% copied from before

Cain took a moment to look at Seth and see that he was still sufficiently
captivated to simply resume the story.

"We walked in to this palace, and when we made our way through the main
entrance, we came to a large throne room. However, instead of the throne facing
towards the entrance, it was facing away, and the direction it was facing was
towards a balcony, where another demon was standing and observing the city of
Pandemonium with his idle gaze.

"Belial walked silently towards this second demon, and gestured for me to
follow. This second demon would not bring their gaze away from the city.

"After a bit, Belial addressed me, gave a low bow, and said, 'I leave you to
your duties.' With that, he scurried off, and I presume returned to the oar
boat where he went back to his duties of matching souls with their demons.

"After Belial left, I turned toward the demon, who was turned away from me on
the other side of the throne room chair, and made my way toward him. I made my
way probably halfway to the throne when I heard the voice of the demon say,
'Stop there human if you wish to return to the world of the living.'

"When I heard this voice, there were two things that startled me. The first was
the intensity the voice carried. The power of the command shook me to my very
core, and I felt as if I was somehow experincing the raw power of the universe
in the form of the voice of this demon.

"The second is that the voice was female.

"There was no mistaking that the voice of the demon I heard was a female voice.
She turned from her perch on the balcony, and made her steps towards the
throne.

"'Seems a shame,' she began speak, 'to face the throne this way, when all the
demons and souls of Pandemonium are that way. Unfortunate. But I suppose we are
here to focus on you for now'

% From here, I am done writing for the time being. What needs to happen next
% is, she reveals that Yahweh is not real, and also that neither is she. I don't
% know what flavor the dialogue will take, but I like ending with a line such
% as "call me the Eve of Eden" or something like that.

% I also like the idea of her starting with the palace secluded, and then
% having her wake Cain up in some way, which would bleed in to the rest of how
% Cain's life goes. I like this approach better.
% Also, with this approach, I think the symbolism would work better if the throne
% were facing the entrance to start, and then if the demon turns it before waking
% Cain up.

"The demon walked towards the chair, and turned it towards the entrance of the
palace, and towards me, with the wave of her hand. Then, with the coil like
precision of a snake, brought her demonic figure seated in to the chair in a
pose which presented her in all of her demonic glory.

"'Speak' she ordered, clearly not in the mood for making small talk.

"I was frightened, and of course I was. This was the first time I had spoken
with a demon on these terms before, and I was beginning to realize that I had
absolutely no idea what words I wanted to say. So I asked, "

% Begin Session 20190506

Cain took a moment to look at Seth and see that he was stillsufficiently
captivated to simply resume the story.

"We walked in to this palace," Cain continued, "and made our way in to the main
entrance. In the main entrance was a long and wide hallway that led to
something like a throne room, but instead of a throne in the middle, there was,
lying there, encased in an alter of ice, the form of a goddess."

Cain stopped for a moment to see Seth's eyes widen a bit. Cain idly wondered
what image Seth's goddess was presenting before him, but continued his story.

"The goddess was in a state which I would call neither asleep nor awake.
Neither would I say she were alive or dead. The best way to describe the state
that she was in was that she was something like the most perfectly assembled
statue of ice, with exact proportions etched in to the grain of the cuts that
are made to sculpt her. It's as if this statue of ice were so perfect that it
was on the verge of coming to life, and it looked as though life were in her
motionless body even though it was impossible to say what exactly I was
witnessing.

"After some moments, Belial simply took a low bow, and without speaking,
scurried out of the palace silently. I presume he had to return to 'Matching
souls to their demons' or something of the sort, but I was to entranced by my
newly found goddess to notice.

"I decided to step forward and take a closer look at this supposed 'demon' that
was assigned to my soul. As I approached her, even though I knew it to be the
case that she could not harm me if she simply lie there and did nothing, I
still took great caution in ensuring that I did not encroach any boundries. To
cross the will of another human being is one thing, because humans are bound by
their own physicality to this realm that we call the place of the living, and
the harm that one inflicts on another can always be repayed in an equivelent or
greater form; but with demons, it is prudent to take care not to step over any
boundries, because untold amounts of chaos and nonsense can come out of one if
you so enrage it.

"So, being acutely aware of the fact that I was to approach my demon with the
caution of understanding that I could not know what this demon was capable of,
I simutaneously bridled my confidence, and took more steps towards this
goddess."

Cain paused again here to see that Seth was still interested. Cain could see
that Seth was entering something of a hypnotic state, induced by the
combination of the story and the influnce of the mushrooms, which was perfect
for what Cain desired. Content that he was achieving his purpose, Cain continued.

"Like I told you before, this goddess resembled something of a statue made of
ice, but that was what she looked like from a distance. As I approached her, as
she lay on the alter of her throne, I began to notice that the image of her
face took no definite form, but would shift based upon my perceptions. For
instance, I noticed when I was wary of her, I saw in her docile face some hints
of a menancing glare, but now that I was approaching her and building my
confidence, I saw instead hints of seduction and temptation in her facial
expression."

Cain stopped at this moment to gather himself. It seemed he wanted to say
something but wasn't sure how to say it. After some time, he eventually found
the words.

"I would also be remiss if I left out a more embarassing detail about the
goddess as well. You see, when I began to notice that she took the form of the
seductress in my mind, I started to look more deeply in to her. When I looked
deeply in to the seductress, I could imagine myself falling in to her arms, her
protecting me from everything around me, as she nurtured me and gave me warmth
and pleasure and shelter and everything that my Dionysian self might desire.
And when I did this, saw something that disturbed me quite greatly, that I
wasn't sure what to do at the time. I saw the image of our mother."

When Cain said that, he looked back at Seth. Seth, who had been imagining the
entire scene as Cain was explaining it, said, "I see it too. Her face appears
where the face of the seductress should go."

Cain smiled, and replied, "Precisely, Seth. That is precisely what I saw in
those moments...

"But I did not understand what I saw (and I dare say that I still do not) so I
chose not to dwell on it, and instead return to the image I was having between
my demon and myself, now armed with the knowledge that somehow my mother was
embedded deeply within her.

"I continued to approach the figure of ice, now with less trepidation. I took
first one step, then another, the second more confindent than the first, until
I found myself taking confident strides towards the goddess. I found myself
standing next to the encasing of ice, looking up at the face of the woman who
would look upon me.

"I was not sure what to do at that point. It seemed inappropiate to reach out
and touch the encasing, but every alternative seemed equally absurd. I wasn't
going to announce my presence to a sleeping goddess like a simpleton.

"After I had stood there for what felt like in that moment for quite a long
while, I somehow came to instinctually realize that doing nothing was more
dangerous than doing something erroneous, so I decided to rid myself of my
anxieties and reach out for the goddess.

"When I reached out to touch the casing of ice, as soon as my finger touched
the surface of the alter, it felt like everything that could have happened in
that moment happened.

"First, I became paralyzed. I attempted to move my arms and legs, but they
wouldn't do anything. I didn't even feel as though I had arms and legs any
more, it simply felt like I was somehow simply a floating being in space. I
achieved a complete disconection from my physical body.

"Next, the encasing shattered, revealing within it the form of the goddess.
However, when the casing shattered, so did her still-life form. She emerged
from the shattered casing with eyes open, head back, breast facing the heavens
as if being lifted by her heart, and being gently lowered as if by magic to a
seductive seated position on the alter.

"'Hello Cain.' She began. 'I know why you are here, and what you seek. My name
is Shiva. Tell me, why do you choose to venture here and bring me to life?'

"When she began speaking to me like this, one might expect that I would become
dreadfully frightened and fearful, that I had lost all control of my body, that
I was at the whim of this Goddess, and that she was speaking to me now in such
a demanding tone, I could have very easily lost my composure.

"However, let me tell you Seth, what I think is the most important thing that I
remember from all of this. It seemed to me that I already knew what this
goddess was going to tell me. It seemed like, as she was speaking to me, that I
already knew the truths she was going to reveal. I felt, as she was talking to
me, that I could have been talking to her just the same, and it wouldn't have
mattered. In some sense, I already knew the things she was telling me to be
true, but I still needed to hear them for them to resonate with me.

"So I was not afraid when she asked me to speak, and instead I answered her
without fear.

"'I am here to find Yahweh, so that I may worship him for all of eternity in
Heaven.'

"When I said this, the Goddess gave out a shrill, ear piercing scream, which
transformed into laughter which finally became managable to my paralyzed soul.
After the torment of her laughter was over and I was able to compose myself,
she said to me, 'You think you can lie to your Goddess? I already know why you
are here. I only ask so that you can know the same.'

"When she said this, I suddenly understood what she meant, and this time was
more prepared to answer her question.

"'I want to know the truth' I answered soberly."

"'Good' she replied, this time much more pleased with the answer. 'Now tell
me,' she continued, 'the truth as you know it.'

"With the shrill pain of her laughter still fresh in my memory, I reached in to
my memory as deeply as I thought I could go, and I attempted to tell the truth
as best I could tell it. I said,

"'My mom and dad, they claim to be the first people, and they tell me I'm the
first human boy to ever be born. They tell me that Yahweh put all of this here,
and that one of his angels Lucifer fell from heaven and is trying to decieve
us. They would also tell me that you were one of Satan's servents, and that I
shouldn't trust you.'

"At that moment I paused though, because I knew there was more. The goddess on
looked at me with a glare of inquiry, as if she already knew that I was not
done.

"'However' I continued, 'To think that they are the first people to ever exist
is a little bit silly. I have roamed many lands, and seen many things, and of
the things I have seen, all of them point to some version of the story which
isn't at all like the version that my parents tell me. So I am not so inclined
to accept their words for it.'

"At that moment I paused. I was still paralyzed, and as much as I didn't want
to admit it to myself, I was still entirely captivated by this goddess. I could
tell she was listening to me, but suddenly I felt a sudden urge like I was
boring her with my troubles, and that my internal conflict was irrelevant to
her.

"After what again felt like an entire lifetime of standing there captivated and
paralyzed next to the goddess, I then asked her, 'Is that what you want from
me? I can't tell you more beyond that.'

"But then she just stared back at me with a look of authority. It was as if my
question were not even relevent to her (because it wasn't). After some time,
when she let her facial expression progress through a range of varied emotions,
she finally closed her eyes and fell into a tranquil pose before she said
softly...

"'Let go...'

"And that was it.

"So I asked her 'What do you mean?'

"And again, with quiet tranquility, she slowly opened her eyes, parted her
lips, and said, 'Let go...'

"However, this time she touched me on the forehead in between my eyes as she
said it, and when she did, I felt as though I could see through the walls of
the temple. With the two eyes I had I could still see the goddess and the
inside of the temple, but it was as if a entirely new and independent eye were
added to my already existing two, to give me a third, functioning eye that
could see outside of the temple, and to all of Pandemonium.

"In that moment, I felt as though I actually _was_ Pandemonium in some sense.
It was as if all of the things that I had been harboring and repressing had
found their way here, and all of these things made up everything of what I
considered to be 'me'. But as soon as this feeling of actually _being_
Pandemonium came to me, it left.

"And to be entirely honest with you Seth, at this point now, twenty years
later, I do know what she meant by the words 'Let go...' I have spent many
years reflecting on the meaning of what she said to me, but I have yet to land
on any complete meaning for why she might have said those exact words in that
exact way. And, regardless of my confusion regarding exactly what I needed to
let go of, I still knew one thing to be true. 

"I was still holding on. I couldn't let go. I couldn't let myself see the
world for what it was. I still wanted it to be a part of this place that Yahweh
created, I wanted it to be a wonderful magical world with angels and demons and
heavens and hells. I needed all of those things to be true.

"'Let go...' her voice was growing more and more distant. It was as if she were
somehow whispering the words in my ear through telepathy.

"And for a moment, I did. I entirely let go."

Cain stopped, and let Seth feel the moment.

"My body stopped existing. Even my mind stopped existing. I'm not sure if I
became one with everything, or everything became one with me, or if I simply
began to realize that the stuff that makes up everything is the same stuff that
makes up me.

"I wasn't sure if I was floating in the universe, or the universe was floating
in me. I felt as though all of my sensations were connected to everything that
existed. I felt as though, as easily as I could think about it and move my
finger now as I speak to you, I could think about and move anything in the
universe using only my mind. Either I was God, or I was finally surrendering to
the power of God. I'm not sure which.

"But I was still in the throne room, still talking to the Goddess.

"'We can see now' She proclaimed in that moment. 'Oh, we can see everything.
Yes. Yes, let us see everything.'

"And with one gesture of her hand, as if by magic, she ripped the cieling and
roof of her palace off of the walls, and made something of a balcony for
herself to observe. She then, with another stroke of her hands and fingers,
turned the alter to become a throne room chair, and faced it towards the newly
realized balcony.

"'Out there is my domain. We will have control, and we will have dominion, over
all of Pandomonium! You have waken me, and now I must take control! You will
come to see the beauty this world has to offer. You only must... let go...'

Cain paused at this point in the story again. Seth was very captivated, so Cain
continued.

"I was still paralyzed at this point, and becoming very concerned at what sorts
of evils I may have let out in to the world. I wanted the visions to stop now,
because I felt like I was done, but it wouldn't go away.

"'Oh, don't fight it,' the goddess grinned slyly towards me as she began
preparing the throne room chair. 'You know this was inevitable.  My sleep was
never going to last forever. I am asleep in everyone, and only those who dare
venture down here to awaken me. You were never the sort to leave me be. This
was inevidatble.

"I still felt paralyzed, and as much as I struglled to attempt to move to do
anything I couldn't do anything but feel helpless to this goddesses whimsy. I
was listening to her words, but I was more concerned with regaining my
facilities and returning to the world of the living.

"'I tell you what' she continued as she turned to me, 'I will let you go, as
much as it would be wonderful of you to stick around for some time. But before
you go, just to provide you with a little reminder of what happened here today
I have something you can remember me by...'

"When she said those words, she stood up from where she was perched, and began
to take slow and seductive steps towards me. She approached me until she was
nearly touching my paralyzed body hovering only milimeters from my skin. Her
icy cold lips were hovering just above mine, cruely, and I could nearly taste
their moisture from just her presence there. I knew not how long she would
torture me by teasing me in this way.

"Then, she pursed her lips together and pressed them to mine. She began to kiss
me passionately.

"At first, I enjoyed the kiss. It felt as though my soul were being lifted
up out of my body through her embrace, and it felt as though my entire essence
were being elevated out of this existance.

"As you might imagine, though, this sensation, pleasurable though it was,
became nearly unbearable.

"'This pleasue, it is greater than I can bear!' I tried to scream out. But the
sensations were too intense. I couldn't scream, I couldn't make a noise. I
could only exist, helplessly, as the goddess continued to feed these sensations
of pleasure into my being. I was too deep in ecstasy to even think or reason
proprely. I was still paralyzed, still unable to move or do anything. I was
unable to feel any sensation except raw, unbridled, pleasure.

"I still felt as though I was the universe (or that the universe was me, I
still wasn't sure which) but now, in the midst of the kiss, it felt as though
the part of me which dissappeared, which I thought of as I, was returning, but
as it returned, it was returning to be the very center of a whirlwind of chaos.
It felt as though the essence of everything were being sucked in to a black
hole, and I was that black hole, and I could do nothing but helplessly
experience what it's like to actually _be_ the universe. And let me tell you,
Seth, it was truly terrifying."

Cain paused, very quickly this time.

"As all things do, this, too, came to an end. Eventually, the pain (or pleasue)
was too much.

"As she was kissing me, I felt her first begin to scatch my ribs with her
fingernails in an erotic way, which only added to the sensations of pleasure
that I felt. But after she had done this for some time, she braced her nails
for a moment, and then shoved them in to my stomach, piercing the skin and
inserting her hand in to my body, on the left side near my heart.

"As soon as that happened, I felt as though everything, including my heart,
stopped for an entire instant. I felt, that somehow it was both one moment and
eternity all at the same time. I felt as if her fingernails had ripped through
the fabric of space time, and in the relativistic confusion, nothing existed,
and everything existed, simultaneously, and that I was, in some sense or
another, tragically connected to it all. I felt all of the pain and tragedy of
all of man, but also all of the earth, and all of nature, in that single moment
of eternity.

"And in that moment, all of the visions came to an end."

Cain took a great breath here. It exhausted him greatly to retell the story as
he did, so he took a deep breath, having finally come to its conclusion.

"The first thing I remember was checking the pain in my side," Cain went on. "I
do not know how I got it, but this scar has remained with me ever since."

Cain lifted the clothing he was wearing to reveal his side. Above his left hip,
just where the stomach met the rib cage, Seth could see a faint but distinctive
scar in Cain's side.

"That's where I felt the pain when I woke. I have put together stories for how
I recieved the scar, but to this day, I think it will remain forever a mystery
the true story about how this scar came to me."

Cain paused, and it was Seth this time who broke the silence.

"But that means you actually saw Shiva? You went down to Pandemonium and you
found her, and you recieved her wisdom, and then you returned, with a scar to
prove it. What a fantastical story that is!"

But Cain just looked incredulously at his brother Seth.

"No, Seth, if there is one thing I know for certain, it's that my physical body
didn't visit a place called Pandemonium where I found a physical goddess named
Shiva who opened up the world of my consciousness to me. If Shiva exists in any
physical form at all (which I suspect is highly unlikely) then she exists
entirely seperate from what I saw during my mushroom experience. I could see
our mother in her, Seth. What more evidence do you need that I created Shiva,
and not the other way around?"

But Seth was still whirling. There were so many things that he wanted to say,
to object to, to point out or make counterpoint to, but by the time he would
bring himself to utter the first words of one train of thought, another train
of thought would come barrelling through and force itself upon Seth's psyche.
Seth merely mumbled in objection for some moment before Cain finally
interjected.

"Seth, calm down. Everything I have told you I told you because I feel it is my
responsibility to. You don't have to accept what I say, and you don't have to
even believe me. In fact, disbelieve me, if you like. Just relax."

Cain could see that Seth was shaking, and becoming delerious, so he grabbed
some blankets and wrapped them around Seth. Seth, suddenly realizing that he
was feeling cold in the evening air, unsure of how long they had been sitting
there and how long they had been talking, wrapped himself more tightly in the
blankets.

"Get some rest, have some visions, experience some dreams. Hopefully, when you
meet your goddess, she won't be as violent as mine."

With that, Cain led his brother to a small area where he cleared some space,
and let Seth find a comfortable spot to lie there. When Seth was comfortable,
Cain kissed Seth on the forehead, extinguished the candles that were lit in the
room, and returned to his cottage where he made his way to bed.
