# Satan's garden

"Come with me now," Cain ushered. "I grow tired of sitting. Let me show you my
farms."

With that, Cain stood up, and gestured for Seth to do the same. Seth took the
tea that he was sipping and placed it on the table in front of himself. He had
already finished most of what was in the glass, and Seth had simply been
sipping on the same bead of water that was insistent on remaining unswallowed.

"After you," Cain instructed, as he gestured Seth out of the cottage.

Seth stepped outside again, and saw the swamp again. Even though it was his
second time to partake in the new surroundings, it still felt as strange and
foreign as when he first saw it. Seth couldn't help but feel as though he was
in some sort of mythological fairy world. But when Seth double checked his own
sanity, he was indeed certain that he was still on the same planet earth that
his parents gave birth to him from, and when he touched the animals and
creatures that would scuffle around him, they would interact in strange and
interesting ways that Seth knew could not be fabricated.

Seth took in the scene for a moment. It was a lot for him to process all at
once. In the course of the day, he had found an entirely new kind of habitat,
met his estranged and exiled brother, and tasted all kinds of new and
interesting things that his brother had offered him.

Seth followed as Cain took off quickly in what seemed to Seth to be a random
direction. Seth could see the path that had been carved out from Cain's
repeated footsteps over however many years he had gone over this particular
stretch of ground. Eventually, Cain's path become more narrow, to the point
where they were in between two muddy enbankments on each side, with shrubbary
and foliage to clear through as they made their way up the hill.

After a couple of switch backs in the path, they finally made their way to the
clearing at the end of the journey, and they came upon the scene that reflected
all of Cain's work over the past twenty years.

For miles, Seth looked out from their current vantage, and saw nothing but
farms.

"At the front, here, we have what I call the "delicates". These crops are more
likely to be harmed by the harsh winters, so I keep them close to the swamp,
where the humidity does well to keep them preserved."

Cain continued walking through the crops as he showed Seth around. After
showing Seth the main bulk of the crop, which consisted mostly of wheat and
barly, and then proceeding to show some of his more experimental crops,
such as grapes and more vine based kinds of ruffage, Cain brought Seth to a
final greenhouse area which was located innocently at the back of the farm.

From the outside, when Seth looked at the hut, it resembled to him something
like a regular cottage. It resembled the cottage that they shared tea in
earlier. However, this cottage, Seth came to quickly discover when they started
walking towards it, was lacking a complete roof, as well as complete walls.
Where his living cottage might have had small, square windows, this greenhouse
instead had whole sections of wall missing.

This seemed to be by design, as everywhere there was missing wall, Seth could
see, layed out in almost domino like fashion, rows of pots and potted plants
growing and cascading out of these missing sections.

The two continued to walk towards the dainty cottage at the end of the farm.
When Cain reached the door, he grasped the handle and prepared to open it, but
before he did, he said to Seth, "I present... the gateway to the other side."

And with that, Cain opened the doorway to his Greenhouse.

The first thing Seth noticed was the centerpiece of the house. In the center of
the room, where the roof was out, there was an elevated platform that came up
to about Seth's hips which contained so many different kinds of pots with
plants in them. The light from the sun shone through the hole in the roof upon,
what looked like to Seth to be an alter to God. But on this alter Cain had
grown all sorts of greens, plants with stems that grew the most intricate and
beautiful buds. Patterns Seth had never even conceived before he saw in the
leaves and in the plants, and all of it was right there in front of him, all in
one place.

Cain stood to the side for a moment just to let Seth take it all in. He was
grinning as he watched Seth ponder in amazement at all of the different kinds
of plants Cain had been able to grow in his time there.

"What do you call these?" Seth said, pointing to one of the buds which was
emerging from a plant that Cain had grown.

"That one I call canabis," Cain replied. "It's a plant I found on my
pilgramage. I'm not sure if it is useful for anything, but it has the most
soothing smell, and as you can see, the patterns that the leaves form can be
quite mesmerizing. I call those leafy parts that flower out the "bud" of the
plant. I've figured out that it's the bud which is responsible for the
reproduction of plant, and I've figured out how to reharvest it, but it still
hasn't proven useful to me for any practical purpose. I've tried eating both
the leaves and the buds, and neither one tasted pleasent, and both upset my
stomach. I tried perhaps cooking with the plant as if it were an herb, but
again, it does not seem as though this plant enjoy's being injested. At least,
not in that way."

Cain paused. Seth, still transfixed on the patterns of the canabis leaves,
asked, "You say the plant doesn't '_enjoy_' being injested. How is it you speak
of a plant enjoying something? How do you presume to know what this plant might
enjoy or not enjoy?"

Cain laughed. "Oh, quite the pedant I see. You have caught me tripping over my
own words. Yes, to be techinically correct, the relationship the plant and I
have took a strange turn when I tried to digest it into my stomach, but the
plant and I have since reconciled, and we are seeing how much longer the
relationship can work out."

Seth was more confused than anything about what Cain had just said. Was he
talking about having a relationship with a plant?

"Still, though," Cain continued, "I think it is much shorter to say that the
plant enjoys itself than to go through all of those clauses and subclauses
of sentence structure to get to the same thing."

Cain stopped there, and the silence was almost startling to Seth's ears. Seth
resumed looking at the various plants that Cain had planted.

"I've labeled all of them with names that seem appropiate to me. I'm not the
best at coming up with names, so I just named them things that already exist.
For instance, the redness of this plant reminded me of roses, and for some
reason the name "Mary" entered my mind when I saw this plant, so I call it
Rosemary."

Cain stopped and took a strong sniff of his own handiwork. "I don't care what
you name them, though, I love all of my plants as I would my children."

Seth turned to Cain. A strange question came to his mind. He wasn't sure where
it came from. It was almost as if he heard a voice in the distance that
instructed him, almost commanded him, to ask it. The voice was not startling or
strange, but it had never been so vivid or forceful towards Seth like this
before.

Seth asked, "Would you say you created each of these plants in your own image?"

Cain let out one, loud, snort. "HAH! How clever of a question you ask. No,
Seth, I did not 'create' each of these plants in my own image. Even the ones
I've grafted and cross-polinated I did not 'create'. The plant's created
themselves, and I only ensured that they did it. You could call me either the
nurturing mother or the tyranical father, I don't care which, but my plant's
and I have a symbiotic relationship, and to say I 'created' them would be as
absurd as saying they created me. So no, I would not say that."

Seth stopped. Part of him wanted to ask further questions of Cain, to push back
on all this talk of "symbiotic plants" but it seemed to Seth that every time he
tried to formulate a coherent question to follow up with, the words he wanted
to say couldn't come to him. It was as if at every moment he knew exactly what
he wanted to say, but his mind would not allow him to solidify the words so
that he could actually speak them.

So, instead of continuing this way, Seth resumed examining Cain's plants.
Symbiotic or not, Seth had to concede the plants were indeed quite astonishing.
Seth looked from one plant to another. They each had similarities in their
design, but it was clear also that each strain and species had their own unique
way of growing and flourishing into maturity. It was easy to identify just
by inspecting the pattens of the leaves which plants those leaves belong to.

Cain allowed Seth to explore more of the green house. Along the walls were a
few different variety of trees. Seth could see that same trees were planted
rather recently, and were being cared for and maintained directly by Cain's
hand, but also there were trees that were planted quite some time ago and had
grown quite large. Some were even close to bearing fruit, and when Seth looked
up towards the ceiling, he could see some of the beginnings of orange or lemon
fruits.

Seth couldn't help but feel more and more as though he were losing his sense of
who he was and why he was here after he had seen all of these plants. Back at
his parents, Seth had become familiar with the doings of the way his mother and
father did things. His mother taught him the basics of farming, and his father
taught him how to shepherd. But when he saw everything that Cain had been able
to accomplish, all of the plants that he was able to discover, and grow, and
harvest, and cultivate, he couldn't help but think that his time on the farm
was being totally wasted, and that it could be spent being more productive in
the way Cain is right now. Seth felt overwhelmed at the amount that Cain was
able to accomplish in this greenhouse after only twenty short years.

But more than that, Seth felt something else happening to him as well. He felt
somehow as though that part of himself which he called "himself" was drifting
away. Seth felt as though he were an arbiter examining the doings of another
human being. It felt as if _he_ were no longer the thing that was looking at
the things he was seeing, but instead he felt as if he were a different human
being watching the actions of another, unable to intervene or change what was
happening.

It made Seth feel very uncomfortable. Seth started to feel dizzy, as if he was
about to fall and collapse to the ground, so he grabbed on to something solid.
When he did, he felt as though what he grabbed was morphing in to an entirely
new object in his hands. This sensation startled Seth, but when he went to look
at the tree which he had placed his hand to balance himself on, it looked just
the same as it always had. When Seth let go of the tree, he actually felt as
though he somehow had more control of his balance now that he was freestanding,
but he still felt like at any moment the universe might turn upside down and
force him to collapse.

Seth, unsure of what was happening to him, started to take some deep breaths.
Seth had never had a panic attack before, but he presumed this is what they
felt like. Similar to how Seth thought he lost his ability to balance, for a
moment he believed that he lost the ability to breathe. He took a large inhale,
and then held it, and when he exhaled, it felt as though he couldn't exhale
enough air, and that the air was sticking to the inside of Seth's lungs, unable
to escape.

But Seth knew that such a thing was absurd. All he had to do was simply expand
his lungs again, and he would get air again.

Cain watched as Seth walked in to the corner of his greenhouse, leaned against
the wall, and took some deep breaths. After Seth took a couple of breaths, Cain
said, "Good, Seth. Just breath. Let it happen naturally. Don't fight it."

Seth looked back at Cain. He was not sure how long he had been attempting to
gather his breath. As far as Seth knew, it could have been anywhere from a
couple of minutes to a couple of hours. But when he heard Cain's voice, he
turned to him, and said to him, "I don't feel okay. I need space."

Cain only smiled. Seth felt as though Cain were tormenting him with the smile.
Seth could not figure out what was possibly amusing about this situation.

"Just breath, and let me explain." Cain said.

Seth, not sure if he wanted to curl up in a ball and cry or pounce at his
brother with ferocity, replied, "And what exactly are you going to explain?
Don't you see I'm suffering? I don't know what's happening."

Cain continued to smile. "That's what I'm going to explain. Let me show you
something."

Cain gestured towards the back corner of his greenhouse. Seth didn't notice it
when he first walked in, but in his current state, it seemed almost impossible
to overlook.

In the corner of the greenhouse was a tree. The tree was larger than any other
tree that Seth had ever seen before. He didn't notice it at first because it
blended so seamlessly with the rest of the greenhouse that Seth didn't realize
that an entire portion of the cottage was made out of this tree.

Cain walked towards the tree, and began to walk around it. Seth, after
reasoning to himself that it was possible for him to walk without tripping on
himself, cautiously followed Cain.

When Seth made his way to the East side of the large tree where Cain was
standing, Seth marked Cain's eyes and followed their gaze to their conclusion.
What he found was that, at the base of this very large tree, growing on this
side of the greenhouse, were large mushroom caps.

These mushrooms were unlike anything Seth had seen. At least with all the
variety of plants, Seth had seen something like plants before, and the
different styles and patterns, while each being unique and distincitve, all
followed a similar pattern and structrue.

But this was the first time Seth had seen any sort of fungus grow in caps like
this. He had seen moss and weeds grow at the base of trees like this before,
but never had he seen it burst out in such a magnificent display of natural
beauty.

Seth felt as though somehow this tree contained all of the knowledge that there
was to contain in the world, and that these mushrooms were those bits of
knowledge which were bursting forth the most strongly.

But as soon as Seth caught himself thinking like this, he regained some of his
senses, and returned the present. Seth looked back to Cain after looking at the
mushrooms. Seth surprised himself with how easily he was able to ask his next
question.

"Are these the mushrooms of awakening?"

Cain continued to look at the mushrooms in silence.

"Well?" Seth continued to press. "Answer me!"

Seth surprised himself at his own assertiveness. Just moments ago he thought he
wanted to crawl up in a ball and cry, and now he was demanding answers from a
stranger he only met hours ago. Seth still didn't know what was happening to
him, but even if he was not yet comfortable he was beginning to at least
understand what it was like to exist in the strange and altered state of mind
that he seemed to be in.

Cain paused, letting Seth's demands echo for a moment. During the silence, Cain
had his gaze still transfixed on the mushrooms, but after a bit he turned his
head to Seth before he began his explanation.

"I wanted you to see." Cain began. "I want to tell you what I saw when I first
ate these mushrooms. I want you to feel it as I felt it. I want you to breath
it as I breathed it. I want you to live it as I lived it. Why would I only tell
you about my journey when you could go on it with me?"

Seth's brain began to spin on itself. He couldn't believe what he was hearing.

"I prepared some of these mushrooms and brewed them in to the tea that you and
I drank this afternoon. I wanted you to feel it for yourself."

Seth's eyes widened when he heard Cain speak this last statement. Seth's mental
state was in a place where, as much as he wanted to put togethre the pieces of
everything that had taken place, his mind wouldn't let those pieces fall
togther. Instead, his mind felt like a whirlwind of puzzlepieces all flying
around in a vortex of energy, and this vortex of energy was lifting him out of
his own body and in to a spirtual realm.

However, Seth was able to grab enough of the puzzle pieces to gather that he
was quite displeased with the way his brother forced this experience on to him.

"You defiled our communion together by adulterating our flesh and blood with
this devil cursed fungus. Maybe I should trust father about you! Only an evil
person would force the food of Satan himself on to another, and I could see
every reason why a demon (which you convinced me you are not, sly as you are)
would force upon me the food which destroyed the paradise our parents were only
so fortunate enough to take part in."

Again, Seth was startled at the assertiveness and power of his own words. As he
was saying them, he felt as though he were merely observing the act of saying
words more than he was actually in control of the words that were being said.

Still, though, Seth also felt a dissonance. On the first hand, he knew that the
words he was saying were the words that he wanted to say, and that they were
appropiate for the situation. But at the same time, he felt as though somehow
the actions of what he were doing were not appropiate for the situation. Even
though he could reason that his instincts were correct, he felt that something
about the way he was acting went against his best interest, but he wasn't sure
what it was or what to do about it.

Cain paused to make sure Seth was finished before he replied. "Seth... This is
what I must try and teach you. And if I fail you, then indeed I suppose I must
be a terrible human being, and I deserve seventy times over the exile that was
given to me. But if I succeed, then you are to carry with you the knowledge of
awakening in to the modern world. I feel this is more important than asking
consent of all parties involved. Perhaps one day we will come up with an idea
such as "human rights" or something equally absurd, and what I have done will
be considered by our children and our childrens children to be an entirely
haneous and treacherous act, but before that time comes, I am doing what I
think is best for humankind as a whole."

Seth wasn't sure if he was actually hearing his brother talk, or if he was
hallucinating the sounds, but either way, the word's only made him more
confused.

"Regardless," Cain continued, "I gave you the tea because I think it is
important that you learn what I have to tell you. Please, for the moment, hold
your anger. Withdraw yourself from attacking me so that I can make my case.
After I have said what I need to say, you may then act however you may choose
upon me."

Seth was finding himself to have very little patience when it came to listening
to Cain's words anymore. Still, he was able to reason about himself enough to
at least have some idea about how he should best handle this situation.

As Seth was attempting to reason so that he may figure out his next course of
action, something happened to him that was wholly unexpected to Seth. Seth
suddenly realized that the past didn't matter.

In some sense, just for a fleeting moment, Seth was able to see the universe
without time. Seth saw himself just as one orb of light which existed in a
world that he called the "present", and the only thing Seth understood about
the world or about what was happening is that, no matter what, he knew that the
present moment existed.

And as long as the present moment existed, Seth also came to realize that all
he needed to do to figure out his next course of action was analyze all of the
options that came to him in the present.

So Seth did that. Seth weighed the options for the ways he could continue with
this conversation.

When Seth looked at all of the options, he saw that none of them changed the
fact Cain had already given him the mushrooms. Seth saw that, of all of the
ways he could choose to act in the present, literally zero of them would change
anything about the fact that the mushrooms of awakening had been ingested, and
that they were digesting through Seth's physiology as the two of them spoke. No
matter how upset he got, or how aggressive he became, or how snarkily he
denounced his brothers actions, none of these things would change the fact that
he had already eaten the mushrooms, and doing any of them would only be
counter-productive towards handling this situation in the most graceful way.

All of this logic, and reasoning, and understanding about the past, the
present, and consequences, took place within one instant for Seth. In that one
instant, Seth suddenly understood all of these things, as if it all was flashed
to his mind in one instant, one exact instant that can never be pin pointed or
remembered. It would take some time for Seth to fully articulate that feeling
that he felt in that one instant, but because of it, Seth understood, not only
academically but also on a deep and visceral level, that it was foolish for
him to continue to fight against his brother in the way that was his instinct.

Before Seth completely let his guard down to the ebbs and flows of time,
though, he chose to remember that his elder brother did decieve and trick him,
so he reasoned that he should remain on alert, even if he was going to trust
Cain even if only for long enough to hear the rest of his story.

So, after having gone through this sort of flash of realization, Seth found
himself telling his brother, "Go ahead, tell me your story then."

