6:10

So at this point, I have talked to great extent about the beginning part of
Cain's exile. As far as the rest of it goes, I do want to say that I am not too
inspired by where that might go, at this moment in time. I think I have written
quite a lot on that topic, and I want to write about something else right now.

So, for this moment, I want to write about Cain's pilgramage.

It's actually somewhat interesting to me, because this pilgramage I just made
up, yet to me it is the part of the story I think that makes the most sense to
me out of everything.

The one thing that happens for certain on this pilgramage is that Cain finds
mushrooms that resemble the mushrooms that his parents told him about, and he
eats them, and after he eats them, he goes on a mushroom trip where he meets
Yahweh, but not the one his parents told him about, but the real one, and
Yahweh reveals to him that he is not real, and that his parents have been lying
to him.

In fact, I love the idea of something like, "The projection of Yahweh" coming
down to Cain.

Holy shit, if we could get something like Paradise Lost but for the Pilgramage
of Cain, that would be so dope. Holy shit. I need to write that. The Pilgramage
of Cain, the epic poem written in the 21st century.

But still, I digress. For the moment, I don't want to think about how Raphael,
or Lucifer, or any of the demons from Pandemonium, or any of the Arch Angels in
heaven might or might not have told Cain the truth about everything that is
going on.

This whole mushroom trip, quite honestly, could be one of my future mushroom
trips. When I write a trip report, I want to incorperate what I write (assuming
I write anything, which I believe I will) in to the story of Cain.

So that obviously can'treally be written right now, but it could be practiced.
But I don't really want to practice that part of it. I think, whether I
practice or not, it will come to me or not in that moment regardless of how
much I think I prepared.

So instead of wasting my time on that, I elect that we instead spend our time
writing out other aspects of the Cain Pilgramage story.

Firstly, I am not sure exactly where he goes on the pilgramage. In the story, I
have so far written in that he goes on the journey for seven times seventy
days. I like this, because it's a numebrs thing, and I know bible people love
numbers things. It literally means nothing to me, but I like having it in there
because firstly, it's longer than the amount of time it takes to gestate a baby
and secondly, I know that that number is used for Cain's ancestor, Tubel-Cain,
and the punishment by someone on Tubel-Cain would not just be Seven times the
punishment of someone else but Seventy times Sevens times the amount.

Secondly, I am not sure exactly how the mushroom trip goes yet. I want him to
visit someone from hell, and I want him to visit someone from heaven. It could
be one of the Devil's right hand men (Lucifer comes to mind) and one of God's
Arch Angel's (or perhaps even Jesus) and I want each of them to give him
instructions. I want each of them to reveal to them that the voice of Yahweh
isn't real.

I just got the image for a scene that I want to have. I want one of these
characters to reveal that Yahweh isn't real.

Okay, so I am getting the scene. Cain begins the mushroom trip. He grows down
on himself, and starts to feel as though he is being pulled down into
pandemonioum itself. Then, as Cain is attempting to repent for his doubts in
the lord, he sees the Archangel Michael. Michael greets him, and tells him to
follow him in to the outdoors. On top of the mountain Michail brings Cain, and
Michael tells Cain that Yahweh does not exist. When Cain asks if that means
Satan isn't real either, Michael says he can't speak for the devil, but that
the Lord God is not real. Michael dissappears then. As Cain makes his way back
to the camp, he sees a snake slither under him. The snake then gets eaten by an
eagle who swoops from the sky and grabs it in it's talons, and then rips the
head of the snake off with it's beak. The eagle then speaks to Cain. The eagle
transforms into the image of Lucifer. In the course of the dialog between
Lucifer and Cain, Lucifer comes to reveal that Satan, or the devil, and
Pandemonioum are not real. Lucifer then disappears, and Cain looks upon what I
have to imagine is probably the setting sun, and contemplates this new
information.

I think this is the most complete version of the story that I can put inside of
one paragraph.

So now, the question becomes, firstly, how long is this story for real? And
secondly, how much of this story is cannon in my universe?

I think, the details of the mushroom trip can be whatever I want, and I see no
reason why they wouldn't be something like this.

Yes, I could take an actual mushroom trip as an actual human, and I could go in
with the expectation of coming out with some material to use for this piece of
the work, but I think that such a literary tactic is, at best, a crutch for
some other sort of weakness as a writer that I am masking through altered
states of consciousness.

Of course, I do a lot of my writing under the influence of Canabis also, but I
don't concern myself too greatly with that.

I am getting off the rails though. I have not, of course, read back what I have
written about Cain's pilgramage, but I do think I have written some good things
there. Firstly, I liket the flow of it. It has a beginnnig, middle, and end, as
any good sub-story should. It could be it's own, independent novel. Perhaps, if
I wanted to go the approach of Milton, I could write my own epic novel, as I
mentioned earlier, detailing out everything that Cain went through in this
portion of his pilgramage. Cain could talk to more angels, and those angels
could reveal different things to him. Perhaps that is a whole nother story for
an entirely different myth.

But for the time being, I am content with saying that Cain had the mushroom
trip, that it went something like what I just put up there in the summary, and
that any elaboration on the details of what went on with Cain during those
times could be retroactively added as cannon to this work, and I don't have to
worry about having an incomplete version here, because the version in this
story will be more of a reference than an actual sub-story.

So with all of that being said, I want to re-cozy up, and continue writing, but
I want to satisfy some of my needs as a human being first. So I am going to do
that, and then continue on this entire venture.

6:33

Cain: So, Seth, have you ever heard the tragedy of Darth Plageious the Wise? I
thought not. It's not a story our parents would tell you.

Cain: Seth, this is what happened to me after I ate the mushrooms.

First, I started to feel as though my thoughts were getting away from me. I
stopped feeling as though I had any control over which thoughts were "mine" and
which weren't. I felt as though all of my thoughts were like balls of energy
that existed in the space around my head, and if I wanted to, I could listen in
on any of these balls of energy, but I stopped identifying with these energies
and instead started to realize that I am not the producer of my own thoughts,
but instead, what we call "I" or "me" is only the thing that listens to the
thoughts that occur. And the degree to which we can tune in and understand
these balls of energy indicates how well we will be able to articulate our
understanding of what that ball of energy represents.

And I want to make one thing clear. I have only been able to articulate this
experience now after twenty years of repeated replaying and analysis of what
the experience was like. In the moment, it literally felt as though "myself"
was transforming from a homonculous in a head to this orb of "selfness" that
would bounce from one train of thought to another. I felt my sense of bodily
awareness disolve in to nothingness.

And let me tell you, Seth, it was terrifying. This is the kind of stuff of
nightmares. At first, the feeling of being a soul that is in the process of
being ripped away from the body, while in some way freeing, is also very
frightening.

The effect that the mushrooms had on my sense of self, and sense of what
something like "self" even means was so profound that I don't believe I will
ever be able to put into adequate words how transformative this entire process
became for me.

But again, at the time, it was very scary. At first, I focused on my breath,
and I let myself go in to a state of calm meditation. But after twenty or so
mintuse of that, I could not stop the barrage of voices and images from playing
in my head. The things that I began to see when I focused deeply on my sense of
existing in the world were so riddled with distraction for my meditation that I
felt I had to focus on the distraction lest I be swept away from this world
into a calm state of nothingness forever.

But as I began to do that, the first things that I saw were demons. So many
demons, Seth. It was as if I was able to imagine what Pandemonium looked like,
and my mind was able to produce for me an image perferct representation of what
it would be like. I tried to focus on my breathing again, but the more I did,
the stronger this image became.

Eventually, I cried out. I said, "Yahweh! If you are there, this is the time to
come and find me. I am being surrounded by demons from every direction, and
none of them have pleasent things to tell me. Deliver me from these monsters,
and bring me in to your light, oh Lord!"

What happened next will always amaze me. In my consciousness, I suddenly
realized that I had my eyes closed and was seeing the blackness of the back of
my eyelids, so I decided to open them. And when I did, I swear to you Seth, I
saw the image of the Archangel Gabriel. Around his neck was one of the seven
keys that your Mother told you about from the Garden of Eden.

I opened my eyes, and I spoke to him. I asked him, "Oh, Gabriel, I thank you
for answering my prayers. Does Yahweh have a message for me?"

But Gabriel did not speak to me. Instead, he simply flew away. I followed him
outside, where I saw him fly to the top of the mountain named Sanai, and from
the peak there, in the distance, I could see him pierce the clouds as he simply
returned to heaven.

With my curiousity getting the best of me, I had to know whether or not this
was a vision or whether I had actually seen an angel. So I decided to
investigate.

I made a hike to the top of the mountain. It was not a long walk, but it was
not an easy one either. When I made it to the top, I arranged a place at the
top of the mountain there, and I began to meditate again.

During this meditation, I heard a voice. The voice said unto me...

"Cain, my name is Yahweh. I do not exist. I spoke to your parents just as I am
speaking to you now. I am part of your subconscious, I am a part of the
subconsciouns that is present in every stable and healthy human being that is
born on this planet. I revealed myself to your parents as I am revealing myself
to you now. Unfortunately, they accepted my existance as literal, and have
fabricated convoluted stories to justify my existance. But I am here to make
clear to you, I am not real. Or at least, I'm not real in the same way other
things are real. Look out to the land and see."

When I heard the voice say that all to me, I wasn't sure what to think. I made
a prayer to Yahweh to reveal himself to me, and when he revealed first his
Archangel, and then his voice, I got a conflicting message about what it means.
After all, it's a strange thing to see an angel come down and then hear a voice
that tells you that the angel isn't real and that even this voice also isn't
real and that both are just manifestations of the effects of the mushrooms on
the psychedilic visions that come to the psyche.

So I wasn't sure what to make of this. So I asked God, "Okay, so suppose you
don't exist. I won't even ask you why I can hear you bceause I know it's
because you are a part of me. But I do want to know, since we are in the
business of talking directly to each other in direct dialogue like this, but if
I accept that about you, must I also accept that about Lucifer and Satan also?

7:00

And so on and so forth for the rest of the piece. This is just pracitce, so
I'll write out the whole thing at some point later if I think this is the way
that I want to go.


