So right now I want to talk about th e prophecy. This is the prophecy of
Gabriel. 

When Adam and Eve were leaving the Garden of Eden, and the Archangel Michael
locked the cgate behind them, he returned to heaven. Then, many days later, the
archangel gabreil came down to Adam and Eve, in  a flurry.

"Welcome," the archangel begane, " am teh archangel Gabriel. I ahave come to
inform you of the things you are to know, and the things taht are to come for
you.

Adam and Eve looked shocked to see the archangel gabriel appear before them.
They had spent the last few days discussing amonsgst themselves what their next
goal should be.

Now, they were being visited by teh archangel Gabrieal. How such a turn of
events has occurered.

"So," teh archangel continued, " I have news from God about the incidencts that
have occured here. There are many poinnts to cover, so let us begin at point
number 1.

"Point number 1: Adam and Eveincapable of resisting temptaiton even when they
are given unlimited happiness.

Point 2: Adam and Eve lied to me about the actions that they took.

Point Number 3, Adam and Eve demonstrated a remarkable ability to stick
togethre, and take all actions, even the bahdd ones, in unison.

Becasute of these things, " the archangel continued, "And of course the fact
that ssomething like the garden of eden counld not be susntaisned for ever, the
God almighty, who called himself Yahweh around you but goes by many names
acreosss masny cultures, wants to tell you this message.

This message is that, in some time, there will be one that is godly in every
way,.  He ill bet the essence of god himself, rieincarnated into the flesh.
This one will save the people of the human race.

"God wanted me to tell you that."

With that, the archangel Gabriel flew off before Adam and Eve could ask him any
questions.

Of course, Adam and Eve were very confused about what just happened.
Immeditely, they confirmed with eachother that they each sa an angel, and that
they each could corraborate the others sotry.

Wehn they knew they were talking on the same page, the y then got to asking
eatch other about what it could possibly mean for there to be one to come as
God reincarnated. Those were the angeles exact words.  "They debated the
nuances of what a sentence like that might mean. FOf course, since Gabriel flew
away immediately , they could not ask him, buwt intstead could nonly write it
down.

Along with what the y wrote down of what gabriel said, tGabriel also bore the
symbol of the Four Pedal Cross. This symbol, adam drew with the writings, and
left it as "the prohpecy of Gabriel."

These texts (the so called prophets of Gabriel) were later to be told in the
biblacal canon stories, and laters in Milton. Beyond this, I beiliev this ins
the next mention of this in any recorded text of teh 21 st centrry( I know that
is not true but I like to belive it anywayway. 

So without further ado, I must say, that the way that I am able to talk and
think on this koeyboard is something else. I see the worsd appearing before me
in my mind and I am amble to type them out on this keyboard witouthout earror,
and without prbolme, for as long as I like, I can just keep on writing whatever
I want. Iti s literally wone word at a time that writing like this is made. I
do'n t care how else you think writing happens, it comes in writing a lot of
words like this, and keeping teh good ones.

So in thi s isnstance, these words here are not the good ones, and the owrlds
above should probably be rifinde into something better.

However, I think I got the general jist of the fact that the thing is the most
significante, that is, one of the themese of the story. That them is... I am
drawing a blank. .. There was a thieme that was the theme of teh story that I
thought was a prominante thema. I could re read it and f ind it wbut I would
rather keep tying ing. The story of Ezeiewkial.

The key points of this story are.

    There is a bulletetd list of the ways that Adam and Eve fucked up.
    Gabriel hands them their sentance, signed and sealed final by god.
    Gabriel gives them a promise of a man to come.
    Gabriel flys away before Adam and Eve can ask questions.
    I think that's about it.

So that is something of the outline of the story above. Of course, there is
bporbably more to say about it, but that is neither here nowre there about this
matter rigthght now.

