# History and Medicine
[Metadata]: # {19}
[Descriptor]: # {19}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# History and Medicine
But Fate did not just govern the lives of individuals. The Greeks believed that
even world history was governed by Fate, and that the fortunes of war could be
swayed by the intervention of the gods. Today there are still many people who
believe that God or some other mysterious power is steering the course of
history.

But at the same time as Greek philosophers were trying to find natural
explanations for the processes of nature, the first historians were beginning
to search for natural explanations for the course of history. When a country
lost a war, the vengeance of the gods was no longer an acceptable explanation
to them. The best known Greek historians were Herodotus (484-424 B.C.) and
Thucydides (460-400 B.C.).

The Greeks also believed that sickness could be ascribed to divine
intervention. On the other hand, the gods could make people well again if they
made the appropriate sacrifices.

This idea was in no way unique to the Greeks. Before the development of modern
medicine, the most widely accepted view was that sickness was due to
supernatural causes. The word “influenza” actually means a malign influence
from the stars.

Even today, there are a lot of people who believe that some diseases—AIDS, for
example—are God’s punishment. Many also believe that sick people can be cured
with the help of the supernatural.

Concurrently with the new directions in Greek philosophy, a Greek medical
science arose which tried to find natural explanations for sickness and health.
The founder of Greek medicine is said to have been Hippocrates, who was born on
the island of Cos around 460 B.C.

The most essential safeguards against sickness, according to the Hippocratic
medical tradition, were moderation and a healthy lifestyle. Health is the
natural condition. When sickness occurs, it is a sign that Nature has gone off
course because of physical or mental imbalance. The road to health for everyone
is through moderation, harmony, and a “sound mind in a sound body.”

There is a lot of talk today about “medical ethics,” which is another way of
saying that a doctor must practice medicine according to certain ethical rules.
For instance, a doctor may not give healthy people a prescription for
narcotics. A doctor must also maintain professional secrecy, which means that
he is not allowed to reveal anything a patient has told him about his illness.
These ideas go back to Hippocrates. He required his pupils to take the
following oath:

I will follow that system or regimen which, according to my ability and
judgment, I consider to be for the benefit of my patients, and abstain from
whatever is deleterious and mischievous. 1 will give no deadly medicine to
anyone if asked nor suggest any such counsel, and in like manner I will not
give to a woman the means to produce an abortion. Whenever I go into a house, I
will go for the benefit of the sick and will abstain from every voluntary act
of mischief and corruption, and further, from the seduction of females or
males, whether freemen or slaves.

Whatever, in connection with my professional practice, I see or hear which
ought not to be spoken abroad, I will keep secret. So long as I continue to
carry out this oath unviolated, may it be granted to me to enjoy life and the
practice of the art, respected by all men in all times, but should I violate
this oath, may the reverse be my lot.

Sophie awoke with a start on Saturday morning. Was it a dream or had she really
seen the philosopher?

She felt under the bed with one hand. Yes—there lay the letter that had come
during the night. It wasn’t only a dream.

She had definitely seen the philosopher! And what’s more, with her own eyes she
had seen him take her letter!

She crouched down on the floor and pulled out all the typewritten pages from
under the bed. But what was that? Right by the wall there was something red. A
scarf, perhaps?

Sophie edged herself in under the bed and pulled out a red silk scarf. It
wasn’t hers, that was for sure!

She examined it more closely and gasped when she saw HILDE written in ink along
the seam.

Hilde! But who was Hilde? How could their paths keep crossing like this?

