# An Immortal Soul
[Metadata]: # {31}
[Descriptor]: # {31}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# An Immortal Soul
As I explained, Plato believed that reality is divided into two regions.

One region is the world of the senses, about which we can only have approximate
or incomplete knowledge by using our five (approximate or incomplete) senses.
In this sensory world, “everything flows” and nothing is permanent. Nothing in
the sensory world is, there are only things that come to be and pass away.

The other region is the world of ideas, about which we can have true knowledge
by using our reason. This world of ideas cannot be perceived by the senses, but
the ideas (or forms) are eternal and immutable.

According to Plato, man is a dual creature. We have a body that “flows,” is
inseparably bound to the world of the senses, and is subject to the same fate
as everything else in this world—a soap bubble, for example. All our senses are
based in the body and are consequently unreliable. But we also have an immortal
soul—and this soul is the realm of reason. And not being physical, the soul can
survey the world of ideas.

But that’s not all, Sophie. IT’S NOT ALL!

Plato also believed that the soul existed before it inhabited the body, (it was
lying on a shelf in the closet with all the cookie molds.) But as soon as the
soul wakes up in a human body, it has forgotten all the perfect ideas. Then
something starts to happen. In fact, a wondrous process begins. As the human
being discovers the various forms in the natural world, a vague recollection
stirs his soul. He sees a horse—but an imperfect horse. (A gingerbread horse!)
The sight of it is sufficient to awaken in the soul a faint recollection of the
perfect “horse,” which the soul once saw in the world of ideas, and this stirs
the soul with a yearning to return to its true realm. Plato calls this yearning
eras—which means love. The soul, then, experiences a “longing to return to its
true origin.” From now on, the body and the whole sensory world is experienced
as imperfect and insignificant. The soul yearns to fly home on the wings of
love to the world of ideas. It longs to be freed from the chains of the body.

Let me quickly emphasize that Plato is describing an ideal course of life,
since by no means all humans set the soul free to begin its journey back to the
world of ideas. Most people cling to the sensory world’s “reflections” of
ideas. They see a horse—and another horse. But they never see that of which
every horse is only a feeble imitation. (They rush into the kitchen and stuff
themselves with gingerbread cookies without so much as a thought as to where
they came from.) What Plato describes is the philosophers’way. His philosophy
can be read as a description of philosophic practice.

When you see a shadow, Sophie, you will assume that there must be something
casting the shadow. You see the shadow of an animal. You think it may be a
horse, but you are not quite sure. So you turn around and see the horse
itself—which of course is infinitely more beautiful and sharper in outline than
the blurred “horse-shadow.” Plato believed similarly that all natural phenomena
are merely shadows of the eternal forms or ideas. But most people are content
with a life among shadows. They give no thought to what is casting the shadows.
They think shadows are all there are, never realizing even that they are, in
fact, shadows. And thus they pay no heed to the immortality of their own soul.

