# Romanticism
[Metadata]: # {70}
[Descriptor]: # {70}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Romanticism
…the path of mystery leads inwards…



Hilde let the heavy ring binder slide into her lap. Then she let it slide
further onto the floor.

It was already lighter in the room than when she had gone to bed. She looked at
the clock. It was almost three. She snuggled down under the covers and closed
her eyes. As she was falling asleep she wondered why her father had begun to
write about Little Red Ridinghood and Winnie-the-Pooh ...

She slept until eleven o’clock the next morning. The tension in her body told
her that she had dreamed intensely all night, but she could not remember what
she had dreamed. It felt as if she had been in a totally different reality.

She went downstairs and fixed breakfast. Her mother had put on her blue
jumpsuit ready to go down to the boathouse and work on the motorboat. Even if
it was not afloat, it had to be shipshape when Dad got back from Lebanon.

“Do you want to come down and give me a hand?”

“I have to read a little first. Should I come down with some tea and a
mid-morning snack?”

“What mid-morning?”

When Hilde had eaten she went back up to her room, made her bed, and sat
herself comfortably with the ring binder resting against her knees.



* * *



Sophie slipped through the hedge and stood in the big garden which she had once
thought of as her own Garden of Eden . . .

There were branches and leaves strewn everywhere after the storm the night
before. It seemed to her that there was some connection between the storm and
the fallen branches and her meeting with Little Red Ridinghood and
Winnie-the-Pooh.

She went into the house. Her mother had just gotten home and was putting some
bottles of soda in the refrigerator. On the table was a delicious-looking
chocolate cake.

“Are you expecting visitors?” asked Sophie; she had almost forgotten it was her
birthday.

“We’re having the real party next Saturday, but I thought we ought to have a
little celebration today as well.”

“How?”

“I have invited Joanna and her parents.”

“Fine with me.”

The visitors arrived shortly before half-past seven. The atmosphere was
somewhat formal—Sophie’s mother very seldom saw Joanna’s parents socially.

It was not long before Sophie and Joanna went upstairs to Sophie’s room to
write the garden party invitations. Since Alberto Knox was also to be invited,
Sophie had the idea of inviting people to a “philosophical garden party.”
Joanna didn’t object. It was Sophie’s party after all, and theme parties were
“in” at the moment.

Finally they had composed the invitation. It had taken two hours and they
couldn’t stop laughing.

Dear. . .

You are hereby invited to a philosophical garden party at 3 Clover Close on
Saturday June 23 (Midsummer Eve) at 7 p.m. During the evening we shall
hopefully solve the mystery of life. Please bring warm sweaters and bright
ideas suitable for solving the riddles of philosophy. Because of the danger of
woodland fires we unfortunately cannot have a bonfire, but everybody is free to
let the flames of their imagination flicker unimpeded. There will be at least
one genuine philosopher among the invited guests. For this reason the party is
a strictly private arrangement. Members of the press will not be admitted. With
regards,

Joanna Ingebrigtsen (organizing committee)

and Sophie Amundsen (hostess)



The two girls went downstairs to their parents, who were now talking somewhat
more freely. Sophie handed the draft invitation, written with a calligraphic
pen, to her mother.

“Could you make eighteen copies, please.” It was not the first time she had
asked her mother to make photocopies for her at work.

Her mother read the invitation and then handed it to Joanna’s father.

“You see what I mean? She is going a little crazy.”

“But it looks really exciting,” said Joanna’s father, handing the sheet on to
his wife. “I wouldn’t mind coming to that party myself.”

Barbie read the invitation, then she said: “Well, I must say! Can we come too,
Sophie?”

“Let’s say twenty copies, then,” said Sophie, taking them at their word.

“You must be nuts!” said Joanna.

Before Sophie went to bed that night she stood for a long time gazing out of
the window. She remembered how she had once seen the outline of Alberto’s
figure in the darkness. It was more than a month ago. Now it was again late at
night, but this was a white summer night.

Sophie heard nothing from Alberto until Tuesday morning. He called just after
her mother had left for work.

“Sophie Amundsen.”

“And Alberto Knox.”

“I thought so.”

“I’m sorry I didn’t call before, but I’ve been working hard on our plan. I can
only be alone and work undisturbed when the major is concentrating wholly and
completely on you.”

“That’s weird.”

“Then I seize the opportunity to conceal myself, you see. The best surveillance
system in the world has its limitations when it is only controlled by one
single person ... I got your card.”

“You mean the invitation?”

“Dare you risk it?”

“Why not?”

“Anything can happen at a party like that.”

“Are you coming?”

“Of course I’m coming. But there is another thing. Did you remember that it’s
the day Hilde’s father gets back from Lebanon?”

“No, I didn’t, actually.”

“It can’t possibly be pure coincidence that he lets you arrange a philosophical
garden party the same day as he gets home to Bjerkely.”

“I didn’t think about it, as I said.”

“I’m sure he did. But all right, we’ll talk about that later. Can you come to
the major’s cabin this morning?”

“I’m supposed to weed the flower beds.”

“Let’s say two o’clock, then. Can you make that?”

“I’ll be there.”

Alberto Knox was sitting on the step again when Sophie arrived.

“Have a seat,” he said, getting straight down to work.

“Previously we spoke of the Renaissance, the Baroque period, and the
Enlightenment. Today we are going to talk about Romanticism, which could be
described as Europe’s last great cultural epoch. We are approaching the end of
a long story, my child.”

“Did Romanticism last that long?”

“It began toward the end of the eighteenth century and lasted till the middle
of the nineteenth. But after 1850 one can no longer speak of whole ‘epochs’
which comprise poetry, philosophy, art, science, and music.”

“Was Romanticism one of those epochs?”

“It has been said that Romanticism was Europe’s last common approach to life.
It started in Germany, arising as a reaction to the Enlightenment’s unequivocal
emphasis on reason. After Kant and his cool intellectualism, it was as if
German youth heaved a sigh of relief.”

“What did they replace it with?”

“The new catchwords were ‘feeling,”imagination,”experience,’ and ‘yearning.’
Some of the Enlightenment thinkers had drawn attention to the importance of
feeling—not least Rousseau—but at that time it was a criticism of the bias
toward reason. What had been an undercurrent now became the mainstream of
German culture.”

“So Kant’s popularity didn’t last very long?”

“Well, it did and it didn’t. Many of the Romantics saw themselves as Kant’s
successors, since Kant had established that there was a limit to what we can
know of ‘das Ding an sich.’ On the other hand, he had underlined the importance
of the ego’s contribution to knowledge, or cognition. The individual was now
completely free to interpret life in his own way. The Romantics exploited this
in an almost unrestrained ‘ego-worship,’ which led to the exaltation of
artistic genius.”

“Were there a lot of these geniuses?”

“Beethoven was one. His music expresses his own feelings and yearnings.
Beethoven was in a sense a ‘free’ artist—unlike the Baroque masters such as
Bach and Handel, who composed their works to the glory of God, mostly in strict
musical forms.”

“I only know the Moonlight Sonata and the Fifth Symphony.”

“But you know how romantic the Moonlight Sonata is, and you can hear how
dramatically Beethoven expresses himself in the Fifth Symphony.”

“You said the Renaissance humanists were individualists too.”

“Yes. There were many similarities between the Renaissance and Romanticism. A
typical one was the importance of art to human cognition. Kant made a
considerable contribution here as well. In his aesthetics he investigated what
happens when we are overwhelmed by beauty—in a work of art, for instance. When
we abandon ourselves to a work of art with no other intention than the
aesthetic experience itself, we are brought closer to an experience of ‘das
Ding an sich.’ “

“So the artist can provide something philosophers can’t express?”

“That was the view of the Romantics. According to Kant, the artist plays freely
on his faculty of cognition. The German poet Schiller developed Kant’s thought
further. He wrote that the activity of the artist is like playing, and man is
only free when he plays, because then he makes up his own rules. The Romantics
believed that only art could bring us closer to ‘the inexpressible.’ Some went
as far as to compare the artist to God.”

“Because the artist creates his own reality the way God created the world.”

“It was said that the artist had a ‘universe-creating imagination.’ In his
transports of artistic rapture he could sense the dissolving of the boundary
between dream and reality.

“Novalis, one of the young geniuses, said that ‘the world becomes a dream, and
the dream becomes reality.’ He wrote a novel called Heinrich von Ofterdingen
set in Medieval times. It was unfinished when he died in 1801, but it was
nevertheless a very significant novel. It tells of the young Heinrich who is
searching for the ‘blue flower’ that he once saw in a dream and has yearned for
ever since. The English Romantic poet Coleridge expressed the same idea; saying
something like this:

What if you slept? And what if, in your sleep, you dreamed? And what if, in
your dream, you went to heaven and there plucked a strange and beautiful
flower? And what if, when you awoke, you had the flower in your hand? Ah, what
then?”

“How pretty!”

“This yearning for something distant and unattainable was characteristic of the
Romantics. They longed for bygone eras, such as the Middle Ages, which now
became enthusiastically reappraised after the Enlightenment’s negative
evaluation. And they longed for distant cultures like the Orient with its
mysticism. Or else they would feel drawn to Night, to Twilight, to old ruins
and the supernatural. They were preoccupied with what we usually refer to as
the dark side of life, or the murky, uncanny, and mystical.”

“It sounds to me like an exciting period. Who were these Romantics?”

“Romanticism was in the main an urban phenomenon. In the first half of the last
century there was, in fact, a flourishing metropolitan culture in many parts of
Europe, not least in Germany. The typical Romantics were young men, often
university students, although they did not always take their studies very
seriously. They had a decidedly anti-middle class approach to life and could
refer to the police or their landladies as philistines, for example, or simply
as the enemy.”

“I would never have dared rent a room to a Romantic!”

“The first generation of Romantics were young in about 1 800, and we could
actually call the Romantic Movement Europe’s first student uprising. The
Romantics were not unlike the hippies a hundred and fifty years later.”

“You mean flower power and long hair, strumming their guitars and lying
around?”

“Yes. It was once said that ‘idleness is the ideal of genius, and indolence the
virtue of the Romantic.’ It was the duty of the Romantic to experience life—or
to dream himself away from it. Day-to-day business could be taken care of by
the philistines.”

“Byron was a Romantic poet, wasn’t he?”

“Yes, both Byron and Shelley were Romantic poets of the so-called Satanic
school. Byron, moreover, provided the Romantic Age with its idol, the Byronic
hero—the alien, moody, rebellious spirit—in life as well as in art. Byron
himself could be both willful and passionate, and being also handsome, he was
besieged by women of fashion. Public gossip attributed the romantic adventures
of his verses to his own life, but although he had numerous liaisons, true love
remained as illusive and as unattainable for him as Novalis’s blue flower.
Novalis became engaged to a fourteen-year-old girl. She died four days after
her fifteenth birthday, but Novalis remained devoted to her for the rest of his
short life.”

“Did you say she died four days after her fifteenth birthday?”

“Yes . . .”

“I am fifteen years and four days old today.”

“So you are.”

“What was her name?”

“Her name was Sophie.”

“What?”

“Yes, it was. . .”

“You scare me. Could it be a coincidence?”

“I couldn’t say, Sophie. But her name was Sophie.”

“Go on!”

“Novalis himself died when he was only twenty-nine. He was one of the ‘y°un9
dead.’ Many of the Romantics died young, usually of tuberculosis. Some
committed suicide . . .”

“Ugh!”

“Those who lived to be old usually stopped being Romantics at about the age of
thirty. Some of them went on to become thoroughly middle-class and
conservative.”

“They went over to the enemy, then.”

“Maybe. But we were talking about romantic love. The theme of unrequited love
was introduced as early as 1774 by Goethe in his novel The Sorrows of Young
Werther. The book ends with young Werther shooting himself when he can’t have
the woman he loves . . .”

“Was it necessary to go that far?”

“The suicide rate rose after the publication of the novel, and for a time the
book was banned in Denmark and Norway. So being a Romantic was not without
danger. Strong emotions were involved.”

“When you say ‘Romantic/ I think of those great big landscape paintings, with
dark forests and wild, rugged nature ... preferably in swirling mists.”

“Yes, one of the features of Romanticism was this yearning for nature and
nature’s mysteries. And as I said, it was not the kind of thing that arises in
rural areas. You may recall Rousseau, who initiated the slogan ‘back to
nature.’ The Romantics gave this slogan popular currency. Romanticism
represents not least a reaction to the Enlightenment’s mechanistic universe. It
was said that Romanticism implied a renaissance of the old cosmic
consciousness.”

“Explain that, please.”

“It means viewing nature as a whole; the Romantics were tracing their roots not
only back to Spinoza, but also to Plotinus and Renaissance philosophers like
Jakob Bohme and Giordano Bruno. What all these thinkers had in common was that
they experienced a divine ‘ego’ in nature.”

“They were Pantheists then . . .”

“Both Descartes and Hume had drawn a sharp line between the ego and ‘extended’
reality. Kant had also left behind him a sharp distinction between the
cognitive ‘I’ and nature ‘in itself.’ Now it was said that nature is nothing
but one big ‘I.’ The Romantics also used the expressions ‘world soul’ or ‘world
spirit.’ “

“I see.”

“The leading Romantic philosopher was Schelling, who lived from 1775 to 1854.
He wanted to unite mind and matter. All of nature—both the human soul and
physical reality—is the expression of one Absolute, or world spirit, he
believed.”

“Yes, just like Spinoza.”

“Nature is visible spirit, spirit is invisible nature, said Schelling, since
one senses a ‘structuring spirit’ everywhere in nature. He also said that
matter is slumbering intelligence.”

“You’ll have to explain that a bit more clearly.”

“Schelling saw a ‘world spirit’ in nature, but he saw the same ‘world spirit’
in the human mind. The natural and the spiritual are actually expressions of
the same thing.”

“Yes, why not?”

“World spirit can thus be sought both in nature and in one’s own mind. Novalis
could therefore say ‘the path of mystery leads inwards.’ He was saying that man
bears the whole universe within himself and comes closest to the mystery of the
world by stepping inside himself.”

“That’s a very lovely thought.”

“For many Romantics, philosophy, nature study, and poetry formed a synthesis.
Sitting in your attic dashing off inspired verses and investigating the life of
plants or the composition of rocks were only two sides of the same coin because
nature is not a dead mechanism, it is one living world spirit.”

“Another word and I think I’ll become a Romantic.”

“The Norwegian-born naturalist Henrik Steffens—whom Wergeland called ‘Norway’s
departed laurel leaf because he had settled in Germany—went to Copenhagen in
1801 to lecture on German Romanticism. He characterized the Romantic Movement
by saying, ‘Tired of the eternal efforts to fight our way through raw matter,
we chose another way and sought to embrace the infinite. We went inside
ourselves and created a new world ... ‘ “

“How can you remember all that?”

“A bagatelle, child.”

“Go on, then.”

“Schelling also saw a development in nature from earth and rock to the human
mind. He drew attention to very gradual transitions from inanimate nature to
more complicated life forms. It was characteristic of the Romantic view in
general that nature was thought of as an organism, or in other words, a unity
which is constantly developing its innate potentialities. Nature is like a
flower unfolding its leaves and petals. Or like a poet unfolding his verses.”

“Doesn’t that remind you of Aristotle?”

“It does indeed. The Romantic natural philosophy had Aristotelian as well as
Neoplatonic overtones. Aristotle had a more organic view of natural processes
than the mechanical materialists . . .”

“Yes, that’s what I thought. . .”

“We find similar ideas at work in the field of history. A man who came to have
great significance for the Romantics was the historical philosopher Johann
Gottfried von Herder, who lived from 1744 to 1803. He believed that history is
characterized by continuity, evolution, and design. We say he had a ‘dynamic’
view of history because he saw it as a process. The Enlightenment philosophers
had often had a ‘static’ view of history. To them, there was only one universal
reason which there could be more or less of at various periods. Herder showed
that each historical epoch had its own intrinsic value and each nation its own
character or ‘soul.’ The question is whether we can identify with other
cultures.”

“So, just as we have to identify with another person’s Situation to understand
them better, we have to identify with other cultures to understand them too.”

“That is taken for granted nowadays. But in the Romantic period it was a new
idea. Romanticism helped strengthen the feeling of national identity. It is no
coincidence that the Norwegian struggle for national independence flourished at
that particular time—in 1814.”

“I see.”

“Because Romanticism involved new orientations in so many areas, it has been
usual to distinguish between two forms of Romanticism. There is what we call
Universal Romanticism, referring to the Romantics who were preoccupied with
nature, world soul, and artistic genius. This form of Romanticism flourished
first, especially around 1800, in Germany, in the town of Jena.”

“And the other?”

“The other is the so-called National Romanticism, which became popular a little
later, especially in the town of Heidelberg. The National Romantics were mainly
interested in the history of ‘the people,’ the language of ‘the people,’ and
the culture of ‘the people’ in general. And ‘the people’ were seen as an
organism unfolding its innate potentiality—exactly like nature and history.”

“Tell me where you live, and I’ll tell you who you are.”

“What united these two aspects of Romanticism was first and foremost the key
word ‘organism.’ The Romantics considered both a plant and a nation to be a
living organism. A poetic work was also a living organism. Language was an
organism. The entire physical world, even, was considered one organism. There
is therefore no sharp dividing line between National Romanticism and Universal
Romanticism. The world spirit was just as much present in the people and in
popular culture as in nature and art.”

“I see.”

“Herder had been the forerunner, collecting folk songs from many lands under
the eloquent title Voices of the People. He even referred to folktales as ‘the
mother tongue of the people.’ The Brothers Grimm and others began to collect
folk songs and fairy tales in Heidelberg. You must know of Grimm’s Fairy
Tales.”

“Oh sure, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Rumpelstiltskin, The Frog Prince,
Hansel and Gretel . . .”

“And many more. In Norway we had Asbj0rnsen and Moe, who traveled around the
country collecting ‘folks’ own tales.’ It was like harvesting a juicy fruit
that was suddenly discovered to be both good and nourishing. And it was
urgent—the fruit had already begun to fall. Folk songs were collected; the
Norwegian language began to be studied scientifically. The old myths and sagas
from heathen times were rediscovered, and composers all over Europe began to
incorporate folk melodies into their compositions in an attempt to bridge the
gap between folk music and art music.”

“What’s art music?”

“Art music is music composed by a particular person, like Beethoven. Folk music
was not written by any particular person, it came from the people. That’s why
we don’t know exactly when the various folk melodies date from. We distinguish
in the same way between folktales and art tales.”

“So art tales are ... ?”

“They are tales written by an author, like Hans Christian Andersen. The fairy
tale genre was passionately cultivated by the Romantics. One of the German
masters of the genre was E.T.A, Hoffmann.”

“I’ve heard of The Tales of Hoffmann.”

“The fairy tale was the absolute literary ideal of the Romantics—in the same
way that the absolute art form of the Baroque period was the theater. It gave
the poet full scope to explore his own creativity.”

“He could play God to a fictional universe.”

“Precisely. And this is a good moment to sum up.”

“Go ahead.”

“The philosophers of Romanticism viewed the ‘world soul’ as an ‘ego’ which in a
more or less dreamlike state created everything in the world. The philosopher
Fichte said that nature stems from a higher, unconscious imagination. Scheliing
said explicitly that the world is ‘in God.’ God is aware of some of it, he
believed, but there are other aspects of nature which represent the unknown in
God. For God also has a dark side.”

“The thought is fascinating and frightening. It reminds me of Berkeley.”

“The relationship between the artist and his work was seen in exactly the same
light. The fairy tale gave the writer free rein to exploit his
‘universe-creating imagination.’ And even the creative act was not always
completely conscious. The writer could experience that his story was being
written by some innate force. He could practically be in a hypnotic trance
while he wrote.”

“He could?”

“Yes, but then he would suddenly destroy the illusion. He would intervene in
the story and address ironic comments to the reader, so that the reader, at
least momentarily, would be reminded that it was, after all, only a story.”

“I see.”

“At the same time the writer could remind his reader that it was he who was
manipulating the fictional universe. This form of disillusion is called
‘romantic irony.’ Henrik Ibsen, for example, lets one of the characters in Peer
Gynt say: ‘One cannot die in the middle of Act Five.’ “

“That’s a very funny line, actually. What he’s really saying is that he’s only
a fictional character.”

“The statement is so paradoxical that we can certainly emphasize it with a new
section.”

“What did you mean by that?”

“Oh, nothing, Sophie. But we did say that Novalis’s fiancee was called Sophie,
just like you, and that she died when she was only fifteen years and four days
old ...”

“You’re scaring me, don’t you know that?”

Alberto sat staring, stony faced. Then he said: “But you needn’t be worriedthat
you will meet the same fate as Novalis’s fiancee.”

“Why not?”

“Because there are several more chapters.”

“What are you saying?”

“I’m saying that anyone reading the story of Sophie and Alberto will know
intuitively that there are many pages of the story still to come. We have only
gotten as far as Romanticism.”

“You’re making me dizzy.”

“It’s really the major trying to make Hilde dizzy. It’s not very nice or him,
is it? New section!”



* * *



Alberto had hardly finished speaking when a boy came running out of the woods.
He had a turban on his head, and he was carrying an oil lamp.

Sophie grabbed Alberto’s arm.

“Who’s that?” she asked.

The boy answered for himself: “My name is Aladdin and I’ve come all the way
from Lebanon.”

Alberto looked at him sternly:

“And what do you have in your lamp?”

The boy rubbed the lamp, and out of it rose a thick cloud which formed itself
into the figure of a man. He had a black beard like Alberto’s and a blue beret.
Floating above the lamp, he said: “Can you hear me, Hilde? I suppose it’s too
late for any more birthday greetings. I just wanted to say that Bjerkely and
the south country back home seem like fairyland to me here in Lebanon. I’ll see
you there in a few days.”

So saying, the figure became a cloud again and was sucked back into the lamp.
The boy with the turban put the lamp under his arm, ran into the woods, and was
gone.

“I don’t believe this,” said Sophie.

“A bagatelle, my dear.”

“The spirit of the lamp spoke exactly like Hilde’s father.”

“That’s because it was Hilde’s father—in spirit.”

“But. . .”

“Both you and I and everything around us are living deep in the major’s mind.
It is late at night on Saturday, April 28, and all the UN soldiers are asleep
around the major, who, although still awake, is not far from sleep himself. But
he must finish the book he is to give Hilde as a fifteenth birthday present.
That’s why he has to work, Sophie, that’s why the poor man gets hardly any
rest.”

“I give up.”

“New section!”



Sophie and Alberto sat looking across the little lake. Alberto seemed to be in
some sort of trance. After a while Sophie ventured to nudge his shoulder.

“Were you dreaming?”

“Yes, he was interfering directly there. The last few paragraphs were dictated
by him to the letter. He should be ashamed of himself. But now he has given
himself away and come out into the open. Now we know that we are living our
lives in a book which Hilde’s father will send home to Hilde as a birthday
present. You heard what I said? Well, it wasn’t ‘me’ saying it.”

“If what you say is true, I’m going to run away from the book and go my own
way.”

“That’s exactly what I am planning. But before that can happen, we must try and
talk with Hilde. She reads every word we say. Once we succeed in getting away
from here it will be much harder to contact her. That means we must grasp the
opportunity now.”

“What do we say?”

“I think the major is just about to fall asleep over his typewriter—although
his fingers are still racing feverishly over the keys ...”

“It’s a creepy thought.”

“This is the moment when he may write something he will regret later. And he
has no correction fluid. That’s a vital part of my plan. May no one give the
major a bottle of correction fluid!”

“He won’t get so much as a single coverup strip from me!”

“I’m calling on that poor girl here and now to rebel against her own father.
She should be ashamed to let herself be amused by his self-indulgent playing
with shadows. If only we had him here, we’d give him a taste of our
indignation!”

“But he’s not here.”

“He is here in spirit and soul, but he’s also safely tucked away in Lebanon.
Everything around us is the major’s ego.”

“But he is more than what we can see here.”

“We are but shadows in the major’s soul. And it is no easy matter for a shadow
to turn on its master, Sophie. It requires both cunning and strategy. But we
have an opportunity of influencing Hilde. Only an angel can rebel against God.”

“We could ask Hilde to give him a piece of her mind the moment he gets home.
She could tell him he’s a rogue. She could wreck his boat—or at least, smash
the lantern.”

Alberto nodded. Then he said: “She could also run away from him That would be
much easier for her than it is for us. She could leave the major’s house and
never return. Wouldn’t that be fitting for a major who plays with his
‘universe-creating imagination’ at our expense?”

“I can picture it. The major travels all over the world searching for Hilde.
But Hilde has vanished into thin air because she can’t stand living with a
father who plays the fool at Alberto’s and Sophie’s expense.”

“Yes, that’s it! Plays the fool! That’s what I meant by his using us as
birthday amusement. But he’d better watch out, Sophie. So had Hilde!”

“How do you mean?”

“Are you sitting tight?”

“As long as there are no more genies from a lamp.”

“Try to imagine that everything that happens to us goes on in someone else’s
mind. We are that mind. That means we have no soul, we are someone else’s soul.
So far we are on familiar philosophical ground. Both Berkeley and Schelling
would prick up their ears.”

“And?”

“Now it is possible that this soul is Hilde M0ller Knag’s father. He is over
there in Lebanon writing a book on philosophy for his daughter’s fifteenth
birthday. When Hilde wakes up on June 15, she finds the book on her bedside
table, and now she—and anyone else—can read about us. It has long been
suggested that this ‘present’ could be shared with others.”

“Yes, I remember.”

“What I am saying to you now will be read by Hilde after her father in Lebanon
once imagined that I was telling you he was in Lebanon ... imagining me telling
you that he was in Lebanon.”

Sophie’s head was swimming. She tried to remember what she had heard about
Berkeley and the Romantics. Alberto Knox continued: “But they shouldn’t feel so
cocky because of that. They are the last people who should laugh, because
laughter can easily get stuck in their throat.”

“Who are we talking about?”

“Hilde and her father. Weren’t we talking about them?”

“But why shouldn’t they feel so cocky?”

“Because it is feasible that they, too, are nothing but mind.”

“How could they be?”

“If it was possible for Berkeley and the Romantics, it must be possible for
them. Maybe the major is also a shadow in a book about him and Hilde, which is
also about us, since we are a part of their lives.”

“That would be even worse. That makes us only shadows of shadows.”

“But it is possible that a completely different author is somewhere writing a
book about a UN Major Albert Knag, who is writing a book for his daughter
Hilde. This book is about a certain Alberto Knox who suddenly begins to send
humble philosophical lectures to Sophie Amundsen, 3 Clover Close.”

“Do you believe that?”

“I’m just saying it’s possible. To us, that author would be a ‘hidden God.’
Although everything we are and everything we say and do proceeds from him,
because we are him we will never be able to know anything about him. We are in
the innermost box.”

Alberto and Sophie now sat for a long time without saying anything. It was
Sophie who finally broke the silence: “But if there really is an author who is
writing a story about Hilde’s father in Lebanon, just like he is writing a
story about us . . .”

“Yes?”

“... then it’s possible that author shouldn’t be cocky either.”

“What do you mean?”

“He is sitting somewhere, hiding both Hilde and me deep inside his head. Isn’t
it just possible that he, too, is part of a higher mind?”

Atberto nodded.

“Of course it is, Sophie. That’s also a possibility. And if that is the way it
is, it means he has permitted us to have this philosophical conversation in
order to present this possibility. He wishes to emphasize that he, too, is a
helpless shadow, and that this book, in which Hilde and Sophie appear, is in
reality a textbook on philosophy.”

“A textbook?”

“Because all our conversations, all our dialogues ...”

“Yes?”

“... are in reality one long monologue.”

“I get the feeling that everything is dissolving into mind and spirit. I’m glad
there are still a few philosophers left. The philosophy that began so proudly
with Thales, Em-pedocles, and Democritus can’t be stranded here, surely?”

“Of course not. I still have to tell you about Hegel. He was the first
philosopher who tried to salvage philosophy when the Romantics had dissolved
everything into spirit.”

“I’m very curious.”

“So as not to be interrupted by any further spirits or shadows, we shall go
inside.”

“It’s getting chilly out here anyway.”

“Next chapter!”

