# The Postcards
[Metadata]: # {51}
[Descriptor]: # {51}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Postcards
…I’m imposing a severe censorship on myself…



Several days went by without any word from the philosophy teacher. Tomorrow was
Thursday, May 17— Norway’s national day. School would be closed on the 18th as
well. As they walked home after school Joanna suddenly exclaimed, “Let’s go
camping!”

Sophie’s immediate reaction was that she couldn’t be away from the house for
long. But then she said, “Sure, why not?”

A couple of hours later Joanna arrived at Sophie’s door with a large backpack.
Sophie had packed hers as well, and she also had the tent. They both had
bedrolls and sweaters, groundsheets and flashlights, large-size thermos bottles
and plenty of their favorite food.

When Sophie’s mother got home around five o’clock, she gave them a sermon about
what they must and must not do. She also insisted on knowing where they were
going to set up camp.

They told her they intended to make for Grouse Top. They might be lucky enough
to hear the mating call of the grouse next morning.

Sophie had an ulterior motive for choosing that particular spot. She thought
that Grouse Top must be pretty close to the major’s cabin. Something was urging
her to return to it, but she didn’t dare go alone.

The two girls walked down the path that led from the little cul-de-sac just
beyond Sophie’s garden gate. They chatted about this and that, and Sophie
enjoyed taking a little time off from everything having to do with philosophy.

By eight o’clock they had pitched their tent in a clearing by Grouse Top. They
had prepared themselves for the night and their bedrolls were unfolded. When
they had eaten their sandwiches, Sophie asked, “Have you ever heard of the
major’s cabin?”

“The major’s cabin?”

“There’s a hut in the woods somewhere near here ... by a little lake. A strange
man lived there once, a major, that’s why it’s called the major’s cabin.”

“Does anyone live there now?”

“Do you want to go and see?”

“Where is it?”

Sophie pointed in among the trees.

Joanna was not particularly eager, but in the end they set out. The sun was low
in the sky.

They walked in between the tall pine trees at first, but soon they were pushing
their way through bush and thicket. Eventually they made their way down to a
path. Could it be the path Sophie had followed that Sunday morning?

It must have been—almost at once she could point to something shining between
the trees to the right of the path.

“It’s in there,” she said.

They were soon standing at the edge of the small lake. Sophie gazed at the
cabin across the water. All the windows were now shuttered up. The red building
was the most deserted place she had seen for ages.

Joanna turned toward her. “Do we have to walk on the water?”

“Of course not. We’ll row.”

Sophie pointed down into the reeds. There lay the rowboat, just as before.

“Have you been here before?”

Sophie shook her head. Trying to explain her previous visit would be far too
complicated. And then she would have to tell her friend about Alberto Knox and
the philosophy course as well.

They laughed and joked as they rowed across the water. When they reached the
opposite bank, Sophie made sure they drew the boat well up on land.

They went to the front door. As there was obviously nobody in the cabin, Joanna
tried the door handle.

“Locked... you didn’t expect it to be open, did you?”

“Maybe we can find a key,” said Sophie.

She began to search in the crevices of the stonework foundation.

“Oh, let’s go back to the tent instead,” said Joanna after a few minutes.

But just then Sophie exclaimed, “Here it is! I found it!”

She held up the key triumphantly. She put it in the lock and the door swung
open.

The two friends sneaked inside as if they were up to something criminal. It was
cold and dark in the cabin.

“We can’t see a thing!” said Joanna.

But Sophie had thought of that. She took a box of matches out of her pocket and
struck one. They only had time to see that the cabin was deserted before the
match went out. Sophie struck another, and this time she noticed a stump of
candle in a wrought-iron candlestick on top of the stove. She lit it with the
third match and the little room became light enough for them to look around.

“Isn’t it odd that such a small candle can light up so much darkness?” said
Sophie.

Her friend nodded.

“But somewhere the light disappears into the dark,” Sophie went on. “Actually,
darkness has no existence of its own. It’s only a lack of light.”

Joanna shivered. “That’s creepy! Come on, let’s go...”

“Not before we’ve looked in the mirror.”

Sophie pointed to the brass mirror hanging above the chest of drawers, just as
before.

“That’s really pretty!” said Joanna.

“But it’s a magic mirror.”

“Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?”

“I’m not kidding, Joanna. I am sure you can look in it and see something on the
other side.”

“Are you sure you’ve never been here before? And why is it so amusing to scare
me all the time?”

Sophie could not answer that one.

“Sorry.”

Now it was Joanna who suddenly discovered something lying on the floor in the
corner. It was a small box. Joanna picked it up.

“Postcards,” she said.

Sophie gasped.

“Don’t touch them! Do you hear—don’t you dare touch them!”

Joanna jumped. She threw the box down as if she had burnt herself. The
postcards were strewn all over the floor. The next second she began to laugh.

“They’re only postcards!”

Joanna sat down on the floor and started to pick them up. After a while Sophie
sat down beside her.

“Lebanon ... Lebanon ... Lebanon ... They are all postmarked in Lebanon,”
Joanna discovered.

“I know,” said Sophie.

Joanna sat bolt upright and looked Sophie in the eye.

“So you have been here before!”

“Yes, I guess I have.”

It suddenly struck her that it would have been a whole lot easier if she had
just admitted she had been here before. It couldn’t do any harm if she let her
friend in on the mysterious things she had experienced during the last few
days.

“I didn’t want to tell you before we were here.”

Joanna began to read the cards.

“They are all addressed to someone called Hilde Moller Knag.”

Sophie had not touched the cards yet.

“What address?”

Joanna read: “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Alberto Knox, Lillesand, Norway.”

Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. She was afraid they would say c/o Sophie
Amundsen.

She began to inspect them more closely.

“April 28 ... May 4 ... May 6 ... May 9 ... They were stamped a few days ago.”

“But there’s something else. All the postmarks are Norwegian! Look at that...
UN Battalion ... the stamps are Norwegian too!”

“I think that’s the way they do it. They have to be sort of neutral, so they
have their own Norwegian post office down there.”

“But how do they get the mail home?”

“The air force, probably.”

Sophie put the candlestick on the floor, and the two friends began to read the
cards. Joanna arranged them in chronological order and read the first card:

Dear Hilde, I can’t wait to come home to Lillesand. I expect to land at Kjevik
airport early evening on Midsummer Eve. I would much rather have arrived in
time for your 15th birthday but I’m under military command of course. To make
up for it, I promise to devote all my loving care to the huge present you are
getting for your birthday.

With love from someone who is always thinking about his daughter’s future.

P.S. I’m sending a copy of this card to our mutual friend. I know you
understand, Hilde. At the moment I’m being very secretive, but you will
understand.

Sophie picked up the next card:

Dear Hilde, Down here we take one day at a time. If there is one thing I’m
going to remember from these months in Lebanon, it’s all this waiting. But I’m
doing what I can so you have as great a 15th birthday as possible. I can’t say
any more at the moment. I’m imposing a severe censorship on myself. Love, Dad.

The two friends sat breathless with excitement. Neither of them spoke, they
just read what was written on the cards:

My dear child, What I would like best would be to send you my secret thoughts
with a white dove. But they are all out of white doves in Lebanon. If there is
anything this war-torn country needs, it is white doves. I pray the UN will
truly manage to make peace in the world some day.

P.S. Maybe your birthday present can be shared with other people. Let’s talk
about that when I get home. But you still have no idea what I’m talking about,
right? Love from someone who has plenty of time to think for the both of us.

When they had read six cards, there was only one left. It read:

Dear Hilde, I am now so bursting with all these secrets for your birthday that
I have to stop myself several times a day from calling home and blowing the
whole thing. It is something that simply grows and grows. And as you know, when
a thing gets bigger and bigger it’s more difficult to keep it to yourself. Love
from Dad.

P.S. Some day you will meet a girl called Sophie. To give you both a chance to
get to know more about each other before you meet, I have begun sending her
copies of all the cards I send to you. I expect she will soon begin to catch
on, Hilde. As yet she knows no more than you. She has a girlfriend called
Joanna. Maybe site can be of help?

After reading the last card, Joanna and Sophie sat quite still staring wildly
at each other. Joanna was holding Sophie’s wrist in a tight grip.

“I’m scared,” she said.

“So am I.”

“When was the last card stamped?”

Sophie looked again at the card.

“May 16,” she said. “That’s today.”

“It can’t be!” cried Joanna, almost angrily.

They examined the postmark carefully, but there was no mistaking it...
05-16-90.

“It’s impossible,” insisted Joanna. “And I can’t imagine who could have written
it. It must be someone who knows us. But how could they know we would come here
on this particular day?”

Joanna was by far the more scared of the two. The business with Hilde and her
father was nothing new to Sophie.

“I think it has something to do with the brass mirror.”

Joanna jumped again.

“You don’t actually think the cards come fluttering out of the mirror the
minute they are stamped in Lebanon?”

“Do you have a better explanation?”

“No.”

Sophie got to her feet and held the candle up in front of the two portraits on
the wall. Joanna came over and peered at the pictures.

“Berkeley and Bjerkely. What does that mean?”

“I have no idea.”

The candle was almost burnt down.

“Let’s go,” said Joanna. “Come on!”

“We must just take the mirror with us.”

Sophie reached up and unhooked the large brass mirror from the wall above the
chest of drawers. Joanna tried to stop her but Sophie would not be deterred.

When they got outside it was as dark as a May night can get. There was enough
light in the sky for the clear outlines of bushes and trees to be visible. The
small lake lay like a reflection of the sky above it. The two girls rowed
pensively across to the other side.

Neither of them spoke much on the way back to the tent, but each knew that the
other was thinking intensely about what they had seen. Now and then a
frightened bird would start up, and a couple of times they heard the hooting of
an owl.

As soon as they reached the tent, they crawled into their bedrolls. Joanna
refused to have the mirror inside the tent. Before they fell asleep, they
agreed that it was scary enough, knowing it was just outside the tent flap.
Sophie had also taken the postcards and put them in one of the pockets of her
backpack.

They woke early next morning. Sophie was up first. She put her boots on and
went outside the tent. There lay the large mirror in the grass, covered with
dew.

Sophie wiped the dew off with her sweater and gazed down at her own reflection.
It was as if she was looking down and up at herself at the same time. Luckily
she found no early morning postcard from Lebanon.

Above the broad clearing behind the tent a ragged morning mist was drifting
slowly into little wads of cotton. Small birds were chirping energetically but
Sophie could neither see nor hear any grouse.

The girls put on extra sweaters and ate their breakfast outside the tent. Their
conversation soon turned to the major’s cabin and the mysterious cards.

After breakfast they folded up the tent and set off for home. Sophie carried
the large mirror under her arm. From time to time she had to rest—Joanna
refused to touch it.

As they approached the outskirts of the town they heard a few sporadic shots.
Sophie recalled what Hilde’s father had written about war-torn Lebanon, and she
realized how lucky she was to have been born in a peaceful country. The “shots”
they heard came from innocent fireworks celebrating the national holiday.

Sophie invited Joanna in for a cup of hot chocolate. Her mother was very
curious to know where they had found the mirror. Sophie told her they had found
it outside the major’s cabin, and her mother repeated the story about nobody
having lived there for many years.

When Joanna had gone, Sophie put on a red dress. The rest of the Norwegian
national day passed quite normally. In the evening, the TV news had a feature
on how the Norwegian UN battalion had celebrated the day in Lebanon. Sophie’s
eyes were glued to the screen. One of the men she was seeing could be Hilde’s
father.

The last thing Sophie did on May 17 was to hang the large mirror on the wall in
her room. The following morning there was a new brown envelope in the den. She
tore it open at once and began to read.

