# No Innate Ideas
[Metadata]: # {36}
[Descriptor]: # {36}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# No Innate Ideas
Like the philosophers before him, Plato wanted to find the eternal and
immutable in the midst of all change. So he found the perfect ideas that were
superior to the sensory world. Plato furthermore held that ideas were more real
than all the phenomena of nature. First came the idea “horse,” then came all
the sensory world’s horses trotting along like shadows on a cave wall. The idea
“chicken” came before both the chicken and the egg.

Aristotle thought Plato had turned the whole thing upside down. He agreed with
his teacher that the particular horse “flows” and that no horse lives forever.
He also agreed that the actual form of the horse is eternal and immutable. But
the “idea” horse was simply a concept that we humans had formed after seeing a
certain number of horses. The “idea” or “form” horse thus had no existence of
its own. To Aristotle, the “idea” or the “form” horse was made up of the
horse’s characteristics—which define what we today call the horse species.

To be more precise: by “form” horse, Aristotle meant that which is common to
all horses. And here the metaphor of the gingerbread mold does not hold up
because the mold exists independently of the particular gingerbread cookies.
Aristotle did not believe in the existence of any such molds or forms that, as
it were, lay on their own shelf beyond the natural world. On the contrary, to
Aristotle the “forms” were in the things, because they were the particular
characteristics of these things.

So Aristotle disagreed with Plato that the “idea” chicken came before the
chicken. What Aristotle called the “form” chicken is present in every single
chicken as the chicken’s particular set characteristics—for one, that it lays
eggs. The real chicken and the “form” chicken are thus just as inseparable as
body and soul.

And that is really the essence of Aristotle’s criticism of Plato’s theory of
ideas. But you should not ignore the fact that this was a dramatic turn of
thought. The highest degree of reality, in Plato’s theory, was that which we
think with our reason. It was equally apparent to Aristotle that the highest
degree of reality is that which we perceive with our senses. Plato thought that
all the things we see in the natural world were purely reflections of things
that existed in the higher reality of the world of ideas—and thereby in the
human soul. Aristotle thought the opposite: things that are in the human soul
were purely reflections of natural objects. So nature is the real world.
According to Aristotle, Plato was trapped in a mythical world picture in which
the human imagination was confused with the real world.

Aristotle pointed out that nothing exists in consciousness that has not first
been experienced by the senses. Plato would have said that there is nothing in
the natural world that has not first existed in the world of ideas. Aristotle
held that Plato was thus “doubling the number of things.” He explained a horse
by referring to the “idea” horse. But what kind of an explanation is that,
Sophie? Where does the “idea” horse come from, is my question. Might there not
even be a third horse, which the “idea” horse is just an imitation of?

Aristotle held that all our thoughts and ideas have come into our consciousness
through what we have heard and seen. But we also have an innate power of
reason. We have no innate ideas, as Plato held, but we have the innate faculty
of organizing all sensory impressions into categories and classes. This is how
concepts such as “stone,” “plant,” “animal,” and “human” arise. Similarly there
arise concepts like “horse,” “lobster,” and “canary.”

Aristotle did not deny that humans have innate reason. On the contrary, it is
precisely reason, according to Aristotle, that is man’s most distinguishing
characteristic. But our reason is completely empty until we have sensed
something. So man has no innate “ideas.”

