# Mysticism
[Metadata]: # {50}
[Descriptor]: # {50}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Mysticism
A mystical experience is an experience of merging with God or the “cosmic
spirit.” Many religions emphasize the gulf between God and Creation, but the
mystic experiences no such gulf. He or she has experienced being “one with God”
or “merging” with Him.

The idea is that what we usually call “I” is not the true “I.” In short
glimpses we can experience an identification with a greater “I.” Some mystics
call it God, others call it the cosmic spirit, Nature, or the Universe. When
the fusion happens, the mystic feels that he is “losing himself”; he disappears
into God or is lost in God in the same way that a drop of water loses itself
when it merges with the sea. An Indian mystic once expressed it in this way:
“When I was, God was not. When God is, I am no more.” The Christian mystic
Angelus Silesius (1624-1677) put it another way: Every drop becomes the sea
when it flows oceanward, just as at last the soul ascends and thus becomes the
Lord.

Now you might feel that it cannot be particularly pleasant to “lose oneself.” I
know what you mean. But the point is that what you lose is so very much less
than what you gain. You lose yourself only in the form you have at the moment,
but at the same time you realize that you are something much bigger. You are
the universe. In fact, you are the cosmic spirit itself, Sophie. It is you who
are God. If you have to lose yourself as Sophie Amundsen, you can take comfort
in the knowledge that this “everyday I” is something you will lose one day
anyway. Your real “I”— which you can only experience if you are able to lose
yourself—is, according to the mystics, like a mysterious fire that goes on
burning to all eternity.

But a mystical experience like this does not always come of itself. The mystic
may have to seek the path of “purification and enlightenment” to his meeting
with God. This path consists of the simple life and various meditation
techniques. Then all at once the mystic achieves his goal, and can exclaim, “I
am God” or “I am You.”

Mystical trends are found in all the great world religions. And the
descriptions of mystical experiences given by the mystics show a remarkable
similarity across all cultural boundaries. It is in the mystic’s attempt to
provide a religious or philosophic interpretation of the mystical experience
that his cultural background reveals itself.

In Western mysticism—that is, within Judaism, Christianity, and Islam—the
mystic emphasizes that his meeting is with a personal God. Although God is
present both in nature and in the human soul, he is also far above and beyond
the world. In Eastern mysticism—that is, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Chinese
religion—it is more usual to emphasize that the mystic experiences a total
fusion with God or the “cosmic spirit.”

“I am the cosmic spirit,” the mystic can exclaim, or “I am God.” For God is not
only present in the world; he has nowhere else to be.

In India, especially, there have been strong mystical movements since long
before the time of Plato. Swami Vivekenanda, an Indian who was instrumental in
bringing Hinduism to the west, once said, “Just as certain world religions say
that people who do not believe in a personal God outside themselves are
atheists, we say that a person who does not believe in himself is an atheist.
Not believing in the splendor of one’s own soul is what we call atheism.”

A mystical experience can also have ethical significance. A former president of
India, Sarvepalli Radhak-rishnan, said once, “Love thy neighbor as thyself
because you ore your neighbor. It is an illusion that makes you think that your
neighbor is someone other than yourself.”

People of our own time who do not adhere to a particular religion also tell of
mystical experiences. They have suddenly experienced something they have called
“cosmic consciousness” or an “oceanic feeling.” They have felt themselves
wrenched out of Time and have experienced the world “from the perspective of
eternity.”

Sophie sat up in bed. She had to feel whether she still had a body. As she read
more and more about Plato and the mystics, she had begun to feel as though she
were floating around in the room, out of the window and far off above the town.
From there she had looked down on all the people in the square, and had floated
on and on over the globe that was her home, over the North Sea and Europe, down
over the Sahara and across the African savanna.

The whole world had become almost like a living person, and it felt as if that
person were Sophie herself. The world is me, she thought. The great big
universe that she had often felt to be unfathomable and terrifying—was her own
“I.” Now, too, the universe was enormous and majestic, but now it was herself
who was so big.

The extraordinary feeling was fleeting, but Sophie was sure she would never
forget it. It felt as if something inside her had burst through her forehead
and become merged with everything else, the way a drop of color can tint a
whole jug of water.

When it was all over, it was like waking up with a headache after a wonderful
dream. Sophie registered with a touch of disillusionment that she had a body
which was trying to sit up in bed. Lying on her stomach reading the pages from
Alberto Knox had given her a backache. But she had experienced something
unforgettable.

Eventually she pulled herself together and stood up. The first thing she did
was to punch holes in the pages and file them in her ring binder together with
the other lessons. Then she .went into the garden.

The birds were singing as if the world had just been born. The pale green of
the birches behind the old rabbit hutches was so intense that it seemed as
though the Creator had not yet finished blending the color.

Could she really believe that everything was one divine “I”? Could she believe
that she carried within her a soul that was a “spark from the fire”? If it was
true, then she was truly a divine creature.

