# True Knowledge
[Metadata]: # {30}
[Descriptor]: # {30}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# True Knowledge
I’m sure you’ve been following me, Sophie dear. But you may be wondering
whether Plato was being serious. Did he really believe that forms like these
actually existed in a completely different reality?

He probably didn’t believe it literally in the same way for all his life, but
in some of his dialogues that is certainly how he means to be understood. Let
us try to follow his train of thought.

A philosopher, as we have seen, tries to grasp something that is eternal and
immutable. It would serve no purpose, for instance, to write a philosophic
treatise on the existence of a particular soap bubble. Partly because one would
hardly have time to study it in depth before it burst, and partly because it
would probably be rather difficult to find a market for a philosophic treatise
on something nobody has ever seen, and which only existed for five seconds.

Plato believed that everything we see around us in nature, everything tangible,
can be likened to a soap bubble, since nothing that exists in the world of the
senses is lasting. We know, of course, that sooner or later every human being
and every animal will die and decompose. Even a block of marble changes and
gradually disintegrates. (The Acropolis is falling into ruin, Sophie! It is a
scandal, but that’s the way it is.) Plato’s point is that we can never have
true knowledge of anything that is in a constant state of change. We can only
have opinions about things that belong to the world of the senses, tangible
things. We can only have true knowledge of things that can be understood with
our reason.

All right, Sophie, I’ll explain it more clearly: a gingerbread man can be so
lopsided after all that baking that it can be quite hard to see what it is
meant to be. But having seen dozens of gingerbread men that were more or less
successful, I can be pretty sure what the cookie mold was like. I can guess,
even though I have never seen it. It might not even be an advantage to see the
actual mold with my own eyes because we cannot always trust the evidence of our
senses. The faculty of vision can vary from person to person. On the other
hand, we can rely on what our reason tells us because that is the same for
everyone.

If you are sitting in a classroom with thirty other pupils, and the teacher
asks the class which color of the rainbow is the prettiest, he will probably
get a lot of different answers. But if he asks what 8 times 3 is, the whole
class will—we hope—give the same answer. Because now reason is speaking and
reason is, in a way, the direct opposite of “thinking so” or “feeling.” We
could say that reason is eternal and universal precisely because it only
expresses eternal and universal states.

Plato found mathematics very absorbing because mathematical states never
change. They are therefore states we can have true knowledge of. But here we
need an example.

Imagine you find a round pinecone out in the woods. Perhaps you say you “think”
it looks completely round, whereas Joanna insists it is a bit flattened on one
side. (Then you start arguing about it!) But you cannot have true knowledge of
anything you can perceive with your eyes. On the other hand you can say with
absolute certainty that the sum of the angles in a circle is 360 degrees. In
this case you would be talking about an ideal circle which might not exist in
the physical world but which you can clearly visualize. (You are dealing with
the hidden gingerbread-man mold and not with the particular cookie on the
kitchen table.)

In short, we can only have inexact conceptions of things we perceive with our
senses. But we can have true knowledge of things we understand with our reason.
The sum of the angles in a triangle will remain 180 degrees to the end of time.
And similarly the “idea” horse will walk on four legs even if all the horses in
the sensory world break a leg.

