# Two Cultures
[Metadata]: # {52}
[Descriptor]: # {52}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Two Cultures
... the only way to avoid floating in a vacuum …



It won’t be long now before we meet, my dear Sophie. I thought you would return
to the major’s cabin—that’s why I left all the cards from Hilde’s father there.
That was the only way they could be delivered to her. Don’t worry about how she
will get them. A lot can happen before June 15.

We have seen how the Hellenistic philosophers recycled the ideas of earlier
philosophers. Some even attempted to turn their predecessors into religious
prophets. Plotinus came close to acclaiming Plato as the savior of humanity.

But as we know, another savior was born during the period we have just been
discussing—and that happened outside the Greco-Roman area. I refer to Jesus of
Nazareth. In this chapter we will see how Christianity gradually began to
permeate the Greco-Roman world—more or less the same way that Hilde’s world has
gradually begun to permeate ours.

Jesus was a jew, and the Jews belong to Semitic culture. The Greeks and the
Romans belong to Indo-European culture. European civilization has its roots in
both cultures. But before we take a closer look at the way Christianity
influenced Greco-Roman culture, we must examine these roots.

THE INDO-EUROPEANS

By Indo-European we mean all the nations and cultures that use Indo-European
languages. This covers all European nations except those whose inhabitants
speak one of the Finno-Ugrian languages (Lapp, Finnish, Estonian, and
Hungarian) or Basque. In addition, most Indian and Iranian languages belong to
the Indo-European family of languages.

About 4,000 years ago, the primitive Indo-Europeans lived in areas bordering on
the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. From there, waves of these Indo-European
tribes began to wander southeast into Iran and India, southwest to Greece,
Italy, and Spain, westward through Central Europe to France and Britain,
northwestward to Scandinavia and northward to Eastern Europe and Russia.
Wherever they went, the Indo-Europeans assimilated with the local culture,
although Indo-European languages and Indo-European religion came to play a
dominant role.

The ancient Indian Veda scriptures and Greek philosophy, and for that matter
Snorri Sturluson’s mythology are all written in related languages. But it is
not only the languages that are related. Related languages often lead to
related ideas. This is why we usually speak of an Indo-European “culture.”

The culture of the Indo-Europeans was influenced most of all by their belief in
many gods. This is called polytheism. The names of these gods as well as much
of the religious terminology recur throughout the whole Indo-European area.
I’ll give you a few examples:

The ancient Indians worshipped the celestial god Dyaus, which in Sanskrit means
the sky, day, heaven/ Heaven. In Greek this god is called Zeus, in Latin,
Jupiter (actually iov-pater, or “Father Heaven”), and in Old Norse, Tyr. So the
names Dyaus, Zeus, lov, and Tyr are dialectal variants of the same word.

You probably learned that the old Vikings believed in gods which they called
Aser. This is another word we find recurring all over the Indo-European area.
In Sanskrit, the ancient classical language of India, the gods are called asura
and in Persian Ahura. Another word for “god” is deva in Sanskrit, claeva in
Persian, deus in Latin and tivurr in Old Norse.

In Viking times, people also believed in a special group of fertility gods
(such as Niord, Freyr, and Freyja). These gods were referred to by a special
collective name, vaner, a word that is related to the Latin name for the
goddess of fertility, Venus. Sanskrit has the related word van/, which means
“desire.”

There is also a clear affinity to be observed in some of the Indo-European
myths. In Snorri’s stories of the Old Norse gods, some of the myths are similar
to the myths of India that were handed down from two to three thousand years
earlier. Although Snorri’s myths reflect the Nordic environment and the Indian
myths reflect the Indian, many of them retain traces of a common origin. We can
see these traces most clearly in myths about immortal potions and the struggles
of the gods against the monsters of chaos.

We can also see clear similarities in modes of thought across the Indo-European
cultures. A typical likeness is the way the world is seen as being the subject
of a drama in which the forces of Good and Evil confront each other in a
relentless struggle. Indo-Europeans have therefore often tried to “predict” how
the battles between Good and Evil will turn out.

One could say with some truth that it was no accident that Greek philosophy
originated in the Indo-European sphere of culture. Indian, Greek, and Norse
mythology all have obvious leanings toward a philosophic, or “speculative,”
view of the world.

The Indo-Europeans sought “insight” into the history of the world. We can even
trace a particular word for “insight” or “knowledge” from one culture to
another all over the Indo-European world. In Sanskrit it is vidya. The word is
identical to the Greek word idea, which was so important in Plato’s philosophy.
From Latin, we have the word video, but on Roman ground the word simply means
to see. For us, “I see” can mean “I understand,” and in the cartoons, a light
bulb can flash on above Woody Woodpecker’s head when he gets a bright idea.
(Not until our own day did “seeing” become synonymous with staring at the TV
screen.) In English we know the words wise and wisdom—in German, wissen (to
know). Norwegian has the word viten, which has the same root as the Indian word
vidya, the Greek idea, and the Latin video.

All in all, we can establish that sight was the most important of the senses
for Indo-Europeans. The literature of Indians, Greeks, Persians, and Teutons
alike was characterized by great cosmic visions. (There is that word again:
“vision” comes from the Latin verb “video.”} It was also characteristic for
Indo-European culture to make pictures and sculptures of the gods and of
mythical events.

Lastly, the Indo-Europeans had a cyc//c view of history. This is the belief
that history goes in circles, just like the seasons of the year. There is thus
no beginning and no end to history, but there are different civilizations that
rise and fall in an eternal interplay between birth and death.

Both of the two great Oriental religions, Hinduism and Buddhism, are
Indo-European in origin. So is Greek philosophy, and we can see a number of
clear parallels between Hinduism and Buddhism on the one hand and Greek
philosophy on the other. Even today, Hinduism and Buddhism are strongly imbued
with philosophical reflection.

Not infrequently we find in Hinduism and Buddhism an emphasis on the fact that
the deity is present in all things (pantheism) and that man can become one with
God through religious insight. (Remember Plotinus, Sophie?) To achieve this
requires the practice of deep self-communion or meditation. Therefore in the
Orient, passivity and seclusion can be religious ideals. In ancient Greece,
too, there were many people who believed in an ascetic, or religiously
secluded, way of life for the salvation of the soul Many aspects of medieval
monastic life can be traced back to beliefs dating from the Greco-Roman
civilization.

Similarly, the transmigration of the soul, or the cycle of rebirth, is a
fundamental belief in many Indo-European cultures. For more than 2,500 years,
the ultimate purpose of life for every Indian has been the release from the
cycle of rebirth. Plato also believed in the transmigration of the soul.

