# The Creed
[Metadata]: # {57}
[Descriptor]: # {57}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Creed
It was not only as a missionary that Paul came to have a fundamental
significance for Christianity. He also had great influence within the Christian
congregations. There was a widespread need for spiritual guidance.

One important question in the early years after Jesus was whether non-Jews
could become Christians without first becoming Jews. Should a Greek, for
instance, observe the dietary laws? Paul believed it to be unnecessary.
Christianity was more than a Jewish sect. It addressed itself to everybody in a
universal message of salvation. The “Old Covenant” between God and Israel had
been replaced by the “New Covenant” which Jesus had established between God and
mankind.

However, Christianity was not the only religion at that time. We have seen how
Hellenism was influenced by a fusion of religions. It was thus vitally
necessary for the church to step forward with a concise summary of the
Christian doctrine, both in order to distance itself from other religions and
to prevent schisms within the Christian Church. Therefore the first Creed was
established, summing up the central Christian “dogmas” or tenets.

One such central tenet was that Jesus was both God and man. He was not the “Son
of God” on the strength of his actions alone. He was God himself. But he was
also a “true man” who had shared the misfortunes of mankind and actually
suffered on the Cross.

This may sound like a contradiction. But the message of the church was
precisely that God became man. Jesus was not a “demigod” (which was half man,
half god). Belief in such “demigods” was quite widespread in Greek and
Hellenistic religions. The church taught that Jesus was “perfect God, perfect
man.”

