# Democritus
[Metadata]: # {14}
[Descriptor]: # {14}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Democritus
…the most ingenious toy in the world…



Sophie put all the typed pages from the unknown philosopher back into the
cookie tin and put the lid on it. She crawled out of the den and stood for a
while looking across the garden. She thought about what happened yesterday. Her
mother had teased her about the “love letter” again at breakfast this morning.
She walked quickly over to the mailbox to prevent the same thing from happening
today. Getting a love letter two days in a row would be doubly embarrassing.

There was another little white envelope! Sophie began to discern a pattern in
the deliveries: every afternoon she would find a big brown envelope. While she
read the contents, the philosopher would sneak up to the mailbox with another
little white envelope.

So now Sophie would be able to find out who he was. If it was a he! She had a
good view of the mailbox from her room. If she stood at the window she would
see the mysterious philosopher. White envelopes don’t just appear out of thin
air!

Sophie decided to keep a careful watch the following day. Tomorrow was Friday
and she would have the whole weekend ahead of her.

She went up to her room and opened the envelope. There was only one question
today, but it was even dumber than the previous three:

Why is Lego the most ingenious toy in the world?

For a start, Sophie was not at all sure she agreed that it was. It was years
since she had played with the little plastic blocks. Moreover she could not for
the life of her see what Lego could possibly have to do with philosophy.

But she was a dutiful student. Rummaging on the top shelf of her closet, she
found a bag full of Lego blocks of all shapes and sizes.

For the first time in ages she began to build with them. As she worked, some
ideas began to occur to her about the blocks.

They are easy to assemble, she thought. Even though they are all different,
they all fit together. They are also unbreakable. She couldn’t ever remember
having seen a broken Lego block. All her blocks looked as bright and new as the
day they were bought, many years ago. The best thing about them was that with
Lego she could construct any kind of object. And then she could separate the
blocks and construct something new.

What more could one ask of a toy? Sophie decided that Lego really could be
called the most ingenious toy in the world. But what it had to do with
philosophy was beyond her.

She had nearly finished constructing a big doll’s house. Much as she hated to
admit it, she hadn’t had as much fun in ages.

Why did people quit playing when they grew up?

When her mother got home and saw what Sophie had been doing, she blurted out,
“What fun! I’m so glad you’re not too grown up to play!”

“I’m not playing!” Sophie retorted indignantly, “I’m doing a very complicated
philosophical experiment!”

Her mother signed deeply. She was probably thinking about the white rabbit and
the top hat.

When Sophie got home from school the following day, there were several more
pages for her in a big brown envelope. She took them upstairs to her room. She
could not wait to read them, but she had to keep her eye on the mailbox at the
same time.

