# The Stoics
[Metadata]: # {47}
[Descriptor]: # {47}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Stoics
The Cynics were instrumental in the development of the Stoic school of
philosophy, which grew up in Athens around 300 B.C. Its founder was Zeno, who
came originally from Cyprus and joined the Cynics in Athens after being
shipwrecked. He used to gather his followers under a portico. The name “Stoic”
comes from the Greek word for portico (stoo). Stoicism was later to have great
significance for Roman culture.

Like Heraclitus, the Stoics believed that everyone was a part of the same
common sense—or “logos.” They thought that each person was like a world in
miniature, or “microcosmos,” which is a reflection of the “macro-cosmos.”

This led to the thought that there exists a universal right-ness, the so-called
natural law. And because this natural law was based on timeless human and
universal reason, it did not alter with time and place. In this, then, the
Stoics sided with Socrates against the Sophists.

Natural law governed all mankind, even slaves. The Stoics considered the legal
statutes of the various states merely as incomplete imitations of the “law”
embedded in nature itself.

In the same way that the Stoics erased the difference between the individual
and the universe, they also denied any conflict between “spirit” and “matter.”
There is only one nature, they averred. This kind of idea is called monism (in
contrast to Plato’s clear dualism or two-fold reality).

As true children of their time, the Stoics were distinctly “cosmopolitan,” in
that they were more receptive to contemporary culture than the “barrel
philosophers” (the Cynics). They drew attention to human fellowship, they were
preoccupied with politics, and many of them, notably the Roman Emperor Marcus
Aurelius (A.D. 121-180), were active statesmen. They encouraged Greek culture
and philosophy in Rome, one of the most distinguished of them being the orator,
philosopher, and statesman Cicero (106-43 B.C.). It was he who formed the very
concept of “humanism”—that is, a view of life that has the individual as its
central focus. Some years later, the Stoic Seneca (4 B.C.-A.D. 65) said that
“to mankind, mankind is holy.” This has remained a slogan for humanism ever
since.

The Stoics, moreover, emphasized that all natural processes, such as sickness
and death, follow the unbreakable laws of nature. Man must therefore learn to
accept his destiny. Nothing happens accidentally. Everything happens through
necessity, so it is of little use to complain when fate comes knocking at the
door. One must also accept the happy events of life unperturbed, they thought.
In this we see their kinship with the Cynics, who claimed that all external
events were unimportant. Even today we use the term “stoic calm” about someone
who does not let his feelings take over.

