# The Philosophic State
[Metadata]: # {33}
[Descriptor]: # {33}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Philosophic State
The Myth of the Cave is found in Plato’s dialogue the Republic. In this
dialogue Plato also presents a picture of the “ideal state,” that is to say an
imaginary, ideal, or what we would call a Utopian, state. Briefly, we could say
that Plato believed the state should be governed by philosophers. He bases his
explanation of this on the construction of the human body.

According to Plato, the human body is composed of three parts: the head, the
chest, and the abdomen. For each of these three parts there is a corresponding
faculty of the soul. Reason belongs to the head, will belongs to the chest, and
appetite belongs to the abdomen. Each of these soul faculties also has an
ideal, or “virtue.” Reason aspires to wisdom, Will aspires to courage, and
Appetite must be curbed so that temperance can be exercised. Only when the
three parts of the body function together as a unity do we get a harmonious or
“virtuous” individual. At school, a child must first learn to curb its
appetites, then it must develop courage, and finally reason leads to wisdom.

Plato now imagines a state built up exactly like the tripartite human body.
Where the body has head, chest, and abdomen, the State has rulers, auxiliaries,
and fa-borers (farmers, for example). Here Plato clearly uses Greek medical
science as his model. Just as a healthy and harmonious man exercises balance
and temperance, so a “virtuous” state is characterized by everyone knowing
their place in the overall picture.

Like every aspect of Plato’s philosophy, his political philosophy is
characterized by rationalism. The creation of a good state depends on its being
governed with reason. Just as the head governs the body, so philosophers must
rule society.

Let us attempt a simple illustration of the relationship between the three
parts of man and the state:

BODY SOUL VIRTUE STATE

head reason wisdom rulers

chest will courage auxiliaries

abdomen appetite temperance laborers



Plato’s ideal state is not unlike the old Hindu caste system, in .which each
and every person has his or her particular function for the good of the whole.
Even before Plato’s time the Hindu caste system had the same tripartite
division between the auxiliary caste (or priest caste), the warrior caste, and
the laborer caste. Nowadays we would perhaps call Plato’s state totalitarian.
But it is worth noting that he believed women could govern just as effectively
as men for the simple reason that the rulers govern by virtue of their reason.
Women, he asserted, have exactly the same powers of reasoning as men, provided
they get the same training and are exempt from child rearing and housekeeping.
In Plato’s ideal state, rulers and warriors are not allowed family life or
private property. The rearing of children is considered too important to be
left to the individual and should be the responsibility of the state. (Plato
was the first philosopher to advocate state-organized nursery schools and
full-time education.)

After a number of significant political setbacks, Plato wrote the tows, in
which he described the “constitutional state” as the next-best state. He now
reintroduced both private property and family ties. Women’s freedom thus became
more restricted. However, he did say that a state that does not educate and
train women is like a man who only trains his right arm.

All in all, we can say that Plato had a positive view of women—considering the
time he lived in. In the dialogue Symposium, he gives a woman, the legendary
priestess Diotima, the honor of having given Socrates his philosophic insight.

So that was Plato, Sophie. His astonishing theories have been discussed—and
criticized—for more than two thousand years. The first man to do so was one of
the pupils from his own Academy. His name was Aristotle, and he was the third
great philosopher from Athens.

I’ll say no more!

While Sophie had been reading about Plato, the sun had risen over the woods to
the east. It was peeping over the horizon just as she was reading how one man
clambered out of the cave and blinked in the dazzling light outside.

It was almost as if she had herself emerged from an underground cave. Sophie
felt that she saw nature in a completely different way after reading about
Plato. It was rather like having been color-blind. She had seen some shadows
but had not seen the clear ideas.

She was not sure Plato was right in everything he had said about the eternal
patterns, but it was a beautiful thought that all living things were imperfect
copies of the eternal forms in the world of ideas. Because wasn’t it true that
all flowers, trees, human beings, and animals were “imperfect”?

Everything she saw around her was so beautiful and so alive that Sophie had to
rub her eyes to really believe it. But nothing she was looking at now would
last. And yet—in a hundred years the same flowers and the same animals would be
here again. Even if every single flower and every single animal should fade
away and be forgotten, there would be something that “recollected” how it all
looked.

Sophie gazed out at the world. Suddenly a squirrel ran up the trunk of a pine
tree. It circled the trunk a few times and disappeared into the branches.

“I’ve seen you before!” thought Sophie. She realized that maybe it was not the
same squirrel that she had seen previously, but she had seen the same “form.”
For all she knew, Plato could have been right. Maybe she really had seen the
eternal “squirrel” before—in the world of ideas, before her soul had taken
residence in a human body.

Could it be true that she had lived before? Had her soul existed before it got
a body to move around in? And was it really true that she carried a little
golden nugget inside her—a jewel that cannot be corroded by time, a soul that
would live on when her own body grew old and died?





The Major’s Cabin




... the girl in the mirror winked with both eyes…



It was only a quarter past seven. There was no need to hurry home. Sophie’s
mother always took it easy on Sundays, so she would probably sleep for another
two hours.

Should she go a bit farther into the woods and try to find Alberto Knox? And
why had the dog snarled at her so viciously?

Sophie got up and began to walk down the path Hermes had taken. She had the
brown envelope with the pages on Plato in her hand. Wherever the path diverged
she took the wider one.

Birds were chirping everywhere—in the trees and in the air, in bush and
thicket. They were busily occupied with their morning pursuits. They knew no
difference between weekdays and Sundays. Who had taught them to do all that?
Was there a tiny computer inside each one of them, programming them to do
certain things?

The path led up over a little hill, then steeply down between tall pine trees.
The woods were so dense now that she could only see a few yards between the
trees.

Suddenly she caught sight of something glittering between the pine trunks. It
must be a little lake. The path went the other way but Sophie picked her way
among the trees. Without really knowing why, she let her feet lead her.

The lake was no bigger than a soccer field. Over on the other side she could
see a red-painted cabin in a small clearing surrounded by silver birches. A
faint wisp of smoke was rising from the chimney.

Sophie went down to the water’s edge. It was very muddy in many places, but
then she noticed a rowboat. It was drawn halfway out of the water. There was a
pair of oars in it.

Sophie looked around. Whatever she did, it would be impossible to get around
the lake to the red cabin without getting her shoes soaked. She went resolutely
over to the boat and pushed it into the water. Then she climbed aboard, set the
oars in the rowlocks, and rowed across the lake. The boat soon touched the
opposite bank. Sophie went ashore and tried to pull the boat up after her. The
bank was much steeper here than the opposite bank had been.

She glanced over her shoulder only once before walking up toward the cabin.

She was quite startled at her own boldness. How did she dare do this? She had
no idea. It was as if “something” impelled her.

Sophie went up to the door and knocked. She waited a while but nobody answered.
She tried the handle cautiously, and the door opened.

“Hallo!” she called. “Is anyone at home?”

She went in and found herself in a living room. She dared not shut the door
behind her.

Somebody was obviously living here. Sophie could hear wood crackling in the old
stove. Someone had been here very recently.

On a big dining table stood a typewriter, some books, a couple of pencils, and
a pile of paper. A smaller table and two chairs stood by the window that
overlooked the lake. Apart from that there was very little furniture, although
the whole of one wall was lined with bookshelves filled with books. Above a
white chest of drawers hung a large round mirror in a heavy brass frame. It
looked very old.

On one of the walls hung two pictures. One was an oil painting of a white house
which lay a stone’s throw from a little bay with a red boathouse. Between the
house and the boathouse was a sloping garden with an apple tree, a few thick
bushes, and some rocks. A dense fringe of birch trees framed the garden like a
garland. The title of the painting was “Bjerkely.”

Beside that painting hung an old portrait of a man sitting in a chair by a
window. He had a book in his lap. This picture also had a little bay with trees
and rocks in the background. It looked as though it had been painted several
hundred years ago. The title of the picture was “Berkeley.” The painter’s name
was Smibert.

Berkeley and Bjerkely. How strange!

Sophie continued her investigation. A door led from the living room to a small
kitchen. Someone had just done the dishes. Plates and glasses were piled on a
tea towel, some of them still glistening with drops of soapy water. There was a
tin bowl on the floor with some leftover scraps of food in it. Whoever lived
here had a pet, a dog or a cat.

Sophie went back to the living room. Another door led to a tiny bedroom. On the
floor next to the bed there were a couple of blankets in a thick bundle. Sophie
discovered some golden hairs on the blankets. Here was the evidence! Now Sophie
knew that the occupants of the cabin were Alberto Knox and Hermes.

Back in the living room, Sophie stood in front of the mirror. The glass was
matte and scratched, and her reflection correspondingly blurred. Sophie began
to make faces at herself like she did at home in the bathroom. Her reflection
did exactly the same, which was only to be expected.

But all of a sudden something scary happened. Just once—in the space of a split
second—Sophie saw quite clearly that the girl in the mirror winked with both
eyes. Sophie started back in fright. If she herself had winked—how could she
have seen the other girl wink? And not only that, it seemed as though the other
girl had winked at Sophie as if to say: I can see you, Sophie. I am in here, on
the other side.

Sophie felt her heart beating, and at the same time she heard a dog barking in
the distance. Hermes! She had to get out of here at once. Then she noticed a
green wallet on the chest of drawers under the mirror. It contained a
hundred-crown note, a fifty, and a school I.D. card. It showed a picture of a
girl with fair hair. Under the picture was the girl’s name: Hilde Moller Knag
...

Sophie shivered. Again she heard the dog bark. She had to get out, at once!

As she hurried past the table she noticed a white envelope between all the
books and the pile of paper. It had one word written on it: SOPHIE.

Before she had time to realize what she was doing, she grabbed the envelope and
stuffed it into the brown envelope with the Plato pages. Then she rushed out of
the door and slammed it behind her.

The barking was getting closer. But worst of all was that the boat was gone.
After a second or two she saw it, adrift halfway across the lake. One of the
oars was floating beside it. All because she hadn’t been able to pull it
completely up on land. She heard the dog barking quite nearby now and saw
movements between the trees on the other side of the lake.

Sophie didn’t hesitate any longer. With the big envelope in her hand, she
plunged into the bushes behind the cabin. Soon she was having to wade through
marshy ground, sinking in several times to well above her ankles. But she had
to keep going. She had to get home.

Presently she stumbled onto a path. Was it the path she had taken earlier? She
stopped to wring out her dress. And then she began to cry.

How could she have been so stupid? The worst of all was the boat. She couldn’t
forget the sight of the row-boat with the one oar drifting helplessly on the
lake. It was all so embarrassing, so shameful. . .

The philosophy teacher had probably reached the lake by now. He would need the
boat to get home. Sophie felt almost like a criminal. But she hadn’t done it on
purpose.

The envelope! That was probably even worse. Why had she taken it? Because her
name was on it, of course, so in a way it was hers. But even so, she felt like
a thief. And what’s more, she had provided the evidence that it was she who had
been there.

Sophie drew the note out of the envelope. It said:

What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken ?

Are we born with innate “ideas”? What is the difference between a plant, an
animal, and a human?

Why does it rain?

What does it take to live a good life?



Sophie couldn’t possibly think about these questions right now, but she assumed
they had something to do with the next philosopher. Wasn’t he called Aristotle?

When she finally saw the hedge after running so far through the woods it was
like swimming ashore after a shipwreck. The hedge looked funny from the other
side.

She didn’t look at her watch until she had crawled into the den. It was
ten-thirty. She put the big envelope into the biscuit tin with the other papers
and stuffed the note with the new questions down her tights.

Her mother was on the telephone when she came in. When she saw Sophie she hung
up quickly.

“Where on earth have you been?”

“I... went for a walk ... in the woods,” she stammered.

“So I see.”

Sophie stood silently, watching the water dripping from her dress.

“I called Joanna...”

“Joanna?”

Her mother brought her some dry clothes. Sophie only just managed to hide the
philosopher’s note. Then they sat together in the kitchen, and her mother made
some hot chocolate.

“Were you with him?” she asked after a while.

“Him?”

Sophie could only think about her philosophy teacher.

“With him, yes. Him.... your rabbit!”

Sophie shook her head.

“What do you do when you’re together, Sophie? Why are you so wet?”

Sophie sat staring gravely at the table. But deep down inside she was laughing.
Poor Mom, now she had that to worry about.

She shook her head again. Then more questions came raining down on her.

“Now I want the truth. Were you out all night? Why did you go to bed with your
clothes on? Did you sneak out as soon as I had gone to bed? You’re only
fourteen, Sophie. I demand to know who you are seeing!”

Sophie started to cry. Then she talked. She was still frightened, and when you
are frightened you usually talk.

She explained that she had woken up very early and had gone for a walk in the
woods. She told her mother about the cabin and the boat, and about the
mysterious mirror. But she mentioned nothing about the secret correspondence
course. Neither did she mention the green wallet. She didn’t quite know why,
but she had to keep Hilde for herself.

Her mother put her arms around Sophie, and Sophie knew that her mother believed
her now.

“I don’t have a boyfriend,” Sophie sniffed. “It was just something I said
because you were so upset about the white rabbit.”

“And you really went all the way to the major’s cabin ...” said her mother
thoughtfully.

“The major’s cabin?” Sophie stared at her mother.

“The little woodland cabin is called the major’s cabin because some years ago
an army major lived there for a time. He was rather eccentric, a little crazy,
I think. But never mind that. Since then the cabin has been unoccupied.”

“But it isn’t! There’s a philosopher living there now.”

“Oh stop, don’t start fantasizing again!”

Sophie stayed in her room, thinking about what had happened. Her head felt like
a roaring circus full of lumbering elephants, silly clowns, daring trapeze
flyers, and trained monkeys. But one image recurred unceasingly— a small
rowboat with one oar drifting in a lake deep in the woods—and someone needing
the boat to get home.

She felt sure that the philosophy teacher didn’t wish her any harm, and would
certainly forgive her if he knew she had been to his cabin. But she had broken
an agreement. That was all the thanks he got for taking on her philosophic
education. How could she make up for it? Sophie took out her pink notepaper and
began to write:

Dear Philosopher, It was me who was in your cabin early Sunday morning. I
wanted so much to meet you and discuss some of the philosophic problems. For
the moment I am a Plato fan, but I am not so sure he was right about ideas or
pattern pictures existing in another reality. Of course they exist in our
souls, but I think—for the moment anyway— that this is a different thing. I
have to admit too that I am not altogether convinced of the immortality of the
soul. Personally, I have no recollections from my former lives. If you could
convince me that my deceased grandmother’s soul is happy in the world of ideas,
I would be most grateful.

Actually, it was not for philosophic reasons that I started to write this
letter (which I shall put in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar). I just
wanted to say I was sorry for being disobedient. I tried to pull the boat
completely up on shore but I was obviously not strong enough. Or perhaps a big
wave dragged the boat out again.

I hope you managed to get home without getting your feet wet. If not, it might
comfort you to know that I got soaked and will probably have a terrible cold.
But that’ll be my own fault.

I didn’t touch anything in the cabin, but I am sorry to say that I couldn’t
resist the temptation to take the envelope that was on the table. It wasn’t
because I wanted to steal anything, but as my name was on it, I thought in my
confusion that it belonged to me. I am really and truly sorry, and I promise
never to disappoint you again.

P.S. I will think all the new questions through very carefully, starting now.

P.P.S. Is the mirror with the brass frame above the white chest of drawers an
ordinary mirror or a magic mirror? I’m only asking because I am not used to
seeing my own reflection wink with both eyes.

With regards from your sincerely interested pupil, SOPHIE

Sophie read the letter through twice before she put it in the envelope. She
thought it was less formal than the previous letter she had written. Before she
went downstairs to the kitchen to get a lump of sugar she looked at the note
with the day’s questions:

“What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken?

This question was just as tricky as the old riddle of the chicken and the egg.
There would be no chicken without the egg, and no egg without the chicken. Was
it really just as complicated to figure out whether the chicken or the “idea”
chicken came first? Sophie understood what Plato meant. He meant that the
“idea” chicken had existed in the world of ideas long before chickens existed
in the sensory world. According to Plato, the soul had “seen” the “idea”
chicken before it took up residence in a body. But wasn’t this just where
Sophie thought Plato must be mistaken? How could a person who had never seen a
live chicken or a picture of a chicken ever have any “idea” of a chicken? Which
brought her to the next question:

Are we born with innate “ideas”? Most unlikely, thought Sophie. She could
hardly imagine a newborn baby being especially well equipped with ideas. One
could obviously never be sure, because the fact that the baby had no language
did not necessarily mean that it had no ideas in its head. But surely we have
to see things in the world before we can know anything about them.

“What is the difference between a plant, an animal, and a human?” Sophie could
immediately see very clear differences.

For instance, she did not think a plant had a very complicated emotional life.
Who had ever heard of a bluebell with a broken heart? A plant grows, takes
nourishment, and produces seeds so that it can reproduce itself. That’s about
all one could say about plants. Sophie concluded that everything that applied
to plants also applied to animals and humans. But animals had other attributes
as well. They could move, for example. (When did a rose ever run a marathon?)
It was a bit harder to point to any differences between animals and humans.
Humans could think, but couldn’t animals do so as well? Sophie was convinced
that her cat Sherekan could think. At least, it could be very calculating. But
could it reflect on philosophical questions? Could a cat speculate about the
difference between a plant, an animal, and a human? Hardly! A cat could
probably be either contented or unhappy, but did it ever ask itself if there
was a God or whether it had an immortal soul? Sophie thought that was extremely
doubtful. But the same problem was raised here as with the baby and the innate
ideas. It was just as difficult to talk to a cat about such questions as it
would be to discuss them with a baby.

“Why does it rain?” Sophie shrugged her shoulders. It probably rains because
seawater evaporates and the clouds condense into raindrops. Hadn’t she learnt
that in the third grade? Of course, one could always say that it rains so that
plants and animals can grow. But was that true? Had a shower any actual
purpose?

The last question definitely had something to do with purpose: “What does it
take to live a good life?”

The philosopher had written something about this quite early on in the course.
Everybody needs food, warmth, love, and care. Such basics were the primary
condition for a good life, at any rate. Then he had pointed out that people
also needed to find answers to certain philosophical questions. It was probably
also quite important to have a job you liked. If you hated traffic, for
instance, you would not be very happy as a taxi driver. And if you hated doing
homework it would probably be a bad idea to become a teacher. Sophie loved
animals and wanted to be a vet. But in any case she didn’t think it was
necessary to win a million in the lottery to live a good life.

Quite the opposite, more likely. There was a saying:

The devil finds work for idle hands.

Sophie stayed in her room until her mother called her down to a big midday
meal. She had prepared sirloin steak and baked potatoes. There were
cloudberries and cream for dessert.

They talked about all kinds of things. Sophie’s mother asked her how she wanted
to celebrate her fifteenth birthday. It was only a few weeks away.

Sophie shrugged.

“Aren’t you going to invite anyone? I mean, don’t you want to have a party?”

“Maybe.”

“We could ask Martha and Anne Marie ... and Helen. And Joanna, of course. And
Jeremy, perhaps. But that’s for you to decide. I remember my own fifteenth
birthday so clearly, you know. It doesn’t seem all that long ago. I felt I was
already quite grown up. Isn’t it odd, Sophie! I don’t feel I have changed at
all since then.”

“You haven’t. Nothing changes. You have just developed, gotten older...”

“Mm ... that was a very grownup thing to say. I just think it’s all happened so
very quickly.”

