# Man at the Center
[Metadata]: # {22}
[Descriptor]: # {22}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Man at the Center
After about 450 B.C., Athens was the cultural center of the Greek world. From
this time on, philosophy took a new direction. The natural philosophers had
been mainly concerned with the nature of the physical world. This gives them a
central position in the history of science. In Athens, interest was now focused
on the individual and the individual’s place in society. Gradually a democracy
evolved, with popular assemblies and courts of law.

In order for democracy to work, people had to be educated enough to take part
in the democratic process. We have seen in our own time how a young democracy
needs popular enlightenment. For the Athenians, it was first and foremost
essential to master the art of rhetoric, which means saying things in a
convincing manner.

A group of itinerant teachers and philosophers from the Greek colonies flocked
to Athens. They called themselves Sophists. The word “sophist” means a wise and
informed person. In Athens, the Sophists made a living out of teaching the
citizens for money.

The Sophists had one characteristic in common with the natural philosophers:
they were critical of the traditional mythology. But at the same time the
Sophists rejected what they regarded as fruitless philosophical speculation.
Their opinion was that although answers to philosophical questions may exist,
man cannot know the truth about the riddles of nature and of the universe. In
philosophy a view like this is called skepticism.

But even if we cannot know the answers to all of nature’s riddles, we know that
people have to learn to live together. The Sophists chose to concern themselves
with man and his place in society.

“Man is the measure of all things,” said the Sophist Protagoras (c. 485-410
B.C.). By that he meant that the question of whether a thing is right or wrong,
good or bad, must always be considered in relation to a person’s needs. On
being asked whether he believed in the Greek gods, he answered, “The question
is complex and life is short.” A person who is unable to say categorically
whether or not the gods or God exists is called an agnostic.

The Sophists were as a rule men who had traveled widely and seen different
forms of government. Both conventions and local laws in the city-states could
vary widely. This led the Sophists to raise the question of what was natural
and what was socially induced. By doing this, they paved the way for social
criticism in the city-state of Athens.

They could for example point out that the use of an expression like “natural
modesty” is not always defensible, for if it is “natural” to be modest, it must
be something you are born with, something innate. But is it really innate,
Sophie—or is it socially induced? To someone who has traveled the world, the
answer should be simple: It is not “natural”—or innate—to be afraid to show
yourself naked. Modesty—or the lack of it—is first and foremost a matter of
social convention.

As you can imagine, the wandering Sophists created bitter wrangling in Athens
by pointing out that there were no absolute norms for what was right or wrong.

Socrates, on the other hand, tried to show that some such norms are in fact
absolute and universally valid.





Who Was Socrates?




Socrates (470-399 B.C.) is possibly the most enigmatic figure in the entire
history of philosophy. He never wrote a single line. Yet he is one of the
philosophers who has had the greatest influence on European thought, not least
because of the dramatic manner of his death.

We know he was born in Athens, and that he spent most of his life in the city
squares and marketplaces talking with the people he met there. “The trees in
the countryside can teach me nothing,” he said. He could also stand lost in
thought for hours on end.

Even during his lifetime he was considered somewhat enigmatic, and fairly soon
after his death he was held to be the founder of any number of different
philosophical schools of thought. The very fact that he was so enigmatic and
ambiguous made it possible for widely differing schools of thought to claim him
as their own.

We know for a certainty that he was extremely ugly. He was potbellied, and had
bulging eyes and a snub nose. But inside he was said to be “perfectly
delightful.” It was also said of him that “You can seek him in the present, you
can seek him in the past, but you will never find his equal.” Nevertheless he
was sentenced to death for his philosophical activities.

The life of Socrates is mainly known to us through the writings of Plato, who
was one of his pupils and who became one of the greatest philosophers of all
time. Plato wrote a number of Dialogues, or dramatized discussions on
philosophy, in which he uses Socrates as his principal character and
mouthpiece.

Since Plato is putting his own philosophy in Socrates’ mouth, we cannot be sure
that the words he speaks in the dialogues were ever actually uttered by him. So
it is no easy matter to distinguish between the teachings of Socrates and the
philosophy of Plato. Exactly the same problem applies to many other historical
persons who left no written accounts. The classic example, of course, is Jesus.
We cannot be certain that the “historical” Jesus actually spoke the words that
Matthew or Luke ascribed to him. Similarly, what the “historical” Socrates
actually said will always be shrouded in mystery.

But who Socrates “really” was is relatively unimportant. It is Plato’s portrait
of Socrates that has inspired thinkers in the Western world for nearly 2,500
years.

