# Neoplatonism
[Metadata]: # {49}
[Descriptor]: # {49}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Neoplatonism
As I showed you, Cynicism, Stoicism, and Epicureanism all had their roots in
the teaching of Socrates. They also made use of certain of the pre-Socratics
like Heraclitus and Democritus.

But the most remarkable philosophic trend in the late Hellenistic period was
first and foremost inspired by Plato’s philosophy. We therefore call it
Neoplatonism.

The most important figure in Neoplatonism was Plotinus (c. 205-270), who
studied philosophy in Alexandria but later settled in Rome. It is interesting
to note that he came from Alexandria, the city that had been the central
meeting point for Greek philosophy and Oriental mysticism for several
centuries. Plotinus brought with him to Rome a doctrine of salvation that was
to compete seriously with Christianity when its time came. However,
Neoplatonism also became a strong influence in mainstream Christian theology as
well.

Remember Plato’s doctrine of ideas, Sophie, and the way he distinguished
between the world of ideas and the sensory world. This meant establishing a
clear division between the soul and the body. Man thus became a dual creature:
our body consisted of earth and dust like everything else in the sensory world,
but we also had an immortal soul. This was widely believed by many Greeks long
before Plato. Plotinus was also familiar with similar ideas from Asia.

Plotinus believed that the world is a span between two poles. At one end is the
divine light which he calls the One. Sometimes he calls it God. At the other
end is absolute darkness, which receives none of the light from the One. But
Plotinus’s point is that this darkness actually has no existence. It is simply
the absence of light—in other words, it is not. All that exists is God, or the
One, but in the same way that a beam of light grows progressively dimmer and is
gradually extinguished, there is somewhere a point that the divine glow cannot
reach.

According to Plotinus, the soul is illuminated by the light from the One, while
matter is the darkness that has no real existence. But the forms in nature have
a faint glow of the One.

Imagine a great burning bonfire in the night from which sparks fly in all
directions. A wide radius of light from the bonfire turns night into day in the
immediate area; but the glow from the fire is visible even from a distance of
several miles. If we went even further away, we would be able to see a tiny
speck of light like a far-off lantern in the dark, and if we went on moving
away, at some point the light would not reach us. Somewhere the rays of light
disappear into the night, and when it is completely dark we see nothing. There
are neither shapes nor shadows.

Imagine now that reality is a bonfire like this. That which is burning is
God—and the darkness beyond is the cold matter that man and animals are made
of. Closest to God are the eternal ideas which are the primal forms of all
creatures. The human soul, above all, is a “spark from the fire.” Yet
everywhere in nature some of the divine light is shining. We can see it in all
living creatures; even a rose or a bluebell has its divine glow. Furthest away
from the living God are earth and water and stone.

I am saying that there is something of the divine mystery in everything that
exists. We can see it sparkle in a sunflower or a poppy. We sense more of this
unfathomable mystery in a butterfly that flutters from a twig—or in a goldfish
swimming in a bowl. But we are closest to God in our own soul. Only there can
we become one with the great mystery of life. In truth, at very rare moments we
can experience that we ourselves are that divine mystery.

Plotinus’s metaphor is rather like Plato’s myth of the cave: the closer we get
to the mouth of the cave, the closer we get to that which all existence springs
from. But in contrast to Plato’s clear two-fold reality, Plotinus’s doctrine is
characterized by an experience of wholeness. Everything is one—for everything
is God. Even the shadows deep down in Plato’s cave have a faint glow of the
One.

On rare occasions in his life, Plotinus experienced a fusion of his soul with
God. We usually call this a mystical experience. Plotinus is not alone in
having had such experiences. People have told of them at all times and in all
cultures. The details might be different, but the essential features are the
same. Let us take a look at some of these features.

