# All Things Flow
[Metadata]: # {11}
[Descriptor]: # {11}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# All Things Flow
A contemporary of Parmenides was Heraditus (c. 540-480 B.C.), who was from
Ephesus in Asia Minor. He thought that constant change, or flow, was in fact
the mosf basic characteristic of nature. We could perhaps say that Heraclitus
had more faith in what he could perceive than Parmenides did.

“Everything flows,” said Heraclitus. Everything is in constant flux and
movement, nothing is abiding. Therefore we “cannot step twice into the same
river.” When I step into the river for the second time, neither I nor the river
are the same.

Heraclitus pointed out that the world is characterized by opposites. If we were
never ill, we would not know what it was to be well. If we never knew hunger,
we would take no pleasure in being full. If there were never any war, we would
not appreciate peace. And if there were no winter, we would never see the
spring.

Both good and bad have their inevitable place in the order of things,
Heraclitus believed. Without this constant interplay of opposites the world
would cease to exist.

“God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, hunger and satiety,”
he said. He used the term “God,” but he was clearly not referring to the gods
of the mythology. To Heraclitus, God—or the Deity—was something that embraced
the whole world. Indeed, God can be seen most clearly in the constant
transformations and contrasts of nature.

Instead of the term “God,” Heraclitus often used the Greek word logos, meaning
reason. Although we humans do not always think alike or have the same degree of
reason, Heraclitus believed that there must be a kind of “universal reason”
guiding everything that happens in nature.

This “universal reason” or “universal law” is something common to us all, and
something that everybody is guided by. And yet most people live by their
individual reason, thought Heraclitus. In general, he despised his fellow
beings. “The opinions of most people,” he said, “are like the playthings of
infants.”

So in the midst of all nature’s constant flux and oppo-sites, Heraclitus saw an
Entity or one-ness. This “something,” which was the source of everything, he
called God or logos.

