# HELLENISM
[Metadata]: # {45}
[Descriptor]: # {45}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# HELLENISM
Here we are again, Sophie! Having read about the natural philosophers and
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, you are now familiar with the foundations of
European philosophy. So from now on we will drop the introductory questions
which you earlier received in white envelopes. I imagine you probably have
plenty of other assignments and tests at school.

I shall now tell you about the long period from Aristotle near the end of the
fourth century B.C. right up to the early Middle Ages around A.D. 400. Notice
that we can now write both B.C. and A.D. because Christianity was in fact one
of the most important, and the most mysterious, factors of the period.

Aristotle died in the year 322 B.C., at the time when Athens had lost its
dominant role. This was not least due to the political upheavals resulting from
the conquests of Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.).

Alexander the Great was the King of Macedonia. Aristotle was also from
Macedonia, and for a time he was even the young Alexander’s tutor. It was
Alexander who won the final, decisive victory over the Persians. And moreover,
Sophie, with his many conquests he linked both Egypt and the Orient as far east
as India to the Greek civilization.

This marked the beginning of a new epoch in the history of mankind. A
civilization sprang up in which Greek culture and the Greek language played a
leading role. This period, which lasted for about 300 years, is known as
Hellenism. The term Hellenism refers to both the period of time and the
Greek-dominated culture that prevailed in the three Hellenistic kingdoms of
Macedonia, Syria, and

Egypt-

However, from about the year 50 B.C., Rome secured the upper hand in military
and political affairs. The new superpower gradually conquered all the
Hellenistic kingdoms, and from then on Roman culture and the Latin language
were predominant from Spain in the west to far into Asia. This was the
beginning of the Roman period, which we often refer to as Late Antiquity. But
remember one thing—before the Romans managed to conquer the Hellenistic world,
Rome itself was a province of Greek culture. So Greek culture and Greek
philosophy came to play an important role long after the political influence of
the Greeks was a thing of the past.





Religion, Philosophy and Science




Hellenism was characterized by the fact that the borders between the various
countries and cultures became erased. Previously the Greeks, the Romans, the
Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Syrians, and the Persians had worshipped their
own gods within what we generally call a “national religion.” Now the different
cultures merged into one great witch’s caldron of religious, philosophical,
-and scientific ideas.

We could perhaps say that the town square was replaced by the world arena. The
old town square had also buzzed with voices, bringing now different wares to
market, now different thoughts and ideas. The new aspect was that town squares
were being filled with wares and ideas from all over the world. The voices were
buzzing in many different languages.

We have already mentioned that the Greek view of life was now much more
widespread than it had been in the former Greek cultural areas. But as time
went on, Oriental gods were also worshipped in all the Mediterranean countries.
New religious formations arose that could draw on the gods and the beliefs of
many of the old nations. This is called syncretism or the fusion of creeds.

Prior to this, people had felt a strong affinity with their own folk and their
own city-state. But as the borders and boundaries became erased, many people
began to experience doubt and uncertainty about their philosophy of life. Late
Antiquity was generally characterized by religious doubts, cultural
dissolution, and pessimism. It was said that “the world has grown old.”

A common feature of the new religious formations during the Hellenistic period
was that they frequently contained teachings about how mankind could attain
salvation from death. These teachings were often secret. By accepting the
teachings and performing certain rituals, a believer could hope for the
immortality of the soul and eternal life. A certain insight into the true
nature of the universe could be just as important for the salvation of the soul
as religious rituals.

So much for the new religions, Sophie. But philosophy was also moving
increasingly in the direction of “salvation” and serenity. Philosophic insight,
it was now thought, did not only have its own reward; it should also free
mankind from pessimism and the fear of death. Thus the boundaries between
religion and philosophy were gradually eliminated.

In general, the philosophy of Hellenism was not star-tlingly original. No new
Plato or Aristotle appeared on the scene. On the contrary, the three great
Athenian philosophers were a source of inspiration to a number of philosophic
trends which I shall briefly describe in a moment.

Hellenistic science, too, was influenced by a blend of knowledge from the
various cultures. The town of Alexandria played a key role here as a meeting
place between East and West. While Athens remained the center of philosophy
with still functioning schools of philosophy after Plato and Aristotle,
Alexandria became the center for science. With its extensive library, it became
the center for mathematics, astronomy, biology, and medicine.

Hellenistic culture could well be compared to the world of today. The twentieth
century has also been influenced by an increasingly open civilization. In our
own time, too, this opening out has resulted in tremendous upheavals for
religion and philosophy. And just as in Rome around the beginning of the
Christian era one could come across Greek, Egyptian, and Oriental religions,
today, as we approach the end of the twentieth century, we can find in all
European cities of any size religions from all parts of the world.

We also see nowadays how a conglomeration of old and new religions,
philosophies, and sciences can form the basis of new offers on the
“view-of-life” market. Much of this “new knowledge” is actually the flotsam of
old thought, some of whose roots go back to Hellenism.

As I have said, Hellenistic philosophy continued to work with the problems
raised by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Common to them all was their desire
to discover how mankind should best live and die. They were concerned with
ethics. In the new civilization, this became the central philosophical project.
The main emphasis was on finding out what true happiness was and how it could
be achieved. We are going to look at four of these philosophical trends.

