# Paul
[Metadata]: # {56}
[Descriptor]: # {56}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Paul
A few days after Jesus had been crucified and buried, rumors spread that he had
risen from the grave. He thereby proved that he was no ordinary man. He truly
was the “Son of God.”

We could say that the Christian Church was founded on Easter Morning with the
rumors of the resurrection of Jesus. This is already established by Paul: “And
if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain and your faith is also
vain.”

Now all mankind could hope for the resurrection of the body, for it was to save
us that Jesus was crucified. But, dear Sophie, remember that from a Jewish
point of view there was no question of the “immortality of the soul” or any
form of “transmigration”; that was a Greek—and therefore an
Indo-European—thought. According to Christianity there is nothing in man—no
“soul,” for example— that is in itself immortal. Although the Christian Church
believes in the “resurrection of the body and eternal life,” it is by God’s
miracle that we are saved from death and “damnation.” It is neither through our
own merit nor through any natural—or innate—ability.

So the early Christians began to preach the “glad tidings” of salvation through
faith in Jesus Christ. Through his mediation, the “Kingdom of God” was about to
become a reality. Now the entire world could be won for Christ. (The word
“christ” is a Greek translation of the Hebrew word “messiah,” the anointed
one.)

A few years after the death of Jesus, the Pharisee Paul converted to
Christianity. Through his many missionary journeys across the whole of the
Greco-Roman world he made Christianity a worldwide religion. We hear of this in
the Acts of the Apostles. Paul’s preaching and guidance for the Christians is
known to us from the many epistles written by him to the early Christian
congregations.

He then turns up in Athens. He wanders straight into the city square of the
philosophic capital. And it is said that “his spirit was stirred in him, when
he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.” He visited the Jewish synagogue in
Athens and conversed with Epicurean and Stoic philosophers. They took him up to
the Areopagos hill and asked him: “May we know what this new doctrine, whereof
thou speakest, is? For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we
would know therefore what these things mean.”

Can you imagine it, Sophie? A Jew suddenly appears in the Athenian marketplace
and starts talking about a savior who was hung on a cross and later rose from
the grave. Even from this visit of Paul in Athens we sense a coming collision
between Greek philosophy and the doctrine of Christian redemption. But Paul
clearly succeeds in getting the Athenians to listen to him. From the
Areopagos—and beneath the proud temples of the Acropolis— he makes the
following speech:

“Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. For
as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this
inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you.

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is
worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to
all life, and breath, and all things. And hath made of one blood all nations of
men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times
before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the
Lord, if haply they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far
from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as
certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.
Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s device.
And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men
everywhere to repent:

Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given
assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.”

Paul in Athens, Sophie! Christianity has begun to penetrate the Greco-Roman
world as something else, something completely different from Epicurean, Stoic,
or Neoplatonic philosophy. But Paul nevertheless finds some common ground in
this culture. He emphasizes that the search for God is natural to all men. This
was not new to the Greeks. But what was new in Paul’s preaching is that God has
also revealed himself to mankind and has in truth reached out to them. So he is
no longer a “philosophic God” that people can approach with their
understanding. Neither is he “an image of gold or silver or stone”—there were
plenty of those both on the Acropolis and down in the marketplace! He is a God
that “dwelleth not in temples made with hands.” He is a personal God who
intervenes in the course of history and dies on the Cross for the sake of
mankind.

When Paul had made his speech on the Areopagos, we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, some mocked him for what he said about the resurrection from the
dead. But others said: “We will hear thee again of this matter.” There were
also some who followed Paul and began to believe in Christianity. One of them,
it is worth noting, was a woman named Damaris. Women were amongst the most
fervent converts to Christianity.

So Paul continued his missionary activities. A few decades after the death of
Jesus, Christian congregations were already established in all the important
Greek and Roman cities—in Athens, in Rome, in Alexandria, in Ephesos, and in
Corinth. In the space of three to four hundred years, the entire Hellenistic
world had become Christian.

