# Hellenism
[Metadata]: # {43}
[Descriptor]: # {43}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Hellenism
... a spark from the fire…



Although the philosophy teacher had begun sending his letters directly to the
old hedge, Sophie nevertheless looked in the mailbox on Monday morning, more
out of habit than anything else.

It was empty, not surprisingly. She began to walk down Clover Close.

Suddenly she noticed a photograph lying on the sidewalk. It was a picture of a
white jeep and a blue flag with the letters UN on it. Wasn’t that the United
Nations flag?

Sophie turned the picture over and saw that it was a regular postcard. To
“Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen ...” It had a Norwegian stamp and was
postmarked “UN Battalion” Friday June 15, 1990.

June 15! That was Sofie’s birthday!

The card read:

Dear Hilde, I assume you are still celebrating your 15th birthday. Or is this
the morning after? Anyway, it makes no difference to your present. In a sense,
that will last a lifetime. But I’d like to wish you a happy birthday one more
time. Perhaps you understand now why I send the cards to Sophie. I am sure she
will pass them on to you.

P.S. Mom said you had lost your wallet. I hereby promise to reimburse you the
150 crowns. You will probably be able to get another school I.D. before they
close for the summer vacation. Love from Dad.

Sophie stood glued to the spot. When was the previous card postmarked? She
seemed to recall that the postcard of the beach was also postmarked June—even
though it was a whole month off. She simply hadn’t looked properly.

She glanced at her watch and then ran back to the house. She would just have to
be late for school today!

Sophie let herself in and leaped upstairs to her room. She found the first
postcard to Hilde under the red silk scarf. Yes! It was also postmarked June
15! Sophie’s birthday and the day before the summer vacation.

Her mind was racing as she ran over to the supermarket to meet Joanna.

Who was Hilde? How could her father as good as take it for granted that Sophie
would find her? In any case, it was senseless of him to send Sophie the cards
instead of sending them directly to his daughter. It could not possibly be
because he didn’t know his own daughter’s address. Was it a practical joke? Was
he trying to surprise his daughter on her birthday by getting a perfect
stranger to play detective and mailman? Was that why she was being given a
month’s headstart? And was using her as the go-between a way of giving his
daughter a new girlfriend as a birthday present? Could she be the present that
would “last a lifetime”?

If this joker really was in Lebanon, how had he gotten hold of Sophie’s
address? Also, Sophie and Hilde had at least two things in common. If Hilde’s
birthday was June 15, they were both born on the same day. And they both had
fathers who were on the other side of the globe.

Sophie felt she was being drawn into an unnatural world. Maybe it was not so
dumb after all to believe in fate. Still—she shouldn’t be jumping to
conclusions; it could all have a perfectly natural explanation. But how had
Alberto Knox found Hilde’s wallet when Hilde lived in Lillesand? Lillesand was
hundreds of miles away. And why had Sophie found this postcard on her sidewalk?
Did it fall out of the mailman’s bag just as he got to Sophie’s mailbox? If so,
why should he drop this particular card?

“Are you completely insane?” Joanna burst out when Sophie finally made it to
the supermarket.

“Sorry!”

Joanna frowned at her severely, like a schoolteacher.

“You’d better have a good explanation.”

“It has to do with the UN,” said Sophie. “I was detained by hostile troops in
Lebanon.”

“Sure ... You’re just in love!”

They ran to school as fast as their legs could carry them.

The Religious Knowledge test that Sophie had not had time to prepare for was
given out in the third period. The sheet read:

