# The World of Ideas
[Metadata]: # {29}
[Descriptor]: # {29}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The World of Ideas
Both Empedocles and Democritus had drawn attention to the fact that although in
the natural world everything “flows,” there must nevertheless be “something”
that never changes (the “four roots,” or the “atoms”). Plato agreed with the
proposition as such—but in quite a different way.

Plato believed that everything tangible in nature “flows.” So there are no
“substances” that do not dissolve. Absolutely everything that belongs to the
“material world” is made of a material that time can erode, but everything is
made after a timeless “mold” or “form” that is eternal and immutable.

You see? No, you don’t.

Why are horses the same, Sophie? You probably don’t think they are at all. But
there is something that all horses have in common, something that enables us to
identify them as horses. A particular horse “flows,” naturally. It might be old
and lame, and in time it will die. But the “form” of the horse is eternal and
immutable.

That which is eternal and immutable, to Plato, is therefore not a physical
“basic substance,” as it was for Empedocles and Democritus. Plato’s conception
was of eternal and immutable patterns, spiritual and abstract in their nature
that all things are fashioned after.

Let me put it like this: The pre-Socratics had given a reasonably good
explanation of natural change without having to presuppose that anything
actually “changed.” In the midst of nature’s cycle there were some eternal and
immutable smallest elements that did not dissolve, they thought. Fair enough,
Sophie! But they had no reasonable explanation for how these “smallest
elements” that were once building blocks in a horse could suddenly whirl
together four or five hundred years later and fashion themselves into a
completely new horse. Or an elephant or a crocodile, for that matter. Plato’s
point was that Democritus’ atoms never fashioned themselves into an “eledile”
or a “crocophant.” This was what set his philosophical reflections going.

If you already understand what I am getting at, you may skip this next
paragraph. But just in case, I will clarify: You have a box of Lego and you
build a Lego horse. You then take it apart and put the blocks back in the box.
You cannot expect to make a new horse just by shaking the box. How could Lego
blocks of their own accord find each other and become a new horse again? No,
you have to rebuild the horse, Sophie. And the reason you can do it is that you
have a picture in your mind of what the horse looked like. The Lego horse is
made from a model which remains unchanged from horse to horse.

How did you do with the fifty identical cookies? Let us assume that you have
dropped in from outer space and have never seen a baker before. You stumble
into a tempting bakery—and there you catch sight of fifty identical gingerbread
men on a shelf. I imagine you would wonder how they could be exactly alike. It
might well be that one of them has an arm missing, another has lost a bit of
its head, and a third has a funny bump on its stomach. But after careful
thought, you would nevertheless conclude that all gingerbread men have
something in common. Although none of them is perfect, you would suspect that
they had a common origin. You would realize that all the cookies were formed in
the same mold. And what is more, Sophie, you are now seized by the irresistible
desire to see this mold. Because clearly, the mold itself must be utter
perfection—and in a sense, more beautiful—in comparison with these crude
copies.

If you solved this problem all by yourself, you arrived at the philosophical
solution in exactly the same way that Plato did.

Like most philosophers, he “dropped in from outer space.” (He stood up on the
very tip of one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s fur.) He was astonished at
the way all natural phenomena could be so alike, and he concluded that it had
to be because there are a limited number of forms “behind” everything we see
around us. Plato called these forms ideas. Behind every horse, pig, or human
being, there is the “idea horse,” “idea pig,” and “idea human being.” (In the
same way, the bakery we spoke of can have gingerbread men, gingerbread horses,
and gingerbread pigs. Because every self-respecting bakery has more than one
mold. But one mold is enough for each type of gingerbread cookie.)

Plato came to the conclusion that there must be a reality behind the “material
world.” He called this reality the world of ideas; it contained the eternal and
immutable “patterns” behind the various phenomena we come across in nature.
This remarkable view is known as Plato’s theory of ideas.

