# The Cynics
[Metadata]: # {46}
[Descriptor]: # {46}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Cynics
The story goes that one day Socrates stood gazing at a stall that sold all
kinds of wares. Finally he said, “What a lot of things I don’t need!”

This statement could be the motto for the Cynic school of philosophy, founded
by Antisthenes in Athens around 400 B.C.

Antisthenes had been a pupil of Socrates, and had become particularly
interested in his frugality.

The Cynics emphasized that true happiness is not found in external advantages
such as material luxury, political power, or good health. True happiness lies
in not being dependent on such random and fleeting things. And because
happiness does not consist in benefits of this kind, it is within everyone’s
reach. Moreover, having once been attained, it can never be lost.

The best known of the Cynics was Diogenes, a pupil of Antisthenes, who
reputedly lived in a barrel and owned nothing but a cloak, a stick, and a bread
bag. (So it wasn’t easy to steal his happiness from him!) One day while he was
sitting beside his barrel enjoying the sun, he was visited by Alexander the
Great. The emperor stood before him and asked if there was anything he could do
for him. Was there anything he desired? “Yes,” Diogenes replied. “Stand to one
side. You’re blocking the sun.” Thus Diogenes showed that he was no less happy
and rich than the great man before him. He had everything he desired.

The Cynics believed that people did not need to be concerned about their own
health. Even suffering and death should not disturb them. Nor should they let
themselves be tormented by concern for other people’s woes. Nowadays the terms
“cynical” and “cynicism” have come to mean a sneering disbelief in human
sincerity, and they imply insensitivity to other people’s suffering.

