# Socrates
[Metadata]: # {20}
[Descriptor]: # {20}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Socrates
…wisest is she who knows she does not know…



Sophie put on a summer dress and hurried down to the kitchen. Her mother was
standing by the kitchen table. Sophie decided not to say anything about the
silk scarf.

“Did you bring in the newspaper?” she asked.

Her mother turned.

“Would you get it for me?”

Sophie was out of the door in a flash, down the gravel path to the mailbox.

Only the newspaper. She couldn’t expect an answer so soon, she supposed. On the
front page of the paper she read something about the Norwegian UN battalion in
Lebanon.

The UN battalion ... wasn’t that the postmark on the card from Hilde’s father?
But the postage stamp had been Norwegian. Maybe the Norwegian UN soldiers had
their own post office with them.

“You’ve become very interested in the newspaper,” said her mother drily when
Sophie returned to the kitchen.

Luckily her mother said no more about mailboxes and stuff, either during
breakfast or later on that day. When she went shopping, Sophie took her letter
about Fate down to the den.

She was surprised to see a little white envelope beside the cookie tin with the
other letters from the philosopher. Sophie was quite sure she had not put it
there.

This envelope was also wet around the edges. And it had a couple of deep holes
in it, just like the one she had received yesterday.

Had the philosopher been here? Did he know about her secret hiding place? Why
was the envelope wet?

All these questions made her head spin. She opened the letter and read the
note:

Dear Sophie, I read your letter with great interest— and not without some
regret. I must unfortunately disappoint you with regard to the invitation. We
shall meet one day, but it will probably be quite a while before I can come in
person to Captain’s Bend.

I must add that from now on I will no longer be able to deliver the letters
personally. It would be much too risky in the long run. In the future, letters
will be delivered by my little messenger. On the other hand, they will be
brought directly to the secret place in the garden.

You may continue to contact me whenever you feel the need. When you do, put a
pink envelope out with a cookie or a lump of sugar in it. When the messenger
finds it, he will bring it straight to me.

P.S. It is not pleasant to decline a young lady’s invitation to coffee, but
sometimes it is a matter of necessity.

P.P.S. If you should come across a red silk scarf anywhere, please take care of
it. Sometimes personal property gets mixed up. Especially at school and places
like that, and this is a philosophy school.

Yours, Alberto Knox

Sophie had lived for almost fifteen years, and had received quite a lot of
letters in her young life, at least at Christmas and on birthdays. But this
letter was the strangest one she had ever received.

It had no postage stamp. It hadn’t even been put in the mailbox. It had been
brought straight to Sophie’s top-secret hideout in the old hedge. The fact that
it was wet in the dry spring weather was also most mystifying.

The strangest thing of all was the silk scarf, of course. The philosopher must
have another pupil. That was it. And this other pupil had lost a red silk
scarf. Right. But how had she managed to lose it under Sophie’s bed?

And Alberto Knox … what kind of a name was that?

One thing was confirmed—the connection between the philosopher and Hilde Moller
Knag. But that Hilde’s own father was now confusing their addresses—that was
completely incomprehensible.

Sophie sat for a long time thinking about what connection there could possibly
be between Hilde and herself. Finally she gave up. The philosopher had written
that she would meet him one day. Perhaps she would meet Hilde too.

She turned the letter over. She now saw that there were some sentences written
on the back as well:

Is there such a thing as natural modesty?

Wisest is she who knows she does not know...

True insight comes from within.

He who knows what is right will do right.



Sophie knew that the short sentences that came in the white envelopes were
intended to prepare her for the next big envelope, which would arrive shortly
thereafter. She suddenly had an idea. If the “messenger” came to the den to
deliver a brown envelope, Sophie could simply sit and wait for him. Or was it a
her? She would definitely hang on to whoever it was until he or she told her
more about the philosopher! The letter said that the “messenger” was little.
Could it be a child? “Is there such a thing as natural modesty?” Sophie knew
that “modesty” was an old-fashioned word for shyness—for example, about being
seen naked. But was it really natural to be embarrassed about that? If
something was natural, she supposed, it was the same for everybody. In many
parts of the world it was completely natural to be naked. So it must be society
that decides what you can and can’t do. When Grandma was young you certainly
couldn’t sunbathe topless. But today, most people think it is “natural,” even
though it is still strictly forbidden in lots of countries. Was this
philosophy? Sophie wondered.

The next sentence was: “Wisest is she who knows she does not know.”

Wiser than who? If the philosopher meant that someone who realized that she
didn’t know everything under the sun was wiser than someone who knew just a
little, but who thought she knew a whole lot—well, that wasn’t so difficult to
agree with. Sophie had never thought about it before. But the more she did, the
more clearly she saw that knowing what you don’t know is also a kind of
knowledge. The stupidest thing she knew was for people to act like they knew
all about things they knew absolutely nothing about.

The next sentence was about true insight coming from within. But didn’t all
knowledge come into people’s heads from the outside? On the other hand, Sophie
could remember situations when her mother or the teachers at school had tried
to teach her something that she hadn’t been receptive to. And whenever she had
really learned something, it was when she had somehow contributed to it
herself. Now and then, even, she would suddenly understand a thing she’d drawn
a total blank on before. That was probably what people meant by “insight.”

So far, so good. Sophie thought she had done reasonably well on the first three
questions. But the next statement was so odd she couldn’t help smiling: “He who
knows what is right will do right.”

Did that mean that when a bank robber robbed a bank it was because he didn’t
know any better? Sophie didn’t think so.

On the contrary, she thought that both children and adults did stupid things
that they probably regretted afterwards, precisely because they had done them
against their better judgment.

While she sat thinking, she heard something rustling in the dry undergrowth on
the other side of the hedge nearest the woods. Could it be the messenger? Her
heart started beating faster. It sounded like a panting animal was coming.

The next moment a big Labrador pushed its way into the den.

In its mouth it held a big brown envelope which it dropped at Sophie’s feet. It
all happened so quickly that Sophie had no time to react. A second later she
was sitting with the big envelope in her hands—and the golden Labrador had
scampered off into the woods again.

Once it was all over she reacted. She started to cry.

She sat like that for a while, losing all sense of time.

Then she looked up suddenly.

So that was his famous messenger! Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. Of course
that was why the white envelopes were wet around the edges and had holes in
them. Why hadn’t she thought of it? Now it made sense to put a cookie or a lump
of sugar in the envelope when she wrote to the philosopher.

She may not always have been as smart as she would like, but who could have
guessed that the messenger was a trained dog! It was a bit out of the ordinary,
to put it mildly! She could certainly forget all about forcing the messenger to
reveal Alberto Knox’s whereabouts.

Sophie opened the big envelope and began to read.

