# Views on Women
[Metadata]: # {42}
[Descriptor]: # {42}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Views on Women
Finally, let us look at Aristotle’s views on women. His was unfortunately not
as uplifting as Plato’s. Aristotle was more inclined to believe that women were
incomplete in some way. A woman was an “unfinished man.” In reproduction, woman
is passive and receptive whilst man is active and productive; for the child
inherits only the male characteristics, claimed Aristotle. He believed that all
the child’s characteristics lay complete in the male sperm. The woman was the
soil, receiving and bringing forth the seed, whilst the man was the “sower.”
Or, in Aristotelian language, the man provides the “form” and the woman
contributes the “substance.”

It is of course both astonishing and highly regrettable that an otherwise so
intelligent man could be so wrong about the relationship of the sexes. But it
demonstrates two things: first, that Aristotle could not have had much
practical experience regarding the lives of women and children, and second, it
shows how wrong things can go when men are allowed to reign supreme in the
fields of philosophy and science.

Aristotle’s erroneous view of the sexes was doubly harmful because it was
his—rather than Plato’s—view that held sway throughout the Middle Ages. The
church thus inherited a view of women that is entirely without foundation in
the Bible. Jesus was certainly no woman hater!

I’ll say no more. But you will be hearing from me again.

When Sophie had read the chapter on Aristotle one and a half times, she
returned it to the brown envelope and remained sitting, staring into space. She
suddenly became aware of the mess surrounding her. Books and ring binders lay
scattered on the floor. Socks and sweaters, tights and jeans hung half out of
the closet. On the chair in front of the writing desk was a huge pile of dirty
laundry.

Sophie had an irresistible desire to clear up. The first thing she did was to
pull all the clothes out of the closet and onto the floor. It was necessary to
start all over. Then she began folding her things very neatly and stacking them
all tidily on the shelves. The closet had seven shelves. One was for underwear,
one for socks and tights, and one for jeans. She gradually filled up each
shelf. She never had any question about where to put anything. Dirty laundry
went into a plastic bag she found on the bottom shelf. One thing she did have
trouble with—a white knee-length stocking. The problem was that the other one
of the pair was missing. What’s more, it had never been Sophie’s.

She examined it carefully. There was nothing to identify the owner, but Sophie
had a strong suspicion about who the owner was. She threw it up onto the top
shelf to join the Lego, the video cassette, and the red silk scarf.

Sophie turned her attention to the floor. She sorted books, ring binders,
magazines, and posters—exactly as the philosophy teacher had described in the
chapter on Aristotle. When she had done that, she made her bed and got started
on her writing desk.

The last thing she did was to gather all the pages on Aristotle into a neat
pile. She fished out an empty ring binder and a hole punch, made holes in the
pages, and clipped them into the ring binder. This also went onto the top
shelf. Later on in the day she would have to bring in the cookie tin from the
den.

From now on things would be kept neat. And she didn’t only mean in her room.
After reading Aristotle, she realized it was just as important to keep her
ideas orderly. She had reserved the top shelf of the closet especially for that
kind of thing. It was the only place in the room that she did not yet have
complete control over.

There had been no sign of life from her mother for over two hours. Sophie went
downstairs. Before she woke her mother up she decided to feed her pets.

She bent over the goldfish bowl in the kitchen. One of the fishes was black,
one orange, and one red and white. This was why she called them Black Jack,
Gold-top, and Red Ridinghood.

As she sprinkled fish food into the water she said:

“You belong to Nature’s living creatures, you can absorb nourishment, you can
grow and reproduce yourselves. More specifically, you belong to the animal
kingdom. So you can move around and look out at the world. To be precise, you
are fish, and you breathe through your gills and can swim back and forth in the
waters of life.”

Sophie put the lid back on the fish food jar. She was quite satisfied with the
way she had placed the goldfish in Nature’s scale, and she was especially
pleased with the expression “the waters of life.” So now it was the
budgerigars’ turn.

Sophie poured a little birdseed in their feeding cup and said:

“Dear Smit and Smule. You have become dear little budgerigars because you grew
out of dear little budgerigar eggs, and because these eggs had the form of
being budgerigars, luckily you didn’t grow into squawking parrots.”

Sophie then went into the large bathroom, where the sluggish tortoise lay in a
big box. Every now and then when her mother showered, she yelled that she would
kill it one day. But so far it had been an empty threat. Sophie took a lettuce
leaf from a large jam jar and laid it in the box.

“Dear Govinda,” she said. “You are not one of the speediest animals, but you
certainly are able to sense a tiny fraction of the great big world we live in.
You’ll have to content yourself with the fact that you are not the only one who
can’t exceed your own limits.”

Sherekan was probably out catching mice—that was a cat’s nature, after all.
Sophie crossed the living room toward her mother’s bedroom. A vase of daffodils
stood on the coffee table. It was as if the yellow blooms bowed respectfully as
Sophie went by. She stopped for a moment and let her fingers gently brush their
smooth heads. “You belong to the living part of nature too,” she said.
“Actually, you are quite privileged compared to the vase you are in. But
unfortunately you are not able to appreciate it.”

Then Sophie tiptoed into her mother’s bedroom. Although her mother was in a
deep sleep, Sophie laid a hand on her forehead.

“You are one of the luckiest ones,” she said, “because you are not only alive
like the lilies of the field. And you are not only a living creature like
Sherekan or Govinda. You are a human, and therefore have the rare capacity of
thought.”

“What on earth are you talking about, Sophie?”

Her mother had woken up more quickly than usual.

“I was just saying that you look like a lazy tortoise. I can otherwise inform
you that I have tidied up my room, with philosophic thoroughness.”

Her mother lifted her head.

“I’ll be right there,” she said. “Will you put the coffee on?”

Sophie did as she was asked, and they were soon sitting in the kitchen over
coffee, juice, and chocolate.

Suddenly Sophie said, “Have you ever wondered why we are alive, Mom?”

“Oh, not again!”

“Yes, because now I know the answer. People live on this planet so that someone
can go around giving names to everything.”

“Is that right? I never thought of that.”

“Then you have a big problem, because a human is a thinking animal. If you
don’t think, you’re not really a human.”

“Sophie!”

“Imagine if there were only vegetables and animals. Then there wouldn’t have
been anybody to tell the difference between ‘cat’ and ‘dog,’ or ‘lily’ and
‘gooseberry.’ Vegetables and animals are living too, but we are the only
creatures that can categorize nature into different groups and classes.”

“You really are the most peculiar girl I have ever had,” said her mother.

“I should hope so,” said Sophie. “Everybody is more or less peculiar. I am a
person, so I am more or less peculiar. You have only one girl, so I am the most
peculiar.”

“What I meant was that you scare the living daylights out of me with all that
new talk.”

“You are easily scared, then.”

Later that afternoon Sophie went back to the den. She managed to smuggle the
big cookie tin up to her room without her mother noticing.

First she put all the pages in the right order. Then she punched holes in them
and put them in the ring binder, before the chapter on Aristotle. Finally she
numbered each page in the top right-hand corner. There were in all over fifty
pages. Sophie was in the process of compiling her own book on philosophy. It
was not by her, but written especially for her.

She had no time to do her homework for Monday. They were probably going to have
a test in Religious Knowledge, but the teacher always said he valued personal
commitment and value judgments. Sophie felt she was beginning to have a certain
basis for both.

