# WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY?
[Metadata]: # {03}
[Descriptor]: # {03}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY?
Dear Sophie,

Lots of people have hobbies. Some people collect old coins or foreign stamps,
some do needlework, others spend most of their spare time on a particular
sport.

A lot of people enjoy reading. But reading tastes differ widely. Some people
only read newspapers or comics, some like reading novels, while others prefer
books on astronomy, wildlife, or technological discoveries.

If I happen to be interested in horses or precious stones, I cannot expect
everyone else to share my enthusiasm. If I watch all the sports programs on TV
with great pleasure, I must put up with the fact that other people find sports
boring.

Is there nothing that interests us all? Is there nothing that concerns
everyone—no matter who they are or where they live in the world? Yes, dear
Sophie, there are questions that certainly should interest everyone. They are
precisely the questions this course is about.

What is the most important thing in life? If we ask someone living on the edge
of starvation, the answer is food. If we ask someone dying of cold, the answer
is warmth. If we put the same question to someone who feels lonely and
isolated, the answer will probably be the company of other people.

But when these basic needs have been satisfied—will there still be something
that everybody needs? Philosophers think so. They believe that man cannot live
by bread alone. Of course everyone needs food. And everyone needs love and
care. But there is something else—apart from that—which everyone needs, and
that is to figure out who we are and why we are here.

Being interested in why we are here is not a “casual” interest like collecting
stamps. People who ask such questions are taking part in a debate that has gone
on as long as man has lived on this planet. How the universe, the earth, and
life came into being is a bigger and more important question than who won the
most gold medals in the last Olympics.

The best way of approaching philosophy is to ask a few philosophical questions:

How was the world created? Is there any will or meaning behind what happens? Is
there a life after death? How can we answer these questions? And most
important, how ought we to live? People have been asking these questions
throughout the ages. We know of no culture which has not concerned itself with
what man is and where the world came from.

Basically there are not many philosophical questions to ask. We have already
asked some of the most important ones. But history presents us with many
different answers to each question. So it is easier to ask philosophical
questions than to answer them.

Today as well each individual has to discover his own answer to these same
questions. You cannot find out whether there is a God or whether there is life
after death by looking in an encyclopedia. Nor does the encyclopedia tell us
how we ought to live. However, reading what other people have believed can help
us formulate our own view of life.

Philosophers’ search for the truth resembles a detective story. Some think
Andersen was the murderer, others think it was Nielsen or Jensen. The police
are sometimes able to solve a real crime. But it is equally possible that they
never get to the bottom of it, although there is a solution somewhere. So even
if it is difficult to answer a question, there may be one—and only one—right
answer. Either there is a kind of existence after death—or there is not.

A lot of age-old enigmas have now been explained by science. What the dark side
of the moon looks like was once shrouded in mystery. It was not the kind of
thing that could be solved by discussion, it was left to the imagination of the
individual. But today we know exactly what the dark side of the moon looks
like, and no one can “believe” any longer in the Man in the Moon, or that the
moon is made of green cheese.

A Greek philosopher who lived more than two thousand years ago believed that
philosophy had its origin in man’s sense of wonder. Man thought it was so
astonishing to be alive that philosophical questions arose of their own accord.

It is like watching a magic trick. We cannot understand how it is done. So we
ask: how can the magician change a couple of white silk scarves into a live
rabbit?

A lot of people experience the world with the same incredulity as when a
magician suddenly pulls a rabbit out of a hat which has just been shown to them
empty.

In the case of the rabbit, we know the magician has tricked us. What we would
like to know is just how he did it. But when it comes to the world it’s
somewhat different. We know that the world is not all sleight of hand and
deception because here we are in it, we are part of it. Actually, we are the
white rabbit being pulled out of the hat. The only difference between us and
the white rabbit is that the rabbit does not realize it is taking part in a
magic trick. Unlike us. We feel we are part of something mysterious and we
would like to know how it all works.

P.S. As far as the white rabbit is concerned, it might be better to compare it
with the whole universe. We who live here are microscopic insects existing deep
down in the rabbit’s fur. But philosophers are always trying to climb up the
fine hairs of the fur in order to stare right into the magician’s eyes.

Are you still there, Sophie? To be continued . . .



Sophie was completely exhausted. Still there? She could not even remember if
she had taken the time to breathe while she read.

Who had brought this letter? It couldn’t be the same person who had sent the
birthday card to Hilde Moller Knag because that card had both a stamp and a
postmark. The brown envelope had been delivered by hand to the mailbox exactly
like the two white ones.

Sophie looked at her watch. It was a quarter to three. Her mother would not be
home from work for over two hours.

Sophie crawled out into the garden again and ran to the mailbox. Perhaps there
was another letter.

She found one more brown envelope with her name on it. This time she looked all
around but there was nobody in sight. Sophie ran to the edge of the woods and
looked down the path.

No one was there. Suddenly she thought she heard a twig snap deep in the woods.
But she was not completely sure, and anyway it would be pointless to chase
after someone who was determined to get away.

Sophie let herself into the house. She ran upstairs to her room and took out a
big cookie tin full of pretty stones. She emptied the stones onto the floor and
put both large envelopes into the tin. Then she hurried out into the garden
again, holding the tin securely with both hands. Before she went she put some
food out for Sherekan.

“Kitty, kitty, kitty!”

Once back in the den she opened the second brown envelope and drew out the new
typewritten pages. She began to read.

