# The Enlightenent
[Metadata]: # {68}
[Descriptor]: # {68}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Enlightenent
...from the way needles are made to the way cannons are founded…



Hilde had just begun the chapter on the Renaissance when she heard her mother
come in the front door. She looked at the clock. It was four in the afternoon.

Her mother ran upstairs and opened Hilde’s door.

“Didn’t you go to the church?”

“Yes, I did.”

“But... what did you wear?”

“What I’m wearing now.”

“Your nightgown?”

“It’s an old stone church from the Middle Ages.”

“Hilde!”

She let the ring binder fall into her lap and looked up at her mother.

“I forgot the time, Mom. I’m sorry, but I’m reading something terribly
exciting.”

Her mother could not help smiling.

“It’s a magic book,” added Hilde.

“Okay. Happy birthday once again, Hilde!”

“Hey, I don’t know if I can take that phrase any more.”

“But I haven’t... I’m just going to rest for a while, then I’ll start fixing a
great dinner. I managed to get hold of some strawberries.”

“Okay, I’ll go on reading.”

Her mother left and Hilde read on.

Sophie is following Hermes through the town. In Alberto’s hall she finds
another card from Lebanon. This, too, is dated June 15.

Hilde was just beginning to understand the system of the dates. The cards dated
before June 15 are copies of cards Hilde had already received from her dad. But
those with today’s date are reaching her for the first time via the ring
binder.

Dear Hilde, Now Sophie is coming to the philosopher’s house. She will soon be
fifteen, but you were fifteen yesterday. Or is it today, Hilde? If it is today,
it must be late, then. But our watches do not always agree . . .

Hilde read how Alberto told Sophie about the Renaissance and the new science,
the seventeenth-century rationalists and British empiricism.

She jumped at every new card and birthday greeting that her father had stuck
into the story. He got them to fall out of an exercise book, turn up inside a
banana skin, and hide inside a computer program. Without the slightest effort,
he could get Alberto to make a slip of the tongue and call Sophie Hilde. On top
of everything else, he got Hermes to say “Happy birthday, Hilde!”

Hilde agreed with Alberto that he was going a bit too far, comparing himself
with God and Providence. But whom was she actually agreeing with? Wasn’t it her
father who put those reproachful—or self-reproachful—words in Alberto’s mouth?
She decided that the comparison with God was not so crazy after all. Her father
really was like an almighty God for Sophie’s world.

When Alberto got to Berkeley, Hilde was at least as enthralled as Sophie had
been. What would happen now? There had been all kinds of hints that something
special was going to happen as soon as they got to that philosopher—who had
denied the existence of a material world outside human consciousness.

The chapter begins with Alberto and Sophie standing at the window, seeing the
little plane with the long Happy Birthday streamer waving behind it. At the
same time dark clouds begin to gather over the town.

“So ‘to be or not to be’ is not the whole question. The question is also who we
are. Are we really human beings of flesh and blood? Does our world consist of
real things—or are we encircled by the mind?”

Not so surprising that Sophie starts biting her nails. Nail-biting had never
been one of Hilde’s bad habits but she didn’t feel particularly pleased with
herself right now. Then finally it was all out in the open: “For us— for you
and me—this ‘will or spirit’ that is the ‘cause of everything in everything’
could be Hilde’s father.”

“Are you saying he’s been a kind of God for us?”

“To be perfectly candid, yes.He should be ashamed of himself!”

“What about Hilde herself?”

“She is an angel, Sophie.”

“An angel?”

“Hilde is the one this ‘spirit’ turns to.”



With that, Sophie tears herself away from Alberto and runs out into the storm.
Could it be the same storm that raged over Bjerkely last night—a few hours
after Sophie ran through the town?



As she ran, one thought kept going round and round in her mind: “Tomorrow is my
birthday*. Isn’t it extra bitter to realize that life is only a dream on the
day before your fifteenth birthday? It’s like dreaming you won a million and
then just as you’re getting the money you wake up.”

Sophie ran across the squelching playing field. Minutes later she saw someone
come running toward her. It was her mother. The sky was pierced again and again
by angry darts of lightning.

When they reached each other Sophie’s mother put her arm around her.

“What’s happening to us, little one?”

“I don’t know,” Sophie sobbed. “It’s like a bad dream.”

Hilde felt the tears start. “To be or not to be—that is the question.” She
threw the ring binder to the end of the bed and stood up. She walked back and
forth across the floor. At last she stopped in front of the brass mirror, where
she remained until her mother came to say dinner was ready. When Hilde heard
the knock on the door, she had no idea how long she had been standing there.

But she was sure, she was perfectly sure, that her reflection had winked with
both eyes.

She tried to be the grateful birthday girl all through dinner. But her thoughts
were with Sophie and Alberto all the time.

How would things go for them now that they knew it was Hilda’s father who
decided everything? Although “knew” was perhaps an exaggeration. It was
nonsense to think they knew anything at all. Wasn’t it only her father who let
them know things?

Still, the problem was the same however you looked at it. As soon as Sophie and
Alberto “knew” how everything hung together, they were in a way at the end of
the road.

She almost choked on a mouthful of food as she suddenly realized that the same
problem possibly applied to her own world too. People had progressed steadily
in their understanding of natural laws. Could history simply continue to all
eternity once the last piece of the jigsaw puzzle of philosophy and science had
fallen into place? Wasn’t there a connection between the development of ideas
and science on the one hand, and the greenhouse effect and deforestation on the
other? Maybe it was not so crazy to call man’s thirst for knowledge a fall from
grace?

The question was so huge and so terrifying that Hilde tried to forget it again.
She would probably understand much more as she read further in her father’s
birthday book.

“Happy birthday to you ...,” sang her mother when they were done with their ice
cream and Italian strawberries. “Now we’ll do whatever you choose.”

“I know it sounds a bit crazy, but all I want to do is read my present from
Dad.”

“Well, as long as he doesn’t make you completely delirious.”

“No way.”

“We could share a pizza while we watch that mystery on TV.”

“Yes, if you like.”

Hilde suddenly thought of the way Sophie spoke to her mother. Dad had hopefully
not written any of Hilde’s mother into the character of the other mother? Just
to make sure, she decided not to mention the white rabbit being pulled out of
the top hat. Not today, at least.

“By the way,” she said as she was leaving the table.

“What?”

“I can’t find my gold crucifix anywhere.”

Her mother looked at her with an enigmatic expression.

“I found it down by the dock weeks ago. You must have dropped it, you untidy
scamp.”

“Did you mention it to Dad?”

“Let me think ... yes, I believe I may have.”

“Where is it then?”

Her mother got up and went to get her own jewelry case. Hilde heard a little
cry of surprise from the bedroom. She came quickly back into the living room.

“Right now I can’t seem to find it.”

“I thought as much.”

She gave her mother a hug and ran upstairs to her room. At last—now she could
read on about Sophie and Alberto. She sat up on the bed as before with the
heavy ring binder resting against her knees and began the next chapter.

Sophie woke up the next morning when her mother came into the room carrying a
tray loaded with birthday presents. She had stuck a flag in an empty soda
bottle.

“Happy birthday, Sophie!”

Sophie rubbed the sleep from her eyes. She tried to remember what had happened
the night before. But it was all like jumbled pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. One of
the pieces was Alberto, another was Hilde and the major. A third was Berkeley,
a fourth Bjerkely. The blackest piece of all was the violent storm. She had
practically been in shock. Her mother had rubbed her dry with a towel and
simply put her to bed with a cup of hot milk and honey. She had fallen asleep
immediately.

“I think I’m still alive,” she said weakly.

“Of course you’re alive! And today you are fifteen years old.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Quite sure. Shouldn’t a mother know when her only child was born? June 15,
1975 ... and half-past one, Sophie. It was the happiest moment of my life.”

“Are you sure it isn’t all only a dream?”

“It must be a good dream to wake up to rolls and soda and birthday presents.”

She put the tray of presents on a chair and disappeared out of the room for a
second. When she came back she was carrying another tray with rolls and soda.
She put it on the end of the bed.

It was the signal for the traditional birthday morning ritual, with the
unpacking of presents and her mother’s sentimental flights back to her first
contractions fifteen years ago. Her mother’s present was a tennis racket.
Sophie had never played tennis, but there were some open-air courts a few
minutes from Clover Close. Her father had sent her a mini-TV and FM radio. The
screen was no bigger than an ordinary photograph. There were also presents from
old aunts and friends of the family.

Presently her mother said, “Do you think I should stay home from work today?”

“No, why should you?”

“You were very upset yesterday. If it goes on, I think we should make an
appointment to see a psychiatrist.”

“That won’t be necessary.”

“Was it the storm—or was it Alberto?”

“What about you? You said: What’s happening to us, little one?”

“I was thinking of you running around town to meet some mysterious person ...
Maybe it’s my fault.”

“It’s not anybody’s ‘fault’ that I’m taking a course in philosophy in my
leisure time. Just go to work. School doesn’t start till ten, and we’re only
getting our grades and sitting around.”

“Do you know what you’re going to get?”

“More than I got last semester at any rate.”



Not long after her mother had gone the telephone rang.

“Sophie Amundsen.”

“This is Alberto.”

“Ah.”

“The major didn’t spare any ammunition last night.”

“What do you mean.”

“The thunderstorm, Sophie.”

“I don’t know what to think.”

“That is the finest virtue a genuine philosopher can have. I am proud of how
much you have learned in such a short time.”

“I am scared that nothing is real.”

“That’s called existential angst, or dread, and is as a rule only a stage on
the way to new consciousness.”

“I think I need a break from the course.”

“Are there that many frogs in the garden at the moment?”

Sophie started to laugh. Alberto continued: “I think it would be better to
persevere. Happy birthday, by the way. We must complete the course by Midsummer
Eve. It’s our last chance.”

“Our last chance for what?”

“Are you sitting comfortably? We’re going to have to spend some time on this,
you understand.”

“I’m sitting down.”

“You remember Descartes?”

“I think, therefore I am?”

“With regard to our own methodical doubt, we are right now starting from
scratch. We don’t even know whether we think. It may turn out that we are
thoughts, and that is quite different from thinking. We have good reason to
believe that we have merely been invented by Hilde’s father as a kind of
birthday diversion for the major’s daughter from Lillesand. Do you see?”

“Yes . . .”

“But therein also lies a built-in contradiction. If we are fictive, we have no
right to ‘believe’ anything at all. In which case this whole telephone
conversation is purely imaginary.”

“And we haven’t the tiniest bit of free will because it’s the major who plans
everything we say and do. So we can just as well hang up now.”

“No, now you’re oversimplifying things.”

“Explain it, then.”

“Would you claim that people plan everything they dream? It may be that Hilde’s
father knows everything we do. It may be just as difficult to escape his
omniscience as it is to run away from your own shadow. However— and this is
where I have begun to devise a plan—it is not certain that the major has
already decided on everything that is to happen. He may not decide before the
very last minute—that is to say, in the moment of creation. Precisely at such
moments we may possibly have an initiative of our own which guides what we say
and do. Such an initiative would naturally constitute extremely weak impulses
compared to the major’s heavy artillery. We are very likely defenseless against
intrusive external forces such as talking dogs, messages in bananas, and
thunderstorms booked in advance. But we cannot rule out our stubbornness,
however weak it may be.”

“How could that be possible?”

“The major naturally knows everything about our little world, but that doesn’t
mean he is all powerful. At any rate we must try to live as if he is not.”

“I think I see where you’re going with this.”

“The trick would be if we could manage to do something all on our own—something
the major would not be able to discover.”

“How can we do that if we don’t even exist?”

“Who said we don’t exist? The question is not whether we are, but what we are
and who we are. Even if it turns out that we are merely impulses in the major’s
dual personality, that need not take our little bit of existence away from us.”

“Or our free will?”

“I’m working on it, Sophie.”

“But Hilde’s father must be fully aware that you are working on it.”

“Decidedly so. But he doesn’t know what the actual plan is. I am attempting to
find an Archimedian point.”

“An Archimedian point?”

“Archimedes was a Greek scientist who said ‘Give me a firm point on which to
stand and I will move the earth.’ That’s the kind of point we must find to move
ourselves out of the major’s inner universe.”

“That would be quite a feat.”

“But we won’t manage to slip away before we have finished the philosophy
course. While that lasts he has much too firm a grip on us. He has clearly
decided that I am to guide you through the centuries right up to our own time.
But we only have a few days left before he boards a plane somewhere down in the
Middle East. If we haven’t succeeded in detaching ourselves from his gluey
imagination before he arrives at Bjerkely, we are done for.”

“You’re frightening me!”

“First of all I shall give you the most important facts about the French
Enlightenment. Then we shall take the main outline of Kant’s philosophy so that
we can get to Romanticism. Hegel will also be a significant part of the picture
for us. And in talking about him we will unavoidably touch on Kierkegaard’s
indignant clash with Hegelian philosophy. We shall briefly talk about Marx,
Darwin, and Freud. And if we can manage a few closing comments on Sartre and
Existentialism, our plan can be put into operation.”

“That’s an awful lot for one week.”

“That’s why we must begin at once. Can you come over right away?”

“I have to go to school. We are having a class get-together and then we get our
grades.”

“Drop it. If we are only fictive, it’s pure imagination that candy and soda
have any taste.”

“But my grades ...”

“Sophie, either you are living in a wondrous universe on a tiny planet in one
of many hundred billion galaxies— or else you are the result of a few
electromagnetic impulses in the major’s mind. And you are talking about grades!
You ought to be ashamed of yourself!”

“I’m sorry.”

“But you’d better go to school before we meet. It might have a bad influence on
Hilde if you cut your last school-day. She probably goes to school even on her
birthday. She is an angel, you know.”

“So I’ll come straight from school.”

“We can meet at the major’s cabin.”

“The major’s cabin?”

... Click!



Hilde let the ring binder slide into her lap. Her father had given her
conscience a dig there—she did cut her last day at school. How sneaky of him!

She sat for a while wondering what the plan was that Alberto was devising.
Should she sneak a look at the last page? No, that would be cheating. She’d
better hurry up and read it to the end.

But she was convinced Alberto was right on one important point. One thing was
that her father had an overview of what was going to happen to Sophie and
Alberto. But while he was writing, he probably didn’t know everything that
would happen. He might dash off something in a great hurry, something he might
not notice till long after he had written it. In a situation like that Sophie
and Alberto would have a certain amount of leeway.

Once again Hilde had an almost transfiguring conviction that Sophie and Alberto
really existed. Still waters run deep, she thought to herself.

Why did that idea come to her?

It was certainly not a thought that rippled the surface.



At school, Sophie received lots of attention because it was her birthday. Her
classmates were already keyed up by thoughts of summer vacation, and grades,
and the sodas on the last day of school. The minute the teacher dismissed the
class with her best wishes for the vacation, Sophie ran home. Joanna tried to
slow her down but Sophie called over her shoulder that there was something she
just had to do.

In the mailbox she found two cards from Lebanon. They were both birthday cards:
HAPPY BIRTHDAY—15 YEARS. One of them was to “Hilde M0ller Knag, c/o Sophie
Amundsen . . .” But the other one was to Sophie herself. Both cards were
stamped “UN Battalion—June 15.”

Sophie read her own card first:

Dear Sophie Amundsen, Today you are getting a card as well. Happy birthday,
Sophie, and many thanks for everything you have done for Hilde. Best regards,
Major Albert Knag.

Sophie was not sure how to react, now that Hilde’s father had finally written
to her too. Hilde’s card read:

Dear Hilde, I have no idea what day or time it is in Lillesand. But, as I said,
it doesn’t make much difference. If I know you, I am not too late for a last,
or next to last, greeting from down here. But don’t stay up too late! Alberto
will soon be telling you about the French Enlightenment. He will concentrate on
seven points. They are:

1. Opposition to authority

2. Rationalism

3. The enlightenment movement

4. Cultural optimism

5. The return to nature

6. Natural religion

7. Human rights



The major was obviously still keeping his eye on them.

Sophie let herself in and put her report card with all the A’s on the kitchen
table. Then she slipped through the hedge and ran into the woods.

Soon she was once again rowing across the little lake.

Alberto was sitting on the doorstep when she got to the cabin. He invited her
to sit beside him. The weather was fine although a slight mist of damp raw air
was coming off the lake. It was as though it had not quite recovered from the
storm.

“Let’s get going right away,” said Alberto.

“After Hume, the next great philosopher was the German, Immanuel Kant. But
France also had many important thinkers in the eighteenth century. We could say
that the philosophical center of gravity h. Europe in the eighteenth century
was in England in the first half, in France in the middle, and in Germany
toward the end of it.”

“A shift from west to east, in other words.”

“Precisely. Let me outline some of the ideas that many of the French
Enlightenment philosophers had in common. The important names are Montesquieu,
Voltaire, and Rousseau, but there were many, many others. I shall concentrate
on seven points.”

“Thanks, that I am painfully aware of.”

Sophie handed him the card from Hilde’s father. Alberto sighed deeply. “He
could have saved himself the trouble ... the first key words, then, are
opposition to authority. Many of the French Enlightenment philosophers visited
England, which was in many ways more liberal than their home country, and were
intrigued by the English natural sciences, especially Newton and his universal
physics. But they were also inspired by British philosophy, in particular by
Locke and his political philosophy. Once back in France, they became
increasingly opposed to the old authority. They thought it was essential to
remain skeptical of all inherited truths, the idea being that the individual
must find his own answer to every question. The tradition of Descartes was very
inspiring in this respect.”

“Because he was the one who built everything up from the ground.”

“Quite so. The opposition to authority was not least directed against the power
of the clergy, the king, and the nobility. During the eighteenth century, these
institutions had far more power in France than they had in England.”

“Then came the French Revolution.”

“Yes, in 1789. But the revolutionary ideas arose much earlier. The next key
word is rationalism.”

“I thought rationalism went out with Hume.”

“Hume himself did not die until 1776. That was about twenty years after
Montesquieu and only two years before Voltaire and Rousseau, who both died in
1778. But all three had been to England and were familiar with the philosophy
of Locke. You may recall that Locke was not consistent in his empiricism. He
believed, for example, that faith in God and certain moral norms were inherent
in human reason. This idea is also the core of the French Enlightenment.”

“You also said that the French have always been more rational than the
British.”

“Yes, a difference that goes right back to the Middle Ages. When the British
speak of ‘common sense,’ the French usually speak of ‘evident.’ The English
expression means ‘what everybody knows,’ the French means ‘what is obvious’—to
one’s reason, that is.”

“I see.”

“Like the humanists of antiquity—such as Socrates and the Stoics—most of the
Enlightenment philosophers had an unshakable faith in human reason. This was so
characteristic that the French Enlightenment is often called the Age of Reason.
The new natural sciences had revealed that nature was subject to reason. Now
the Enlightenment philosophers saw it as their duty to lay a foundation for
morals, religion, and ethics in accordance with man’s immutable reason. This
led to the enlightenment movement.”

“The third point.”

“Now was the time to start ‘enlightening’ the masses. This was to be the basis
for a better society. People thought that poverty and oppression were the fault
of ignorance and superstition. Great attention was therefore focused on the
education of children and of the people. It is no accident that the science of
pedagogy was founded during the Enlightenment.”

“So schools date from the Middle Ages, and pedagogy from the Enlightenment.”

“You could say that. The greatest monument to the enlightenment movement was
characteristically enough a huge encyclopedia. I refer to the Encyclopedia in
28 volumes published during the years from 1751 to 1772. All the great
philosophers and men of letters contributed to it. ‘Everything is to be found
here,’ it was said, ‘from the way needles are made to the way cannons are
founded.’ “

“The next point is cultural optimism,” Sophie said.

“Would you oblige me by putting that card away while I am talking?”

“Excuse me.”

“The Enlightenment philosophers thought that once reason and knowledge became
widespread, humanity would make great progress. It could only be a question of
time before irrationalism and ignorance would give way to an ‘enlightened’
humanity. This thought was dominant in Western Europe until the last couple of
decades. Today we are no longer so convinced that all ‘developments’ are to the
good.

“But this criticism of ‘civilization’ was already being voiced by French
Enlightenment philosophers.”

“Maybe we should have listened to them.”

“For some, the new catchphrase was back to nature. But ‘nature’ to the
Enlightenment philosophers meant almost the same as ‘reason/ since human reason
was a gift of nature rather than of religion or of ‘civilization.’ It was
observed that the so-called primitive peoples were frequently both healthier
and happier than Europeans, and this, it was said, was because they had not
been ‘civilized.’ Rousseau proposed the catchphrase, ‘We should return to
nature.’ For nature is good, and man is ‘by nature’ good; it is civilization
which ruins him. Rousseau also believed that the child should be allowed to
remain in its ‘naturally’ innocent state as long as possible. It would not be
wrong to say that the idea of the intrinsic value of childhood dates from the
Enlightenment. Previously, childhood had been considered merely a preparation
for adult life. But we are all human beings—and we live our life on this earth,
even when we are children.”

“I should think so!”

“Religion, they thought, had to be made natural.”

“What exactly did they mean by that?”

“They meant that religion also had to be brought into harmony with ‘natural’
reason. There were many who fought for what one could call a natural religion,
and that is the sixth point on the list. At the time there were a lot of
confirmed materialists who did not believe in a God, and who professed to
atheism. But most of the Enlightenment philosophers thought it was irrational
to imagine a world without God. The world was far too rational for that. Newton
held the same view, for example. It was also considered rational to believe in
the immortality of the soul. Just as for Descartes, whether or not man has an
immortal soul was held to be more a question of reason than of faith.”

“That I find very strange. To me, it’s a typical case of what you believe, not
of what you know.”

“That’s because you don’t live in the eighteenth century. According to the
Enlightenment philosophers, what religion needed was to be stripped of all the
irrational dogmas or doctrines that had got attached to the simple teachings of
Jesus during the course of ecclesiastical history.”

“I see.”

“Many people consequently professed to what is known as Deism.”

“What is that?”

“By Deism we mean a belief that God created the world ages and ages ago, but
has not revealed himself to the world since. Thus God is reduced to the
‘Supreme Being’ who only reveals himself to mankind through nature and natural
laws, never in any ‘supernatural’ way. We find a similar ‘philosophical God’ in
the writings of Aristotle. For him, God was the ‘formal cause’ or ‘first
mover.’ “

“So now there’s only one point left, human rights.”

“And yet this is perhaps the most important. On the whole, you could say that
the French Enlightenment was more practical than the English philosophy.”

“You mean they lived according to their philosophy?”

“Yes, very much so. The French Enlightenment philosophers did not content
themselves with theoretical views on man’s place in society. They fought
actively for what they called the ‘natural rights’ of the citizen. At first,
this took the form of a campaign against censorship—for the freedom of the
press. But also in matters of religion, morals, and politics, the individual’s
right to freedom of thought and utterance had to be secured. They also fought
for the abolition of slavery and for a more humane treatment of criminals.”

“I think I agree with most of that.”

“The principle of the ‘inviolability of the individual’ culminated in the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen adopted by the French National
Assembly in 178V. This Declaration of Human Rights was the basis for our own
Norwegian Constitution of 1814.”

“But a lot of people still have to fight for these rights.”

“Yes, unhappily. But the Enlightenment philosophers wanted to establish certain
rights that everybody was entitled to simply by being born. That was what they
meant by natural rights.

“We still speak of a ‘natural right’ which can often be in conflict with the
laws of the land. And we constantly find individuals, or even whole nations,
that claim this ‘natural right’ when they rebel against anarchy, servitude, and
oppression.”

“What about women’s rights?”

“The French Revolution in 1787 established a number of rights for all
‘citizens.’ But a citizen was nearly always considered to be a man. Yet it was
the French Revolution that gave us the first inklings of feminism.”

“It was about time!”

“As early as 1787 the Enlightenment philosopher Condorcet published a treatise
on the rights of women. He held that women had the same ‘natural rights’ as
men. During the Revolution of 1789, women were extremely active in the fight
against the old feudal regime. For example, it was women who led the
demonstrations that forced the king away from his palace at Versailles. Women’s
groups were formed in Paris. In addition to the demand for the same political
rights as men, they also demanded changes in the marriage laws and in women’s
social conditions.”

“Did they get equal rights?”

“No. Just as on so many subsequent occasions, the question of women’s rights
was exploited in the heat of the struggle, but as soon as things fell into
place in a new regime, the old male-dominated society was re-introduced.”

“Typical!”

“One of those who fought hardest for the rights of women during the French
Revolution was Olympe de Gouges. In 1791—two years after the revolution—she
published a declaration on the rights of women. The declaration on the rights
of the citizen had not included any article on women’s natural rights. Olympe
de Gouges now demanded all the same rights for women as for men.”

“What happened?”

“She was beheaded in 1793. And all political activity for women was banned.”

“How shameful!”

“It was not until the nineteenth century that feminism really got under way,
not only in France but also in the rest of Europe. Little by little this
struggle began to bear fruit. But in Norway, for example, women did not get the
right to vote until 1913. And women in many parts of the world still have a lot
to fight for.”

“They can count on my support.”

Alberto sat looking across at the lake. After a minute or two he said:

“That was more or less what I wanted to say about the Enlightenment.”

“What do you mean by more or less?”

“I have the feeling there won’t be any more.”

But as he said this, something began to happen in the middle of the lake.
Something was bubbling up from the depths. A huge and hideous creature rose
from the surface.

“A sea serpent!” cried Sophie.

The dark monster coiled itself back and forth a few times and then disappeared
back into the depths. The water was as still as before.

Alberto had turned away.

“Now we’ll go inside,” he said.

They went into the little hut.

Sophie stood looking at the two pictures of Berkeley and Bjerkely. She pointed
to the picture of Bjerkely and said:

“I think Hilde lives somewhere inside that picture.”

An embroidered sampler now hung between the two pictures. It read: LIBERTY,
EQUALITY AND FRATERNITY.

Sophie turned to Alberto: “Did you hang that there?”

He just shook his head with a disconsolate expression.

Then Sophie discovered a small envelope on the mantelpiece. “To Hilde and
Sophie,” it said. Sophie knew at once who it was from, but it was a new turn of
events that he had begun to count on her.

She opened the letter and read aloud:

Dear both of you, Sophie’s philosophy teacher ought to have underlined the
significance of the French Enlightenment for the ideals and principles the UN
is founded on. Two hundred years ago, the slogan “Liberty, Equality, and
Fraternity” helped unite the people of France. Today the same words should
unite the whole world. It is more important now than ever before to be one big
Family of Man. Our descendants are our own children and grandchildren. What
kind of world are they inheriting from us?

Hilde’s mother was calling from downstairs that the mystery was starting in ten
minutes and that she had put the pizza in the oven. Hilde was quite exhausted
after all she had read. She had been up since six o’clock this morning.

She decided to spend the rest of the evening celebrating her birthday with her
mother. But first she had to look something up in her encyclopedia.

Gouges ... no. De Gouges? No again. Olympe de Gouges? Still a blank. This
encyclopedia had not written one single word about the woman who was beheaded
for her political commitment. Wasn’t that scandalous!

She was surely not just someone her father had thought up?

Hilde ran downstairs to get a bigger encyclopedia.

“I just have to look something up,” she said to her astounded mother.

She took the FORV to GP volume of the big family encyclopedia and ran up to her
room again.

Gouges ... there she was!

Gouges, Marie Olympe (1748-1793), Fr. author, played a prominent role during
the French Revolution with numerous brochures on social questions and several
plays. One of the few during the Revolution who campaigned for human rights to
apply to women. In 1791 published “Declaration on the Rights of Women.”
Beheaded in 1793 for daring to defend Louis XVI and oppose Robespierre. (Lit:
L. Lacour, “Les Origines du feminisme contem-porain,” 1900)

