# PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE AND TOLERANCE
[Metadata]: # {44}
[Descriptor]: # {44}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE AND TOLERANCE
1. Make a list of things we can know. Then make a list of things we can only
believe.

2. Indicate some of the factors contributing to a person’s philosophy of life.

3. What is meant by conscience? Do you think conscience is the same for
everyone?

4. What is meant by priority of values?



Sophie sat thinking for a long time before she started to write. Could she use
any of the ideas she had learned from Alberto Knox? She was going to have to,
because she had not opened her Religious Knowledge book for days. Once she
began to write, the words simply flowed from her pen.

She wrote that we know the moon is not made of green cheese and that there are
also craters on the dark side of the moon, that both Socrates and Jesus were
sentenced to death, that everybody has to die sooner or later, that the great
temples on the Acropolis were built after the Persian wars in the fifth century
B.C. and that the most important oracle in ancient Greece was the oracle at
Delphi. As examples of what we can only believe, Sophie mentioned the questions
of whether or not there is life on other planets, whether God exists or not,
whether there is life after death, and whether Jesus was the son of God or
merely a wise man. “We can certainly not know where the world came from,” she
wrote, completing her list. “The universe can be compared to a large rabbit
pulled out of a top hat. Philosophers try to climb up one of the fine hairs of
the rabbit’s fur and stare straight into the eyes of the Great Magician.
Whether they will ever succeed is an open question. But if each philosopher
climbed onto another one’s back, they would get even higher up in the rabbit’s
fur, and then, in my opinion, there would be some chance they would make it
some day. P.S. In the Bible there is something that could have been one of the
fine hairs of the rabbit’s fur. The hair was called the Tower of Babel, and it
was destroyed because the Magician didn’t want the tiny human insects to crawl
up that high out of the white rabbit he had just created.”

Then there was the next question: “Indicate some of the factors contributing to
a person’s philosophy of life.” Upbringing and environment were important here.
People living at the time of Plato had a different philosophy of life than many
people have today because they lived in a different age and a different
environment. Another factor was the kind of experience people chose to get
themselves. Common sense was not determined by environment. Everybody had that.
Maybe one could compare environment and social situation with the conditions
that existed deep down in Plato’s cave. By using their intelligence individuals
can start to drag themselves up from the darkness. But a journey like that
requires personal courage. Socrates is a good example of a person who managed
to free himself from the prevailing views of his time by his own intelligence.
Finally, she wrote: “Nowadays, people of many lands and cultures are being
intermingled more and more. Christians, Muslims, and Buddhists may live in the
same apartment building. In which case it is more important to accept each
other’s beliefs than to ask why everyone does not believe the same thing.”

Not bad, thought Sophie. She certainly felt she had covered some ground with
what she had learned from her philosophy teacher. And she could always
supplement it with a dash of her own common sense and what she might have read
and heard elsewhere.

She applied herself to the third question: “What is meant by conscience? Do you
think conscience is the same for everyone?” This was something they had
discussed a lot in class. Sophie wrote: Conscience is people’s ability to
respond to right and wrong. My personal opinion is that everyone is endowed
with this ability, so in other words, conscience is innate. Socrates would have
said the same. But just what conscience dictates can vary a lot from one person
to the next. One could say that the Sophists had a point here. They thought
that right and wrong is something mainly determined by the environment the
individual grows up in. Socrates, on the other hand, believed that conscience
is the same for everyone. Perhaps both views were right. Even if everybody
doesn’t feel guilty about showing themselves naked, most people will have a bad
conscience if they are really mean to someone. Still, it must be remembered
that having a conscience is not the same as using it. Sometimes it looks as if
people act quite unscrupulously, but I believe they also have a kind of
conscience somewhere, deep down. Just as it seems as if some people have no
sense at all, but that’s only because they are not using it. P.S. Common sense
and conscience can both be compared to a muscle. If you don’t use a muscle, it
gets weaker and weaker.”

Now there was only one question left: “What is meant by priority of values?”
This was another thing they had discussed a lot lately. For example, it could
be of value to drive a car and get quickly from one place to another. But if
driving led to deforestation and polluting the natural environment, you were
facing a choice of values. After careful consideration Sophie felt she had come
to the conclusion that healthy forests and a pure environment were more
valuable than getting to work quickly. She gave several more examples. Finally
she wrote: “Personally, I think Philosophy is a more important subject than
English Grammar. It would therefore be a sensible priority of values to have
Philosophy on the timetable and cut down a bit on English lessons.”

In the last break the teacher drew Sophie aside.

“I have already read your Religion test,” he said. “It was near the top of the
pile.”

“I hope it gave you some food for thought.”

“That was exactly what I wanted to talk to you about. It was in many ways very
mature. Surprisingly so. And self-reliant. But had you done your homework,
Sophie?”

Sophie fidgeted a little.

“Well, you did say it was important to have a personal point of view.”

“Well, yes I did ... but there are limits.”

Sophie looked him straight in the eye. She felt she could permit herself this
after all she had experienced lately.

“I have started studying philosophy,” she said. “It gives one a good background
for personal opinions.”

“But it doesn’t make it easy for me to grade your paper. It will either be a D
or an A.”

“Because I was either quite right or quite wrong? Is that what you’re saying?”

“So let’s say A,” said the teacher. “But next time, do your homework!”

When Sophie got home from school that afternoon, she flung her schoolbag on the
steps and ran down to the den. A brown envelope lay on top of the gnarled
roots. It was quite dry around the edges, so it must have been a long time
since Hermes had dropped it.

She took the envelope with her and let herself in the front door. She fed the
animals and then went upstairs to her room. Lying on her bed, she opened
Alberto’s letter and read:

