# Four Basic Elements
[Metadata]: # {12}
[Descriptor]: # {12}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Four Basic Elements
In one way, Parmenides and Heraclitus were the direct opposite of each other.
Parmenides’ reason made it clear that nothing could change. Heraclitus’ sense
perceptions made it equally clear that nature was in a constant state of
change. Which of them was right? Should we let reason dictate or should we rely
on our senses?

Parmenides and Heraclitus both say two things:

Parmenides says:

a) that nothing can change, and

b) that our sensory perceptions must therefore be unreliable. Heraclitus, on
the other hand, says:

a) that everything changes (“all things flow”), and

b) that our sensory perceptions are reliable.



* * *



Philosophers could hardly disagree more than that! But who was right? It fell
to Empedocles (c. 490-430 B.C.) from Sicily to lead the way out of the tangle
they had gotten themselves into.

He thought they were both right in one of their assertions but wrong in the
other.

Empedocles found that the cause of their basic disagreement was that both
philosophers had assumed the presence of only one element. If this were true,
the gap between what reason dictates and what “we can see with our own eyes”
would be unbridgeable.

Water obviously cannot turn into a fish or a butterfly. In fact, water cannot
change. Pure water will continue to be pure water. So Parmenides was right in
holding that “nothing changes.”

But at the same time Empedocles agreed with Heraclitus that we must trust the
evidence of our senses. We must believe what we see, and what we see is
precisely that nature changes.

Empedocles concluded that it was the idea of a single basic substance that had
to be rejected. Neither water nor air alone can change into a rosebush or a
butterfly. The source of nature cannot possibly be one single “element.”

Empedocles believed that all in all, nature consisted of four elements, or
“roots” as he termed them. These four roots were earth, air, fire, and wafer.

All natural processes were due to the coming together and separating of these
four elements. For all things were a mixture of earth, air, fire, and water,
but in varying proportions. When a flower or an animal dies, he said, the four
elements separate again. We can register these changes with the naked eye. But
earth and air, fire and water remain everlasting, “untouched” by all the
compounds of which they are part. So it is not correct to say that “everything”
changes. Basically, nothing changes. What happens is that the four elements are
combined and separated—only to be combined again.

We can make a comparison to painting. If a painter only has one color—red, for
instance—he cannot paint green trees. But if he has yellow, red, blue, and
black, he can paint in hundreds of different colors because he can mix them in
varying proportions.

An example from the kitchen illustrates the same thing. If I only have flour, I
have to be a wizard to bake a cake. But if I have eggs, flour, milk, and sugar,
then I can make any number of different cakes.

It was not purely by chance that Empedocles chose earth, air, fire, and water
as nature’s “roots.” Other philosophers before him had tried to show that the
primordial substance had to be either water, air, or fire. Thales and
Anaximenes had pointed out that both water and air were essential elements in
the physical world. The Greeks believed that fire was also essential. They
observed, for example, the importance of the sun to all living things, and they
also knew that both animals and humans have body heat.

Empedocles might have watched a piece of wood burning. Something disintegrates.
We hear it crackle and splutter. That is “water.” Something goes up in smoke.
That is “air.” The “fire” we can see. Something also remains when the fire is
extinguished. That is the ashes—or “earth.”

After Empedocles’ clarification of nature’s transformations as the combination
and dissolution of the four “roots,” something still remained to be explained.
What makes these elements combine so that new life can occur? And what makes
the “mixture” of, say, a flower dissolve again?

Empedocles believed that there were two different forces at work in nature. He
called them love and strife. Love binds things together, and strife separates
them.

He distinguishes between “substance” and “force.” This is worth noting. Even
today, scientists distinguish between elements and natural forces. Modern
science holds that all natural processes can be explained as the interaction
between different elements and various natural forces.

Empedocles also raised the question of what happens when we perceive something.
How can I “see” a flower, for example? What is it that happens? Have you ever
thought about it, Sophie?

Empedocles believed that the eyes consist of earth, air, fire, and water, just
like everything else in nature. So the “earth” in my eye perceives what is of
the earth in my surroundings, the “air” perceives what is of the air, the
“fire” perceives what is of fire, and the “water” what is of water. Had my eyes
lacked any of the four substances, I would not have seen all of nature.

