# The Top Hat
[Metadata]: # {02}
[Descriptor]: # {02}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Top Hat
… the only thing we require to be good philosophers is the faculty of wonder...



Sophie was sure she would hear from the anonymous letter writer again. She
decided not to tell anyone about the letters for the time being.

At school she had trouble concentrating on what the teachers said. They seemed
to talk only about unimportant things. Why couldn’t they talk about what a
human being is—or about what the world is and how it came into being?

For the first time she began to feel that at school as well as everywhere else
people were only concerned with trivialities. There were major problems that
needed to be solved.

Did anybody have answers to these questions? Sophie felt that thinking about
them was more important than memorizing irregular verbs.

When the bell rang after the last class, she left the school so fast that
Joanna had to run to catch up with her.

After a while Joanna said, “Do you want to play cards this evening?”

Sophie shrugged her shoulders.

“I’m not that interested in card games any more.”

Joanna looked surprised.

“You’re not? Let’s play badminton then.”

Sophie stared down at the pavement—then up at her friend.

“I don’t think I’m that interested in badminton either.”

“You’re kidding!”

Sophie noticed the touch of bitterness in Joanna’s tone.

“Do you mind telling me what’s suddenly so important?”

Sophie just shook her head. “It’s ... it’s a secret.”

“Yuck! You’re probably in love!”

The two girls walked on for a while without saying anything. When they got to
the soccer field Joanna said, “I’m going across the field.”

Across the field! It was the quickest way for Joanna, but she only went that
way when she had to hurry home in time for visitors or a dental appointment.

Sophie regretted having been mean to her. But what else could she have said?
That she had suddenly become so engrossed in who she was and where the world
came from that she had no time to play badminton? Would Joanna have understood?

Why was it so difficult to be absorbed in the most vital and, in a way, the
most natural of all questions?

She felt her heart beating faster as she opened the mailbox. At first she found
only a letter from the bank and some big brown envelopes for her mother. Darn!
Sophie had been looking forward to getting another letter from the unknown
sender.

As she closed the gate behind her she noticed her own name on one of the big
envelopes. Turning it over, she saw written on the back: “Course in Philosophy.
Handle with care.”

Sophie ran up the gravel path and flung her schoolbag onto the step. Stuffing
the other letters under the doormat, she ran around into the back garden and
sought refuge in the den. This was the only place to open the big letter.

Sherekan came jumping after her but Sophie had to put up with that. She knew
the cat would not give her away.

Inside the envelope there were three typewritten pages held together with a
paper clip. Sophie began to read.

