# Logic
[Metadata]: # {39}
[Descriptor]: # {39}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Logic
The distinction between “form” and “substance” plays an important part in
Aristotle’s explanation of the way we discern things in the world.

When we discern things, we classify them in various groups or categories. I see
a horse, then I see another horse, and another. The horses are not exactly
alike, but they have something in common, and this common something is the
horse’s “form.” Whatever might be distinctive, or individual, belongs to the
horse’s “substance.”

So we go around pigeonholing everything. We put cows in cowsheds, horses in
stables, pigs in pigsties, and chickens in chicken coops. The same happens when
Sophie Amundsen tidies up her room. She puts her books on the bookshelf, her
schoolbooks in her schoolbag, and her magazines in the drawer. Then she folds
her clothes neatly and puts them in the closet—underwear on one shelf, sweaters
on another, and socks in a drawer on their own. Notice that we do the same
thing in our minds. We distinguish between things made of stone, things made of
wool, and things made of rubber. We distinguish between things that are alive
or dead, and we distinguish between vegetable, animal, and human.

Do you see, Sophie? Aristotle wanted to do a thorough clearing up in nature’s
“room.” He tried to show that everything in nature belongs to different
categories and subcategories. (Hermes is a live creature, more specifically an
animal, more specifically a vertebrate, more specifically a mammal, more
specifically a dog, more specifically a Labrador, more specifically a male
Labrador.)

Go into your room, Sophie. Pick up something, anything, from the floor.
Whatever you take, you will find that what you are holding belongs to a higher
category The day you see something you are unable to classify you will get a
shock. If, for example, you discover a small whatsit, and you can’t really say
whether it is animal, vegetable, or mineral—I don’t think you would dare touch
it.

Saying animal, vegetable, and mineral reminds me of that party game where the
victim is sent outside the room, and when he comes in again he has to guess
what everyone else is thinking of. Everyone has agreed to think of Fluffy, the
cat, which at the moment is in the neighbor’s garden. The victim comes in and
begins to guess. The others must only answer “yes” or “no.” If the victim is a
good Aristotelian—and therefore no victim—the game could go pretty much as
follows:

Is it concrete? (Yes!) Mineral? (No!) Is it alive? (Yes!) Vegetable? (No!)
Animal? (Yes!) Is it a bird? (No!) Is it a mammal? (Yes!) Is it the whole
animal? (Yes!) Is it a cat? (Yes!) Is it Fluffy? (Yeah! Laughter. . .)

So Aristotle invented that game. We ought to give Plato the credit for having
invented hide-and-seek. Democritus has already been credited with having
invented Lego.

Aristotle was a meticulous organizer who set out to clarify our concepts. In
fact, he founded the science of Logic. He demonstrated a number of laws
governing conclusions or proofs that were valid. One example will suffice. If I
first establish that “all living creatures are mortal” (first premise), and
then establish that “Hermes is a living creature” (second premise), I can then
elegantly conclude that “Hermes is mortal.”

The example demonstrates that Aristotle’s logic was based on the correlation of
terms, in this case “living creature” and “mortal.” Even though one has to
admit that the above conclusion is 100% valid, we may also add that it hardly
tells us anything new. We already knew that Hermes was “mortal.” (He is a “dog”
and all dogs are “living creatures”—which are “mortal,” unlike the rock of
Mount Everest.) Certainly we knew that, Sophie. But the relationship between
classes of things is not always so obvious. From time to time it can be
necessary to clarify our concepts.

For example: Is it really possible that tiny little baby mice suckle just like
lambs and piglets? Mice certainly do not lay eggs. (When did I last see a
mouse’s egg?) So they give birth to live young—just like pigs and sheep. But we
call animals that bear live young mammals—and mammals are animals that feed on
their mother’s milk. So—we got there. We had the answer inside us but we had to
think it through. We forgot for the moment that mice really do suckle from
their mother. Perhaps it was because we have never seen a baby mouse being
suckled, for the simple reason that mice are rather shy of humans when they
suckle their young.





Nature’s Scale




When Aristotle “clears up” in life, he first of all points out that everything
in the natural world can be divided into two main categories. On the one hand
there are nonliving things, such as stones, drops of water, or clumps of soil.
These things have no potentiality for change. According to Aristotle, nonliving
things can only change through external influence. Only living things have the
potentiality for change.

Aristotle divides “living things” into two different categories. One comprises
plants, and the other creatures. Finally, these “creatures” can also be divided
into two subcategories, namely animals and humans.

You have to admit that Aristotle’s categories are clear and simple. There is a
decisive difference between a living and a nonliving thing, for example a rose
and a stone, just as there is a decisive difference between a plant and an
animal, for example a rose and a horse. I would also claim that there
definitely is a difference between a horse and a man. But what exactly does
this difference consist of? Can you tell me that?

Unfortunately I do not have time to wait while you write the answer down and
put it in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar, so I’ll answer myself. When
Aristotle divides natural phenomena into various categories, his criterion is
the object’s characteristics, or more specifically what it can do or what it
does.

All living things (plants, animals, humans) have the ability to absorb
nourishment, to grow, and to propagate. All “living creatures” (animals and
humans) have in addition the ability to perceive the world around them and to
move about. Moreover, all humans have the ability to think—or otherwise to
order their perceptions into various categories and classes.

So there are in reality no sharp boundaries in the natural world. We observe a
gradual transition from simple growths to more complicated plants, from simple
animals to more complicated animals. At the top of this “scale” is man—who
according to Aristotle lives the whole life of nature. Man grows and absorbs
nourishment like plants, he has feelings and the ability to move like animals,
but he also has a specific characteristic peculiar to humans, and that is the
ability to think rationally.

Therefore, man has a spark of divine reason, Sophie. Yes, I did say divine.
From time to time Aristotle reminds us that there must be a God who started all
movement in the natural world. Therefore God must be at the very top of
nature’s scale.

Aristotle imagined the movement of the stars and the planets guiding all
movement on Earth. But there had to e something causing the heavenly bodies to
move. Aristotle called this the “first mover,” or “God.” The “first mover” is
itself at rest, but it is the “formal cause” of the movement of the heavenly
bodies, and thus of all movement in nature.

