# FATE
[Metadata]: # {17}
[Descriptor]: # {17}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# FATE
Good morning once again, my dear Sophie. In case you should get any ideas, let
me make it quite clear that you must never attempt to check up on me. One day
we will meet, but I shall be the one to decide when and where. And that’s
final. You are not going to disobey me, are you?

But to return to the philosophers. We have seen how they tried to find natural
explanations for the transformations in Nature. Previously these things had
been explained through myths.

Old superstitions had to be cleared away in other areas as well. We see them at
work in matters of sickness and health as well as in political events. In both
these areas the Greeks were great believers in fatalism.

Fatalism is the belief that whatever happens is predestined. We find this
belief all over the world, not only throughout history but in our own day as
welt. Here in the Nordic countries we find a strong belief in “lagnadan,” or
fate, in the old Icelandic sagas of the Edda.

We also find the belief, both in Ancient Greece and in other parts of the
world, that people could learn their fate from some form of oracle. In other
words, that the fate of a person or a country could be foreseen in various
ways.

There are still a lot of people who believe that they can tell your fortune in
the cards, read your palm, or predict your future in the stars.

A special Norwegian version of this is telling your fortune in coffee cups.
When a coffee cup is empty there are usually some traces of coffee grounds
left. These might form a certain image or pattern—at least, if we give our
imagination free rein. If the grounds resemble a car, it might mean that the
person who drank from the cup is going for a long drive.

Thus the “fortune-teller” is trying to foresee something that is really quite
unforeseeable. This is characteristic of all forms of foreseeing. And precisely
because what they “see” is so vague, it is hard to repudiate fortune-tellers’
claims.

When we gaze up at the stars, we see a veritable chaos of twinkling dots.
Nevertheless, throughout the ages there have always been people who believed
that the stars could tell us something about our life on Earth. Even today
there are political leaders who seek the advice of astrologers before they make
any important decisions.

