# The Right Insight Leads to the Right Action
[Metadata]: # {26}
[Descriptor]: # {26}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Right Insight Leads to the Right Action
As I have mentioned earlier, Socrates claimed that he was guided by a divine
inner voice, and that this “conscience” told him what was right. “He who knows
what good is will do good,” he said.

By this he meant that the right insight leads to the right action. And only he
who does right can be a “virtuous man.” When we do wrong it is because we don’t
know any better. That is why it is so important to go on learning. Socrates was
concerned with finding clear and universally valid definitions of right and
wrong. Unlike the Sophists, he believed that the ability to distinguish between
right and wrong lies in people’s reason and not in society.

You may perhaps think this last part is a bit too obscure, Sophie. Let me put
it like this: Socrates thought that no one could possibly be happy if they
acted against their better judgment. And he who knows how to achieve happiness
will do so. Therefore, he who knows what is right will do right. Because why
would anybody choose to be unhappy?

What do you think, Sophie? Can you live a happy life if you continually do
things you know deep down are wrong? There are lots of people who lie and cheat
and speak ill of others. Are they aware that these things are not right—or
fair, if you prefer? Do you think these people are happy?

Socrates didn’t.

When Sophie had read the letter, she quickly put it in the cookie tin and
crawled out into the garden. She wanted to go indoors before her mother got
back with the shopping in order to avoid any questions about where she had
been. And she had promised to do the dishes.

She had just filled the sink with water when her mother came staggering in with
two huge shopping bags. Perhaps that was why her mother said, “You are rather
preoccupied these days, Sophie.”

Sophie didn’t know why she said it; the words just tumbled out of her mouth:
“So was Socrates.”

“Socrates?”

Her mother stared at her, wide-eyed.

“It was just so sad that he had to die as a result,” Sophie went on
thoughtfully.

“My goodness! Sophie! I don’t know what I’m to do!”

“Neither did Socrates. All he knew was that he knew nothing. And yet he was the
cleverest person in Athens.”

Her mother was speechless.

Finally she said, “Is this something you’ve learned at school?”

Sophie shook her head energetically.

“We don’t learn anything there. The difference between schoolteachers and
philosophers is that school-teachers think they know a lot of stuff that they
try to force down our throats. Philosophers try to figure things out together
with the pupils.”

“Now we’re back to white rabbits again! You know something? I demand to know
who your boyfriend really is. Otherwise I’ll begin to think he is a bit
disturbed.”

Sophie turned her back on the dishes and pointed at her mother with the dish
mop.

“It’s not him who’s disturbed. But he likes to disturb others—to shake them out
of their rut.”

“That’s enough of that! I think he sounds a bit too impertinent.” Sophie turned
back to the dishes.

“He is neither impertinent nor pertinent,” said Sophie. “But he is trying to
reach real wisdom. That’s the great difference between a real joker and all the
other cards in the deck.”

“Did you say joker?”

Sophie nodded. “Have you ever thought about the fact that there are a lot of
hearts and diamonds in a pack of cards? And a lot of spades and clubs. But
there’s only one joker.”

“Good grief, how you talk back, Sophie!”

“And how you ask!”

Her mother had put all the groceries away. Now she took the newspaper and went
into the living room. Sophie thought she closed the door more loudly than
usual.

Sophie finished doing the dishes and went upstairs to her room. She had put the
red silk scarf on the top shelf of the closet with the Lego blocks. She took it
down and examined it carefully.

Hilde ...

