# The Garden Party
[Metadata]: # {77}
[Descriptor]: # {77}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Garden Party
... a white crow…



Hilde sat on the bed, transfixed. She felt her arms and her hands tremble, as
they gripped the heavy ring binder.

It was almost eleven o’clock. She had been reading for over two hours. From
time to time she had raised her eyes from the text and laughed aloud, but she
had also turned over on her side and gasped. It was a good thing she was alone
in the house.

And what she had been through these last two hours! It started with Sophie
trying to attract the major’s attention on the way home from the cabin in the
woods. She had finally climbed a tree and been rescued by Morten Goose, who had
arrived like a guardian angel from Lebanon.

Although it was a long, long time ago, Hilde had never forgotten how her father
had read The Wonderful Adventures of Nils to her. For many years after that,
she and her father had had a secret language together that was connected with
the book. Now he had dragged the old goose out again.

Then Sophie had her first experience as a lone customer in a cafe. Hilde had
been especially taken with what Alberto said about Sartre and existentialism.
He had almost managed to convert her—although he had done that many times
before in the ring binder too.

Once, about a year ago, Hilde had bought a book on astrology. Another time she
had come home with a set of tarot cards. Next time it was a book on
spiritualism. Each time, her father had lectured her about “superstition” and
her “critical faculty,” but he had waited until now for the final blow. His
counterattack was deadly accurate. Clearly, his daughter would not be allowed
to grow up without a thorough warning against that kind of thing. To be
absolutely sure, he had waved to her from a TV screen in a radio store. He
could have saved himself the trouble ...

What she wondered about most of all was Sophie. Sophie—who are you? Where do
you come from? Why have you come into my life?

Finally Sophie had been given a book about herself. Was it the same book that
Hilde now had in her hands? This was only a ring binder. But even so—how could
one find a book about oneself in a book about oneself? What would happen if
Sophie began to read that book?

What was going to happen now? What could happen now? There were only a few
pages left in her ring binder.

Sophie met her mother on the bus on her way home from town. Oh, no! What would
her mother say when she saw the book in Sophie’s hand?

Sophie tried to put it in the bag with all the streamers and balloons she had
bought for the party but she didn’t quite make it.

“Hi, Sophie! We caught the same bus! How nice!”

“Hi, Mom!”

“You bought a book?”

“No, not exactly.”

“Sophie’s World ... how curious.”

Sophie knew she didn’t have the slightest chance of lying to her mother.

“I got it from Alberto.”

“Yes, I’m sure you did. As I said, I’m looking forward to meeting this man. May
I see?”

“Would you mind very much waiting till we get home, at least. It is my book,
Mom.”

“Of course it’s your book. I just want to take a peek at the first page, okay?
... ‘Sophie Amundsen was on her way home from school. She had walked the first
part of the way with Joanna. They had been discussing robots . . .’”

“Does it really say that?”

“Yes, it does, Sophie. It’s written by someone called Albert Knag. He must be a
newcomer. What’s your Al-berto’s name, by the way?”

“Knox.”

“It’ll probably turn out that this extraordinary person has written a whole
book about you, Sophie. It’s called using a pseudonym.”

“It’s not him, Mom. Why don’t you just give up. You don’t understand anything
anyway.”

“No, I don’t suppose I do. The garden party is tomorrow, then everything will
be all right again.”

“Albert Knag lives in a completely different reality. That’s why this book is a
white crow.”

“You really must stop all this! Wasn’t it a white rabbit?”

“You stop it!”

That was as far as they got before they reached their stop at the end of Clover
Close. They ran straight into a demonstration.

“My God!” exclaimed Helene Amundsen, “I really thought we would be spared
street politics in this neighborhood.”

There were no more than about ten or twelve people. Their banners read:

THE MAJOR IS AT HAND

YES TO YUMMY MIDSUMMER EATS

MORE POWER TO THE UN



Sophie almost felt sorry for her mother.

“Never mind,” she said.

“But it was a peculiar demonstration, Sophie. Quite absurd, really.”

“It was a mere bagatelle.”

“The world changes more and more rapidly all the time. Actually, I’m not in the
least surprised.”

“You should be surprised that you’re not surprised, at any rate.”

“Not at all. They weren’t violent, were they? I just hope they haven’t trampled
all over our rosebeds. Surely it can’t be necessary to demonstrate in a garden.
Let’s hurry home and see.”

“It was a philosophical demonstration, Mom. Real philosophers don’t trample on
rosebeds.”

“I’ll tell you what, Sophie. I don’t think I believe in real philosophers any
longer. Everything is synthetic nowadays.”

They spent the afternoon and evening preparing. They continued the next
morning, setting and decorating the table. Joanna came over to give them a
hand.

“Good grief!” she said, “Mom and Dad are coming too. It’s your fault, Sophie!”

Everything was ready half an hour before the guests were due. The trees were
festooned with streamers and Japanese lanterns. The garden gate, the trees
lining the path, and the front of the house were hung with balloons. Sophie and
Joanna had spent most of the afternoon blowing them up.

The table was set with chicken, salad, and different kinds of homemade bread.
In the kitchen there were raisin buns and layer cake, Danish pastry and
chocolate cake. But from the start the place of honor in the center of the
table was reserved for the birthday cake—a pyramid of almond-paste rings. On
the top of the cake was the tiny figure of a girl in a confirmation dress.
Sophie’s mother had assured her that it could just as well represent an
unconfirmed fifteen-year-old, but Sophie was certain her mother had only put it
there because Sophie had told her she was not sure she wanted to be confirmed.
Her mother seemed to think the cake embodied the confirmation itself.

“We haven’t spared any expense,” she repeated several times in the half hour
before the party was due to start.

The guests began to arrive. First came three of the girls from Sophie’s class,
dressed in summer shirts and light cardigans, long skirts, and the barest
suggestion of eye makeup. A bit later, Jeremy and David came strolling in
through the gate, with a blend of shyness and boyish arrogance.

“Happy birthday!”

“You’re an adult now, too!”

Sophie noticed that Joanna and Jeremy had already begun eyeing each other
discreetly. There was something in the air. It was Midsummer Eve.

Everybody had brought birthday presents, and as it was a philosophical garden
party, several of the guests had tried to find out what philosophy was.
Although not all of them had managed to find philosophical presents, most of
them had written something philosophical on their cards. Sophie received a
philosophical dictionary as well as a diary with a lock; on the cover was
written MY PERSONAL PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHTS. As the guests arrived they were
served apple juice in long-stemmed wine glasses. Sophie’s mother did the
serving.

“Welcome ... And what is this young man’s name? I don’t believe we’ve met
before ... So glad you could come, Cecilie . . .”

When all the younger guests had arrived and were strolling under the trees with
their wine glasses, Joanna’s parents drew up at the garden gate in a white
Mercedes. The financial adviser was impeccably dressed in an expensively cut
gray suit. His wife was wearing a red pants suit with dark red sequins. Sophie
was sure she had bought a Barbie doll in a toy store dressed in that suit, and
had a tailor make it up in her size. There was another possibility; the
financial adviser could have bought the doll and given it to a magician to make
into a live woman. But this possibility was unlikely, so Sophie rejected it.

They stepped out of the Mercedes and walked into the garden where younger
guests looked at them with surprise. The financial adviser presented a long,
narrow package from the Ingebrigtsen family. Sophie tried hard to maintain her
composure when it turned out to be—yes, it was!—a Barbie doll. But Joanna made
no such effort:

“Are you crazy? Sophie doesn’t play with dolls!”

Mrs. Ingebrigtsen came hurrying over, with all her sequins clanking. “But it’s
only for decoration, you know.”

“Well, thank you very much indeed.” Sophie tried to smooth things over. “Now I
can start ft collection.”

People began to drift toward the table.

“We’re only waiting for Alberto,” said Sophie’s mother to her in a somewhat
brisk tone that was intended to hide her growing apprehension. Rumors of the
special guest of honor had already spread among the other guests.

“He has promised to come, so he’ll come.”

“But we can’t seat the guests before he arrives, can we?”

“Of course we can. Let’s go ahead.”

Helene Amundsen began to seat people around the long table. She made sure that
the vacant chair was between her own and Sophie’s place. She said a few words
about the beautiful weather and the fact that Sophie was now a grownup.

They had been sitting at the table for half an hour when a middle-aged man with
a black goatee and a beret came walking up Clover Close and in through the
garden gate. He was carrying a bouquet of fifteen red roses.

“Alberto!”

Sophie left the table and ran to greet him. She threw her arms around his neck
and took the bouquet from him. He responded to the welcome by rooting around in
his jacket pocket and drawing out a couple of Chinese firecrackers which he lit
and tossed into the yard. As. he approached the table, he lit a sparkler and
set it on top of the almond pyramid. Then he went over and stood at the empty
place between Sophie and her mother.

“I’m delighted to be here,” he said.

The guests were dumbstruck. Mrs. Ingebrigtsen gave her husband a significant
look. Sophie’s mother was so relieved that the man had finally arrived,
however, that she would have forgiven him anything. Sophie herself was
struggling to suppress her laughter.

Helene Amundsen tapped on her glass and said:

“Let us also welcome Alberto Knox to this philosophical garden party. He is not
my new boyfriend, because although my husband is so often away at sea, I don’t
have a new boyfriend for the time being. However, this astounding person is
Sophie’s new philosophy teacher. His prowess extends further than to setting
off fireworks.

This man is able, for example, to draw a live rabbit out of a top hat. Or was
it a crow, Sophie?”

“Many thanks,” said Alberto. He sat down.

“Cheers!” said Sophie, and the guests raised their glasses and drank his
health.

They sat for a long time over their chicken and salad. Suddenly Joanna got up,
walked determinedly over to Jeremy, and gave him a resounding kiss on the lips.
He responded by trying to topple her backward over the table so as to get a
better grip as he returned her kiss.

“Well, I’ve never ...” exclaimed Mrs. Ingebrigtsen.

“Not on the table, children,” was Mrs. Amundsen’s only comment.

“Why not?” asked Alberto, turning toward her.

“That was an odd question.”

“It’s never wrong for a real philosopher to ask questions.”

A couple of the other boys who had not been kissed started to throw chicken
bones up on the roof. This, too, elicited only a mild comment from Sophie’s
mother:

“Would you mind not doing that. It’s such a nuisance when there are chicken
bones in the gutter.”

“Sorry,” said one of the boys, whereupon they started throwing chicken bones
over the garden hedge instead.

“I think it’s time to clear the plates away and serve the cake,” said Mrs.
Amundsen finally. “Sophie and Joanna, will you give me a hand?”

On their way to the kitchen there was only time for a brief discussion.

“What made you kiss him?” Sophie said to Joanna.

“I sat looking at his mouth and couldn’t resist it. He is so cute!”

“How did it taste?”

“Not exactly like I’d imagined, but. . .”

“It was the first time, then?”

“But not the last!”

Coffee and cake were soon on the table. Alberto had started giving the boys
some of his firecrackers when Sophie’s mother tapped on her coffee cup.

“I am not going to make a long speech,” she began, “but I only have this one
daughter, and it is only this once that exactly one week and a day ago she
reached the age of fifteen. As you see, we have spared no expense. There are
twenty-four almond rings on the birthday cake, so there’s at least one whole
ring for each of you. Those who help themselves first can take two rings,
because we start from the top and the rings get bigger and bigger as you go.
That’s the way it is in life too. When Sophie was a little girl, she went
tripping around in tiny little rings. But as the years went by, the rings got
bigger and bigger. Now they reach right over to the Old Town and back. And what
is more, with a father who is at sea so much, she makes calls to all parts of
the world. We congratulate you on your fifteenth birthday, Sophie!”

“Delightful!” exclaimed Mrs. Ingebrigtsen.

Sophie was not sure whether she was referring to her mother, the speech, the
birthday cake, or Sophie herself.

The guests applauded, and one of the boys threw a firecracker up into the pear
tree. Joanna left the table and pulled Jeremy up off his chair. They lay down
on the grass and started kissing each other again. After a while they rolled in
under the red-currant bushes.

“Nowadays it’s the girl who takes the initiative,” said Mr. Ingebrigtsen.

Having said that, he got up and went over to the red-currant bushes where he
stood observing the phenomenon at close quarters. The rest of the guests
followed suit. Only Sophie and Alberto remained sitting at the table. The other
guests now stood in a semicircle around Joanna and Jeremy.

“They can’t be stopped,” said Mrs. Ingebrigtsen, not without a certain pride.

“No, generation follows generation,” said her husband.

He looked around, expecting applause for his well-chosen words. When the only
response was a few silent nods, he added: “It can’t be helped.”

Sophie saw from a distance that Jeremy was trying to unbutton Joanna’s white
shirt, which was already covered with green stains from the grass. She was
fumbling with his belt.

“Don’t catch cold!” said Mrs. Ingebrigtsen.

Sophie looked despairingly at Alberto.

“It’s happening more quickly than I thought,” he said. “We have to get away
from here as soon as possible. I just have to make a short speech.”

Sophie clapped her hands loudly.

“Could everyone please come back and sit down again? Alberto is going to make a
speech.”

Everyone except Joanna and Jeremy came drifting back to their places at the
table.

“Are you really going to make a speech?” asked He-lene Amundsen. “How
charming!”

“Thank you.”

“And you like going for walks, I know. It is so important to stay in shape. And
it’s so much nicer when you have a dog to keep you company. Hermes, isn’t that
its name?”

Alberto stood up. “Dear Sophie,” he began. “Since this is a philosophical
garden party, I will make a philosophical speech.”

This was greeted by a burst of applause.

“In this riotous company, a dose of reason might not be out of place. But
whatever happens, let us not forget to congratulate Sophie on her fifteenth
birthday.”

He had hardly finished these sentences when they heard the drone of an
approaching sports plane. It flew in low over the garden. Behind it streamed a
long tail banner saying: “Happy 15th birthday!”

This led to renewed applause, even louder than before.

“There, you see?” Mrs. Amundsen cried joyfully. “This man can do more than set
off fireworks!”

“Thank you. It was a mere bagatelle. During the past few weeks, Sophie and I
have carried out a major philosophical investigation. We shall here and now
reveal our findings. We shall reveal the innermost secrets of our existence.”

The little gathering was now so quiet that the only sounds were the twittering
of the birds and a few subdued noises from the red-currant bushes. “Go on,”
said Sophie.

“After a thorough philosophical study—which has led from the first Greek
philosophers to the present day—we have discovered that we are living our lives
in the mind of a major who is at this moment serving as a UN observer in
Lebanon. He has also written a book about us for his daughter back in
Lillesand. Her name is Hilde Mailer Knag, and she was fifteen years old on the
same day as Sophie. The book about us lay on her bedside table when she woke up
early on the morning of June 15. To be more precise, it was in the form of a
ring binder. Even as we speak, she can feel the final pages of the ring binder
under her index finger.”

A feeling of apprehension had begun to spread around the table.

“Our existence is therefore neither more nor less than a kind of birthday
diversion for Hilde Mailer Knag. We have all been invented as a framework for
the major’s philosophical education of his daughter. This means, for example,
that the white Mercedes at the gate is not worth a cent. It’s just a bagatelle.
It’s worth no more than the white Mercedes that drives around and around inside
the head of a poor UN major, who has just this minute sat down in the shade of
a palm tree to avoid getting sunstroke. The days are hot in Lebanon, my
friends.”

“Garbage!” exclaimed the financial adviser. “This is absolutely pure nonsense.”

“You are welcome to your opinion,” Alberto continued unabashed, “but the truth
is that it is this garden party which is absolutely pure nonsense. The only
dose of reason in the whole party is this speech.”

At that, the financial adviser got up and said:

“Here we are, trying our best to run a business, and to make sure we have
insurance coverage against every kind of risk. Then along comes this
know-it-all who tries to destroy it all with his ‘philosophical’ allegations.”

Alberto nodded in agreement.

“There is indeed no insurance to cover this kind of philosophical insight. We
are talking of something worse than a natural catastrophe, sir. But as you are
probably aware, insurance doesn’t cover those either.”

“This is not a natural catastrophe.”

“No, it is an existential catastrophe. For example, just take a look under the
currant bushes and you will see what I mean. You cannot insure yourself against
the collapse of your whole life. Neither can you insure yourself against the
sun going out.”

“Do we have to put up with this?” asked Joanna’s father, looking at his wife.

She shook her head, and so did Sophie’s mother.

“What a shame,” she said, “and after we had spared no expense.”

The younger guests continued to look at Alberto. “We want to hear more,” said a
curly-haired boy with glasses.

“Thank you, but there is not much more to say. When you have realized that you
are a dream image in another person’s sleepy consciousness, then, in my
opinion, it is wisest to be silent. But I can finish by recommending that you
take a short course in the history of philosophy. It is important to be
critical of the older generation’s values. If I have tried to teach Sophie
anything, it is precisely that, to think critically. Hegel called it thinking
negatively.”

The financial adviser was still standing, drumming his fingers on the table.

“This agitator is attempting to break down all the sound values which the
school and the church and we ourselves are trying to instill in the younger
generation. It is they who have the future before them and who one day will
inherit everything we have built up. If this man is not immediately removed
from this gathering I intend to call our lawyer. He will know how to deal with
this situation.”

“It makes little difference whether you deal with this situation or not, since
you are nothing but a shadow. Anyway, Sophie and I are about to leave the
party, since for us the philosophy course has not been purely theoretical. It
has also had its practical side. When the time is ripe we will perform our
disappearing act. That is how we are going to sneak our way out of the major’s
consciousness.”

Helene Amundsen took hold of her daughter’s arm.

“You are not leaving me, are you, Sophie?”

Sophie put her arms around her mother. She looked up at Alberto.

“Mom is so sad . . .”

“No, that’s just ridiculous. Don’t forget what you have learned. It’s this sort
of nonsense we must liberate ourselves from. Your mother is a sweet and kind
lady, just as the Little Red Ridinghood who came to my door that day had a
basket filled with food for her grandmother. Your mother is no more sad than
the plane that just flew over needed fuel for its congratulation maneuvers.”

“I think I see what you mean,” said Sophie, and turned back to her mother.
“That’s why I have to do what he says, Mom. One day I had to leave you.”

“I’m going to miss you,” said her mother, “but if there is a heaven over this
one, you’ll just have to fly. I promise to take good care of Govinda. Does it
eat one or two lettuce leaves a day?”

Alberto put his hand on her shoulder.

“Neither you nor anyone else here will miss us for the simple reason that you
do not exist. You are no more than shadows.”

“That is the worst insult I’ve ever heard,” Mrs. Ingebrigtsen burst out.

Her husband nodded.

“If nothing else, we can always get him nailed for defamation of character. I’m
sure he’s a Communist. He wants to strip us of everything we hold dear. The
man’s a scoundrel.”

With that, both Alberto and the financial adviser sat down. The letter’s face
was crimson with rage. Now Joanna and Jeremy also came and sat at the table.
Their clothes were grubby and crumpled. Joanna’s golden hair was caked with mud
and earth.

“Mom, I’m going to have a baby,” she announced.

“All right, but you’ll have to wait till you get home.”

She had immediate support from her husband. “She’ll simply have to contain
herself,” he said. “And if there is to be a christening tonight, she’ll have to
arrange it herself.”

Alberto looked down at Sophie with a somber expression.

“It’s time.”

“Can’t you at least bring us a little more coffee before you go?” asked her
mother.

“Of course, Mom, I’ll do it right away.”

Sophie took the thermos from the table. She had to make more coffee. While she
stood waiting for it to brew, she fed the birds and the goldfish. She also went
into the bathroom and put a lettuce leaf out for Govinda. She couldn’t see the
cat anywhere, but she opened a large can of cat food, emptied it into a bowl
and set it out on the step. She felt her tears welling up.

When she returned with the coffee, the garden party looked more like a
children’s party than a young woman’s philosophical celebration. Several soda
bottles had been knocked over on the table, there was chocolate cake smeared
all over the tablecloth and the dish of raisin buns lay upside down on the
lawn. Just as Sophie arrived, one of the boys put a firecracker to the layer
cake, which exploded all over the table and the guests. The worst casualty was
Mrs. Ingebrigtsen’s red pants suit. The curious thing was that both she and
everybody else took it with the utmost calm. Joanna picked up a huge piece of
chocolate cake, smeared it all over Jeremy’s face, and proceeded to lick it off
again.

Her mother and Alberto were sitting in the glider a little way away from the
others. They waved to Sophie.

“So you finally had your confidential talk,” said Sophie.

“And you were perfectly right,” said her mother, quite elated now. “Alberto is
a very altruistic person. I entrust you to his strong arms.”

Sophie sat down between them.

Two of the boys had managed to climb onto the roof. One of the girls went
around pricking holes in all the balloons with a hairpin. Then an uninvited
guest arrived on a motorcycle with a crate of beer and bottles of aquavit
strapped to the carrier. A few helpful souls welcomed him in.

At that, the financial adviser rose from the table. He clapped his hands and
said:

“Do you want to play a game?”

He grabbed a bottle of beer, drank it down, and set the empty bottle in the
middle of the lawn. Then he went to the table and fetched the last five rings
of the birthday cake. He showed the other guests how to throw the rings so they
landed over the neck of the bottle.

“The death throes,” said Alberto. “We’d better get away before the major ends
it all and Hilde closes the ring binder.”

“You’ll have to clear up alone, Mom.”

“It doesn’t matter, child. This was no life for you. If Alberto can give you a
better one, nobody will be happier than I. Didn’t you tell me he had a white
horse?”

Sophie looked out across the garden. It was unrecognizable. Bottles, chicken
bones, buns, and balloons were trampled into the grass.

“This was once my little Garden of Eden,” she said.

“And now you’re being driven out of it,” said Alberto.

One of the boys was sitting in the white Mercedes. He revved the engine and the
car smashed through the garden gate, up the gravel path, and down into the
garden.

Sophie felt a hard grip on her arm as she was dragged into the den. Then she
heard Alberto’s voice:

“Now!”

At the same moment the white Mercedes crashed into an apple tree. Unripe fruit
showered down onto the hood.

“That’s going too far!” shouted the financial adviser. “I demand substantial
compensation!”

His wife gave him her full support.

“It’s that damned scoundrel’s fault! Where is he?”

“They have vanished into thin air,” said Helene Amundsen, not without a touch
of pride.

She drew herself up to her full height, walked toward the long table and began
to clear up after the philosophical garden party.

“More coffee, anyone?”

