# Marx
[Metadata]: # {73}
[Descriptor]: # {73}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Marx
… a spectre is haunting Europe…



Hilde got off her bed and went to the window facing the bay. When she had
started to read this Saturday, it was still Sophie’s fifteenth birthday. The
day before had been Hilde’s own birthday.

If her father had imagined that she would get as far as Sophie’s birthday
yesterday, he had certainly not been realistic. She had done nothing but read
all day long. But he was right that there would only be one more birthday
greeting. It was when Alberto and Sophie had sung Happy Birthday to her. Very
embarrassing, Hilde thought.

And now Sophie had invited people to a philosophical garden party on the very
day her father was due back from Lebanon. Hilde was convinced something would
happen that day which neither she nor her father were quite sure of.

But one thing was certain: before her father got home to Bjerkely he would get
a scare. That was the least she could do for Sophie and Alberto, especially
after they had appealed for help ...

Her mother was still down in the boathouse. Hilde ran downstairs to the
telephone. She found Anne and Ole’s number in Copenhagen and called them.

“Anne Kvamsdal.”

“Hi, this is Hilde.”

“Oh, how are you? How are things in Lillesand?”

“Fine, with vacation and everything. And Dad gets back from Lebanon in a week.”

“Won’t that be great, Hilde!”

“Yes, I’m looking forward to it. That’s actually why I’m calling...”

“It is?”

“I think he’s landing at Kastrup around 5 p.m. on Saturday the 23rd. Will you
be in Copenhagen then?”

“I think so.”

“I was wondering if you could do something for me.”

“Why, of course.”

“It’s kind of a special favor. I’m not even sure if it’s possible.”

“Now you’re making me curious ...”

Hilde began to describe her plan. She told Anne about the ring binder, about
Sophie and Alberto and all the rest. She had to backtrack several times because
either she or Anne were laughing too hard. But when Hilde hung up, her plan was
in operation.

She would now have to begin some preparations of her own. But there was still
plenty of time.

Hilde spent the remainder of the afternoon and the evening with her mother.
They ended up driving to Kris-tiansand and going to the movies. They felt they
had some catching up to do since they had not done anything special the day
before. As they drove past the exit to Kjevik airport, a few more pieces of the
big jigsaw puzzle Hilde was constructing fell into place.

It was late before she went to bed that night, but she took the ring binder and
read on.

When Sophie slipped out of the den through the hedge it was almost eight
o’clock. Her mother was weeding the flowerbeds by the front door when Sophie
appeared.

“Where did you spring from?”

“I came through the hedge.”

“Through the hedge?”

“Didn’t you know there was a path on the other side?”

“But where have you been, Sophie? This is the second time you’ve just
disappeared without leaving any message.”

“I’m sorry, Mom. It was such a lovely day, I went for a long walk.”

Her mother rose from the pile of weeds and gave her a severe look.

“You haven’t been with that philosopher again?”

“As a matter of fact, I have. I told you he likes going for long walks.”

“But he is coming to the garden party, isn’t he?”

“Oh yes, he’s looking forward to it.”

“Me too. I’m counting the days.”

Was there a touch of sharpness in her voice? To be on the safe side, Sophie
said:

“I’m glad I invited Joanna’s parents too. Otherwise it might be a bit
embarrassing.”

“I don’t know ... but whatever happens, I am going to have a talk with this
Alberto as one adult to another.”

“You can borrow my room if you like. I’m sure you’ll like him.”

“And another thing. There’s a letter for you.”

“There is?”

“It’s stamped UN Battalion.”

“It must be from Alberto’s brother.”

“It’s got to stop, Sophie!”

Sophie’s brain worked overtime. But in a flash she hit on a plausible answer It
was as though she was getting inspiration from some guiding spirit.

“I told Alberto I collect rare postmarks. And brothers also have their uses.”

Her mother seemed to be reassured.

“Dinner’s in the fridge,” she said in a slightly more amicable tone.

“Where’s the letter?”

“On top of the fridge.”

Sophie rushed inside. The envelope was stamped June 15, 1990. She opened it and
took out a little note:

What matters our creative endless toil,

When at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil?



Indeed, Sophie had no answer to that question. Before she ate, she put the note
in the closet together with all the other stuff she had collected in the past
weeks. She would learn soon enough why the question had been asked.

The following morning Joanna came by. After a game of badminton, they got down
to planning the philosophical garden party. They needed to have some surprises
on hand in case the party flopped at any point.

When Sophie’s mother got home from work they were still talking about it. Her
mother kept saying: “Don’t worry about what it costs.” And she was not being
sarcastic!

Perhaps she was thinking that a “philosophical garden party” was just what was
needed to bring Sophie down to earth again after her many weeks of intensive
philosophical studies.

Before the evening was over they had agreed on everything, from paper lanterns
to a philosophical quiz with a prize. The prize should preferably be a book
about philosophy for young people. If there was such a thing! Sophie was not at
all sure.

Two days before Midsummer Eve, on Thursday, June 21, Alberto called Sophie
again.

“Sophie.”

“And Alberto.”

“Oh, hi! How are you?”

“Very well indeed, thank you. I think I have found an excellent way out.”

“Way out of what?”

“You know what. A way out of the mental captivity we have lived in for much too
long.”

“Oh, that.”

“But I cannot say a word about the plan before it is set in motion.”

“Won’t it be too late then? I need to know what I am involved in.”

“Now you’re being na’i’ve. All our conversations are being overheard. The most
sensible thing would be to say nothing.”

“It’s as bad as that, huh?”

“Naturally, my child. The most important things must happen when we are not
talking.”

“Oh.”

“We are living our lives in a fictional reality behind the words in a long
story. Each single letter is being written on an old portable typewriter by the
major. Nothing that is in print can therefore escape his attention.”

“No, I realize that. But how are we going to hide from him?”

“Ssh!”

“What?”

“There’s something going on between the lines as well. That’s just where I’m
trying to be tricky, with every crafty ruse I know.”

“I get it.”

“But we must make the most of the time both today and tomorrow. On Saturday the
balloon goes up. Can you come over right now?”

“I’m on my way.”

Sophie fed the birds and the fish and found a large lettuce leaf for Govinda.
She opened a can of cat food for Sher-ekan and put it out in a bowl on the step
as she left.

Then she slipped through the hedge and out to the path on the far side. A
little way further on she suddenly caught sight of a spacious desk standing in
the midst of the heather. An elderly man was sitting at it, apparently adding
up figures. Sophie went over to him and asked his name.

“Ebenezer Scrooge,” he said, poring over his ledgers again.

“My name is Sophie. You are a businessman, I presume?”

He nodded. “And immensely rich. Not a penny must go to waste. That’s why I have
to concentrate on my accounts.”

“Why bother?”

Sophie waved and walked on. But she had not gone many yards before she noticed
a little girl sitting quite alone under one of the tall trees. She was dressed
in rags, and looked pale and ill. As Sophie walked by, she thrust her hand into
a little bag and pulled out a box of matches.

“Will you buy some matches?” she asked, holding them out to Sophie. Sophie felt
in her pockets to see if she had any money with her. Yes—she found a crown.

“How much are they?”

“One crown.”

Sophie gave the girl the coin and stood there, with the box of matches in her
hand.

“You are the first person to buy anything from me for over a hundred years.
Sometimes I starve to death, and other times the frost does away with me.”

Sophie thought it was perhaps not surprising if the sale of matches was not
especially brisk here in the woods. But then she came to think of the
businessman she had just passed. There was no reason for the little match girl
to die of starvation when he was so wealthy.

“Come here,” said Sophie.

She took the girl’s hand and walked with her back to the rich man.

“You must see to it that this girl gets a better life,” she said.

The man glanced up from his paperwork and said: “That kind of thing costs
money, and I said not so much as a penny must go to waste.”

“But it’s not fair that you’re so rich when this girl is so poor,” insisted
Sophie. “It’s unjust!”

“Bah! Humbug! Justice only exists between equals.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“I had to work my way up, and it has paid off. Progress, they call it.”

“If you don’t help me, I’ll die,” said the poor girl.

The businessman looked up again from his ledgers. Then he threw his quill pen
onto the table impatiently.

“You don’t figure in my accounts! So—be off with you—to the poorhouse!”

“If you don’t help me, I’ll set fire to the woods,” the girl persisted.

That brought the man to his feet, but the girl had already struck one of her
matches. She held it to a tuft of dry grass which flared up instantly.

The man threw up his arms. “God help me!” he shouted. “The red cock has
crowed!”

The girl looked up at him with a playful smile.

“You didn’t know I was a communist, did you?”

The next minute, the girl, the businessman, and the desk had disappeared.
Sophie was once again standing alone while the flames consumed the dry grass
ever more hungrily. It took her a while to put out the fire by stamping on it.

Thank goodness! Sophie glanced down at the blackened grass. She was holding a
box of matches in her hand.

She couldn’t have started the fire herself, could she?

When she met Alberto outside the cabin she told him what had happened.

“Scrooge was the miserly capitalist in A Christmas Carol, by Charles Dickens.
You probably remember the little match girl from the tale by Hans Christian
Andersen.”

“I didn’t expect to meet them here in the woods.”

“Why not? These are no ordinary woods, and now we are going to talk about Karl
Marx. It is most appropriate that you have witnessed an example of the
tremendous class struggles of the mid-nineteenth century. But let’s go inside.
We are a little more protected from the major’s interference there.”

Once again they sat at the little table by the window facing the lake. Sophie
could still feel all over her body how she had experienced the little lake
after having drunk from the blue bottle.

Today, both bottles were standing on the mantelpiece. There was a miniature
model of a Greek temple on the table.

“What’s that?” asked Sophie.

“All in good time, my dear.”

Alberto began to talk: “When Kierkegaard went to Berlin in 1841, he might have
sat next to Karl Marx at Schel-ling’s lectures. Kierkegaard had written a
master of arts thesis on Socrates. About the same time, Marx had written a
doctoral thesis on Democritus and Epicurus—in other words, on the materialism
of antiquity. Thus they had both staked out the course of their own
philosophies.”

“Because Kierkegaard became an existentialist and Marx became a materialist?”

“Marx became what is known as a historical materialist. But we’ll come back to
that.”

“Go on.”

“Each in his own way, both Kierkegaard and Marx took Hegel’s philosophy as
their point of departure. Both were influenced by Hegel’s mode of thought, but
both rejected his ‘world spirit,’ or his idealism.”

“It was probably too high-flown for them.”

“Definitely. In general, we usually say that the era of the great philosophical
systems ended with Hegel. After him, philosophy took a new direction. Instead
of great speculative systems, we had what we call an existential philosophy or
a philosophy of action. This was what Marx meant when he observed that until
now, ‘philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point
is to change it.’ These words mark a significant turning point in the history
of philosophy.”

“After meeting Scrooge and the little match girl, I have no problem
understanding what Marx meant.”

“Marx’s thinking had a practical—or political—objective. He was not only a
philosopher; he was a historian, a sociologist, and an economist.”

“And he was a forerunner in all these areas?”

“Certainly no other philosopher had greater significance for practical
politics. On the other hand, we must be wary of identifying everything that
calls itself Marxism with Marx’s own thinking. It is said of Marx that he only
became a Marxist in the mid-1840s, but even after that he could at times feel
it necessary to assert that he was not a Marxist.”

“Was Jesus a Christian?”

“That, too, of course, is debatable.”

“Carry on.”

“Right from the start, his friend and colleague Friedrich Engels contributed to
what was subsequently known as Marxism. In our own century, Lenin, Stalin, Mao
and many others also made their contribution to Marxism, or Marxism-Leninism.”

“I suggest we try to stick to Marx himself. You said he was a historical
materialist?”

“He was not a philosophical materialist like the atomists of antiquity nor did
he advocate the mechanical materialism of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. But he thought that, to a great extent, it was the material factors
in society which determined the way we think. Material factors of that nature
have certainly been decisive for historical development.”

“That was quite different from Hegel’s world spirit.”

“Hegel had pointed out that historical development is driven by the tension
between opposites—which is then resolved by a sudden change. Marx developed
this idea further. But according to Marx, Hegel was standing on his head.”

“Not all the time, I hope.”

“Hegel called the force that drives history forward world spirit or world
reason. This, Marx claimed, is upside down. He wished to show that material
changes are the ones that affect history. ‘Spiritual relations’ do not create
material change, it is the other way about. Material change creates new
spiritual relations. Marx particularly emphasized that it was the economic
forces in society that created change and thus drove history forward.”

“Do you have an example?”

“Antiquity’s philosophy and science were purely theoretical in purpose. Nobody
was particularly interested in putting new discoveries into practice.”

“They weren’t?”

“That was because of the way the economic life of the community was organized.
Production was mainly based on slave labor, so the citizens had no need to
increase production with practical innovations. This is an example of how
material relations help to affect philosophical reflection in society.”

“Yes, I see.”

“Marx called these material, economic, and social relations the basis of
society. The way a society thinks, what kind of political institutions there
are, which laws it has and, not least, what there is of religion, morals, art,
philosophy, and science, Marx called society’s superstructure.”

“Basis and superstructure, right.”

“And now you will perhaps be good enough to pass me the Greek temple.”

Sophie did so.

“This is a model of the Parthenon temple on the Acropolis. You have also seen
it in real life.”

“On the video, you mean.”

“You can see that the construction has a very elegant and elaborate roof.
Probably the roof with its front gable is what strikes one first. This is what
we call the superstructure.”

“But the roof cannot float in thin air.”

“It is supported by the columns.”

“The building has very powerful foundations—its bases—supporting the entire
construction. In the same way, Marx believed that material relations support,
so to speak, everything in the way of thoughts and ideas in society. Society’s
superstructure is in fact a reflection of the bases of that society.”

“Are you saying that Plato’s theory of ideas is a reflection of vase production
and wine growing?”

“No, it’s not that simple, as Marx expressly points out. It is the interactive
effect of society’s basis on its superstructure. If Marx had rejected this
interaction, he would have been a mechanical materialist. But because Marx
realized that there was an interactive or dialectic relation between bases and
superstructure, we say that he is a dialectical materialist. By the way, you
may care to note that Plato was neither a potter nor a wine grower.”

“All right. Do you have any more to say about the temple?”

“Yes, a little. Could you describe the bases of the temple?”

“The columns are standing on a base that consists of three levels—or steps.”

“In the same manner we will identify three levels in the bases of society. The
most basic level is what we may call society’s conditions of production. In
other words, the natural conditions or resources that are available to society.
These are the foundation of any society, and this foundation clearly determines
the type of production in the society, and by the same token, the nature of
that society and its culture in general.”

“You can’t have a herring trade in the Sahara, or grow dates in northern
Norway.”

“You’ve got it. And the way people think in a nomadic culture is very different
from the way they think in a fishing village in northern Norway The next level
is the society’s means of production. By this Marx meant the various kinds of
equipment, tools, and machinery, as well as the raw materials to be found
there.”

“In the old days people rowed out to the fishing grounds. Nowadays they use
huge trawlers to catch the fish.”

“Yes, and here you are talking about the next level in the base of society,
namely, those who own the means of production. The division of labor, or the
distribution of work and ownership, was what Marx called society’s ‘production
relations.’ “

“I see.”

“So far we can conclude that it is the mode of production in a society which
determines which political and ideological conditions are to be found there. It
is not by chance that today we think somewhat differently—and have a somewhat
different moral codex—from the old feudal society.”

“So Marx didn’t believe in a natural right that was eternally valid.”

“No, the question of what was morally right, according to Marx, is a product of
the base of society. For example, it is not accidental that in the old peasant
society, parents would decide whom their children married. It was a question of
who was to inherit the farm. In a modern city, social relations are different.
Nowadays you can meet your future spouse at a party or a disco, and if you are
sufficiently in love, you’ll find somewhere to live.”

“I could never have put up with my parents deciding who I was to marry.”

“No, that’s because you are a child of your time. Marx emphasized moreover that
it is mainly society’s ruling class that sets the norms for what is right or
wrong. Because ‘the history of all hitherto existing societies is the history
of class struggles.’ In other words, history is principally a matter of who is
to own the means of production.”

“Don’t people’s thoughts and ideas help to change history?”

“Yes and no. Marx understood that conditions in society’s superstructure could
have an interactive effect on the base of society, but he denied that society’s
superstructure had any independent history of its own. What has driven
historical development from the slave society of antiquity to the industrial
society of today has primarily been determined by changes in the base of
society.”

“So you said.”

“Marx believed that in all phases of history there has been a conflict between
two dominant classes of society. In antiquity’s slave society, the conflict was
between free citizen and slave. In the feudal society of the Middle Ages, it
was between feudal lord and serf; later on, between aristocrat and citizen. But
in Marx’s own time, in what he called a bourgeois or capitalist society, the
conflict was first and foremost between the capitalists and the workers, or the
proletariat. So the conflict stood between those who own the means of
production and those who do not. And since the ‘upper classes’ do not
voluntarily relinquish their power, change can only come about through
revolution.”

“What about a communist society?”

“Marx was especially interested in the transition from a capitalist to a
communist society. He also carried out a detailed analysis of the capitalist
mode of production. But before we look at that, we must say something about
Marx’s view of man’s labor.”

“Go ahead.”

“Before he became a communist, the young Marx was preoccupied with what happens
to man when he works. This was something Hegel had also analyzed. Hegel
believed there was an interactive, or dialectic, relationship between man and
nature. When man alters nature, he himself is altered. Or, to put it slightly
differently, when man works, he interacts with nature and transforms it. But in
the process nature also interacts with man and transforms his consciousness.”

“Tell me what you do and I’ll tell you who you are.”

“That, briefly, was Marx’s point. How we work affects our consciousness, but
our consciousness also affects the way we work. You could say it is an
interactive relationship between hand and consciousness. Thus the way you think
is closely connected to the job you do.”

“So it must be depressing to be unemployed.”

“Yes. A person who is unemployed is, in a sense, empty. Hegel was aware of this
early on. To both Hegel and Marx, work was a positive thing, and was closely
connected with the essence of mankind.”

“So it must also be positive to a worker?”

“Yes, originally. But this is precisely where Marx aimed his criticism of the
capitalist method of production.”

“What was that?”

“Under the capitalist system, the worker labors for someone else. His labor is
thus something external to him—or something that does not belong to him. The
worker becomes alien to his work—but at the same time also alien to himself. He
loses touch with his own reality. Marx says, with a Hegelian expression, that
the worker becomes alienated.”

“I have an aunt who has worked in a factory, packaging candy for over twenty
years, so I can easily understand what you mean. She says she hates going to
work, every single morning.”

“But if she hates her work, Sophie, she must hate herself, in a sense.”

“She hates candy, that’s for sure.”

“In a capitalist society, labor is organized in such a way that the worker in
fact slaves for another social class. Thus the worker transfers his own
labor—and with it, the whole of his life—to the bourgeoisie.”

“Is it really that bad?”

“We’re talking about Marx, and we must therefore take our point of departure in
the social conditions during the middle of the last century. So the answer must
be a resounding yes. The worker could have a 12-hour working day in a freezing
cold production hall. The pay was often so poor that children and expectant
mothers also had to work. This led to unspeakable social conditions. In many
places, part of the wages was paid out in the form of cheap liquor, and women
were obliged to supplement their earnings by prostitution. Their customers were
the respected citizenry of the town. In short, in the precise situation that
should have been the honorable hallmark of mankind, namely work, the worker was
turned into a beast of burden.”

“That infuriates me!”

“It infuriated Marx too. And while it was happening, the children of the
bourgeoisie played the violin in warm, spacious living rooms after a refreshing
bath. Or they sat at the piano while waiting for their four-course dinner. The
violin and the piano could have served just as well as a diversion after a long
horseback ride.”

“Ugh! How unjust!”

“Marx would have agreed. Together with Engels, he published a Communist
Manifesto in 1848. The first sentence in this manifesto says: A spectre is
haunting Europe—the spectre of Communism.”

“That sounds frightening.”

“It frightened the bourgeoisie too. Because now the proletariat was beginning
to revolt. Would you like to hear how the Manifesto ends?”

“Yes, please.”

“The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare
that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing
social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communist revolution.
The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to
win. Workingmen of all countries, unite!”

“If conditions were as bad as you say, I think I would have signed that
Manifesto. But conditions are surely a lot different today?”

“In Norway they are, but they aren’t everywhere. Many people still live under
inhuman conditions while they continue to produce commodities that make
capitalists richer and richer. Marx called this exploitation.”

“Could you explain that word, please?”

“If a worker produces a commodity, this commodity has a certain
exchange-value.”

“Yes.”

“If you now deduct the workers’ wages and the other production costs from the
exchange-value, there will always be a certain sum left over. This sum was what
Marx called profit. In other words, the capitalist pockets a value that was
actually created by the worker. That is what is meant by exploitation.”

“I see.”

“So now the capitalist invests some of his profit in new capital—for instance,
in modernizing the production plant in the hope of producing his commodity even
more cheaply, and thereby increasing his profit in the future.”

“That sounds logical.”

“Yes, it can seem logical. But both in this and in other areas, in the long
term it will not go the way the capitalist has imagined.”

“How do you mean?”

“Marx believed there were a number of inherent contradictions in the capitalist
method of production. Capitalism is an economic system which is
self-destructive because it lacks rational control.”

“That’s good, isn’t it, for the oppressed?”

“Yes; it is inherent in the capitalist system that it is marching toward its
own destruction. In that sense, capitalism is ‘progressive’ because it is a
stage on the way to communism.”

“Can you give an example of capitalism being self-destructive?”

“We said that the capitalist had a good surplus of money, and he uses part of
this surplus to modernize the factory. But he also spends money on violin
lessons. Moreover, his wife has become accustomed to a luxurious way of life.”

“No doubt.”

“He buys new machinery and so no longer needs so many employees. He does this
to increase his competitive power.”

“I get it.”

“But he is not the only one thinking in this way, which means that production
as a whole is continually being made more effective. Factories become bigger
and bigger, and are gradually concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. What
happens then, Sophie?”

“Er. . .”

“Fewer and fewer workers are required, which means there are more and more
unemployed. There are therefore increasing social problems, and crises such as
these are a signal that capitalism is marching toward its own destruction. But
capitalism has a number of other self-destructive elements. Whenever profit has
to be tied up in the means of production without leaving a big enough surplus
to keep production going at competitive prices . . .”

“Yes?”

“, . . what does the capitalist do then? Can you tell me?”

“No, I’m afraid I can’t.”

“Imagine if you were a factory owner. You cannot make ends meet. You cannot buy
the raw materials you need to keep producing. You are facing bankruptcy. So now
my question is, what can you do to economize?”

“Maybe I could cut down on wages?”

“Smart! Yes, that really is the smartest thing you could do. But if all
capitalists were as smart as you—and they are—the workers would be so poor that
they couldn’t afford to buy goods any more. We would say that purchasing power
is falling. And now we really are in a vicious circle. The knell has sounded
for capitalist private property, Marx would say. We are rapidly approaching a
revolutionary situation.”

“Yes, I see.”

“To make a long story short, in the end the proletariat rises and takes over
the means of production.”

“And then what?”

“For a period, we get a new ‘class society’ in which the proletarians suppress
the bourgeoisie by force. Marx called this the dictatorship of the proletariat.
But after a transition period, the dictatorship of the proletariat is replaced
by a ‘classless society,’ in which the means of production are owned ‘by
all’—that is, by the people themselves. In this kind of society, the policy is
‘from each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs.’
Moreover, labor now belongs to the workers themselves and capitalism’s
alienation ceases.”

“It all sounds wonderful, but what actually happened? Was there a revolution?”

“Yes and no. Today, economists can establish that Marx was mistaken on a number
of vital issues, not least his analysis of the crises of capitalism. And he
paid insufficient attention to the plundering of the natural environment—the
serious consequences of which we are experiencing today. Nevertheless . . .”

“Nevertheless?”

“Marxism led to great upheavals. There is no doubt that socialism has largely
succeeded in combating an inhumane society. In Europe, at any rate, we live in
a society with more justice—and more solidarity—than Marx did. This is not
least due to Marx himself and the entire socialist movement.”

“What happened?”

“After Marx, the socialist movement split into two main streams, Social
Democracy and Leninism. Social Democracy, which has stood for a gradual and
peaceful path in the direction of socialism, was Western Europe’s way. We might
call this the slow revolution. Leninism, which retained Marx’s belief that
revolution was the only way to combat the old class society, had great
influence in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Each in their own way, both
movements have fought against hardship and oppression.”

“But didn’t it create a new form of oppression? For example in Russia and
Eastern Europe?”

“No doubt of that, and here again we see that everything man touches becomes a
mixture of good and evil. On the other hand, it would be unreasonable to blame
Marx for the negative factors in the so-called socialist countries fifty or a
hundred years after his death. But maybe he had given too little thought to the
people who would be the administrators of communist society. There will
probably never be a ‘promised land.’ Mankind will always create new problems to
fight about.”

“I’m sure it will.”

“And there we bring down the curtain on Marx, Sophie.”

“Hey, wait a minute! Didn’t you say something about justice only existing among
equals?”

“No, it was Scrooge who said that.”

“How do you know what he said?”

“Oh well—you and I have the same author. In actual fact we are more closely
linked to each other than we would appear to the casual observer.”

“Your wretched irony again!”

“Double, Sophie, that was double irony.”

“But back to justice. You said that Marx thought capitalism was an unjust form
of society. How would you define a just society?”

“A moral philosopher called John Rawls attempted to say something about it with
the following example: Imagine you were a member of a distinguished council
whose task it was to make all the laws for a future society.”

“I wouldn’t mind at all being on that council.”

“They are obliged to consider absolutely every detail, because as soon as they
reach an agreement—and everybody has signed the laws—they will all drop dead.”

“Oh . . .”

“But they will immediately come to life again in the society they have
legislated for. The point is that they have no idea which position they will
have in society.”

“Ah, I see.”

“That society would be a just society. It would have arisen among equals.”

“Men and women!”

“That goes without saying. None of them knew whether they would wake up as men
or women. Since the odds are fifty-fifty, society would be just as attractive
for women as for men.”

“It sounds promising.”

“So tell me, was the Europe of Karl Marx a society like that?”

“Absolutely not!”

“But do you by any chance know of such a society today?”

“Hm ... that’s a good question.”

“Think about it. But for now there will be no more about Marx.”

“Excuse me?”

“Next chapter!”

