# A Joker in Athens
[Metadata]: # {25}
[Descriptor]: # {25}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# A Joker in Athens
Socrates, Sophie! We aren’t done with him yet. We have talked about his method.
But what was his philosophical project?

Socrates lived at the same time as the Sophists. Like them, he was more
concerned with man and his place in society than with the forces of nature. As
a Roman philosopher, Cicero, said of him a few hundred years later, Socrates
“called philosophy down from the sky and established her in the towns and
introduced her into homes and forced her to investigate life, ethics, good and
evil.”

But Socrates differed from the Sophists in one significant way. He did not
consider himself to be a “sophist”—that is, a learned or wise person. Unlike
the Sophists, he did not teach for money. No, Socrates called himself a
philosopher in the true sense of the word. A “philosopher” really means “one
who loves wisdom.”

Are you sitting comfortably, Sophie? Because it is central to the rest of this
course that you fully understand the difference between a sophist and a
philosopher. The Sophists took money for their more or less hairsplitting
expoundings, and sophists of this kind have come and gone from time immemorial.
I am referring to all the schoolmasters and self-opinionated know-it-alls who
are satisfied with what little they know, or who boast of knowing a whole lot
about subjects they haven’t the faintest notion of. You have probably come
across a few of these sophists in your young life. A real philosopher, Sophie,
is a completely different kettle of fish—the direct opposite, in fact. A
philosopher knows that in reality he knows very little. That is why he
constantly strives to achieve true insight. Socrates was one of these rare
people. He knew that he knew nothing about life and about the world. And now
comes the important part: it troubled him that he knew so little.

A philosopher is therefore someone who recognizes that there is a lot he does
not understand, and is troubled by it. In that sense, he is still wiser than
all those who brag about their knowledge of things they know nothing about.
“Wisest is she who knows she does not know,” I said previously. Socrates
himself said, “One thing only I know, and that is that I know nothing.”

Remember this statement, because it is an admission that is rare, even among
philosophers. Moreover, it can be so dangerous to say it in public that it can
cost you your life. The most subversive people are those who ask questions.
Giving answers is not nearly as threatening. Any one question can be more
explosive than a thousand answers.

You remember the story of the emperor’s new clothes? The emperor was actually
stark naked but none of his subjects dared say so. Suddenly a child burst out,
“But he’s got nothing on!” That was a courageous child, Sophie. Like Socrates,
who dared tell people how little we humans know. The similarity between
children and philosophers is something we have already talked about.

To be precise: Mankind is faced with a number of difficult questions that we
have no satisfactory answers to. So now two possibilities present themselves:
We can either fool ourselves and the rest of the world by pretending that we
know all there is to know, or we can shut our eyes to the central issues once
and for all and abandon all progress. In this sense, humanity is divided.
People are, generally speaking, either dead certain or totally indifferent.
(Both types are crawling around deep down in the rabbit’s fur!)

It is like dividing a deck of cards into two piles, Sophie. You lay the black
cards in one pile and the red in the other. But from time to time a joker turns
up that is neither heart nor club, neither diamond nor spade. Socrates was this
joker in Athens. He was neither certain nor indifferent. All he knew was that
he knew nothing—and it troubled him. So he became a philosopher—someone who
does not give up but tirelessly pursues his quest for truth.

An Athenian is said to have asked the oracle at Delphi who the wisest man in
Athens was. The oracle answered that Socrates of all mortals was the wisest.
When Socrates heard this he was astounded, to put it mildly. (He must have
laughed, Sophie!) He went straight to the person in the city whom he, and
everyone else, thought was excessively wise. But when it turned out that this
person was unable to give Socrates satisfactory answers to his questions,
Socrates realized that the oracle had been right.

Socrates felt that it was necessary to establish a solid foundation for our
knowledge. He believed that this foundation lay in man’s reason. With his
unshakable faith in human reason he was decidedly a rationalist.

