# Spinoza
[Metadata]: # {63}
[Descriptor]: # {63}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Spinoza
…God is not a puppeteer…



They sat silently for a long time. Then Sophie spoke, trying to get Alberto’s
mind off what had happened.

“Descartes must have been an odd kind of person. Did he become famous?”

Alberto breathed deeply for a couple of seconds before answering: “He had a
great deal of significance. Perhaps most of all for another great philosopher,
Ba-ruch Spinoza, who lived from 1632 to 1677.”

“Are you going to tell me about him?”

“That was my intention. And we’re not going to be stopped by military
provocations.”

“I’m all ears.”

“Spinoza belonged to the Jewish community of Amsterdam, but he was
excommunicated for heresy. Few philosophers in more recent times have been so
blasphemed and so persecuted for their ideas as this man. It happened because
he criticized the established religion. He believed that Christianity and
Judaism were only kept alive by rigid dogma and outer ritual. He was the first
to apply what we call a historico-critical interpretation of the Bible.”

“Explanation, please.”

“He denied that the Bible was inspired by God down to the last letter. When we
read the Bible, he said, we must continually bear in mind the period it was
written in. A ‘critical’ reading, such as the one he proposed, revealed a
number of inconsistencies in the texts. But beneath the surface of the
Scriptures in the New Testament is Jesus, who could well be called God’s
mouthpiece. The teachings of Jesus therefore represented a liberation from the
orthodoxy of Judaism. Jesus preached a ‘religion of reason’ which valued love
higher than all else. Spinoza interpreted this as meaning both love of God and
love of humanity. Nevertheless, Christianity had also become set in its own
rigid dogmas and outer rituals.”

“I don’t suppose these ideas were easy to swallow, either for the church or the
synagogue.”

“When things got really tough, Spinoza was even deserted by his own family.
They tried to disinherit him on the grounds of his heresy. Paradoxically
enough, few have spoken out more powerfully in the cause of free speech and
religious tolerance than Spinoza. The opposition he was met with on all sides
led him to pursue a quiet and secluded life devoted entirely to philosophy. He
earned a meager living by polishing lenses, some of which have come into my
possession.”

“Very impressive!”

“There is almost something symbolic in the fact that he lived by polishing
lenses. A philosopher must help people to see life in a new perspective. One of
the pillars of Spinoza’s philosophy was indeed to see things from the
perspective of eternity.”

“The perspective of eternity?”

“Yes, Sophie. Do you think you can imagine your own life in a cosmic context?
You’ll have to try and imagine yourself and your life here and now ...”

“Hm ... that’s not so easy.”

“Remind yourself that you are only living a minuscule part of all nature’s
life. You are part of an enormous whole.”

“I think I see what you mean ...”

“Can you manage to feel it as well? Can you perceive all of nature at one
time—the whole universe, in fact— at a single glance?”

“I doubt it. Maybe I need some lenses.”

“I don’t mean only the infinity of space. I mean the eternity of time as well.
Once upon a time, thirty thousand years ago there lived a little boy in the
Rhine valley. He was a tiny part of nature, a tiny ripple on an endless sea.
You too, Sophie, you too are living a tiny part of nature’s life. There is no
difference between you and that boy.”

“Except that I’m alive now.”

“Yes, but that is precisely what I wanted you to try and imagine. Who will you
be in thirty thousand years?”

“Was that the heresy?”

“Not entirely ... Spinoza didn’t only say that everything is nature. He
identified nature with God. He said God is all, and all is in God.”

“So he was a pantheist.”

“That’s true. To Spinoza, God did not create the world in order to stand
outside it. No, God is the world. Sometimes Spinoza expresses it differently.
He maintains that the world is in God. In this, he is quoting St. Paul’s speech
to the Athenians on the Areopagos hill: ‘In him we live and move and have our
being.’ But let us pursue Spinoza’s own reasoning. His most important book was
his Ethics Geometrically Demonstrated.”

“Ethics—geometrically demonstrated?”

“It may sound a bit strange to us. In philosophy, ethics means the study of
moral conduct for living a good life. This is also what we mean when we speak
of the ethics of Socrates or Aristotle, for example. It is only in our own time
that ethics has more or less become reduced to a set of rules for living
without treading on other people’s toes.”

“Because thinking of yourself is supposed to be egoism?”

“Something like that, yes. When Spinoza uses the word ethics, he means both the
art of living and moral conduct.”

“But even so ... the art of living demonstrated geometrically?”

“The geometrical method refers to the terminology he used for his formulations.
You may recall how Descartes wished to use mathematical method for
philosophical reflection. By this he meant a form of philosophic reflection
that was constructed from strictly logical conclusions. Spinoza was part of the
same rationalistic tradition. He wanted his ethics to show that human life is
subject to the universal laws of nature. We must therefore free ourselves from
our feelings and our passions. Only then will we find contentment and be happy,
he believed.”

“Surely we are not ruled exclusively by the laws of nature?”

“Well, Spinoza is not an easy philosopher to grasp. Let’s take him bit by bit.
You remember that Descartes believed that reality consisted of two completely
separate substances, namely thought and extension.”

“How could I have forgotten it?”

“The word ‘substance’ can be interpreted as ‘that which something consists of,’
or that which something basically is or can be reduced to. Descartes operated
then with two of these substances. Everything was either thought or extension.

“However, Spinoza rejected this split. He believed that there was only one
substance. Everything that exists can be reduced to one single reality which he
simply called Substance. At times he calls it God or nature. Thus Spinoza does
not have the dualistic view of reality that Descartes had. We say he is a
monist. That is, he reduces nature and the condition of all things to one
single substance.”

“They could hardly have disagreed more.”

“Ah, but the difference between Descartes and Spinoza is not as deep-seated as
many have often claimed. Descartes also pointed out that only God exists
independently. It’s only when Spinoza identifies God with nature—or God and
creation—that he distances himself a good way from both Descartes and from the
Jewish and Christian doctrines.”

“So then nature is God, and that’s that.”

“But when Spinoza uses the word ‘nature,’ he doesn’t only mean extended nature.
By Substance, God, or nature, he means everything that exists, including all
things spiritual.”

“You mean both thought and extension.”

“You said it! According to Spinoza, we humans recognize two of God’s qualities
or manifestations. Spinoza called these qualities God’s attributes, and these
two attributes are identical with Descartes’s ‘thought’ and ‘extension.’ God—or
nature—manifests itself either as thought or as extension. It may well be that
God has infinitely more attributes than ‘thought’ and ‘extension,’ but these
are the only two that are known to man.”

“Fair enough, but what a complicated way of saying it.”

“Yes, one almost needs a hammer and chisel to get through Spinoza’s language.
The reward is that in the end you dig out a thought as crystal clear as a
diamond.”

“I can hardly wait!”

“Everything in nature, then, is either thought or extension. The various
phenomena we come across in everyday life, such as a flower or a poem by
Wordsworth, are different modes of the attribute of thought or extension. A
‘mode’ is the particular manner which Substance, God, or nature assumes. A
flower is a mode of the attribute of extension, and a poem about the same
flower is a mode of the attribute of thought. But both are basically the
expression of Substance, God, or nature.”

“You could have fooled me!”

“But it’s not as complicated as he makes it sound. Beneath his stringent
formulation lies a wonderful realization that is actually so simple that
everyday language cannot accommodate it.”

“I think I prefer everyday language, if it’s all the same to you.”

“Right. Then I’d better begin with you yourself. When you get a pain in your
stomach, what is it that has a pain?”

“Like you just said. It’s me.”

“Fair enough. And when you later recollect that you once had a pain in your
stomach, what is it that thinks?”

“That’s me, too.”

“So you are a single person that has a stomachache one minute and is in a
thoughtful mood the next. Spinoza maintained that all material things and
things that happen around us are an expression of God or nature. So it follows
that all thoughts that we think are also God’s or nature’s thoughts. For
everything is One. There is only one God, one nature, or one Substance.”

“But listen, when I think something, I’m the one who’s doing the thinking. When
I move, I’m doing the moving. Why do you have to mix God into it?”

“I like your involvement. But who are you? You are Sophie Amundsen, but you are
also the expression of something infinitely bigger. You can, if you wish, say
that you are thinking or that you are moving, but could you not also say that
it is nature that is thinking your thoughts, or that it is nature that is
moving through you? It’s really just a question of which lenses you choose to
look through.”

“Are you saying I cannot decide for myself?”

“Yes and no. You may have the right to move your thumb any way you choose. But
your thumb can only move according to its nature. It cannot jump off your hand
and dance about the room. In the same way you also have your place in the
structure of existence, my dear. You are Sophie, but you are also a finger of
God’s body.”

“So God decides everything I do?”

“Or nature, or the laws of nature. Spinoza believed that God—or the laws of
nature—is the inner cause of everything that happens. He is not an outer cause,
since God speaks through the laws of nature and only through them.”

“I’m not sure I can see the difference.”

“God is not a puppeteer who pulls all the strings, controlling everything that
happens. A real puppet master controls the puppets from outside and is
therefore the ‘outer cause’ of the puppet’s movements. But that is not the way
God controls the world. God controls the world through natural laws. So God—or
nature—is the ‘inner cause’ of everything that happens. This means that
everything in the material world happens through necessity. Spinoza had a
determinist view of the material, or natural, world.”

“I think you said something like that before.”

“You’re probably thinking of the Stoics. They also claimed that everything
happens out of necessity. That was why it was important to meet every situation
with ‘stoicism.’ Man should not get carried away by his feelings. Briefly, that
was also Spinoza’s ethics.”

“I see what you mean, but I still don’t like the idea that I don’t decide for
myself.”

“Okay, let’s go back in time to the Stone Age boy who lived thirty thousand
years ago. When he grew up, he cast spears after wild animals, loved a woman
who became the mother of his children, and quite certainly worshipped the
tribal gods. Do you really think he decided all that for himself?”

“I don’t know.”

“Or think of a lion in Africa. Do you think it makes up its mind to be a beast
of prey? Is that why it attacks a limping antelope? Could it instead have made
up its mind to be a vegetarian?”

“No, a lion obeys its nature.”

“You mean, the laws of nature. So do you, Sophie, because you are also part of
nature. You could of course protest, with the support of Descartes, that a lion
is an animal and not a free human being with free mental faculties. But think
of a newborn baby that screams and yells. If it doesn’t get milk it sucks its
thumb. Does that baby have a free will?”

“I guess not.”

“When does the child get its free will, then? At the age of two, she runs
around and points at everything in sight. At the age of three she nags her
mother, and at the age of four she suddenly gets afraid of the dark. Where’s
the freedom, Sophie?”

“I don’t know.”

“When she is fifteen, she sits in front of a mirror experimenting with makeup.
Is this the moment when she makes her own personal decisions and does what she
likes?”

“I see what you’re getting at.”

“She is Sophie Amundsen, certainly. But she also lives according to the laws of
nature. The point is that she doesn’t realize it because there are so many
complex reasons for everything she does.”

“I don’t think I want to hear any more.”

“But you must just answer a last question. Two equally old trees are growing in
a large garden. One of the trees grows in a sunny spot and has plenty of good
soil and water. The other tree grows in poor soil in a dark spot. Which of the
trees do you think is bigger? And which of them bears more fruit?”

“Obviously the tree with the best conditions for growing.”

“According to Spinoza, this tree is free. It has its full freedom to develop
its inherent abilities. But if it is an apple tree it will not have the ability
to bear pears or plums. The same applies to us humans. We can be hindered in
our development and our personal growth by political conditions, for instance.
Outer circumstances can constrain us. Only when we are free to develop our
innate abilities can we live as free beings. But we are just as much determined
by inner potential and outer opportunities as the Stone Age boy on the Rhine,
the lion in Africa, or the apple tree in the garden.”

“Okay, I give in, almost.”

“Spinoza emphasizes that there is only one being which is totally and utterly
‘its own cause’ and can act with complete freedom. Only God or nature is the
expression of such a free and ‘nonaccidental’ process. Man can strive for
freedom in order to live without outer constraint, but he will never achieve
‘free will.’ We do not control everything that happens in our body—which is a
mode of the attribute of extension. Neither do we ‘choose’ our thinking. Man
therefore does not have a ‘free soul’; it is more or less imprisoned in a
mechanical body.”

“That is rather hard to understand.”

“Spinoza said that it was our passions—such as ambition and lust—which prevent
us from achieving true happiness and harmony, but that if we recognize that
everything happens from necessity, we can achieve an intuitive understanding of
nature as a whole. We can come to realize with crystal clarity that everything
is related, even that everything is One. The goal is to comprehend everything
that exists in an all-embracing perception. Only then will we achieve true
happiness and contentment. This was what Spinoza called seeing everything ‘sub
specie aeternitatis.’ “

“Which means what?”

“To see everything from the perspective of eternity. Wasn’t that where we
started?”

“It’ll have to be where we end, too. I must get going.”

Alberto got up and fetched a large fruit dish from the book shelves. He set it
on the coffee table.

“Won’t you at least have a piece of fruit before you go?”

Sophie helped herself to a banana. Alberto took a green apple.

She broke off the top of the banana and began to peel it.

“There’s something written here,” she said suddenly.

“Where?”

“Here—inside the banana peel. It looks as if it was written with an ink brush.”

Sophie leaned over and showed Alberto the banana. He read aloud:

Here I am again, Hilde. I’m everywhere. Happy birthday!

“Very funny,” said Sophie.

“He gets more crafty all the time.”

“But it’s impossible ... isn’t it? Do you know if they grow bananas in
Lebanon?”

Alberto shook his head.

“I’m certainly not going to eat that.”

“Leave it then. Someone who writes birthday greetings to his daughter on the
inside of an unpeeled banana must be mentally disturbed. But he must also be
quite ingenious.”

“Yes, both.”

“So shall we establish here and now that Hilde has an ingenious father? In
other words, he’s not so stupid.”

“That’s what I’ve been telling you. And it could just as well be him that made
you call me Hilde last time I came here. Maybe he’s the one putting all the
words in our mouths.”

“Nothing can be ruled out. But we should doubt everything.”

“For all we know, our entire life could be a dream.”

“But let’s not jump to conclusions. There could be a simpler explanation.”

“Well whatever, I have to hurry home. My mom is waiting for me.”

Alberto saw her to the door. As she left, he said:

“We’ll meet again, dear Hilde.”

Then the door closed behind her.

