# The Big Bang
[Metadata]: # {79}
[Descriptor]: # {79}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Big Bang
... we too are stardust. . .

Hilde settled herself comfortably in the glider beside her father. It was
nearly midnight. They sat looking out across the bay. A few stars glimmered
palely in the light sky. Gentle waves lapped over the stones under the dock.

Her father broke the silence.

“It’s a strange thought that we live on a tiny little planet in the universe.”

“Yes ...”

“Earth is only one of many planets orbiting the sun. Yet Earth is the only
living planet.”

“Perhaps the only one in the entire universe?”

“It’s possible. But it’s also possible that the universe is teeming with life.
The universe is inconceivably huge. The distances are so great that we measure
them in light-minutes and light-years.”

“What are they, actually?”

“A light-minute is the distance light travels in one minute. And that’s a long
way, because light travels through space at 300,000 kilometers a second. That
means that a light-minute is 60 times 300,000—or 18 million kilometers. A
light-year is nearly ten trillion kilometers.”

“How far away is the sun?”

“It’s a little over eight light-minutes away. The rays of sunlight warming our
faces on a hot June day have traveled for eight minutes through the universe
before they reach us.”

“Go on...”

“Pluto, which is the planet farthest out in our solar system, is about five
light-hours away from us. When an astronomer looks at Pluto through his
telescope, he is in fact looking five hours back in time. We could also say
that the picture of Pluto takes five hours to get here.”

“It’s a bit hard to visualize, but I think I understand.”

“That’s good, Hilde. But we here on Earth are only just beginning to orient
ourselves. Our own sun is one of 400 billion other stars in the galaxy we call
the Milky Way. This galaxy resembles a large discus, with our sun situated in
one of its several spiral arms. When we look up at the sky on a clear winter’s
night, we see a broad band of stars. This is because we are looking toward the
center of the Milky Way.”

“I suppose that’s why the Milky Way is called ‘Winter Street’ in Swedish.”

“The distance to the star in the Milky Way that is our nearest neighbor is four
light-years. Maybe that’s it just above the island over there. If you could
imagine that at this very moment a stargazer is sitting up there with a
powerful telescope pointing at Bjerkely—he would see Bjerkely as it looked four
years ago. He might see an eleven-year-old girl swinging her legs in the
glider.”

“Incredible.”

“But that’s only the nearest star. The whole galaxy— or nebula, as we also call
it—is 90,000 light-years wide. That is another way of describing the time it
takes for light to travel from one end of the galaxy to the other. When we gaze
at a star in the Milky Way which is 50,000 light-years away from our sun, we
are looking back 50,000 years in time.”

“The idea is much too big for my little head.”

“The only way we can look out into space, then, is to look back in time. We can
never know what the universe is like now. We only know what it was like then.
When we look up at a star that is thousands of light-years away, we are really
traveling thousands of years back in the history of space.”

“It’s completely incomprehensible.”

“But everything we see meets the eye in the form of light waves. And these
light waves take time to travel through space. We could compare it to thunder.
We always hear the thunder after we have seen the lightning. That’s because
sound waves travel slower than light waves. When I hear a peal of thunder, I’m
hearing the sound of something that happened a little while ago. It’s the same
thing with the stars. When I look at a star that is thousands of light-years
away, I’m seeing the ‘peal of thunder’ from an event that lies thousands of
years back in time.”

“Yes, I see.”

“But so far, we’ve only been talking about our own galaxy. Astronomers say
there are about a hundred billion of such galaxies in the universe, and each of
these galaxies consists of about a hundred billion stars. We call the nearest
galaxy to the Milky Way the Andromeda nebula. It lies two million light-years
from our own galaxy. That means the light from that galaxy takes two million
years to reach us. So we’re looking two million years back in time when we see
the Andromeda nebula high up in the sky. If there was a clever stargazer in
this nebula—I can just imagine him pointing his telescope at Earth right now—he
wouldn’t be able to see us. If he was lucky, he’d see a few flat-faced
Neanderthals.”

“It’s amazing.”

“The most distant galaxies we know of today are about ten billion light-years
away from us. When we receive signals from these galaxies, we are going ten
billion years back in the history of the universe. That’s about twice as long
as our own solar system has existed.”

“You’re making me dizzy.”

“Although it is hard enough to comprehend what it means to look so far back in
time, astronomers have discovered something that has even greater significance
for our world picture.”

“What?”

“Apparently no galaxy in space remains where it is. All the galaxies in the
universe are moving away from each other at colossal speeds. The further they
are away from us, the quicker they move. That means that the distance between
the galaxies is increasing all the time.”

“I’m trying to picture it.”

“If you have a balloon and you paint black spots on it, the spots will move
away from each other as you blow up the balloon. That’s what’s happening with
the galaxies in the universe. We say that the universe is expanding.”

“What makes it do that?”

“Most astronomers agree that the expanding universe can only have one
explanation: Once upon a time, about 15 billion years ago, all substance in the
universe was assembled in a relatively small area. The substance was so dense
that gravity made it terrifically hot. Finally it got so hot and so tightly
packed that it exploded. We call this explosion the Big Bang.”

“Just the thought of it makes me shudder.”

“The Big Bang caused all the substance in the universe to be expelled in all
directions, and as it gradually cooled, it formed stars and galaxies and moons
and planets ...”

“But I thought you said the universe was still expanding?”

“Yes I did, and it’s expanding precisely because of this explosion billions of
years ago. The universe has no timeless geography. The universe is a happening.
The universe is an explosion. Galaxies continue to fly through the universe
away from each other at colossal speeds.”

“Will they go on doing that for ever?”

“That’s one possibility. But there is another. You may recall that Alberto told
Sophie about the two forces that cause the planets to remain in constant orbit
round the sun?”

“Weren’t they gravity and inertia?”

“Right, and the same thing applies to the galaxies. Because even though the
universe continues to expand, the force of gravity is working the other way.
And one day, in a couple of billion years, gravity will perhaps cause the
heavenly bodies to be packed together again as the force of the huge explosion
begins to weaken. Then we would get a reverse explosion, a so-called implosion.
But the distances are so great that it will happen like a movie that is run in
slow motion. You might compare it with what happens when you release the air
from a balloon.”

“Will all the galaxies be drawn together in a tight nucleus again?”

“Yes, you’ve got it. But what will happen then?”

“There would be another Big Bang and the universe would start expanding again.
Because the same natural laws are in operation. And so new stars and galaxies
will form.”

“Good thinking. Astronomers think there are two possible scenarios for the
future of the universe. Either the universe will go on expanding forever so
that the galaxies will draw further and further apart—or the universe will
begin to contract again. How heavy and massive the universe is will determine
what happens. And this is something astronomers have no way of knowing as yet.”

“But if the universe is so heavy that it begins to contract again, perhaps it
has expanded and contracted lots of times before.”

“That would be an obvious conclusion. But on this point theory is divided. It
may be that the expansion of the universe is something that will only happen
this one time. But if it keeps on expanding for all eternity, the question of
where it all began becomes even more pressing.”

“Yes, where did it come from, all that stuff that suddenly exploded?”

“For a Christian, it would be obvious to see the Big Bang as the actual moment
of creation. The Bible tells us that God said ‘Let there be light!’ You may
possibly also remember that Alberto indicated Christianity’s ‘linear’ view of
history. From the point of view of a Christian belief in the creation, it is
better to imagine the universe continuing to expand.”

“It is?”

“In the Orient they have a ‘cyclic’ view of history.

In other words, history repeats itself eternally. In India, for example, there
is an ancient theory that the world continually unfolds and folds again, thus
alternating between what Indians have called Brahman’s Day and Brahman’s Night.
This idea harmonizes best, of course, with the universe expanding and
contracting—in order to expand again—in an eternal cyclic process. I have a
mental picture of a great cosmic heart that beats and beats and beats...”

“I think both theories are equally inconceivable and equally exciting.”

“And they can compare with the great paradox of eternity that Sophie once sat
pondering in her garden: either the universe has always been there—or it
suddenly came into existence out of nothing ...”

“Ouch!”

Hilde clapped her hand to her forehead.

“What was that?”

“I think I’ve just been stung by a gadfly.”

“It was probably Socrates trying to sting you into life.”



Sophie and Alberto had been sitting in the red convertible listening to the
major tell Hilde about the universe.

“Has it struck you that our roles are completely reversed?” asked Alberto after
a while.

“In what sense?”

“Before it was they who listened to us, and we couldn’t see them. Now we’re
listening to them and they can’t see us.”

“And that’s not all.”

“What are you referring to?”

“When we started, we didn’t know about the other reality that Hilde and the
major inhabited. Now they don’t know about ours.”

“Revenge is sweet.”

“But the major could intervene in our world.”

“Our world was nothing but his interventions.”

“I haven’t yet relinquished all hope that we may also intervene in their
world.”

“But you know that’s impossible. Remember what happened in the Cinderella? I
saw you trying to get out that bottle of Coke.”

Sophie was silent. She gazed out over the garden while the major explained
about the Big Bang. There was something about that term which started a train
of thought in her mind.

She began to rummage around in the car.

“What are you doing?” asked Alberto.

“Nothing.”

She opened the glove compartment and found a wrench. She grabbed it and jumped
out of the car. She went over to the glider and stood right in front of Hilde
and her father. First she tried to catch Hilde’s eye but that was quite
useless. Finally she raised the wrench above her head and crashed it down on
Hilde’s forehead.

“Ouch!” said Hilde.

Then Sophie hit the major on his forehead, but he didn’t react at all.

“What was that?” he asked.

“I think I’ve just been stung by a gadfly.”

“It was probably Socrates trying to sting you into life.”

Sophie lay down on the grass and tried to push the glider. But it remained
motionless. Or did she manage to get it to move a millimeter?

“There’s a chilly breeze coming up,” said Hilde.

“No, there isn’t. It’s very mild.”

“It’s not only that. There is something.”

“Only the two of us and the cool summer night.”

“No, there’s something in the air.”

“And what might that be?”

“You remember Alberto and his secret plan?”

“How could I forget!”

“They simply disappeared from the garden party. It was as if they had vanished
into thin air . . .”

“Yes, but...”

“... into thin air.”

“The story had to end somewhere. It was just something I wrote.”

“That was, yes, but not what happened afterward. Suppose they were here . . .”

“Do you believe that?”

“I can feel it, Dad.”

Sophie ran back to the car.

“Impressive,” said Alberto grudgingly as she climbed on board clasping the
wrench tightly in her hand. “You have unusual talents, Sophie. Just wait and
see.”

The major put his arm around Hilde.

“Do you hear the mysterious play of the waves?”

“Yes. We must get the boat in the water tomorrow.”

“But do you hear the strange whispering of the wind? Look how the aspen leaves
are trembling.”

“The planet is alive, you know ...”

“You wrote that there was something between the lines.”

“I did?”

“Perhaps there is something between the lines in this garden too.”

“Nature is full of enigmas. But we are talking about stars in the sky.”

“Soon there will be stars on the water.”

“That’s right. That’s what you used to say about phosphorescence when you were
little. And in a sense you were right. Phosphorescence and all other organisms
are made of elements that were once blended together in a star.”

“Us too?”

“Yes, we too are stardust.”

“That was beautifully put.”

“When radio telescopes can pick up light from distant galaxies billions of
light-years away, they will be charting the universe as it looked in primeval
times after the Big Bang. Everything we can see in the sky is a cosmic fossil
from thousands and millions of years ago. The only thing an astrologer can do
is predict the past.”

“Because the stars in the constellations moved away from each other long before
their light reached us, right?”

“Even two thousand years ago, the constellations looked considerably different
from the way they look today.”

“I never knew that.”

“If it’s a clear night, we can see millions, even billions of years back into
the history of the universe. So in a way, we are going home.”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“You and I also began with the Big Bang, because all substance in the universe
is an organic unity. Once in a primeval age all matter was gathered in a clump
so enormously massive that a pinhead weighed many billions of tons. This
‘primeval atom’ exploded because of the enormous gravitation. It was as if
something disintegrated. When we look up at the sky, we are trying to find the
way back to ourselves.”

“What an extraordinary thing to say.”

“All the stars and galaxies in the universe are made of the same substance.
Parts of it have lumped themselves together, some here, some there. There can
be billions of light-years between one galaxy and the next. But they all have
the same origin. All stars and all planets belong to the same family.”

“Yes, I see.”

“But what is this earthly substance? What was it that exploded that time
billions of years ago? Where did it come from?”

“That is the big question.”

“And a question that concerns us all very deeply. For we ourselves are of that
substance. We are a spark from the great fire that was ignited many billions of
years ago.”

“That’s a beautiful thought too.”

“However, we must not exaggerate the importance of these figures. It is enough
just to hold a stone in your hand. The universe would have been equally
incomprehensible if it had only consisted of that one stone the size of an
orange. The question would be just as impenetrable: where did this stone come
from?”

Sophie suddenly stood up in the red convertible and pointed out over the bay.

“I want to try the rowboat,” she said.

“It’s tied up. And we would never be able to lift the oars.”

“Shall we try? After all, it is Midsummer Eve.”

“We can go down to the water, at any rate.”

They jumped out of the car and ran down the garden.

They tried to loosen the rope that was made fast in a metal ring. But they
could not even lift one end.

“It’s as good as nailed down,” said Alberto.

“We’ve got plenty of time.”

“A true philosopher must never give up. If we could just... get it loose . . .”



“There are more stars now,” said Hilde.

“Yes, when the summer night is darkest.”

“But they sparkle more in winter. Do you remember the night before you left for
Lebanon? It was New Year’s Day.”

“That was when I decided to write a book about philosophy for you. I had been
to a large bookstore in Kris-tiansand and to the library too. But they had
nothing suitable for young people.”

“It’s as if we are sitting at the very tip of the fine hairs in the white
rabbit’s fur.”

“I wonder if there is anyone out there in the night of the light-years?”

“The rowboat has worked itself loose!”

“So it has!”

“I don’t understand it. I went down and checked it just before you got here.”

“Did you?”

“It reminds me of when Sophie borrowed Alberto’s boat. Do you remember how it
lay drifting out in the lake?”

“I bet it’s her at work again.”

“Go ahead and make fun of me. All evening, I’ve been able to feel someone
here.”

“One of us will have to swim out to it.”

“We’ll both go, Dad.”

