# A Divine Voice
[Metadata]: # {24}
[Descriptor]: # {24}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# A Divine Voice
It was not in order to torment his fellow beings that Socrates kept on stinging
them. Something within him left him no choice. He always said that he had a
“divine voice” inside him. Socrates protested, for example, against having any
part in condemning people to death. He moreover refused to inform on his
political enemies. This was eventually to cost him his life.

In the year 399 B.C. he was accused of “introducing new gods and corrupting the
youth,” as well as not believing in the accepted gods. With a slender majority,
a jury of five hundred found him guilty.

He could very likely have appealed for leniency. At least he could have saved
his life by agreeing to leave Athens. But had he done this he would not have
been Socrates. He valued his conscience—and the truth— higher than life. He
assured the jury that he had only acted in the best interests of the state. He
was nevertheless condemned to drink hemlock. Shortly thereafter, he drank the
poison in the presence of his friends, and died.

Why, Sophie? Why did Socrates have to die? People have been asking this
question for 2,400 years. However, he was not the only person in history to
have seen things through to the bitter end and suffered death for the sake of
their convictions.

I have mentioned Jesus already, and in fact there are several striking
parallels between them.

Both Jesus and Socrates were enigmatic personalities, also to their
contemporaries. Neither of them wrote down their teachings, so we are forced to
rely on the picture we have of them from their disciples. But we do know that
they were both masters of the art of discourse. They both spoke with a
characteristic self-assuredness that could fascinate as well as exasperate. And
not least, they both believed that they spoke on behalf of something greater
than themselves. They challenged the power of the community by criticizing all
forms of injustice and corruption. And finally—their activities cost them their
lives.

The trials of Jesus and Socrates also exhibit clear parallels.

They could certainly both have saved themselves by appealing for mercy, but
they both felt they had a mission that would have been betrayed unless they
kept faith to the bitter end. And by meeting their death so bravely they
commanded an enormous following, also after they had died.

I do not mean to suggest that Jesus and Socrates were alike. I am merely
drawing attention to the fact that they both had a message that was inseparably
linked to their personal courage.

