# The Epicureans
[Metadata]: # {48}
[Descriptor]: # {48}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Epicureans
As we have seen, Socrates was concerned with finding out how man could live a
good life. Both the Cynics and the Stoics interpreted his philosophy as meaning
that man had to free himself from material luxuries. But Socrates also had a
pupil named Aristippus. He believed that the aim of life was to attain the
highest possible sensory enjoyment. “The highest good is pleasure,” he said,
“the greatest evil is pain.” So he wished to develop a way of life whose aim
was to avoid pain in all forms. (The Cynics and the Stoics believed in enduring
pain of all kinds, which is not the same as setting out to avoid pain.)

Around the year 300 B.C., Epicurus (341-270) founded a school of philosophy in
Athens. His followers were called Epicureans. He developed the pleasure ethic
of Aristippus and combined it with the atom theory of Democritus.

The story goes that the Epicureans lived in a garden. They were therefore known
as the “garden philosophers.” Above the entrance to this garden there is said
to have hung a notice saying, “Stranger, here you will live well. Here pleasure
is the highest good.”

Epicurus emphasized that the pleasurable results of an action must always be
weighed against its possible side effects. If you have ever binged on chocolate
you know what I mean. If you haven’t, try this exercise: Take all your saved-up
pocket money and buy two hundred crowns’ worth of chocolate. (We’ll assume you
like chocolate.) It is essential to this exercise that you eat it all at one
time. About half an hour later, when all that delicious chocolate is eaten, you
will understand what Epicurus meant by side effects.

Epicurus also believed that a pleasurable result in the short term must be
weighed against the possibility of a greater, more lasting, or more intense
pleasure in the long term. (Maybe you abstain from eating chocolate for a whole
year because you prefer to save up all your pocket money and buy a new bike or
go on an expensive vacation abroad.) Unlike animals, we are able to plan our
lives. We have the ability to make a “pleasure calculation.” Chocolate is good,
but a new bike or a trip to England is better.

Epicurus emphasized, though, that “pleasure” does not necessarily mean sensual
pleasure—like eating chocolate, for instance. Values such as friendship and the
appreciation of art also count. Moreover, the enjoyment of life required the
old Greek ideals of self-control, temperance, and serenity. Desire must be
curbed, and serenity will help us to endure pain.

Fear of the gods brought many people to the garden of Epicurus. In this
connection, the atom theory of Democritus was a useful cure for religious
superstitions. In order to live a good life it is not unimportant to overcome
the fear of death. To this end Epicurus made use of Democritus’s theory of the
“soul atoms.” You may perhaps remember that Democritus believed there was no
life after death because when we die, the “soul atoms” disperse in all
directions.

“Death does not concern us,” Epicurus said quite simply, “because as long as we
exist, death is not here. And when it does come, we no longer exist.” (When you
think about it, no one has ever been bothered by being dead.)

Epicurus summed up his liberating philosophy with what he called the four
medicinal herbs:

The gods are not to be feared. Death is nothing to worry about. Good is easy to
attain. The fearful is easy to endure.

From a Greek point of view, there was nothing new in comparing philosophical
projects with those of medical science. The intention was simply that man
should equip himself with a “philosophic medicine chest” containing the four
ingredients I mentioned.

In contrast to the Stoics, the Epicureans showed little or no interest in
politics and the community. “Live in seclusion!” was the advice of Epicurus. We
could perhaps compare his “garden” with our present-day communes. There are
many people in our own time who have sought a “safe harbor”—away from society.

After Epicurus, many Epicureans developed an overemphasis on self-indulgence.
Their motto was “Live for the moment!” The word “epicurean” is used in a
negative sense nowadays to describe someone who lives only for pleasure.

