# Jesus
[Metadata]: # {55}
[Descriptor]: # {55}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Jesus
I assume you are still with me, Sophie? The key words are “Messiah,” “Son of
God,” and “Kingdom of God.” At first it was all taken politically. In the time
of Jesus, there were a lot of people who imagined that there would come a new
“Messiah” in the sense of a political, military, and religious leader of the
caliber of King David. This “savior” was thus looked upon as a national
deliverer who would put an end to the suffering of the Jews under Roman
domination.

Well and good. But there were also many people who were more farsighted. For
the past two hundred years there had been prophets who believed that the
promised “Messiah” would be the savior of the whole world. He would not simply
free the Israelites from a foreign yoke, he would save all mankind from sin and
blame—and not least, from death. The longing for “salvation” in the sense of
redemption was widespread all over the Hellenistic world.

So along comes Jesus of Nazareth. He was not the only man ever to have come
forward as the promised “Messiah.” Jesus also uses the words “Son of God,” the
“Kingdom of God,” and “redemption.” In doing this he maintains the link with
the old prophets. He rides into Jerusalem and allows himself to be acclaimed by
the crowds as the savior of the people, thus playing directly on the way the
old kings were installed in a characteristic “throne accession ritual.” He also
allows himself to be anointed by the people. “The time is fulfilled,” he says,
and “the Kingdom of God is at hand.”

But here is a very important point: Jesus distinguished himself from the other
“messiahs” by stating clearly that he was not a military or political rebel.
His mission was much greater. He preached salvation and God’s forgiveness for
everyone. To the people he met on his way he said “Your sins are forgiven you
for his name’s sake.”

Handing out the “remission of sins” in this way was totally unheard of. And
what was even worse, he addressed God as “Father” (Abba). This was absolutely
unprecedented in the Jewish community at that time. It was therefore not long
before there arose a wave of protest against him among the scribes.

So here was the situation: a great many people at the time of Jesus were
waiting for a Messiah who would reestablish the Kingdom of God with a great
flourish of trumpets (in other words, with fire and sword). The expression
“Kingdom of God” was indeed a recurring theme in the preachings of Jesus—but in
a much broader sense. Jesus said that the “Kingdom of God” is loving thy
neighbor, compassion for the weak and the poor, and forgiveness of those who
have erred.

This was a dramatic shift in the meaning of an age-old expression with warlike
overtones. People were expecting a military leader who would soon proclaim the
establishment of the Kingdom of God, and along comes Jesus in kirtle and
sandals telling them that the Kingdom of God— or the “new covenant”—is that you
must “love thy neighbor as thyself.” But that was not all, Sophie, he also said
that we must love our enemies. When they strike us, we must not retaliate; we
must even turn the other cheek. And we must forgive—not seven times but seventy
times seven.

Jesus himself demonstrated that he was not above talking to harlots, corrupt
usurers, and the politically subversive. But he went even further: he said that
a good-for-nothing who has squandered all his father’s inheritance— or a humble
publican who has pocketed official funds— is righteous before God when he
repents and prays for forgiveness, so great is God’s mercy.

But hang on—he went a step further: Jesus said that such sinners were more
righteous in the eyes of God and more deserving of God’s forgiveness than the
spotless Pharisees who went around flaunting their virtue.

Jesus pointed out that nobody can earn God’s mercy. We cannot redeem ourselves
(as many of the Greeks believed). The severe ethical demands made by Jesus in
the Sermon on the Mount were not only to teach what the will of God meant, but
also to show that no man is righteous in the eyes of God. God’s mercy is
boundless, but we have to turn to God and pray for his forgiveness.

I shall leave a more thorough study of Jesus and his teachings to your religion
teacher. He will have quite a task. I hope he will succeed in showing what an
exceptional man Jesus was. In an ingenious way he used the language of his time
to give the old war cries a totally new and broader content. It’s not
surprising that he ended on the Cross. His radical tidings of redemption were
at odds with so many interests and power factors that he had to be removed.

When we talked about Socrates, we saw how dangerous it could be to appeal to
people’s reason. With Jesus we see how dangerous it can be to demand
unconditional brotherly love and unconditional forgiveness. Even in the world
of today we can see how mighty powers can come apart at the seams when
confronted with simple demands for peace, love, food for the poor, and amnesty
for the enemies of the state.

You may recall how incensed Plato was that the most righteous man in Athens had
to forfeit his life. According to Christian teachings, Jesus was the only
righteous person who ever lived. Nevertheless he was condemned to death.
Christians say he died for the sake of humanity. This is what Christians
usually call the “Passion” of Christ Jesus was the “suffering servant” who bore
the sins of humanity in order that we could be “atoned” and saved from God’s
wrath.

