# The Semites
[Metadata]: # {53}
[Descriptor]: # {53}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Semites
Let us now turn to the Semites, Sophie. They belong to a completely different
culture with a completely different language. The Semites originated in the
Arabian Peninsula, but they also migrated to different parts of the world. The
Jews lived far from their home for more than 2,000 years. Semitic history and
religion reached furthest away from its roots by way of Christendom, although
Semitic culture also became widely spread via Islam.

All three Western religions—Judaism, Christianity, and Islam—share a Semitic
background. The Muslims’ holy scripture, the Koran, and the Old Testament were
both written in the Semitic family of languages. One of the Old Testament words
for “god” has the same semantic root as the Muslim Allah. (The word “allah”
means, quite simply, “god.”)

When we get to Christianity the picture becomes more complicated. Christianity
also has a Semitic background, but the New Testament was written in Greek, and
when the Christian theology or creed was formulated, it was influenced by Greek
and Latin, and thus also by Hellenistic philosophy.

The Indo-Europeans believed in many different gods. It was just as
characteristic for the Semites that from earliest times they were united in
their belief in one God. This is called monotheism. Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam all share the same fundamental idea that there is only one God.

The Semites also had in common a linear view of history. In other words,
history was seen as an ongoing line. In the beginning God created the world and
that was the beginning of history. But one day history will end and that will
be Judgment Day, when God judges the living and the dead.

The role played by history is an important feature of these three Western
religions. The belief is that God intervenes in the course of history—even that
history exists in order that God may manifest his will in the world, just as he
once led Abraham to the “Promised Land,” he leads mankind’s steps through
history to the Day of Judgment. When that day comes, all evil in the world will
be destroyed.

With their strong emphasis on God’s activity in the course of history, the
Semites were preoccupied with the writing of history for many thousands of
years. And these historical roots constitute the very core of their holy
scriptures.

Even today the city of Jerusalem is a significant religious center for Jews,
Christians, and Muslims alike. This indicates something of the common
background of these three religions.

The city comprises prominent (Jewish) synagogues, (Christian) churches, and
(Islamic) mosques. It is therefore deeply tragic that Jerusalem should have
become a bone of contention—with people killing each other by the thousand
because they cannot agree on who is to have ascendancy over this “Eternal
City.” May the UN one day succeed in making Jerusalem a holy shrine for all
three religions! (We shall not go any further into this more practical part of
our philosophy course for the moment. We will leave it entirely to Hilde’s
father. You must have gathered by now that he is a UN observer in Lebanon. To
be more precise, I can reveal that he is serving as a major. If you are
beginning to see some connection, that’s quite as it should be. On the other
hand, let’s not anticipate events!)

We said that the most important of the senses for Indo-Europeans was sight. How
important hearing was to the Semitic cultures is just as interesting. It is no
accident that the Jewish creed begins with the words: “Hear, O Israel!” In the
Old Testament we read how the people “heard” the word of the Lord, and the
Jewish prophets usually began their sermons with the words: “Thus spake Jehovah
(God).”

“Hearing” the word of God is also emphasized in Christianity. The religious
ceremonies of Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are all characterized by reading
aloud or “reciting.”

I also mentioned that the Indo-Europeans always made pictorial representations
or sculptures of their gods. It was just as characteristic for the Semites that
they never did. They were not supposed to create pictures or sculptures of God
or the “deity.” The Old Testament commands that the people shall not make any
image of God. This is still law today both for Judaism and Islam. Within Islam
there is moreover a general aversion to both photography and art, because
people should not compete with God in “creating” anything.

But the Christian churches are full of pictures of Jesus and God, you are
probably thinking. True enough, Sophie, but this is just one example of how
Christendom was influenced by the Greco-Roman world. (In the Greek Orthodox
Church—that is, in Greece and in Russia— “graven images,” or sculptures and
crucifixes, from Bible stories are still forbidden.)

In contrast to the great religions of the Orient, the three Western religions
emphasize that there is a distance between God and his creation. The purpose is
not to be released from the cycle of rebirth, but to be redeemed from sin and
blame. Moreover, religious life is characterized more by prayer, sermons, and
the study of the scriptures than by self-communion and meditation.

