# Hume
[Metadata]: # {65}
[Descriptor]: # {65}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Hume
…commit it then to the flames…



Alberto sat staring down at the table. He finally turned and looked out of the
window.

“It’s clouding over,” said Sophie.

“Yes, it’s muggy.”

“Are you going to talk about Berkeley now?”

“He was the next of the three British empiricists. But as he is in a category
of his own in many ways, we will first concentrate on David Hume, who lived
from 1711 to 1776. He stands out as the most important of the empiricists. He
is also significant as the person who set the great philosopher Immanuel Kant
on the road to his philosophy.”

“Doesn’t it matter to you that I’m more interested in Berkeley’s philosophy?”

“That’s of no importance. Hume grew up near Edinburgh in Scotland. His family
wanted him to take up law but he felt ‘an insurmountable resistance to
everything but philosophy and learning.’ He lived in the Age of Enlightenment
at the same time as great French thinkers like Voltaire and Rousseau, and he
traveled widely in Europe before returning to settle down in Edinburgh toward
the end of his life. His main work, A Treatise of Human Nature, was published
when Hume was twenty-eight years old, but he claimed that he got the idea for
the book when he was only fifteen.”

“I see I don’t have any time to waste.”

“You have already begun.”

“But if I were going to formulate my own philosophy, it would be quite
different from anything I’ve heard up to now.”

“Is there anything in particular that’s missing?”

“Well, to start with, all the philosophers you have talked about are men. And
men seem to live in a world of their own. I am more interested in the real
world, where there are flowers and animals and children that are born and grow
up. Your philosophers are always talking about ‘man’ and ‘humans,’ and now
here’s another treatise on ‘human nature.’ It’s as if this ‘human’ is a
middle-aged man. I mean, life begins with pregnancy and birth, and I’ve heard
nothing about diapers or crying babies so far. And hardly anything about love
and friendship.”

“You are right, of course. But Hume was a philosopher who thought in a
different way. More than any other philosopher, he took the everyday world as
his starting point. I even think Hume had a strong feeling for the way
children—the new citizens of the world— experienced life.”

“I’d better listen then.”

“As an empiricist, Hume took it upon himself to clean up all the woolly
concepts and thought constructions that these male philosophers had invented.
There were piles of old wreckage, both written and spoken, from the Middle Ages
and the rationalist philosophy of the seventeenth century. Hume proposed the
return to our spontaneous experience of the world. No philosopher ‘will ever be
able to take us behind the daily experiences or give us rules of conduct that
are different from those we get through reflections on everyday life,’ he
said.”

“Sounds promising so far. Can you give any examples?”

“In the time of Hume there was a widespread belief in angels. That is, human
figures with wings. Have you ever seen such a creature, Sophie?”

“No.”

“But you have seen a human figure?”

“Dumb question.”

“You have also seen wings?”

“Of course, but not on a human figure.”

“So, according to Hume, an ‘angel’ is a complex idea. It consists of two
different experiences which are not in fact related, but which nevertheless are
associated in man’s imagination. In other words, it is a false idea which must
be immediately rejected. We must tidy up all our thoughts and ideas, as well as
our book collections, in the same way. For as Hume put it: If we take in our
hands any volume ... let us ask, ‘Does it contain any abstract reasoning
concerning quantity or number?’ No. ‘Does it contain any experimental reasoning
concerning matter of fact and existence?’ No. Commit it then to the flames, for
it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.”

“That was drastic.”

“But the world still exists. More fresh and sharply outlined than ever. Hume
wanted to know how a child experiences the world. Didn’t you say that many of
the philosophers you have heard about lived in their own world, and that you
were more interested in the real world?”

“Something like that.”

“Hume could have said the same thing. But let us follow his train of thought
more closely.”

“I’m with you.”

“Hume begins by establishing that man has two different types of perceptions,
namely impressions and ideas. By ‘impressions’ he means the immediate sensation
of external reality. By ‘ideas’ he means the recollection of such impressions.”

“Could you give me an example?”

“If you burn yourself on a hot oven, you get an immediate ‘impression.’
Afterward you can recollect that you burned yourself. That impression insofar
as it is recalled is what Hume calls an ‘idea.’ The difference is that an
impression is stronger and livelier than your reflective memory of that
impression. You could say that the sensation is the original and that the idea,
or reflection, is only a pale imitation. It is the impression which is the
direct cause of the idea stored in the mind.”

“I follow you—so far.”

“Hume emphasizes further that both an impression and an idea can be either
simple or complex. You remember we talked about an apple in connection with
Locke. The direct experience of an apple is an example of a complex
impression.”

“Sorry to interrupt, but is this terribly important?”

“Important? How can you ask? Even though philosophers may have been preoccupied
with a number of pseudoproblems, you mustn’t give up now over the construction
of an argument. Hume would probably agree with Descartes that it is essential
to construct a thought process right from the ground.”

“Okay, okay.”

“Hume’s point is that we sometimes form complex ideas for which there is no
corresponding object in the physical world. We’ve already talked about angels.
Previously we referred to crocophants. Another example is Pegasus, a winged
horse. In all these cases we have to admit that the mind has done a good job of
cutting out and pasting together all on its own. Each element was once sensed,
and entered the theater of the mind in the form of a real ‘impression.’ Nothing
is ever actually invented by the mind. The mind puts things together and
constructs false ‘ideas.’ “

“Yes, I see. That is important.”

“All right, then. Hume wanted to investigate every single idea to see whether
it was compounded in a way that does not correspond to reality. He asked: From
which impression does this idea originate? First of all he had to find out
which ‘single ideas’ went into the making of a complex idea. This would provide
him with a critical method by which to analyze our ideas, and thus enable him
to tidy up our thoughts and notions.”

“Do you have an example or two?”

“In Hume’s day, there were a lot of people who had very clear ideas of ‘heaven’
or the ‘New Jerusalem.’ You remember how Descartes indicated that ‘clear and
distinct’ ideas in themselves could be a guarantee that they corresponded to
something that really existed?”

“I said I was not especially forgetful.”

“We soon realize that our idea of ‘heaven’ is compounded of a great many
elements. Heaven is made up of ‘pearly gates,”streets of gold,”angels’ by the
score and so on and so forth. And still we have not broken everything down into
single elements, for pearly gates, streets of gold, and angels are all complex
ideas in themselves. Only when we recognize that our idea of heaven consists of
single notions such as ‘pearl,”gate,”street,”gold,”white-robed figure,’ and
‘wings’ can we ask ourselves if we ever really had any such ‘simple
impressions.’ “

“We did. But we cut out and pasted all these ‘simple impressions’ into one
idea.”

“That’s just what we did. Because if there is something we humans do when we
visualize, it’s use scissors and paste. But Hume emphasizes that all the
elements we put together in our ideas must at some time have entered the mind
in the form of ‘simple impressions.’ A person who has never seen gold will
never be able to visualize streets of gold.”

“He was very clever. What about Descartes having a clear and distinct idea of
God?”

“Hume had an answer to that too. Let’s say we imagine God as an infinitely
‘intelligent, wise, and good being.’ We have thus a ‘complex idea’ that
consists of something infinitely intelligent, something infinitely wise, and
something infinitely good. If we had never known intelligence, wisdom, and
goodness, we would never have such an idea of God. Our idea of God might also
be that he is a ‘severe but just Father’—that is to say, a concept made up of
‘severity’,’justice,’ and ‘father.’ Many critics of religion since Hume have
claimed that such ideas of God can be associated with how we experienced our
own father when we were little. It was said that the idea of a father led to
the idea of a ‘heavenly father.’ “

“Maybe that’s true, but I have never accepted that God had to be a man.
Sometimes my mother calls God ‘Godiva,’ just to even things up.”

“Anyway, Hume opposed all thoughts and ideas that could not be traced back to
corresponding sense perceptions. He said he wanted to ‘dismiss all this
meaningless nonsense which long has dominated metaphysical thought and brought
it into disrepute.’

“But even in everyday life we use complex ideas without stopping to wonder
whether they are valid. For example, take the question of T—or the ego. This
was the very basis of Descartes’s philosophy. It was the one clear and distinct
perception that the whole of his philosophy was built on.”

“I hope Hume didn’t try to deny that I am me. He’d be talking off the top of
his head.”

“Sophie, if there is one thing I want this course to teach you, it’s not to
jump to conclusions.”

“Sorry. Go on.”

“No, why don’t you use Hume’s method and analyze what you perceive as your
‘ego.’ “

“First I’d have to figure out whether the ego is a single or a complex idea.”

“And what conclusion do you come to?”

“I really have to admit that I feel quite complex. I’m very volatile, for
instance. And I have trouble making up my mind about things. And I can both
like and dislike the same people.”

“In other words, the ‘ego concept’ is a ‘complex idea.’ “

“Okay. So now I guess I must figure out if I have had a corresponding ‘complex
impression’ of my own ego. And I guess I have. I always had, actually.”

“Does that worry you?”

“I’m very changeable. I’m not the same today as I was when I was four years
old. My temperament and how I see myself alter from one minute to the next. I
can suddenly feel like I am a ‘new person.’ “

“So the feeling of having an unalterable ego is a false perception. The
perception of the ego is in reality a long chain of simple impressions that you
have never experienced simultaneously. It is ‘nothing but a bundle or
collection of different perceptions, which succeed one another with an
inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement,’ as Hume
expressed it. The mind is ‘a kind of theater, where several perceptions
successively make their appearance; pass, re-pass, slide away, and mingle in an
infinite variety of postures and situations.’ Hume pointed out that we have no
underlying ‘personal identity’ beneath or behind these perceptions and feelings
which come and go. It is just like the images on a movie screen. They change so
rapidly we do not register that the film is made up of single pictures. In
reality the pictures are not connected. The film is a collection of instants.”

“I think I give in.”

“Does that mean you give up the idea of having an unalterable ego?”

“I guess it does.”

“A moment ago you believed the opposite. I should add that Hume’s analysis of
the human mind and his rejection of the unalterable ego was put forward almost
2,500 years earlier on the other side of the world.”

“Who by?”

“By Buddha. It’s almost uncanny how similarly the two formulate their ideas.
Buddha saw life as an unbroken succession of mental and physical processes
which keep people in a continual state of change. The infant is not the same as
the adult; I am not the same today as I was yesterday. There is nothing of
which I can say ‘this is mine,’ said Buddha, and nothing of which I can say
‘this is me.’ There is thus no T or unalterable ego.”

“Yes, that was typically Hume.”

“In continuation of the idea of an unalterable ego, many rationalists had taken
it for granted that man had an eternal soul.”

“Is that a false perception too?”

“According to Hume and Buddha, yes. Do you know what Buddha said to his
followers just before he died?”

“No, how could I?”

“ ‘Decay is inherent in all compound things. Work out your own salvation with
diligence.’ Hume could have said the same thing. Or Democritus, for that
matter. We know at all events that Hume rejected any attempt to prove the
immortality of the soul or the existence of God. That does not mean that he
ruled out either one, but to prove religious faith by human reason was
rationalistic claptrap, he thought. Hume was not a Christian, neither was he a
confirmed atheist. He was what we call an agnostic.”

“What’s that?”

“An agnostic is someone who holds that the existence of God or a god can
neither be proved nor disproved. When Hume was dying a friend asked him if he
believed in life after death. He is said to have answered:

“It is also possible that a knob of coal placed upon the fire will not burn.”

“I see.”

“The answer was typical of his unconditional open-mindedness. He only accepted
what he had perceived through his senses. He held all other possibilities open.
He rejected neither faith in Christianity nor faith in miracles. But both were
matters of faith and not of knowledge or reason. You might say that with Hume’s
philosophy, the final link between faith and knowledge was broken.”

“You say he didn’t deny that miracles can happen?”

“That didn’t mean that he believed in them, more the opposite. He made a point
of the fact that people seemed to have a powerful need of what we today would
call ‘supernatural’ happenings. The thing is that all the miracles you hear of
have always happened in some far distant place or a long, long time ago.
Actually, Hume only rejected miracles because he had never experienced any. But
he had not experienced that they couldn’t happen either.”

“You’ll have to explain that.”

“According to Hume, a miracle is against the laws of nature. But it is
meaningless to allege that we have experienced the laws of nature. We
experience that a stone falls to the ground when we let go of it, and if it
didn’t fall—well, then we experienced that.’1”

“I would say that was a miracle—or something supernatural.”

“So you believe there are two natures—a ‘natural’ and a ‘supernatural.’ Aren’t
you on the way back to the rationalistic claptrap?”

“Maybe, but I still think the stone will fall to the ground every time I let
go.”

“Why?”

“Now you’re being horrible.”

“I’m not horrible, Sophie. It’s never wrong for a philosopher to ask questions.
We may be getting to the crux of Hume’s philosophy. Tell me how you can be so
certain that the stone will always fall to the earth.”

“I’ve seen it happen so many times that I’m absolutely certain.”

“Hume would say that you have experienced a stone falling to the ground many
times. But you have never experienced that it will always fall. It is usual to
say that the stone falls to the ground because of the law of gravitation. But
we have never experienced such a law. We have only experienced that things
fall.”

“Isn’t that the same thing?”

“Not completely. You say you believe the stone will fall to the ground because
you have seen it happen so many times. That’s exactly Hume’s point. You are so
used to the one thing following the other that you expect the same to happen
every time you let go of a stone. This is the way the concept of what we like
to call ‘the unbreakable laws of nature’ arises.”

“Did he really mean it was possible that a stone would not fall?”

“He was probably just as convinced as you that it would fall every time he
tried it. But he pointed out that he had not experienced why it happens.”

“Now we’re far away from babies and flowers again!”

“No, on the contrary. You are welcome to take children as Hume’s verification.
Who do you think would be more surprised if the stone floated above the ground
for an hour or two—you or a one-year-old child?”

“I guess I would.”

“Why?”

“Because I would know better than the child how unnatural it was.”

“And why wouldn’t the child think it was unnatural?”

“Because it hasn’t yet learned how nature behaves.”

“Or perhaps because nature hasn’t yet become a habit?”

“I see where you’re coming from. Hume wanted people to sharpen their
awareness.”

“So now do the following exercise: let’s say you and a small child go to a
magic show, where things are made to float in the air. Which of you would have
the most fun?”

“I probably would.”

“And why would that be?”

“Because I would know how impossible it all is.”

“So... for the child it’s no fun to see the laws of nature being defied before
it has learned what they are.”

“I guess that’s right.”

“And we are still at the crux of Hume’s philosophy of experience. He would have
added that the child has not yet become a slave of the expectations of habit;
he is thus the more open-minded of you two. I wonder if the child is not also
the greater philosopher? He comes utterly without preconceived opinions. And
that, my dear Sophie, is the philosopher’s most distinguishing virtue. The
child perceives the world as it is, without putting more into things than he
experiences.”

“Every time I feel prejudice I get a bad feeling.”

“When Hume discusses the force of habit, he concentrates on ‘the law of
causation.’ This law establishes that everything that happens must have a
cause. Hume used two billiard balls for his example. If you roll a black
billiard ball against a white one that is at rest, what will the white one do?”

“If the black ball hits the white one, the white one will start to move.”

“I see, and why will it do that?”

“Because it was hit by the black one.”

“So we usually say that the impact of the black ball is the cause of the white
ball’s starting to move. But remember now, we can only talk of what we have
actually experienced.”

“I have actually experienced it lots of times. Joanna has a pool table in her
basement.”

“Hume would say the only thing you have experienced is that the white ball
begins to roll across the table. You have not experienced the actual cause of
it beginning to roll. You have experienced that one event comes after the
other, but you have not experienced that the other event happens because o/the
first one.”

“Isn’t that splitting hairs?”

“No, it’s very central. Hume emphasized that the expectation of one thing
following another does not lie in the things themselves, but in our mind. And
expectation, as we have seen, is associated with habit. Going back to the child
again, it would not have stared in amazement if when one billiard ball struck
the other, both had remained perfectly motionless. When we speak of the ‘laws
of nature’ or of ‘cause and effect,’ we are actually speaking of what we
expect, rather than what is ‘reasonable.’ The laws of nature are neither
reasonable nor unreasonable, they simply are. The expectation that the white
billiard ball will move when it is struck by the black billiard ball is
therefore not innate. We are not born with a set of expectations as to what the
world is like or how things in the world behave. The world is like it is, and
it’s something we get to know.”

“I’m beginning to feel as if we’re getting off the track again.”

“Not if our expectations cause us to jump to conclusions. Hume did not deny the
existence of unbreakable ‘natural laws,’ but he held that because we are not in
a position to experience the natural laws themselves, we can easily come to the
wrong conclusions.”

“Like what?”

“Well, because I have seen a whole herd of black horses doesn’t mean that all
horses are black.”

“No, of course not.”

“And although I have seen nothing but black crows in my life, it doesn’t mean
that there’s no such thing as a white crow. Both for a philosopher and for a
scientist it can be important not to reject the possibility of finding a white
crow. You might almost say that hunting for ‘the white crow’ is science’s
principal task.”

“Yes, I see.”

“In the question of cause and effect, there can be many people who imagine that
lightning is the cause of thunder because the thunder comes after the
lightning. The example is really not so different from the one with the
billiard balls. But is lightning the cause of thunder?”

“Not really, because actually they both happen at the same time.”

“Both thunder and lightning are due to an electric discharge. So in reality a
third factor causes them both.”

“Right.”

“An empiricist of our own century, Bertrand Russell, has provided a more
grotesque example. A chicken which experiences every day that it gets fed when
the farmer’s wife comes over to the chicken run will finally come to the
conclusion that there is a causal link between the approach of the farmer’s
wife and feed being put into its bowl.”

“But one day the chicken doesn’t get its food?”

“No, one day the farmer’s wife comes over and wrings the chicken’s neck.”

“Yuck, how disgusting!”

“The fact that one thing follows after another thus does not necessarily mean
there is a causal link. One of the main concerns of philosophy is to warn
people against jumping to conclusions. It can in fact lead to many different
forms of superstition.”

“How come?”

“You see a black cat cross the street. Later that day you fall and break your
arm. But that doesn’t mean there is any causal link between the two incidents.
In science, it is especially important not to jump to conclusions. For
instance, the fact that a lot of people get well after taking a particular drug
doesn’t mean it was the drug that cured them. That’s why it’s important to have
a large control group of patients who think they are also being given this same
medicine, but who are in fact only being given flour and water. If these
patients also get well, there has to be a third factor—such as the belief that
the medicine works, and has cured them.”

“I think I’m beginning to see what empiricism is.”

“Hume also rebelled against rationalist thought in the area of ethics. The
rationalists had always held that the ability to distinguish between right and
wrong is inherent in human reason. We have come across this idea of a so-called
natural right in many philosophers from Socrates to Locke. But according to
Hume, it is not reason that determines what we say and do.”

“What is it then?”

“It is our sentiments. If you decide to help someone in need, you do so because
of your feelings, not your reason.”

“What if I can’t be bothered to help?”

“That, too, would be a matter of feelings. It is neither reasonable nor
unreasonable not to help someone in need, but it could be unkind.”

“But there must be a limit somewhere. Everyone knows it’s wrong to kill.”

“According to Hume, everybody has a feeling for other people’s welfare. So we
all have a capacity for compassion. But it has nothing to do with reason.”

“I don’t know if I agree.”

“It’s not always so unwise to get rid of another person, Sophie. If you wish to
achieve something or other, it can actually be quite a good idea.”

“Hey, wait a minute! I protest!”

“Maybe you can try and explain why one shouldn’t kill a troublesome person.”

“’That person wants to live too. Therefore you ought not to kill them.”

“Was that a logical reason?”

“I don’t know.”

“What you did was to draw a conclusion from a descriptive sentence—That person
wants to live too’—to what we call a normative sentence: ‘Therefore you ought
not to kill them.’ From the point of view of reason this is nonsense. You might
just as well say ‘There are lots of people who cheat on their taxes, therefore
I ought to cheat on my taxes too.’ Hume said you can never draw conclusions
from is sentences to ought sentences. Nevertheless it is exceedingly common,
not least in newspaper articles, political party programs, and speeches. Would
you like some examples?”

“Please.”

“ ‘More and more people want to travel by air. Therefore more airports ought to
be built.’ Do you think the conclusion holds up?”

“No. It’s nonsense. We have to think of the environment. I think we ought to
build more railroads instead.”

“Or they say: The development of new oilfields will raise the population’s
living standards by ten percent. Therefore we ought to develop new oilfields as
rapidly as possible.”

“Definitely not. We have to think of the environment again. And anyway, the
standard of living in Norway is high enough.”

“Sometimes it is said that ‘this law has been passed by the Senate, therefore
all citizens in this country ought to abide by it.’ But frequently it goes
against people’s deepest convictions to abide by such conventions.”

“Yes, I understand that.”

“So we have established that we cannot use reason as a yardstick for how we
ought to act. Acting responsibly is not a matter of strengthening our reason
but of deepening our feelings for the welfare of others. “Tis not contrary to
reason to prefer the destruction of the whole world to the scratching of my
finger,’ said Hume.”

“That’s a hair-raising assertion.”

“It’s maybe even more hair-raising if you shuffle the cards. You know that the
Nazis murdered millions of Jews. Would you say that there was something wrong
with the Nazis’ reason, or would you say there was something wrong with their
emotional life?”

“There was definitely something wrong with their feelings.”

“Many of them were exceedingly clear-headed. It is not unusual to find ice-cold
calculation behind the most callous decisions. Many of the Nazis were convicted
after the war, but they were not convicted for being ‘unreasonable.’ They were
convicted for being gruesome murderers. It can happen that people who are not
of sound mind can be acquitted of their crimes. We say that they were ‘not
accountable for their actions.’ Nobody has ever been acquitted of a crime they
committed for being unfeeling.”

“I should hope not.”

“But we need not stick to the most grotesque examples. If a flood disaster
renders millions of people homeless, it is our feelings that determine whether
we come to their aid. If we are callous, and leave the whole thing to ‘cold
reason,’ we might think it was actually quite in order that millions of people
die in a world that is threatened by overpopulation.”

“It makes me mad that you can even think that.”

“And notice it’s not your reason that gets mad.”

“Okay, I got it.”

