# A STRANGE CREATURE
[Metadata]: # {04}
[Descriptor]: # {04}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# A STRANGE CREATURE
Hello again! As you see, this short course in philosophy will come in
handy-sized portions. Here are a few more introductory remarks:

Did I say that the only thing we require to be good philosophers is the faculty
of wonder? If I did not, I say it now: THE ONLY THING WE REQUIRE TO BE GOOD
PHILOSOPHERS IS THE FACULTY OF WONDER.

Babies have this faculty. That is not surprising. After a few short months in
the womb they slip out into a brand-new reality. But as they grow up the
faculty of wonder seems to diminish. Why is this? Do you know?

If a newborn baby could talk, it would probably say something about what an
extraordinary world it had come into. We see how it looks around and reaches
out in curiosity to everything it sees.

As words are gradually acquired, the child looks up and says “Bow-wow” every
time it sees a dog. It jumps up and down in its stroller, waving its arms:
“Bow-wow! Bow-wow!” We who are older and wiser may feel somewhat exhausted by
the child’s enthusiasm. “All right, all right, it’s a bow-wow,” we say,
unimpressed. “Please sit still.” We are not enthralled. We have seen a dog
before.

This rapturous performance may repeat itself hundreds of times before the child
learns to pass a dog without going crazy. Or an elephant, or a hippopotamus.
But long before the child learns to talk properly—and Ion before it learns to
think philosophically—the world we have become a habit.

A pity, if you ask me.

My concern is that you do not grow up to be one of those people who take the
world for granted, Sophie dear. So just to make sure, we are going to do a
couple of experiments in thought before we begin on the course itself.

Imagine that one day you are out for a walk in the woods. Suddenly you see a
small spaceship on the path in front of you. A tiny Martian climbs out of the
spaceship and stands on the ground looking up at you . . .

What would you think? Never mind, it’s not important. But have you ever given
any thought to the fact that you are a Martian yourself?

It is obviously unlikely that you will ever stumble upon a creature from
another planet. We do not even know that there is life on other planets. But
you might stumble upon yourself one day. You might suddenly stop short and see
yourself in a completely new light. On just such a walk in the woods.

I am an extraordinary being, you think. I am a mysterious creature.

You feel as if you are waking from an enchanted slumber. Who am I? you ask. You
know that you are stumbling around on a planet in the universe. But what is the
universe?

If you discover yourself in this manner you will have discovered something as
mysterious as the Martian we just mentioned. You will not only have seen a
being from outer space. You will feel deep down that you are yourself an
extraordinary being.

Do you follow me, Sophie? Let’s do another experiment in thought:

One morning, Mom, Dad, and little Thomas, aged two or three, are having
breakfast in the kitchen. After a while Mom gets up and goes over to the
kitchen sink, and Dad—yes, Dad—flies up and floats around under the ceiling
while Thomas sits watching. What do you think Thomas says? Perhaps he points up
at his father and says: “Daddy’s flying!” Thomas will certainly be astonished,
but then he very often is. Dad does so many strange things that this business
of a little flight over the breakfast table makes no difference to him. Every
day Dad shaves with a funny machine, sometimes he climbs onto the roof and
turns the TV aerial—or else he sticks his head under the hood of the car and
comes up black in the face.

Now it’s Mom’s turn. She hears what Thomas says and turns around abruptly. How
do you think she reacts to the sight of Dad floating nonchalantly over the
kitchen table?

She drops the jam jar on the floor and screams with fright. She may even need
medical attention once Dad has returned respectably to his chair. (He should
have learned better table manners by now!) Why do you think Thomas and his
mother react so differently?

It all has to do with habit. (Note this!) Mom has learned that people cannot
fly. Thomas has not. He still isn’t certain what you can and cannot do in this
world.

But what about the world itself, Sophie? Do you think it can do what it does?
The world is also floating in space.

Sadly it is not only the force of gravity we get used to as we grow up. The
world itself becomes a habit in no time at all. It seems as if in the process
of growing up we lose the ability to wonder about the world. And in doing so,
we lose something central—something philosophers try to restore. For somewhere
inside ourselves, something tells us that life is a huge mystery. This is
something we once experienced, long before we learned to think the thought.

To be more precise: Although philosophical questions concern us all, we do not
all become philosophers. For various reasons most people get so caught up in
everyday affairs that their astonishment at the world gets pushed into the
background. (They crawl deep into the rabbit’s fur, snuggle down comfortably,
and stay there for the rest of their lives.)

To children, the world and everything in it is new, something that gives rise
to astonishment. It is not like that for adults. Most adults accept the world
as a matter of course.

This is precisely where philosophers are a notable exception. A philosopher
never gets quite used to the world. To him or her, the world continues to seem
a bit unreasonable—bewildering, even enigmatic. Philosophers and small children
thus have an important faculty in common. You might say that throughout his
life a philosopher remains as thin-skinned as a child.

So now you must choose, Sophie. Are you a child who has not yet become
world-weary? Or are you a philosopher who will vow never to become so?

If you just shake your head, not recognizing yourself as either a child or a
philosopher, then you have gotten so used to the world that it no longer
astonishes you. Watch out! You are on thin ice. And this is why you are
receiving this course in philosophy, just in case. I will not allow you, of all
people, to join the ranks of the apathetic and the indifferent. I want you to
have an inquiring mind.

The whole course is free of charge, so you get no money back if you do not
complete it. If you choose to break off the course you are free to do so. In
that case you must leave a message for me in the mailbox. A live frog would be
eminently suitable. Something green, at least, otherwise the mailman might get
scared.

To summarize briefly: A white rabbit is pulled out of a top hat. Because it is
an extremely large rabbit, the trick takes many billions of years. All mortals
are born at the very tip of the rabbit’s fine hairs, where they are in a
position to wonder at the impossibility of the trick. But as they grow older
they work themselves ever deeper into the fur. And there they stay. They become
so comfortable they never risk crawling back up the fragile hairs again. Only
philosophers embark on this perilous expedition to the outermost reaches of
language and existence. Some of them fall off, but others cling on desperately
and yell at the people nestling deep in the snug softness, stuffing themselves
with delicious food and drink.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” they yell, “we are floating in space!” But none of the
people down there care.

“What a bunch of troublemakers!” they say. And they keep on chatting: Would you
pass the butter, please? How much have our stocks risen today? What is the
price of tomatoes? Have you heard that Princess Di is expecting again?

When Sophie’s mother got home later that afternoon, Sophie was practically in
shock. The tin containing the letters from the mysterious philosopher was
safely hidden in the den. Sophie had tried to start her homework but could only
sit thinking about what she had read.

She had never thought so hard before! She was no longer a child—but she wasn’t
really grown up either. Sophie realized that she had already begun to crawl
down into the cozy rabbit’s fur, the very same rabbit that had been pulled from
the top hat of the universe. But the philosopher had stopped her. He—or was it
a she?—had grabbed her by the back of the neck and pulled her up again to the
tip of the fur where she had played as a child. And there, on the outermost
tips of the fine hairs, she was once again seeing the world as if for the very
first time.

The philosopher had rescued her. No doubt about it. The unknown letter writer
had saved her from the triviality of everyday existence.

When Mom got home at five o’clock, Sophie dragged her into the living room and
pushed her into an armchair.

“Mom—don’t you think it’s astonishing to be alive?” she began.

Her mother was so surprised that she didn’t answer at first. Sophie was usually
doing her homework when she got home.

“I suppose I do—sometimes,” she said.

“Sometimes? Yes, but—don’t you think it’s astonishing that the world exists at
all?”

“Now look, Sophie. Stop talking like that.”

“Why? Perhaps you think the world is quite normal?”

“Well, isn’t it? More or less, anyway.”

Sophie saw that the philosopher was right. Grownups took the world for granted.
They had let themselves be lulled into the enchanted sleep of their humdrum
existence once and for all.

“You’ve just grown so used to the world that nothing surprises you any more.”

“What on earth are you talking about?”

“I’m talking about you getting so used to everything. Totally dim, in other
words.”

“I will not be spoken to like that, Sophie!”

“All right, I’ll put it another way. You’ve made yourself comfortable deep down
in the fur of a white rabbit that is being pulled out of the universe’s top hat
right now. And in a minute you’ll put the potatoes on. Then you’ll read the
paper and after half an hour’s nap you’ll watch the news on TV!”

An anxious expression came over her mother’s face. She did indeed go into the
kitchen and put the potatoes on. After a while she came back into the living
room, and this time it was she who pushed Sophie into an armchair.

“There’s something I must talk to you about,” she began. Sophie could tell by
her voice that it was something serious.

“You haven’t gotten yourself mixed up with drugs, have you, dear?”

Sophie was just about to laugh, but she understood why the question was being
brought up now.

“Are you nuts?” she said. “That only makes you duller’.”

No more was said that evening about either drugs or white rabbits.

