# The Natural Philosophers
[Metadata]: # {07}
[Descriptor]: # {07}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Natural Philosophers
… nothing can come from nothing …



When her mother got home from work that afternoon Sophie was sitting in the
glider, pondering the possible connection between the philosophy course and
Hilde Moller Knag, who would not be getting a birthday card from her father.

Her mother called from the other end of the garden, “Sophie! There’s a letter
for you!”

She caught her breath. She had already emptied the mailbox, so the letter had
to be from the philosopher. What on earth would she say to her mother?

“There’s no stamp on it. It’s probably a love letter!”

Sophie took the letter.

“Aren’t you going to open it?”

She had to find an excuse.

“Have you ever heard of anyone opening a love letter with her mother looking
over her shoulder?”

Let her mother think it was a love letter. Although it was embarrassing enough,
it would be even worse if her mother found out that she was doing a
correspondence course with a complete stranger, a philosopher who was playing
hide-and-seek with her.

It was one of the little white envelopes. When Sophie got upstairs to her room,
she found three new questions:

Is there a basic substance that everything else is made of?

Can water turn into wine?

How can earth and water produce a live frog!



Sophie found the questions pretty stupid, but nevertheless they kept buzzing
around in her head all evening. She was still thinking about them at school the
next day, examining them one by one.

Could there be a “basic substance” that everything was made of? If there was
some such substance, how could it suddenly turn into a flower or an elephant?

The same objection applied to the question of whether water could turn into
wine. Sophie knew the parable of how Jesus turned water into wine, but she had
never taken it literally. And if Jesus really had turned water into wine, it
was because it was a miracle, something that could not be done normally. Sophie
knew there was a lot of water, not only in wine but in all other growing
things. But even if a cucumber was 95 percent water, there must be something
else in it as well, because a cucumber was a cucumber, not water.

And then there was the question about the frog. Her philosophy teacher had this
really weird thing about frogs.

Sophie could possibly accept that a frog consisted of earth and water, in which
case the earth must consist of more than one kind of substance. If the earth
consisted of a lot of different substances, it was obviously possible that
earth and water together could produce a frog. That is, if the earth and the
water went via frog spawn and tadpoles. Because a frog could not just grow out
of a cabbage patch, however much you watered it.

When she got home from school that day there was a fat envelope waiting for her
in the mailbox. Sophie hid in the den just as she had done the other days.





THE PHILOSOPHERS’ PROJECT




Here we are again! We’ll go directly to today’s lesson without detours around
white rabbits and the like.

I’ll outline very broadly the way people have thought about philosophy, from
the ancient Greeks right up to our own day. But we’ll take things in their
correct order.

Since some philosophers lived in a different age—and perhaps in a completely
different culture from ours—it is a good idea to try and see what each
philosopher’s project is. By this I mean that we must try to grasp precisely
what it is that each particular philosopher is especially concerned with
finding out. One philosopher might want to know how plants and animals came
into being. Another might want to know whether there is a God or whether man
has an immortal soul.

Once we have determined what a particular philosopher’s project is, it is
easier to follow his line of thought, since no one philosopher concerns himself
with the whole of philosophy.

I said his line of thought—referring to the philosopher, because this is also a
story of men. Women of the past were subjugated both as females and as thinking
beings, which is sad because a great deal of very important experience was lost
as a result. It was not until this century that women really made their mark on
the history of philosophy.

I do not intend to give you any homework—no difficult math questions, or
anything like that, and conjugating English verbs is outside my sphere of
interest. However, from time to time I’ll give you a short assignment.

If you accept these conditions, we’ll begin.

