# THE ATOM THEORY
[Metadata]: # {15}
[Descriptor]: # {15}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# THE ATOM THEORY
Here I am again, Sophie. Today you are going to hear about the last of the
great natural philosophers. His name is Democritus (c. 460-370 B.C.) and he was
from the little town of Abdera on the northern Aegean coast.

If you were able to answer the question about Lego blocks without difficulty,
you should have no problem understanding what this philosopher’s project was.

Democritus agreed with his predecessors that transformations in nature could
not be due to the fact that anything actually “changed.” He therefore assumed
that everything was built up of tiny invisible blocks, each of which was
eternal and immutable. Democritus called these smallest units atoms.

The word “a-tom” means “un-cuttable.” For Democritus it was all-important to
establish that the constituent parts that everything else was composed of could
not be divided indefinitely into smaller parts. If this were possible, they
could not be used as blocks. If atoms could eternally be broken down into ever
smaller parts, nature would begin to dissolve like constantly diluted soup.

Moreover, nature’s blocks had to be eternal—because nothing can come from
nothing. In this, he agreed with Parmenides and the Eleatics. Also, he believed
that all atoms were firm and solid. But they could not all be the same. If all
atoms were identical, there would still be no satisfactory explanation of how
they could combine to form everything from poppies and olive trees to goatskin
and human hair.

Democritus believed that nature consisted of an unlimited number and variety of
atoms. Some were round and smooth, others were irregular and jagged. And
precisely because they were so different they could join together into all
kinds of different bodies. But however infinite they might be in number and
shape, they were all eternal, immutable, and indivisible.

When a body—a tree or an animal, for instance—died and disintegrated, the atoms
dispersed and could be used again in new bodies. Atoms moved around in space,
but because they had “hooks” and “barbs,” they could join together to form all
the things we see around us.

So now you see what I meant about Lego blocks. They have more or less the same
properties as those which Democritus ascribed to atoms. And that is what makes
them so much fun to build with. They are first and foremost indivisible. Then
they have different shapes and sizes. They are solid and impermeable. They also
have “hooks” and “barbs” so that they can be connected to form every
conceivable figure. These connections can later be broken again so that new
figures can be constructed from the same blocks.

The fact that they can be used over and over is what has made Lego so popular.
Each single Lego block can be part of a truck one day and part of a castle the
day after. We could also say that lego blocks are “eternal.” Children of today
can play with the same blocks their parents played with when they were little.

We can form things out of clay too, but clay cannot be used over and over,
because it can be broken up into smaller and smaller pieces. These tiny pieces
can never be joined together again to make something else.

Today we can establish that Democritus’ atom theory was more or less correct.
Nature really is built up of different “atoms” that join and separate again. A
hydrogen atom in a cell at the end of my nose was once part of an elephant’s
trunk. A carbon atom in my cardiac muscle was once in the tail of a dinosaur.

In our own time, however, scientists have discovered that atoms can be broken
into smaller “elemental particles.” We call these elemental particles protons,
neutrons, and electrons. These will possibly some day be broken into even
lesser particles. But physicists agree that somewhere along the line there has
to be a limit. There has to be a “minimal part” of which nature consists.

Democritus did not have access to modern electronic apparatus. His only proper
equipment was his mind. But reason left him no real choice. Once it is accepted
that nothing can change, that nothing can come out of nothing, and that nothing
is ever lost, then nature must consist of infinitesimal blocks that can join
and separate again.

Democritus did not believe in any “force” or “soul” that could intervene in
natural processes. The only things that existed, he believed, were atoms and
the void. Since he believed in nothing but material things, we call him a
materialist.

According to Democritus, there is no conscious “design” in the movement of
atoms. In nature, everything happens quite mechanically. This does not mean
that everything happens randomly, for everything obeys the inevitable laws of
necessity. Everything that happens has a natural cause, a cause that is
inherent in the thing itself. Democritus once said that he would rather
discover a new cause of nature than be the King of Persia.

The atom theory also explains our sense perception, thought Democritus. When we
sense something, it is due to the movement of atoms in space. When I see the
moon, it is because “moon atoms” penetrate my eye.

But what about the “soul,” then? Surely that could not consist of atoms, of
material things? Indeed it could. Democritus believed that the soul was made up
of special round, smooth “soul atoms.” When a human being died, the soul atoms
flew in all directions, and could then become part of a new soul formation.

This meant that human beings had no immortal soul, another belief that many
people share today. They believe, like Democritus, that “soul” is connected
with brain, and that we cannot have any form of consciousness once the brain
disintegrates.

Democritus’s atom theory marked the end of Greek natural philosophy for the
time being. He agreed with ,Her-aclitus that everything in nature “flowed,”
since Torms come and go. But behind everything that flowed there were some
eternal and immutable things that did not flow. Democritus called them atoms.

During her reading Sophie glanced out of the window several times to see
whether her mysterious correspondent had turned up at the mailbox. Now she just
sat staring down the road, thinking about what she had read. She felt that
Democritus’s ideas had been so simple and yet so ingenious. He had discovered
the real solution to the problem of “basic substance” and “transformation.”
This problem had been so complicated that philosophers had gone around puzzling
over it for generations. And in the end Democritus had solved it on his own by
using his common sense.

Sophie could hardly help smiling. It had to be true that nature was built up of
small parts that never changed. At the same time Heraclitus was obviously right
in thinking that all forms in nature “flow.” Because everybody dies, animals
die, even a mountain range slowly disintegrates. The point was that the
mountain range is made up of tiny indivisible parts that never break up.

At the same time Democritus had raised some new questions. For example, he had
said that everything happened mechanically. He did not accept that there was
any spiritual force in life—unlike Empedocles and An-axagoras. Democritus also
believed that man had no immortal soul.

Could she be sure of that?

She didn’t know. But then she had only just begun the philosophy course.

