# Ethics
[Metadata]: # {40}
[Descriptor]: # {40}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Ethics
Let us go back to man, Sophie. According to Aristotle, man’s “form” comprises a
soul, which has a plant-like part, an animal part, and a rational part. And now
he asks: How should we live? What does it require to live a good life? His
answer: Man can only achieve happiness by using all his abilities and
capabilities.

Aristotle held that there are three forms of happiness. The first form of
happiness is a life of pleasure and enjoyment. The second form of happiness is
a life as a free and responsible citizen. The third form of happiness is a life
as thinker and philosopher.

Aristotle then emphasized that all three criteria must be present at the same
time for man to find happiness and fulfillment. He rejected all forms of
imbalance. Had he lived today he might have said that a person who only
develops his body lives a life that is just as unbalanced as someone who only
uses his head. Both extremes are an expression of a warped way of life.

The same applies in human relationships, where Aristotle advocated the “Golden
Mean.” We must be neither cowardly nor rash, but courageous (too little courage
is cowardice, too much is rashness), neither miserly nor extravagant but
liberal (not liberal enough is miserly, too liberal is extravagant). The same
goes for eating. It is dangerous to eat too little, but also dangerous to eat
too much. The ethics of both Plato and Aristotle contain echoes of Greek
medicine: only by exercising balance and temperance will I achieve a happy or
“harmonious” life.

