# Israel
[Metadata]: # {54}
[Descriptor]: # {54}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Israel
I have no intention of competing with your religion teacher, Sophie, but let us
just make a quick summary of Christianity’s Jewish background.

It all began when God created the world. You can read how that happened on the
very first page of the Bible. Then mankind began to rebel against God. Their
punishment was not only that Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of
Eden—Death also came into the world.

Man’s disobedience to God is a theme that runs right through the Bible. If we
go further on in the Book of Genesis we read about the Flood and Noah’s Ark.
Then we read that God made a covenant with Abraham and his seed. This
covenant—or pact—was that Abraham and all his seed would keep the Lord’s
commandments. In exchange God promised to protect all the children of Abraham.
This covenant was renewed when Moses was given the Ten Commandments on Mount
Sinai around the year 1200 B.C. At that time the Israelites had long been held
as slaves in Egypt, but with God’s help they were led back to the land of
Israel.

About 1,000 years before Christ—and therefore long before there was anything
called Greek philosophy—we hear of three great kings of Israel. The first was
Saul, then came David, and after him came Solomon. Now all the Israelites were
united in one kingdom, and under King David, especially, they experienced a
period of political, military, and cultural glory.

When kings were chosen, they were anointed by the people. They thus received
the title Messiah, which means “the anointed one.” In a religious sense kings
were looked upon as a go-between between God and his people. The king could
therefore also be called the “Son of God” and the country could be called the
“Kingdom of God.”

But before long Israel began to lose its power and the kingdom was divided into
a Northern kingdom (Israel) and a Southern kingdom (Judea). In 722 B.C. the
Northern kingdom was conquered by the Assyrians and it lost all political and
religious significance. The Southern kingdom fared no better, being conquered
by the Babylonians in 586 B.C. Its temple was destroyed and most of its people
were carried off to slavery in Babylon. This “Babylonian captivity” lasted
until 539 B.C. when the people were permitted to return to Jerusalem, and the
great temple was restored. But for the rest of the period before the birth of
Christ the Jews continued to live under foreign domination.

The question Jews constantly asked themselves was why the Kingdom of David was
destroyed and why catastrophe after catastrophe rained down on them, for God
had promised to hold Israel in his hand. But the people had also promised to
keep God’s commandments. It gradually became widely accepted that God was
punishing Israel for her disobedience.

From around 750 B.C. various prophets began to come forward preaching God’s
wrath over Israel for not keeping his commandments. One day God would hold a
Day of Judgment over Israel, they said. We call prophecies like these Doomsday
prophecies.

In the course of time there came other prophets who preached that God would
redeem a chosen few of his people and send them a “Prince of Peace” or a king
of the House of David. He would restore the old Kingdom of David and the people
would have a future of prosperity.

“The people that walked in darkness will see a great light,” said the prophet
Isaiah, and “they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath
the light shined.” We call prophecies like these prophecies of redemption.

To sum up: The children of Israel lived happily under King David. But later on
when their situation deteriorated, their prophets began to proclaim that there
would one day come a new king of the House of David. This “Messiah,” or “Son of
God,” would “redeem” the people, restore Israel to greatness, and found a
“Kingdom of God.”

