# The Final Cause
[Metadata]: # {38}
[Descriptor]: # {38}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# The Final Cause
Before we leave the subject of all living and dead things having a “form” that
says something about their potential “action,” I must add that Aristotle had a
remarkable view of causality in nature.

Today when we talk about the “cause” of anything, we mean how it came to
happen. The windowpane was smashed because Peter hurled a stone through it; a
shoe is made because the shoemaker sews pieces of leather together. But
Aristotle held that there were different types of cause in nature. Altogether
he named four different causes. It is important to understand what he meant by
what he called the “final cause.”

In the case of window smashing, it is quite reasonable to ask why Peter threw
the stone. We are thus asking what his purpose was. There can be no doubt that
purpose played a role, also, in the matter of the shoe being made. But
Aristotle also took into account a similar “purpose” when considering the
purely lifeless processes in nature. Here’s an example:

Why does it rain, Sophie? You have probably learned at school that it rains
because the moisture in the clouds cools and condenses into raindrops that are
drawn to the earth by the force of gravity. Aristotle would have nodded in
agreement. But he would have added that so far you have only mentioned three of
the causes. The “material cause” is that the moisture (the clouds) was there at
the precise moment when the air cooled. The “efficient cause” is that the
moisture cools, and the “formal cause” is that the “form,” or nature of the
water, is to fall to the earth. But if you stopped there, Aristotle would add
that it rains because plants and animals need rainwater in order to grow. This
he called the “final cause.” Aristotle assigns the raindrops a life-task, or
“purpose.”

We would probably turn the whole thing upside down and say that plants grow
because they find moisture. You can see the difference, can’t you, Sophie?
Aristotle believed that there is a purpose behind everything in nature. It
rains so that plants can grow; oranges and grapes grow so that people can eat
them.

That is not the nature of scientific reasoning today. We say that food and
water are necessary conditions of life for man and beast. Had we not had these
conditions we would not have existed. But it is not the purpose of water or
oranges to be food for us.

In the question of causality then, we are tempted to say that Aristotle was
wrong. But let us not be too hasty. Many people believe that God created the
world as it is so that all His creatures could live in it. Viewed in this way,
it can naturally be claimed that there is water in the rivers because animals
and humans need water to live. But now we are talking about God’s purpose. The
raindrops and the waters of the river have no interest in our welfare.

