# Descartes
[Metadata]: # {62}
[Descriptor]: # {62}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Descartes
... he wanted to clear all the rubble off the site…



Alberto stood up, took off the red cloak, and laid it over a chair. Then he
settled himself once again in the corner of the sofa.

“Rene Descartes was born in 1596 and lived in a number of different European
countries at various periods of his life. Even as a young man he had a strong
desire to achieve insight into the nature of man and the universe. But after
studying philosophy he became increasingly convinced of his own ignorance.”

“Like Socrates?”

“More or less like him, yes. Like Socrates, he was convinced that certain
knowledge is only attainable through reason. We can never trust what the old
books tell us. We cannot even trust what our senses tell us.”

“Plato thought that too. He believed that only reason can give us certain
knowledge.”

“Exactly. There is a direct line of descent from Socrates and Plato via St.
Augustine to Descartes. They were all typical rationalists, convinced that
reason was the only path to knowledge. After comprehensive studies, Descartes
came to the conclusion that the body of knowledge handed down from the Middle
Ages was not necessarily reliable. You can compare him to Socrates, who did not
trust the general views he encountered in the central square of Athens. So what
does one do, Sophie? Can you tell me that?”

“You begin to work out your own philosophy.”

“Right! Descartes decided to travel around Europe, the way Socrates spent his
life talking to people in Athens. He relates that from then on he meant to
confine himself to seeking the wisdom that was to be found, either within
himself or in the ‘great book of the world.’ So he joined the army and went to
war, which enabled him to spend periods of time in different parts of Central
Europe. Later he lived for some years in Paris, but in 1629 he went to Holland,
where he remained for nearly twenty years working on his mathematical and
philosophic writings.

“In 1649 he was invited to Sweden by Queen Christina. But his sojourn in what
he called ‘the land of bears, ice, and rocks’ brought on an attack of pneumonia
and he died in the winter of 1650.”

“So he was only 54 when he died.”

“Yes, but he was to have enormous influence on philosophy, even after his
death. One can say without exaggeration that Descartes was the father of modern
philosophy. Following the heady rediscovery of man and nature in the
Renaissance, the need to assemble contemporary thought into one coherent
philosophical system again presented itself. The first significant
system-builder was Descartes, and he was followed by Spinoza and Leibniz, Locke
and Berkeley, Hume and Kant.”

“What do you mean by a philosophical system?”

“I mean a philosophy that is constructed from the ground up and that is
concerned with finding explanations for all the central questions of
philosophy. Antiquity had its great system-constructors in Plato and Aristotle.
The Middle Ages had St. Thomas Aquinas, who tried to build a bridge between
Aristotle’s philosophy and Christian theology. Then came the Renaissance, with
a welter of old and new beliefs about nature and science, God and man. Not
until the seventeenth century did philosophers make any attempt to assemble the
new ideas into a clarified philosophical system, and the first to attempt it
was Descartes. His work was the forerunner of what was to be philosophy’s most
important project in the coming generations. His main concern was with what we
can know, or in other words, certain knowledge. The other great question that
preoccupied him was the relationship between body and mind. Both these
questions were the substance of philosophical argument for the next hundred and
fifty years.”

“He must have been ahead of his time.”

“Ah, but the question belonged to the age. When it came to acquiring certain
knowledge, many of his contemporaries voiced a total philosophic skepticism.
They thought that man should accept that he knew nothing. But Descartes would
not. Had he done so he would not have been a real philosopher. We can again
draw a parallel with Socrates, who did not accept the skepticism of the
Sophists. And it was in Descartes’s lifetime that the new natural sciences were
developing a method by which to provide certain and exact descriptions of
natural processes.

“Descartes was obliged to ask himself if there was a similar certain and exact
method of philosophic reflection.”

“That I can understand.”

“But that was only part of it. The new physics had also raised the question of
the nature of matter, and thus what determines the physical processes of
nature. More and more people argued in favor of a mechanistic view of nature.
But the more mechanistic the physical world was seen to be, the more pressing
became the question of the relationship between body and soul. Until the
seventeenth century, the soul had commonly been considered as a sort of ‘breath
of life’ that pervaded all living creatures. The original meaning of the words
‘soul’ and ‘spirit’ is, in fact, ‘breath’ and ‘breathing.’ This is the case for
almost all European languages. To Aristotle, the soul was something that was
present everywhere in the organism as its ‘life principle’—and therefore could
not be conceived as separate from the body. So he was able to speak of a plant
soul or an animal soul. Philosophers did not introduce any radical division of
soul and body until the seventeenth century. The reason was that the motions of
all material objects—including the body, animal or human—were explained as
involving mechanical processes. But man’s soul could surely not be part of this
body machinery, could it? What of the soul, then? An explanation was required
not least of how something ‘spiritual’ could start a mechanical process.”

“It’s a strange thought, actually.”

“What is?”

“I decide to lift my arm—and then, well, the arm lifts itself. Or I decide to
run for a bus, and the next second my legs are moving. Or I’m thinking about
something sad, and suddenly I’m crying. So there must be some mysterious
connection between body and consciousness.”

“That was exactly the problem that set Descartes’s thoughts going. Like Plato,
he was convinced that there was a sharp division between ‘spirit’ and ‘matter.’
But as to how the mind influences the body—or the soul the body—Plato could not
provide an answer.”

“Neither have I, so I am looking forward to hearing what Descartes’s theory
was.”

“Let us follow his own line of reasoning.”

Albert pointed to the book that lay on the table between them.

“In his Discourse on Method, Descartes raises the question of the method the
philosopher must use to solve a philosophical problem. Science already had its
new method...”

“So you said.”

“Descartes maintains that we cannot accept anything as being true unless we can
clearly and distinctly perceive it. To achieve this can require the breaking
down of a compound problem into as many single factors as possible. Then we can
take our point of departure in the simplest idea of all. You could say that
every single thought must be weighed and measured, rather in the way Galileo
wanted everything to be measured and everything immeasurable to be made
measurable. Descartes believed that philosophy should go from the simple to the
complex. Only then would it be possible to construct a new insight. And finally
it would be necessary to ensure by constant enumeration and control that
nothing was left out. Then, a philosophical conclusion would be within reach.”

“It sounds almost like a math test.”

“Yes. Descartes was a mathematician; he is considered the father of analytical
geometry, and he made important contributions to the science of algebra.
Descartes wanted to use the ‘mathematical method’ even for philosophizing. He
set out to prove philosophical truths in the way one proves a mathematical
theorem. In other words, he wanted to use exactly the same instrument that we
use when we work with figures, namely, reason, since only reason can give us
certainty. It is far from certain that we can rely on our senses. We have
already noted Descartes’s affinity with Plato, who also observed that
mathematics and numerical ratio give us more certainty than the evidence of our
senses.”

“But can one solve philosophical problems that way?”

“We had better go back to Descartes’s own reasoning. His aim is to reach
certainty about the nature of life, and he starts by maintaining that at first
one should doubt everything. He didn’t want to build on sand, you see.”

“No, because if the foundations give way, the whole house collapses.”

“As you so neatly put it, my child. Now, Descartes did not think it reasonable
to doubt everything, but he thought it was possible in principle to doubt
everything. For one thing, it is by no means certain that we advance our
philosophical quest by reading Plato or Aristotle. It may increase our
knowledge of history but not of the world. It was important for Descartes to
rid himself of all handed down, or received, learning before beginning his own
philosophical construction.”

“He wanted to clear all the rubble off the site before starting to build his
new house ...”

“Thank you. He wanted to use only fresh new materials in order to be sure that
his new thought construction would hold. But Descartes’s doubts went even
deeper. We cannot even trust what our senses tell us, he said. Maybe they are
deceiving us.”

“How come?”

“When we dream, we feel we are experiencing reality. What separates our waking
feelings from our dream feelings?

“ ‘When I consider this carefully, I find not a single property which with
certainty separates the waking state from the dream,’ writes Descartes. And he
goes on: ‘How can you be certain that your whole life is not a dream?’ “

“Jeppe thought he had only been dreaming when he had slept in the Baron’s bed.”

“And when he was lying in the Baron’s bed, he thought his life as a poor
peasant was only a dream. So in the same way, Descartes ends up doubting
absolutely everything. Many philosophers before him had reached the end of the
road at that very point.”

“So they didn’t get very far.”

“But Descartes tried to work forward from this zero point. He doubted
everything, and that was the only thing he was certain of. But now something
struck him: one thing had to be true, and that was that he doubted. When he
doubted, he had to be thinking, and because he was thinking, it had to be
certain that he was a thinking being. Or, as he himself expressed it: Cogito,
ergo sum.”

“Which means?”

“I think, therefore I am.”

“I’m not surprised he realized that.”

“Fair enough. But notice the intuitive certainty with which he suddenly
perceives himself as a thinking being. Perhaps you now recall what Plato said,
that what we grasp with our reason is more real than what we grasp with our
senses. That’s the way it was for Descartes. He perceived not only that he was
a thinking /, he realized at the same time that this thinking / was more real
than the material world which we perceive with our senses. And he went on. He
was by no means through with his philosophical quest.”

“What came next?”

“Descartes now asked himself if there was anything more he could perceive with
the same intuitive certainty.

He came to the conclusion that in his mind he had a clear and distinct idea of
a perfect entity. This was an idea he had always had, and it was thus
self-evident to Descartes that such an idea could not possibly have come from
himself. The idea of a perfect entity cannot have originated from one who was
himself imperfect, he claimed. Therefore the idea of a perfect entity must have
originated from that perfect entity itself, or in other words, from God. That
God exists was therefore just as self-evident for Descartes as that a thinking
being must exist.”

“Now he was jumping to a conclusion. He was more cautious to begin with.”

“You’re right. Many people have called that his weak spot. But you say
‘conclusion.’ Actually it was not a question of proof. Descartes only meant
that we all possess the idea of a perfect entity, and that inherent in that
idea is the fact that this perfect entity must exist. Because a perfect entity
wouldn’t be perfect if it didn’t exist. Neither would we possess the idea of a
perfect entity if there were no perfect entity. For we are imperfect, so the
idea of perfection cannot come from us. According to Descartes, the idea of God
is innate, it is stamped on us from birth ‘like the artisan’s mark stamped on
his product.’ “

“Yes, but just because I possess the idea of a crocophant doesn’t mean that the
crocophant exists.”

“Descartes would have said that it is not inherent in the concept of a
crocophant that it exists. On the other hand, it is inherent in the concept of
a perfect entity that such an entity exists. According to Descartes, this is
just as certain as it is inherent in the idea of a circle that all points of
the circle are equidistant from the center. You cannot have a circle that does
not conform to this law. Nor can you have a perfect entity that lacks its most
important property, namely, existence.”

“That’s an odd way of thinking.”

“It is a decidedly rationalistic way of thinking. Descartes believed like
Socrates and Plato that there is a connection between reason and being. The
more self-evident a thing is to one’s reason, the more certain it is that it
exists.”

“So far he has gotten to the fact that he is a thinking person and that there
exists a perfect entity.”

“Yes, and with this as his point of departure, he proceeds. In the question of
all the ideas we have about outer reality—for example, the sun and the
moon—there is the possibility that they are fantasies. But outer reality also
has certain characteristics that we can perceive with our reason. These are the
mathematical properties, or, in other words, the kinds of things that are
measurable, such as length, breadth, and depth. Such ‘quantitative’ properties
are just as clear and distinct to my reason as the fact that I am a thinking
being. ‘Qualitative’ properties such as color, smell, and taste, on the other
hand, are linked to our sense perception and as such do not describe outer
reality.”

“So nature is not a dream after all.”

“No, and on that point Descartes once again draws upon our idea of the perfect
entity. When our reason recognizes something clearly and distinctly—as is the
case for the mathematical properties of outer reality—it must necessarily be
so. Because a perfect God would not deceive us. Descartes claims ‘God’s
guarantee’ that whatever we perceive with our reason also corresponds to
reality.”

“Okay, so now he’s found out he’s a thinking being, God exists, and there is an
outer reality.”

“Ah, but the outer reality is essentially different from the reality of
thought. Descartes now maintains that there are two different forms of
reality—or two ‘substances.’ One substance is thought, or the ‘mind,’ the other
is extension, or matter. The mind is purely conscious, it takes up no room in
space and can therefore not be subdivided into smaller parts. Matter, however,
is purely extension, it takes up room in space and can therefore always be
subdivided into smaller and smaller parts— but it has no consciousness.
Descartes maintained that both substances originate from God, because only God
himself exists independently of anything else. But although both thought and
extension come from God, the two substances have no contact with each other.
Thought is quite independent of matter, and conversely, the material processes
are quite independent of thought.”

“So he divided God’s creation into two.”

“Precisely. We say that Descartes is a dualist, which means that he effects a
sharp division between the reality of thought and extended reality. For
example, only man has a mind. Animals belong completely to extended reality.
Their living and moving are accomplished mechanically. Descartes considered an
animal to be a kind of complicated automaton. As regards extended reality, he
takes a thoroughly mechanistic view—exactly like the materialists.”

“I doubt very much that Hermes is a machine or an automaton. Descartes couldn’t
have liked animals very much. And what about us? Are we automatons as well?”

“We are and we aren’t. Descartes came to the conclusion that man is a dual
creature that both thinks and takes up room in space. Man has thus both a mind
and an extended body. St. Augustine and Thomas Aquinas had already said
something similar, namely, that man had a body like the animals and a soul like
the angels. According to Descartes, the human body is a perfect machine. But
man also has a mind which can operate quite independently of the body. The
bodily processes do not have the same freedom, they obey their own laws. But
what we think with our reason does not happen in the body—it happens in the
mind, which is completely independent of extended reality. I should add, by the
way, that Descartes did not reject the possibility that animals could think.
But if they have that faculty, the same dualism between thought and extension
must also apply to them.”

“We have talked about this before. If I decide to run after a bus, the whole
‘automaton’ goes into action. And if I don’t catch the bus, I start to cry.”

“Even Descartes could not deny that there is a constant interaction between
mind and body. As long as the mind is in the body, he believed, it is linked to
the brain through a special brain organ which he called the pineal gland, where
a constant interaction takes place between ‘spirit’ and ‘matter.’ Therefore the
mind can constantly be affected by feelings and passions that are related to
bodily needs. But the mind can also detach itself from such ‘base’ impulses and
operate independently of the body. The aim is to get reason to assume command.
Because even if I have the worst pain in my stomach, the sum of the angles in a
triangle will still be 180 degrees. Thus humans have the capacity to rise above
bodily needs and behave rationally. In this sense the mind is superior to the
body. Our legs can age and become weak, the back can become bowed and our teeth
can fall out—but two and two will go on being four as long as there is reason
left in us. Reason doesn’t become bowed and weak. It is the body that ages. For
Descartes, the mind is essentially thought. Baser passions and feelings such as
desire and hate are more closely linked to our bodily functions—and therefore
to extended reality.”

“I can’t get over the fact that Descartes compared the human body to a machine
or an automaton.”

“The comparison was based on the fact that people in his time were deeply
fascinated by machines and the workings of clocks, which appeared to have the
ability to function of their own accord. The word ‘automaton’ means precisely
that—something that moves of its own accord. It was obviously only an illusion
that they moved of their own accord. An astronomical clock, for instance, is
both constructed and wound up by human hands. Descartes made a point of the
fact that ingenious inventions of that kind were actually assembled very simply
from a relatively small number of parts compared with the vast number of bones,
muscles, nerves, veins, and arteries that the human and the animal body
consists of. Why should God not be able to make an animal or a human body based
on mechanical laws?”

“Nowadays there is a lot of talk about ‘artificial intelligence.’ “

“Yes, that is the automaton of our time. We have created machines that can
sometimes deceive us into believing that they are intelligent. Machines like
these would have terrified Descartes out of his wits. He might have begun to
doubt whether human reason really was as free and independent as he had
supposed. And there are philosophers who believe that man’s spiritual life is
no more free than the bodily processes. The human soul is naturally infinitely
more complex than any data program, but some people think that in principle we
are just as unfree as these data programs. But look, Sophie—I’ll show you
something.”

Alberto pointed to a large writing table at the other end of the room. On it
stood a small computer. He went over to it. Sophie followed him.

Alberto switched the computer on and soon the screen showed C: at the top. He
wrote “Laila,” explaining that this was an advanced conversation program.

A text soon appeared at the top of the screen:

“Hi, my name is Laila. Are you sitting comfortably?”

Sophie entered three letters:

“Yes,” she wrote although she had not yet sat down. Alberto brought up a chair
for her.

“What is your name?” appeared on the screen.

“Sophie Amundsen,” wrote Sophie, and the computer answered:

“3 Clover Close. Nice to meet you, Sophie. Are you looking forward to your
fifteenth birthday?”

Sophie was startled. Alberto laid a hand on her shoulder and said: “I have only
given her your name, your address, and your date of birth. It’s like when you
are going to be introduced to a new friend. It’s nice to know a little about
them beforehand.”

“Not bad,” wrote Sophie.

“Oh dear, I hope you are not feeling bad, Sophie. You must try to talk in whole
sentences.”

“Thank you, I’m perfectly well. Can I ask you something?”

“I am glad you are well. Go ahead and ask me something.”

“How old are you?” Sophie wrote.

“I was constructed in Atlanta on August 8, 1988, but I was translated into
Norwegian at the Norwegian Polytechnic on March 28, 1990.”

“Gosh!”

“I said you must talk in whole sentences.”

“I only said gosh!”

“I do not understand slang. I have a vocabulary of over 100,000 words, but the
nearest I can find to gosh is gospel.”

“That means the story of Jesus.”

“Are you a Christian, Sophie?”

“I don’t know.”

“As a rule not knowing is a step toward new knowledge.”

“Socrates would most likely have said the same. Or Descartes, for that matter.”

“Socrates was a Greek philosopher who lived from 470 to 399 B.C. If you wish to
know more, press F7. Descartes was a French philosopher who lived from 1596 to
1650. If you wish to know more, press F7.”

“Thank you, that will be quite enough. Can I ask you something else?”

“I am glad that this was enough. Go ahead and ask!”

Alberto laughed quietly. Sophie wrote:

“Who is Hilde Moller Knag?”

“Hilde Moller Knag lives in Lillesand and is exactly the same age as Sophie
Amundsen.”

“How do you know?”

“I don’t know how. I found her on the hard disc.”

Sophie felt a hand on her shoulder.

“I have fed the data program with the little information we have about Hilde,”
said Alberto.

“What else do you know about Hilde?” wrote Sophie.

“Hilde’s father is a UN Observer in Lebanon. He has the rank of major and
continually sends postcards to his daughter.”

“I want you to find him!”

“I can’t do that. He is not on any of my files and I am not coupled to any
other data base.”

“I said find him!!!!!!!!”

“Are you angry, Sophie? So many exclamation marks are a sign of violent
feelings.”

“I want to talk to Hilde’s father!”

“You have difficulty controlling yourself. If you wish to talk about your
childhood, press F9.”

Alberto laid his hand on Sophie’s shoulder again.

“She’s right. This is not a crystal ball. Laila is only a data program.”

“Shut up!” wrote Sophie.

“As you wish, Sophie. Our acquaintance lasted only 13 minutes and 52 seconds. I
shall remember everything we have said. I shall now end the program.”

The letter C: once again showed up on the screen.

“Now we can sit down again,” said Alberto.

But Sophie had already pressed some other keys.

“Knag,” she wrote.

Immediately the following message appeared on the screen:

“Here I am.”

Now it was Alberto who jumped.

“Who are you?” wrote Sophie.

“Major Albert Knag at your service. I came straight from Lebanon. What is your
command?”

“This beats everything!” breathed Alberto. “The rat has sneaked onto the hard
disc.”

He motioned for Sophie to move and sat down in front of the keyboard.

“How did you manage to get into my PC?” he wrote.

“A mere bagatelle, dear colleague. I am exactly where I choose to be.”

“You loathsome data virus!”

“Now, now! At the moment I am here as a birthday virus. May I send a special
greeting?”

“No thanks, we’ve had enough of them.”

“But I’ll be quick: all in your honor, dear Hilde. Once again, a very happy
fifteenth birthday. Please excuse the circumstances, but I wanted my birthday
greetings to spring up around you everywhere you go. Love from Dad, who is
longing to give you a great big hug.”

Before Alberto could write again, the sign C: had once again appeared on the
screen.

Alberto wrote “dir knag*.*,” which called up the following information on the
screen:

knag.lib 147,643 06-15-90 12:47

knag.lil 326,439 06-23-90 22:34



Alberto wrote “erase knag*.*” and switched off the computer.

“There—now I have erased him,” he said. “But it’s impossible to say where he’ll
turn up next time.”

He went on sitting there, staring at the screen. Then he added:

“The worst of it all was the name. Albert Knag ...”

For the first time Sophie was struck by the similarity between the two names.
Albert Knag and Alberto Knox. But Alberto was so incensed that she dared not
say a word. They went over and sat by the coffee table again.

