# Something of Everything in Everything
[Metadata]: # {13}
[Descriptor]: # {13}
[Author]: # {gaarder}
# Something of Everything in Everything
Anaxagoras (500-428 B.C.) was another philosopher who could not agree that one
particular basic substance—water, for instance—might be transformed into
everything we see in the natural world. Nor could he accept that earth, air,
fire, and water can be transformed into blood and bone.

Anaxagoras held that nature is built up of an infinite number of minute
particles invisible to the eye. Moreover, everything can be divided into even
smaller parts, but even in the minutest parts there are fragments of all other
things. If skin and bone are not a transformation of something else, there must
also be skin and bone, he thought, in the milk we drink and the food we eat. ~~

A couple of present-day examples can perhaps illustrate Anaxagoras’ line of
thinking. Modern laser technology can produce so-called holograms. If one of
these holograms depicts a car, for example, and the hologram is fragmented, we
will see a picture of the whole car even though we only have the part of the
hologram that showed the bumper. This is because the whole subject is present
in every tiny part.

In a sense, our bodies are built up in the same way. If I loosen a skin cell
from my finger, the nucleus will contain not only the characteristics of my
skin: the same cell will also reveal what kind of eyes I have, the color of my
hair, the number and type of my fingers, and so on. Every cell of the human
body carries a blueprint of the way all the other cells are constructed. So
there is “something of everything” in every single cell. The whole exists in
each tiny part.

Anaxagoras called these minuscule particles which have something of everything
in them seeds.

Remember that Empedocles thought that it was “love” that joined the elements
together in whole bodies. Anaxagoras also imagined “order” as a kind of force,
creating animals and humans, flowers and trees. He called this force mind or
intelligence (nous).

Anaxagoras is also interesting because he was the first philosopher we hear of
in Athens. He was from Asia Minor but he moved to Athens at the age of forty.
He was later accused of atheism and was ultimately forced to leave the city.
Among other things, he said that the sun was not a god but a red-hot stone,
bigger than the entire Peloponnesian peninsula.

Anaxagoras was generally very interested in astronomy. He believed that all
heavenly bodies were made of the same substance as Earth. He reached this
conclusion after studying a meteorite. This gave him the idea that there could
be human life on other planets. He also pointed out that the Moon has no light
of its own—its light comes from Earth, he said. He thought up an explanation
for solar eclipses as well.

P.S. Thank you for your attention, Sophie. It is not unlikely that you will
need to read this chapter two or three times before you understand it all. But
understanding will always require some effort. You probably wouldn’t admire a
friend who was good at everything if it cost her no effort.

The best solution to the question of basic substance and the transformations in
nature must wait until tomorrow, when you will meet Democritus. I’ll say no
more!



Sophie sat in the den looking out into the garden through a little hole in the
dense thicket. She had to try and sort out her thoughts after all she had read.

It was as clear as daylight that plain water could never turn into anything
other than ice or steam. Water couldn’t even turn into a watermelon, because
even watermelons consisted of more than just water. But she was only sure of
that because that’s what she had learned. Would she be absolutely certain, for
example, that ice was only water if that wasn’t what she had learned? At least,
she would have to have studied very closely how water froze to ice and melted
again.

Sophie tried once again to use her own common sense, and not to think about
what she had learned from others.

Parmenides had refused to accept the idea of change in any form. And the more
she thought about it, the more she was convinced that, in a way, he had been
right. His intelligence could not accept that “something” could suddenly
transform itself into “something completely different.” It must have taken
quite a bit of courage to come right out and say it, because it meant denying
all the natural changes that people could see for themselves. Lots of people
must have laughed at him.

And Empedocles must have been pretty smart too, when he proved that the world
had to consist of more than one single substance. That made all the
transformations of nature possible without anything actually changing.

The old Greek philosopher had found that out just by reasoning. Of course he
had studied nature, but he didn’t have the equipment to do chemical analysis
the way scientists do nowadays.

Sophie was not sure whether she really believed that the source of everything
actually was earth, air, fire, and water. But after all, what did that matter?
In principle, Empedocles was right. The only way we can accept the
transformations we can see with our own eyes—without losing our reason—is to
admit the existence of more than one single basic substance.

Sophie found philosophy doubly exciting because she was able to follow all the
ideas by using her own common sense—without having to remember everything she
had learned at school. She decided that philosophy was not something you can
learn; but perhaps you can learn to think philosophically.

