# CHAPTER 1





Enfant perdu





May


He'd never know why he stopped. Kelly pulled his Scout over to the shoulder
without a conscious thought. She hadn't had her hand out soliciting a ride.
She'd just been standing at the side of the road, watching the cars speed past
in a spray of highway grit and a wake of fumes. Her posture was that of a
hitchhiker, one knee locked, the other bent. Her clothes were clearly well used
and a backpack was loosely slung over one shoulder. Her tawny, shoulder-length
hair moved about in the rush of air from the traffic. Her face showed nothing,
but Kelly didn't see that until he was already pressing his right foot on the
brake pedal and angling onto the loose rock of the shoulder. He wondered if he
should go back into the traffic, then decided that he was already committed,
though to what he didn't know, exactly. The girl's eyes followed the car and,
as he looked in his rearview mirror, she shrugged without any particular
enthusiasm and walked towards him. The passenger window was down already, and
in a few seconds she was there.

'Where you goin'?' she asked.

That surprised Kelly. He thought the first question -Need a ride? - was
supposed to be his. He hesitated for a second or two, looking at her.
Twenty-one, perhaps, but old for her years. Her face wasn't dirty, but neither
was it clean, perhaps from the wind and dust on the interstate. She wore a
man's cotton shirt that hadn't been ironed in months, and her hair was knotted.
But what surprised him most of all were her eyes. Fetchingly gray-green, they
stared past Kelly into ... what? He'd seen the look before often enough, but
only on weary men. He'd had the look himself, Kelly remembered, but even then
he'd never known what his eyes saw. It didn't occur to him that he wore a look
not so different now.

'Back to my boat,' he answered finally, not knowing what else to say. And that
quickly, her eyes changed.

'You have a boat?' she asked. Her eyes lit up like a child's, a smile started
there and radiated down the remainder of her face, as though he'd just answered
an important question. She had a cute gap between her front teeth, Kelly
noticed.

'Forty-footer - she's a diesel cruiser.' He waved to the back of the Scout,
whose cargo area was completely filled with cartons of groceries. 'You want to
come along?' he asked, also without thinking.

'Sure!' Without hesitation she yanked open the door and tossed her backpack on
the floor in front of the passenger seat.

Pulling back into traffic was dangerous. Short of wheel-base and short of
power, the Scout wasn't built for interstate-highway driving, and Kelly had to
concentrate. The car wasn't fast enough to go in any other lane than the right,
and with people coming on and off at every interchange, he had to pay attention
because the Scout wasn't nimble enough to avoid all the idiots who were heading
out to the ocean or wherever the hell people went on a three-day weekend.

You want to come along? he'd asked, and she'd said Sure, his mind reported to
him. What the h–µll? Kelly frowned in frustration at the traffic because he
didn't know the answer, but then there were a lot of questions to which he
hadn't known the answers in the last six months. He told his mind to be quiet
and watched the traffic, even though it kept up its inquiries in a nagging sort
of background noise. One's mind, after all, rarely obeys its own commands.

Memorial Day weekend, he thought. The cars around him were filled with people
rushing home from work, or those who'd already made that trip and picked up
their families. The faces of children stared out of the rear-seat windows. One
or two waved at him, but Kelly pretended not to notice. It was hard not having
a soul, most especially when you could remember having had one.

Kelly ran a hand across his jaw, feeling the sandpaper texture. The hand itself
was dirty. No wonder they'd acted that way at the grocery warehouse. Letting
yourself go, Kelly.

Well, who the hell cares?

He turned to look at his guest and realized that he didn't know her name. He
was taking her to his boat, and he didn't know her name. Amazing. She was
staring forward, her face serene. It was a pretty face in profile. She was thin
- perhaps willowy was the right word, her hair halfway between blonde and
brown. Her jeans were worn and torn in a few places, and had begun life at one
of those stores where they charged you extra to sell jeans that were pre-faded
- or whatever they did with them. Kelly didn't know and cared less. One more
thing not to care about.

Christ, how did you ever get this screwed up? his mind demanded of him. He knew
the answer, but even that was not a full explanation. Different segments of the
organism called John Terrence Kelly knew different parts of the whole story,
but somehow they'd never all come together, leaving the separate fragments of
what had once been a tough, smart, decisive man to blunder about in confusion -
and despair? There was a happy thought.

He remembered what he'd once been. He remembered all the things that he had
survived, amazed that he had done so. And perhaps the worst torment of all was
that he didn't understand what had gone wrong. Sure, he knew what had happened,
but those things had all been on the outside, and somehow his understanding had
gotten lost, leaving him alive and confused and without purpose. He was on
autopilot. He knew that, but not where fate was taking him.

She didn't try to talk, whoever she was, and that was just as well, Kelly told
himself, though he sensed that there was something he ought to know. The
realization came as a surprise. It was instinctual, and he'd always trusted his
instincts, the warning chill on his neck and forearms. He looked around at the
traffic and Kelly saw no particular danger other than cars with too much engine
under the hood and not enough brains behind the wheel. His eyes scanned
carefully and found nothing. But the warning didn't go away, and Kelly found
himself checking the mirror for no good reason, while his left hand wandered
down between his legs and found the checkered grips of the Colt automatic that
hung hidden under the seat. His hand was stroking the weapon before he realized
it.

Now what the hell did you do that for? Kelly pulled his hand back and shook his
head with a grimace of frustration. But he did keep checking the mirror - just
the normal watch on traffic, he lied to himself for the next twenty minutes.

The boatyard was a swarm of activity. The three-day weekend, of course. Cars
were zipping about too fast for the small and badly paved parking lot, each
driver trying to evade the Friday rush that each was, of course, helping to
create. At least here the Scout came into its own. The high ground clearance
and visibility gave Kelly an advantage as he maneuvered to Springer's transom,
and he looped around to back up to the slip he'd left six hours before. It was
a relief, to crank up the windows and lock the car. His adventure on the
highways was over, and the safety of the trackless water beckoned.

Springer was a diesel-powered motor yacht, forty-one feet long, custom built
but similar in her lines and internal arrangements to a Pacemaker Coho. She was
not especially pretty, but she had two sizable cabins, and the midships salon
could be converted easily into a third. Her diesels were large but not
supercharged, because Kelly preferred a large comfortable engine to a small
straining one. He had a high-quality marine radar, every sort of communications
gear that he could legally use, and navigation aids normally reserved for
offshore fishermen. The fiberglass hull was immaculate, and there was not a
speck of rust on the chromed rails, though he had defiberately done without the
topside varnish that most yacht-owners cherished because it wasn't worth the
maintenance time. Springer was a workboat, or was supposed to be.

Kelly and his guest alighted from the car. He opened the cargo door and started
carrying the cartons aboard. The young lady, he saw, had the good sense to stay
out of the way.

'Yo, Kelly!' a voice called from the flying bridge.

'Yeah, Ed, what was it?'

'Bad gauge. The generator brushes were a little worn, and I replaced them, but
I think it was the gauge. Replaced that, too.' Ed Murdock, the yard's chief
mechanic, started down, and spotted the girl as he began to step off the
ladder. Murdock tripped on the last step and nearly landed flat on his face in
surprise. The mechanic's face evaluated the girl quickly and approvingly.

'Anything else?' Kelly asked pointedly.

'Topped off the tanks. The engines are warm,' Murdock said, turning back to his
customer. 'It's all on your bill.'

'Okay, thanks, Ed.'

'Oh, Chip told me to tell you, somebody else made an offer in case you ever
want to sell -'

Kelly cut him off. 'No chance, Ed.'

'She's a jewel, Kelly,' Murdock said as he gathered his tools and walked away
smiling, pleased with himself for the double entendre.

It took several seconds for Kelly to catch that one. It evoked a belated grunt
of semi-amusement as he loaded the last of the groceries into the salon.

'What do I do?' the girl asked. She'd just been standing there, and Kelly had
the impression that she was trembling a little and trying to hide it.

'Just take a seat topside,' Kelly said, pointing to the flying bridge. 'It'll
take me a few minutes to get things started.'

'Okay.' She beamed a smile at him guaranteed to melt ice, as though she knew
exactly what one of his needs was.

Kelly walked aft to his cabin, pleased at least that he kept his boat tidy. The
master-cabin head was also neat, and he found himself staring into the mirror
and asking, 'Okay, now what the fuck are you going to do?'

There was no immediate answer, but common decency told him to wash up. Two
minutes later he entered the salon. He checked to see that the grocery cartons
were secure, then went topside.

'I, uh, forgot to ask you something -' he began.

'Pam,' she said, extending her hand. 'What's yours?'

'Kelly,' he replied, nonplussed yet again.

'Where we going, Mr Kelly?'

'Just Kelly,' he corrected her, keeping his distance for the moment. Pam just
nodded and smiled again.

'Okay, Kelly, where to?'

'I own a little island about thirty -'

'You own an island?' Her eyes went wide.

'That's right.' Actually, he just leased it, and that had been a fact long
enough that Kelly didn't find it the least bit remarkable.

'Let' go!' she said with enthusiasm, looking back at the shore.

Kelly laughed out loud. 'Okay, let's do that!'

He flipped on the bilge blowers. Springer had diesel engines, and he didn't
really have to worry about fumes building up, but for all his recently acquired
slovenliness, Kelly was a seaman, and his life on the water followed a strict
routine, which meant observing all the safety rules that had been written in
the blood of less careful men. After the prescribed two minutes, he punched the
button to start the port-side, then the starboard-side diesel. Both of the big
Detroit Diesel engines caught at once, rumbling to impressive life as Kelly
checked the gauges. Everything looked fine.

He left the flying bridge to slip his mooring lines, then came back and eased
the throttles forward to take his boat out of the slip, checking tide and wind
- there was not much of either at the moment - and looking for other boats.
Kelly advanced the port throttle a notch farther as he turned the wheel,
allowing Springer to pivot all the more quickly in the narrow channel, and then
he was pointed straight out. He advanced the starboard throttle next, bringing
his cruiser to a mannerly five knots as he headed past the ranks of motor and
sail yachts. Pam was looking around at the boats, too, mainly aft, and her eyes
fixed on the parking lot for a long couple of seconds before she looked forward
again, her body relaxing more as she did so.

'You know anything about boats?' Kelly asked.

'Not much,' she admitted, and for the first time he noticed her accent.

'Where you from?'

'Texas. How about you?'

'Indianapolis, originally, but it's been a while.'

'What's this?' she asked. Her hands reached out to touch the tattoo on his
forearm.

'It's from one of the places I've been,' he said. 'Not a very nice place.'

'Oh, over there.' She understood.

"That's the place.' Kelly nodded matter-of-factly. They were out of the yacht
basin now, and he advanced the throttles yet again.

'What did you do there?'

'Nothing to talk to a lady about,' Kelly replied, looking around from a
half-standing position.

'What makes you think I'm a lady?' she asked.

It caught him short, but he was getting used to it by now. He'd also found that
talking to a girl, no matter what the subject, was something that he needed to
do. For the first time he answered her smile with one of his own.

'Well, it wouldn't be very nice of me if I assumed that you weren't.'

'I wondered how long it would be before you smiled.' You have a very nice
smile, her tone told him.

How's six months grab you? he almost said. Instead he laughed, mainly at
himself. That was something else he needed to do.

'I'm sorry. Guess I haven't been very good company.' He turned to look at her
again and saw understanding in her eyes. Just a quiet look, very human and
feminine, but it shook Kelly. He could feel it happen, and ignored the part of
his consciousness that told him that it was something he'd needed badly for
months. That was something he didn't' need to hear, especially from himself.
Loneliness was bad enough without reflection on its misery. Her hand reached
out yet again, ostensibly to stroke the tattoo, but that wasn't what it was all
about. It was amazing how warm her touch was, even under a hot afternoon sun.
Perhaps it was a measure of just how cold his life had become.

But he had a boat to navigate. There was a freighter about a thousand yards
ahead. Kelly was now at full cruising power, and the trim tabs at the stem had
automatically engaged, bringing the boat to an efficient planing angle as her
speed came to eighteen knots. The ride was smooth until they got into the
merchant ship's wake. Then Springer started pitching, up and down three or four
feet at the bow as Kelly maneuvered left to get around the worst of it. The
freighter grew before them like a cliff as they overtook her.

'Is there someplace I can change?'

'My cabin is aft. You can move in forward if you want.'

'Oh, really?' She giggled. 'Why would I do that?'

'Huh?' She'd done it to him again.

Pam went below, careful to hold on to the rails as she carried her backpack.
She hadn't been wearing much. She reappeared in a few minutes wearing even
less, short-shorts and a halter, no shoes, and perceptibly more relaxed. She
had dancer's legs, Kelly noticed, slim and very feminine. Also very pale, which
surprised him. The halter was loose on her, and frayed at the edges. Perhaps
she'd recently lost weight, or maybe she'd deliberately bought it overlarge.
Whatever the reason, it showed quite a bit of her chest. Kelly caught himself
shifting his eyes, and chastised himself for ogling the girl. But Pam made it
hard not to. Now she grasped his upper arm and sat up against him. Looking
over, he could see right down the halter just as far as he wanted.

'You like them?' she asked.

Kelly's brain and mouth went into lock. He made a few embarrassed sounds, and
before he could decide to say anything she was laughing. But not at him. She
was waving at the crew of the freighter, who waved back. It was an Italian
ship, and one of the half dozen or so men hanging over the rail at the stern
blew Pam a kiss. She did the same in return.

It made Kelly jealous.

He turned the wheel to port again, taking his boat across the bow wave of the
freighter, and as he passed the vessel's bridge he tooted his hom. It was the
correct thing to do, though few small boaters ever bothered. By this time, a
watch officer had his glasses on Kelly - actually Pam, of course. He turned and
shouted something to the wheelhouse. A moment later the freighter's enormous
'whistle' sounded its own bass note, nearly causing the girl to leap from her
seat.

Kelly laughed, and so did she, and then she wrapped her arms tightly around his
bicep. He could feel a finger tracing its way around the tattoo.

'It doesn't feel like-'

Kelly nodded. 'I know. Most people expect it to feel like paint or something.'

'Why did-'

' -I get it? Everybody in the outfit did. Even the officers. It was something
to do, I guess. Pretty dumb, realty.'

'I dunk it's cute.'

'Well, I think you're pretty cute.'

'You say the nicest things.' She moved slightly, rubbing her breast against his
upper arm.

Kelly settled down to a steady cruising speed of eighteen knots as he worked
his way out of Baltimore harbor. The Italian freighter was the only merchant
ship in view, and the seas were flat, with one-foot ripples. He kept to the
main shipping channel all the way out into the Chesapeake Bay.

'You thirsty?' she asked as they turned south.

'Yeah. There's a fridge in the kitchenette - it's in the-'

'I saw it. What do you want?'

'Get two of anything.'

'Okay, ' she replied brightly. When she stood, the soft feeling worked its way
straight up his arm, finally departing at the shoulder.

'What's that?' she asked on returning. Kelly turned and winced. He'd been so
content with the girl on his arm that he'd neglected to pay attention to the
weather. 'That' was a thunderstorm, a towering mass of cumulonimbus clouds that
reached eight or ten miles skyward.

'Looks like we're going to get some rain,' he told her as he took the beer from
her hand.

'When I was a little girl, that meant a tornado.'

'Well, not here, it doesn't,' Kelly replied, looking around the boat to make
sure that there was no loose gear. Below, he knew, everything was in its proper
place, because it always was, ennui or not. Then he switched on his marine
radio. He caught a weather forecast at once, one that ended with the usual
warning.

'Is this a small craft?' Pam asked.

'Technically it is, but you can relax. I know what I'm doing. I used to be a
chief bosun's mate.'

'What's that?'

'A sailor. In the Navy, that is. Besides, this is a pretty big boat. The ride
might get a little bumpy, is all. If you're worried, there are life jackets
under the seat you're on.'

'Are you worried?' Pam asked. Kelly smiled and shook his head. 'Okay.' She
resumed her previous position, her chest against his arm, her head on his
shoulder, a dreamy expression in her eyes, as though anticipating something
that was to be, storm or no storm.

Kelly wasn't worried - at least not about the storm - but he wasn't casual
about things either. Passing Bodkin Point, he continued east across the
shipping channel. He didn't turn south until he was in water he knew to be too
shallow for anything large enough to run him down. Every few minutes he turned
to keep an eye on the storm, which was charging right in at twenty knots or so.
It had already blotted out the sun. A fast-moving storm most often meant a
violent one, and his new southerly course meant that he wasn't outrunning it
any longer. Kelly finished off his beer and decided against another. Visibility
would drop fast. He pulled out a plastic-coated chart and fixed it in place on
the table to the right of the instrument panel, marked his position with a
grease pencil, and then checked, to make sure that his course didn't take him
into shallows - Springer drew four and a half feet of water, and for Kelly
anything less than eight feet constituted shallow water. Satisfied, he set his
compass course and relaxed again. His training was his buffer against both
danger and complacency.

'Won't be long now,' Pam observed, just a trace of unease in her voice as she
held on to him.

'You can head below if you want,' Kelly said. 'It's gonna get rainy and windy.
And bumpy.'

'But not dangerous.'

'No, unless I do something really dumb. I'll try not to,' he promised.

'Can I stay here and see what it's like?' she asked, dearly unwilling to leave
his side, though Kelly did not know why.

'It's going to get wet,' he warned her again.

'That's okay.' She smiled brightly, fixing even more tightly to his arm.

–ö–µll—É throttled back some, taking the boat down off plane. There was no reason
to hurry. With the throttles eased back, there was no longer a need for two
hands on the controls either. He wrapped his arm around the girl, her head came
automatically down on his shoulder again, and despite the approaching storm
everything was suddenly right with the world. Or that's what Kelly's emotions
told him. His reason said something else, and the two views would not reconcile
themselves. His reason reminded him that the girl at his side was - what? He
didn't know. His emotions told him that it didn't matter a damn. She was what
he needed. But Kelly was not a man ruled by emotions, and the conflict made him
glower at the horizon.

'Something wrong?' Pam asked.

Kelly started to say something, then stopped, and reminded himself that he was
alone on his yacht with a pretty girl. He let emotion win this round for a
change.

'I‚Äôm a little confused, but, no, nothing is wrong that I know about.'

'I can tell that you -'

Kelly shook his head. 'Don't bother. Whatever it is, it can wait. Just relax
and enjoy the ride.'

The first gust of wind arrived a moment later, heeling the boat a few degrees
to port. Kelly adjusted his rudder to compensate. The rain arrived quickly. The
first few warning sprinkles were rapidly followed by solid sheets that marched
like curtains across the surface of the Chesapeake Bay. Within a minute
visibility was down to only a few hundred yards, and the sky was as dark as
late twilight. Kelly made sure his running lights were on. The waves started
kicking up in earnest, driven by what felt like thirty knots of wind. Weather
and seas were directly on the beam. He decided that he could keep going, but he
was in a good anchoring place now, and wouldn't be in another for five hours.
Kelly took another look at the chart, then switched on his radar to verify his
position. Ten feet of water, a sand bottom that the chart called HRD and was
therefore good holding ground. He brought Springer into the wind and eased the
throttles until the propellers were providing just enough thrust to overcome
the driving force of the wind.

'Take the wheel,' he told Pam.

'But I don't know what to do!'

'It's all right. Just hold her steady and steer the way I tell you to. I have
to go forward to set the anchors. 'Kay?'

'You be careful!' she shouted over the gusting wind. The waves were about five
feet now, and the bow of the boat was leaping up and down. Kelly gave her
shoulder a squeeze and went forward.

He had to watch himself, of course, but his shoes had no-skid soles, and Kelly
knew his business. He kept his hands on the grab rail all the way around the
superstructure, and in a minute he was on the foredeck. Two anchors were
clipped to the deck, a Danforth and a CQR plow-type, both slightly oversized.
He tossed the Danforth over first, then signaled for Pam to ease the wheel to
port. When the boat had moved perhaps fifty feet south, he dropped the CQR over
the side as well. Both ropes were already set to the proper lengths, and after
checking that all was secure, Kelly made his way back to the flying bridge.

Pam looked nervous until the moment that he sat back down on the vinyl bench -
everything was covered with water now, and their clothes were soaked through.
Kelly eased the throttles to idle, allowing the wind to push Springer back
nearly a hundred feet. By that time both anchors had dug into the bottom. Kelly
frowned at their placement. He ought to have set them farther apart. But only
one anchor was really necessary. The second was just insurance. Satisfied, he
switched off the diesels.

'I could fight the storm all the way down, but I'd prefer not to,' he
explained.

'So we park here for the night?'

'That's right. You can go down to your cabin and -'

'You want me to go away?'

'No -I mean, if you don't like it here -' Her hand came up to his face. He
barely caught her words through the wind and rain.

'I like it here.' Somehow it didn't seem like a contradiction at all.

A moment later Kelly asked himself why it had taken so long. All the signals
had been there. There was another brief discussion between emotion and reason,
and reason lost again. There was nothing to be afraid of here, just a person as
lonely as he. It was so easy to forget. Loneliness didn't tell you what you had
lost, only that something was missing. It took something like this to define
that emptiness. Her skin was soft, dripping with rain, but warm. It was so
different from the rented passion that he'd tried twice in the past month, each
time coming away disgusted with himself.

But this was something else. This was real. Reason cried out one last time that
it couldn't be, that he'd picked her up at the side of the road and had known
her for only a brief span of hours. Emotion said that it didn't matter. As
though observing the conflict in his mind, Pam pulled the halter over her head.
Emotion won.

'They look just fine to me,' Kelly said. His hand moved to them, touching
delicately. They felt just fine, too. Pam hung the halter on the steering wheel
and pressed her face against his, her hands pulling him forward, taking charge
in a very feminine way. Somehow her passion wasn't animalistic. Something made
it different. Kelly didn't know what it was, but didn't search for the reason,
not now.

Both rose to their feet. Pam nearly slipped, but Kelly caught her, dropping to
his knees to help remove her shorts. Then it was her turn to unbutton his shirt
after placing his hands on her breasts. His shirt remained in place for a long
moment because neither wanted his hands to move, but then it was done, one arm
at a time, and his jeans went next. Kelly slipped out of his shoes as the rest
came off. Both stood for the next embrace, weaving as the boat pitched and
rocked beneath them, the rain and wind pelting them. Pam took his hand and led
him just aft of the driver's console, guiding him down to a supine position on
the deck. She mounted him at once. Kelly tried to sit up, but she didn't let
him, instead leaning forward while her hips moved with gentle violence. Kelly
was as unready for that as he'd been for everything else this afternoon, and
his shout seemed to outscream the thunder. When his eyes opened, her face was
inches from him, and the smile was like that on a stone angel in a church.

'I'm sorry, Pam, I -'

She stopped his apology with a giggle. 'Are you always this good?'

Long minutes later, Kelly's arms were wrapped around her thin form, and so they
stayed until the storm passed. Kelly was afraid to let go, afraid of the
possibility that this was as unreal as it had to be. Then the wind acquired a
chill, and they went below. Kelly got some towels and they dried each other
off. He tried to smile at her, but the hurt was back, all the more powerful
from the joy of the previous hour, and it was Pam's turn to be surprised. She
sat beside him on the deck of the salon, and when she pulled his face down to
her chest, he was the one who wept, until her chest was wet again. She didn't
ask. She was smart enough for that. Instead she held him tightly until he was
done and his breathing came back to normal.

'I'm sorry,' he said after a while. Kelly tried to move but she wouldn't let
him.

'You don't have to explain. But I'd like to help,' she said, knowing that she
already had. She'd seen it from almost the first moment in the car: a strong
man, badly hurt. So different from the others she had known. When he finally
spoke, she could feel his words on her breast.

'It's been nearly seven months. Down in Mississippi on a job. She was pregnant,
we just found out. She went to the store, and - it was a truck, a big
tractor-trailer rig. The linkage broke.' He couldn't make himself say more, and
he didn't have to.

'What was her name?'

'Tish - Patricia.'

'How long were you -'

'Year and a half. Then she was just ... gone. I never expected it. I mean, I
put my time in, did some dangerous stuff, but that's all over, and that was me,
not her. I never thought -' His voice cracked again. Pam looked down at him in
the muted light of the salon, seeing the scars she'd missed before and
wondering what their story was. It didn't matter. She brought her cheek down to
the top of his head. He should have been a father right about now. Should have
been a lot of things.

'You never let it out, did you?'

'No.'

'And why now?'

'I don't know,' he whispered.

'Thank you.' Kelly looked up in surprise. 'That's the nicest thing a man has
ever done to me.'

'I don't understand.'

'Yes, you do,' Pam replied. 'And Tish understands, too. You let me take her
place. Or maybe she did. She loved you, John. She must have loved you a lot.
And she still does. Thank you for letting me help.'

He started crying again, and Pam brought his head back down, cradling him like
a small child. It lasted ten minutes, though neither looked at a clock. When he
was done, he kissed her in gratitude that rapidly turned to renewed passion.
Pam lay back, letting him take charge as he needed to do now that he was again
a man in spirit. Her reward was in keeping with the magnitude of what she had
done for him, and this time it was her cries that canceled out the thunder.
Later, he fell asleep at her side, and she kissed his unshaven cheek. That was
when her own tears began at the wonder of what the day had brought after the
terror with which it had begun.





