#Introduction
So this is something that I like to do occasionally.

The thing about it is, I have to make sure that I am writing in a way that is
coherent and lucid, and at the same time fully represents what my stream of
consiousness might do.

Right now it is 9:15 on a Thursday. I have many things that need to get done,
and I am procrastinating those things.

I have told nick and sent him an email informing him that the structure update
portion of the case that I am working on will be complete.

I need to figure out how the structure needs to be updated. What that means is
that I need to pencil in an algorithm, then pen in an algorithm, then I can
write the algorithm into the machine.

Of course, it might not be that simple, but I did literally spend all of
yesterday writing and playing chess and browsing reddit.

Something also that I want to mention here before I start slogging through the
dirt is that Google is a vastly superior company to apple, and they are
unparalleled in my opinion when it comes to making quality products.

It's profound to me just how much better my google product is over my apple
product, and for much much less of the price as well.

# Yin and Yang and Black Boxing
Anyway, that is not what I came in here to talk about. What I came here to talk
about was the Yin and Yang of transparency and black boxing.

## Watches
So currently, I have bought many watches. The most interesting watches, in my
opinion, are the ones that many refer to as "skeleton" watches. The reasoing
for this name is because these watches are transparent all the way through.

So from the face, if you were to look top down in to the watch, you would be
able to see your wrist through the gears and motion of everything in there.

Another kind of watch that I have purchased is the standard quartz watch. When
I walked in to the Fossil store and talked to the man there (his name is Joshua
by the way) He told me that the "Original Boyfriend" watch was actually a
"build your own". Because of that, I grabbed two of the faces, and then a
purple and a blue band, and I now have two "original boyfriends."

I'm not sure which one is the original "original boyfriend" but I have two of
the models of watch with that name.

The original boyfriend is a great watch. However, my gold version has a broken
reset button. The start/stop button works splendidly, but the reset button
causes the watch to go in to a weird spin move.

Suffice it to say, I have avoided that reset button. However, at some point I
will plan to open up the gold watch. It won't be easy, but it will represent a
mile stone for me on my journey.

### Ramblings
It's time to talk about something else, and I'm not sure what.

The original point of this thread was to talk about transparency vs black
boxing.

I suppose I could apply what I have learned from my watches to my situation at
Alliant.

Well, I'm not going to, because that would be silly. I know what is happening
to me at Alliant when it comes to Transparency and Black Boxing.

## What has been happening
At Alliant, Nick takes a very hands-off approach to managment. He gives us the
rope to hang ourselves with.

I have tied my rope in to a noose, and now I must convince Nick that the noose
is not for hanging, but that it is instead for getting things under reign.

The noose is also symbolic.

I need a noose.

### Ramblings
So that was my full train of thought when it comes to transparency vs black
boxing. I am scaring management at Allaint now because of my new found
discovery of just how black box I am being. The transparancy of how that black
box functions scares the people at Alliant.

And rightfully so. If you would have told me when I was 14 that the key to
working hard is being care free, yet contientous, I would have laughed at you.

I didn't understand these things as a child. I thought that logic was the only
thing that mattered, and that a mastery over that would represent a mastery
over all of life.

But we live in a different kind of world than that. We live in a world where
everyone and everything is connected to everyone and everything else, and to
attempt to remove those aspects of existence which are "logical" from those
that are "emotional" is foolish. It would be like attempting to remove a tree
from it's trunk.

