# 001
The sun shone down on Seth from the top of the sky as he pruned away the last
of the wheat with his shears. With a bundle of oats in his wagon, Seth made his
way back to his parents cottage.

Inside, Adam, Seth's father, was nearly finished preparing some cuts of the
lamb that had been sacrificed earlier that year. Seth's mother Eve was tending
to the noontime meal in the kitchen area of the house. She had a pot of boiling
stew that looked and smelled amazing. Both his father and his mother turned to
Seth as he walked in to the cottage.

"I have a lot of excess today. Where should I put it?" Seth asked his father as
he set down the wagon. Seth knew the excess would either go into the cottage to
be sacrificed, or it would go to the pantry to be preserved. Seth always asked,
because he knew his father was particular about having everything in tight
order.

Adam replied simply, "All excess from this point until our seasonal ceremony
should be set aside as sacrifice."

Seth nodded towards his father, turned around and began walking towards the
sacrifical cottage.

The cottage had been built inside of a groove which fit nicely between
two hills. It had unpainted tree trunks for walls and hand-planed slats for a
roof. The entrance was simply an opening which faced the main house, and
towards the back was a window which looks out to the vast fields of nature
beyond. It was just barely within sight of the main house, so Seth picked it
out on the horizon, and made his way towards it.

Seth had made this trip hundreds of times before. Every year in the farms
there would be excess crops, and every year in the meadows there would be
excess livestock. Since before Seth was born, his parents made it a ritual to
routinely sacrifice the excess to Yahweh.

Seth had never attended a sacrifice himself. When Seth asked them why he was
not allowed to attend the sacrifice, his father always told him "When you are
old enough, you will understand." Seth felt he was old enough to be told what
he didn't understand, but his father still disagreed. Seth wasn't sure if he
respected his father more or less because of this.

"If only Yahweh had given us a list of instructions for things we should or
shouldn't do. That would be nice." Seth brushed off the thought.

Seth had been exposed to his fathers explanation of sacrifice since a young
age, but as he grew older he started to realize that it was a rather strange
thing for the Creator of Existance to ask for. After all, if He created
everything, then why does He have need of the excess? Would it not be wiser to
store the excess in case of a harsh winter?

"Do not question the words of the Lord," Seth reminded himself as he approached
the cottage. It had become a mantra for Seth, one he learned from his Father.
As he was continuing to approach maturity, Seth had many questions for his
parents, and one of his father's most common replies was "You must have faith
in Yahweh's Great Plan. Do not question the words of our Lord."

Seth thought he had faith. At least, when he prayed, he felt like he could feel
God, and his mother told him that it was the effort and the faith that mattered
to God more than the actual prayer.

Still, Seth wasn't sure if what he felt was faith, or if it was hope. Surely he
didn't just "hope" God exists, right? Was his lack of faith a sin? Why was it
so hard to know if the person he was talking to was actually God or not? His
mother told him it was okay, and that he would understand in time, but it was
frustrating to Seth not to be able to connect to God in the same way that his
Mother and Father were able.

Seth shook his head. "Do not question the word of the Lord" Seth reminded
himself again as he continued steadily along the beaten path towards the
cottage.

Seth opened the entrance to the cottage, and passed in.

Seth looked to his right and found what he wasn't expecting. Nothing.

Seth looked to his left, and saw the collected offering that had been
accumulated so far.

Seth walked outside again, and looked at the sun to get his bearings. Since it
was high noon, Seth couldn't tell from the sun which way was East, and which
way was West, but he could tell from the direction of the shadow that the
openning of the cottage split the East and the West evenly. This meant that
the opening still faced in the same compass direction that it had been for
years, which meant that the right side was still East, and left was still West.

Of course, that was exactly the result Seth was expecting to find, but somehow
it seemed more reasonable to think that somehow the sun had changed in its
path rather than to believe that his father had moved the sacrificial
collection to the opposite side of the cottage.

Seth thought back to a time that his father became alarmingly upset over a
particular bone that had been misplaced on the alter during the ceremony. For
many days after that sacrifice, Adam wouldn't talk to either Seth or Eve, and
it got to the point that Eve actually became concerned that Adam might become
violent.

During that period, as Seth was tending to the livestock, Adam approached him
and started yelling at him over some misplaced butcher's knives. Seth had
simply left them in the rinsing trough overnight instead of taking them out to
dry, which meant that the finish on the handles became moldy. This happened in
the heat of Adam's anger, and when he saw it, he immediately began yelling at
Seth.

Seth became very scared in that time. Seth knew that it was a mistake to leave
the knives unattended like that, and he apoligized for it profusely. That
didn't seem like it was enough for Adam.

As Adam's voice became louder, Seth wasn't sure what to do, and he started
cowering before his father. Seth put his arms together in front of his face and
started turning away from his father to protect himself.

When Adam saw Seth make this motion, a serene calm came over him, and he
started crying. Adam collapsed as a baby, tears flowing down his eyes, over
his cheeks, and onto his lips. Adam stood up, wiped away his tears and said,
"I'm sorry Seth, please forgive me. What I do you understand not, but you will
understand in time." With that Adam walked away, and his attitude returned to
normal after that.

Since that event, Seth had always been sure to be particularly conscientous
about the sacrifcial goods. Adam wanted everything just perfect for the
sacrificial ceremony, and Seth knew how much it meant to him.

But now that all of the supplies were on the West side of the cottage instead
of the East, Seth had no idea what to do. Seth placed the goods on the East
side of the cottage where his Father had last instructed him to a few days
before, and began his return journey back to the house.

"For what reason could the goods be on the West?" Seth pondered all of the
possibilites. All of the options seemed equally absurd to Seth. Then, suddenly,
he realized what the most likely case was. "Satan could have moved them!"

Seth chastised himself for thinking of it so late. He was already halfway back
to the house, and needed to make a decision.

"If it really was the devil, then I need to act fast! I should turn towards the
cottage, and make sure that all ef the sacrifical goods are safe and attended
for."

Seth turned around and started back towards the cottage with a hurried pace. He
went only a few steps before he stopped, and looked back the other way towards
his parents house.

"But, if it is not the devil, and my father really did move everything to the
other side of the cottage, then I should continue on my path home, and ask him
about the reason for the change."

Seth was torn in two, and honestly didn't know which way to turn.

Seth looked up and felt the sun beating down on him. "Yahweh, listen to your
humble child praying. Instruct me in the way I should go. Amen."

With that short prayer uttered, Seth closed his eyes and waited for the voice
of Yahweh. He heard silence. Seth opened his eyes.

Seth looked right towards his parents home, and then left back towards the
cottage. Both directions had pro's and con's, and Seth had no way of choosing
between the two.

Seth checked in front of him. He saw sheep grazing in the meadows and livestock
coralling towards the trough. Behind him Seth felt the sheaves of wheat blowing
through the wind.

"Up, right and left, forward and back... The only direction I haven't looked is
down," Seth thought. "Is there anything down worth looking at?"

Seth thought about it for a moment. What was down? The earth? Surely he
shouldn't pray to the earth.

Seth thought again. Hell was also down. Pandemonium, the capital city of the
fallen realm. That was where the devil lived. Lucifer was his name as Archangel
before he fell, but now as the Fallen One he was called Satan. He was the
antagonist of the Angelic War. 

He was still in Pandemonium. He had to be. He didn't totally understand
everything that his parents told him, but he knew for sure that Yahweh had
banished Satan to that realm, and that it would be impossible for Him to
escape. The only way he could escape is if Yahweh let's him, and there is no
way Yahweh would do anything like that. "Since the devil is in Pandemonium,"
Seth reasoned, "then he is not in the cottage." The logic made sense to Seth.

Seth turned back and continued on towards his parents home.
