# Cain's Abel
"So as you know, my young brother Seth," Cain began his story, "I was the first
born of our parents, so named Adam and Eve. Our mother... I remember she was so
beautiful to look upon... she raised me in the farms. By the time I was
walking, I was working the plows and learning how to rotate crops.

"Life was good as I grew up. My mother... our mother... took great care of me,
and our father managed the sheep.

"I was in love with our mother. By the time I was becoming a teenager, I was
beginning to realize that I was developing sexual feelings for my mother... our
mother. Of course, I understood that what I was experiencing was simply
natural human instinct, but regardless, the feeling was there. I knew that if I
were ever to be able to think clearly, I would have to remove myself from my
mother. That is what I did.

"It was when I was about your age that I, too went on a pilgramage. However,
for my pilgramage, I decided to pack with me seven times seventy days worth of
food, nearly a year and a half worth. I saw a great many things on my
pilgramage, a great many things that I will never forget." Cain looked towards
Seth for a moment. "My pilgramage was truly special for me."

"As I returned, there were matters about the universe that I was confused
about. The stories our parents had told me did not seem to fit with what I had
experienced on my pilgramage. Their stories did not seem to match what I saw,
and I wanted to ask them all about it.

"I returned home, and when I did, I was greeted by a father and a mother with a
baby in her arms. The baby was an infant, and the first thing our parents said
to me when I returned was, 'Cain, your mother and I had another child, we named
him Abel.'

"Of course, I looked amicably upon the prospect of a little brother. A sibling
seemed nice, and he could be useful in helping out around the farms. Still,
though, I was excited to tell my parents about my pilgramage, and after they
introduced me to Abel, and put him to sleep, we talked all about it."

At this point, Cain's demeanor changed. He voice changed from a happy tone to a
more somber one.

"Well, they did not take to kindly to my discovered wisddom. You see, to me,
their story about how they were "created" by some benelovent being named
"Yahweh" seemed rather far-fetched, and the concept of a perfect garden
named "Eden" was something that seemed to me more like a fairy story than it was
an actual place. Especially as I walked around and saw all the varied kinds of
terrain that the world has to offer, I see very little reason why I should
believe that everything was just poofed somehow magically into existance.

"When I explore the world, I see cultures. I see other things, which look like
they've been put here by other people. I see things like pyrmids, built out of
sand blocks so symetrical that you can't even slide your finger nails between
them. I've seen hanging gardens in babylon, and I've seen a combination of a
clock and a compass at stonehenge. On my journies, I saw all sorts of amazing
beasts and creatures of the land and also I fished and found many sorts of
different kinds of fish, all of which I could skin and eat for nourishment.

"As I was doing all of this, I thought, 'There is simply no way that all of
this was created by a single diety. This was the work of the masses, of people
cooperating to finish a task. These things are the result of years and years of
evolutionary history and continued growing intellegence. There is evidence here
of more than thousands of years of evolutionary and archeological history to be
explored and unpacked. The story my parents tell me about their God and their
creator must be incorrect.'

"I explained all of this to mother and father, but they would not listen. They
told me things like 'Those ideas are only Satan's demons trying to take a hold
of you.' They made me believe that any lack of faith in their invisible diety
they called Yahweh would condemn me to a life of eternal damnation.

"I just had questions that I wanted answers to, but they wouldn't even let me
ask the questions. They were more concerned with Abel than they were with my
questions.

"And so, I returned to helping my mother with the farms. It soon became a
rather sore subject amongst my parents, so I reasoned that in some way I must
be faulty or possessed for having these doubts of their lord creator.

"I returned to working on the farms with mother, and Father raised Abel to mend
to the sheep.

"To think," Cain put in an aside for a moment, "To think I actually felt
guilty for questioning the stories I was being told. It sounds so absurd to me
now."

Cain and Seth shared a moment of silence together. Seth was actually the one
that broke the silence. "So what happened after that?"

"Oh," Cain returned to reality. "Well, I continued to grow up. Abel and I both
grew up to become adults. As he started to come of age, he became the favored
by the parents. I'm not resentful of him now, but at the time I was quite
jealous of the attention he was receiving, particularly from my father.

"I don't know what mom and dad have told you about Abel and my own upbringing,
but I must say that despite the tragic end that we met together, we got along
rather well. Sure, we had our quablles, as you might expect brothers to do, but
we actually got along quite well.

"You see, ever since I had returned from my pilgramage, I began to protest our
parents rituals one by one. First, I stopped resting so much on the sabbath.
Mind you, I would still rest, but I began doing work on the sabbath, just
because it was forbidden. Our parents did not like it, but I told them it was
important to me that I do it.

"Next, I told them I didn't want to join them in their evening prayer sessions.
This one took longer for me to break free from, because they argued that not
only were the evenings a good time to pray, but they were also a good time to
commune with the family. And that is true. But I told them it was important to
me that I abstain from praying, because to me it seemed that I wasn't able to
connect to God in any way through that practice. And so we agreed on a
compromise, that I would not have to pray with them, but that I would commune
with the family immediately after they finished praying.

"And so, piece by piece, I began to sepreate myself from the rituals that our
parents took part in.

"The ritual that they held most dear to them was sacrifice. 'Paying taxes to
our lord is the greatest responsibility a man can bear.' is something our
father would always say."

"He still does." Seth interjected.

Cain chuclked. "I'm sure he does."

"Regardless," Cain continued. "I didn't want to do these things, and the last
one that I was pushing back on was sacrifice. It seemed wrong to me to waste a
portion of our crop by burning it needlessly in to the sky. Such sacrifices
were entirely valid resources that were going to waste each harvest. After the
sacrifices, as a family we still had plenty of food to nourish ourselves, but I
can't help thinking that more food would have done the family some good during
some rather harsh winters.

"So I expressed this feeling to our parents. During a sacrifice one year, the
four of us gathered to make our sacrifices to God. I brought a portion of the
crop, as I always do, and Abel brought the fattest sheep from his flock.

"When we had all placed our sacrifices on the alter and burned them, my father
then made the statement, 'Oh, great lord in heaven, please accept Abel's
sacrifice, as this lamb is the fattest lamb of his stock, and very deep is this
sacrifice to him. Shine favorably upon Abel's sacrifice this evening.'

"Of course, when he said all of this, I was slightly taken aback, but not
overly so, because I thought the whole ritual was a silly ordeal anyway. But
then, our father turned to me, and said, 'And to my son Cain, please bestow
your Holy Spirit upon him so that he may see the transgressions of his ways and
return to your everlasting and eternal light, oh Lord."

Cain paused for a moment. When Seth looked closely, he could see that Cain's
ears were beginning to turn red. Seth also noticed that Cain's facial demeanor
became more furled at this point in time.

"Well," Cain continued, "I decided that I had enough of such nonsense, and
decided to speak back right then and there. In the present, this only evokes
memories of resentment and hartred, but I will continue to speak of the
experience as I best remember it. I said, 'Father, please spare me your
mysticism. I do not believe in your God, and I do not believe it is wise to
waste our spoils in this manner. I don't want to hear anything more about a
"Holy Spirit" and I don't want to hear you go on about the "Divine Trinity". If
you don't appreciate my work around here, perhaps I should return on my
pilgramage, and leave this place for good.'

"Of course, I was feeling mighty brave, finally standing up to father like
that." Cain paused again, before continuing, "Even though it was twenty years
ago, I remember what I said to him so vividly. I had been stewing on these
words for such a long time, and when I finally said, it felt so sweet that I
remember it exactly to this day.

"Father said, 'If you reject our Lord and Creator Yahweh himself, then my son,
you a truly and deeply lost."

"To that I replied, 'If you reject the world as it reveals itself to you day
by day, and if choose instead to supplant it with an invisible man named
Yahweh, then I am the one that sees you as deeply lost.'

"Let me tell you how satisfying it was to see the confused look on father's
face. He didn't know how to reply.

"Unfortunately for me, Abel spoke up. Abel got between me and Father,
and began insulting me about what I was saying. So I turned to Abel, and I told
him, 'Abel, I don't want to hurt you, but this is between me and father
right now. Do not get in the middle of this.'

"Abel, instead of backing off like a reasonable man would, stood resolutely
between me and father. Abel continued to yell back at me, saying, 'You godless
prick! How dare you defile not only your father's beliefs but my own as well!
Find the Lord Yahweh and call him your creator or get away from this place! Do
not ever dare to call my sacrifice of my fattest lamb worthless!'

"Of course," Cain continued, "I did not take to this outburst all too kindly,
and retorted with something like, 'Of course your fattest lamb is not a
worthless sacrifice, your fattest lamb would make an amazing stew, and it's a
shame now that such potential has gone to waste.'

"And of course, this angered Abel a good deal, and we began to get physical
with eachother.

"But before we threw any punches, mother began to interfere. She said something
like, 'Cain, this is the devil working inside of you. Please, return to your
senses. I understand that you are confused and lost now, but the way to find
yourself is not by staging outbursts like this. Please, son, come to your
senses.'

"My first instinct was to begin yelling at my mother, telling her that the
devil wasn't real in the way she thought she was, and that her story in no way
could be literally true in the way she thought it was. It was when my father
had to stop me from raising a fist to my mother that I came to my senses.

In that moment, I realized I was being an unreasonable asshole, and everything
that had led to those events was my doing.  Regardless of the fact that I
thought all of the stories about the Garden of Eden and the Devil and the
Angelic War and everything else were all nonsense, the way that I was
attempting to express that idea to my parents was not productive towards the
life I wanted to live. I saw with utmost clarity, as if I had been given a
third eye, and was looking on to the alter from the outside, that I was
conducting myself in a manner which was counterproductive to my overall well
being.

"Immediately, as soon as I realized this, I apologized to my mother. I told
her, 'Mother, I am sorry, you are right, I should not be behaving in this way.'
I then turned to my father, and said, 'Father, you are right, my sacrifice is
not as great as Abel's is, and I see every reason why the Lord would look more
favorably upon his than mine.'

"At this point, after I had turned to both of our parents, I then turned to
Abel. I saw that he had hardened his heart towards me. I began to attempt to
apologize, but before I could get barely any words out, Abel inturrupted me
with, 'Don't think for a moment that defiling the Lord's place of sacrifice is
ever acceptable.'

"When Abel said this, I looked to Abel, then I looked back to both of my
parents. It was at this point that I asked them, 'Could you leave Abel and I
alone, please? I think we can work past this brother to brother.'

"At this request, mother and father left the room, leaving Abel and I at the
sacrificial alter alone."

Cain paused here. Seth knew how the story went from here, but he still had to
hear it.

"Abel started to yell at me," Cain continued. "He yelled about God, about
Yahweh, about sacrifice, about ritual. He was giving me a good lesson on what
it means to be a child of God.

"I tried to get him to calm down, but he wouldn't. At first, I tried the
agreement approach. I told him, 'Look, I'm sorry I doubted your God, but if it
will calm you down, I will tell you that I respect him and believe that he
exists.'

"Well, once I said this, Abel got even more upset. He saw through what I was
trying to do, and replied, 'Is that what you think my God is? You think Yahweh
is just some sort of bargaining chip that you can just choose to believe or
disbelieve in at your whimsy? You insult this holy place with your blaspheming
words.'

"Abel went on and on with such drabble. I continued to attempt to defuse the
situation, but it only got worse. Eventually, in something of a last ditch
effort, I said, 'Listen, Abel, I can see that you are clearly upset. For right
now we are going to have to agree to disagree. Tensions are high, and I can see
you are passionate, so how about we each take a deep breath and we'll each
believe whatever we believe for the time being, and we'll come back to this at
a later date?'

"Well, unfortantely, Abel's response to this was, 'You say tensions are high?
Tensions are high all right. Tensions are higher than this roof right now.'
After Abel said all of that. He stepped towards me and threw a punch at me.

"Of course, I was aware that Abel was getting visibly upset, and I was keen to
the fact that his body language was getting more and more tense as the
conversation went on. I was able to notice Abel posture to punch before he
actually threw his fist towards me, and so I was prepared for it.

"I blocked his intial punch, and returned with a left jab of my own, followed
by an uppercut. Abel clearly was not at all prepared for me to return any
punches, and both of my punches landed squarely first on his nose and then on
his jaw that he immediately got knocked out and dropped to the floor."

Cain pasued for a moment as he mentally recalled the scene in his head. Seth
could tell by Cain's facial expression that this was a hard moment for him to
recall.

"I should have gone for a more conservative defense, but my instinct was my
instinct, and what's done is done." Cain bowed his head for a moment of silence
before resuming his conversation. "As Abel fell back from the force of my
punch, the base of his skull landed on the corner of the alter before bouncing
off and hitting the floor. It all happened in such a short span of time. By the
time I saw him falling back, I glanced over to see the alter. When I realized
his head was on a direct path to the corner, I looked over to see his head
already colliding with the alter and smearing it with drips of liquid blood.
The sound of the "thud" I heard when his skull hit the alter was the most
innocuous yet dreadful sounds; I still here it in the occasonial nightmare. It
was as if his head was a watermelon and the alter was an icepick that pierced
towards the inside before it dropped to the floor, leaving a hole with nothing
but red liquid to ooze out of.

"Immediately, I saw blood start to drain from the wound that was just made. I
knelt down next to him, turned Abel on to his back so that he was facing me,
and put his head in my hands. Immediately, my hands started to feel warm as I
could feel them becoming covered with blood.

"With my right hand I continued to hold the bleeding head of my brother, and
with my left I felt his hand. I could already feel the spasms as his injured
brain began sending random signals down the spinal cord and in to all of the
motor neurons. I could feel his entire body seizing in and out as his body held
on to it's last semblance of consciousness. I stood above him and felt helpless
to watch him as his body squirmed in it's dying moments. For what felt like an
entire lifetime, I held my dying brother in my hands as I felt his last breaths
leave his body."

Cain took a long pause. Seth thought he might have seen a tear in Cain's eye,
but before Cain let himself become too vulnerable, he resumed his story.

"When there was nothing but a still and lifeless corpse, I slowly raised the
body of my dead brother to the alter, and I said, 'perhaps, if God is there, he
will accept my brother Abel as sacrifice.'"

Cain smiled before he continued. "Let me tell you, Seth, if there is a God, he
very clearly does not have a keen sense of humor."

Cain continued with his story. "After I had placed our brother on the alter, I
made my way back to the house where mother and father had retreated. When I
arrived, Father asked me, 'Where is Abel?' to which I replied, 'I don't know.
Am I my brother's keeper?'

"My father looked at my hand covered with blood and said, 'Oh, Cain, what have
you done? Your brother's blood cries out to me from the earth! It appears that
in your rage you have slewn your brother!'

"To this, I said, 'Father, please believe me when I say that Abel's rage, not
mine, was his undoing. If he should have only been more calm, I would not have
been required to raise my fist to him.'

"'Raise your fist!' father exclaimed. 'My son, you never raise your fist even
to someone that raises theirs, and this is exactly why. Just how unfortunate
can one punch be before the so called accident begins to look like a deliberate
murder?'

"When father began to accuse me of murder, at first I rejected the idea. I told
him, 'I only raised my fist in self defense, I did not intend to kill him with
my blow.'

"But as I grow older now, I start to see that there is certainly some part of
me that wanted Abel dead in that time. After all, his death has allowed for me
to make a life for myself out here."

Cain paused for a moment, as Seth finally came back to his senses and
remembered where he was and who he was talking to. To his estimation, it had
been something like twenty years since the events that Cain had just described
to him took place. Seth looked around saw that Cain had made quite a life for
himself out here in exile. The hut he was sitting in was very homely, and he
could see that Cain was very conscientious when it comes to gathering and
baking food.

"I could have worked with my parents and Abel over many years to try and
understand our differences, but killing Abel brought me to that end much
sooner."

Cain paused. Seth wanted to say something, but wasn't even sure what to say.
Cain continued.

"Don't get me wrong," Cain resumed. "I never intended to kill my brother Abel.
It was entirely an accident, and a tragic one at that. Abel was a great man,
much greater than me. In fact, I know that I greatly resented him for it at the
time, which only makes his death by my hand look all the more premeditated.
Still, Seth, I swear to you I did not plan his death. It is unfortunate that
you will only ever meet one of your brothers in your life time, I wish you
could have known Abel..."

Cain trailed off. After a long pause, he finally broke the silence between
them.

"So that's my story," Cain told Seth. "Consider me the devil if you would like,
but that is my tale of woe."

