# Yahweh's Eden

Seth stopped for a moment, still sipping on his now warm tea. Was it half full
or half empty? Seth didn't know, and he didn't know what to think of his
brother's story either.

Still, Seth had his senses about him, so he said. "I'm... not sure what to
say..."

Well, that at least seemed better to Seth than deafening silence.

"Heh, I don't either."

After the short reply, Cain turned back to his tea. He had already finished
most of his, so he poured the remainder into his mouth and swallowed it with
one final gulp.

"I love when the ending of a story matches the ending of a drink!" Cain said in
a meager attempt to lighten the mood.

Seth looked at his drink, and took another sip. He wasn't sure he was finished
with his yet.

"There's one thing I don't get," Seth realized, and started to voice out loud.
"So, I followed your story, you had a pilgramage where you learned 'something'
(and we must return to exactly what that something is, because that seems very
unclear to me, but for now let us continue) and when you returned, our parents
rejected it. Then, you proceeded to describe how you first rejected, then
defamed, and finally defiled all that both of them believe to be holy, all
because you felt you had some sort of 'revelation' that was so profound that
this somehow justifies everything?" Seth paused for a moment to let the
ridiculousness of the whole thing sink in. "Well, I don't know about you, but
no singular experience or revelation that I have had has been so profound that
I would put myself through everything that you have, and _still_ find myself on
the other end telling the tale as if I were somehow on the upper end of
everything. The fact that you can stand there and prentend that somehow killing
your brother, expressing incestuous interest in our mother, and disrespect and
defaming the name of our father are all a reasonable price to pay for something
so profound that you would pay all of those things seven and seventy times over
if you had to?"

Seth paused, and realized that Cain was becoming wholy uninterested in what he
was saying. When Seth noticed this, he became upset, and said, "Answer me!
I'm asking you a question about your story."

Cain stopped for a moment before he turned to Seth and replied. "You are
asleep, but soon you will be awoken."

Cain paused, and Seth found himself dumbfounded, unable to say anything except,
"What?"

"I could attempt to explain all of the things you want answers for," Cain
continued, "but when you spirit wakes up, they will be much more equiped to
help you understand what you are struglling with."

Seth wasn't what this talk of awakening and spirits was, but Seth was beginning
to feel insulted.

Cain continued. "And, to answer your immediate question (though I won't answer
any more, so don't ask them), I would argue that for all who take a spiritual
awakening, the tax of that awakening is on the original sin of man to bear.
That original sin is mine, and mine alone, to bear, just as it is yours, and
yours alone to bear.  One day you will see that. You will have to."

With that Cain finished his question. Seth immediately had an entire multiude
of things to come back with, but Cain saw this, turned his finger toward Seth,
and said, "Remember, I said no more questions. I'm not answering so don't ask."

Before Seth could react in any way to this demand from Cain, Cain continued,
"But, let me tell you a story I came up with. There is a lot of free time for a
farmer like myself to come up with a lot of stories, and this is one that I've
written, and I am quite fond of this one, for reason which will become clear
when I tell it. Maybe this story will answer your questions."

Seth, while not entirely satisfied, was curious enough if Cain was talented
enough to answer the questions he had with a story. So, Seth allowed it, and
decided to listen to another story of Cain's, this time presumed to be
fictional rather than historical.

"So, before I tell you this story, I must first inform you that our main
character, whose name is 'Steve' in this version (but he could be named
anything you like really, I just chose 'Steve' because it seemed vanilla enough
for my purposes), is a fifth dimensional being."

Cain paused, and saw that Seth was alerady losing interest in the story.

"Now, I know what you're thinking!" Cain said hurridely, recognizing that Seth
was losing his patience, 'Five dimensions! But we only live in Four dimensions.
How do you expect me to imagine an entirely new spacial dimension?  That's
ridiculous.'

"To that, I must hastily reply that, when counted in this way, our character
'Steve' is actually a _seven_ dimensional being, composed of five spatial
dimensions, and two temporal ones.

"And I know everyone has tons of questions about how multiple orthagonal
timelines work, or how five spatial dimensions can even be thought about or
reasoned with in a practical story telling sense. But to answer those questions
would be pointless. The bottom line that you need to know is that, while some
quirks of motion and time do exist to our main character, the relationships and
politics and governments and so forth of our seven dimensional friends more or
less resemble the same quables and quarlls that our four dimensional selves
love and enjoy."

Seth, still not at all sure if trusting Cain that this story was going to be
worth while, decided to let Cain continue before he made any sort of
interjections. He just merely said "Sure, why not" to indicate that he would
suspend his disbelief for the sake of the story.

"Good, so our five dimensional friend Steve has a five dimensional job working
for the five dimeniosal goverment of five dimensional affairs. I could come up
with names for all of these things, but the point is, Steve has a mundane life
doing mundane five dimensional things, and he decides that he wants to take up
a hobby."

Again, Cain could see that Seth was losing interest in the level of word play
he was using in the story, se Cain brought himself more quickly to his point.

"In this five dimensional world, one of the things that some of the beings do
is called 'Archetechture'. Now, what this 'Archetechture' (or they also just
call it 'Arch' for short) is in five dimensions is entirely different than what
we would call architechture in three dimensions. But 'Arch' was a technique
that these 5-d beings would use to compress one of their time dimensions in to
a space dimension, and then compress three of their space dimensions into the
other time dimension.

"The people who did this in this world called thimselves 'Architcets' and they
oversaw and maintained the care of what to them was a strange and fascinating
living and breathing fourth dimensinoal universe. And, because of the way that
their five dimensional buildings worked, they could fit all of this in four of
the dimensions of the building, and still have an extra dimension left over for
things like opening doors and walking in and out of the building. That way, the
'Archs' took care of their world like it was their child, but they were able to
keep it all contianed inside of it's own little universe."

Cain stopped now to see that, at the very least, Seth was feigning interest in
Cain's story, so he continued without fear.

"Well, of course, Steve, being such an architect in this universe, was so
inspired by his visit to the cross dimensional pan atlantic expressway 'Arch'
(they called the four dimensinal universes they created 'Archs') that he
decided that he wanted to try his hand at creating his own hand made 'Arch'
from scratch.

"And a small fact you should know about these hobbies is that they are mighty
difficult to maintain at any scale. But still, with a refined enough hand, and
a skilled enough craftsman, one man could, in theory at least, operate and
maintain his own 'Arch'. However, it was very expensive to do, and the smallest
of mistakes could cause the whole thing to implode. When Arch's implode, they
don't usually do any harm (although the really large ones would certainly harm
people in the near vicinity if those imploded, but of course they have many
precautions against that happening) but it still means tons of time, energy,
and resources which have effectively been flushed down the five dimensional
drain and need to be re-gathered and re-constructed from scratch.

"But, with all of that being said, of all our five-dimensional friends Steve
was one of the best suited architechts to handle his own personal project like
this.

"So, with ferocity, he got to work on his new project. Over the course of many
months in one direction, and multiple years in the other, along with tons of
whatever five-dimensional currency he used to purchase the raw material needed,
Steve was finally able to put together his own, working, Arch.

"Of course, it wasn't perfect, and while he was in the process of building it,
he went through a few phases where it would stabalize in to a living four
dimensional world, before it would collapse suddenly. But after he got all of
the details fine-tuned, and ironed out all of the kinks in his design, he was
able to get a working prototype which so closely resembled his final vision for
his project that he couldn't help but feel in awe of what he had accomplished.

"After all of that two dimensional time spent, Steve's Arch was operational.
Steve found the closest figurines, (which would be the 5-d equivilent of lego
people) and used them to place objects which appeared to become something like
living things (but, I must remind you, very strange and novel living things
that resemeble something like "intricate dust in the wind" to 5-d people)
which were to become the first lifelike objects to go in to his universe.

"And when he placed them there, he said to them, 'My name is Steve, I created
you in my image. I also created the world, and everything around you, so that
it may nourish and sustain you...'

"But at around that moment, as he was giving his first oration to the first
living objects of his own, personal, arch, he realized that he was still using
the quantum flux generator to power the core of the universe, and it would be
some number of quantum hours before it would be entirely safe to stably remove
it from the design of his arch. He realized all of this as he was talking to
his creatures, so he also said to them...

"'Of the fruit of the tree of life (which was where he had stored his quantum
generators) you should not eat, but of every other fruit you should nourish
yourself.'

"Satisfied that he had sufficiently warned his creatures of the dangers of
eating the forbidden fruit, Steve went on to do his regular five dimensional
things, while us three dimensional beings wandered around in wonder at the new
and astonishing things that Steve made for us.

"And of course, from there we eat the mushrooms, and Steve finds out, and so on
and so forth. I could go on about the rest of the story, but you know how the
rest must go"

And then Cain just stopped. His story just ended.

"Well, that's about as far as I have gotten. I'm not so inspired to write more
of it, but I think that's because this is the only part I am interested in.
It's certainly not a complete story, and it also doesn't tell us any morals.
There also in very little connection to what happens in our day to day lives in
this story. But still, I like this story. I just like it. It's absurd, and
that's what I love."

Cain stopped, and saw that Seth was almost frothing at the mouth in
anticipation to retort. Almost as if commanding him again, Cain said, "Well, go
ahead, say what you want to say."

"But that is utter ridiculousness!" Seth almost burst out. "You presume me so
naive not to see straight through your analogy? Steve is Yahweh, and his Arch
is our universe. It's so directly a paradoy of our parents story, it's almost
insulting to them, and to Abel, and to me, and even to yourself to have the
nerve to come up with a story like that! And you think that it doesn't have any
connection to what happens in our day to day lives? It has _everything_ to do
with our day to day lives, because it's a parody of the bedrock on which I was
and am being raised by our parents."

Seth's tone was getting noticably hurried, and he caught himself getting so
excited that he stumbled over his own words sometimes. It was clear that he
felt passionatly, for some reason, about Cain's story.

But Cain just chuckled at Seth's response, and said, "No, Seth, it has
everything to do with _your_ day to day lives, but it has nothing to do with
_mine_. In fact, this story allowed me to get to understand that this story
truly does has nothing to do with our universe, or the predicament we are in."

Cain paused, and Seth gestured like he was going to reply, but could only get
out a couple of inaudible grunts before finally mumbling, "I still think the
story is blasphemous."

"In other words," Cain continued, ignoring Seth's accusations of blasphemy, "we
are not ruled by a tran-dimensional being named Yahweh who created us and
watches us and guides and who we can 'tap in to' if we only pray hard enough.
The thing that we are able to 'tap in to' is actually ourselves, and prayer is
only one method of finding stillness in your psyche. One thing that I have
learned is that I don't understand _why_ everything exists the way it does, but
that when I actually look at it deeply, as if looking through the surface of a
lake to see the bottom, I see that on the floor of our metaphorical lake is a
place that is worth exploring. To pretend as though we have already explored
it, and already found a man named Yahweh there, is foolishness. Perhaps you
have found Yahweh, but I have looked deeply not for Yahweh, but just for
whatever was resting on the floor of the lake.



My story allowed me to stop and look at the world for what it really was, and
not what I would tell myself it might be. My story is the most
feasable explanation for how our parents story could be in any way true, and my
story is so blatently far-fetched that to even begin to believe my version of
'Yahweh's Eden' would be considered lunacy by even the most mad of mad men. You
even said it yourself, my story is blasphemous. To honestly believe that the
most reasonable way to explain the phenomenon of our consciousness is through
multi dimensional architects who exist on a seperate plane of existance, and
created us, is so absurd that people have been ostracized and exiled for saying
such things before. Yet here we are, where the stories of our bedrock are so
deeply perverted, that I can create an absurd parody story which mirrors our
bedrock story so well that it is near impossible to tell the difference between
them, yet one of them is clearly false and ridiculous, and the other one we
hold to be our most dear and highest reverance."

Cain paused, finishing the conclusion to his cute little story by wrapping up
all of the philosophical loose ends with a little bow.

"Or at least," Cain continued, "I suppose there is no harm in believing that
some sort of trans-dimensional demigod created our universe. If you want to
project what you see at the bottom of the lake, then you are free to do so. I
am not here to tell you that anything really is at the bottom of the lake. I am
here to merely tell you that you should question what you see in the world. But
I do want to, at the very least, warn you against the dangers of projecting
your images of God, and divinity, on to their own, anthroplogical, forms. It
can be helpful, especially in times of hardship, to project something like that
to surrender to. But we must always be aware that, when we do this, we run the
danger of becoming madmen, lunatics, and crazy people, who follow their
hallucinations to their conclusions, and remark that their dreams are truly
divinly inspired. If we are not careful, our Lucifer's might become our Satan."

Unsure exactly what Cain meant by this last line, Seth could only listen in
bafflement as Cain went on about these philosphical points. It felt to Seth as
though any time it felt as though Cain were coming to a point where he might
reach some kind of conclusion, it seemed as though he would continue on with
another point, and eventually it got to the point where it was exhausting Seth.





