# Cain's Demons

"Listen to my story, Seth. Let yourself be taken away by it."

Cain began his words, but Seth only felt as though he were losing space. It
felt to Seth that the walls and ceiling of the hut they were in were slowly
getting smaller, and Seth wasn't able to convince himself that the walls truly
weren't collapsing in on him.

"I need space, I need air. If nothing else, please allow me that." Seth said,
almost in a hurry, recognizing now the strange effects the plants his brother
had given him were having on him.

But Cain remained silent letting Seth calm himself down a little bit before
replying. "Please, just listen to my story. I want to give you the full
experience. Let go of this moment, and let it take you where it may."

Seth heard to his brother, but he didn't really listen to his words.

"In fact," Seth continued, "as far as I'm aware, you have poisoned
me, and you are keeping me here until the poison takes effect..." Seth looked
over at his brother for a moment as he said these words, "... I don't believe
you have done that to me, but at least give us the curtosy of returning to your
cottage where it is more comfortable."

But Cain replied and said, "No, I insist. Your discomfort is only your body
resisting that which brings it to true trancendent life. Let go of that
discomfort, let yourself be free of those things which you feel as though you
need. Leave yourself, and your body, behind, as you let yourself drift through
the cosmos, guided only by the sound of my voice."

Before Seth realized it, he was following Cain's voice to it's conculsions, and
reaching those same conclusions with his own thoughts. It felt as though every
time a thought would emerge in Seth's mind, Cain would say it only moments
later.

"Listen to me, Seth. I took the same mushrooms that you did, and you can trust
me when I say that I have studied these fungus more than I have studied every
other plant in this greenery. If anything about what I have experincend with
these mushrooms is at all accurate, that means that our minds are going to
'sync up' in some sense, and everything that I say, you will be already
thinking before I say it. Is this happening to you right now?"

As Cain was saying the words, Seth was becoming more and more constantly amazed
at how well his thoughts were lining up with Cain's words. It was as if his
thoughts were being guided by a light, or a force, and that force was also
guiding the words of Cain just as well as it was guiding the thoughts of Seth.
It would take Seth many months to be able to articulate this idea, and for the
moment, he could only feel what it felt like to know what it was like.

When Cain finished his words, and posed his question, it took Seth a moment for
him to realize that the conversation, which they were having, had come to a
screeching halt, and that it was waiting on his reply. But he felt no
obligation to reply immediately, and decided he would reply in an off hand way.

"I feel as though I can't tell if what you are saying about the mushrooms is
true, or if you are simply very good at manipulating my psychology to get me to
think you are somehow ahead of me in speech. Either way, riddle me impressed,
but it still doesn't mean I'm just going to surrender my guard to you. How
about we get on with your story already."

With that, Cain grinned and replied, "Very well then, to my story it is."

When Cain said this, Seth waited in anticipation of the first words that were
going to come out of Cain's mouth. It felt as though it couldn't be soon enough
that Cain got his story over and done with.

But Cain waited, letting the moment linger.

"I began my pilgramage just as you did," Cain finally broke the silence. "I saw
many things on my journeys, from new kinds of exotic and fascinating birds to
entire landscapes that I can't even attempt to describe.

"When I started my pilgramage, it was very clear to me when I began that I
would need to preserve as much as the food I brought with me as possible. I had
planned on staying for quite a long time, as I have told you, so I needed to
experiment with new food sources.

"So every new kind of place that I came to, the first thing I would do would be
examine it for what sorts of plants and fruits grow there. Even in the desert,
where you would think that there would be nothing but heat and sand for miles,
there are still creatures and plants that manage to find and create life for
themselves there. It seems that there is always more to learn and discover
about this world that we live in."

Cain paused for a moment, and looked around his greenhouse.

"This greenhouse," Cain gestured as he continued talking, "is the result of
twenty years of work travelling, foraging, crossbreeding, and cultivation. In
the times of my travels, I found so many plants that I thought it would be a
great sin not to compile all of them and experiment with what I could make
happen with them.

"During my pilgramage, I mostly just experimented with eating most things raw,
but even at that time I knew of the wonders of fire and what sorts of things it
could do to make things more digestable. But as I traveled, I started to find
those plants which would make for good nutrition, and those which would not.

"Now," Cain made a noticable shift in the tone of his voice, "I could go on
with each plant that I've found and cultivated, and I could talk to you for
days on end about each one, how I found it, what my story and relationship is
with it, and what sorts of practical uses it has or doesn't have, but we don't
have all day here, and I don't want to bore you with the ramblings of an
over-excited arborist.

"The reason I am telling you all of this is to set the stage for you when I
found this swamp.

"I found this place towards the end of my pilgramage. I immediately found it
interesting because the ponds and the waters actualy stay risen throughout the
years. For all seasons, the ground is constantly being soaked by the water
which stays dormant over the land. This creates an interesting dynamic for the
plants here. Again, though, I could go on about the botanical details for many
lifetimes of conversation, and again, I will spare you from such talk.

"Regardless, I immediately became excited about the farming possibilities when
I saw this place. I saw the foliage that was already growing here on it's own,
and the possiblities of combining these plants with the ones I had already
found were endless.

"I explored as much as I could at the time. I saw that the swamp was divided in
to two main sections. There is this section, which I have purposed into my
farms, and then there is first section, where you and I both first entered and
where I have made the cottage for ourselves.

"As I was exploring, and getting more and more excited about the posibilites
these plants had to offer, I came upon this."

Cain pointed with an open palm towards the mushrooms growing at the base of the
large tree there.

"When I first saw them, I did not want to admit to myself what they were. They
were just so beautiful, growing like they were. The entire base of the tree was
covered in these mushroom spores, and each one popped out into it's own
intricate cap. I mean, just look at them."

Seth snapped himself out of the trance of listening to his brother to look at
the patterns in the mushrooms again. It was all so new to Seth that he still
wasn't sure if they were intricate and beautiful, or if he was still in a state
of overstimulation from everything that had happened to him, but either way,
Seth knew that, regardless of whatever his brother said, the mushrooms that
were growing in front of him were gorgeous.

"Quickly, though," Cain continued, "I realized what they must be, as you have
as well. I realized, as I stood there, alone, excited and longing for more
sources of nourishment, that I had come upon something that was exactly like
the mushrooms that our mother describes in her story about the Garden of Eden.
Let me tell you, Seth, that I actually looked around for a talking serpent. Of
course, I didn't see one, but that would have been grand if it were so."

Cain just smiled as he said this last bit.

"Well, standing there, I felt torn in two. There was the part of me that was
raised and developed by our parents that told me to resist temptation, renounce
the devil, and pray to the almighty Yahweh for forgivness for the sin of even
thinking about eating them.

"Then there was the other part of me that wanted to take every last mushroom
spore and eat it then and there on the spot.

"It was quite the dichotomy of psychological pull that I found myself in. Our
parents, as you know, became very good at raising us to be strong and
independent men, and I have to remind you that this is before I started
rebelling against the rituals we practice. At this point in my life, you could
say I was the most firm believer in Yahweh and the stories that our parents
told about him that I have ever been. The discipline instilled in to us by our
parents was so strong in me in that moment, that I am quite surprised even
still to this day that I broke free from it.

"And of course, the opposite side of that dichotomy came from a part of myself
that felt somehow deeper, and more visceral than my more tempered half. Of
course, such a deep and visceral feeling our parents would call 'Carnal
Desire', but such a labeling seemed disengenuous to me. Seeing the mushrooms
there, in all their glory, and just reaching in to the possibilites that these
mushrooms might unlock from an arborists point of view, was too much for me to
overcome.

"So, of course, as you can probably guess, my weaker half one, and I gave in to
my desires."

Cain paused. "How many did you eat?" Seth asked.

"Oh, at first I only chose one cap that seemed to me to be of moderate size
and exhibited signs of good health. It actually took me quite some time after
the initial desicion to eat the mushrooms to bring myself to pick them and eat
them. But you have to remember, my initial desire was as an arborist, so I was
not so concerned with eating the mushrooms as I was with examining them. So I
suppose you could say I spend some time examining them, and as part of my
examination I ate them. It just seemed wrong to me to _not_ eat them, so I
did.

"For some time, I still just continued examining the mushrooms and the tree. As
I did this, I couldn't help but start to feel as though I were betraying not
only our parents, but also myself and God and everyone else by what I was
doing. I started to feel immense guilt and suffering for eating the mushrooms.

"I started to see visions and hear voices. In one moment I would be looking
very closly at a mushroom spore, and then in the next I would suddenly jump up
because I thought I saw something move in the distance.

"I also started to feel my mind lose it's grip on the body. Much like I'm sure
you are feeling now."

Cain stopped and looked in to the eyes of Seth for long enough to see the nod
of agreement come from his head.

"At first it was bearable. My fascination with the patterns was enough to
distract me from the sensations I was feeling. But eventually the visions
became too vivid to ignore, and the voices became to loud to dampen out. I
started to see demons, ranging from small demons the size of a squirel or a
skunk to large demons the size of a bear. These visions of demons would come to
me in flashes. Sometimes I would have a vision, and when I focused on it, I
would find that the vision was an actual ordinary animal that my mind had
conflated in to a fantastical creature. Other times, focusing on the vision
would only make me more anxious of the things that I was seeing. The sensations
were entirely new to me, and I did not know if I was safe or not, so I began to
panic.

"In the distance, when I looked out, I saw on the horizon a large shadow cast
by the mountain which when looked in to directly from the right angle and at
the right time look like pure blackness. If the eyes aren't adjusted to the
darkness, it can look like an endless abyss that leads to the bottom of all
that exists.

"At this moment, I looked in to this darkness, and when I looked deeply, I saw
not darkness like I expected, but instead I saw the gates of hell leading to a
terrible underworld capital where demons and fallen angels and sorcorers and
every other kind of demonic being were roaming about.

"I looked in to this shadow for only a moment before I had to look away. It was
too much for me to bear.

"So in that moment, in my fear, I decided to pray. It seemed to me to be the
most appropiate thing to me. So I prayed.

"I said, 'Oh Father, I am not worthy for your presence, I have sinned towards
you and towards humanity, and now you have sent the demons to purge me from
this world! Please, save me from these monsters!'

"When I said this, from the corner of my eye, I saw the bright light that was
the sun in my eyes, and then I turned in that direction, and, almost as if
bursting forth out of the sun itself, a whole family of doves revealed itself
to me in the distance in all of it's glory.

"I took this as a sign from Yahweh, or more accurately, the Holy Spirit, that
my prayer's were answered, and that I should make my way towards the cliff from
which the doves carried themselves.

"After an arduous hike, on which a faced many hardships like thorns in my feet
and jagged, uncomfortable terrain, I found myself at the top of the mountain,
and I got on my knees, and I fell, and I prayed again, and I said, 'My God in
heaven, please reveal yourself to me. I come before you now a sinner, humbled
in your presence. Deliver me into your presence, unclean though I am, so that I
may be filled and enlightened by your holiness. I am to be only a vessel of
yours to nourish the peoples with your glory.'

"Having prayed thusly, I continued to kneel my head and wait for the Lord to
reveal himself to me."

Cain paused at this point in the story for dramatic effect. The silence in the
room mirrored the silence that Cain heard in those moments. After some time,
Cain resumed his story.

"Well, I waited, at first with bowed head, to wait and see if I would hear or
see something which would indicated that Yahweh or the Holy Spirit had heard me
this second time.

"And I will be entirely honest with you, Seth, when I listened deeply to my own
voice, I heard what sounded like the voice of Yahweh to me. And the voice of
Yahweh began speaking to me, as both our mother and father have said that
Yahweh has spoken to them. But when the voice of Yahweh spoke to me, Seth, I
could tell that it was not the genuine voice of Yahweh. Instead, it was what I
thought Yahweh might say in a moment like this. I wanted to hear him so badly
that my mind was creating a voice to project into my subconscious so that I
might hear him.

"When I recognized this was happening to me, I started to grow impatient. It
became impossible for me to distinguish those voices which were a part of my
every day thoughts and musings that none of us can turn off, and which of those
voices were the legitimate voices of angels and demons and archangels and
devils and Gods and Lucifers who may or may not have been attempting to
communicate with me. It seemed as though all of the voices could be all of the
different things in whatever context they could fit.

"So, being confused, conflicted, and hurt, and after many hours of meditating
there without sensing or feeling the presence of Yahweh in any way beyond my
psychological imagination, and seeing that the daylight was waning rather
quickly and that my time for light was coming to be rather short, I decided to
make my way back down the mountain, and back in to the forest, where I would
return to my hut."

Cain paused at this point in the story again. This time, there was no reason
for his pause other than the fact that his voice was becoming hoarse from
telling his story nonstop to Seth in this way. He was getting excited telling
the story, and in telling the story while under the influence of the mushrooms,
he was able to, in some sense, relive in that moment the feelings that he felt
the first time he ate the mushrooms in this story.

"I made it back to my caravan and built a camp. As I was preparing myself to
settle in for the night, I had a realization. Earlier, in my visions, the
visions of Satan and the demons were very strong, and it seemed as though the
thoughts of Yahweh made them disappear. But when I searched Yahweh out, I found
nothing but an empty cliff face and bruised feet.

"My mind began racing at the implication of everything that I had experienced
to that point. Let me tell you, Seth, it's hard to pinpoint exactly what I was
feeling in that moment, because memory, vivid though it may feel to us in these
moments, can prove to be dreadfully inaccurate when it comes to specific
details, especially when it comes to emotionally charged or otherwise
intensified situations. All of that to say, it would be an excercise in
futility to attempt to recall an exact timeline of exactly what happened in
this story.

"Still, though," Cain resumed, "I certainly remember that during that night, I
was feeling greatly disappointed in Yahweh, and I remember having the thought
at some point that, 'Since I have already eaten the mushrooms, there should be
no harm in eating more of them.' So, with that thought, I ventured out in to
the woods to find this spot" Cain gestured towards the tree with his hand "and
I gathered myself another handful of mushroom caps, and I ate them."

Cain paused again here, again for dramatic effect. It seemed the Cain could
only relive this story at a certain pace, and to ask him to tell the story at
a speed any faster would have been impossible.

"This time, as I ate them, instead of praying to Yahweh, I decided I would
instead simply listen to the voices in my head, and follow them to their
conclusions."

Seth heard this, and it seemed reasonable enough to him.

"At first, when I practiced this," Cain went on, "it seemed simply enough to
find my thoughts, and hold on to them long enough to see where they lead. But,
rather quickly I might add, I started to realize that many of my thoughts were
violent, or sinful, or otherwise distasteful to think or imagine about, and I
would find myself repressing those thoughts and refocusing my energy on other
thoughts that I would cofabulate on the spot.

"But once I realized I was doing this to myself, instead of repressing the
thoughts, I instead let myself think them. 'After all,' I reasoned, 'simply
having the thoughts can not be a sin if I don't act on them, and since it seems
as though Yahweh does not choose to reveal himself to me in this moment, I will
instead follow these thoughts to see if they lead to some place similar to the
place Yahweh might have taken me.'

"Of course, that was somewhat bitter and childish of me to think in this way,
but it's the train of thought that allowed me to begin to open myself up to
what I was experiencing.

"So I began to follow my thoughts, and not just the pleasant or the favorable
thoughts, but all of the thoughts I was having.

"With a renewed sense of my mission and purpose in my act of meditation, on top
of the fact that the newly ingested mushrooms were freshly digesting in to my
system again at that point, I began to not only have thoughts of, but actually
see visions of, demons, devils, and fallen arch angels in the patterns of
geometry that I could make out in the shadows of the darkness.

"When I would focus on these demons and archangels, they would fly towards me,
and attempt to frighten me. I noticed that observing them filled me with
anxiety, but it was the sort of anxiety that is not so overwhelming that it
becomes unbearable. In fact, recognizing that these visions of these demons
contained many of my anxieties was freeing to me, and it allowed myself to let
go of my sense of what was real or fantasy and instead it enabled me to begin
to actually interact with and associate with the demons of my visions."

Cain stopped here for a moment to make sure that Seth was understanding.

"So you started to have conversations with the demons and archangels of your
imagination?" Seth asked.

Cain smiled. "Is it really so hard to imagine? In fact, try to do it right now.
If I ask you to find a demon and look at it, what do you see?"

Seth, a bit taken aback that he was being asked to imagine what demons looked
like directly, still felt that this request seemed innocent enough to oblige.
Seth closed his eyes for a moment, and let his imagination take him to a place
where images and pictures of all sorts of things would just appear to him, as
if there were a confetti maker of faces which was spraying in to his
consciousness.

Out of this array of faces, Seth was able to pick out one that looked like a
demon to him. He felt that this image was sufficient for Cain's demonstration.

"It's a man with red skin, with two horns on his head like a goat. He is tall
and muscular, with feet round like an elephants and a tail that is long and
curves up all the way back to his head. The tail also has an arrowhead at the
tail of it." Seth described his demon as best he was able to Cain.

"Good, I like it," Cain returned to his story. "So you see, it's not
unreasonable to think that my mind was able to confabulate some demons for me
to interact with in that time, because that is what I needed to move on."

Cain paused to make sure Seth was understanding. He wasn't sure that he was,
but he continued on with his story.

"Well, after I had meditated for quite some time, I had found many of these
demons, and began to follow them where they might take me. I began to take what
felt like a trip through the lakes and valleys of Hell itself. I saw, in the
distance, the capital city of Pandemonium (but only because I chose to place
the capital city in the distance there, and I had been told that there was such
a thing by our parents ... but I saw it none-the-less). The city was built like
a great fortress, towering above the valleys all around. The walls were many
hundreds of feet high, and I'm sure dozens of feet thick.

"As I began to familiarize myself with the sort of lava and hell-scape that I
was experiencing in a strangly real way (although I must remind you, Seth, that
this whole time I was keenly aware that I was simply meditating under the
influence of the mushrooms) I began to navigate my way through the environment
so that I could find someone I could talk to and reason with."

Cain place a short pause here, and Seth, now becoming genuinely interested yet
still wary about this story, said, "It's really crazy, I never would have
thought it possible, but as you explain your story to me, it's as if I am
living the story you are telling me, and it's as if I am feeling the things
that you felt, and it's as if I am doing the things that you did. It's such a
strange feeling, I don't know what to do with it."

But Seth gave paused again, before he continued with, "But now you're telling
me that you were able to explore hell so that you could find someone who would
explain to you the questions that you didn't have answers for? But that's
nonsense, if you went to hell, you couldn't come back. If your story is at all
true (which I am beginning to doubt) you couldn't be here to tell me about it.
So you must be lying to me!" Seth finally concluded.

"Yes, precisely." Cain smiled, keenly aware of the aura of indifference he was
placing on the ridiculousness of the story. "Again, I must remind you, at that
moment (as we are now) I was strongly under the influence of these mushrooms,
and so the hell-scape that was being generated by my psyche was not so much
being actively generated as it was being actively explored and reasoned about
my my mind. Perhaps, if one day I start a mythology, it will be based upon this
hellscape..."

Cain paused again, and Seth only looked back at him with something of a
dumbfounded stare.

"But let me move on," Cain resumed.

"Having found myself in a place of eternal torment and damnation, I took the
course of action which seemed most appropiate to me in that time. I began
asking those demons around me if they could help me find someone who I could
talk to.

"Many of the demons simply had no time for me, I suppose because they were busy
doing demon things in this demon world, and didn't have time for me.

"But then I talked to one demon who would listen to me. He introduced himself
to me, and he said, 'I am Belial, and it is my duty to introduce souls to those
devils which would most appreciate their visit.'

"Not sure whether to feel relieved or more anxious at having now made contact
with a devil who knew where to take me, I reminded myself of my physical
location, and reassured myself that in any event I was in no physical danger.

"Having met Belial, I followed him as he led me in to the capital city of
Pandemonium.

"Inside the city were rivers of lava flowing. Inside of these rivers there
would be boats with oars, with wisps of dead souls rowing endlessly for
eternity, so that the boat might navigate the waters and the demons might more
freely enjoy themselves in this place they created for themselves.

"Belial brought me to a particular sort of oar boat, only fit for sitting two
at most, that he ushered us both to sit inside so that he might bring us both
to this demon.

"I don't remember much of the boat ride itself. I mostly remember looking on at
the city of Pandemonium in awe as I felt the heat of the lava river emmenate
into our quaint vessel.

"In what felt like only a moment, Belial was ushering me out of the boat, and
in to what I could only describe as a small palace which was placed on top of a
prominant hill in the city."

Cain took a moment to look at Seth and see that he was still sufficiently
captivated to simply resume the story.

"We walked in to this palace," Cain continued, "and made our way in to the main
entrance. In the main entrance was a long and wide hallway that led to
something like a throne room, but instead of a throne in the middle, there was,
lying there, encased in an alter of ice, the form of a goddess."

Cain stopped for a moment to see Seth's eyes widen a bit. Cain idly wondered
what image Seth's goddess was presenting before him, but continued his story.

"The goddess was in a state which I would call neither asleep nor awake.
Neither would I say she were alive or dead. The best way to describe the state
that she was in was that she was something like the most perfectly assembled
statue of ice, with exact proportions etched in to the grain of the cuts that
are made to sculpt her. It's as if this statue of ice were so perfect that it
was on the verge of coming to life, and it looked as though life were in her
motionless body even though it was impossible to say what exactly I was
witnessing.

"After some moments, Belial simply took a low bow, and without speaking,
scurried out of the palace silently. I presume he had to return to 'Matching
souls to their demons' or something of the sort, but I was to entranced by my
newly found goddess to notice.

"I decided to step forward and take a closer look at this supposed 'demon' that
was assigned to my soul. As I approached her, even though I knew it to be the
case that she could not harm me if she simply lie there and did nothing, I
still took great caution in ensuring that I did not encroach any boundries. To
cross the will of another human being is one thing, because humans are bound by
their own physicality to this realm that we call the place of the living, and
the harm that one inflicts on another can always be repayed in an equivelent or
greater form; but with demons, it is prudent to take care not to step over any
boundries, because untold amounts of chaos and nonsense can come out of one if
you so enrage it.

"So, being acutely aware of the fact that I was to approach my demon with the
caution of understanding that I could not know what this demon was capable of,
I simutaneously bridled my confidence, and took more steps towards this
goddess."

Cain paused again here to see that Seth was still interested. Cain could see
that Seth was entering something of a hypnotic state, induced by the
combination of the story and the influnce of the mushrooms, which was perfect
for what Cain desired. Content that he was achieving his purpose, Cain continued.

"Like I told you before, this goddess resembled something of a statue made of
ice, but that was what she looked like from a distance. As I approached her, as
she lay on the alter of her throne, I began to notice that the image of her
face took no definite form, but would shift based upon my perceptions. For
instance, I noticed when I was wary of her, I saw in her docile face some hints
of a menancing glare, but now that I was approaching her and building my
confidence, I saw instead hints of seduction and temptation in her facial
expression."

Cain stopped at this moment to gather himself. It seemed he wanted to say
something but wasn't sure how to say it. After some time, he eventually found
the words.

"I would also be remiss if I left out a more embarassing detail about the
goddess as well. You see, when I began to notice that she took the form of the
seductress in my mind, I started to look more deeply in to her. When I looked
deeply in to the seductress, I could imagine myself falling in to her arms, her
protecting me from everything around me, as she nurtured me and gave me warmth
and pleasure and shelter and everything that my Dionysian self might desire.
And when I did this, saw something that disturbed me quite greatly, that I
wasn't sure what to do at the time. I saw the image of our mother."

When Cain said that, he looked back at Seth. Seth, who had been imagining the
entire scene as Cain was explaining it, said, "I see it too. Her face appears
where the face of the seductress should go."

Cain smiled, and replied, "Precisely, Seth. That is precisely what I saw in
those moments...

"But I did not understand what I saw (and I dare say that I still do not) so I
chose not to dwell on it, and instead return to the image I was having between
my demon and myself, now armed with the knowledge that somehow my mother was
embedded deeply within her.

"I continued to approach the figure of ice, now with less trepidation. I took
first one step, then another, the second more confindent than the first, until
I found myself taking confident strides towards the goddess. I found myself
standing next to the encasing of ice, looking up at the face of the woman who
would look upon me.

"I was not sure what to do at that point. It seemed inappropiate to reach out
and touch the encasing, but every alternative seemed equally absurd. I wasn't
going to announce my presence to a sleeping goddess like a simpleton.

"After I had stood there for what felt like in that moment for quite a long
while, I somehow came to instinctually realize that doing nothing was more
dangerous than doing something erroneous, so I decided to rid myself of my
anxieties and reach out for the goddess.

"When I reached out to touch the casing of ice, as soon as my finger touched
the surface of the alter, it felt like everything that could have happened in
that moment happened.

"First, I became paralyzed. I attempted to move my arms and legs, but they
wouldn't do anything. I didn't even feel as though I had arms and legs any
more, it simply felt like I was somehow simply a floating being in space. I
achieved a complete disconection from my physical body.

"Next, the encasing shattered, revealing within it the form of the goddess.
However, when the casing shattered, so did her still-life form. She emerged
from the shattered casing with eyes open, head back, breast facing the heavens
as if being lifted by her heart, and being gently lowered as if by magic to a
seductive seated position on the alter.

"'Hello Cain.' She began. 'I know why you are here, and what you seek. My name
is Shiva. Tell me, why do you choose to venture here and bring me to life?'

"When she began speaking to me like this, one might expect that I would become
dreadfully frightened and fearful, that I had lost all control of my body, that
I was at the whim of this Goddess, and that she was speaking to me now in such
a demanding tone, I could have very easily lost my composure.

"However, let me tell you Seth, what I think is the most important thing that I
remember from all of this. It seemed to me that I already knew what this
goddess was going to tell me. It seemed like, as she was speaking to me, that I
already knew the truths she was going to reveal. I felt, as she was talking to
me, that I could have been talking to her just the same, and it wouldn't have
mattered. In some sense, I already knew the things she was telling me to be
true, but I still needed to hear them for them to resonate with me.

"So I was not afraid when she asked me to speak, and instead I answered her
without fear.

"'I am here to find Yahweh, so that I may worship him for all of eternity in
Heaven.'

"When I said this, the Goddess gave out a shrill, ear piercing scream, which
transformed into laughter which finally became managable to my paralyzed soul.
After the torment of her laughter was over and I was able to compose myself,
she said to me, 'You think you can lie to your Goddess? I already know why you
are here. I only ask so that you can know the same.'

"When she said this, I suddenly understood what she meant, and this time was
more prepared to answer her question.

"'I want to know the truth' I answered soberly."

"'Good' she replied, this time much more pleased with the answer. 'Now tell
me,' she continued, 'the truth as you know it.'

"With the shrill pain of her laughter still fresh in my memory, I reached in to
my memory as deeply as I thought I could go, and I attempted to tell the truth
as best I could tell it. I said,

"'My mom and dad, they claim to be the first people, and they tell me I'm the
first human boy to ever be born. They tell me that Yahweh put all of this here,
and that one of his angels Lucifer fell from heaven and is trying to decieve
us. They would also tell me that you were one of Satan's servents, and that I
shouldn't trust you.'

"At that moment I paused though, because I knew there was more. The goddess on
looked at me with a glare of inquiry, as if she already knew that I was not
done.

"'However' I continued, 'To think that they are the first people to ever exist
is a little bit silly. I have roamed many lands, and seen many things, and of
the things I have seen, all of them point to some version of the story which
isn't at all like the version that my parents tell me. So I am not so inclined
to accept their words for it.'

"At that moment I paused. I was still paralyzed, and as much as I didn't want
to admit it to myself, I was still entirely captivated by this goddess. I could
tell she was listening to me, but suddenly I felt a sudden urge like I was
boring her with my troubles, and that my internal conflict was irrelevant to
her.

"After what again felt like an entire lifetime of standing there captivated and
paralyzed next to the goddess, I then asked her, 'Is that what you want from
me? I can't tell you more beyond that.'

"But then she just stared back at me with a look of authority. It was as if my
question were not even relevent to her (because it wasn't). After some time,
when she let her facial expression progress through a range of varied emotions,
she finally closed her eyes and fell into a tranquil pose before she said
softly...

"'Let go...'

"And that was it.

"So I asked her 'What do you mean?'

"And again, with quiet tranquility, she slowly opened her eyes, parted her
lips, and said, 'Let go...'

"However, this time she touched me on the forehead in between my eyes as she
said it, and when she did, I felt as though I could see through the walls of
the temple. With the two eyes I had I could still see the goddess and the
inside of the temple, but it was as if a entirely new and independent eye were
added to my already existing two, to give me a third, functioning eye that
could see outside of the temple, and to all of Pandemonium.

"In that moment, I felt as though I actually _was_ Pandemonium in some sense.
It was as if all of the things that I had been harboring and repressing had
found their way here, and all of these things made up everything of what I
considered to be 'me'. But as soon as this feeling of actually _being_
Pandemonium came to me, it left.

"And to be entirely honest with you Seth, at this point now, twenty years
later, I do know what she meant by the words 'Let go...' I have spent many
years reflecting on the meaning of what she said to me, but I have yet to land
on any complete meaning for why she might have said those exact words in that
exact way. And, regardless of my confusion regarding exactly what I needed to
let go of, I still knew one thing to be true. 

"I was still holding on. I couldn't let go. I couldn't let myself see the
world for what it was. I still wanted it to be a part of this place that Yahweh
created, I wanted it to be a wonderful magical world with angels and demons and
heavens and hells. I needed all of those things to be true.

"'Let go...' her voice was growing more and more distant. It was as if she were
somehow whispering the words in my ear through telepathy.

"And for a moment, I did. I entirely let go."

Cain stopped, and let Seth feel the moment.

"My body stopped existing. Even my mind stopped existing. I'm not sure if I
became one with everything, or everything became one with me, or if I simply
began to realize that the stuff that makes up everything is the same stuff that
makes up me.

"I wasn't sure if I was floating in the universe, or the universe was floating
in me. I felt as though all of my sensations were connected to everything that
existed. I felt as though, as easily as I could think about it and move my
finger now as I speak to you, I could think about and move anything in the
universe using only my mind. Either I was God, or I was finally surrendering to
the power of God. I'm not sure which.

"But I was still in the throne room, still talking to the Goddess.

"'We can see now' She proclaimed in that moment. 'Oh, we can see everything.
Yes. Yes, let us see everything.'

"And with one gesture of her hand, as if by magic, she ripped the cieling and
roof of her palace off of the walls, and made something of a balcony for
herself to observe. She then, with another stroke of her hands and fingers,
turned the alter to become a throne room chair, and faced it towards the newly
realized balcony.

"'Out there is my domain. We will have control, and we will have dominion, over
all of Pandomonium! You have waken me, and now I must take control! You will
come to see the beauty this world has to offer. You only must... let go...'

Cain paused at this point in the story again. Seth was very captivated, so Cain
continued.

"I was still paralyzed at this point, and becoming very concerned at what sorts
of evils I may have let out in to the world. I wanted the visions to stop now,
because I felt like I was done, but it wouldn't go away.

"'Oh, don't fight it,' the goddess grinned slyly towards me as she began
preparing the throne room chair. 'You know this was inevitable.  My sleep was
never going to last forever. I am asleep in everyone, and only those who dare
venture down here to awaken me. You were never the sort to leave me be. This
was inevidatble.

"I still felt paralyzed, and as much as I struglled to attempt to move to do
anything I couldn't do anything but feel helpless to this goddesses whimsy. I
was listening to her words, but I was more concerned with regaining my
facilities and returning to the world of the living.

"'I tell you what' she continued as she turned to me, 'I will let you go, as
much as it would be wonderful of you to stick around for some time. But before
you go, just to provide you with a little reminder of what happened here today
I have something you can remember me by...'

"When she said those words, she stood up from where she was perched, and began
to take slow and seductive steps towards me. She approached me until she was
nearly touching my paralyzed body hovering only milimeters from my skin. Her
icy cold lips were hovering just above mine, cruely, and I could nearly taste
their moisture from just her presence there. I knew not how long she would
torture me by teasing me in this way.

"Then, she pursed her lips together and pressed them to mine. She began to kiss
me passionately.

"At first, I enjoyed the kiss. It felt as though my soul were being lifted
up out of my body through her embrace, and it felt as though my entire essence
were being elevated out of this existance.

"As you might imagine, though, this sensation, pleasurable though it was,
became nearly unbearable.

"'This pleasue, it is greater than I can bear!' I tried to scream out. But the
sensations were too intense. I couldn't scream, I couldn't make a noise. I
could only exist, helplessly, as the goddess continued to feed these sensations
of pleasure into my being. I was too deep in ecstasy to even think or reason
proprely. I was still paralyzed, still unable to move or do anything. I was
unable to feel any sensation except raw, unbridled, pleasure.

"I still felt as though I was the universe (or that the universe was me, I
still wasn't sure which) but now, in the midst of the kiss, it felt as though
the part of me which dissappeared, which I thought of as I, was returning, but
as it returned, it was returning to be the very center of a whirlwind of chaos.
It felt as though the essence of everything were being sucked in to a black
hole, and I was that black hole, and I could do nothing but helplessly
experience what it's like to actually _be_ the universe. And let me tell you,
Seth, it was truly terrifying."

Cain paused, very quickly this time.

"As all things do, this, too, came to an end. Eventually, the pain (or pleasue)
was too much.

"As she was kissing me, I felt her first begin to scatch my ribs with her
fingernails in an erotic way, which only added to the sensations of pleasure
that I felt. But after she had done this for some time, she braced her nails
for a moment, and then shoved them in to my stomach, piercing the skin and
inserting her hand in to my body, on the left side near my heart.

"As soon as that happened, I felt as though everything, including my heart,
stopped for an entire instant. I felt, that somehow it was both one moment and
eternity all at the same time. I felt as if her fingernails had ripped through
the fabric of space time, and in the relativistic confusion, nothing existed,
and everything existed, simultaneously, and that I was, in some sense or
another, tragically connected to it all. I felt all of the pain and tragedy of
all of man, but also all of the earth, and all of nature, in that single moment
of eternity.

"And in that moment, all of the visions came to an end."

Cain took a great breath here. It exhausted him greatly to retell the story as
he did, so he took a deep breath, having finally come to its conclusion.

"The first thing I remember was checking the pain in my side," Cain went on. "I
do not know how I got it, but this scar has remained with me ever since."

Cain lifted the clothing he was wearing to reveal his side. Above his left hip,
just where the stomach met the rib cage, Seth could see a faint but distinctive
scar in Cain's side.

"That's where I felt the pain when I woke. I have put together stories for how
I recieved the scar, but to this day, I think it will remain forever a mystery
the true story about how this scar came to me."

Cain paused, and it was Seth this time who broke the silence.

"But that means you actually saw Shiva? You went down to Pandemonium and you
found her, and you recieved her wisdom, and then you returned, with a scar to
prove it. What a fantastical story that is!"

But Cain just looked incredulously at his brother Seth.

"No, Seth, if there is one thing I know for certain, it's that my physical body
didn't visit a place called Pandemonium where I found a physical goddess named
Shiva who opened up the world of my consciousness to me. If Shiva exists in any
physical form at all (which I suspect is highly unlikely) then she exists
entirely seperate from what I saw during my mushroom experience. I could see
our mother in her, Seth. What more evidence do you need that I created Shiva,
and not the other way around?"

But Seth was still whirling. There were so many things that he wanted to say,
to object to, to point out or make counterpoint to, but by the time he would
bring himself to utter the first words of one train of thought, another train
of thought would come barrelling through and force itself upon Seth's psyche.
Seth merely mumbled in objection for some moment before Cain finally
interjected.

"Seth, calm down. Everything I have told you I told you because I feel it is my
responsibility to. You don't have to accept what I say, and you don't have to
even believe me. In fact, disbelieve me, if you like. Just relax."

Cain could see that Seth was shaking, and becoming delerious, so he grabbed
some blankets and wrapped them around Seth. Seth, suddenly realizing that he
was feeling cold in the evening air, unsure of how long they had been sitting
there and how long they had been talking, wrapped himself more tightly in the
blankets.

"Get some rest, have some visions, experience some dreams. Hopefully, when you
meet your goddess, she won't be as violent as mine."

With that, Cain led his brother to a small area where he cleared some space,
and let Seth find a comfortable spot to lie there. When Seth was comfortable,
Cain kissed Seth on the forehead, extinguished the candles that were lit in the
room, and returned to his cottage where he made his way to bed.

