# About the Author

![Brett Gerald Webster] (jpg\brettgeraldwebster.jpg)

Brett "Gerald B Orbweaver" Webster is a Dallas born Richardsonite who decided
to use his middle name, and the name of a species of spider, as a penname. His
motivations for using a penname like this are unclear, even to himself, but he
has found that it allows for him to talk about himself in the third person
without seeming weird. Gerald would say that Brett is very long winded, and
Brett would say that Gerald is a little too contientious. Of course, Brett
loves Gerald for that very reason, and likewise Gerald loves Brett for what he
is. Both sides of the brain can meet in the middle.

Of course, my full, real name is Brett Gerald Webster, and my pen name is
"Gerald B Orbweaver". I chose Gerald as the familiar name of my penname mostly
because Gerald is my middle name, but also because my Father's Father, who was
resting soundly in the grave for ten years before I was born, was also named
Gerald, which is of course where my parents got the idea.

Likewise, I chose the last name of Orbweaver mostly because I like that
particular species of spider. Of course, there were additional reasons for
choosing that name. First and foremost, the syllables of the word "Orbweaver"
simply sound aesthetically pleasing, and it flows off the tongue with elegance.
Second, I have reccuring dreams where I spin thread into orb, and then
capture that orb inside of glass. The name "Orbweaver" seems like the best
description of that process.

Lastly, the middle name of "B" is used. B is, of course, the first letter of
the word "Brett", but in the penname the letter B is used with no punctuation.
This serves a dual purpose. It divides the penname in two,
creating a nice reflective look to it. It also has the property that the
typesetter will use the format that I find most aesthetically pleasing
(FirstName MiddleInitial. LastName) by default. This would usually have the
downside that it would be impossible to tell if the typesetter is set correctly
or not, but since the letter B has no punctuation, a simple check for a period
after the letter B in the penname will reveal exactly in what configuration the
typesetting is aligned. Such an elegent sanity check seemed too good to pass
up.

I will close with the final remark that, as much as my psyche is split in
two, Gerald is the author, and Brett is the artist. Fortunately, my psyche is
not split in two anymore, so Brett and Gerald can integrate with eachother to
form "Brett Gerald", which is incidentally what my Mother used to yell towards
me when I was in serious trouble.  I don't know if I have a third man inside of
me named Webster; I suspect no, but only time will reveal if another sort of
man reveals himself to me.

Peace and Love,

![Gerald B Orbweaver] (img\geraldborbweaversigniture.png)
