## Prompt
You've accepted a mysterious job offer with a salary of $30k a week, all you
have to do is sit in a dark room for 8 hours a day. Today is your first day.

## Text
"And this is the room I'll be sitting in?" I confirmed with the gentleman who
was to be my boss. He had introduced himself earlier as Mr. M.

"Yes, this will be it." Mr. M gestured towards the door that held a small room.
The room itself was not constrictive in any way, which relieved some of my
initial fears. It wasn't exactly spacious, but there was enough room to stand
up and stretch. "I would like to go over the rules with you one last time
before you enter today. Your success in this is more important than you can
know."

"Of course," I replied, and listened as Mr. M went over the requirements of the
job.

"So the first, and most important thing is you are never to leave this room for
any reason. We would recommend you use the restroom and ready yourself before
you enter.

"While you are in the room, you are not to amuse yourself in any way. You are
permitted to change your sitting position, or even get up and pace, or
otherwise move about, but when it comes to the hours that go by, you are not to
bring any games, electronic devices, or other such time sinking activities with
you in to the room. You are to remain inside as you, with only your clothes and
thoughts.

"Beyond that, there is not much more to say. Those two rules cover most cases
that would be a requirement. Just remain calm, please don't make any noise, and
try and relax while you're inside. Do you have any questions for me?"

"Yeah, only around 200," I thought breifly as the proctor finished his
explanation. This whole opportunity seemed too good to be true, and being told
that all I had to do was sit in a dark room for eight hours a day and be paid
orders of magnitude more than I had previously seemed like a scam if I had ever
seen one. However, having just recently been layed off without a back up plan
has led me to this opportunity, which seemed foolish not to at least follow up
on. I thought about asking what I considered to be the most pertinant question,
which was, "Why do you want me to do this?" but I had asked it a few times and
gotten the same answer each time. "We cannot tell you why, you must only accept
the position and it will be your daily requirement. It is imperitave that the
sitter not understand the purpose of his designation."

"Brett?" Mr. M broke the breif train of thought that I had been lost on. "Do we
understand?"

"Yes, yes, of course," I regained my composure and locked eye contact again
with my new employer.

"Okay then, are we ready to begin?"

I ran through a mental checklist of all the things I wanted to make sure I
remembered to do before entering the dark room. I had just used the restroom,
and I had eaten enough a few hours before that I felt satisfied that hunger
pangs would not bother me too much while I was in the room. I felt I was a
little thirsty, but decided that having a drink of water would probably more of
a detrimant than an asset. I would much rather feel thirst than the urge to
pee, and what would I even need to be hydrated for in a dark room anyway?

After going through all of things, I turned to Mr. M and said, "Yes, I'm ready,
let's get this going."

"Excellent." Mr. M turned around and pressed a button on the panel outside the
room I was to stay in. The button prompted the opening of the door, which
lifted upwards on it's hinge to allow myself to duck into the dark room.

After I had stepped in to the room, Mr. M reminded me, "Your eight hours will
begin from the moment the door closes. We will retrieve you at the end of the
day, at which point you will be given whatever amenities you will require, and
your first day of work will be over. Good luck!"

With that, I heard Mr. M press some buttons on the panel which initiated the
closing of the door, and I waited on the inside as the light from the other
side of the door shrank from it's initial rectangle down to a square and
finally down to a small line that eventually closed at the bottom of the room
where the wall met the floor.

That was the beginning of my work day.

I stumbled around for a bit as I felt around for the chair. When they said the
room was going to be dark, they weren't kidding. "Maybe my eyes are merely
adjusting still," was my first thought. This thought, however, was dispelled in
some time when I still couldn't see my hand as I waved it in front of my face.

After spending some time kicking around trying to find the chair that had been
provided for me, I eventually found it, and adjusted myself to sit on it.

I had not been told, but the chair that I was given was not very comfortable.
It was a chair made entirely out of metal, with a straight back and a flat,
uncushioned seat. I made myself as comfortable as I could in the chair, and sat
straight up in it.

Immediately, the first thing that I started to notice was that I was becoming
dreadfully uncomfortable rather quickly. At the point I started feeling this, I
estimated that no more than five minutes could have gone by at that point.
Immediately, I started to re think my decision to agree to walk in to a
mysterious black room that I was not allowed to walk out of under any
circumstance.
