So I have noticed, in reading some of my draft for this so far, that I am not
entirely sure where I am going with my arguments, and a lot of times, it seems
as though my arguments could go in many different ways, and they often times
don't lead to somewhere which would go in the place that I want it to go.

So now, I want to write some of the beginning, middle, and end of this work all
at once. I want to take the thoughts I have and just let them roam, and then,
when I have this sorted out a little better, I might be able to use some of
this material to fill in some of the paragraphs of the work, but mostly, I just
want to get all of the ducks in a row so that when I go back to the draft and
continue to write, I have some understanding of where I am, and where I think I
am going, so that I can write in a bit more of a cohesive way.

So that all being said, right now I am at this point in the draft. I am fairly
confident that the start I have made, going from the notion of the inner, to
the notion of the outer, and first stopping at the point where we say that
there is an outer, is the correct way to go.

Although now, just thinking on it, I don't think it's entirely neccessary to
say that there is an outer. I think it would be more correct to say that the
most straightforward way of thinking about those experiences which we would say
originate from "outside" ourselves, or are not generated by our "imagination",
constitute the outer.

But it's important to draw the distinction between the outer, and those
experiences which we would call the outer. So just because you feel a hot stove
does not mean anything about the stove, it only says that your experience about
hot stoves, and your experience with other hot things, have a certain
characteristic, and that when you say "the stove is hot" what you are really
saying is that your experiences in relation to the stove when filtered through
the model of reality that I am living through lead me to say that the statement
"the stove is hot" is a reasonable one.

So it's important also to make the distinction to say that I am not saying the
opposite. I am not making a claim that says that our experiences don't
coorespond to reality, but rather, I am just trying to make the distinction
between reality and our experience of reality.

Something also to really hammer home here is the idea that it is impossible to
know what form reality truely takes. It's something that is truly unknowable.

This could be illustated by talking about things like the models of
computation, or the models for numbers, or the different models of physics. It
is tempting to say that there is one "true correct" model for these things, but
in reality, there are only models of these things, and certain models are more
or less correct in the sense that some are more useful than others at
predicting what our experiences with reality are going to be like.

So I don't think it's neccesary to invoke the notion that the outer exists.
I think it creates a misleading notion of what it means to attempt to define
reality.

It's such a strange thing though. I am having difficulty saying whether or not
something as universally accepted as reality exists.

I think part of the difficulty is in saying that reality exists, we are then
forced to ask ourselves in what capacity, or what form, reality takes. In other
words, it's existance merely begs the question of what it's form is. It is
unsatisfying to say it exists but we can never know it's form. It's much more
satisfying to say something like "Reality doesn't exist" or "Reality exists and
it has this form." So I think, to avoid that trap, I think it is correct to say
that reality exists.

Another difficulty I am running in to is my attempt to decouple my notion of
what the imagination is with what the actual experience is. In fact, I think
it's correct to say that there is no such thing as imaginiation, and that it
all corresponds to actual experience. Now, this is such a strange idea, and
such a notion is so strong as to say that free will doesn't exist, and that
every experience we have is the product of the objective world. The man in the
sensory deprivation chamber may think he is imagining the world of fairys and
dragons, while really, he is simply experiencing the firing of neurons in
particular ways, and he is more in tune with that firing of neurons because
there are no other senses to distract him from what is normally considered the
imagination. Also, any attempt by the man to warp or twist that image is simply
an illusion, and is simply his observation that the "warp and twist" neurons
are firing as well, and that through those firing, the image gets warped and
twisted.

But I suppose I am having difficulty now at this point, because there are
things that I want to say, but don't seem appropiate to say here. So I will try
and spell out the end point of the view, and then see how to get there. I will
work backward now, because I started working forward, and now I wish to work
backward.

So the final statement that I think is more or less where I am trying to end up
is this. The only thing we can know about the world is through our experience
of it. We don't even know if there is a world, or if there only exists our
experience. Regardless, based upon our experience, we are compelled to believe,
at the very least, that there is at least some of our aspect, and likely all of
it, that is under the influence of something external. We cannot and will never
know what form this external takes, but based upon our experience with it, we
can create models of what we think it is like. The models take many forms, and
all of these models exist in superposition to eachother. Something also that I
am hesitant to write down because I am not sure whether or not it is correct is
to say that there is no one model that is entirely correct. One of the things
that I feel most strongly about is that there is no such thing as the most
correct model, and there is never an end point for our discovery models which
are ever better and ever more correct in describing the world. ALl of our
experiences that we have are neccisarily filtered through these models, and
being able to harness any particular model will lead to a human being which is
better able to navigate the specialty which that model proliferates. The most
haneous and disgusting models of the world are those which attempt to claim
that they are the absolute or the only true models by which to live in the
world. These models stifle and are a parasite to other models which would
attempt to provide a greater understanding of the world. There is also a way in
which these models of the world propogate, similar to the passing on of
genetics from one species to another, these models of the world will propogate
and will more or less fit through the generations. The models, however, do not
tell us what reality us, but merely give us a way of interpreting our
experiences of that reality in a way that allows us to trancend those
experiences and overcome them.

I have discovered at least what I am missing here. In this discussion, we don't
have any notion of the idea that there is a "what you should do with the
models." In other words, there is a statement missing that has anything to do
with the trancendent value of taking this view. In fact, it's not entirely
clear to me that there is. I think, what I am getting at with the agnostic
truth doesn't have anything to do with what that truth is. It actually hurts me
on some level to think about this. Perhaps the agnostic truth is my universe in
a bottle, and I must travel to the center of the universe and bring it forth
into existance, and to attempt to do so in any other way is missing that truth.
I feel so strongly that simply writing it out here is only the way in which I
wrap the universe in the bottle.

--

So it has been some time since I last wrote here, and I think it's not because
I have a lack of things that I want to say about this topic, but more because I
think I still haven't entirely grasped exactly what it is that I want to be the
point of the work.

So I think, in an effort to continue writing this work, I want this work to
come around to the idea of universal consciousness, and I want to link this
idea to both Christianity, in the ideas of original sin most notably, as well
as things like the golden rule, and the concept of compassion, but I also want
to link it to something else. And this something else I think is the main point
of where I want to get, but I'm not sure what this something else is.

I think, the biggest thing about "the agnostic truth" is that there is
something which is a reality. Or maybe the better way of putting it is, the
theory that there is such a thing as reality is so much more compelling than
any alternative that we ought to act under the assumption that the experiences
we have are predicated by a reality. Or in other words, the conclusion to be
drawn is that the inner is in some way inextricably linked to reality, and any
attempt to divorce the inner from reality represents a fundamental
misunderstanding about the nature of our existance. Another conclusion that I
would suspect could be drawn is that the every aspect of the inner is
invariably attached to reality, and that no aspect of the inner is without some
doing in reality.

Now, it's very difficult to talk about these things without getting
confobulated, because again I run into the problem of talking about the inner,
and talking about the difference between "reality" and "our experiences of the
inner which coorespond to what we consider to be direct coalations to reality."
But I think this sort of distinction between two different kinds of "inner"
experiences, one being the feelings of reality, and the other being the
feelings of our imaginations, is a mistake, and really, our imaginations are
actually just something to do with the state of our mind.

And the tricky thing in talking about all of this is in making the distinction
between the inner and reality. Because, if we are never actually able to talk
about the naked truth of what reality is, then every way that we talk about it
is neccisarily some interpretation of our inner. And if that is the case, what
I am attempting to do is to create some distinction between reality and our
perception of reality, but really what's happening is that I am only making a
distinction between the inner and another aspect of the inner, which as I said
before, isn't really something that happens.

So it becomes a tricky topic to talk about. The reason it becomes tricky is
because, suppose you were to speak out a dream to someone. In this dream, you
were riding a horse, and the horse bucked up and then it started flying, and it
went through the clouds, and over rainbows, before you got close to the sun,
and the heat of the sun caused you to wake up in a sweat.

Now, we can imagine a future where we have neural imaging so advanced, that we
can scan your memory centers, and with that information recreate with 3-d
models the work of the dream. Then we make a distinction. What we will say is,
"The neural pathways and synapses are the reality, the outer, and the
description and representation of the dream as you felt it in that moment is
the inner."

But the problem is, the process of observing computers, operating MRI machines,
and so on, all of that is a part of the inner. What this does is make the
assumption about the reality that the scans you are making, and the models that
they create, and everything else, that those things are "reality" when really,
those things are also a part of the subjective experience. Or in other words, I
can't seem to get around any way of talking about reality which doesn't rely on
the assumption that there is a reality to talk about.

But I think that's not the problem. I have gotten through this where I have
written so far about the book. We have to take it as an assumption, a
presuppostion, that the outer exists. Then, the computers, and the models, and
so on, would be one method of interpreting what the outer is like. Or in other
words, those things would be ways of interpreting the inner in a way which, we
would hope, faithfully represents what the outer is like.

So I think this is what the agnostic truth is. It is "the outer", and the
agnostic truth is that the outer is something that exists, and that is revealed
to us through our experiences.

But something still seem disconcordant to me still.

I suppose I will write out what it is that I am dancing around.

Reality is something that exists. It just is. It is like a video game, where
the models of the ground, and the trees, and everything else are rendered and
put into storage, and when it is there, it is there, and it just exists. On top
of that, consciousness permeates all of reality. All things in reality share
some level of consciousness. Unlike reality, we have not found a desirable way
to measure consciousness, but it exists in some fashion. The way in which
consciousness binds to reality is unclear, but in the view of universal
consciousness, it could be thought that the reason that we only feel like we
are "us" is because consciousness only binds to our neural network, and the
matter around that has a much diminished level of consciousness, that it feels
entirely seperate to, and distinct from, "us".

I will expand on this later, but I think I have hit through to something here.

I want to continue with the idea of linking together minds in a way which would
combine in some sense, their consciousness.
