# Chapter 5 - The Psychology of Happiness
[Metadata]: # {06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {06.03}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 5
The Psychology of Happiness
# The Psychology of Happiness
I have said very little in this book about the current state of psychological
science as it relates to human well-being. This research—which occasionally
goes by the name of “positive psychology”—is in its infancy, especially when it
comes to understanding the relevant details at the level of the brain. And
given the difficulty of defining human well-being, coupled with the general
reluctance of scientists to challenge anyone’s beliefs about it, it is
sometimes hard to know what is being studied in this research. What does it
mean, for instance, to compare self-reported ratings of “happiness” or “life
satisfaction” between individuals or across cultures? I’m not at all sure.
Clearly, a person’s conception of what is possible in human life will affect
her judgment of whether she has made the best use of her opportunities, met her
goals, developed deep friendships, etc. Some people will go to bed tonight
proud to have merely reduced their daily consumption of methamphetamine; others
will be frustrated that their rank on the Forbes 400 list has slipped into the
triple digits. Where one is satisfied to be in life often has a lot to do with
where one has been.

I once knew a very smart and talented man who sent an email to dozens of
friends and acquaintances declaring his intention to kill himself. As you might
expect, this communication prompted a flurry of responses. While I did not know
him well, I sent several emails urging him to seek professional counseling, to
try antidepressants, to address his sleep issues, and to do a variety of other
obvious things to combat depression. In each of his replies, however, he
insisted that he was not depressed. He believed himself to be acting on a
philosophical insight: everyone dies eventually; life, therefore, is ultimately
pointless; thus, there is no reason to keep on living if one doesn’t want to.

We went back and forth on these topics, as I sought to persuade him that his
“insight” was itself a symptom of depression or some other mood disorder. I
argued that if he simply felt better, he wouldn’t believe that his life was no
longer worth living. No doubt many other people had similar exchanges with him.
These communications seemed to nudge him away from the precipice for a while.
Four years later, however, he committed suicide.

Experiences of this kind reveal how difficult it can be to discuss the subject
of human well-being. Communication on any subject can be misleading, of course,
because people often use the same words quite differently. Talking about states
of mind poses special difficulties, however. Was my friend really “depressed”
in my sense of the term? Did he even know what I meant by “depression”? Did I
know what I should have meant by it? For instance, are there forms of
depression that have yet to be differentiated which admit of distinct remedies?
And is it possible that my friend suffered from none of these? Is it, in other
words, possible for a person to see no point in living another day, and to be
motivated to kill himself, without experiencing any disorder of mood? Two
things seem quite clear to me at this point: such questions have answers, and
yet we often do not know enough about human experience to even properly discuss
the questions themselves.

We can mean many things when using words like “happiness” and “well-being.”
This makes it difficult to study the most positive aspects of human experience
scientifically. In fact, it makes it difficult for many of us to even know what
goals in life are worth seeking. Just how happy and fulfilled should we expect
to be in our careers or intimate relationships? Much of the skepticism I
encounter when speaking about these issues comes from people who think
“happiness” is a superficial state of mind and that there are far more
important things in life than “being happy.” Some readers may think that
concepts like “well-being” and “flourishing” are similarly effete. However, I
don’t know of any better terms with which to signify the most positive states
of being to which we can aspire. One of the virtues of thinking about a moral
landscape, the heights of which remain to be discovered, is that it frees us
from these semantic difficulties. Generally speaking, we need only worry about
what it will mean to move “up” as opposed to “down.”

Some of what psychologists have learned about human well-being confirms what
everyone already knows: people tend to be happier if they have good friends,
basic control over their lives, and enough money to meet their needs.
Loneliness, helplessness, and poverty are not recommended. We did not need
science to tell us this.

But the best of this research also reveals that our intuitions about happiness
are often quite wrong. For instance, most of us feel that having more choices
available to us—when seeking a mate, choosing a career, shopping for a new
stove, etc.—is always desirable. But while having some choice is generally
good, it seems that having too many options tends to undermine our feelings of
satisfaction, no matter which option we choose.5 Knowing this, it could be
rational to strategically limit one’s choices. Anyone who has ever remodeled a
home will know the glassy-eyed anguish of having gone to one too many stores in
search of the perfect faucet.

One of the most interesting things to come out of the research on human
happiness is the discovery that we are very bad judges of how we will feel in
the future—an ability that the psychologist Daniel Gilbert has called
“affective forecasting.” Gilbert and others have shown that we systematically
overestimate the degree to which good and bad experiences will affect us.6
Changes in wealth, health, age, marital status, etc., tend not to matter as
much as we think they will—and yet we make our most important decisions in life
based on these inaccurate assumptions. It is useful to know that what we think
will matter often matters much less than we think. Conversely, things we
consider trivial can actually impact our lives greatly. If you have ever been
impressed by how people often rise to the occasion while experiencing great
hardship but can fall to pieces over minor inconveniences, you have seen this
principle at work. The general finding of this research is now uncontroversial:
we are poorly placed to accurately recall the past, to perceive the present, or
to anticipate the future with respect to our own happiness. It seems little
wonder, therefore, that we are so often unfulfilled.

