# Chapter 2 - Evil
[Metadata]: # {03.09}
[Descriptor]: # {03.09}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Evil
# Evil
When confronted with psychopathy at its most extreme, it is very difficult not
to think in terms of good and evil. But what if we adopt a more naturalistic
view? Consider the prospect of being locked in a cage with a wild grizzly: why
would this be a problem? Well, clearly, wild grizzlies suffer some rather
glaring cognitive and emotional deficits. Your new roommate will not be easy to
reason with or placate; he is unlikely to recognize that you have interests
analogous to his own, or that the two of you might have shared interests; and
if he could understand such things, he would probably lack the emotional
resources to care. From his point of view, you will be a distraction at best, a
cowering annoyance, and something tender to probe with his teeth. We might say
that a wild bear is, like a psychopath, morally insane. However, we are very
unlikely to refer to his condition as a form of “evil.”

Human evil is a natural phenomenon, and some level of predatory violence is
innate in us. Humans and chimpanzees tend to display the same level of
hostility toward outsiders, but chimps are far more aggressive than humans are
within a group (by a factor of about 200).92 Therefore, we seem to have
prosocial abilities that chimps lack. And, despite appearances, human beings
have grown steadily less violent. As Jared Diamond explains:



It’s true, of course, that twentieth-century state societies, having developed
potent technologies of mass killing, have broken all historical records for
violent deaths. But this is because they enjoy the advantage of having by far
the largest populations of potential victims in human history; the actual
percentage of the population that died violently was on the average higher in
traditional pre-state societies than it was even in Poland during the Second
World War or Cambodia under Pol Pot.93



We must continually remind ourselves that there is a difference between what is
natural and what is actually good for us. Cancer is perfectly natural, and yet
its eradication is a primary goal of modern medicine. Evolution may have
selected for territorial violence, rape, and other patently unethical behaviors
as strategies to propagate one’s genes—but our collective well-being clearly
depends on our opposing such natural tendencies.

Territorial violence might have even been necessary for the development of
altruism. The economist Samuel Bowles has argued that lethal, “out-group”
hostility and “in-group” altruism are two sides of the same coin.94 His
computer models suggest that altruism cannot emerge without some level of
conflict between groups. If true, this is one of the many places where we must
transcend evolutionary pressures through reason—because, barring an attack from
outer space, we now lack a proper “out-group” to inspire us to further
altruism.

In fact, Bowles’s work has interesting implications for my account of the moral
landscape. Consider the following from Patricia Churchland:



Assuming our woodland ape ancestors as well as our own human ancestors engaged
in out-group raids, as chimps and several South American tribes still do, can
we be confident in moral condemnation of their behavior? I see no basis in
reality for such a judgment. If, as Samuel Bowles argues, the altruism typical
of modern humans plausibly co-evolved with lethal out-group competition, such a
judgment will be problematic.95



Of course, the purpose of my argument is to suggest a “basis in reality” for
universal judgments of value. However, as Churchland points out, if there was
simply no other way for our ancestors to progress toward altruism without
developing a penchant for out-group hostility, then so be it. Assuming that the
development of altruism represents an extraordinarily important advance in
moral terms (I believe it does), this would be analogous to our ancestors
descending into an unpleasant valley on the moral landscape only to make
progress toward a higher peak. But it is important to reiterate that such
evolutionary constraints no longer hold. In fact, given recent developments in
biology, we are now poised to consciously engineer our further evolution.
Should we do this, and if so, in which ways? Only a scientific understanding of
the possibilities of human well-being could guide us.

