# Chapter 5 - Which Self Should We Satisfy?
[Metadata]: # {06.04}
[Descriptor]: # {06.04}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 5
Which Self Should We Satisfy?
# Which Self Should We Satisfy?
If you ask people to report on their level of well-being moment-to-moment—by
giving them a beeper that sounds at random intervals, prompting them to record
their mental state—you get one measure of how happy they are. If, however, you
simply ask them how satisfied they are with their lives generally, you often
get a very different measure. The psychologist Daniel Kahneman calls the first
source of information “the experiencing self” and the second “the remembering
self.” And his justification for partitioning the human mind in this way is
that these two “selves” often disagree. Indeed, they can be experimentally
shown to disagree, even across a relatively brief span of time. We saw this
earlier with respect to Kahneman’s data on colonoscopies: because “the
remembering self” evaluates any experience by reference to its peak intensity
and its final moments (the “peak/end rule”), it is possible to improve its lot,
at the expense of “the experiencing self,” by simply prolonging an unpleasant
procedure at its lowest level of intensity (and thereby reducing the negativity
of future memories).

What applies to colonoscopies seems to apply elsewhere in life. Imagine, for
instance, that you want to go on vacation: You are deciding between a trip to
Hawaii and a trip to Rome. On Hawaii, you envision yourself swimming in the
ocean, relaxing on the beach, playing tennis, and drinking mai tais. Rome will
find you sitting in cafés, visiting museums and ancient ruins, and drinking an
impressive amount of wine. Which vacation should you choose? It is quite
possible that your “experiencing self” would be much happier on Hawaii, as
indicated by an hourly tally of your emotional and sensory pleasure, while your
remembering self would give a much more positive account of Rome one year
hence. Which self would be right? Does the question even make sense? Kahneman
observes that while most of us think our “experiencing self” must be more
important, it has no voice in our decisions about what to do in life. After
all, we can’t choose from among experiences; we must choose from among
remembered (or imagined) experiences. And, according to Kahneman, we don’t tend
to think about the future as a set of experiences; we think of it as a set of
“anticipated memories.”7 The problem, with regard to both doing science and
living one’s life, is that the “remembering self” is the only one who can think
and speak about the past. It is, therefore, the only one who can consciously
make decisions in light of past experience.

According to Kahneman, the correlation in well-being between these two “selves”
is around 0.5.8 This is essentially the same correlation observed between
identical twins, or between a person and himself a decade later.9 It would
seem, therefore, that about half the information about a person’s happiness is
still left on the table whichever “self” we consult. What are we to make of a
“remembering self” who claims to have a wonderful life, while his “experiencing
self” suffers continuous marital stress, health complaints, and career anxiety?
And what of a person whose “remembering self” claims to be deeply
dissatisfied—having failed to reach his most important goals—but whose
moment-to-moment state of happiness is quite high? Kahneman seems to think that
there is no way to reconcile disparities of this sort. If true, this would
appear to present a problem for any science of morality.

It seems clear, however, that the “remembering self” is simply the
“experiencing self” in one of its modes. Imagine, for instance, that you are
going about your day quite happily, experiencing one moment of contentment
after the next, when you run into an old rival from school. Looking like the
very incarnation of success, he asks what you have made of yourself in the
intervening decades. At this point your “remembering self” steps forward and,
feeling great chagrin, admits “not so much.” Let us say that this encounter
pitches you into a crisis of self-doubt that causes you to make some drastic
decisions, affecting both your family and career. All of these moments are part
of the fabric of your experience, however, whether recollected or not.
Conscious memories and self-evaluations are themselves experiences that lay the
foundation for future experiences. Making a conscious assessment of your life,
career, or marriage feels a certain way in the present and leads to subsequent
thoughts and behaviors. These changes will also feel a certain way and have
further implications for your future. But none of these events occur outside
the continuum of your experience in the present moment (i.e., the “experiencing
self”).

If we could take the 2.5 billion seconds that make up the average human life
and assess a person’s well-being at each point in time, the distinction between
the “experiencing self” and the “remembering self” would disappear. Yes, the
experience of recalling the past often determines what we decide to do in the
future—and this greatly affects the character of one’s future experience. But
it would still be true to say that in each of the 2.5 billion seconds of an
average life, certain moments were pleasant, and others were painful; some were
later recalled with greater or lesser fidelity, and these memories had whatever
effects they had later on. Consciousness and its ever-changing contents remain
the only subjective reality.

Thus, if your “remembering self” claims to have had a wonderful time in Rome,
while your “experiencing self” felt only boredom, fatigue, and despair, then
your “remembering self” (i.e., your recollection of the trip) is simply wrong
about what it was like to be you in Rome. This becomes increasingly obvious the
more we narrow our focus: Imagine a “remembering self” who thinks that you were
especially happy while sitting for fifteen minutes on the Spanish Steps; while
your “experiencing self” was, in fact, plunged deeper into misery for every one
of those minutes than at any other point on the trip. Do we need two selves to
account for this disparity? No. The vagaries of memory suffice.

As Kahneman admits, the vast majority of our experiences in life never get
recalled, and the time we spend actually remembering the past is comparatively
brief. Thus, the quality of most of our lives can be assessed only in terms of
whatever fleeting character it has as it occurs. But this includes the time we
spend recalling the past. Amid this flux, the moments in which we construct a
larger story about our lives appear like glints of sunlight on a dark river:
they may seem special, but they are part of the current all the same.

