# Chapter 4 - The Clash Between Faith and Reason
[Metadata]: # {05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {05.05}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 4
The Clash Between Faith and Reason
# The Clash Between Faith and Reason
Introspection offers no clue that our experience of the world around us, and of
ourselves within it, depends upon voltage changes and chemical interactions
taking place inside our heads. And yet a century and a half of brain science
declares it to be so. What will it mean to finally understand the most prized,
lamented, and intimate features of our subjectivity in terms of neural circuits
and information processing?

With respect to our current scientific understanding of the mind, the major
religions remain wedded to doctrines that are growing less plausible by the
day. While the ultimate relationship between consciousness and matter has not
been settled, any naïve conception of a soul can now be jettisoned on account
of the mind’s obvious dependency upon the brain. The idea that there might be
an immortal soul capable of reasoning, feeling love, remembering life events,
etc., all the while being metaphysically independent of the brain, seems
untenable given that damage to the relevant neural circuits obliterates these
capacities in a living person. Does the soul of a person suffering from total
aphasia (loss of language ability) still speak and think fluently? This is
rather like asking whether the soul of a diabetic produces abundant insulin.
The specific character of the mind’s dependency on the brain also suggests that
there cannot be a unified self at work in each of us. There are simply too many
separable components to the human mind—each susceptible to independent
disruption—for there to be a single entity to stand as rider to the horse.66

The soul doctrine suffers further upheaval in light of the fatal resemblance of
the human brain to the brains of other animals. The obvious continuity of our
mental powers with those of ostensibly soulless primates raises special
difficulties. If the joint ancestors of chimpanzees and human beings did not
have souls, when did we acquire ours?67 Many of the world’s major religions
ignore these awkward facts and simply assert that human beings possess a unique
form of subjectivity that has no connection to the inner lives of other
animals. The soul is the preeminent keepsake here, but the claim of human
uniqueness generally extends to the moral sense as well: animals are thought to
possess nothing like it. Our moral intuitions must, therefore, be the work of
God. Given the pervasiveness of this claim, intellectually honest scientists
cannot help but fall into overt conflict with religion regarding the origins of
morality.

Nevertheless, it is widely imagined that there is no conflict, in principle,
between science and religion because many scientists are themselves
“religious,” and some even believe in the God of Abraham and in the truth of
ancient miracles. Even religious extremists value some of the products of
science—antibiotics, computers, bombs, etc.—and these seeds of inquisitiveness,
we are told, can be patiently nurtured in a way that offers no insult to
religious faith.

This prayer of reconciliation goes by many names and now has many advocates.
But it is based on a fallacy. The fact that some scientists do not detect any
problem with religious faith merely proves that a juxtaposition of good ideas
and bad ones is possible. Is there a conflict between marriage and infidelity?
The two regularly coincide. The fact that intellectual honesty can be confined
to a ghetto—in a single brain, in an institution, or in a culture—does not mean
that there isn’t a perfect contradiction between reason and faith, or between
the worldview of science taken as a whole and those advanced by the world’s
“great,” and greatly discrepant, religions.

What can be shown by example is how poorly religious scientists manage to
reconcile reason and faith when they actually attempt to do so. Few such
efforts have received more public attention than the work of Francis Collins.
Collins is currently the director of the National Institutes of Health, having
been appointed to the post by President Obama. One must admit that his
credentials were impeccable: he is a physical chemist, a medical geneticist,
and the former head of the Human Genome Project. He is also, by his own
account, living proof that there can be no conflict between science and
religion. I will discuss Collins’s views at some length, because he is widely
considered the most impressive example of “sophisticated” faith in action.

In 2006, Collins published a bestselling book, The Language of God,68 in which
he claimed to demonstrate “a consistent and profoundly satisfying harmony”
between twenty-first-century science and Evangelical Christianity. The Language
of God is a genuinely astonishing book. To read it is to witness nothing less
than an intellectual suicide. It is, however, a suicide that has gone almost
entirely unacknowledged: The body yielded to the rope; the neck snapped; the
breath subsided; and the corpse dangles in ghastly discomposure even now—and
yet polite people everywhere continue to celebrate the great man’s health.

Collins is regularly praised by his fellow scientists for what he is not: he is
not a “young earth creationist,” nor is he a proponent of “intelligent design.”
Given the state of the evidence for evolution, these are both very good things
for a scientist not to be. But as director of the NIH, Collins now has more
responsibility for biomedical and health-related research than any person on
earth, controlling an annual budget of more than $30 billion. He is also one of
the foremost representatives of science in the United States. We need not
congratulate him for believing in evolution.

Here is how Collins, as a scientist and educator, summarizes his understanding
of the universe for the general public (what follows are a series of slides,
presented in order, from a lecture Collins gave at the University of
California, Berkeley, in 2008):

Slide 1

Almighty God, who is not limited in space or time, created a universe 13.7
billion years ago with its parameters precisely tuned to allow the development
of complexity over long periods of time.

Slide 2

God’s plan included the mechanism of evolution to create the marvelous
diversity of living things on our planet. Most especially, that creative plan
included human beings.

Slide 3

After evolution had prepared a sufficiently advanced “house” (the human brain),
God gifted humanity with the knowledge of good and evil (the Moral Law), with
free will, and with an immortal soul.

Slide 4

We humans use our free will to break the moral law, leading to our estrangement
from God. For Christians, Jesus is the solution to that estrangement.

Slide 5

If the Moral Law is just a side effect of evolution, then there is no such
thing as good or evil. It’s all an illusion. We’ve been hoodwinked. Are any of
us, especially the strong atheists, really prepared to live our lives within
that worldview?

Is it really so difficult to perceive a conflict between Collin’s science and
his religion? Just imagine how scientific it would seem to most Americans if
Collins, as a devout Hindu, informed his audience that Lord Brahma had created
the universe and now sleeps; Lord Vishnu sustains it and tinkers with our DNA
(in a way that respects the law of karma and rebirth); and Lord Shiva will
eventually destroy it in a great conflagration.69 Is there any chance that
Collins would be running the NIH if he were an outspoken polytheist?


Early in his career as a physician, Collins attempted to fill the God-shaped
hole in his life by studying the world’s major religions. He admits, however,
that he did not get very far with this research before seeking the tender
mercies of “a Methodist minister who lived down the street.” In fact, Collins’s
ignorance of world religion appears prodigious. For instance, he regularly
repeats the Christian canard about Jesus being the only person in human history
who ever claimed to be God (as though this would render the opinions of an
uneducated carpenter of the first century especially credible). Collins seems
oblivious to the fact that saints, yogis, charlatans, and schizophrenics by the
thousands claim to be God at this very instant. And it has always been thus.
Forty years ago, a very unprepossessing Charles Manson convinced a band of
misfits in the San Fernando Valley that he was both God and Jesus. Should we,
therefore, consult Manson on questions of cosmology? He still walks among us—or
at least sits—in Corcoran State Prison. The fact that Collins, as both a
scientist and as an influential apologist for religion, repeatedly emphasizes
the silly fiction of Jesus’ singular self-appraisal is one of many embarrassing
signs that he has lived too long in the echo chamber of Evangelical
Christianity.

But the pilgrim continues his progress: next, we learn that Collins’s
uncertainty about the identity of God could not survive a collision with C. S.
Lewis. The following passage from Lewis proved decisive:



I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people
often say about Him: “I’m ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I
don’t accept His claim to be God.” That is one thing we must not say. A man who
was merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great
moral teacher. He would either be a lunatic—on a level with the man who says He
is a poached egg—or else He would be the Devil of Hell. You must make your
choice. Either this man was, and is, the Son of God: or else a madman or
something worse. You can shut Him up for a fool, you can spit at Him and kill
Him as a demon; or you can fall at His feet and call him Lord and God. But let
us not come with any patronizing nonsense about His being a great human
teacher. He has not left that open to us. He did not intend to.



Collins provides this pabulum for our contemplation and then describes how it
irrevocably altered his view of the universe:



Lewis was right. I had to make a choice. A full year had passed since I decided
to believe in some sort of God, and now I was being called to account. On a
beautiful fall day, as I was hiking in the Cascade Mountains during my first
trip west of the Mississippi, the majesty and beauty of God’s creation
overwhelmed my resistance. As I rounded a corner and saw a beautiful and
unexpected frozen waterfall, hundreds of feet high, I knew the search was over.
The next morning, I knelt in the dewy grass as the sun rose and surrendered to
Jesus Christ.70



This is self-deception at full gallop. It is simply astounding that this
passage was written by a scientist with the intent of demonstrating the
compatibility of faith and reason. And if we thought Collins’s reasoning could
grow no more labile, he has since divulged that the waterfall was frozen into
three streams, which put him in mind of the Holy Trinity.71

It should go without saying that if a frozen waterfall can confirm the specific
tenets of Christianity, anything can confirm anything. But this truth was not
obvious to Collins as he “knelt in the dewy grass,” and it is not obvious to
him now. Nor was it obvious to the editors of Nature, which is the most
important scientific publication in any language. The journal praised Collins
for engaging “with people of faith to explore how science—both in its mode of
thought and its results—is consistent with their religious beliefs.”72
According to Nature, Collins was engaged in the “moving” and “laudable”
exercise of building “a bridge across the social and intellectual divide that
exists between most of U.S. academia and the so-called heartlands.” And here is
Collins, hard at work on that bridge:



As believers, you are right to hold fast to the concept of God as Creator; you
are right to hold fast to the truths of the Bible; you are right to hold fast
to the conclusion that science offers no answers to the most pressing questions
of human existence; and you are right to hold fast to the certainty that the
claims of atheistic materialism must be steadfastly resisted.73





God, who is not limited to space and time, created the universe and established
natural laws that govern it. Seeking to populate this otherwise sterile
universe with living creatures, God chose the elegant mechanism of evolution to
create microbes, plants, and animals of all sorts. Most remarkably, God
intentionally chose the same mechanism to give rise to special creatures who
would have intelligence, a knowledge of right and wrong, free will, and a
desire to seek fellowship with Him. He also knew these creatures would
ultimately choose to disobey the Moral Law.74

Imagine: the year is 2006; half of the American population believes that the
universe is 6,000 years old; our president has just used his first veto to
block federal funding for the world’s most promising medical research on
religious grounds; and one of the foremost scientists in the land has this to
say, straight from the heart (if not the brain).

Of course, once the eyes of faith have opened, confirmation can be found
everywhere. Here Collins considers whether to accept the directorship of the
Human Genome Project:



I spent a long afternoon praying in a little chapel, seeking guidance about
this decision. I did not “hear” God speak—in fact, I’ve never had that
experience. But during those hours, ending in an evensong service that I had
not expected, a peace settled over me. A few days later, I accepted the
offer.75



One hopes to see, but does not find, the phrase “Dear Diary” framing these
solemn excursions from honest reasoning. Again we find a peculiar emphasis on
the most unremarkable violations of expectation: just as Collins had not
expected to see a frozen waterfall, he had not expected an evensong service.
How unlikely would it be to encounter an evensong service (generally celebrated
just before sunset) while spending “a long afternoon praying in a little
chapel”? And what of Collins’s feeling of “peace”? We are clearly meant to view
it as some indication, however slight, of the veracity of his religious
beliefs. Elsewhere in his book Collins states, correctly, that “monotheism and
polytheism cannot both be right.” But doesn’t he think that at some point in
the last thousand years a Hindu or two has prayed in a temple, perhaps to the
elephant-headed god Ganesh, and experienced similar feelings of peace? What
might he, as a scientist, make of this fact?

I should say at this point that I see nothing irrational about seeking the
states of mind that lie at the core of many of the world’s religions.
Compassion, awe, devotion, and feelings of oneness are surely among the most
valuable experiences a person can have. What is irrational, and irresponsible
in a scientist and educator, is to make unjustified and unjustifiable claims
about the structure of the universe, about the divine origin of certain books,
and about the future of humanity on the basis of such experiences. And by the
standards of even ordinary contemplative experience, the phenomena that Collins
puts forward in support of his religious beliefs scarcely merit discussion. A
beautiful waterfall? An unexpected church service? A feeling of peace? The fact
that these are the most salient landmarks on Collins’s journey out of bondage
may be the most troubling detail in this positive sea of troubles.


Collins argues that science makes belief in God “intensely plausible”—the Big
Bang, the fine-tuning of Nature’s constants, the emergence of complex life, the
effectiveness of mathematics,76 all suggest to him that a “loving, logical, and
consistent” God exists. But when challenged with alternate (and far more
plausible) accounts of these phenomena—or with evidence that suggests that God
might be unloving, illogical, inconsistent, or, indeed, absent—Collins declares
that God stands outside of Nature, and thus science cannot address the question
of His existence at all. Similarly, Collins insists that our moral intuitions
attest to God’s existence, to His perfectly moral character, and to His desire
to have fellowship with every member of our species; but when our moral
intuitions recoil at the casual destruction of innocent children by tidal wave
or earthquake, Collins assures us that our time-bound notions of good and evil
cannot be trusted and that God’s will is a perfect mystery.77 As is often the
case with religious apology, it is a case of heads, faith wins; tails, reason
loses.

Like most Christians, Collins believes in a suite of canonical miracles,
including the virgin birth and literal resurrection of Jesus Christ. He cites
N. T. Wright78 and John Polkinghorne79 as the best authorities on these
matters, and when pressed on points of theology, he recommends that people
consult their books for further illumination. To give readers a taste of this
literature, here is Polkinghorne describing the physics of the coming
resurrection of the dead:



If we regard human beings as psychosomatic unities, as I believe both the Bible
and contemporary experience of the intimate connection between mind and brain
encourage us to do, then the soul will have to be understood in an Aristotelian
sense as the “form,” or information-bearing pattern, of the body. Though this
pattern is dissolved at death it seems perfectly rational to believe that it
will be remembered by God and reconstituted in a divine act of resurrection.
The “matter” of the world to come, which will be the carrier of the
reembodiment, will be the transformed matter of the present universe, itself
redeemed by God beyond its cosmic death. The resurrected universe is not a
second attempt by the Creator to produce a world ex nihilo but it is the
transmutation of the present world in an act of new creation ex vetere. God
will then truly be “all in all” (1 Cor. 15:28) in a totally sacramental
universe whose divine infused “matter” will be delivered from the transience
and decay inherent in the present physical process. Such mysterious and
exciting beliefs depend for their motivation not only on the faithfulness of
God, but also on Christ’s resurrection, understood as the seminal event from
which the new creation grows, and indeed also on the detail of the empty tomb,
with its implication that the Lord’s risen and glorified body is the
transmutation of his dead body, just as the world to come will be the
transformation of this present mortal world.80



These beliefs are, indeed, “mysterious and exciting.” As it happens,
Polkinghorne is also a scientist. The problem, however, is that it is
impossible to differentiate his writing on religion—which now fills an entire
shelf of books—from an extraordinarily patient Sokal-style hoax.81 If one
intended to embarrass the religious establishment with carefully constructed
nonsense, this is exactly the sort of pseudoscience, pseudo-scholarship, and
pseudoreasoning one would employ. Unfortunately, I see no reason to doubt
Polkinghorne’s sincerity. Neither, it would seem, does Francis Collins.

Even for a scientist of Collins’s stature, who has struggled to reconcile his
belief in the divinity of Jesus with modern science, it all boils down to the
“empty tomb.” Collins freely admits that if all his scientific arguments for
the plausibility of God were proven to be in error, his faith would be
undiminished, as it is founded upon the belief, shared by all serious
Christians, that the Gospel account of the miracles of Jesus is true. The
problem, however, is that miracle stories are as common as house dust, even in
the twenty-first century. For instance, all of Jesus’ otherworldly powers have
been attributed to the South Indian guru Sathya Sai Baba by vast numbers of
living eyewitnesses. Sai Baba even claims to have been born of a virgin. This
is actually not an uncommon claim in the history of religion, or in history
generally. Even worldly men like Genghis Khan and Alexander were once thought
to have been born of virgins (parthenogenesis apparently offers no guarantee
that a man will turn the other cheek). Thus, Collins’s faith is predicated on
the claim that miracle stories of the sort that today surround a person like
Sathya Sai Baba—and do not even merit an hour on cable television—somehow
become especially credible when set in the prescientific religious context of
the first-century Roman Empire, decades after their supposed occurrence, as
evidenced by discrepant and fragmentary copies of copies of copies of ancient
Greek manuscripts.82 It is on this basis that the current head of the NIH
recommends that we believe the following propositions:



1. Jesus Christ, a carpenter by trade, was born of a virgin, ritually murdered
as a scapegoat for the collective sins of his species, and then resurrected
from death after an interval of three days.



2. He promptly ascended, bodily, to “heaven”—where, for two millennia, he has
eavesdropped upon (and, on occasion, even answered) the simultaneous prayers of
billions of beleaguered human beings.



3. Not content to maintain this numinous arrangement indefinitely, this
invisible carpenter will one day return to earth to judge humanity for its
sexual indiscretions and skeptical doubts, at which time he will grant
immortality to anyone who has had the good fortune to be convinced, on Mother’s
knee, that this baffling litany of miracles is the most important series of
truths ever revealed about the cosmos.



4. Every other member of our species, past and present, from Cleopatra to
Einstein, no matter what his or her terrestrial accomplishments, will be
consigned to a far less desirable fate, best left unspecified.



5. In the meantime, God/Jesus may or may not intervene in our world, as He
pleases, curing the occasional end-stage cancer (or not), answering an
especially earnest prayer for guidance (or not), consoling the bereaved (or
not), through His perfectly wise and loving agency.

Just how many scientific laws would be violated by this scheme? One is tempted
to say “all of them.” And yet, judging from the way that journals like Nature
have treated Collins, one can only conclude that there is nothing in the
scientific worldview, or in the intellectual rigor and self-criticism that gave
rise to it, that casts these convictions in an unfavorable light.

Prior to his appointment as head of the NIH, Collins started an organization
called the BioLogos Foundation, whose purpose (in the words of its mission
statement) is to communicate “the compatibility of the Christian faith with
scientific discoveries about the origins of the universe and life.” BioLogos is
funded by the Templeton Foundation, an organization that claims to seek answers
to “life’s biggest questions,” but appears primarily dedicated to erasing the
boundary between religion and science. Because of its astonishing wealth,
Templeton seems able to purchase the complicity of otherwise secular academics
as it seeks to rebrand religious faith as a legitimate arm of science. True to
form, Nature has adopted an embarrassingly supine posture with respect to
Templeton as well.83

Would Collins have received the same treatment in Nature if he had argued for
the compatibility between science and witchcraft, astrology, or Tarot cards? On
the contrary, he would have been met by an inferno of criticism. As a point of
comparison, we should recall that the biochemist Rupert Sheldrake had his
academic career neatly decapitated by a single Nature editorial.84 In his book
A New Science of Life, Sheldrake advanced a theory of “morphic resonance,” in
an attempt to account for how living systems and other patterns in nature
develop.85 Needless to say, the theory stands a very good chance of being
utterly wrong. But there is not a single sentence in Sheldrake’s book to rival
the intellectual dishonesty that Collins achieves on nearly every page of The
Language of God.86 What accounts for the double standard? Clearly, it remains
taboo to criticize mainstream religion (which, in the West, means Christianity,
Judaism, and Islam).


According to Collins, the moral law applies exclusively to human beings:



Though other animals may at times appear to show glimmerings of a moral sense,
they are certainly not widespread, and in many instances other species’
behavior seems to be in dramatic contrast to any sense of universal
rightness.87



One wonders if the author has ever read a newspaper. The behavior of humans
offers no such “dramatic contrast”? How badly must human beings behave to put
this “sense of universal rightness” in doubt? While no other species can match
us for altruism, none can match us for sadistic cruelty either. And just how
widespread must “glimmerings” of morality be among other animals before
Collins—who, after all, knows a thing or two about genes—begins to wonder
whether our moral sense has evolutionary precursors? What if mice show greater
distress at the suffering of familiar mice than unfamiliar ones? (They do.88)
What if monkeys will starve themselves to prevent their cage mates from
receiving painful shocks? (They will.89) What if chimps have a demonstrable
sense of fairness when receiving food rewards? (They have.90) What if dogs do
too? (Ditto.91) Wouldn’t these be precisely the sorts of findings one would
expect if our morality were the product of evolution?

Collins’s case for the supernatural origin of morality rests on the further
assertion that there can be no evolutionary explanation for genuine altruism.
Because self-sacrifice cannot increase the likelihood that an individual
creature will survive and reproduce, truly self-sacrificing behavior stands as
a primordial rejoinder to any biological account of morality. In Collins’s
view, therefore, the mere existence of altruism offers compelling evidence of a
personal God. A moment’s thought reveals, however, that if we were to accept
this neutered biology, almost everything about us would be bathed in the warm
glow of religious mystery. Smoking cigarettes isn’t a healthy habit and is
unlikely to offer an adaptive advantage—and there were no cigarettes in the
Paleolithic—but this habit is very widespread and compelling. Is God, by any
chance, a tobacco farmer? Collins can’t seem to see that human morality and
selfless love may arise from more basic biological and psychological traits,
which were themselves products of evolution. It is hard to interpret this
oversight in light of his scientific training. If one didn’t know better, one
might be tempted to conclude that religious dogmatism presents an obstacle to
scientific reasoning.

There are, of course, ethical implications to believing that human beings are
the only species made in God’s image and vouchsafed with “immortal souls.”
Concern about souls is a very poor guide to ethical behavior—that is, to
actually mitigating the suffering of conscious creatures like ourselves. The
belief that the soul enters the zygote at (or very near) the moment of
conception leads to spurious worries about the fate of undifferentiated cells
in Petri dishes and, therefore, to profound qualms over embryonic stem cell
research. Rather often, a belief in souls leaves people indifferent to the
suffering of creatures thought not to possess them. There are many species of
animals that can suffer in ways that three-day-old human embryos cannot. The
use of apes in medical research, the exposure of whales and dolphins to
military sonar92—these are real ethical dilemmas, with real suffering at issue.
Concern over human embryos smaller than the period at the end of this
sentence—when, for years they have constituted one of the most promising
contexts for medical research—is one of the many delusional products of
religion that has led to an ethical blind alley, and to terrible failures of
compassion. While Collins appears to support embryonic stem-cell research, he
does so after much (literal) soul searching and under considerable theological
duress. Everything he has said and written about the subject needlessly
complicates an ethical question that is—if one is actually concerned about
human and animal well-being—utterly straightforward.

The ethics of embryonic stem-cell research, which currently entails the
destruction of human embryos, can be judged only by considering what embryos at
the 150-cell-stage actually are. We must contemplate their destruction in light
of how we treat organisms at similar and greater stages of complexity, as well
as how we treat human beings at later stages of development. For instance,
there are a variety of conditions that can occur during gestation, the remedy
for which entails the destruction of far more developed embryos—and yet these
interventions offer far less potential benefit to society. Curiously, no one
objects to such procedures. A child can be born with his underdeveloped yet
living twin lodged inside him—a condition known as fetus in fetu. Occasionally
this condition isn’t discovered until years after birth, when the first child
complains about having something moving around inside his body. This second
child is then removed like a tumor and destroyed.93 As God seems to love
diversity, there are countless permutations of this condition, and twins can
fuse in almost any way imaginable. The second twin can also be a disorganized
mass called a teratoma. Needless to say, any parasitic twin, however
disorganized, will be a far more developed entity than an embryo at the
150-cell stage. Even the intentional sacrifice of one conjoined (“Siamese”)
twin to save the other has occurred in the United States, with shared organs
being given to the survivor. In fact, there have been cases where unshared
organs have been transferred from the twin that is to be sacrificed.94

Some have argued that the “viability” of an organism is the primary issue here:
for without some extraordinary intervention such twins cannot survive. But many
fully developed human beings answer to this condition of utter dependency at
some point in their lives (e.g., a kidney patient on dialysis). And embryos
themselves are not viable unless placed in the proper conditions. Indeed,
embryos could be engineered to not be viable past a certain age even if
implanted in a womb. Would this obviate the ethical concerns of those who
oppose embryonic stem-cell research?

At the time of this writing, the Obama administration still has not removed the
most important impediments to embryonic stem-cell research. Currently, federal
funding is only allowed for work on stem cells that have been derived from
surplus embryos at fertility clinics. This delicacy is a clear concession to
the religious convictions of the American electorate. While Collins seems
willing to go further and support research on embryos created through
somatic-cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), he is very far from being a voice of
ethical clarity in this debate. For instance, he considers embryos created
through SCNT to be distinct from those formed through the union of sperm and
egg because the former are “not part of God’s plan to create a human
individual” while “the latter is very much part of God’s plan, carried out
through the millennia by our own species and many others.”95 What is to be
gained in a serious discussion of bioethics by talking about “God’s plan”? If
such embryos were brought to term and became sentient and suffering human
beings, would it be ethical to kill these people and harvest their organs
because they had been conceived apart from “God’s plan”? While Collins’s
stewardship of the NIH seems unlikely to impede our mincing progress on
embryonic stem-cell research, his appointment is one of President Obama’s
efforts to split the difference between real science and real ethics on the one
hand and religious superstition and taboo on the other.

Collins has written that “science offers no answers to the most pressing
questions of human existence” and that “the claims of atheistic materialism
must be steadfastly resisted.” One can only hope that these convictions will
not affect his judgment at the NIH. As I have argued throughout this book,
understanding human well-being at the level of the brain might very well offer
some answers to the most pressing questions of human existence—questions like,
Why do we suffer? How can we achieve the deepest forms of happiness? Or,
indeed, Is it possible to love one’s neighbor as oneself? And wouldn’t any
effort to explain human nature without reference to a soul, and to explain
morality without reference to God, constitute “atheistic materialism”? Is it
really wise to entrust the future of biomedical research in the United States
to a man who believes that understanding ourselves through science is
impossible, while our resurrection from death is inevitable?


When I criticized President Obama’s appointment of Collins in The New York
Times, many readers considered it an overt expression of “intolerance.”96 For
instance, the biologist Kenneth Miller claimed in a letter to the editor that
my view was purely the product of my own “deeply held prejudices against
religion” and that I opposed Collins merely because “he is a Christian.”97
Writing in The Guardian, Andrew Brown called my criticism of Collins a
“fantastically illiberal and embryonically totalitarian position that goes
against every possible notion of human rights and even the American
constitution.” Miller and Brown clearly feel that unjustified beliefs and
disordered thinking should not be challenged as long as they are associated
with a mainstream religion—and that to do so is synonymous with bigotry. They
are not alone.

There is now a large and growing literature—spanning dozens of books and
hundreds of articles—attacking Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Christopher
Hitchens, and me (the so-called New Atheists) for our alleged incivility, bias,
and ignorance of how “sophisticated” believers practice their faith. It is
often said that we caricature religion, taking its most extreme forms to
represent the whole. We do no such thing. We simply do what a paragon of
sophisticated faith like Francis Collins does: we take the specific claims of
religion seriously.

Many of our secular critics worry that if we oblige people to choose between
reason and faith, they will choose faith and cease to support scientific
research; if, on the other hand, we ceaselessly reiterate that there is no
conflict between religion and science, we might cajole great multitudes into
accepting the truth of evolution (as though this were an end in itself). Here
is a version of this charge that, I fear, most people would accept, taken from
journalist Chris Mooney and marine biologist Sheril Kirshenbaum’s book
Unscientific America:



If the goal is to create an America more friendly toward science and reason,
the combativeness of the New Atheists is strongly counterproductive. If
anything, they work in ironic combination with their dire enemies, the
anti-science conservative Christians who populate the creation science and
intelligent design movements, to ensure we’ll continue to be polarized over
subjects like the teaching of evolution when we don’t have to be. America is a
very religious nation, and if forced to choose between faith and science, vast
numbers of Americans will select the former. The New Atheists err in insisting
that such a choice needs to be made. Atheism is not the logically inevitable
outcome of scientific reasoning, any more than intelligent design is a
necessary corollary of religious faith. A great many scientists believe in God
with no sense of internal contradiction, just as many religious believers
accept evolution as the correct theory to explain the development, diversity,
and inter-relatedness of life on Earth. The New Atheists, like the
fundamentalists they so despise, are setting up a false dichotomy that can only
damage the cause of scientific literacy for generations to come. It threatens
to leave science itself caught in the middle between extremes, unable to find
cover in a destructive, seemingly unending, culture war.98



The first thing to observe is that Mooney and Kirshenbaum are confused about
the nature of the problem. The goal is not to get more Americans to merely
accept the truth of evolution (or any other scientific theory); the goal is to
get them to value the principles of reasoning and educated discourse that now
make a belief in evolution obligatory. Doubt about evolution is merely a
symptom of an underlying condition; the condition is faith itself—conviction
without sufficient reason, hope mistaken for knowledge, bad ideas protected
from good ones, good ideas obscured by bad ones, wishful thinking elevated to a
principle of salvation, etc. Mooney and Kirshenbaum seem to imagine that we can
get people to value intellectual honesty by lying to them.

While it is invariably advertised as an expression of “respect” for people of
faith, the accommodationism that Mooney and Kirshenbaum recommend is nothing
more than naked condescension, motivated by fear. They assure us that people
will choose religion over science, no matter how good a case is made against
religion. In certain contexts, this fear is probably warranted. I wouldn’t be
eager to spell out the irrationality of Islam while standing in the Great
Mosque in Mecca. But let’s be honest about how Mooney and Kirshenbaum view
public discourse in the United States: Watch what you say, or the Christian mob
will burn down the Library of Alexandria all over again. By comparison, the
“combativeness” of the “New Atheists” seems quite collegial. We are merely
guilty of assuming that our fellow Homo sapiens possess the requisite
intelligence and emotional maturity to respond to rational argument, satire,
and ridicule on the subject of religion—just as they respond to these
discursive pressures on all other subjects. Of course, we could be wrong. But
let’s admit which side in this debate currently views our neighbors as
dangerous children and which views them as adults who might prefer not to be
completely mistaken about the nature of reality.

Finally, we come to the kernel of confusion that has been the subject of this
section—the irrelevant claim that “a great many scientists believe in God with
no sense of internal contradiction.”99 The fact that certain people can reason
poorly with a clear conscience—or can do so while saying that they have a clear
conscience—proves absolutely nothing about the compatibility of religious and
scientific ideas, goals, or ways of thinking. It is possible to be wrong and to
not know it (we call this “ignorance”). It is possible to be wrong and to know
it, but to be reluctant to incur the social cost of admitting this publicly (we
call this “hypocrisy”). And it may also be possible to be wrong, to dimly
glimpse this fact, but to allow the fear of being wrong to increase one’s
commitment to one’s erroneous beliefs (we call this “self-deception”). It seems
clear that these frames of mind do an unusual amount of work in the service of
religion.

There is an epidemic of scientific ignorance in the United States. This isn’t
surprising, as very few scientific truths are self-evident and many are deeply
counterintuitive. It is by no means obvious that empty space has structure or
that we share a common ancestor with both the housefly and the banana. It can
be difficult to think like a scientist (even, we have begun to see, when one is
a scientist). But it would seem that few things make thinking like a scientist
more difficult than an attachment to religion.

