# Introduction - THE MORAL LANDSCAPE
[Metadata]: # {01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01}
[Author]: # {harris}
Introduction
THE MORAL LANDSCAPE
# THE MORAL LANDSCAPE
The people of Albania have a venerable tradition of vendetta called Kanun: if a
man commits a murder, his victim’s family can kill any one of his male
relatives in reprisal. If a boy has the misfortune of being the son or brother
of a murderer, he must spend his days and nights in hiding, forgoing a proper
education, adequate health care, and the pleasures of a normal life. Untold
numbers of Albanian men and boys live as prisoners of their homes even now.1
Can we say that the Albanians are morally wrong to have structured their
society in this way? Is their tradition of blood feud a form of evil? Are their
values inferior to our own?

Most people imagine that science cannot pose, much less answer, questions of
this sort. How could we ever say, as a matter of scientific fact, that one way
of life is better, or more moral, than another? Whose definition of “better” or
“moral” would we use? While many scientists now study the evolution of
morality, as well as its underlying neurobiology, the purpose of their research
is merely to describe how human beings think and behave. No one expects science
to tell us how we ought to think and behave. Controversies about human values
are controversies about which science officially has no opinion.2

I will argue, however, that questions about values—about meaning, morality, and
life’s larger purpose—are really questions about the well-being of conscious
creatures. Values, therefore, translate into facts that can be scientifically
understood: regarding positive and negative social emotions, retributive
impulses, the effects of specific laws and social institutions on human
relationships, the neurophysiology of happiness and suffering, etc. The most
important of these facts are bound to transcend culture—just as facts about
physical and mental health do. Cancer in the highlands of New Guinea is still
cancer; cholera is still cholera; schizophrenia is still schizophrenia; and so,
too, I will argue, compassion is still compassion, and well-being is still
well-being.3 And if there are important cultural differences in how people
flourish—if, for instance, there are incompatible but equivalent ways to raise
happy, intelligent, and creative children—these differences are also facts that
must depend upon the organization of the human brain. In principle, therefore,
we can account for the ways in which culture defines us within the context of
neuroscience and psychology. The more we understand ourselves at the level of
the brain, the more we will see that there are right and wrong answers to
questions of human values.

Of course, we will have to confront some ancient disagreements about the status
of moral truth: people who draw their worldview from religion generally believe
that moral truth exists, but only because God has woven it into the very fabric
of reality; while those who lack such faith tend to think that notions of
“good” and “evil” must be the products of evolutionary pressure and cultural
invention. On the first account, to speak of “moral truth” is, of necessity, to
invoke God; on the second, it is merely to give voice to one’s apish urges,
cultural biases, and philosophical confusion. My purpose is to persuade you
that both sides in this debate are wrong. The goal of this book is to begin a
conversation about how moral truth can be understood in the context of science.


While the argument I make in this book is bound to be controversial, it rests
on a very simple premise: human well-being entirely depends on events in the
world and on states of the human brain. Consequently, there must be scientific
truths to be known about it. A more detailed understanding of these truths will
force us to draw clear distinctions between different ways of living in society
with one another, judging some to be better or worse, more or less true to the
facts, and more or less ethical. Clearly, such insights could help us to
improve the quality of human life—and this is where academic debate ends and
choices affecting the lives of millions of people begin.

I am not suggesting that we are guaranteed to resolve every moral controversy
through science. Differences of opinion will remain—but opinions will be
increasingly constrained by facts. And it is important to realize that our
inability to answer a question says nothing about whether the question itself
has an answer. Exactly how many people were bitten by mosquitoes in the last
sixty seconds? How many of these people will contract malaria? How many will
die as a result? Given the technical challenges involved, no team of scientists
could possibly respond to such questions. And yet we know that they admit of
simple numerical answers. Does our inability to gather the relevant data oblige
us to respect all opinions equally? Of course not. In the same way, the fact
that we may not be able to resolve specific moral dilemmas does not suggest
that all competing responses to them are equally valid. In my experience,
mistaking no answers in practice for no answers in principle is a great source
of moral confusion.

There are, for instance, twenty-one U.S. states that still allow corporal
punishment in their schools. These are places where it is actually legal for a
teacher to beat a child with a wooden board hard enough to raise large bruises
and even to break the skin. Hundreds of thousands of children are subjected to
this violence each year, almost exclusively in the South. Needless to say, the
rationale for this behavior is explicitly religious: for the Creator of the
Universe Himself has told us not to spare the rod, lest we spoil the child
(Proverbs 13:24, 20:30, and 23:13–14). However, if we are actually concerned
about human well-being, and would treat children in such a way as to promote
it, we might wonder whether it is generally wise to subject little boys and
girls to pain, terror, and public humiliation as a means of encouraging their
cognitive and emotional development. Is there any doubt that this question has
an answer? Is there any doubt that it matters that we get it right? In fact,
all the research indicates that corporal punishment is a disastrous practice,
leading to more violence and social pathology—and, perversely, to greater
support for corporal punishment.4

But the deeper point is that there simply must be answers to questions of this
kind, whether we know them or not. And these are not areas where we can afford
to simply respect the “traditions” of others and agree to disagree. Why will
science increasingly decide such questions? Because the discrepant answers
people give to them—along with the consequences that follow in terms of human
relationships, states of mind, acts of violence, entanglements with the law,
etc.—translate into differences in our brains, in the brains of others, and in
the world at large. I hope to show that when talking about values, we are
actually talking about an interdependent world of facts.

There are facts to be understood about how thoughts and intentions arise in the
human brain; there are facts to be learned about how these mental states
translate into behavior; there are further facts to be known about how these
behaviors influence the world and the experience of other conscious beings. We
will see that facts of this sort exhaust what we can reasonably mean by terms
like “good” and “evil.” They will also increasingly fall within the purview of
science and run far deeper than a person’s religious affiliation. Just as there
is no such thing as Christian physics or Muslim algebra, we will see that there
is no such thing as Christian or Muslim morality. Indeed, I will argue that
morality should be considered an undeveloped branch of science.


Since the publication of my first book, The End of Faith, I have had a
privileged view of the “culture wars”—both in the United States, between
secular liberals and Christian conservatives, and in Europe, between largely
irreligious societies and their growing Muslim populations. Having received
tens of thousands of letters and emails from people at every point on the
continuum between faith and doubt, I can say with some confidence that a shared
belief in the limitations of reason lies at the bottom of these cultural
divides. Both sides believe that reason is powerless to answer the most
important questions in human life. And how a person perceives the gulf between
facts and values seems to influence his views on almost every issue of social
importance—from the fighting of wars to the education of children.

This rupture in our thinking has different consequences at each end of the
political spectrum: religious conservatives tend to believe that there are
right answers to questions of meaning and morality, but only because the God of
Abraham deems it so.5 They concede that ordinary facts can be discovered
through rational inquiry, but they believe that values must come from a voice
in a whirlwind. Scriptural literalism, intolerance of diversity, mistrust of
science, disregard for the real causes of human and animal suffering—too often,
this is how the division between facts and values expresses itself on the
religious right.

Secular liberals, on the other hand, tend to imagine that no objective answers
to moral questions exist. While John Stuart Mill might conform to our cultural
ideal of goodness better than Osama bin Laden does, most secularists suspect
that Mill’s ideas about right and wrong reach no closer to the Truth.
Multiculturalism, moral relativism, political correctness, tolerance even of
intolerance—these are the familiar consequences of separating facts and values
on the left.

It should concern us that these two orientations are not equally empowering.
Increasingly, secular democracies are left supine before the unreasoning zeal
of old-time religion. The juxtaposition of conservative dogmatism and liberal
doubt accounts for the decade that has been lost in the United States to a ban
on federal funding for embryonic stem-cell research; it explains the years of
political distraction we have suffered, and will continue to suffer, over
issues like abortion and gay marriage; it lies at the bottom of current efforts
to pass antiblasphemy laws at the United Nations (which would make it illegal
for the citizens of member states to criticize religion); it has hobbled the
West in its generational war against radical Islam; and it may yet refashion
the societies of Europe into a new Caliphate.6 Knowing what the Creator of the
Universe believes about right and wrong inspires religious conservatives to
enforce this vision in the public sphere at almost any cost; not knowing what
is right—or that anything can ever be truly right—often leads secular liberals
to surrender their intellectual standards and political freedoms with both
hands.

The scientific community is predominantly secular and liberal—and the
concessions that scientists have made to religious dogmatism have been
breathtaking. As we will see, the problem reaches as high as the National
Academies of Science and the National Institutes of Health. Even the journal
Nature, the most influential scientific publication on earth, has been unable
to reliably police the boundary between reasoned discourse and pious fiction. I
recently reviewed every appearance of the term “religion” in the journal going
back ten years and found that Nature’s editors have generally accepted Stephen
J. Gould’s doomed notion of “nonoverlapping magisteria”—the idea that science
and religion, properly construed, cannot be in conflict because they constitute
different domains of expertise.7 As one editorial put it, problems arise only
when these disciplines “stray onto each other’s territories and stir up
trouble.”8 The underlying claim is that while science is the best authority on
the workings of the physical universe, religion is the best authority on
meaning, values, morality, and the good life. I hope to persuade you that this
is not only untrue, it could not possibly be true. Meaning, values, morality,
and the good life must relate to facts about the well-being of conscious
creatures—and, in our case, must lawfully depend upon events in the world and
upon states of the human brain. Rational, open-ended, honest inquiry has always
been the true source of insight into such processes. Faith, if it is ever right
about anything, is right by accident.


The scientific community’s reluctance to take a stand on moral issues has come
at a price. It has made science appear divorced, in principle, from the most
important questions of human life. From the point of view of popular culture,
science often seems like little more than a hatchery for technology. While most
educated people will concede that the scientific method has delivered centuries
of fresh embarrassment to religion on matters of fact, it is now an article of
almost unquestioned certainty, both inside and outside scientific circles, that
science has nothing to say about what constitutes a good life. Religious
thinkers in all faiths, and on both ends of the political spectrum, are united
on precisely this point; the defense one most often hears for belief in God is
not that there is compelling evidence for His existence, but that faith in Him
is the only reliable source of meaning and moral guidance. Mutually
incompatible religious traditions now take refuge behind the same non sequitur.

It seems inevitable, however, that science will gradually encompass life’s
deepest questions—and this is guaranteed to provoke a backlash. How we respond
to the resulting collision of worldviews will influence the progress of
science, of course, but it may also determine whether we succeed in building a
global civilization based on shared values. The question of how human beings
should live in the twenty-first century has many competing answers—and most of
them are surely wrong. Only a rational understanding of human well-being will
allow billions of us to coexist peacefully, converging on the same social,
political, economic, and environmental goals. A science of human flourishing
may seem a long way off, but to achieve it, we must first acknowledge that the
intellectual terrain actually exists.9


Throughout this book I make reference to a hypothetical space that I call “the
moral landscape”—a space of real and potential outcomes whose peaks correspond
to the heights of potential well-being and whose valleys represent the deepest
possible suffering. Different ways of thinking and behaving—different cultural
practices, ethical codes, modes of government, etc.—will translate into
movements across this landscape and, therefore, into different degrees of human
flourishing. I’m not suggesting that we will necessarily discover one right
answer to every moral question or a single best way for human beings to live.
Some questions may admit of many answers, each more or less equivalent.
However, the existence of multiple peaks on the moral landscape does not make
them any less real or worthy of discovery. Nor would it make the difference
between being on a peak and being stuck deep in a valley any less clear or
consequential.

To see that multiple answers to moral questions need not pose a problem for us,
consider how we currently think about food: no one would argue that there must
be one right food to eat. And yet there is still an objective difference
between healthy food and poison. There are exceptions—some people will die if
they eat peanuts, for instance—but we can account for these within the context
of a rational discussion about chemistry, biology, and human health. The
world’s profusion of foods never tempts us to say that there are no facts to be
known about human nutrition or that all culinary styles must be equally healthy
in principle.

Movement across the moral landscape can be analyzed on many levels—ranging from
biochemistry to economics—but where human beings are concerned, change will
necessarily depend upon states and capacities of the human brain. While I fully
support the notion of “consilience” in science10—and, therefore, view the
boundaries between scientific specialties as primarily a function of university
architecture and limitations on how much any one person can learn in a
lifetime—the primacy of neuroscience and the other sciences of mind on
questions of human experience cannot be denied. Human experience shows every
sign of being determined by, and realized in, states of the human brain.

Many people seem to think that a universal conception of morality requires that
we find moral principles that admit of no exceptions. If, for instance, it is
truly wrong to lie, it must always be wrong to lie—and if one can find a single
exception, any notion of moral truth must be abandoned. But the existence of
moral truth—that is, the connection between how we think and behave and our
well-being—does not require that we define morality in terms of unvarying moral
precepts. Morality could be a lot like chess: there are surely principles that
generally apply, but they might admit of important exceptions. If you want to
play good chess, a principle like “Don’t lose your Queen” is almost always
worth following. But it admits of exceptions: sometimes sacrificing your Queen
is a brilliant thing to do; occasionally, it is the only thing you can do. It
remains a fact, however, that from any position in a game of chess there will
be a range of objectively good moves and objectively bad ones. If there are
objective truths to be known about human well-being—if kindness, for instance,
is generally more conducive to happiness than cruelty is—then science should
one day be able to make very precise claims about which of our behaviors and
uses of attention are morally good, which are neutral, and which are worth
abandoning.

While it is too early to say that we have a full understanding of how human
beings flourish, a piecemeal account is emerging. Consider, for instance, the
connection between early childhood experience, emotional bonding, and a
person’s ability to form healthy relationships later in life. We know, of
course, that emotional neglect and abuse are not good for us, psychologically
or socially. We also know that the effects of early childhood experience must
be realized in the brain. Research on rodents suggests that parental care,
social attachment, and stress regulation are governed, in part, by the hormones
vasopressin and oxytocin,11 because they influence activity in the brain’s
reward system. When asking why early childhood neglect is harmful to our
psychological and social development, it seems reasonable to think that it
might result from a disturbance in this same system.

While it would be unethical to deprive young children of normal care for the
purposes of experiment, society inadvertently performs such experiments every
day. To study the effects of emotional deprivation in early childhood, one
group of researchers measured the blood concentrations of oxytocin and
vasopressin in two populations: children raised in traditional homes and
children who spent their first years in an orphanage.12 As you might expect,
children raised by the State generally do not receive normal levels of
nurturing. They also tend to have social and emotional difficulties later in
life. As predicted, these children failed to show a normal surge of oxytocin
and vasopressin in response to physical contact with their adoptive mothers.

The relevant neuroscience is in its infancy, but we know that our emotions,
social interactions, and moral intuitions mutually influence one another. We
grow attuned to our fellow human beings through these systems, creating culture
in the process. Culture becomes a mechanism for further social, emotional, and
moral development. There is simply no doubt that the human brain is the nexus
of these influences. Cultural norms influence our thinking and behavior by
altering the structure and function of our brains. Do you feel that sons are
more desirable than daughters? Is obedience to parental authority more
important than honest inquiry? Would you cease to love your child if you
learned that he or she was gay? The ways parents view such questions, and the
subsequent effects in the lives of their children, must translate into facts
about their brains.


My goal is to convince you that human knowledge and human values can no longer
be kept apart. The world of measurement and the world of meaning must
eventually be reconciled. And science and religion—being antithetical ways of
thinking about the same reality—will never come to terms. As with all matters
of fact, differences of opinion on moral questions merely reveal the
incompleteness of our knowledge; they do not oblige us to respect a diversity
of views indefinitely.

