# Chapter 1 - Moral Blindness in the Name of “Tolerance”
[Metadata]: # {02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 1
Moral Blindness in the Name of “Tolerance”
# Moral Blindness in the Name of “Tolerance”
There are very practical concerns that follow from the glib idea that anyone is
free to value anything—the most consequential being that it is precisely what
allows highly educated, secular, and otherwise well-intentioned people to pause
thoughtfully, and often interminably, before condemning practices like
compulsory veiling, genital excision, bride burning, forced marriage, and the
other cheerful products of alternative “morality” found elsewhere in the world.
Fanciers of Hume’s is/ought distinction never seem to realize what the stakes
are, and they do not see how abject failures of compassion are enabled by this
intellectual “tolerance” of moral difference. While much of the debate on these
issues must be had in academic terms, this is not merely an academic debate.
There are girls getting their faces burned off with acid at this moment for
daring to learn to read, or for not consenting to marry men they have never
met, or even for the “crime” of getting raped. The amazing thing is that some
Western intellectuals won’t even blink when asked to defend these practices on
philosophical grounds. I once spoke at an academic conference on themes similar
to those discussed here. Near the end of my lecture, I made what I thought
would be a quite incontestable assertion: We already have good reason to
believe that certain cultures are less suited to maximizing well-being than
others. I cited the ruthless misogyny and religious bamboozlement of the
Taliban as an example of a worldview that seems less than perfectly conducive
to human flourishing.

As it turns out, to denigrate the Taliban at a scientific meeting is to court
controversy. At the conclusion of my talk, I fell into debate with another
invited speaker, who seemed, at first glance, to be very well positioned to
reason effectively about the implications of science for our understanding of
morality. In fact, this person has since been appointed to the President’s
Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues and is now one of only thirteen
people who will advise President Obama on “issues that may emerge from advances
in biomedicine and related areas of science and technology” in order to ensure
that “scientific research, health care delivery, and technological innovation
are conducted in an ethically responsible manner.”25 Here is a snippet of our
conversation, more or less verbatim:



She: What makes you think that science will ever be able to say that forcing
women to wear burqas is wrong?



Me: Because I think that right and wrong are a matter of increasing or
decreasing well-being—and it is obvious that forcing half the population to
live in cloth bags, and beating or killing them if they refuse, is not a good
strategy for maximizing human well-being.



She: But that’s only your opinion.



Me: Okay … Let’s make it even simpler. What if we found a culture that ritually
blinded every third child by literally plucking out his or her eyes at birth,
would you then agree that we had found a culture that was needlessly
diminishing human well-being?



She: It would depend on why they were doing it.



Me [slowly returning my eyebrows from the back of my head]: Let’s say they were
doing it on the basis of religious superstition. In their scripture, God says,
“Every third must walk in darkness.”



She: Then you could never say that they were wrong.

Such opinions are not uncommon in the Ivory Tower. I was talking to a woman
(it’s hard not to feel that her gender makes her views all the more
disconcerting) who had just delivered an entirely lucid lecture on some of the
moral implications of recent advances in neuroscience. She was concerned that
our intelligence services might one day use neuroimaging technology for the
purposes of lie detection, which she considered a likely violation of cognitive
liberty. She was especially exercised over rumors that our government might
have exposed captured terrorists to aerosols containing the hormone oxytocin in
an effort to make them more cooperative.26 Though she did not say it, I suspect
that she would even have opposed subjecting these prisoners to the smell of
freshly baked bread, which has been shown to have a similar effect.27 While
listening to her talk, as yet unaware of her liberal views on compulsory
veiling and ritual enucleation, I thought her slightly overcautious, but a
basically sane and eloquent authority on scientific ethics. I confess that once
we did speak, and I peered into the terrible gulf that separated us on these
issues, I found that I could not utter another word to her. In fact, our
conversation ended with my blindly enacting two neurological clichés: my jaw
quite literally dropped open, and I spun on my heels before walking away.





While human beings have different moral codes, each competing view presumes its
own universality. This seems to be true even of moral relativism. While few
philosophers have ever answered to the name of “moral relativist,” it is by no
means uncommon to find local eruptions of this view whenever scientists and
other academics encounter moral diversity. Forcing women and girls to wear
burqas may be wrong in Boston or Palo Alto, so the argument will run, but we
cannot say that it is wrong for Muslims in Kabul. To demand that the proud
denizens of an ancient culture conform to our view of gender equality would be
culturally imperialistic and philosophically naïve. This is a surprisingly
common view, especially among anthropologists.28

Moral relativism, however, tends to be self-contradictory. Relativists may say
that moral truths exist only relative to a specific cultural framework—but this
claim about the status of moral truth purports to be true across all possible
frameworks. In practice, relativism almost always amounts to the claim that we
should be tolerant of moral difference because no moral truth can supersede any
other. And yet this commitment to tolerance is not put forward as simply one
relative preference among others deemed equally valid. Rather, tolerance is
held to be more in line with the (universal) truth about morality than
intolerance is. The contradiction here is unsurprising. Given how deeply
disposed we are to make universal moral claims, I think one can reasonably
doubt whether any consistent moral relativist has ever existed.

Moral relativism is clearly an attempt to pay intellectual reparations for the
crimes of Western colonialism, ethnocentrism, and racism. This is, I think, the
only charitable thing to be said about it. I hope it is clear that I am not
defending the idiosyncrasies of the West as any more enlightened, in principle,
than those of any other culture. Rather, I am arguing that the most basic facts
about human flourishing must transcend culture, just as most other facts do.
And if there are facts that are truly a matter of cultural construction—if, for
instance, learning a specific language or tattooing your face fundamentally
alters the possibilities of human experience—well, then these facts also arise
from (neurophysiological) processes that transcend culture.

In his wonderful book The Blank Slate, Steven Pinker includes a quotation from
the anthropologist Donald Symons that captures the problem of multiculturalism
especially well:



If only one person in the world held down a terrified, struggling, screaming
little girl, cut off her genitals with a septic blade, and sewed her back up,
leaving only a tiny hole for urine and menstrual flow, the only question would
be how severely that person should be punished, and whether the death penalty
would be a sufficiently severe sanction. But when millions of people do this,
instead of the enormity being magnified millions-fold, suddenly it becomes
“culture,” and thereby magically becomes less, rather than more, horrible, and
is even defended by some Western “moral thinkers,” including feminists.29



It is precisely such instances of learned confusion (one is tempted to say
“learned psychopathy”) that lend credence to the claim that a universal
morality requires the support of faith-based religion. The categorical
distinction between facts and values has opened a sinkhole beneath secular
liberalism—leading to moral relativism and masochistic depths of political
correctness. Think of the champions of “tolerance” who reflexively blamed
Salman Rushdie for his fatwa, or Ayaan Hirsi Ali for her ongoing security
concerns, or the Danish cartoonists for their “controversy,” and you will
understand what happens when educated liberals think there is no universal
foundation for human values. Among conservatives in the West, the same
skepticism about the power of reason leads, more often than not, directly to
the feet of Jesus Christ, Savior of the Universe. The purpose of this book is
to help cut a third path through this wilderness.

