# Chapter 1 - MORAL TRUTH
[Metadata]: # {02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 1
MORAL TRUTH
# MORAL TRUTH
Many people believe that something in the last few centuries of intellectual
progress prevents us from speaking in terms of “moral truth” and, therefore,
from making cross-cultural moral judgments—or moral judgments at all. Having
discussed this subject in a variety of public forums, I have heard from
literally thousands of highly educated men and women that morality is a myth,
that statements about human values are without truth conditions (and are,
therefore, nonsensical), and that concepts like well-being and misery are so
poorly defined, or so susceptible to personal whim and cultural influence, that
it is impossible to know anything about them.1

Many of these people also claim that a scientific foundation for morality would
serve no purpose in any case. They think we can combat human evil all the while
knowing that our notions of “good” and “evil” are completely unwarranted. It is
always amusing when these same people then hesitate to condemn specific
instances of patently abominable behavior. I don’t think one has fully enjoyed
the life of the mind until one has seen a celebrated scholar defend the
“contextual” legitimacy of the burqa, or of female genital mutilation, a mere
thirty seconds after announcing that moral relativism does nothing to diminish
a person’s commitment to making the world a better place.2

And so it is obvious that before we can make any progress toward a science of
morality, we will have to clear some philosophical brush. In this chapter, I
attempt to do this within the limits of what I imagine to be most readers’
tolerance for such projects. Those who leave this section with their doubts
intact are encouraged to consult the endnotes.

First, I want to be very clear about my general thesis: I am not suggesting
that science can give us an evolutionary or neurobiological account of what
people do in the name of “morality.” Nor am I merely saying that science can
help us get what we want out of life. These would be quite banal claims to
make—unless one happens to doubt the truth of evolution, the mind’s dependency
on the brain, or the general utility of science. Rather I am arguing that
science can, in principle, help us understand what we should do and should
want—and, therefore, what other people should do and should want in order to
live the best lives possible. My claim is that there are right and wrong
answers to moral questions, just as there are right and wrong answers to
questions of physics, and such answers may one day fall within reach of the
maturing sciences of mind.

Once we see that a concern for well-being (defined as deeply and as inclusively
as possible) is the only intelligible basis for morality and values, we will
see that there must be a science of morality, whether or not we ever succeed in
developing it: because the well-being of conscious creatures depends upon how
the universe is, altogether. Given that changes in the physical universe and in
our experience of it can be understood, science should increasingly enable us
to answer specific moral questions. For instance, would it be better to spend
our next billion dollars eradicating racism or malaria? Which is generally more
harmful to our personal relationships, “white” lies or gossip? Such questions
may seem impossible to get a hold of at this moment, but they may not stay that
way forever. As we come to understand how human beings can best collaborate and
thrive in this world, science can help us find a path leading away from the
lowest depths of misery and toward the heights of happiness for the greatest
number of people. Of course, there will be practical impediments to evaluating
the consequences of certain actions, and different paths through life may be
morally equivalent (i.e., there may be many peaks on the moral landscape), but
I am arguing that there are no obstacles, in principle, to our speaking about
moral truth.





It seems to me, however, that most educated, secular people (and this includes
most scientists, academics, and journalists) believe that there is no such
thing as moral truth—only moral preference, moral opinion, and emotional
reactions that we mistake for genuine knowledge of right and wrong. While we
can understand how human beings think and behave in the name of “morality,” it
is widely imagined that there are no right answers to moral questions for
science to discover.

Some people maintain this view by defining “science” in exceedingly narrow
terms, as though it were synonymous with mathematical modeling or immediate
access to experimental data. However, this is to mistake science for a few of
its tools. Science simply represents our best effort to understand what is
going on in this universe, and the boundary between it and the rest of rational
thought cannot always be drawn. There are many tools one must get in hand to
think scientifically—ideas about cause and effect, respect for evidence and
logical coherence, a dash of curiosity and intellectual honesty, the
inclination to make falsifiable predictions, etc.—and these must be put to use
long before one starts worrying about mathematical models or specific data.

Many people are also confused about what it means to speak with scientific
“objectivity” about the human condition. As the philosopher John Searle once
pointed out, there are two very different senses of the terms “objective” and
“subjective.”3 The first sense relates to how we know (i.e., epistemology), the
second to what there is to know (i.e., ontology). When we say that we are
reasoning or speaking “objectively,” we generally mean that we are free of
obvious bias, open to counterarguments, cognizant of the relevant facts, and so
on. This is to make a claim about how we are thinking. In this sense, there is
no impediment to our studying subjective (i.e., first-person) facts
“objectively.”

For instance, it is true to say that I am experiencing tinnitus (ringing in my
ear) at this moment. This is a subjective fact about me, but in stating this
fact, I am being entirely objective: I am not lying; I am not exaggerating for
effect; I am not expressing a mere preference or personal bias. I am simply
stating a fact about what I am hearing at this moment. I have also been to an
otologist and had the associated hearing loss in my right ear confirmed. No
doubt, my experience of tinnitus must have an objective (third-person) cause
that could be discovered (likely, damage to my cochlea). There is simply no
question that I can speak about my tinnitus in the spirit of scientific
objectivity—and, indeed, the sciences of mind are largely predicated on our
being able to correlate first-person reports of subjective experience with
third-person states of the brain. This is the only way to study a phenomenon
like depression: the underlying brain states must be distinguished with
reference to a person’s subjective experience.

However, many people seem to think that because moral facts relate to our
experience (and are, therefore, ontologically “subjective”), all talk of
morality must be “subjective” in the epistemological sense (i.e., biased,
merely personal, etc.). This is simply untrue. I hope it is clear that when I
speak about “objective” moral truths, or about the “objective” causes of human
well-being, I am not denying the necessarily subjective (i.e., experiential)
component of the facts under discussion. I am certainly not claiming that moral
truths exist independent of the experience of conscious beings—like the
Platonic Form of the Good4—or that certain actions are intrinsically wrong.5 I
am simply saying that, given that there are facts—real facts—to be known about
how conscious creatures can experience the worst possible misery and the
greatest possible well-being, it is objectively true to say that there are
right and wrong answers to moral questions, whether or not we can always answer
these questions in practice.

And, as I have said, people consistently fail to distinguish between there
being answers in practice and answers in principle to specific questions about
the nature of reality. When thinking about the application of science to
questions of human well-being, it is crucial that we not lose sight of this
distinction. After all, there are countless phenomena that are subjectively
real, which we can discuss objectively (i.e., honestly and rationally), but
which remain impossible to describe with precision. Consider the complete set
of “birthday wishes” corresponding to every conscious hope that people have
entertained silently while blowing out candles on birthday cakes. Will we ever
be able to retrieve these unspoken thoughts? Of course not. Many of us would be
hard-pressed to recall even one of our own birthday wishes. Does this mean that
these wishes never existed or that we can’t make true or false statements about
them? What if I were to say that every one of these wishes was phrased in
Latin, focused on improvements in solar panel technology, and produced by the
activity of exactly 10,000 neurons in each person’s brain? Is this a vacuous
assertion? No, it is quite precise and surely wrong. But only a lunatic could
believe such a thing about his fellow human beings. Clearly, we can make true
or false claims about human (and animal) subjectivity, and we can often
evaluate these claims without having access to the facts in question. This is a
perfectly reasonable, scientific, and often necessary thing to do. And yet many
scientists will say that moral truths do not exist, simply because certain
facts about human experience cannot be readily known, or may never be known. As
I hope to show, this misunderstanding has created tremendous confusion about
the relationship between human knowledge and human values.

Another thing that makes the idea of moral truth difficult to discuss is that
people often employ a double standard when thinking about consensus: most
people take scientific consensus to mean that scientific truths exist, and they
consider scientific controversy to be merely a sign that further work remains
to be done; and yet many of these same people believe that moral controversy
proves that there can be no such thing as moral truth, while moral consensus
shows only that human beings often harbor the same biases. Clearly, this double
standard rigs the game against a universal conception of morality.6

The deeper issue, however, is that truth has nothing, in principle, to do with
consensus: one person can be right, and everyone else can be wrong. Consensus
is a guide to discovering what is going on in the world, but that is all that
it is. Its presence or absence in no way constrains what may or may not be
true.7 There are surely physical, chemical, and biological facts about which we
are ignorant or mistaken. In speaking of “moral truth,” I am saying that there
must be facts regarding human and animal well-being about which we can also be
ignorant or mistaken. In both cases, science—and rational thought generally—is
the tool we can use to uncover these facts.

And here is where the real controversy begins, for many people strongly object
to my claim that morality and values relate to facts about the well-being of
conscious creatures. My critics seem to think that consciousness holds no
special place where values are concerned, or that any state of consciousness
stands the same chance of being valued as any other. The most common objection
to my argument is some version of the following:



But you haven’t said why the well-being of conscious beings ought to matter to
us. If someone wants to torture all conscious beings to the point of madness,
what is to say that he isn’t just as “moral” as you are?



While I do not think anyone sincerely believes that this kind of moral
skepticism makes sense, there is no shortage of people who will press this
point with a ferocity that often passes for sincerity.

Let us begin with the fact of consciousness: I think we can know, through
reason alone, that consciousness is the only intelligible domain of value. What
is the alternative? I invite you to try to think of a source of value that has
absolutely nothing to do with the (actual or potential) experience of conscious
beings. Take a moment to think about what this would entail: whatever this
alternative is, it cannot affect the experience of any creature (in this life
or in any other). Put this thing in a box, and what you have in that box is—it
would seem, by definition—the least interesting thing in the universe.

So how much time should we spend worrying about such a transcendent source of
value? I think the time I will spend typing this sentence is already too much.
All other notions of value will bear some relationship to the actual or
potential experience of conscious beings. So my claim that consciousness is the
basis of human values and morality is not an arbitrary starting point.8

Now that we have consciousness on the table, my further claim is that the
concept of “well-being” captures all that we can intelligibly value. And
“morality”—whatever people’s associations with this term happen to be—really
relates to the intentions and behaviors that affect the well-being of conscious
creatures.

On this point, religious conceptions of moral law are often put forward as
counterexamples: for when asked why it is important to follow God’s law, many
people will cannily say, “for its own sake.” Of course, it is possible to say
this, but this seems neither an honest nor a coherent claim. What if a more
powerful God would punish us for eternity for following Yahweh’s law? Would it
then make sense to follow Yahweh’s law “for its own sake”? The inescapable fact
is that religious people are as eager to find happiness and to avoid misery as
anyone else: many of them just happen to believe that the most important
changes in conscious experience occur after death (i.e., in heaven or in hell).
And while Judaism is sometimes held up as an exception—because it tends not to
focus on the afterlife—the Hebrew Bible makes it absolutely clear that Jews
should follow Yahweh’s law out of concern for the negative consequences of not
following it. People who do not believe in God or an afterlife, and yet still
think it important to subscribe to a religious tradition, only believe this
because living this way seems to make some positive contribution to their
well-being or to the well-being of others.9

Religious notions of morality, therefore, are not exceptions to our common
concern for well-being. And all other philosophical efforts to describe
morality in terms of duty, fairness, justice, or some other principle that is
not explicitly tied to the well-being of conscious creatures, draw upon some
conception of well-being in the end.10

The doubts that immediately erupt on this point invariably depend upon bizarre
and restrictive notions of what the term “well-being” might mean.11 I think
there is little doubt that most of what matters to the average person—like
fairness, justice, compassion, and a general awareness of terrestrial
reality—will be integral to our creating a thriving global civilization and,
therefore, to the greater well-being of humanity.12 And, as I have said, there
may be many different ways for individuals and communities to thrive—many peaks
on the moral landscape—so if there is real diversity in how people can be
deeply fulfilled in this life, such diversity can be accounted for and honored
in the context of science. The concept of “well-being,” like the concept of
“health,” is truly open for revision and discovery. Just how fulfilled is it
possible for us to be, personally and collectively? What are the
conditions—ranging from changes in the genome to changes in economic
systems—that will produce such happiness? We simply do not know.

But what if certain people insist that their “values” or “morality” have
nothing to do with well-being? Or, more realistically, what if their conception
of well-being is so idiosyncratic and circumscribed as to be hostile, in
principle, to the well-being of all others? For instance, what if a man like
Jeffrey Dahmer says, “The only peaks on the moral landscape that interest me
are ones where I get to murder young men and have sex with their corpses.” This
possibility—the prospect of radically different moral commitments—is at the
heart of many people’s doubts about moral truth.

Again, we should observe the double standard in place regarding the
significance of consensus: those who do not share our scientific goals have no
influence on scientific discourse whatsoever; but, for some reason, people who
do not share our moral goals render us incapable of even speaking about moral
truth. It is, perhaps, worth remembering that there are trained “scientists”
who are Biblical Creationists, and their “scientific” thinking is purposed
toward interpreting the data of science to fit the Book of Genesis. Such people
claim to be doing “science,” of course, but real scientists are free, and
indeed obligated, to point out that they are misusing the term. Similarly,
there are people who claim to be highly concerned about “morality” and “human
values,” but when we see that their beliefs cause tremendous misery, nothing
need prevent us from saying that they are misusing the term “morality” or that
their values are distorted. How have we convinced ourselves that, on the most
important questions in human life, all views must count equally?

Consider the Catholic Church: an organization which advertises itself as the
greatest force for good and as the only true bulwark against evil in the
universe. Even among non-Catholics, its doctrines are widely associated with
the concepts of “morality” and “human values.” However, the Vatican is an
organization that excommunicates women for attempting to become priests13 but
does not excommunicate male priests for raping children.14 It excommunicates
doctors who perform abortions to save a mother’s life—even if the mother is a
nine-year-old girl raped by her stepfather and pregnant with twins15—but it did
not excommunicate a single member of the Third Reich for committing genocide.
Are we really obliged to consider such a diabolical inversion of priorities to
be evidence of an alternative “moral” framework? No. It seems clear that the
Catholic Church is as misguided in speaking about the “moral” peril of
contraception, for instance, as it would be in speaking about the “physics” of
Transubstantiation. In both domains, it is true to say that the Church is
grotesquely confused about which things in this world are worth paying
attention to.

However, many people will continue to insist that we cannot speak about moral
truth, or anchor morality to a deeper concern for well-being, because concepts
like “morality” and “well-being” must be defined with reference to specific
goals and other criteria—and nothing prevents people from disagreeing about
these definitions. I might claim that morality is really about maximizing
well-being and that well-being entails a wide range of psychological virtues
and wholesome pleasures, but someone else will be free to say that morality
depends upon worshipping the gods of the Aztecs and that well-being, if it
matters at all, entails always having a terrified person locked in one’s
basement, waiting to be sacrificed.

Of course, goals and conceptual definitions matter. But this holds for all
phenomena and for every method we might use to study them. My father, for
instance, has been dead for twenty-five years. What do I mean by “dead”? Do I
mean “dead” with reference to specific goals? Well, if you must, yes—goals like
respiration, energy metabolism, responsiveness to stimuli, etc. The definition
of “life” remains, to this day, difficult to pin down. Does this mean we can’t
study life scientifically? No. The science of biology thrives despite such
ambiguities. Again, the concept of “health” is looser still: it, too, must be
defined with reference to specific goals—not suffering chronic pain, not always
vomiting, etc.—and these goals are continually changing. Our notion of “health”
may one day be defined by goals that we cannot currently entertain with a
straight face (like the goal of spontaneously regenerating a lost limb). Does
this mean we can’t study health scientifically?

I wonder if there is anyone on earth who would be tempted to attack the
philosophical underpinnings of medicine with questions like: “What about all
the people who don’t share your goal of avoiding disease and early death? Who
is to say that living a long life free of pain and debilitating illness is
‘healthy’? What makes you think that you could convince a person suffering from
fatal gangrene that he is not as healthy as you are?” And yet these are
precisely the kinds of objections I face when I speak about morality in terms
of human and animal well-being. Is it possible to voice such doubts in human
speech? Yes. But that doesn’t mean we should take them seriously.

One of my critics put the concern this way: “Morals are relative to the time
and place in which they appear. If you do not already accept well-being as a
value, then there seems to be no argument for why one should promote
well-being.” As proof of this assertion, he observed that I would be unable to
convince the Taliban that they value the wrong things. By this standard,
however, the truths of science are also “relative to the time and place in
which they appear,” and there is no way to convince someone who does not value
empirical evidence that he should value it.16 Despite 150 years of working at
it, we still can’t convince a majority of Americans that evolution is a fact.
Does this mean biology isn’t a proper science?

Everyone has an intuitive “physics,” but much of our intuitive physics is wrong
(with respect to the goal of describing the behavior of matter). Only
physicists have a deep understanding of the laws that govern the behavior of
matter in our universe. I am arguing that everyone also has an intuitive
“morality,” but much of our intuitive morality is clearly wrong (with respect
to the goal of maximizing personal and collective well-being). And only genuine
moral experts would have a deep understanding of the causes and conditions of
human and animal well-being.17 Yes, we must have a goal to define what counts
as “right” or “wrong” when speaking about physics or morality, but this
criterion visits us equally in both domains. And yes, I think it is quite clear
that members of the Taliban are seeking well-being in this world (as well as
hoping for it in the next). But their religious beliefs have led them to create
a culture that is almost perfectly hostile to human flourishing. Whatever they
think they want out of life—like keeping all women and girls subjugated and
illiterate—they simply do not understand how much better life would be for them
if they had different priorities.


Science cannot tell us why, scientifically, we should value health. But once we
admit that health is the proper concern of medicine, we can then study and
promote it through science. Medicine can resolve specific questions about human
health—and it can do this even while the very definition of “health” continues
to change. Indeed, the science of medicine can make marvelous progress without
knowing how much its own progress will alter our conception of health in the
future.

I think our concern for well-being is even less in need of justification than
our concern for health is—as health is merely one of its many facets. And once
we begin thinking seriously about human well-being, we will find that science
can resolve specific questions about morality and human values, even while our
conception of “well-being” evolves.

It is essential to see that the demand for radical justification leveled by the
moral skeptic could not be met by any branch of science. Science is defined
with reference to the goal of understanding the processes at work in the
universe. Can we justify this goal scientifically? Of course not. Does this
make science itself unscientific? If so, we appear to have pulled ourselves
down by our bootstraps.

It would be impossible to prove that our definition of science is correct,
because our standards of proof will be built into any proof we would offer.
What evidence could prove that we should value evidence? What logic could
demonstrate the importance of logic?18 We might observe that standard science
is better at predicting the behavior of matter than Creationist “science” is.
But what could we say to a “scientist” whose only goal is to authenticate the
Word of God? Here, we seem to reach an impasse. And yet, no one thinks that the
failure of standard science to silence all possible dissent has any
significance whatsoever; why should we demand more of a science of morality?19

Many moral skeptics piously cite Hume’s is/ought distinction as though it were
well known to be the last word on the subject of morality until the end of the
world.20 They insist that notions of what we ought to do or value can be
justified only in terms of other “oughts,” never in terms of facts about the
way the world is. After all, in a world of physics and chemistry, how could
things like moral obligations or values really exist? How could it be
objectively true, for instance, that we ought to be kind to children?

But this notion of “ought” is an artificial and needlessly confusing way to
think about moral choice. In fact, it seems to be another dismal product of
Abrahamic religion—which, strangely enough, now constrains the thinking of even
atheists. If this notion of “ought” means anything we can possibly care about,
it must translate into a concern about the actual or potential experience of
conscious beings (either in this life or in some other). For instance, to say
that we ought to treat children with kindness seems identical to saying that
everyone will tend to be better off if we do. The person who claims that he
does not want to be better off is either wrong about what he does, in fact,
want (i.e., he doesn’t know what he’s missing), or he is lying, or he is not
making sense. The person who insists that he is committed to treating children
with kindness for reasons that have nothing to do with anyone’s well-being is
also not making sense. It is worth noting in this context that the God of
Abraham never told us to treat children with kindness, but He did tell us to
kill them for talking back to us (Exodus 21:15, Leviticus 20:9, Deuteronomy
21:18–21, Mark 7:9–13, and Matthew 15:4–7). And yet everyone finds this “moral”
imperative perfectly insane. Which is to say that no one—not even
fundamentalist Christians and orthodox Jews—can so fully ignore the link
between morality and human well-being as to be truly bound by God’s law.21

