# Chapter 3 - What Is “Belief”?
[Metadata]: # {04.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 3
What Is “Belief”?
# What Is “Belief”?
It is surprising that so little research has been done on belief, as few mental
states exert so sweeping an influence over human life. While we often make a
conventional distinction between “belief” and “knowledge,” these categories are
actually quite misleading. Knowing that George Washington was the first
president of the United States and believing the statement “George Washington
was the first president of the United States” amount to the same thing. When we
distinguish between belief and knowledge in ordinary conversation, it is
generally for the purpose of drawing attention to degrees of certainty: I’m apt
to say “I know it” when I am quite certain that one of my beliefs about the
world is true; when I’m less sure, I may say something like “I believe it is
probably true.” Most of our knowledge about the world falls between these
extremes. The entire spectrum of such convictions—ranging from
better-than-a-coin-toss to I-would-bet-my-life-on-it—expresses gradations of
“belief.”

It is reasonable to wonder, however, whether “belief” is really a single
phenomenon at the level of the brain. Our growing understanding of human memory
should make us cautious: over the last fifty years, the concept of “memory” has
decomposed into several forms of cognition that are now known to be
neurologically and evolutionarily distinct.9 This should make us wonder whether
a notion like “belief” might not also shatter into separate processes when
mapped onto the brain. In fact, belief overlaps with certain types of memory,
as memory can be equivalent to a belief about the past (e.g., “I had breakfast
most days last week”),10 and certain beliefs are indistinguishable from what is
often called “semantic memory” (e.g., “The earth is the third planet from the
sun”).

There is no reason to think that any of our beliefs about the world are stored
as propositions, or within discrete structures, inside the brain.11 Merely
understanding a simple proposition often requires the unconscious activation of
considerable background knowledge12 and an active process of hypothesis
testing.13 For instance, a sentence like “The team was terribly disappointed
because the second stage failed to fire,” while easy enough to read, cannot be
understood without some general concept of a rocket launch and a team of
engineers. So there is more to even basic communication than the mere decoding
of words. We must expect that a similar penumbra of associations will surround
specific beliefs as well.

And yet our beliefs can be represented and expressed as discrete statements.
Imagine hearing any one of the following assertions from a trusted friend:



1. The CDC just announced that cell phones really do cause brain cancer.



2. My brother won $100,000 in Las Vegas over the weekend.



3. Your car is being towed.


We trade in such representations of the world all the time. The acceptance of
such statements as true (or likely to be true) is the mechanism by which we
acquire most of our knowledge about the world. While it would not make any
sense to search for structures in the brain that correspond to specific
sentences, we may be able to understand the brain states that allow us to
accept such sentences as true.14 When someone says “Your car is being towed,”
it is your acceptance of this statement as true that sends you racing out the
door. “Belief,” therefore, can be thought of as a process taking place in the
present; it is the act of grasping, not the thing grasped.

The Oxford English Dictionary defines multiple senses of the term “belief”:



1. The mental action, condition, or habit, of trusting to or confiding in a
person or thing; trust, dependence, reliance, confidence, faith.



2. Mental acceptance of a proposition, statement, or fact as true, on the
ground of authority or evidence; assent of the mind to a statement, or to the
truth of a fact beyond observation, on the testimony of another, or to a fact
or truth on the evidence of consciousness; the mental condition involved in
this assent.



3. The thing believed; the proposition or set of propositions held true.

Definition 2 is exactly what we are after, and 1 may apply as well. These first
two senses of the term are quite different from the data-centered meaning given
in 3.


Consider the following claim: Starbucks does not sell plutonium. I suspect that
most of us would be willing to wager a fair amount of money that this statement
is generally true—which is to say that we believe it. However, before reading
this statement, you are very unlikely to have considered the prospect that the
world’s most popular coffee chain might also trade in one of the world’s most
dangerous substances. Therefore, it does not seem possible for there to have
been a structure in your brain that already corresponded to this belief. And
yet you clearly harbored some representation of the world that amounts to this
belief.

Many modes of information processing must lay the groundwork for us to judge
the above statement as “true.” Most of us know, in a variety of implicit and
explicit ways, that Starbucks is not a likely proliferator of nuclear material.
Several distinct capacities—episodic memory, semantic knowledge, assumptions
about human behavior and economic incentives, inductive reasoning,
etc.—conspire to make us accept the above proposition. To say that we already
believed that one cannot buy plutonium at Starbucks is to merely put a name to
the summation of these processes in the present moment: that is, “belief,” in
this case, is the disposition to accept a proposition as true (or likely to
be).

This process of acceptance often does more than express our prior commitments,
however. It can revise our view of the world in an instant. Imagine reading the
following headline in tomorrow’s New York Times: “Most of the World’s Coffee Is
Now Contaminated by Plutonium.” Believing this statement would immediately
influence your thinking on many fronts, as well as your judgment about the
truth of the former proposition. Most of our beliefs have come to us in just
this form: as statements that we accept on the assumption that their source is
reliable, or because the sheer number of sources rules out any significant
likelihood of error.

In fact, everything we know outside of our personal experience is the result of
our having encountered specific linguistic propositions—the sun is a star;
Julius Caesar was a Roman emperor; broccoli is good for you—and found no reason
(or means) to doubt them. It is “belief” in this form, as an act of acceptance,
which I have sought to better understand in my neuroscientific research.15

