# Chapter 5 - Science and Philosophy
[Metadata]: # {06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {06.02}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 5
Science and Philosophy
# Science and Philosophy
Throughout this book, I have argued that the split between facts and
values—and, therefore, between science and morality—is an illusion. However,
the discussion has taken place on at least two levels: I have reviewed
scientific data that, I believe, supports my argument; but I have made a more
basic, philosophical case, the validity of which does not narrowly depend on
current data. Readers may wonder how these levels are related.

First, we should observe that a boundary between science and philosophy does
not always exist. Einstein famously doubted Bohr’s view of quantum mechanics,
and yet both physicists were armed with the same experimental findings and
mathematical techniques. Was their disagreement a matter of “philosophy” or
“physics”? We cannot always draw a line between scientific thinking and “mere”
philosophy because all data must be interpreted against a background theory,
and different theories come bundled with a fair amount of contextual reasoning.
A dualist who believes in the existence of immaterial souls might say that the
entire field of neuroscience is beholden to the philosophy of physicalism (the
view that mental events should be understood as physical events), and he would
be right. The assumption that the mind is the product of the brain is integral
to almost everything neuroscientists do. Is physicalism a matter of
“philosophy” or “neuroscience”? The answer may depend upon where one happens to
be standing on a university campus. Even if we grant that only philosophers
tend to think about “physicalism” per se, it remains a fact that any argument
or experiment that put this philosophical assumption in doubt would be a
landmark finding for neuroscience—likely the most important in its history. So
while there are surely some philosophical views that make no contact with
science, science is often a matter of philosophy in practice. It is probably
worth recalling that the original name for the physical sciences was, in fact,
“natural philosophy.”

Throughout the sections of this book that could be aptly described as
“philosophical,” I make many points that have scientific implications. Most
scientists treat facts and values as though they were distinct and
irreconcilable in principle. I have argued that they cannot be, as anything of
value must be valuable to someone (whether actually or potentially)—and,
therefore, its value should be attributable to facts about the well-being of
conscious creatures. One could call this a “philosophical” position, but it is
one that directly relates to the boundaries of science. If I am correct,
science has a far wider purview than many of its practitioners suppose, and its
findings may one day impinge upon culture in ways that they do not expect. If I
am wrong, the boundaries of science are as narrow as most people assume. This
difference of view might be ascribed to “philosophy,” but it is a difference
that will determine the practice of science in the years to come.

Recall the work of Jonathan Haidt, discussed at some length in chapter 2: Haidt
has convinced many people, both inside and outside the scientific community,
that there are two types of morality: liberal morality focuses on two primary
concerns (harm and fairness), while conservative morality emphasizes five
(harm, fairness, authority, purity, and group loyalty). As a result, many
people believe that liberals and conservatives are bound to view human behavior
in incompatible ways and that science will never be able to say that one
approach to morality is “better” or “truer” or more “moral” than the other.

I think that Haidt is wrong, for at least two reasons. First, I suspect that
the extra factors he attributes to conservatives can be understood as further
concerns about harm. That is, I believe that conservatives have the same
morality as liberals do, they just have different ideas about how harm accrues
in this universe.3 There is also some research to suggest that conservatives
are more prone to feelings of disgust, and this seems to especially influence
their moral judgments on the subject of sex.4 More important, whatever the
differences between liberals and conservatives may or may not be, if my
argument about the moral landscape is correct, one approach to morality is
likely more conducive to human flourishing than the other. While my
disagreement with Haidt may be more a matter of argument than of experiment at
present, whichever argument prevails will affect the progress of science, as
well as science’s impact on the rest of culture.

