# Chapter 2 - Is Being Good Just Too Difficult?
[Metadata]: # {03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Is Being Good Just Too Difficult?
# Is Being Good Just Too Difficult?
Most of us spend some time over the course of our lives deciding how (or
whether) to respond to the fact that other people on earth needlessly starve to
death. Most of us also spend some time deciding which delightful foods we want
to consume at home and in our favorite restaurants. Which of these projects
absorbs more of your time and material resources on a yearly basis? If you are
like most people living in the developed world, such a comparison will not
recommend you for sainthood. Can the disparity between our commitment to
fulfilling our selfish desires and our commitment to alleviating the
unnecessary misery and death of millions be morally justified? Of course not.
These failures of ethical consistency are often considered a strike against
consequentialism. They shouldn’t be. Who ever said that being truly good, or
even ethically consistent, must be easy?

I have no doubt that I am less good than I could be. Which is to say, I am not
living in a way that truly maximizes the well-being of others. I am nearly as
sure, however, that I am also failing to live in a way that maximizes my own
well-being. This is one of the paradoxes of human psychology: we often fail to
do what we ostensibly want to do and what is most in our self-interest to do.
We often fail to do what we most want to do—or, at the very least, we fail to
do what, at the end of the day (or year, or lifetime) we will most wish we had
done.

Just think of the heroic struggles many people must endure simply to quit
smoking or lose weight. The right course of action is generally obvious: if you
are smoking two packs of cigarettes a day or are fifty pounds overweight, you
are surely not maximizing your well-being. Perhaps this isn’t so clear to you
now, but imagine: if you could successfully stop smoking or lose weight, what
are the chances that you would regret this decision a year hence? Probably
zero. And yet, if you are like most people, you will find it extraordinarily
difficult to make the simple behavioral changes required to get what you
want.51

Most of us are in this predicament in moral terms. I know that helping people
who are starving is far more important than most of what I do. I also have no
doubt that doing what is most important would give me more pleasure and
emotional satisfaction than I get from most of what I do by way of seeking
pleasure and emotional satisfaction. But this knowledge does not change me. I
still want to do what I do for pleasure more than I want to help the starving.
I strongly believe that I would be happier if I wanted to help the starving
more—and I have no doubt that they would be happier if I spent more time and
money helping them—but these beliefs are not sufficient to change me. I know
that I would be happier and the world would be a (marginally) better place if I
were different in these respects. I am, therefore, virtually certain that I am
neither as moral, nor as happy, as I could be.52 I know all of these things,
and I want to maximize my happiness, but I am generally not moved to do what I
believe will make me happier than I now am.

At bottom, these are claims both about the architecture of my mind and about
the social architecture of our world. It is quite clear to me that given the
current state of my mind—that is, given how my actions and uses of attention
affect my life—I would be happier if I were less selfish. This means I would be
more wisely and effectively selfish if I were less selfish. This is not a
paradox.

What if I could change the architecture of my mind? On some level, this has
always been possible, as everything we devote attention to, every discipline we
adopt, or piece of knowledge we acquire changes our minds. Each of us also now
has access to a swelling armamentarium of drugs that regulate mood, attention,
and wakefulness. And the possibility of far more sweeping (as well as more
precise) changes to our mental capacities may be within reach. Would it be good
to make changes to our minds that affect our sense of right and wrong? And
would our ability to alter our moral sense undercut the case I am making for
moral realism? What if, for instance, I could rewire my brain so that eating
ice cream was not only extremely pleasurable, but also felt like the most
important thing I could do?

Despite the ready availability of ice cream, it seems that my new disposition
would present certain challenges to self-actualization. I would gain weight. I
would ignore social obligations and intellectual pursuits. No doubt, I would
soon scandalize others with my skewed priorities. But what if advances in
neuroscience eventually allow us to change the way every brain responds to
morally relevant experiences? What if we could program the entire species to
hate fairness, to admire cheating, to love cruelty, to despise compassion, etc.
Would this be morally good? Again, the devil is in the details. Is this really
a world of equivalent and genuine well-being, where the concept of “well-being”
is susceptible to ongoing examination and refinement as it is in our world? If
so, so be it. What could be more important than genuine well-being? But, given
all that the concept of “well-being” entails in our world, it is very difficult
to imagine that its properties could be entirely fungible as we move across the
moral landscape.

A miniature version of this dilemma is surely on the horizon: increasingly, we
will need to consider the ethics of using medications to mitigate mental
suffering. For instance, would it be good for a person to take a drug that made
her indifferent to the death of her child? Surely not while she still had
responsibilities as a parent. But what if a mother lost her only child and was
thereafter inconsolable? How much better than inconsolable should her doctor
make her feel? How much better should she want to feel? Would any of us want to
feel perfectly happy in this circumstance? Given a choice—and this choice, in
some form, is surely coming—I think that most of us will want our mental states
to be coupled, however loosely, to the reality of our lives. How else could our
bonds with one another be maintained? How, for instance, can we love our
children and yet be totally indifferent to their suffering and death? I suspect
we cannot. But what will we do once our pharmacies begin stocking a genuine
antidote to grief?

If we cannot always resolve such conundrums, how should we proceed? We cannot
perfectly measure or reconcile the competing needs of billions of creatures. We
often cannot effectively prioritize our own competing needs. What we can do is
try, within practical limits, to follow a path that seems likely to maximize
both our own well-being and the well-being of others. This is what it means to
live wisely and ethically. As we will see, we have already begun to discover
which regions of the brain allow us to do this. A fuller understanding of what
moral life entails, however, would require a science of morality.

