# Chapter 2 - Moral Responsibility
[Metadata]: # {03.11}
[Descriptor]: # {03.11}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Moral Responsibility
# Moral Responsibility
The question of free will is no mere curio of philosophy seminars. The belief
in free will underwrites both the religious notion of “sin” and our enduring
commitment to retributive justice.105 The Supreme Court has called free will a
“universal and persistent” foundation for our system of law, distinct from “a
deterministic view of human conduct that is inconsistent with the underlying
precepts of our criminal justice system” (United States v. Grayson, 1978).106
Any scientific developments that threatened our notion of free will would seem
to put the ethics of punishing people for their bad behavior in question.107

But, of course, human goodness and human evil are the product of natural
events. The great worry is that any honest discussion of the underlying causes
of human behavior seems to erode the notion of moral responsibility. If we view
people as neuronal weather patterns, how can we coherently speak about
morality? And if we remain committed to seeing people as people, some who can
be reasoned with and some who cannot, it seems that we must find some notion of
personal responsibility that fits the facts.

What does it really mean to take responsibility for an action? For instance,
yesterday I went to the market; as it turns out, I was fully clothed, did not
steal anything, and did not buy anchovies. To say that I was responsible for my
behavior is simply to say that what I did was sufficiently in keeping with my
thoughts, intentions, beliefs, and desires to be considered an extension of
them. If, on the other hand, I had found myself standing in the market naked,
intent upon stealing as many tins of anchovies as I could carry, this behavior
would be totally out of character; I would feel that I was not in my right
mind, or that I was otherwise not responsible for my actions. Judgments of
responsibility, therefore, depend upon the overall complexion of one’s mind,
not on the metaphysics of mental cause and effect.

Consider the following examples of human violence:



1. A four-year-old boy was playing with his father’s gun and killed a young
woman. The gun had been kept loaded and unsecured in a dresser drawer.



2. A twelve-year-old boy, who had been the victim of continuous physical and
emotional abuse, took his father’s gun and intentionally shot and killed a
young woman because she was teasing him.



3. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been the victim of continuous abuse as a
child, intentionally shot and killed his girlfriend because she left him for
another man.



4. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been raised by wonderful parents and
never abused, intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met
“just for the fun of it.”



5. A twenty-five-year-old man, who had been raised by wonderful parents and
never abused, intentionally shot and killed a young woman he had never met
“just for the fun of it.” An MRI of the man’s brain revealed a tumor the size
of a golf ball in his medial prefrontal cortex (a region responsible for the
control of emotion and behavioral impulses).

In each case a young woman has died, and in each case her death was the result
of events arising in the brain of another human being. The degree of moral
outrage we feel clearly depends on the background conditions described in each
case. We suspect that a four-year-old child cannot truly intend to kill someone
and that the intentions of a twelve-year-old do not run as deep as those of an
adult. In both cases 1 and 2, we know that the brain of the killer has not
fully matured and that all the responsibilities of personhood have not yet been
conferred. The history of abuse and precipitating circumstance in example 3
seem to mitigate the man’s guilt: this was a crime of passion committed by a
person who had himself suffered at the hands of others. In 4, we have no abuse,
and the motive brands the perpetrator a psychopath. In 5, we appear to have the
same psychopathic behavior and motive, but a brain tumor somehow changes the
moral calculus entirely: given its location in the MPFC, it seems to divest the
killer of all responsibility. How can we make sense of these gradations of
moral blame when brains and their background influences are, in every case, and
to exactly the same degree, the real cause of a woman’s death?

It seems to me that we need not have any illusions about a casual agent living
within the human mind to condemn such a mind as unethical, negligent, or even
evil, and therefore liable to occasion further harm. What we condemn in another
person is the intention to do harm—and thus any condition or circumstance
(e.g., accident, mental illness, youth) that makes it unlikely that a person
could harbor such an intention would mitigate guilt, without any recourse to
notions of free will. Likewise, degrees of guilt could be judged, as they are
now, by reference to the facts of the case: the personality of the accused, his
prior offenses, his patterns of association with others, his use of
intoxicants, his confessed intentions with regard to the victim, etc. If a
person’s actions seem to have been entirely out of character, this will
influence our sense of the risk he now poses to others. If the accused appears
unrepentant and anxious to kill again, we need entertain no notions of free
will to consider him a danger to society.

Of course, we hold one another accountable for more than those actions that we
consciously plan, because most voluntary behavior comes about without explicit
planning.108 But why is the conscious decision to do another person harm
particularly blameworthy? Because consciousness is, among other things, the
context in which our intentions become completely available to us. What we do
subsequent to conscious planning tends to most fully reflect the global
properties of our minds—our beliefs, desires, goals, prejudices, etc. If, after
weeks of deliberation, library research, and debate with your friends, you
still decide to kill the king—well, then killing the king really reflects the
sort of person you are. Consequently, it makes sense for the rest of society to
worry about you.

While viewing human beings as forces of nature does not prevent us from
thinking in terms of moral responsibility, it does call the logic of
retribution into question. Clearly, we need to build prisons for people who are
intent upon harming others. But if we could incarcerate earthquakes and
hurricanes for their crimes, we would build prisons for them as well.109 The
men and women on death row have some combination of bad genes, bad parents, bad
ideas, and bad luck—which of these quantities, exactly, were they responsible
for? No human being stands as author to his own genes or his upbringing, and
yet we have every reason to believe that these factors determine his character
throughout life. Our system of justice should reflect our understanding that
each of us could have been dealt a very different hand in life. In fact, it
seems immoral not to recognize just how much luck is involved in morality
itself.

Consider what would happen if we discovered a cure for human evil. Imagine, for
the sake of argument, that every relevant change in the human brain can be made
cheaply, painlessly, and safely. The cure for psychopathy can be put directly
into the food supply like vitamin D. Evil is now nothing more than a
nutritional deficiency.

If we imagine that a cure for evil exists, we can see that our retributive
impulse is profoundly flawed. Consider, for instance, the prospect of
withholding the cure for evil from a murderer as part of his punishment. Would
this make any moral sense at all? What could it possibly mean to say that a
person deserves to have this treatment withheld? What if the treatment had been
available prior to the person’s crime? Would he still be responsible for his
actions? It seems far more likely that those who had been aware of his case
would be indicted for negligence. Would it make any sense at all to deny
surgery to the man in example 5 as a punishment if we knew the brain tumor was
the proximate cause of his violence? Of course not. The urge for retribution,
therefore, seems to depend upon our not seeing the underlying causes of human
behavior.

Despite our attachment to notions of free will, most us know that disorders of
the brain can trump the best intentions of the mind. This shift in
understanding represents progress toward a deeper, more consistent, and more
compassionate view of our common humanity—and we should note that this is
progress away from religious metaphysics. It seems to me that few concepts have
offered greater scope for human cruelty than the idea of an immortal soul that
stands independent of all material influences, ranging from genes to economic
systems.

And yet one of the fears surrounding our progress in neuroscience is that this
knowledge will dehumanize us. Could thinking about the mind as the product of
the physical brain diminish our compassion for one another? While it is
reasonable to ask this question, it seems to me that, on balance, soul/body
dualism has been the enemy of compassion. For instance, the moral stigma that
still surrounds disorders of mood and cognition seems largely the result of
viewing the mind as distinct from the brain. When the pancreas fails to produce
insulin, there is no shame in taking synthetic insulin to compensate for its
lost function. Many people do not feel the same way about regulating mood with
antidepressants (for reasons that appear quite distinct from any concern about
potential side effects). If this bias has diminished in recent years, it has
been because of an increased appreciation of the brain as a physical organ.


However, the issue of retribution is a genuinely tricky one. In a fascinating
article in The New Yorker, Jared Diamond recently wrote of the high price we
often pay for leaving vengeance to the state.110 He compares the experience of
his friend Daniel, a New Guinea highlander, who avenged the death of a paternal
uncle and felt exquisite relief, to the tragic experience of his late
father-in-law, who had the opportunity to kill the man who murdered his family
during the Holocaust but opted instead to turn him over to the police. After
spending only a year in jail, the killer was released, and Diamond’s
father-in-law spent the last sixty years of his life “tormented by regret and
guilt.” While there is much to be said against the vendetta culture of the New
Guinea Highlands, it is clear that the practice of taking vengeance answers to
a common psychological need.

We are deeply disposed to perceive people as the authors of their actions, to
hold them responsible for the wrongs they do us, and to feel that these debts
must be repaid. Often, the only compensation that seems appropriate requires
that the perpetrator of a crime suffer or forfeit his life. It remains to be
seen how the best system of justice would steward these impulses. Clearly, a
full account of the causes of human behavior should undermine our natural
response to injustice, at least to some degree. It seems doubtful, for
instance, that Diamond’s father-in-law would have suffered the same pangs of
unrequited vengeance if his family had been trampled by an elephant or laid low
by cholera. Similarly, we can expect that his regret would have been
significantly eased if he had learned that his family’s killer had lived a
flawlessly moral life until a virus began ravaging his medial prefrontal
cortex.

It may be that a sham form of retribution could still be moral, if it led
people to behave far better than they otherwise would. Whether it is useful to
emphasize the punishment of certain criminals—rather than their containment or
rehabilitation—is a question for social and psychological science. But it seems
quite clear that a retributive impulse, based upon the idea that each person is
the free author of his thoughts and actions, rests on a cognitive and emotional
illusion—and perpetuates a moral one.


It is generally argued that our sense of free will presents a compelling
mystery: on the one hand, it is impossible to make sense of it in causal terms;
on the other, there is a powerful subjective sense that we are the authors of
our own actions.111 However, I think that this mystery is itself a symptom of
our confusion. It is not that free will is simply an illusion: our experience
is not merely delivering a distorted view of reality; rather, we are mistaken
about the nature of our experience. We do not feel as free as we think we feel.
Our sense of our own freedom results from our not paying attention to what it
is actually like to be what we are. The moment we do pay attention, we begin to
see that free will is nowhere to be found, and our subjectivity is perfectly
compatible with this truth. Thoughts and intentions simply arise in the mind.
What else could they do? The truth about us is stranger than many suppose: The
illusion of free will is itself an illusion.

