# Chapter 3 - BELIEF
[Metadata]: # {04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 3
BELIEF
# BELIEF
A candidate for the presidency of the United States once met a group of
potential supporters at the home of a wealthy benefactor. After brief
introductions, he spotted a bowl of potpourri on the table beside him.
Mistaking it for a bowl of trail mix, he scooped up a fistful of this
decorative debris—which consisted of tree bark, incense, flowers, pinecones,
and other inedible bits of woodland—and delivered it greedily into his mouth.

What our hero did next went unreported (suffice it to say that he did not
become the next president of the United States). We can imagine the psychology
of the scene, however: the candidate wide-eyed in ambush, caught between the
look of horror on his host’s face and the panic of his own tongue, having to
quickly decide whether to swallow the vile material or disgorge it in full view
of his audience. We can see the celebrities and movie producers feigning not to
notice the great man’s gaffe and taking a sudden interest in the walls,
ceiling, and floorboards of the room. Some were surely less discreet. We can
imagine their faces from the candidate’s point of view: a pageant of
ill-concealed emotion, ranging from amazement to schadenfreude.

All such responses, their personal and social significance, and their
moment-to-moment physiological effects, arise from mental capacities that are
distinctly human: the recognition of another’s intentions and state of mind,
the representation of the self in both physical and social space, the impulse
to save face (or to help others to save it), etc. While such mental states
undoubtedly have analogs in the lives of other animals, we human beings
experience them with a special poignancy. There may be many reasons for this,
but one is clearly paramount: we alone, among all earth’s creatures, possess
the ability to think and communicate with complex language.

The work of archeologists, paleoanthropologists, geneticists, and
neuroscientists—not to mention the relative taciturnity of our primate
cousins—suggests that human language is a very recent adaptation.1 Our species
diverged from its common ancestor with the chimpanzees only 6.3 million years
ago. And it now seems that the split with chimps may have been less than
decisive, as comparisons between the two genomes, focusing on the
greater-than-expected similarity of our X chromosomes, reveal that our species
diverged, interbred for a time, and then diverged for good.2 Such rustic
encounters notwithstanding, all human beings currently alive appear to have
descended from a single population of hunter-gatherers that lived in Africa
around 50,000 BCE. These were the first members of our species to exhibit the
technical and social innovations made possible by language.3

Genetic evidence indicates that a band of perhaps 150 of these people left
Africa and gradually populated the rest of the earth. Their migration would not
have been without its hardships, however, as they were not alone: Homo
neanderthalensis laid claim to Europe and the Middle East, and Homo erectus
occupied Asia. Both were species of archaic humans that had developed along
separate evolutionary paths after one or more prior migrations out of Africa.
Both possessed large brains, fashioned stone tools similar to those of Homo
sapiens, and were well armed. And yet over the next twenty thousand years, our
ancestors gradually displaced, and may have physically eradicated, all rivals.4
Given the larger brains and sturdier build of the Neanderthals, it seems
reasonable to suppose that only our species had the advantage of fully
symbolic, complex speech.5

While there is still controversy over the biological origins of human language,
as well as over its likely precursors in the communicative behavior of other
animals,6 there is no question that syntactic language lies at the root of our
ability to understand the universe, to communicate ideas, to cooperate with one
another in complex societies, and to build (one hopes) a sustainable, global
civilization.7 But why has language made such a difference? How has the ability
to speak (and to read and write of late) given modern humans a greater purchase
on the world? What, after all, has been worth communicating these last 50,000
years? I hope it will not seem philistine of me to suggest that our ability to
create fiction has not been the driving force here. The power of language
surely results from the fact that it allows mere words to substitute for direct
experience and mere thoughts to simulate possible states of the world.
Utterances like, “I saw some very scary guys in front of that cave yesterday,”
would have come in quite handy 50,000 years ago. The brain’s capacity to accept
such propositions as true—as valid guides to behavior and emotion, as
predictive of future outcomes, etc.—explains the transformative power of words.
There is a common term we use for this type of acceptance; we call it “belief.”8

