# Chapter 2 - GOOD AND EVIL
[Metadata]: # {03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
GOOD AND EVIL
# GOOD AND EVIL
There may be nothing more important than human cooperation. Whenever more
pressing concerns seem to arise—like the threat of a deadly pandemic, an
asteroid impact, or some other global catastrophe—human cooperation is the only
remedy (if a remedy exists). Cooperation is the stuff of which meaningful human
lives and viable societies are made. Consequently, few topics will be more
relevant to a maturing science of human well-being.

Open a newspaper, today or any day for the rest of your life, and you will
witness failures of human cooperation, great and small, announced from every
corner of the world. The results of these failures are no less tragic for being
utterly commonplace: deception, theft, violence, and their associated miseries
arise in a continuous flux of misspent human energy. When one considers the
proportion of our limited time and resources that must be squandered merely to
guard against theft and violence (to say nothing of addressing their effects),
the problem of human cooperation seems almost the only problem worth thinking
about.1 “Ethics” and “morality” (I use these terms interchangeably) are the
names we give to our deliberate thinking on these matters.2 Clearly, few
subjects have greater bearing upon the question of human well-being.

As we better understand the brain, we will increasingly understand all of the
forces—kindness, reciprocity, trust, openness to argument, respect for
evidence, intuitions of fairness, impulse control, the mitigation of
aggression, etc.—that allow friends and strangers to collaborate successfully
on the common projects of civilization. Understanding ourselves in this way,
and using this knowledge to improve human life, will be among the most
important challenges to science in the decades to come.

Many people imagine that the theory of evolution entails selfishness as a
biological imperative. This popular misconception has been very harmful to the
reputation of science. In truth, human cooperation and its attendant moral
emotions are fully compatible with biological evolution. Selection pressure at
the level of “selfish” genes would surely incline creatures like ourselves to
make sacrifices for our relatives, for the simple reason that one’s relatives
can be counted on to share one’s genes: while this truth might not be obvious
through introspection, your brother’s or sister’s reproductive success is, in
part, your own. This phenomenon, known as kin selection, was not given a formal
analysis until the 1960s in the work of William Hamilton,3 but it was at least
implicit in the understanding of earlier biologists. Legend has it that J. B.
S. Haldane was once asked if he would risk his life to save a drowning brother,
to which he quipped, “No, but I would save two brothers or eight cousins.”4

The work of evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers on reciprocal altruism has
gone a long way toward explaining cooperation among unrelated friends and
strangers.5 Trivers’s model incorporates many of the psychological and social
factors related to altruism and reciprocity, including: friendship, moralistic
aggression (i.e., the punishment of cheaters), guilt, sympathy, and gratitude,
along with a tendency to deceive others by mimicking these states. As first
suggested by Darwin, and recently elaborated by the psychologist Geoffrey
Miller, sexual selection may have further encouraged the development of moral
behavior. Because moral virtue is attractive to both sexes, it might function
as a kind of peacock’s tail: costly to produce and maintain, but beneficial to
one’s genes in the end.6

Clearly, our selfish and selfless interests do not always conflict. In fact,
the well-being of others, especially those closest to us, is one of our primary
(and, indeed, most selfish) interests. While much remains to be understood
about the biology of our moral impulses, kin selection, reciprocal altruism,
and sexual selection explain how we have evolved to be, not merely atomized
selves in thrall to our self-interest, but social selves disposed to serve a
common interest with others.7

Certain biological traits appear to have been shaped by, and to have further
enhanced, the human capacity for cooperation. For instance, unlike the rest of
the earth’s creatures, including our fellow primates, the sclera of our eyes
(the region surrounding the colored iris) is white and exposed. This makes the
direction of the human gaze very easy to detect, allowing us to notice even the
subtlest shifts in one another’s visual attention. The psychologist Michael
Tomasello suggests the following adaptive logic:



If I am, in effect, advertising the direction of my eyes, I must be in a social
environment full of others who are not often inclined to take advantage of this
to my detriment—by, say, beating me to the food or escaping aggression before
me. Indeed, I must be in a cooperative social environment in which others
following the direction of my eyes somehow benefits me.8



Tomasello has found that even twelve-month old children will follow a person’s
gaze, while chimpanzees tend to be interested only in head movements. He
suggests that our unique sensitivity to gaze direction facilitated human
cooperation and language development.


While each of us is selfish, we are not merely so. Our own happiness requires
that we extend the circle of our self-interest to others—to family, friends,
and even to perfect strangers whose pleasures and pains matter to us. While few
thinkers have placed greater focus on the role that competing self-interests
play in society, even Adam Smith recognized that each of us cares deeply about
the happiness of others.9 He also recognized, however, that our ability to care
about others has its limits and that these limits are themselves the object of
our personal and collective concern:



Let us suppose that the great empire of China, with all its myriads of
inhabitants, was suddenly swallowed up by an earthquake, and let us consider
how a man of humanity in Europe, who had no sort of connection with that part
of the world, would be affected upon receiving intelligence of this dreadful
calamity. He would, I imagine, first of all, express very strongly his sorrow
for the misfortune of that unhappy people, he would make many melancholy
reflections upon the precariousness of human life, and the vanity of all the
labours of man, which could thus be annihilated in a moment. He would too,
perhaps, if he was a man of speculation, enter into many reasonings concerning
the effects which this disaster might produce upon the commerce of Europe, and
the trade and business of the world in general. And when all this fine
philosophy was over, when all these humane sentiments had been once fairly
expressed, he would pursue his business or his pleasure, take his repose or his
diversion, with the same ease and tranquility, as if no such accident had
happened. The most frivolous disaster which could befall himself would occasion
a more real disturbance. If he was to lose his little finger to-morrow, he
would not sleep to-night; but, provided he never saw them, he will snore with
the most profound security over the ruin of a hundred millions of his brethren,
and the destruction of that immense multitude seems plainly an object less
interesting to him, than this paltry misfortune of his own. To prevent,
therefore, this paltry misfortune to himself, would a man of humanity be
willing to sacrifice the lives of a hundred millions of his brethren, provided
he had never seen them? Human nature startles with horror at the thought, and
the world, in its greatest depravity and corruption, never produced such a
villain as could be capable of entertaining it. But what makes this
difference?10




Smith captures the tension between our reflexive selfishness and our broader
moral intuitions about as well as anyone can here. The truth about us is plain
to see: most of us are powerfully absorbed by selfish desires almost every
moment of our lives; our attention to our own pains and pleasures could
scarcely be more acute; only the most piercing cries of anonymous suffering
capture our interest, and then fleetingly. And yet, when we consciously reflect
on what we should do, an angel of beneficence and impartiality seems to spread
its wings within us: we genuinely want fair and just societies; we want others
to have their hopes realized; we want to leave the world better than we found
it.

Questions of human well-being run deeper than any explicit code of morality.
Morality—in terms of consciously held precepts, social contracts, notions of
justice, etc.—is a relatively recent development. Such conventions require, at
a minimum, complex language and a willingness to cooperate with strangers, and
this takes us a stride or two beyond the Hobbesian “state of nature.” However,
any biological changes that served to mitigate the internecine misery of our
ancestors would fall within the scope of an analysis of morality as a guide to
personal and collective well-being. To simplify matters enormously:



1. Genetic changes in the brain gave rise to social emotions, moral intuitions,
and language …



2. These allowed for increasingly complex cooperative behavior, the keeping of
promises, concern about one’s reputation, etc.…



3. Which became the basis for cultural norms, laws, and social institutions
whose purpose has been to render this growing system of cooperation durable in
the face of countervailing forces.


Some version of this progression has occurred in our case, and each step
represents an undeniable enhancement of our personal and collective well-being.
To be sure, catastrophic regressions are always possible. We could, either by
design or negligence, employ the hard-won fruits of civilization, and the
emotional and social leverage wrought of millennia of biological and cultural
evolution, to immiserate ourselves more fully than unaided Nature ever could.
Imagine a global North Korea, where the better part of a starving humanity
serve as slaves to a lunatic with bouffant hair: this might be worse than a
world filled merely with warring australopithecines. What would “worse” mean in
this context? Just what our intuitions suggest: more painful, less satisfying,
more conducive to terror and despair, and so on. While it may never be feasible
to compare such counterfactual states of the world, this does not mean that
there are no experiential truths to be compared. Once again, there is a
difference between answers in practice and answers in principle.

The moment one begins thinking about morality in terms of well-being, it
becomes remarkably easy to discern a moral hierarchy across human societies.
Consider the following account of the Dobu islanders from Ruth Benedict:



Life in Dobu fosters extreme forms of animosity and malignancy which most
societies have minimized by their institutions. Dobuan institutions, on the
other hand, exalt them to the highest degree. The Dobuan lives out without
repression man’s worst nightmares of the ill-will of the universe, and
according to his view of life virtue consists in selecting a victim upon whom
he can vent the malignancy he attributes alike to human society and to the
powers of nature. All existence appears to him as a cutthroat struggle in which
deadly antagonists are pitted against one another in contest for each one of
the goods of life. Suspicion and cruelty are his trusted weapons in the strife
and he gives no mercy, as he asks none.11



The Dobu appear to have been as blind to the possibility of true cooperation as
they were to the truths of modern science. While innumerable things would have
been worthy of their attention—the Dobu were, after all, extremely poor and
mightily ignorant—their main preoccupation seems to have been malicious
sorcery. Every Dobuan’s primary interest was to cast spells on other members of
the tribe in an effort to sicken or kill them and in the hopes of magically
appropriating their crops. The relevant spells were generally passed down from
a maternal uncle and became every Dobuan’s most important possessions. Needless
to say, those who received no such inheritance were believed to be at a
terrible disadvantage. Spells could be purchased, however, and the economic
life of the Dobu was almost entirely devoted to trade in these fantastical
commodities.

Certain members of the tribe were understood to have a monopoly over both the
causes and cures for specific illnesses. Such people were greatly feared and
ceaselessly propitiated. In fact, the conscious application of magic was
believed necessary for the most mundane tasks. Even the work of gravity had to
be supplemented by relentless wizardry: absent the right spell, a man’s
vegetables were expected to rise out of the soil and vanish under their own
power.

To make matters worse, the Dobu imagined that good fortune conformed to a rigid
law of thermodynamics: if one man succeeded in growing more yams than his
neighbor, his surplus crop must have been pilfered through sorcery. As all Dobu
continuously endeavored to steal one another’s crops by such methods, the lucky
gardener is likely to have viewed his surplus in precisely these terms. A good
harvest, therefore, was tantamount to “a confession of theft.”

This strange marriage of covetousness and magical thinking created a perfect
obsession with secrecy in Dobu society. Whatever possibility of love and real
friendship remained seems to have been fully extinguished by a final doctrine:
the power of sorcery was believed to grow in proportion to one’s intimacy with
the intended victim. This belief gave every Dobuan an incandescent mistrust of
all others, which burned brightest on those closest. Therefore, if a man fell
seriously ill or died, his misfortune was immediately blamed on his wife, and
vice versa. The picture is of a society completely in thrall to antisocial
delusions.

Did the Dobu love their friends and family as much as we love ours? Many people
seem to think that the answer to such a question must, in principle, be “yes,”
or that the question itself is vacuous. I think it is clear, however, that the
question is well posed and easily answered. The answer is “no.” Being fellow
Homo sapiens, we must presume that the Dobu islanders had brains sufficiently
similar to our own to invite comparison. Is there any doubt that the
selfishness and general malevolence of the Dobu would have been expressed at
the level of their brains? Only if you think the brain does nothing more than
filter oxygen and glucose out of the blood. Once we more fully understand the
neurophysiology of states like love, compassion, and trust, it will be possible
to spell out the differences between ourselves and people like the Dobu in
greater detail. But we need not await any breakthroughs in neuroscience to
bring the general principle in view: just as it is possible for individuals and
groups to be wrong about how best to maintain their physical health, it is
possible for them to be wrong about how to maximize their personal and social
well-being.


I believe that we will increasingly understand good and evil, right and wrong,
in scientific terms, because moral concerns translate into facts about how our
thoughts and behaviors affect the well-being of conscious creatures like
ourselves. If there are facts to be known about the well-being of such
creatures—and there are—then there must be right and wrong answers to moral
questions. Students of philosophy will notice that this commits me to some form
of moral realism (viz. moral claims can really be true or false) and some form
of consequentialism (viz. the rightness of an act depends on how it impacts the
well-being of conscious creatures). While moral realism and consequentialism
have both come under pressure in philosophical circles, they have the virtue of
corresponding to many of our intuitions about how the world works.12

Here is my (consequentialist) starting point: all questions of value (right and
wrong, good and evil, etc.) depend upon the possibility of experiencing such
value. Without potential consequences at the level of experience—happiness,
suffering, joy, despair, etc.—all talk of value is empty. Therefore, to say
that an act is morally necessary, or evil, or blameless, is to make (tacit)
claims about its consequences in the lives of conscious creatures (whether
actual or potential). I am unaware of any interesting exception to this rule.
Needless to say, if one is worried about pleasing God or His angels, this
assumes that such invisible entities are conscious (in some sense) and
cognizant of human behavior. It also generally assumes that it is possible to
suffer their wrath or enjoy their approval, either in this world or the world
to come. Even within religion, therefore, consequences and conscious states
remain the foundation of all values.

Consider the thinking of a Muslim suicide bomber who decides to obliterate
himself along with a crowd of infidels: this would appear to be a perfect
repudiation of the consequentialist attitude. And yet, when we look at the
rationale for seeking martyrdom within Islam, we see that the consequences of
such actions, both real and imagined, are entirely the point. Aspiring martyrs
expect to please God and experience an eternity of happiness after death. If
one fully accepts the metaphysical presuppositions of traditional Islam,
martyrdom must be viewed as the ultimate attempt at career advancement. The
martyr is also the greatest of altruists: for not only does he secure a place
for himself in Paradise, he wins admittance for seventy of his closest
relatives as well. Aspiring martyrs also believe that they are furthering God’s
work here on earth, with desirable consequences for the living. We know quite a
lot about how such people think—indeed, they advertise their views and
intentions ceaselessly—and it has everything to do with their belief that God
has told them, in the Qur’an and the hadith, precisely what the consequences of
certain thoughts and actions will be. Of course, it seems profoundly unlikely
that our universe has been designed to reward individual primates for killing
one another while believing in the divine origin of a specific book. The fact
that would-be martyrs are almost surely wrong about the consequences of their
behavior is precisely what renders it such an astounding and immoral misuse of
human life.

Because most religions conceive of morality as a matter of being obedient to
the word of God (generally for the sake of receiving a supernatural reward),
their precepts often have nothing to do with maximizing well-being in this
world. Religious believers can, therefore, assert the immorality of
contraception, masturbation, homosexuality, etc., without ever feeling obliged
to argue that these practices actually cause suffering. They can also pursue
aims that are flagrantly immoral, in that they needlessly perpetuate human
misery, while believing that these actions are morally obligatory. This pious
uncoupling of moral concern from the reality of human and animal suffering has
caused tremendous harm.





Clearly, there are mental states and capacities that contribute to our general
well-being (happiness, compassion, kindness, etc.) as well as mental states and
incapacities that diminish it (cruelty, hatred, terror, etc.). It is,
therefore, meaningful to ask whether a specific action or way of thinking will
affect a person’s well-being and/or the well-being of others, and there is much
that we might eventually learn about the biology of such effects. Where a
person finds himself on this continuum of possible states will be determined by
many factors—genetic, environmental, social, cognitive, political, economic,
etc.—and while our understanding of such influences may never be complete,
their effects are realized at the level of the human brain. Our growing
understanding of the brain, therefore, will have increasing relevance for any
claims we make about how thoughts and actions affect the welfare of human
beings.

Notice that I do not mention morality in the preceding paragraph, and perhaps I
need not. I began this book by arguing that, despite a century of timidity on
the part of scientists and philosophers, morality can be linked directly to
facts about the happiness and suffering of conscious creatures. However, it is
interesting to consider what would happen if we simply ignored this step and
merely spoke about “well-being.” What would our world be like if we ceased to
worry about “right” and “wrong,” or “good” and “evil,” and simply acted so as
to maximize well-being, our own and that of others? Would we lose anything
important? And if important, wouldn’t it be, by definition, a matter of
someone’s well-being?

