# Chapter 1 - Moral Science
[Metadata]: # {02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 1
Moral Science
# Moral Science
Charges of “scientism” cannot be long in coming. No doubt, there are still some
people who will reject any description of human nature that was not first
communicated in iambic pentameter. Many readers may also fear that the case I
am making is vaguely, or even explicitly, utopian. It isn’t, as should become
clear in due course.

However, other doubts about the authority of science are even more fundamental.
There are academics who have built entire careers on the allegation that the
foundations of science are rotten with bias—sexist, racist, imperialist,
Northern, etc. Sandra Harding, a feminist philosopher of science, is probably
the most famous proponent of this view. On her account, these prejudices have
driven science into an epistemological cul-de-sac called “weak objectivity.” To
remedy this dire situation, Harding recommends that scientists immediately give
“feminist” and “multicultural” epistemologies their due.30

First, let’s be careful not to confuse this quite crazy claim for its sane
cousin: There is no question that scientists have occasionally demonstrated
sexist and racist biases. The composition of some branches of science is still
disproportionately white and male (though some are now disproportionately
female), and one can reasonably wonder whether bias is the cause. There are
also legitimate questions to be asked about the direction and application of
science: in medicine, for instance, it seems clear that women’s health issues
have been sometimes neglected because the prototypical human being has been
considered male. One can also argue that the contributions of women and
minority groups to science have occasionally been ignored or undervalued: the
case of Rosalind Franklin standing in the shadows of Crick and Watson might be
an example of this. But none of these facts, alone or in combination, or
however multiplied, remotely suggests that our notions of scientific
objectivity are vitiated by racism or sexism.

Is there really such a thing as a feminist or multicultural epistemology?
Harding’s case is not helped when she finally divulges that there is not just
one feminist epistemology, but many. On this view, why was Hitler’s notion of
“Jewish physics” (or Stalin’s idea of “capitalist biology”) anything less than
a thrilling insight into the richness of epistemology? Should we now consider
the possibility of not only Jewish physics, but of Jewish women’s physics? How
could such a balkanization of science be a step toward “strong objectivity”?
And if political inclusiveness is our primary concern, where could such efforts
to broaden our conception of scientific truth possibly end? Physicists tend to
have an unusual aptitude for complex mathematics, and anyone who doesn’t cannot
expect to make much of a contribution to the field. Why not remedy this
situation as well? Why not create an epistemology for physicists who failed
calculus? Why not be bolder still and establish a branch of physics for people
suffering from debilitating brain injuries? Who could reasonably expect that
such efforts at inclusiveness would increase our understanding of a phenomenon
like gravity?31 As Steven Weinberg once said regarding similar doubts about the
objectivity of science, “You have to be very learned to be that wrong.”32
Indeed, one does—and many are.


There is no denying, however, that the effort to reduce all human values to
biology can produce howlers. For instance, when the entomologist E. O. Wilson
(in collaboration with the philosopher Michael Ruse) wrote that “morality, or
more strictly our belief in morality, is merely an adaptation put in place to
further our reproductive ends,” the philosopher Daniel Dennett rightly
dismissed it as “nonsense.”33 The fact that our moral intuitions probably
conferred some adaptive advantage upon our ancestors does not mean that the
present purpose of morality is successful reproduction, or that “our belief in
morality” is just a useful delusion. (Is the purpose of astronomy successful
reproduction? What about the practice of contraception? Is that all about
reproduction, too?) Nor does it mean that our notion of “morality” cannot grow
deeper and more refined as our understanding of ourselves develops.

Many universal features of human life need not have been selected for at all;
they may simply be, as Dennett says, “good tricks” communicated by culture or
“forced moves” that naturally emerge out of the regularities in our world. As
Dennett says, it is doubtful that there is a gene for knowing that you should
throw a spear “pointy end first.” And it is, likewise, doubtful that our
ancestors had to spend much time imparting this knowledge to each successive
generation.34

We have good reason to believe that much of what we do in the name of
“morality”—decrying sexual infidelity, punishing cheaters, valuing cooperation,
etc.—is borne of unconscious processes that were shaped by natural selection.35
But this does not mean that evolution designed us to lead deeply fulfilling
lives. Again, in talking about a science of morality, I am not referring to an
evolutionary account of all the cognitive and emotional processes that govern
what people do when they say they are being “moral”; I am referring to the
totality of scientific facts that govern the range of conscious experiences
that are possible for us. To say that there are truths about morality and human
values is simply to say that there are facts about well-being that await our
discovery—regardless of our evolutionary history. While such facts necessarily
relate to the experience of conscious beings, they cannot be the mere invention
of any person or culture.

It seems to me, therefore, that there are at least three projects that we
should not confuse:



1. We can explain why people tend to follow certain patterns of thought and
behavior (many of them demonstrably silly and harmful) in the name of
“morality.”



2. We can think more clearly about the nature of moral truth and determine
which patterns of thought and behavior we should follow in the name of
“morality.”



3. We can convince people who are committed to silly and harmful patterns of
thought and behavior in the name of “morality” to break these commitments and
to live better lives.


These are distinct and independently worthy endeavors. Most scientists who
study morality in evolutionary, psychological, or neurobiological terms are
exclusively devoted to the first project: their goal is to describe and
understand how people think and behave in light of morally salient emotions
like anger, disgust, empathy, love, guilt, humiliation, etc. This research is
fascinating, of course, but it is not my focus. And while our common
evolutionary origins and resultant physiological similarity to one another
suggest that human well-being will admit of general principles that can be
scientifically understood, I consider this first project all but irrelevant to
projects 2 and 3. In the past, I have found myself in conflict with some of the
leaders in this field because many of them, like the psychologist Jonathan
Haidt, believe that this first project represents the only legitimate point of
contact between science and morality.

I happen to believe that the third project—changing people’s ethical
commitments—is the most important task facing humanity in the twenty-first
century. Nearly every other important goal—from combating climate change, to
fighting terrorism, to curing cancer, to saving the whales—falls within its
purview. Of course, moral persuasion is a difficult business, but it strikes me
as especially difficult if we haven’t figured out in what sense moral truths
exist. Hence, my main focus is on project 2.

To see the difference between these three projects, it is best to consider
specific examples: we can, for instance, give a plausible evolutionary account
of why human societies have tended to treat women as the property of men (1);
it is, however, quite another thing to give a scientific account of whether,
why, and to what degree human societies change for the better when they outgrow
this tendency (2); it is yet another thing altogether to decide how best to
change people’s attitudes at this moment in history and to empower women on a
global scale (3).

It is easy to see why the study of the evolutionary origins of “morality” might
lead to the conclusion that morality has nothing at all to do with Truth. If
morality is simply an adaptive means of organizing human social behavior and
mitigating conflict, there would be no reason to think that our current sense
of right and wrong would reflect any deeper understanding about the nature of
reality. Hence, a narrow focus explaining why people think and behave as they
do can lead a person to find the idea of “moral truth” literally
unintelligible.

But notice that the first two projects give quite different accounts of how
“morality” fits into the natural world. In 1, “morality” is the collection of
impulses and behaviors (along with their cultural expressions and
neurobiological underpinnings) that have been hammered into us by evolution. In
2, “morality” refers to the impulses and behaviors we can follow so as to
maximize our well-being in the future.

To give a concrete example: Imagine that a handsome stranger tries to seduce
another man’s wife at the gym. When the woman politely informs her admirer that
she is married, the cad persists, as though a happy marriage could be no
impediment to his charms. The woman breaks off the conversation soon
thereafter, but far less abruptly than might have been compatible with the laws
of physics.

I write now, in the rude glare of recent experience. I can say that when my
wife reported these events to me yesterday, they immediately struck me as
morally salient. In fact, she had not completed her third sentence before the
dark fluids of moral indignation began coursing through my brain—jealousy,
embarrassment, anger, etc.—albeit only at a trickle. First, I was annoyed by
the man’s behavior—and had I been present to witness it, I suspect that my
annoyance would have been far greater. If this Don Juan had been as dismissive
of me in my presence as he was in my absence, I could imagine how such an
encounter could result in physical violence.

No evolutionary psychologist would find it difficult to account for my response
to this situation—and almost all scientists who study “morality” would confine
their attention to this set of facts: my inner ape had swung into view, and any
thoughts I might entertain about “moral truth” would be linguistic effluvium
masking far more zoological concerns. I am the product of an evolutionary
history in which every male of the species has had to guard against squandering
his resources on another man’s offspring. Had we scanned my brain and
correlated my subjective feelings with changes in my neurophysiology, the
scientific description of these events would be nearly complete. So ends
project 1.

But there are many different ways for an ape to respond to the fact that other
apes find his wife desirable. Had this happened in a traditional honor culture,
the jealous husband might beat his wife, drag her to the gym, and force her to
identify her suitor so that he could put a bullet in his brain. In fact, in an
honor society, the employees of the gym might sympathize with this project and
help to organize a proper duel. Or perhaps the husband would be satisfied to
act more obliquely, killing one of his rival’s relatives and initiating a
classic blood feud. In either case, assuming he didn’t get himself killed in
the process, he might then murder his wife for emphasis, leaving his children
motherless. There are many communities on earth where men commonly behave this
way, and hundreds of millions of boys are beginning to run this ancient
software on their brains even now.

However, my own mind shows some precarious traces of civilization: one being
that I view the emotion of jealously with suspicion. What is more, I happen to
love my wife and genuinely want her to be happy, and this entails a certain
empathetic understanding of her point of view. Given a moment to think about
it, I can feel glad that her self-esteem received a boost from this man’s
attention; I can also feel compassion for the fact that, after recently having
our first child, her self-esteem needed any boost at all. I also know that she
would not want to be rude, and that this probably made her somewhat slow to
extricate herself from a conversation that had taken a wrong turn. And I am
under no illusions that I am the only man on earth whom she will find
attractive, or momentarily distracting, nor do I imagine that her devotion to
me should consist in this impossible narrowing of her focus. And how do I feel
about the man? Well, I still find his behavior objectionable—because I cannot
sympathize with his effort to break up a marriage, and I know that I would not
behave as he did—but I sympathize with everything else he must have felt,
because I also happen to think that my wife is beautiful, and I know what it’s
like to be a single ape in the jungle.

Most important, however, I value my own well-being, as well as that of my wife
and daughter, and I want to live in a society that maximizes the possibility of
human well-being generally. Here begins project 2: Are there right and wrong
answers to the question of how to maximize well-being? How would my life have
been affected if I had killed my wife in response to this episode? We do not
need a completed neuroscience to know that my happiness, as well as that of
many other people, would have been profoundly diminished. And what about the
collective well-being of people in an honor society that might support such
behavior? It seems to me that members of these societies are obviously worse
off. If I am wrong about this, however, and there are ways to organize an honor
culture that allow for precisely the same level of human flourishing enjoyed
elsewhere—then so be it. This would represent another peak on the moral
landscape. Again, the existence of multiple peaks would not render the truths
of morality merely subjective.

The framework of a moral landscape guarantees that many people will have flawed
conceptions of morality, just as many people have flawed conceptions of
physics. Some people think “physics” includes (or validates) practices like
astrology, voodoo, and homeopathy. These people are, by all appearances, simply
wrong about physics. In the United States, a majority of people (57 percent)
believe that preventing homosexuals from marrying is a “moral” imperative.36
However, if this belief rests on a flawed sense of how we can maximize our
well-being, such people may simply be wrong about morality. And the fact that
millions of people use the term “morality” as a synonym for religious
dogmatism, racism, sexism, or other failures of insight and compassion should
not oblige us to merely accept their terminology until the end of time.

What will it mean for us to acquire a deep, consistent, and fully scientific
understanding of the human mind? While many of the details remain unclear, the
challenge is for us to begin speaking sensibly about right and wrong, and good
and evil, given what we already know about our world. Such a conversation seems
bound to shape our morality and public policy in the years to come.37

