# Introduction - The Bad Life and the Good Life
[Metadata]: # {01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {01.04}
[Author]: # {harris}
Introduction
The Bad Life and the Good Life
# The Bad Life and the Good Life
For my argument about the moral landscape to hold, I think one need only grant
two points: (1) some people have better lives than others, and (2) these
differences relate, in some lawful and not entirely arbitrary way, to states of
the human brain and to states of the world. To make these premises less
abstract, consider two generic lives that lie somewhere near the extremes on
this continuum:





The Bad Life





You are a young widow who has lived her entire life in the midst of civil war.
Today, your seven-year-old daughter was raped and dismembered before your eyes.
Worse still, the perpetrator was your fourteen-year-old son, who was goaded to
this evil at the point of a machete by a press gang of drug-addled soldiers.
You are now running barefoot through the jungle with killers in pursuit. While
this is the worst day of your life, it is not entirely out of character with
the other days of your life: since the moment you were born, your world has
been a theater of cruelty and violence. You have never learned to read, taken a
hot shower, or traveled beyond the green hell of the jungle. Even the luckiest
people you have known have experienced little more than an occasional respite
from chronic hunger, fear, apathy, and confusion. Unfortunately, you’ve been
very unlucky, even by these bleak standards. Your life has been one long
emergency, and now it is nearly over.





The Good Life





You are married to the most loving, intelligent, and charismatic person you
have ever met. Both of you have careers that are intellectually stimulating and
financially rewarding. For decades, your wealth and social connections have
allowed you to devote yourself to activities that bring you immense personal
satisfaction. One of your greatest sources of happiness has been to find
creative ways to help people who have not had your good fortune in life. In
fact, you have just won a billion-dollar grant to benefit children in the
developing world. If asked, you would say that you could not imagine how your
time on earth could be better spent. Due to a combination of good genes and
optimal circumstances, you and your closest friends and family will live very
long, healthy lives, untouched by crime, sudden bereavements, and other
misfortunes.


The examples I have picked, while generic, are nonetheless real—in that they
represent lives that some human beings are likely to be leading at this moment.
While there are surely ways in which this spectrum of suffering and happiness
might be extended, I think these cases indicate the general range of experience
that is accessible, in principle, to most of us. I also think it is
indisputable that most of what we do with our lives is predicated on there
being nothing more important, at least for ourselves and for those closest to
us, than the difference between the Bad Life and the Good Life.

Let me simply concede that if you don’t see a distinction between these two
lives that is worth valuing (premise 1 above), there may be nothing I can say
that will attract you to my view of the moral landscape. Likewise, if you admit
that these lives are different, and that one is surely better than the other,
but you believe these differences have no lawful relationship to human
behavior, societal conditions, or states of the brain (premise 2), then you
will also fail to see the point of my argument. While I don’t see how either
premise 1 or 2 can be reasonably doubted, my experience discussing these issues
suggests that I should address such skepticism, however far-fetched it may
seem.


There are actually people who claim to be unimpressed by the difference between
the Bad Life and the Good Life. I have even met people who will go so far as to
deny that any difference exists. While they will acknowledge that we habitually
speak and act as if there were a continuum of experience that can be described
by words like “misery,” “terror,” “agony,” “madness,” etc., on one end and
“well-being,” “happiness,” “peace,” “bliss,” etc., on the other, when the
conversation turns to philosophical and scientific matters, such people will
say learned things like, “but, of course, that is just how we play our
particular language game. It doesn’t mean there is a difference in reality.”
One hopes that these people take life’s difficulties in stride. They also use
words like “love” and “happiness,” from time to time, but we should wonder what
these terms could signify that does not entail a preference for the Good Life
over the Bad Life. Anyone who claims to see no difference between these two
states of being (and their concomitant worlds), should be just as likely to
consign himself and those he “loves” to one or the other at random and call the
result “happiness.”

Ask yourself, if the difference between the Bad Life and the Good Life doesn’t
matter to a person, what could possibly matter to him? Is it conceivable that
something might matter more than this difference, expressed on the widest
possible scale? What would we think of a person who said, “Well, I could have
delivered all seven billion of us into the Good Life, but I had other
priorities.” Would it be possible to have other priorities? Wouldn’t any real
priority be best served amid the freedom and opportunity afforded by the Good
Life? Even if you happen to be a masochist who fancies an occasional taunting
with a machete, wouldn’t this desire be best satisfied in the context of the
Good Life?

Imagine someone who spends all his energy trying to move as many people as
possible toward the Bad Life, while another person is equally committed to
undoing this damage and moving people in the opposite direction: Is it
conceivable that you or anyone you know could overlook the differences between
these two projects? Is there any possibility of confusing them or their
underlying motivations? And won’t there necessarily be objective conditions for
these differences? If, for instance, one’s goal were to place a whole
population securely in the Good Life, wouldn’t there be more and less effective
ways of doing this? How would forcing boys to rape and murder their female
relatives fit into the picture?

I do not mean to belabor the point, but the point is crucial—and there is a
pervasive assumption among educated people that either such differences don’t
exist, or that they are too variable, complex, or culturally idiosyncratic to
admit of general value judgments. However, the moment one grants there is a
difference between the Bad Life and the Good Life that lawfully relates to
states of the human brain, to human behavior, and to states of the world, one
has admitted that there are right and wrong answers to questions of morality.
To make sure this point is nailed down, permit me to consider a few more
objections:



What if, seen in some larger context, the Bad Life is actually better than the
Good Life—e.g., what if all those child soldiers will be happier in some
afterlife, because they have been purified of sin or have learned to call God
by the right name, while the people in the Good Life will get tortured in some
physical hell for eternity?



If the universe is really organized this way, much of what I believe will stand
corrected on the Day of Judgment. However, my basic claim about the connection
between facts and values would remain unchallenged. The rewards and punishments
of an afterlife would simply alter the temporal characteristics of the moral
landscape. If the Bad Life is actually better over the long run than the Good
Life—because it wins you endless happiness, while the Good Life represents a
mere dollop of pleasure presaging an eternity of suffering—then the Bad Life
would surely be better than the Good Life. If this were the way the universe
worked, we would be morally obligated to engineer an appropriately pious Bad
Life for as many people as possible. Under such a scheme, there would still be
right and wrong answers to questions of morality, and these would still be
assessed according to the experience of conscious beings. The only thing left
to be decided is how reasonable it is to worry that the universe might be
structured in so bizarre a way. It is not reasonable at all, I think—but that
is a different discussion.



What if certain people would actually prefer the Bad Life to the Good Life?
Perhaps there are psychopaths and sadists who can expect to thrive in the
context of the Bad Life and would enjoy nothing more than killing other people
with machetes.



Worries like this merely raise the question of how we should value dissenting
opinions. Jeffrey Dahmer’s idea of a life well lived was to kill young men,
have sex with their corpses, dismember them, and keep their body parts as
souvenirs. We will confront the problem of psychopathy in greater detail in
chapter 3. For the moment, it seems sufficient to notice that in any domain of
knowledge, we are free to say that certain opinions do not count. In fact, we
must say this for knowledge or expertise to count at all. Why should it be any
different on the subject of human well-being?

Anyone who doesn’t see that the Good Life is preferable to the Bad Life is
unlikely to have anything to contribute to a discussion about human well-being.
Must we really argue that beneficence, trust, creativity, etc., enjoyed in the
context of a prosperous civil society are better than the horrors of civil war
endured in a steaming jungle filled with aggressive insects carrying dangerous
pathogens? I don’t think so. In the next chapter, I will argue that anyone who
would seriously maintain that the opposite is the case—or even that it might be
the case—is either misusing words or not taking the time to consider the
details.

If we were to discover a new tribe in the Amazon tomorrow, there is not a
scientist alive who would assume a priori that these people must enjoy optimal
physical health and material prosperity. Rather, we would ask questions about
this tribe’s average lifespan, daily calorie intake, the percentage of women
dying in childbirth, the prevalence of infectious disease, the presence of
material culture, etc. Such questions would have answers, and they would likely
reveal that life in the Stone Age entails a few compromises. And yet news that
these jolly people enjoy sacrificing their firstborn children to imaginary gods
would prompt many (even most) anthropologists to say that this tribe was in
possession of an alternate moral code every bit as valid and impervious to
refutation as our own. However, the moment one draws the link between morality
and well-being, one sees that this is tantamount to saying that the members of
this tribe must be as fulfilled, psychologically and socially, as any people on
earth. The disparity between how we think about physical health and
mental/societal health reveals a bizarre double standard: one that is
predicated on our not knowing—or, rather, on our pretending not to
know—anything at all about human well-being.

Of course, some anthropologists have refused to follow their colleagues over
the cliff. Robert Edgerton performed a book-length exorcism on the myth of the
“noble savage,” detailing the ways in which the most influential
anthropologists of the 1920s and 1930s—such as Franz Boas, Margaret Mead, and
Ruth Benedict—systematically exaggerated the harmony of folk societies and
ignored their all too frequent barbarism or reflexively attributed it to the
malign influence of colonialists, traders, missionaries, and the like.23
Edgerton details how this romance with mere difference set the course for the
entire field. Thereafter, to compare societies in moral terms was deemed
impossible. Rather, it was believed that one could only hope to understand and
accept a culture on its own terms. Such cultural relativism became so
entrenched that by 1939 one prominent Harvard anthropologist wrote that this
suspension of judgment was “probably the most meaningful contribution which
anthropological studies have made to general knowledge.”24 Let’s hope not. In
any case, it is a contribution from which we are still struggling to awaken.

Many social scientists incorrectly believe that all long-standing human
practices must be evolutionarily adaptive: for how else could they persist?
Thus, even the most bizarre and unproductive behaviors—female genital excision,
blood feuds, infanticide, the torture of animals, scarification, foot binding,
cannibalism, ceremonial rape, human sacrifice, dangerous male initiations,
restricting the diet of pregnant and lactating mothers, slavery, potlatch, the
killing of the elderly, sati, irrational dietary and agricultural taboos
attended by chronic hunger and malnourishment, the use of heavy metals to treat
illness, etc.—have been rationalized, or even idealized, in the fire-lit
scribblings of one or another dazzled ethnographer. But the mere endurance of a
belief system or custom does not suggest that it is adaptive, much less wise.
It merely suggests that it hasn’t led directly to a society’s collapse or
killed its practitioners outright.

The obvious difference between genes and memes (e.g., beliefs, ideas, cultural
practices) is also important to keep in view. The latter are communicated; they
do not travel with the gametes of their human hosts. The survival of memes,
therefore, is not dependent on their conferring some actual benefit
(reproductive or otherwise) on individuals or groups. It is quite possible for
people to traffic in ideas and other cultural products that diminish their
well-being for centuries on end.

Clearly, people can adopt a form of life that needlessly undermines their
physical health—as the average lifespan in many primitive societies is scarcely
a third of what it has been in the developed world since the middle of the
twentieth century.25 Why isn’t it equally obvious that an ignorant and isolated
people might undermine their psychological well-being or that their social
institutions could become engines of pointless cruelty, despair, and
superstition? Why is it even slightly controversial to imagine that some tribe
or society could harbor beliefs about reality that are not only false but
demonstrably harmful?

Every society that has ever existed has had to channel and subdue certain
aspects of human nature—envy, territorial violence, avarice, deceit, laziness,
cheating, etc.—through social mechanisms and institutions. It would be a
miracle if all societies—irrespective of size, geographical location, their
place in history, or the genomes of their members—had done this equally well.
And yet the prevailing bias of cultural relativism assumes that such a miracle
has occurred not just once, but always.


Let’s take a moment to get our bearings. From a factual point of view, is it
possible for a person to believe the wrong things? Yes. It is possible for a
person to value the wrong things (that is, to believe the wrong things about
human well-being)? I am arguing that the answer to this question is an equally
emphatic “yes” and, therefore, that science should increasingly inform our
values. Is it possible that certain people are incapable of wanting what they
should want? Of course—just as there will always be people who are unable to
grasp specific facts or believe certain true propositions. As with every other
description of a mental capacity or incapacity, these are ultimately statements
about the human brain.

