# Chapter 4 - RELIGION
[Metadata]: # {05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {05.01}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 4
RELIGION
# RELIGION
Since the nineteenth century, it has been widely assumed that the spread of
industrialized society would spell the end of religion. Marx,1 Freud,2 and
Weber3—along with innumerable anthropologists, sociologists, historians, and
psychologists influenced by their work—expected religious belief to wither in
the light of modernity. It has not come to pass. Religion remains one of the
most important aspects of human life in the twenty-first century. While most
developed societies have grown predominantly secular,4 with the curious
exception of the United States, orthodox religion is in florid bloom throughout
the developing world. In fact, humanity seems to be growing proportionally more
religious, as prosperous, nonreligious people have the fewest babies.5 When one
considers the rise of Islamism throughout the Muslim world, the explosive
spread of Pentecostalism throughout Africa, and the anomalous piety of the
United States, it becomes clear that religion will have geopolitical
consequences for a long time to come.

Despite the explicit separation of church and state provided for by the U.S.
Constitution, the level of religious belief in the United States (and the
concomitant significance of religion in American life and political discourse)
rivals that of many theocracies. The reason for this is unclear. While it has
been widely argued that religious pluralism and competition have caused
religion to flourish in the United States, with state-church monopolies leading
to its decline in Western Europe,6 the support for this “religious market
theory” now appears weak. It seems, rather, that religiosity is strongly
coupled to perceptions of societal insecurity. Within a rich nation like the
United States, high levels of socioeconomic inequality may dictate levels of
religiosity generally associated with less developed (and less secure)
societies. In addition to being the most religious of developed nations, the
United States also has the greatest economic inequality.7 The poor tend to be
more religious than the rich, both within and between nations.8

Fifty-seven percent of Americans think that one must believe in God to have
good values and to be moral,9 and 69 percent want a president who is guided by
“strong religious beliefs.”10 Such views are unsurprising, given that even
secular scientists regularly acknowledge religion to be the most common source
of meaning and morality. It is true that most religions offer a prescribed
response to specific moral questions—the Catholic Church forbids abortion, for
instance. But research on people’s responses to unfamiliar moral dilemmas
suggests that religion has no effect on moral judgments that involve weighing
harms against benefits (e.g., lives lost vs. lives saved).11

And on almost every measure of societal health, the least religious countries
are better off than the most religious. Countries like Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
and the Netherlands—which are the most atheistic societies on
earth—consistently rate better than religious nations on measures like life
expectancy, infant mortality, crime, literacy, GDP, child welfare, economic
equality, economic competitiveness, gender equality, health care, investments
in education, rates of university enrollment, internet access, environmental
protection, lack of corruption, political stability, and charity to poorer
nations, etc.12 The independent researcher Gregory Paul has cast further light
on this terrain by creating two scales—the Successful Societies Scale and
Popular Religiosity Versus Secularism Scale—which offer greater support for a
link between religious conviction and societal insecurity.13 And there is
another finding which may be relevant to this variable of societal insecurity:
religious commitment in the United States is highly correlated with racism.14

While the mere correlation between societal dysfunction and religious belief
does not tell us what the connection is between them, these data should abolish
the ever-present claim that religion is the most important guarantor of
societal health. They also prove, conclusively, that a high level of unbelief
need not lead to the fall of civilization.15

Whether religion contributes to societal dysfunction, it seems clear that as
societies become more prosperous, stable, and democratic, they tend to become
more secular. Even in the United States, the trend toward secularism is
visible. As Paul points out, this suggests that, contrary to the opinions of
many anthropologists and psychologists, religious commitment “is superficial
enough to be readily abandoned when conditions improve to the required
degree.”16

