# Chapter 4 - Does Religion Matter?
[Metadata]: # {05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {05.04}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 4
Does Religion Matter?
# Does Religion Matter?
While religious belief may be nothing more than ordinary belief applied to
religious content, such beliefs are clearly special in so far as they are
deemed special by their adherents. They also appear especially resistant to
change. This is often attributed to the fact that such beliefs treat matters
aloof from the five senses, and thus are not usually susceptible to disproof.
But this cannot be the whole story. Many religious groups, ranging from
Christian sects to flying saucer cults, have anchored their worldviews to
specific, testable predictions. For instance, such groups occasionally claim
that a great cataclysm will befall the earth on a specific date in the near
future. Inevitably, enthusiasts of these prophecies also believe that once the
earth starts to shake or the floodwaters begin to rise, they will be spirited
away to safety by otherworldly powers. Such people often sell their homes and
other possessions, abandon their jobs, and renounce the company of skeptical
friends and family—all in apparent certainty that the end of the world is at
hand. When the date arrives, and with it the absolute refutation of a cherished
doctrine, many members of these groups rationalize the failure of prophecy with
remarkable agility.55 In fact, such crises of faith are often attended by
increased proselytizing and the manufacture of fresh prophecy—which provides
the next target for zealotry and, alas, subsequent collisions with empirical
reality. Phenomena of this sort have led many people to conclude that religious
faith must be distinct from ordinary belief.

On the other hand, one often encounters bewildering denials of the power of
religious belief, especially from scientists who are not themselves religious.
For instance, the anthropologist Scott Atran alleges that “core religious
beliefs are literally senseless and lacking in truth conditions”56 and,
therefore, cannot actually influence a person’s behavior. According to Atran,
Muslim suicide bombing has absolutely nothing to do with Islamic ideas about
martyrdom and jihad; rather, it is the product of bonding among “fictive kin.”
Atran has publicly stated that the greatest predictor of whether a Muslim will
move from merely supporting jihad to actually perpetrating an act of suicidal
violence “has nothing to do with religion, it has to do with whether you belong
to a soccer club.”57

Atran’s analysis of the causes of Muslim violence is relentlessly oblivious to
what jihadists themselves say about their own motives.58 He even ignores the
role of religious belief in inspiring Muslim terrorism when it bursts into view
in his own research. Here is a passage from one of his papers in which he
summarizes his interviews with jihadists:



All were asked questions of the sort, ‘So what if your family were to be killed
in retaliation for your action?’ or ‘What if your father were dying and your
mother found out your plans for a martyrdom attack and asked you to delay until
the family could get back on its feet?’ To a person they answered along lines
that there is duty to family but duty to God cannot be postponed. ‘And what if
your action resulted in no one’s death but your own?’ The typical response is,
‘God will love you just the same.’ For example, when these questions were posed
to the alleged Emir of Jemaah Islamiyah, Abu Bakr Ba’asyir, in Jakarta’s
Cipinang prison in August 2005, he responded that martyrdom for the sake of
jihad is the ultimate fardh ’ain, an inescapable individual obligation that
trumps all others, including four of the five pillars of Islam (only profession
of faith equals jihad). What matters for him as for most would-be martyrs and
their sponsors I have interviewed is the martyr’s intention and commitment to
God, so that blowing up only oneself has the same value and reward as killing
however many of the enemy.59



What may appear to the untutored eye as patent declarations of religious
conviction are, on Atran’s account, merely “sacred values” and “moral
obligations” shared among kin and confederates; they have no propositional
content. Atran’s bizarre interpretation of his own data ignores the widespread
Muslim belief that martyrs go straight to Paradise and secure a place for their
nearest and dearest there. In light of such religious ideas, solidarity within
a community takes on another dimension. And phrases like “God will love you
just the same” have a meaning worth unpacking. First, it is pretty clear that
Atran’s subjects believe that God exists. What is God’s love good for? It is
good for escaping the fires of hell and reaping an eternity of happiness after
death. To say that the behavior of Muslim jihadists has nothing to do with
their religious beliefs is like saying that honor killings have nothing to do
with what their perpetrators believe about women, sexuality, and male honor.

Beliefs have consequences. In Tanzania, there is a growing criminal trade in
the body parts of albino human beings—as it is widely imagined that albino
flesh has magical properties. Fishermen even weave the hair of albinos into
their nets with the expectation of catching more fish.60 I would not be in the
least surprised if an anthropologist like Atran refused to accept this macabre
irrationality at face value and sought a “deeper” explanation that had nothing
to do with the belief in the magical power of albino body parts. Many social
scientists have a perverse inability to accept that people often believe
exactly what they say they believe. In fact, the belief in the curative powers
of human flesh is widespread in Africa, and it used to be common in the West.
It is said that “mummy paint” (a salve made from ground mummy parts) was
applied to Lincoln’s wounds as he lay dying outside Ford’s Theatre. As late as
1908 the Merck medical catalog sold “genuine Egyptian mummy” to treat epilepsy,
abscesses, fractures and the like.61 How can we explain this behavior apart
from the content of people’s beliefs? We need not try. Especially when, given
the clarity with which they articulate their core beliefs, there is no mystery
whatsoever as to why certain people behave as they do.


The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), published
by the American Psychiatric Association, is the most widely used reference work
for clinicians in the field of mental health. It defines “delusion” as a “false
belief based on incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly
sustained despite what almost everyone else believes and despite what
constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary.”
Lest we think that certain religious beliefs might fall under the shadow of
this definition, the authors exonerate religious doctrines, in principle, in
the next sentence: “The belief is not one ordinarily accepted by other members
of the person’s culture or subculture (e.g., it is not an article of religious
faith)” (p. 765). As others have observed, there are several problems with this
definition.62 As any clinician can attest, delusional patients often suffer
from religious delusions. And the criterion that a belief be widely shared
suggests that a belief can be delusional in one context and normative in
another, even if the reasons for believing it are held constant. Does a lone
psychotic become sane merely by attracting a crowd of devotees? If we are
measuring sanity in terms of sheer numbers of subscribers, then atheists and
agnostics in the United States must be delusional: a diagnosis which would
impugn 93 percent of the members of the National Academy of Sciences.63 There
are, in fact, more people in the United States who cannot read than who doubt
the existence of Yahweh.64 In twenty-first-century America, disbelief in the
God of Abraham is about as fringe a phenomenon as can be named. But so is a
commitment to the basic principles of scientific thinking—not to mention a
detailed understanding of genetics, special relativity, or Bayesian statistics.

The boundary between mental illness and respectable religious belief can be
difficult to discern. This was made especially vivid in a recent court case
involving a small group of very committed Christians accused of murdering an
eighteen-month-old infant.65 The trouble began when the boy ceased to say
“Amen” before meals. Believing that he had developed “a spirit of rebellion,”
the group, which included the boy’s mother, deprived him of food and water
until he died. Upon being indicted, the mother accepted an unusual plea
agreement: she vowed to cooperate in the prosecution of her codefendants under
the condition that all charges be dropped if her son were resurrected. The
prosecutor accepted this plea provided that that resurrection was “Jesus-like”
and did not include reincarnation as another person or animal. Despite the fact
that this band of lunatics carried the boy’s corpse around in a green suitcase
for over a year, awaiting his reanimation, there is no reason to believe that
any of them suffer from a mental illness. It is obvious, however, that they
suffer from religion.

