# Chapter 5 - On Being Right or Wrong
[Metadata]: # {06.05}
[Descriptor]: # {06.05}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 5
On Being Right or Wrong
# On Being Right or Wrong
It is clear that we face both practical and conceptual difficulties when
seeking to maximize human well-being. Consider, for instance, the tensions
between freedom of speech, the right to privacy, and the duty of every
government to keep its citizens safe. Each of these principles seems
fundamental to a healthy society. The problem, however, is that at their
extremes, each is hostile to the other two. Certain forms of speech painfully
violate people’s privacy and can even put society itself in danger. Should I be
able to film my neighbor through his bedroom window and upload this footage
onto YouTube as a work of “journalism”? Should I be free to publish a detailed
recipe for synthesizing smallpox? Clearly, appropriate limits to free
expression exist. Likewise, too much respect for privacy would make it
impossible to gather the news or to prosecute criminals and terrorists. And too
zealous a commitment to protecting innocent people can lead to unbearable
violations of both privacy and freedom of expression. How should we balance our
commitment to these various goods?

We may never be able to answer this question with absolute precision. It seems
quite clear, however, that questions like this have answers. Even if there are
a thousand different ways to optimally tune these three variables, given
concomitant changes in the rest of culture, there must be many more ways that
are less than optimal—and people will suffer as a result.


What would it mean for a couple to decide that they should have a child? It
probably means they think that their own well-being will tend to increase for
having brought another person into the world; it should also mean that they
expect their child to have a life that is, on balance, worth living. If they
didn’t expect these things, it’s hard to see why they would want to have a
child in the first place.

However, most of the research done on happiness suggests that people actually
become less happy when they have children and do not begin to approach their
prior level of happiness until their children leave home.10 Let us say that you
are aware of this research but imagine that you will be an exception. Of
course, another body of research shows that most people think that they are
exceptions to rules of this sort: there is almost nothing more common than the
belief that one is above average in intelligence, wisdom, honesty, etc. But you
are aware of this research as well, and it does not faze you. Perhaps, in your
case, all relevant exceptions are true, and you will be precisely as happy a
parent as you hope to be. However, a famous study of human achievement suggests
that one of the most reliable ways to diminish a person’s contributions to
society is for that person to start a family.11 How would you view your
decision to have a child if you knew that all the time you spent changing
diapers and playing with Legos would prevent you from developing the cure for
Alzheimer’s disease that was actually within your reach?

These are not empty questions. But neither are they the sorts of questions that
anyone is likely to answer. The decision to have a child may always be made in
the context of reasonable (and not so reasonable) expectations about the future
well-being of all concerned. It seems to me that thinking in this way is,
nevertheless, to contemplate the moral landscape.

If we are not able to perfectly reconcile the tension between personal and
collective well-being, there is still no reason to think that they are
generally in conflict. Most boats will surely rise with the same tide. It is
not at all difficult to envision the global changes that would improve life for
everyone: We would all be better off in a world where we devoted fewer of our
resources to preparing to kill one another. Finding clean sources of energy,
cures for disease, improvements in agriculture, and new ways to facilitate
human cooperation are general goals that are obviously worth striving for. What
does such a claim mean? It means that we have every reason to believe that the
pursuit of such goals will lead upward on the slopes of the moral landscape.





The claim that science could have something important to say about values
(because values relate to facts about the well-being of conscious creatures) is
an argument made on first principles. As such, it doesn’t rest on any specific
empirical results. That does not mean that this claim couldn’t be falsified,
however. Clearly, if there is a more important source of value that has nothing
to do with the well-being of conscious creatures (in this life or a life to
come), my thesis would be disproved. As I have said, however, I cannot conceive
of what such a source of value could be: for if someone claimed to have found
it somewhere, it could be of no possible interest to anyone, by definition.

There are other ways that my thesis could be falsified, however. There would be
no future science of morality, for instance, if human well-being were
completely haphazard and unrelated to states of the brain. If some people are
made happiest by brain state X, while others are made miserable by it, there
would be no neural correlate of human well-being. Alternately, a neural
correlate of human well-being might exist, but it could be invoked to the same
degree by antithetical states of the world. In this case, there would be no
connection between a person’s inner life and his or her outer circumstances. If
either of these scenarios were true, we could not make any general claims about
human flourishing. However, if this is the way the world works, the brain would
seem to be little more than insulation for the skull, and the entire field of
neuroscience would constitute an elaborate and very costly method of
misunderstanding the world. Again, this is an intelligible claim, but that does
not mean that intelligent people should take it seriously.

It is also conceivable that a science of human flourishing could be possible,
and yet people could be made equally happy by very different “moral” impulses.
Perhaps there is no connection between being good and feeling good—and,
therefore, no connection between moral behavior (as generally conceived) and
subjective well-being. In this case, rapists, liars, and thieves would
experience the same depth of happiness as the saints. This scenario stands the
greatest chance of being true, while still seeming quite far-fetched.
Neuroimaging work already suggests what has long been obvious through
introspection: human cooperation is rewarding.12 However, if evil turned out to
be as reliable a path to happiness as goodness is, my argument about the moral
landscape would still stand, as would the likely utility of neuroscience for
investigating it. It would no longer be an especially “moral” landscape; rather
it would be a continuum of well-being, upon which saints and sinners would
occupy equivalent peaks.

Worries of this kind seem to ignore some very obvious facts about human beings:
we have all evolved from common ancestors and are, therefore, far more similar
than we are different; brains and primary human emotions clearly transcend
culture, and they are unquestionably influenced by states of the world (as
anyone who has ever stubbed his toe can attest). No one, to my knowledge,
believes that there is so much variance in the requisites of human well-being
as to make the above concerns seem plausible.


Whether morality becomes a proper branch of science is not really the point. Is
economics a true science yet? Judging from recent events, it wouldn’t appear
so. Perhaps a deep understanding of economics will always elude us. But does
anyone doubt that there are better and worse ways to structure an economy?
Would any educated person consider it a form of bigotry to criticize another
society’s response to a banking crisis? Imagine how terrifying it would be if
great numbers of smart people became convinced that all efforts to prevent a
global financial catastrophe must be either equally valid or equally
nonsensical in principle. And yet this is precisely where we stand on the most
important questions in human life.

Currently, most scientists believe that answers to questions of human value
will fall perpetually beyond our reach—not because human subjectivity is too
difficult to study, or the brain too complex, but because there is no
intellectual justification for speaking about right and wrong, or good and
evil, across cultures. Many people also believe that nothing much depends on
whether we find a universal foundation for morality. It seems to me, however,
that in order to fulfill our deepest interests in this life, both personally
and collectively, we must first admit that some interests are more defensible
than others. Indeed, some interests are so compelling that they need no defense
at all.

This book was written in the hope that as science develops, we will recognize
its application to the most pressing questions of human existence. For nearly a
century, the moral relativism of science has given faith-based religion—that
great engine of ignorance and bigotry—a nearly uncontested claim to being the
only universal framework for moral wisdom. As a result, the most powerful
societies on earth spend their time debating issues like gay marriage when they
should be focused on problems like nuclear proliferation, genocide, energy
security, climate change, poverty, and failing schools. Granted, the practical
effects of thinking in terms of a moral landscape cannot be our only reason for
doing so—we must form our beliefs about reality based on what we think is
actually true. But few people seem to recognize the dangers posed by thinking
that there are no true answers to moral questions.

If our well-being depends upon the interaction between events in our brains and
events in the world, and there are better and worse ways to secure it, then
some cultures will tend to produce lives that are more worth living than
others; some political persuasions will be more enlightened than others; and
some world views will be mistaken in ways that cause needless human misery.
Whether or not we ever understand meaning, morality, and values in practice, I
have attempted to show that there must be something to know about them in
principle. And I am convinced that merely admitting this will transform the way
we think about human happiness and the public good.

