# Introduction - Facts and Values
[Metadata]: # {01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02}
[Author]: # {harris}
Introduction
Facts and Values
# Facts and Values
The eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher David Hume famously argued that no
description of the way the world is (facts) can tell us how we ought to behave
(morality).13 Following Hume, the philosopher G. E. Moore declared that any
attempt to locate moral truths in the natural world was to commit a
“naturalistic fallacy.”14 Moore argued that goodness could not be equated with
any property of human experience (e.g., pleasure, happiness, evolutionary
fitness) because it would always be appropriate to ask whether the property on
offer was itself good. If, for instance, we were to say that goodness is
synonymous with whatever gives people pleasure, it would still be possible to
worry whether a specific instance of pleasure is actually good. This is known
as Moore’s “open question argument.” And while I think this verbal trap is
easily avoided when we focus on human well-being, most scientists and public
intellectuals appear to have fallen into it. Other influential philosophers,
including Karl Popper,15 have echoed Hume and Moore on this point, and the
effect has been to create a firewall between facts and values throughout our
intellectual discourse.16

While psychologists and neuroscientists now routinely study human happiness,
positive emotions, and moral reasoning, they rarely draw conclusions about how
human beings ought to think or behave in light of their findings. In fact, it
seems to be generally considered intellectually disreputable, even vaguely
authoritarian, for a scientist to suggest that his or her work offers some
guidance about how people should live. The philosopher and psychologist Jerry
Fodor crystallizes the view:



Science is about facts, not norms; it might tell us how we are, but it couldn’t
tell us what is wrong with how we are. There couldn’t be a science of the human
condition.17




While it is rarely stated this clearly, this faith in the intrinsic limits of
reason is now the received opinion in intellectual circles.

Despite the reticence of most scientists on the subject of good and evil, the
scientific study of morality and human happiness is well underway. This
research is bound to bring science into conflict with religious orthodoxy and
popular opinion—just as our growing understanding of evolution has—because the
divide between facts and values is illusory in at least three senses: (1)
whatever can be known about maximizing the well-being of conscious
creatures—which is, I will argue, the only thing we can reasonably value—must
at some point translate into facts about brains and their interaction with the
world at large; (2) the very idea of “objective” knowledge (i.e., knowledge
acquired through honest observation and reasoning) has values built into it, as
every effort we make to discuss facts depends upon principles that we must
first value (e.g., logical consistency, reliance on evidence, parsimony, etc.);
(3) beliefs about facts and beliefs about values seem to arise from similar
processes at the level of the brain: it appears that we have a common system
for judging truth and falsity in both domains. I will discuss each of these
points in greater detail below. Both in terms of what there is to know about
the world and the brain mechanisms that allow us to know it, we will see that a
clear boundary between facts and values simply does not exist.


Many readers might wonder how can we base our values on something as difficult
to define as “well-being”? It seems to me, however, that the concept of
well-being is like the concept of physical health: it resists precise
definition, and yet it is indispensable.18 In fact, the meanings of both terms
seem likely to remain perpetually open to revision as we make progress in
science. Today, a person can consider himself physically healthy if he is free
of detectable disease, able to exercise, and destined to live into his eighties
without suffering obvious decrepitude. But this standard may change. If the
biogerontologist Aubrey de Grey is correct in viewing aging as an engineering
problem that admits of a full solution,19 being able to walk a mile on your
hundredth birthday will not always constitute “health.” There may come a time
when not being able to run a marathon at age five hundred will be considered a
profound disability. Such a radical transformation of our view of human health
would not suggest that current notions of health and sickness are arbitrary,
merely subjective, or culturally constructed. Indeed, the difference between a
healthy person and a dead one is about as clear and consequential a distinction
as we ever make in science. The differences between the heights of human
fulfillment and the depths of human misery are no less clear, even if new
frontiers await us in both directions.

If we define “good” as that which supports well-being, as I will argue we must,
the regress initiated by Moore’s “open question argument” really does stop.
While I agree with Moore that it is reasonable to wonder whether maximizing
pleasure in any given instance is “good,” it makes no sense at all to ask
whether maximizing well-being is “good.” It seems clear that what we are really
asking when we wonder whether a certain state of pleasure is “good,” is whether
it is conducive to, or obstructive of, some deeper form of well-being. This
question is perfectly coherent; it surely has an answer (whether or not we are
in a position to answer it); and yet, it keeps notions of goodness anchored to
the experience of sentient beings.20

Defining goodness in this way does not resolve all questions of value; it
merely directs our attention to what values actually are—the set of attitudes,
choices, and behaviors that potentially affect our well-being, as well as that
of other conscious minds. While this leaves the question of what constitutes
well-being genuinely open, there is every reason to think that this question
has a finite range of answers. Given that change in the well-being of conscious
creatures is bound to be a product of natural laws, we must expect that this
space of possibilities—the moral landscape—will increasingly be illuminated by
science.

It is important to emphasize that a scientific account of human values—i.e.,
one that places them squarely within the web of influences that link states of
the world and states of the human brain—is not the same as an evolutionary
account. Most of what constitutes human well-being at this moment escapes any
narrow Darwinian calculus. While the possibilities of human experience must be
realized in the brains that evolution has built for us, our brains were not
designed with a view to our ultimate fulfillment. Evolution could never have
foreseen the wisdom or necessity of creating stable democracies, mitigating
climate change, saving other species from extinction, containing the spread of
nuclear weapons, or of doing much else that is now crucial to our happiness in
this century.

As the psychologist Steven Pinker has observed,21 if conforming to the dictates
of evolution were the foundation of subjective well-being, most men would
discover no higher calling in life than to make daily contributions to their
local sperm bank. After all, from the perspective of a man’s genes, there could
be nothing more fulfilling than spawning thousands of children without
incurring any associated costs or responsibilities. But our minds do not merely
conform to the logic of natural selection. In fact, anyone who wears eyeglasses
or uses sunscreen has confessed his disinclination to live the life that his
genes have made for him. While we have inherited a multitude of yearnings that
probably helped our ancestors survive and reproduce in small bands of
hunter-gatherers, much of our inner life is frankly incompatible with our
finding happiness in today’s world. The temptation to start each day with
several glazed donuts and to end it with an extramarital affair might be
difficult for some people to resist, for reasons that are easily understood in
evolutionary terms, but there are surely better ways to maximize one’s
long-term well-being. I hope it is clear that the view of “good” and “bad” I am
advocating, while fully constrained by our current biology (as well as by its
future possibilities), cannot be directly reduced to instinctual drives and
evolutionary imperatives. As with mathematics, science, art, and almost
everything else that interests us, our modern concerns about meaning and
morality have flown the perch built by evolution.

