# Chapter 2 - Can We Ever Be “Right” About Right and Wrong?
[Metadata]: # {03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Can We Ever Be “Right” About Right and Wrong?
# Can We Ever Be “Right” About Right and Wrong?
The philosopher and neuroscientist Joshua Greene has done some of the most
influential neuroimaging research on morality.13 While Greene wants to
understand the brain processes that govern our moral lives, he believes that we
should be skeptical of moral realism on metaphysical grounds. For Greene, the
question is not, “How can you know for sure that your moral beliefs are true?”
but rather, “How could it be that anyone’s moral beliefs are true?” In other
words, what is it about the world that could make a moral claim true or
false?14 He appears to believe that the answer to this question is “nothing.”

However, it seems to me that this question is easily answered. Moral view A is
truer than moral view B, if A entails a more accurate understanding of the
connections between human thoughts/intentions/behavior and human well-being.
Does forcing women and girls to wear burqas make a net positive contribution to
human well-being? Does it produce happier boys and girls? Does it produce more
compassionate men or more contented women? Does it make for better
relationships between men and women, between boys and their mothers, or between
girls and their fathers? I would bet my life that the answer to each of these
questions is “no.” So, I think, would many scientists. And yet, as we have
seen, most scientists have been trained to think that such judgments are mere
expressions of cultural bias—and, thus, unscientific in principle. Very few of
us seem willing to admit that such simple, moral truths increasingly fall
within the scope of our scientific worldview. Greene articulates the prevailing
skepticism quite well:



Moral judgment is, for the most part, driven not by moral reasoning, but by
moral intuitions of an emotional nature. Our capacity for moral judgment is a
complex evolutionary adaptation to an intensely social life. We are, in fact,
so well adapted to making moral judgments that our making them is, from our
point of view, rather easy, a part of “common sense.” And like many of our
common sense abilities, our ability to make moral judgments feels to us like a
perceptual ability, an ability, in this case, to discern immediately and
reliably mind-independent moral facts. As a result, we are naturally inclined
toward a mistaken belief in moral realism. The psychological tendencies that
encourage this false belief serve an important biological purpose, and that
explains why we should find moral realism so attractive even though it is
false. Moral realism is, once again, a mistake we were born to make.15




Greene alleges that moral realism assumes that “there is sufficient uniformity
in people’s underlying moral outlooks to warrant speaking as if there is a fact
of the matter about what’s ‘right’ or ‘wrong,’ ‘just’ or ‘unjust.’”16 But do we
really need to assume such uniformity for there to be right answers to moral
questions? Is physical or biological realism predicated on “sufficient
uniformity in people’s underlying [physical or biological] outlooks”? Taking
humanity as a whole, I am quite certain that there is a greater consensus that
cruelty is wrong (a common moral precept) than the passage of time varies with
velocity (special relativity) or that humans and lobsters share a common
ancestor (evolution). Should we doubt whether there is a “fact of the matter”
with respect to these physical and biological truth claims? Does the general
ignorance about the special theory of relativity or the pervasive
disinclination of Americans to accept the scientific consensus on evolution put
our scientific worldview, even slightly, in question?17

Greene notes that it is often difficult to get people to agree about moral
truth, or to even get an individual to agree with himself in different
contexts. These tensions lead him to the following conclusion:



[M]oral theorizing fails because our intuitions do not reflect a coherent set
of moral truths and were not designed by natural selection or anything else to
behave as if they were … If you want to make sense of your moral sense, turn to
biology, psychology, and sociology—not normative ethics.18




This objection to moral realism may seem reasonable, until one notices that it
can be applied, with the same leveling effect, to any domain of human
knowledge. For instance, it is just as true to say that our logical,
mathematical, and physical intuitions have not been designed by natural
selection to track the Truth.19 Does this mean that we must cease to be
realists with respect to physical reality? We need not look far in science to
find ideas and opinions that defy easy synthesis. There are many scientific
frameworks (and levels of description) that resist integration and which divide
our discourse into areas of specialization, even pitting Nobel laureates in the
same discipline against one another. Does this mean that we can never hope to
understand what is really going on in the world? No. It means the conversation
must continue.20

Total uniformity in the moral sphere—either interpersonally or
intrapersonally—may be hopeless. So what? This is precisely the lack of closure
we face in all areas of human knowledge. Full consensus as a scientific goal
only exists in the limit, at a hypothetical end of inquiry. Why not tolerate
the same open-endedness in our thinking about human well-being?

Again, this does not mean that all opinions about morality are justified. To
the contrary—the moment we accept that there are right and wrong answers to
questions of human well-being, we must admit that many people are simply wrong
about morality. The eunuchs who tended the royal family in China’s Forbidden
City, dynasty after dynasty, seem to have felt generally well compensated for
their lives of arrested development and isolation by the influence they
achieved at court—as well as by the knowledge that their genitalia, which had
been preserved in jars all the while, would be buried with them after their
deaths, ensuring them rebirth as human beings. When confronted with such an
exotic point of view, a moral realist would like to say we are witnessing more
than a mere difference of opinion: we are in the presence of moral error. It
seems to me that we can be reasonably confident that it is bad for parents to
sell their sons into the service of a government that intends to cut off their
genitalia “using only hot chili sauce as a local anesthetic.”21 This would mean
that Sun Yaoting, the emperor’s last eunuch, who died in 1996 at the age of
ninety-four, was wrong to harbor, as his greatest regret, “the fall of the
imperial system he had aspired to serve.” Most scientists seem to believe that
no matter how maladaptive or masochistic a person’s moral commitments, it is
impossible to say that he is ever mistaken about what constitutes a good life.

