# Chapter 4 - Religion and Evolution
[Metadata]: # {05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 4
Religion and Evolution
# Religion and Evolution
The evolutionary origins of religion remain obscure. The earliest signs of
human burial practices date to 95,000 years ago, and many take these as
evidence of the emergence of religious belief.17 Some researchers consider the
connection between religion and evolution to be straightforward insofar as
religious doctrines tend to view sexual conduct as morally problematic and
attempt to regulate it, both to encourage fertility and to protect against
sexual infidelity. Clearly, it is in the genetic interests of every man that he
not spend his life rearing another man’s children, and it is in the genetic
interests of every woman that her mate not squander his resources on other
women and their offspring. The fact that the world’s religions generally codify
these interests, often prescribing harsh penalties for their transgression,
forms the basis for one of their more persistent claims to social utility. It
is, therefore, tempting to trace a line between religious doctrines regarding
marriage and sexuality to evolutionary fitness.18 Even here, however, the link
to evolution appears less than straightforward: as evolution should actually
favor indiscriminate heterosexual activity on the part of men, as long as these
scoundrels can avoid squandering their resources in ways that imperil the
reproductive success of their offspring.19

Human beings may be genetically predisposed to superstition: for natural
selection should favor rampant belief formation as long as the benefits of the
occasional, correct belief are great enough.20 The manufacture of new religious
doctrines and identities, resulting in group conformity and xenophobia, may
have offered some protection against infectious illness: for to the degree that
religion divides people, it would inhibit the spread of novel pathogens.21
However, the question of whether religion (or anything else) might have given
groups of human beings an evolutionary advantage (so-called “group selection”)
has been widely debated.22 And even if tribes have occasionally been the
vehicles of natural selection, and religion proved adaptive, it would remain an
open question whether religion increases human fitness today. As already
mentioned, there are a wide variety of genetically entrenched human traits
(e.g., out-group aggression, infidelity, superstition, etc.) that, while
probably adaptive at some point in our past, may have been less than optimal
even in the Pleistocene. In a world that is growing ever more crowded and
complex, many of these biologically selected traits may yet imperil us.


Clearly, religion cannot be reduced to a mere concatenation of religious
beliefs. Every religion consists of rites, rituals, prayers, social
institutions, holidays, etc., and these serve a wide variety of purposes,
conscious and otherwise.23 However, religious belief—that is, the acceptance of
specific historical and metaphysical propositions as being true—is generally
what renders these enterprises relevant, or even comprehensible. I share with
anthropologist Rodney Stark the view that belief precedes ritual and that a
practice like prayer is usually thought to be a genuine act of communication
with a God (or gods).24 Religious adherents generally believe that they possess
knowledge of sacred truths, and every faith provides a framework for
interpreting experience so as to lend further credence to its doctrine.25

There seems little question that most religious practices are the direct
consequence of what people believe to be true about both external and internal
reality. Indeed, most religious practices become intelligible only in light of
these underlying beliefs. The fact that many people have begun to doubt
specific religious doctrines in the meantime, while still mouthing the liturgy
and aping the rituals, is beside the point. What faith is best exemplified by
those who are in the process of losing it? While there may be many Catholics,
for instance, who value the ritual of the Mass without believing that the bread
and wine are actually transformed into the body and blood of Jesus Christ, the
doctrine of Transubstantiation remains the most plausible origin of this
ritual. And the primacy of the Mass within the Church hinges on the fact that
many Catholics still consider the underlying doctrine to be true—which is a
direct consequence of the fact that the Church still promulgates and defends
it. The following passage, taken from The Profession of Faith of the Roman
Catholic Church, represents the relevant case, and illustrates the kind of
assertions about reality that lie at the heart of most religions:



I likewise profess that in the Mass a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice
is offered to God on behalf of the living and the dead, and that the Body and
the Blood, together with the soul and the divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ is
truly, really, and substantially present in the most holy sacrament of the
Eucharist, and there is a change of the whole substance of the bread into the
Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into Blood; and this change the
Catholic Mass calls transubstantiation. I also profess that the whole and
entire Christ and a true sacrament is received under each separate species.



There is, of course, a distinction to be made between mere profession of such
beliefs and actual belief26—a distinction that, while important, makes sense
only in a world in which some people actually believe what they say they
believe. There seems little reason to doubt that a significant percentage of
human beings, likely a majority, falls into this latter category with respect
to one or another religious creed.

What is surprising, from a scientific point of view, is that 42 percent of
Americans believe that life has existed in its present form since the beginning
of the world, and another 21 percent believe that while life may have evolved,
its evolution has been guided by the hand of God (only 26 percent believe in
evolution through natural selection).27 Seventy-eight percent of Americans
believe that the Bible is the word of God (either literal or “inspired”); and
79 percent of Christians believe that Jesus Christ will physically return to
earth at some point in the future.28

How is it possible that so many millions of people believe these things?
Clearly, the taboo around criticizing religious beliefs must contribute to
their survival. But, as the anthropologist Pascal Boyer points out, the failure
of reality testing does not explain the specific character of religious
beliefs:



People have stories about vanishing islands and talking cats, but they usually
do not insert them in their religious beliefs. In contrast, people produce
concepts of ghosts and person-like gods and make use of these concepts when
they think about a whole variety of social questions (what is moral behavior,
what to do with dead people, how misfortune occurs, why perform rituals, etc.).
This is much more precise than just relaxing the usual principles of sound
reasoning.29



According to Boyer, religious concepts must arise from mental categories that
predate religion—and these underlying structures determine the stereotypical
form that religious beliefs and practices take. These categories of thought
relate to things like living beings, social exchange, moral infractions,
natural hazards, and ways of understanding human misfortune. On Boyer’s
account, people do not accept incredible religious doctrines because they have
relaxed their standards of rationality; they relax their standards of
rationality because certain doctrines fit their “inference machinery” in such a
way as to seem credible. And what most religious propositions may lack in
plausibility they make up for by being memorable, emotionally salient, and
socially consequential. All of these properties are a product of the underlying
structure of human cognition, and most of this architecture is not consciously
accessible. Boyer argues, therefore, that explicit theologies and consciously
held dogmas are not a reliable indicator of the real contents or causes of a
person’s religious beliefs.

Boyer may be correct in his assertion that we have cognitive templates for
religious ideas that run deeper than culture (in the same way that we appear to
have deep, abstract concepts like “animal” and “tool”). The psychologist Justin
Barrett makes a similar claim, likening religion to language acquisition: we
come into this world cognitively prepared for language; our culture and
upbringing merely dictate which languages we will be exposed to.30 We may also
be what the psychologist Paul Bloom has called “common sense dualists”—that is,
we may be naturally inclined to see the mind as distinct from the body and,
therefore, we tend to intuit the existence of disembodied minds at work in the
world.31 This propensity could lead us to presume ongoing relationships with
dead friends and relatives, to anticipate our own survival of death, and
generally to conceive of people as having immaterial souls. Similarly, several
experiments suggest that children are predisposed to assume both design and
intention behind natural events—leaving many psychologists and anthropologists
to believe that children, left entirely to their own devices, would invent some
conception of God.32 The psychologist Margaret Evans has found that children
between the ages of eight and ten, whatever their upbringing, are consistently
more inclined to give a Creationist account of the natural world than their
parents are.33

The psychologist Bruce Hood likens our susceptibility to religious ideas to the
fact that people tend to develop phobias for evolutionarily relevant threats
(like snakes and spiders) rather than for things that are far more likely to
kill them (like automobiles and electrical sockets).34 And because our minds
have evolved to detect patterns in the world, we often detect patterns that
aren’t actually there—ranging from faces in the clouds to a divine hand in the
workings of Nature. Hood posits an additional cognitive schema that he calls
“supersense”—a tendency to infer hidden forces in the world, working for good
or for ill. On his account, supersense generates beliefs in the supernatural
(religious and otherwise) all on its own, and such beliefs are thereafter
modulated, rather than instilled, by culture.

While religious affiliation is strictly a matter of cultural inheritance,
religious attitudes (e.g., social conservatism) and behaviors (e.g., church
attendance) seem to be moderately influenced by genetic factors.35 The
relevance of the brain’s dopaminergic systems to religious experience, belief,
and behavior is suggested by several lines of evidence, including the fact that
several clinical conditions involving the neurotransmitter dopamine—mania,
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and schizophrenia—are regularly associated
with hyperreligiosity.36 Serotonin has also been implicated, as drugs known to
modulate it—like LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, N,N-dimethyltryptamine (“DMT”),
and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (“ecstasy”)—seem to be especially potent
drivers of religious/spiritual experience.37 Links have also been drawn between
religious experience and temporal lobe epilepsy.38

However predisposed the human mind may be to harboring religious beliefs, it
remains a fact that each new generation receives a religious worldview, at
least in part, in the form of linguistic propositions—far more so in some
societies than in others. Whatever the evolutionary underpinnings of religion,
it seems extraordinarily unlikely that there is a genetic explanation for the
fact that the French, Swedes, and Japanese tend not to believe in God while
Americans, Saudis, and Somalis do. Clearly, religion is largely a matter of
what people teach their children to believe about the nature of reality.

