# Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Free Will
[Metadata]: # {03.10}
[Descriptor]: # {03.10}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
The Illusion of Free Will
# The Illusion of Free Will
Brains allow organisms to alter their behavior and internal states in response
to changes in the environment. The evolution of these structures, tending
toward increased size and complexity, has led to vast differences in how the
earth’s species live.

The human brain responds to information coming from several domains: from the
external world, from internal states of the body, and, increasingly, from a
sphere of meaning—which includes spoken and written language, social cues,
cultural norms, rituals of interaction, assumptions about the rationality of
others, judgments of taste and style, etc. Generally, these domains seem
unified in our experience: You spot your best friend standing on the street
corner looking strangely disheveled. You recognize that she is crying and
frantically dialing her cell phone. Did someone assault her? You rush to her
side, feeling an acute desire to help. Your “self” seems to stand at the
intersection of these lines of input and output. From this point of view, you
tend to feel that you are the source of your own thoughts and actions. You
decide what to do and not to do. You seem to be an agent acting of your own
free will. As we will see, however, this point of view cannot be reconciled
with what we know about the human brain.

We are conscious of only a tiny fraction of the information that our brains
process in each moment. While we continually notice changes in our
experience—in thought, mood, perception, behavior, etc.—we are utterly unaware
of the neural events that produce these changes. In fact, by merely glancing at
your face or listening to your tone of voice, others are often more aware of
your internal states and motivations than you are. And yet most of us still
feel that we are the authors of our own thoughts and actions.

All of our behavior can be traced to biological events about which we have no
conscious knowledge: this has always suggested that free will is an illusion.
For instance, the physiologist Benjamin Libet famously demonstrated that
activity in the brain’s motor regions can be detected some 350 milliseconds
before a person feels that he has decided to move.96 Another lab recently used
fMRI data to show that some “conscious” decisions can be predicted up to 10
seconds before they enter awareness (long before the preparatory motor activity
detected by Libet).97 Clearly, findings of this kind are difficult to reconcile
with the sense that one is the conscious source of one’s actions. Notice that
distinction between “higher” and “lower” systems in the brain gets us nowhere:
for I no more initiate events in executive regions of my prefrontal cortex than
I cause the creaturely outbursts of my limbic system. The truth seems
inescapable: I, as the subject of my experience, cannot know what I will next
think or do until a thought or intention arises; and thoughts and intentions
are caused by physical events and mental stirrings of which I am not aware.

Many scientists and philosophers realized long ago that free will could not be
squared with our growing understanding of the physical world.98 Nevertheless,
many still deny this fact.99 The biologist Martin Heisenberg recently observed
that some fundamental processes in the brain, like the opening and closing of
ion channels and the release of synaptic vesicles, occur at random, and cannot,
therefore, be determined by environmental stimuli. Thus, much of our behavior
can be considered “self-generated,” and therein, he imagines, lies a basis for
free will.100 But “self-generated” in this sense means only that these events
originate in the brain. The same can be said for the brain states of a chicken.

If I were to learn that my decision to have a third cup of coffee this morning
was due to a random release of neurotransmitters, how could the indeterminacy
of the initiating event count as the free exercise of my will? Such
indeterminacy, if it were generally effective throughout the brain, would
obliterate any semblance of human agency. Imagine what your life would be like
if all your actions, intentions, beliefs, and desires were “self-generated” in
this way: you would scarcely seem to have a mind at all. You would live as one
blown about by an internal wind. Actions, intentions, beliefs, and desires are
the sorts of things that can exist only in a system that is significantly
constrained by patterns of behavior and the laws of stimulus-response. In fact,
the possibility of reasoning with other human beings—or, indeed, of finding
their behaviors and utterances comprehensible at all—depends on the assumption
that their thoughts and actions will obediently ride the rails of a shared
reality. In the limit, Heisenberg’s “self-generated” mental events would amount
to utter madness.101

The problem is that no account of causality leaves room for free will.
Thoughts, moods, and desires of every sort simply spring into view—and move us,
or fail to move us, for reasons that are, from a subjective point of view,
perfectly inscrutable. Why did I use the term “inscrutable” in the previous
sentence? I must confess that I do not know. Was I free to do otherwise? What
could such a claim possibly mean? Why, after all, didn’t the word “opaque” come
to mind? Well, it just didn’t—and now that it vies for a place on the page, I
find that I am still partial to my original choice. Am I free with respect to
this preference? Am I free to feel that “opaque” is the better word, when I
just do not feel that it is the better word? Am I free to change my mind? Of
course not. It can only change me.

It means nothing to say that a person would have done otherwise had he chosen
to do otherwise, because a person’s “choices” merely appear in his mental
stream as though sprung from the void. In this sense, each of us is like a
phenomenological glockenspiel played by an unseen hand. From the perspective of
your conscious mind, you are no more responsible for the next thing you think
(and therefore do) than you are for the fact that you were born into this
world.102

Our belief in free will arises from our moment-to-moment ignorance of specific
prior causes. The phrase “free will” describes what it feels like to be
identified with the content of each thought as it arises in consciousness.
Trains of thought like, “What should I get my daughter for her birthday? I
know, I’ll take her to a pet store and have her pick out some tropical fish,”
convey the apparent reality of choices, freely made. But from a deeper
perspective (speaking both subjectively and objectively), thoughts simply arise
(what else could they do?) unauthored and yet author to our actions.


As Daniel Dennett has pointed out, many people confuse determinism with
fatalism.103 This gives rise to questions like, “If everything is determined,
why should I do anything? Why not just sit back and see what happens?” But the
fact that our choices depend on prior causes does not mean that they do not
matter. If I had not decided to write this book, it wouldn’t have written
itself. My choice to write it was unquestionably the primary cause of its
coming into being. Decisions, intentions, efforts, goals, willpower, etc., are
causal states of the brain, leading to specific behaviors, and behaviors lead
to outcomes in the world. Human choice, therefore, is as important as fanciers
of free will believe. And to “just sit back and see what happens” is itself a
choice that will produce its own consequences. It is also extremely difficult
to do: just try staying in bed all day waiting for something to happen; you
will find yourself assailed by the impulse to get up and do something, which
will require increasingly heroic efforts to resist.

Of course, there is a distinction between voluntary and involuntary actions,
but it does nothing to support the common idea of free will (nor does it depend
upon it). The former are associated with felt intentions (desires, goals,
expectations, etc.) while the latter are not. All of the conventional
distinctions we like to make between degrees of intent—from the bizarre
neurological complaint of alien hand syndrome104 to the premeditated actions of
a sniper—can be maintained: for they simply describe what else was arising in
the mind at the time an action occurred. A voluntary action is accompanied by
the felt intention to carry it out, while an involuntary action isn’t. Where
our intentions themselves come from, however, and what determines their
character in every instant, remains perfectly mysterious in subjective terms.
Our sense of free will arises from a failure to appreciate this fact: we do not
know what we will intend to do until the intention itself arises. To see this
is to realize that you are not the author of your thoughts and actions in the
way that people generally suppose. This insight does not make social and
political freedom any less important, however. The freedom to do what one
intends, and not to do otherwise, is no less valuable than it ever was.

