# Chapter 5 - ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
[Metadata]: # {06.06}
[Descriptor]: # {06.06}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 5
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Moral Landscape is based, in part, on the dissertation I wrote for my PhD
in neuroscience at the University of California, Los Angeles. Consequently, the
book has benefited greatly from the vetting that this first manuscript received
from my thesis committee. I am extremely grateful to Mark Cohen, Marco
Iacoboni, Eran Zaidel, and Jerome (“Pete”) Engel for their guidance and
support—sustained, as it was, over many years during which the progress of my
scientific research was difficult to discern. Each saved me from myself on
several occasions—and, with unnerving frequency, from one another.

I am especially indebted to Mark Cohen, my dissertation advisor. Mark is an
uncommonly gifted teacher and a model of caution in reporting scientific
results. If our academic interests did not always coincide, I was surely the
poorer for it. I would also like to thank Mark’s wife and colleague, Susan
Bookheimer: I always profited from Susan’s advice—delivered, in my case, with
the compassionate urgency of a mother rescuing a child from a busy
intersection. I am also grateful to Suzie Vader, the smiling face of the
Interdepartmental PhD Program for Neuroscience at UCLA, for providing generous
encouragement and assistance over many years.

Sections of this book are based on two published papers: chapter 3 contains a
discussion of Harris, S., Sheth, S. A., and Cohen, M. S. (2008), Functional
neuroimaging of belief, disbelief, and uncertainty, Annals of Neurology, 63
(2), 141–147; part of chapter 4 is drawn from Harris, S., Kaplan, J. T.,
Curiel, A., Bookheimer, S. Y., Iacoboni, M., Cohen, M. S. (2009), The neural
correlates of religious and nonreligious belief, PLoS ONE 4 (10). I gratefully
acknowledge my coauthors on these works as well as their original publishers. I
would especially like to thank Jonas T. Kaplan, now at the Brain and Creativity
Institute at the University of Southern California, for partnering with me on
the second paper. This study was a joint effort at every stage, and Jonas’s
involvement was essential to its completion.

In addition to my dissertation committee at UCLA, several outside scholars and
scientists reviewed early drafts of this book. Paul Churchland, Daniel Dennett,
Owen Flanagan, and Steven Pinker read the text, in whole or in part, and
offered extremely helpful notes. A few sections contain cannibalized versions
of essays that were first read by a larger circle of scientists and writers:
including Jerry Coyne, Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Owen Flanagan, Anthony
Grayling, Christopher Hitchens, and Steven Pinker. I am pleased to notice that
with friends like these, it has become increasingly difficult to say something
stupid. (Still, one does what one can.) It is an honor to be so deeply in their
debt.

My editor at the Free Press, Hilary Redmon, greatly improved The Moral
Landscape at every level, through several stages of revision. It was simply a
joy to work with her. My agents, John Brockman, Katinka Matson, and Max
Brockman, were extremely helpful in refining my initial conception of the book
and in placing it with the right publisher. Of course, JB, as his friends,
colleagues, and clients well know, is much more than an agent: he has become
the world’s preeminent wrangler of scientific opinion. We are all richer for
his efforts to bring scientists and public intellectuals together through his
Edge Foundation to discuss the most interesting questions of our time.

I have been greatly supported in all things by my family and friends—especially
by my mother, who has always been a most extraordinary friend. She read the
manuscript of The Moral Landscape more than once and offered extremely valuable
notes and copyedits.

My wife, Annaka Harris, has continued to help me professionally on all
fronts—editing my books, essays, and public talks, and helping to run our
nonprofit foundation. If her abundant talent is not evident in every sentence I
produce, it is because I remain a hard case. Annaka has also raised our
daughter, Emma, while I’ve worked, and herein lies the largest debt of all:
much of the time I spent researching and writing The Moral Landscape belonged
to “my girls.”

