# Chapter 3 - A World Without Lying?
[Metadata]: # {04.07}
[Descriptor]: # {04.07}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 3
A World Without Lying?
# A World Without Lying?
Knowing what a person believes is equivalent to knowing whether or not he is
telling the truth. Consequently, any external means of determining which
propositions a subject believes would constitute a de facto “lie detector.”
Neuroimaging research on belief and disbelief may one day enable researchers to
put this equivalence to use in the study of deception.62 It is possible that
this new approach could circumvent many of the impediments that have hindered
the study of deception in the past.

When evaluating the social cost of deception, we need to consider all of the
misdeeds—premeditated murders, terrorist atrocities, genocides, Ponzi schemes,
etc.—that must be nurtured and shored up, at every turn, by lies. Viewed in
this wider context, deception commends itself, perhaps even above violence, as
the principal enemy of human cooperation. Imagine how our world would change
if, when the truth really mattered, it became impossible to lie. What would
international relations be like if every time a person shaded the truth on the
floor of the United Nations an alarm went off throughout the building?

The forensic use of DNA evidence has already made the act of denying one’s
culpability for certain actions comically ineffectual. Recall how Bill
Clinton’s cantatas of indignation were abruptly silenced the moment he learned
that a semen-stained dress was en route to the lab. The mere threat of a DNA
analysis produced what no grand jury ever could—instantaneous communication
with the great man’s conscience, which appeared to be located in another
galaxy. We can be sure that a dependable method of lie detection would produce
similar transformations, on far more consequential subjects.

The development of mind-reading technology is just beginning—but reliable lie
detection will be much easier to achieve than accurate mind reading. Whether or
not we ever crack the neural code, enabling us to download a person’s private
thoughts, memories, and perceptions without distortion, we will almost surely
be able to determine, to a moral certainty, whether a person is representing
his thoughts, memories, and perceptions honestly in conversation. The
development of a reliable lie detector would only require a very modest advance
over what is currently possible through neuroimaging.

Traditional methods for detecting deception through polygraphy never achieved
widespread acceptance,63 as they measure the peripheral signs of emotional
arousal rather than the neural activity associated with deception itself. In
2002, in a 245-page report, the National Research Council (an arm of the
National Academy of Sciences) dismissed the entire body of research underlying
polygraphy as “weak” and “lacking in scientific rigor.”64 More modern
approaches to lie detection, using thermal imaging of the eyes,65 suffer a
similar lack of specificity. Techniques that employ electrical signals at the
scalp to detect “guilty knowledge” have limited application, and it is unclear
how one can use these methods to differentiate guilty knowledge from other
forms of knowledge in any case.66

Methodological problems notwithstanding, it is difficult to exaggerate how
fully our world would change if lie detectors ever became reliable, affordable,
and unobtrusive. Rather than spirit criminal defendants and hedge fund managers
off to the lab for a disconcerting hour of brain scanning, there may come a
time when every courtroom or boardroom will have the requisite technology
discreetly concealed behind its wood paneling. Thereafter, civilized men and
women might share a common presumption: that wherever important conversations
are held, the truthfulness of all participants will be monitored.
Well-intentioned people would happily pass between zones of obligatory candor,
and these transitions will cease to be remarkable. Just as we’ve come to expect
that certain public spaces will be free of nudity, sex, loud swearing, and
cigarette smoke—and now think nothing of the behavioral constraints imposed
upon us whenever we leave the privacy of our homes—we may come to expect that
certain places and occasions will require scrupulous truth telling. Many of us
might no more feel deprived of the freedom to lie during a job interview or at
a press conference than we currently feel deprived of the freedom to remove our
pants in the supermarket. Whether or not the technology works as well as we
hope, the belief that it generally does work would change our culture
profoundly.

In a legal context, some scholars have already begun to worry that reliable lie
detection will constitute an infringement of a person’s Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination.67 However, the Fifth Amendment has
already succumbed to advances in technology. The Supreme Court has ruled that
defendants can be forced to provide samples of their blood, saliva, and other
physical evidence that may incriminate them. Will neuroimaging data be added to
this list, or will it be considered a form of forced testimony? Diaries,
emails, and other records of a person’s thoughts are already freely admissible
as evidence. It is not at all clear that there is a distinction between these
diverse sources of information that should be ethically or legally relevant to
us.

In fact, the prohibition against compelled testimony itself appears to be a
relic of a more superstitious age. It was once widely believed that lying under
oath would damn a person’s soul for eternity, and it was thought that no one,
not even a murderer, should be placed between the rock of Justice and so hard a
place as hell. But I doubt whether even many fundamentalist Christians
currently imagine that an oath sworn on a courtroom Bible has such cosmic
significance.

Of course, no technology is ever perfect. Once we have a proper lie detector in
hand, well-intentioned people will begin to suffer its propensity for positive
and negative error. This will raise ethical and legal concerns. It is
inevitable, however, that we will deem some rate of error to be acceptable. If
you doubt this, remember that we currently lock people away in prison for
decades—or kill them—all the while knowing that some percentage of the
condemned must be innocent, while some percentage of those returned to our
streets will be dangerous psychopaths guaranteed to reoffend. We are currently
living with a system in which the occasional unlucky person gets falsely
convicted of murder, suffers for years in prison in the company of terrifying
predators, only to be finally executed by the state. Consider the tragic case
of Cameron Todd Willingham, who was convicted of setting fire to the family
home and thereby murdering his three children. While protesting his innocence,
Willingham served over a decade on death row and was finally executed. It now
seems that he was almost surely innocent—the victim of a chance electrical
fire, forensic pseudoscience, and of a justice system that has no reliable
means of determining when people are telling the truth.68

We have no choice but to rely upon our criminal justice system, despite the
fact that judges and juries are very poorly calibrated truth detectors, prone
to both type I (false positive) and type II (false negative) errors. Anything
that can improve the performance of this antiquated system, even slightly, will
raise the quotient of justice in our world.69

