# Chapter 4 - Is Religious Belief Special?
[Metadata]: # {05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 4
Is Religious Belief Special?
# Is Religious Belief Special?
While religious faith remains one of the most significant features of human
life, little has been known about its relationship to ordinary belief at the
level of the brain. Nor has it been clear whether religious believers and
nonbelievers differ in how they evaluate statements of fact. Several
neuroimaging and EEG studies have been done on religious practice and
experience—primarily focusing on meditation39 and prayer.40 But the purpose of
this research has been to evoke spiritual/contemplative experiences in
religious subjects and to compare these to more conventional states of
consciousness. None of these studies was designed to isolate belief itself.

Working in Mark Cohen’s cognitive neuroscience lab at UCLA, I published the
first neuroimaging study of belief as a general mode of cognition41 (discussed
in the previous chapter). While another group at the National Institutes of
Health later looked specifically at religious belief,42 no research had
compared these two forms of belief directly. In a subsequent study, Jonas T.
Kaplan and I used fMRI to measure signal changes in the brains of both
Christians and nonbelievers as they evaluated the truth and falsity of
religious and nonreligious propositions.43 For each trial, subjects were
presented with either a religious statement (e.g., “Jesus Christ really
performed the miracles attributed to him in the Bible”) or a nonreligious
statement (e.g., “Alexander the Great was a very famous military leader”), and
they pressed a button to indicate whether the statement was true or false.

For both groups, and in both categories of stimuli, our results were largely
consistent with our earlier findings. Believing a statement to be true was
associated with greater activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), a
region important for self-representation,44 emotional associations,45 reward,46
and goal-driven behavior.47 This area showed greater activity whether subjects
believed statements about God and the Virgin Birth or statements about ordinary
facts.48

Our study was designed to elicit the same responses from the two groups on
nonreligious stimuli (e.g., “Eagles really exist”) and opposite responses on
religious stimuli (e.g., “Angels really exist”). The fact that we obtained
essentially the same result for belief in both devout Christians and
nonbelievers, on both categories of content, argues strongly that the
difference between belief and disbelief is the same, regardless of what is
being thought about.49

While the comparison between belief and disbelief produced similar activity for
both categories of questions, the comparison of all religious thinking to all
nonreligious thinking yielded a wide range of differences throughout the brain.
Religious thinking was associated with greater signal in the anterior insula
and the ventral striatum. The anterior insula has been linked to pain
perception,50 to the perception of pain in others,51 and to negative feelings
like disgust.52 The ventral striatum has been frequently linked to reward.53 It
would not be surprising if religious statements provoked more positive and
negative emotion in both groups of subjects.

It also seems that both Christians and nonbelievers were probably less certain
of their religious beliefs. In our previous study of belief, in which a third
of our stimuli were designed to provoke uncertainty, we found greater signal in
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) when subjects could not assess the
truth-value of a proposition. Here we found that religious thinking (when
compared with nonreligious thinking) elicited this same pattern in both groups.
Both groups also took considerably longer to respond to religious stimuli,
despite the fact that these statements were no more complex than those in the
other category. Perhaps both atheists and religious believers are generally
less sure about the truth and falsity of religious statements.54

Despite vast differences in the underlying processing responsible for religious
and nonreligious modes of thought, the distinction between believing and
disbelieving a proposition appears to transcend content. Our research suggests
that these opposing states of mind can be detected by current techniques of
neuroimaging and are intimately tied to networks involved in
self-representation and reward. These findings may have many areas of
application—ranging from the neuropsychology of religion, to the use of “belief
detection” as a surrogate for “lie detection,” to understanding how the
practice of science itself, and truth claims generally, emerge from the biology
of the human brain. And again, results of this kind further suggest that a
sharp boundary between facts and values does not exist as a matter of human
cognition.

