# Chapter 2 - Bewildered by Diversity
[Metadata]: # {03.06}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Bewildered by Diversity
# Bewildered by Diversity
The psychologist Jonathan Haidt has put forward a very influential thesis about
moral judgment known as the “social-intuitionist model.” In a widely referenced
article entitled “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail,” Haidt summarizes
our predicament this way:



[O]ur moral life is plagued by two illusions. The first illusion can be called
the “wag-the-dog” illusion: We believe that our own moral judgment (the dog) is
driven by our own moral reasoning (the tail). The second illusion can be called
the “wag-the-other-dog’s-tail” illusion: In a moral argument, we expect the
successful rebuttal of our opponents’ arguments to change our opponents’ minds.
Such a belief is analogous to believing that forcing a dog’s tail to wag by
moving it with your hand should make the dog happy.53



Haidt does not go so far as to say that reasoning never produces moral
judgments; he simply argues that this happens far less often than people think.
Haidt is pessimistic about our ever making realistic claims about right and
wrong, or good and evil, because he has observed that human beings tend to make
moral decisions on the basis of emotion, justify these decisions with post hoc
reasoning, and stick to their guns even when their reasoning demonstrably
fails. He notes that when asked to justify their responses to specific moral
(and pseudo-moral) dilemmas, people are often “morally dumbfounded.” His
experimental subjects would “stutter, laugh, and express surprise at their
inability to find supporting reasons, yet they would not change their initial
judgments …”

The same can be said, however, about our failures to reason effectively.
Consider the Monty Hall Problem (based on the television game show Let’s Make a
Deal). Imagine that you are a contestant on a game show and presented with
three closed doors: behind one sits a new car; the other two conceal goats.
Pick the correct door, and the car is yours.

The game proceeds this way: Assume that you have chosen Door #1. Your host then
opens Door #2, revealing a goat. He now gives you a chance to switch your bet
from Door #1 to the remaining Door #3. Should you switch? The correct answer is
“yes.” But most people find this answer very perplexing, as it violates the
common intuition that, with two unopened doors remaining, the odds must be 1 in
2 that the car will be behind either one of them. If you stick with your
initial choice, however, your odds of winning are actually 1 in 3. If you
switch, your odds increase to 2 in 3.54

It would be fair to say that the Monty Hall problem leaves many of its victims
“logically dumbfounded.” Even when people understand conceptually why they
should switch doors, they can’t shake their initial intuition that each door
represents a 1/2 chance of success. This reliable failure of human reasoning is
just that—a failure of reasoning. It does not suggest that there is no correct
answer to the Monty Hall problem.

And yet scientists like Joshua Greene and Jonathan Haidt seem to think that the
very existence of moral controversy nullifies the possibility of moral truth.
In their opinion, all we can do is study what human beings do in the name of
“morality.” Thus, if religious conservatives find the prospect of gay marriage
abhorrent, and secular liberals find it perfectly acceptable, we are confronted
by a mere difference of moral preference—not a difference that relates to any
deeper truths about human life.

In opposition to the liberal notion of morality as being a system of
“prescriptive judgments of justice, rights, and welfare pertaining to how
people ought to relate to each other,” Haidt asks us to ponder mysteries of the
following sort:



[I]f morality is about how we treat each other, then why did so many ancient
texts devote so much space to rules about menstruation, who can eat what, and
who can have sex with whom?55



Interesting question. Are these the same ancient texts that view slavery as
morally unproblematic? Perhaps slavery has no moral implications after
all—otherwise, surely these ancient texts would have something of substance to
say against it. Could abolition have been the ultimate instance of liberal
bias? Or, following Haidt’s logic, why not ask, “if physics is just a system of
laws that explains the structure of the universe in terms of mass and energy,
why do so many ancient texts devote so much space to immaterial influences and
miraculous acts of God?” Why indeed.

Haidt appears to consider it an intellectual virtue to accept, uncritically,
the moral categories of his subjects. But where is it written that everything
that people do or decide in the name of “morality” deserves to be considered
part of its subject matter? A majority of Americans believe that the Bible
provides an accurate account of the ancient world. Many millions of Americans
also believe that a principal cause of cancer is “repressed anger.” Happily, we
do not allow these opinions to anchor us when it comes time to have serious
discussions about history and oncology. It seems abundantly clear that many
people are simply wrong about morality—just as many people are wrong about
physics, biology, history, and everything else worth understanding. What
scientific purpose is served by averting our eyes from this fact? If morality
is a system of thinking about (and maximizing) the well-being of conscious
creatures like ourselves, many people’s moral concerns must be immoral.


Moral skeptics like Haidt generally emphasize the intractability of moral
disagreements:



The bitterness, futility, and self-righteousness of most moral arguments can
now be explicated. In a debate about abortion, politics, consensual incest, or
what my friend did to your friend, both sides believe that their positions are
based on reasoning about the facts and issues involved (the wag-the-dog
illusion). Both sides present what they take to be excellent arguments in
support of their positions. Both sides expect the other side to be responsive
to such reasons (the wag-the-other-dog’s-tail illusion). When the other side
fails to be affected by such good reasons, each side concludes that the other
side must be closed minded or insincere. In this way the culture wars over
issues such as homosexuality and abortion can generate morally motivated
players on both sides who believe that their opponents are not morally
motivated.56



But the dynamic Haidt describes will be familiar to anyone who has ever entered
into a debate on any subject. Such failures of persuasion do not suggest that
both sides of every controversy are equally credible. For instance, the above
passage perfectly captures my occasional collisions with 9/11 conspiracy
theorists. A nationwide poll conducted by the Scripps Survey Research Center at
Ohio University found that more than a third of Americans suspect that the
federal government “assisted in the 9/11 terrorist attacks or took no action to
stop them so the United States could go to war in the Middle East” and 16
percent believe that this proposition is “very likely” to be true.57 Many of
these people believe that the Twin Towers collapsed not because fully fueled
passenger jets smashed into them but because agents of the Bush administration
had secretly rigged these buildings to explode (6 percent of all respondents
judged this “very likely,” 10 percent judged it “somewhat likely”). Whenever I
encounter people harboring these convictions, the impasse that Haidt describes
is well in place: both sides “present what they take to be excellent arguments
in support of their positions. Both sides expect the other side to be
responsive to such reasons (the wag-the-other-dog’s-tail illusion). When the
other side fails to be affected by such good reasons, each side concludes that
the other side must be closed minded or insincere.” It is undeniable, however,
that if one side in this debate is right about what actually happened on
September 11, 2001, the other side must be absolutely wrong.

Of course, it is now well known that our feeling of reasoning objectively is
often illusory.58 This does not mean, however, that we cannot learn to reason
more effectively, pay greater attention to evidence, and grow more mindful of
the ever-present possibility of error. Haidt is right to notice that the
brain’s emotional circuitry often governs our moral intuitions, and the way in
which feeling drives judgment is surely worthy of study. But it does not follow
that there are no right and wrong answers to questions of morality. Just as
people are often less than rational when claiming to be rational, they can be
less than moral when claiming to be moral.


In describing the different forms of morality available to us, Haidt offers a
choice between “contractual” and “beehive” approaches: the first is said to be
the province of liberals, who care mainly about harm and fairness; the second
represents the conservative (generally religious) social order, which
incorporates further concerns about group loyalty, respect for authority, and
religious purity. The opposition between these two conceptions of the good life
may be worth discussing, and Haidt’s data on the differences between liberals
and conservatives is interesting, but is his interpretation correct? It seems
possible, for instance, that his five foundations of morality are simply facets
of a more general concern about harm.

What, after all, is the problem with desecrating a copy of the Qur’an? There
would be no problem but for the fact that people believe that the Qur’an is a
divinely authored text. Such people almost surely believe that some harm could
come to them or to their tribe as a result of such sacrileges—if not in this
world, then in the next. A more esoteric view might be that any person who
desecrates scripture will have harmed himself directly: a lack of reverence
might be its own punishment, dimming the eyes of faith. Whatever interpretation
one favors, sacredness and respect for religious authority seem to reduce to a
concern about harm just the same.

The same point can be made in the opposite direction: even a liberal like
myself, enamored as I am of thinking in terms of harm and fairness, can readily
see that my vision of the good life must be safeguarded from the aggressive
tribalism of others. When I search my heart, I discover that I want to keep the
barbarians beyond the city walls just as much as my conservative neighbors do,
and I recognize that sacrifices of my own freedom may be warranted for this
purpose. I expect that epiphanies of this sort could well multiply in the
coming years. Just imagine, for instance, how liberals might be disposed to
think about the threat of Islam after an incident of nuclear terrorism. Liberal
hankering for happiness and freedom might one day produce some very strident
calls for stricter laws and tribal loyalty. Will this mean that liberals have
become religious conservatives pining for the beehive? Or is the liberal notion
of avoiding harm flexible enough to encompass the need for order and
differences between in-group and out-group?

There is also the question of whether conservatism contains an extra measure of
cognitive bias—or outright hypocrisy—as the moral convictions of social
conservatives are so regularly belied by their louche behavior. The most
conservative regions of the United States tend to have the highest rates of
divorce and teenage pregnancy, as well as the greatest appetite for
pornography.59 Of course, it could be argued that social conservatism is the
consequence of so much ambient sinning. But this seems an unlikely
explanation—especially in those cases where a high level of conservative
moralism and a predilection for sin can be found in a single person. If one
wants examples of such hypocrisy, Evangelical ministers and conservative
politicians seem to rarely disappoint.

When is a belief system not only false but so encouraging of falsity and
needless suffering as to be worthy of our condemnation? According to a recent
poll, 36 percent of British Muslims (ages sixteen to twenty-four) think
apostates should be put to death for their unbelief.60 Are these people
“morally motivated,” in Haidt’s sense, or just morally confused?

And what if certain cultures are found to harbor moral codes that look terrible
no matter how we jigger Haidt’s five variables of harm, fairness, group
loyalty, respect for authority, and spiritual purity? What if we find a group
of people who aren’t especially sensitive to harm and fairness, or cognizant of
the sacred, or morally astute in any other way? Would Haidt’s conception of
morality then allow us to stop these benighted people from abusing their
children? Or would that be unscientific?

