# Introduction - The Problem of Religion
[Metadata]: # {01.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.06}
[Author]: # {harris}
Introduction
The Problem of Religion
# The Problem of Religion
Anyone who wants to understand the world should be open to new facts and new
arguments, even on subjects where his or her views are very well established.
Similarly, anyone truly interested in morality—in the principles of behavior
that allow people to flourish—should be open to new evidence and new arguments
that bear upon questions of happiness and suffering. Clearly, the chief enemy
of open conversation is dogmatism in all its forms. Dogmatism is a
well-recognized obstacle to scientific reasoning; and yet, because scientists
have been reluctant even to imagine that they might have something prescriptive
to say about values, dogmatism is still granted remarkable scope on questions
of both truth and goodness under the banner of religion.

In the fall of 2006, I participated in a three-day conference at the Salk
Institute entitled Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason, and Survival. This
event was organized by Roger Bingham and conducted as a town-hall meeting
before an audience of invited guests. Speakers included Steven Weinberg, Harold
Kroto, Richard Dawkins, and many other scientists and philosophers who have
been, and remain, energetic opponents of religious dogmatism and superstition.
It was a room full of highly intelligent, scientifically literate
people—molecular biologists, anthropologists, physicists, and engineers—and
yet, to my amazement, three days were insufficient to force agreement on the
simple question of whether there is any conflict at all between religion and
science. Imagine a meeting of mountaineers unable to agree about whether their
sport ever entails walking uphill, and you will get a sense of how bizarre our
deliberations began to seem.

While at Salk, I witnessed scientists giving voice to some of the most
dishonest religious apologies I have ever heard. It is one thing to be told
that the pope is a peerless champion of reason and that his opposition to
embryonic stem-cell research is both morally principled and completely
uncontaminated by religious dogmatism; it is quite another to be told this by a
Stanford physician who sits on the President’s Council on Bioethics.28 Over the
course of the conference, I had the pleasure of hearing that Hitler, Stalin,
and Mao were examples of secular reason run amok, that the Islamic doctrines of
martyrdom and jihad are not the cause of Islamic terrorism, that people can
never be argued out of their beliefs because we live in an irrational world,
that science has made no important contributions to our ethical lives (and
cannot), and that it is not the job of scientists to undermine ancient
mythologies and, thereby, “take away people’s hope”—all from atheist scientists
who, while insisting on their own skeptical hardheadedness, were equally
adamant that there was something feckless and foolhardy, even indecent, about
criticizing religious belief. There were several moments during our panel
discussions that brought to mind the final scene of Invasion of the Body
Snatchers: people who looked like scientists, had published as scientists, and
would soon be returning to their labs, nevertheless gave voice to the alien
hiss of religious obscurantism at the slightest prodding. I had previously
imagined that the front lines in our culture wars were to be found at the
entrance to a megachurch. I now realized that we have considerable work to do
in a nearer trench.

I have made the case elsewhere that religion and science are in a zero-sum
conflict with respect to facts.29 Here, I have begun to argue that the division
between facts and values is intellectually unsustainable, especially from the
perspective of neuroscience. Consequently, it should come as no surprise that I
see very little room for compromise between faith and reason on questions of
morality. While religion is not the primary focus of this book, any discussion
about the relationship between facts and values, the nature of belief, and the
role of science in public discourse must continually labor under the burden of
religious opinion. I will, therefore, examine the conflict between religion and
science in greater depth in chapter 4.

But there is no mystery why many scientists feel that they must pretend that
religion and science are compatible. We have recently emerged—some of us
leaping, some shuffling, others crawling—out of many dark centuries of
religious bewilderment and persecution, into an age when mainstream science is
still occasionally treated with overt hostility by the general public and even
by governments.30 While few scientists living in the West now fear torture or
death at the hands of religious fanatics, many will voice concerns about losing
their funding if they give offense to religion, particularly in the United
States. It also seems that, given the relative poverty of science, wealthy
organizations like the Templeton Foundation (whose endowment currently stands
at $1.5 billion) have managed to convince some scientists and science
journalists that it is wise to split the difference between intellectual
integrity and the fantasies of a prior age.

Because there are no easy remedies for social inequality, many scientists and
public intellectuals also believe that the great masses of humanity are best
kept sedated by pious delusions. Many assert that, while they can get along
just fine without an imaginary friend, most human beings will always need to
believe in God. In my experience, people holding this opinion never seem to
notice how condescending, unimaginative, and pessimistic a view it is of the
rest of humanity—and of generations to come.

There are social, economic, environmental, and geopolitical costs to this
strategy of benign neglect—ranging from personal hypocrisy to public policies
that needlessly undermine the health and safety of millions. Nevertheless, many
scientists seem to worry that subjecting people’s religious beliefs to
criticism will start a war of ideas that science cannot win. I believe that
they are wrong. More important, I am confident that we will eventually have no
choice in the matter. Zero-sum conflicts have a way of becoming explicit.

Here is our situation: if the basic claims of religion are true, the scientific
worldview is so blinkered and susceptible to supernatural modification as to be
rendered nearly ridiculous; if the basic claims of religion are false, most
people are profoundly confused about the nature of reality, confounded by
irrational hopes and fears, and tending to waste precious time and
attention—often with tragic results. Is this really a dichotomy about which
science can claim to be neutral?

The deference and condescension of most scientists on these subjects is part of
a larger problem in public discourse: people tend not to speak honestly about
the nature of belief, about the invidious gulf between science and religion as
modes of thought, or about the real sources of moral progress. Whatever is true
about us, ethically and spiritually, is discoverable in the present and can be
talked about in terms that are not an outright affront to our growing
understanding of the world. It makes no sense at all to have the most important
features of our lives anchored to divisive claims about the unique sanctity of
ancient books or to rumors of ancient miracles. There is simply no question
that how we speak about human values—and how we study or fail to study the
relevant phenomena at the level of the brain—will profoundly influence our
collective future.

