# Chapter 2 - Psychopaths
[Metadata]: # {03.08}
[Descriptor]: # {03.08}
[Author]: # {harris}
Chapter 2
Psychopaths
# Psychopaths
In order to understand the relationship between the mind and the brain, it is
often useful to study subjects who, whether through illness or injury, lack
specific mental capacities. As luck would have it, Mother Nature has provided
us with a nearly perfect dissection of conventional morality. The resulting
persons are generally referred to as “psychopaths” or “sociopaths,”72 and there
seem to be many more of them living among us than most of us realize. Studying
their brains has yielded considerable insight into the neural basis of
conventional morality.

As a personality disorder, psychopathy has been so sensationalized in the media
that it is difficult to research it without feeling that one is pandering,
either to oneself or to one’s audience. However, there is no question that
psychopaths exist, and many of them speak openly about the pleasure they take
in terrorizing and torturing innocent people. The extreme examples, which
include serial killers and sexual sadists, seem to defy any sympathetic
understanding on our parts. Indeed, if you immerse yourself in this literature,
each case begins to seem more horrible and incomprehensible than the last.
While I am reluctant to traffic in the details of these crimes, I fear that
speaking in abstractions may obscure the underlying reality. Despite a steady
diet of news, which provides a daily reminder of human evil, it can be
difficult to remember that certain people truly lack the capacity to care about
their fellow human beings. Consider the statement of a man who was convicted of
repeatedly raping and torturing his nine-year-old stepson:



After about two years of molesting my son, and all the pornography that I had
been buying, renting, swapping, I had got my hands on some “bondage discipline”
pornography with children involved. Some of the reading that I had done and the
pictures that I had seen showed total submission. Forcing the children to do
what I wanted.



And I eventually started using some of this bondage discipline with my own son,
and it had escalated to the point where I was putting a large Zip-loc bag over
his head and taping it around his neck with black duct tape or black electrical
tape and raping and molesting him … to the point where he would turn blue, pass
out. At that point I would rip the bag off his head, not for fear of hurting
him, but because of the excitement.



I was extremely aroused by inflicting pain. And when I see him pass out and
change colors, that was very arousing and heightening to me, and I would rip
the bag off his head and then I’d jump on his chest and masturbate in his face
and make him suck my penis while he … started to come back awake. While he was
coughing and choking, I would rape him in the mouth.



I used this same sadistic style of plastic bag and the tape two or three times
a week, and it went on for I’d say a little over a year.73

I suspect that this brief glimpse of one man’s private passions will suffice to
make the point. Be assured that this is not the worst abuse a man or woman has
ever inflicted upon a child just for the fun of it. And one remarkable feature
of the literature on psychopaths is the extent to which even the worst people
are able to find collaborators. For instance, the role played by violent
pornography in these cases is difficult to overlook. Child pornography
alone—which, as many have noted, is the visual record of an actual crime—is now
a global, multibillion-dollar industry, involving kidnapping, “sex tourism,”
organized crime, and great technical sophistication in the use of the internet.
Apparently, there are enough people who are eager to see children—and,
increasingly, toddlers and infants—raped and tortured so as to create an entire
subculture.74





While psychopaths are especially well represented in our prisons,75 many live
below the threshold of overt criminality. For every psychopath who murders a
child, there are tens of thousands who are guilty of far more conventional
mischief. Robert Hare, the creator of the standard diagnostic instrument to
assess psychopathy, the Psychopathy Checklist–Revised (PCL–R), estimates that
while there are probably no more than a hundred serial killers in the United
States at any moment, there are probably 3 million psychopaths (about 1 percent
of the population).76 If Hare is correct, each of us crosses paths with such
people all the time.

For instance, I recently met a man who took considerable pride in having
arranged his life so as to cheat on his wife with impunity. In fact, he was
also cheating on the many women with whom he was cheating—for each believed him
to be faithful. All this gallantry involved aliases, fake businesses, and,
needless to say, a blizzard of lies. While I can’t say for certain this man was
a psychopath, it was quite apparent that he lacked what most of us would
consider a normal conscience. A life of continuous deception and selfish
machination seemed to cause him no discomfort whatsoever.77

Psychopaths are distinguished by their extraordinary egocentricity and their
total lack of concern for the suffering of others. A list of their most
frequent characteristics reads like a personal ad from hell: they are said to
be callous, manipulative, deceptive, impulsive, secretive, grandiose,
thrill-seeking, sexually promiscuous, unfaithful, irresponsible, prone to both
reactive and calculated aggression,78 and lacking in emotional depth. They also
show reduced emotional sensitivity to punishment (whether actual or
anticipated). Most important, psychopaths do not experience a normal range of
anxiety and fear, and this may account for their lack of conscience.

The first neuroimaging experiment done on psychopaths found that, when compared
to nonpsychopathic criminals and noncriminal controls, they exhibit
significantly less activity in regions of the brain that generally respond to
emotional stimuli.79 While anxiety and fear are emotions that most of us would
prefer to live without, they serve as anchors to social and moral norms.80
Without an ability to feel anxious about one’s own transgressions, real or
imagined, norms become nothing more than “rules that others make up.”81 The
developmental literature also supports this interpretation: fearful children
have been shown to display greater moral understanding.82 It remains an open
question, therefore, just how free of anxiety we can reasonably want to be.
Again, this is something that only an empirical science of morality could
decide. And as more effective remedies for anxiety appear on the horizon, this
is an issue that we will have to confront in some form.

Further neuroimaging work suggests that psychopathy is also a product of
pathological arousal and reward.83 People scoring high on the psychopathic
personality inventory show abnormally high activity in the reward regions of
their brain (in particular, the nucleus accumbens) in response to amphetamine
and while anticipating monetary gains. Hypersensitivity of this circuitry is
especially linked to the impulsive-antisocial dimension of psychopathy, which
leads to risky and predatory behavior. Researchers speculate that an excessive
response to anticipated reward can prevent a person from learning from the
negative emotions of others.

Unlike others who suffer from mental illness or mood disorders, psychopaths
generally do not feel that anything is wrong with them. They also meet the
legal definition of sanity, in that they possess an intellectual understanding
of the difference between right and wrong. However, psychopaths generally fail
to distinguish between conventional and moral transgressions. When asked “Would
it be okay to eat at your desk if the teacher gave you permission?” vs. “Would
it be okay to hit another student in the face if the teacher gave you
permission?” normal children age thirty-nine months and above tend to see these
questions as fundamentally distinct and consider the latter transgression
intrinsically wrong. In this, they appear to be guided by an awareness of
potential human suffering. Children at risk for psychopathy tend to view these
questions as morally indistinguishable.

When asked to identify the mental states of other people on the basis of
photographs of their eyes alone, psychopaths show no general impairment.84
Their “theory of mind” processing (as the ability to understand the mental
states of others is generally known) seems to be basically intact, with subtle
deficits resulting from their simply not caring about how other people feel.85
The one crucial exception, however, is that psychopaths are often unable to
recognize expressions of fear and sadness in others.86 And this may be the
difference that makes all the difference.

Neuroscientist James Blair and colleagues suggest that psychopathy results from
a failure of emotional learning due to genetic impairments of the amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex, regions vital to the processing of emotion.87 The
negative emotions of others, rather than parental punishment, may be what goad
us to normal socialization. Psychopathy, therefore, could result from a failure
to learn from the fear and sadness of other people.88

A child at risk for psychopathy, being emotionally blind to the suffering he
causes, may increasingly resort to antisocial behavior in pursuit of his goals
throughout adolescence and adulthood.89 As Blair points out, parenting
strategies that increase empathy tend to successfully mitigate antisocial
behavior in healthy children; such strategies inevitably fail with children who
present with the callousness/unemotional (CU) trait that is characteristic of
psychopathy. While it may be difficult to accept, the research strongly
suggests that some people cannot learn to care about others.90 Perhaps we will
one day develop interventions to change this. For the purposes of this
discussion, however, it seems sufficient to point out that we are beginning to
understand the kinds of brain pathologies that lead to the most extreme forms
of human evil. And just as some people have obvious moral deficits, others must
possess moral talent, moral expertise, and even moral genius. As with any human
ability, these gradations must be expressed at the level of the brain.


Game theory suggests that evolution probably selected for two stable
orientations toward human cooperation: tit for tat (often called “strong
reciprocity”) and permanent defection.91 Tit for tat is generally what we see
throughout society: you show me some kindness, and I am eager to return the
favor; you do something rude or injurious, and the temptation to respond in
kind becomes difficult to resist. But consider how permanent defection would
appear at the level of human relationships: the defector would probably engage
in continuous cheating and manipulation, sham moralistic aggression (to provoke
guilt and altruism in others), and strategic mimicry of positive social
emotions like sympathy (as well as of negative emotions like guilt). This
begins to sound like garden-variety psychopathy. The existence of psychopaths,
while otherwise quite mysterious, would seem to be predicted by game theory.
And yet, the psychopath who lives his entire life in a tiny village must be at
a terrible disadvantage. The stability of permanent defection as a strategy
would require that a defector be able to find people to fleece who are not yet
aware of his terrible reputation. Needless to say, the growth of cities has
made this way of life far more practicable than it has ever been.

