"It's either right or it's not, I can't give you partial credit when you
clearly don't have a grasp on the material."

Damien adjusted his glasses as he sat back in his chair and continued to
explain to the student that he wasn't going to budge on this issue.

"But I tried my best. Other TA's will give me partial credit if I at least show
some work, but you have just marked the answer as wrong completely. That's just
mean."

Damien took a sigh. He didn't want to give this student a lecture, but he was
being persistent, and he decided that it would be best to lecture him to
persuade him to leave so he could get back to his work. He had a lot of grading
to do.

"Listen, I don't want to be rude, but you clearly don't grasp the concepts.
I've tried to explain why you were inncorrect on the problem, but instead of
trying to listen to me, you simply go on about how I should award you partial
credit. You clearly don't want to understand the principles of elementary
physics, and I get it, you're not a physicist and you don't want to become one.
You are probably just attending this class because it's required for your
major, and you're hoping that with just a few more points, this grade won't
injure your GPA too drasticically. I get it. But here is the thing."

Damien leaned forward a bit in his chair as he said this, and brought his arms
forward to gesture with them. He liked this particular speech, and he would use
grand gestures to give it.

"All of science, especially Physics, is not about what you think it should be.
A century ago, we thought that the way the world should work is that time and
space should be seperate things, and we created laws to govern that. But then
physicists came along and showed us that time and space aren't seperate things,
and that the world isn't like we thought. And I'm not here to lecture you on
special relativity when you can't even grasp the basics of mechanics. But my
point is, the world is what it is, and no ammount of believing or hoping that
the world is a certain way will change the way the world is. You see that?
Physics seeks to answer the question, 'how does everything work', and if you
think you have it right, but then you do some experiments, and it turns out
that the experiments don't match what you thought, then you have to say, 'I got
it wrong, there is something about the world that I don't understand, and I
have to use my intellect to try and find it'. The world does not give partial
credit, and neither will I. If you show me that you wanted to understand, then
I would be lenient. If you would listen to my explanations of why you are
wrong, then I could see that there might be some saving you. But you cling on
to your false view of the world. You refuse to reject your hypothesis. When you
are proven wrong, when you are shown taht you are incorrect in your thinking,
instead of coming to me and consulting me on how you could be correct, you say,
'I know it is not correct, but I want to go on living knowing that it is not
correct, and I want to get partial credit for my flawed thinking.' To that I
reply, 'Those that are not willing to see the truth should not be given partial
credit. It is only those that are willing to reject what they thought they
knew, and rediscover the truth anew that I am willing to reason with.' So
enough of this talk, you got the problem wrong, and I will not give partial
credit to you simply for the fact that you were close. You want your incorrect
answer to be correct, and that goes against the principles of science. That is
all."

The student had tried stammering, the student had tried pleading, and after
this speech, the student could do nothing but feel defeated. "Okay, well thank
you for your time." The student walked out.

As the student walked out, Damien looked around the open door. He had had a
line of students that all wanted partial credit for various questions. Such was
the nature of final exam season. But as he looked out and watched this student
walk away, he looked out his door and saw that there were no more students
outside his office. He stood up for a bit and looked out his window. His view
was not particularly striking, but at least he could see the sun.

Damien heard the buzz of his phone vibrate on his desk. He looked over and saw
that it was an email. An email from an organization called The Buddhist
Society.

"Odd" was the first thought that came into his head. Damien wasn't sure why he
would be getting an email from them. He opened the email and saw the subject
line "Concerning Brett".

Brett had been a friend to Damien in his undergraduate years. Damien and Brett
were always good friends, and since they had graduated, even though they went
their seperate ways, they would still keep in touch. When it came to their view
of the world, they were complete opposites, and that was why they became such
good friends. Brett and Damien would often have long discussion about the
nature of the universe. Brett would always take the side of the spiritual or
the occult, where as Damien would always take the side of the skeptic or the
athiest. Brett had grown up in a sheltered Christian upbringing, but when he
came to college, he could see that Brett was struggling with his faith. From
talking with him, Damien knew that Brett had mostly rejected the notions of
Christianity, but he could also see that he was not eager to let go of the fact
that "there has to be something out there that's bigger then us." That would be
what Brett would say often. Damien would always provide his point of view, that
until science advanced far enough it was silly to have faith in something that
we weren't able to prove exists, but Brett would always reply with skepticism.
"It can't have just come from nothing, there has to be something that all of
this came from."

Damien saw Brett go through many phases. First he saw Brett's questioning of
the Christian faith. This followed by an extremely nihilistic phase. Damien was
even concerned that Brett might commit suicide during this point, but he never
called the authorities. Damien would get wrapped up in his own work and forget
Brett for a while, but he would always be there to talk about the nature of the
universe.

Eventually, Brett started getting into conspiricy theories. He started talking
about how the government is hiding all of these things, and how the government
is blinding us. Damien knew that there must be some truth in these theories,
but Damien reasoned that this was probably Brett just grasping for something to
grab a handle on, anything to find the nature of the world, and the fact that
he felt he had been lied to about Christianity meant that he felt that whatever
it was that was true had to be something that was being repressed from the
people. Psychologically it made sense to Damien, but analytically he knew that
it was absurd.

Eventually, Brett became almost a zealot for the Flat-Earth theory. "Look into
it man, I'm telling you, their hiding it, it's got to be flat, there's no way
it's a ball."

Damien could only laugh. "I have looked into it, I look into it everyday, it's
what I'm studying in school."

"But school is just an organization, and like every orginazation it's under
their control. What you're studying doesn't prove anything about the earth, it
only proves things about flying balls and levers, this is totally different,
it's bigger than you man."

Eventually, when both realized that neither would budge on the topic, they
would end up not having this sort of conversation anymore. They would talk
about other things, more interesting things, and any time the topic would
devolve into the topic of Flat-Earth, they would sort of mock eachother and
laugh about it.

Since they graduated they hadn't talked much, but now he was getting this
email, an email from the Buddhist Society, that had Brett in the subject line.

"Seems he's gotten into Buddhism for now." Damien closed his phone and left the
email unopened. It was probably some story about how Buddhism is the true way,
and he was going to give me irrefutable proof that this was the case. Damien
didn't really care. 

Although the email said "Concerning Brett," as if something had happened to
him.
