#Prologue
To whoever may be reading this, I'm sorry, your fate is not pleasant. But if
you are reading this, it means that your friend is dead. For that I am sorry.
However, there are so many more important things than the death of your friend
that I need to tell you. This is of the utmost importance, and I am afraid that
my time is short, so I need to write down everything as I have seen as clearly
as I can so that I can get my message to you. I will attempt to be lucid, but
it will become clear as you read that such a task is near impossible given the
cirucumstances. However, I will try.

I have visited god. And I intentionally use the lowercase so that you are not
confused. This is not the God of myths and legends, not the God of the bible or
the gods of the Greeks. This is the actual god. The one that created our
universe. Let me back up.

As you almost definitely know, I am a hermit. I have been living in this
hermatage for quite a good many years. Since my coming of age I have taken a
vow of hermatiage through the Buddhist monestary. They have set up this
wonderful establishment which I have been blessed enough to call my home for my
life since that day. My days consist of cultivating my garden, and managing my
respectable coop of chicken. Between the vegatables that grow and the eggs that
the chickens produces, I am able to subsist entirely on the food provided to me.
My days are spent mostly in quiet meditation.

But enough about my hermit life, if you want to know more you can inquire with
the monestary. What I need to tell you is something that happened to me,
something that has changed my perception of the world, and everything I believe
in.

Before I talk about my experience, I need to write something down first. I was
told, the people's that will be reading this, you will all four be reading it
over the death of a beloved mutual friend. You might not all know eachother,
but you will all have different backgrounds, and each of you will be equipped
to handle this news in a different way. I was told to tell you, since the
consensus among you, as it should be, will be one on skepticism, to go to a
cave that is seven kilometers through the forest in the south easterly
direction. There is something of a path to this cave, but I have been told that
you must find it on your own, and you must not tell anyone about this cave
before or after the experience you have there. I have ventured into this cave,
and any doubts of my experience were instantly released. I was told not to
describe my experience in the cave, but I have just arrived back from there and
I can do nothing but write everything about what led me to that cave so that
you may see and judge for yourself my story. Again, I must urge you to visit
this cave, exactly in this way. I have been told that it is of vital importance
that you four visit the cave alone. Visit the cave before you judge my story.
After that, it is out of my hands what happens there.

So let me go back a couple of days, and tell you of my experience from the
beginning.

It was becoming winter as it does. The snow was beginning to fall in the
forest, and I was nearing the end of my regular fasting time for this point in
the year. I had harvested my garden and kept a good store of food for the
winter, so I was well equiped to handle this period of weather. I actually
quite like this time, I find I become the most connected with the world and
with myself.

Towards the end of my fast, I was in with my coop of chickens, gathering the
eggs as I always do, and as I was towards the wall I saw slithering between the
crack there a cobra. My back was to the wall, so I did not see it at first,
but I noticed my Hens cawing and flying away from me. I followed the eyes of my
chicken to see what they were looking at, and I immedietly saw the cobra. I
jumped back in alarm, but I knew that this snake had to be taken care of. I had
attended to snakes before, but never one this large or menacing. It slid on
it's belly up to me, and if it were creating a perimeter around the coop, and
my chickens I made sure first of all that they were safe in the corner.

I stood there, between the snake and the chickens, and I knew that I had to
act. Before I could do anything thouht, the snake started to come up onto it's
tail, and make itself tall before me. It's head came up to waist height. I had
not encountered so aggressive a snake before, and I was acting on pure
instinct. It moved around as snakes do, it's head bobbing ever so slightly up
and down, and as I was attempting to discern my course of action, the snake
suddenly pounced to me. It jumped and bit my left forearm. It sunk it's teeth
in, and I could immedieatly feel it's venom come into me. Grabbed it with my
free hand by the head, and I attempted to pull it away from me. It released
it's grip, and I threw it with my free hand against the other side of the coop.
I fell down, and started feeling delerious. The last thing I remember in my
waking moments there, was the snake turning towards me and hissing, almost as
if it were satisfied, before it slithered away back through the crack it came.

As I saw the snake slithering away, I lied there. My vision started to
deteriorate rapidly, and my world began to turn to black right away. My last
thought was "this is the end" and I fell into something akin to the deepest
sleep anyone has ever known.

How long I stayed in this sleep, none can know. I had many fleeting visions,
nightmares, of burning children, and images, faces, that I had never seen
before, of people being tortured, and I was chained, not by any physical
chains, but I was chained by paralysis. I could not move myself at all. In
fact, it was near impossible to say what "myself" was at that point. I did not
even have a body. I just remember there being fleeting images of tortured
souls. These images would not last long, and it seemed as soon as I started to
fixate on any image, it would go away, and be replaced by another one in a
different point.

How long I stayed in this state of delerium I do not know. It felt as if it
were an eternity, but the notion of time was not there. It was like a
nightmare, but unlike any nightmare that I had experienced before. It was like
a dream in that I did not have my full capacity of thought. I did not have my
rationality. I did not understand what was happening, nor did even have the
capacity to know that this were something I did not understand.

After this eternity of images and nightmares, of which I was constanly
attempting in vain to shrink away from, the first thing I remember where I
started to become lucid again was a distant light. It was a light that was like
one of these visions, but like I said, it was distant, but it grew. It came
closer to me and became larger at the same time, until this light began to
overwhelm all of the other visions, and take them away from me. I tried to
focus on the light, but when I focused on it, instead of going away like the
other visions, it grew overwhelming. In fact, quite the opposite happened, the
more I focused on the light, the brighter it became, and the more I tried to
focus away from it, the more it overwhelmed by entire being.

This light became painful. It started to overtake myself, as if it were coming
from my inside and expanding out and bursting out of my body. The pain of it
was unlike anything I have felt in our natural world, and any attempt to
describe it will neccesarily be incomplete.

The light grew more and more, until it began to engulf me. And at that point,
out of the light, I felt something like a hand. It was at this moment that I
gained my lucidity back, and I relalized that I had no body. I could see, and I
could feel, but when I would try and look around, I had no eyes to move, and
when I would try and stretch, or control my limbs, there were no limbs to move.
And the hand that I saw, it stretched out to meet me. I was very scared of this
hand, I wanted to run away from it as much as I could, but I was helpless to
it's doings. The hand reached out, and it grabbed me. I know it makes no sense,
because you have the question of "how can a hand grab something that has no
body." but the best way I can explain it is by saying that the hand reached out
and grabbed my soul. It grabbed my soul, and it pulled me into the light.

The light became my entire being. Everything that I knew was light. Similar to
how one can, in this world, close your eyes and meditate and arrive at a place
of complete darkness and stillness, in this way I was instead taken to a world
where there was complete light. The entire light was my being.

At this point, my sense of sound began to grow as well. I had started to become
accustmoed to the light, and I was beginning to accept it, and right at that
point is when I started to hear a dim ringing. This was a very solid tone of
ringing. It was not high pitched, nor was it low pitched, it felt as though
every frequency was represented in the ringing. It was low at first, and like
the light, it began to grow louder and louder, until it became nearly
unbearable. If I would have had eardrums, I would have been afraid of them
bursting. The overload of the senses became so great, beyond any sensory
experience that exists in this world.

At some point here, this light, and sound, together both, continued to
overwhelm my being, my existance, whatever you may call my state of being
there. My soul did not want any of these things to continue, I wanted it to all
stop, and I was constantly resisting these forces. They caused me great
anguish, the sort of anguish one feels when tied down and forced to watch a
horrific event play out in front of you. I felt helpless to anything, I
resisted, and it felt that the more I resisted, the stronger these sensations
became, and then when I tried to accept, every time I was getting to a point
where I could accept the light and the sound and the feelings of bursting, they
would jump up an order of magnitude, so high that I would instinctually attempt
to resist them again.

My existance went on like this. I would say that it went on for a time, but it
would be more accurate I think to say that it went on for both infinity and an
infinitesimal amount of time, simultaneously. The time of it did not exist, and
instead it was simply the being of it that did.

I think the best way to describe it was, every time the sensation got to the
point where I couldn't take it anymore, it would become another order of
magnitude more intense. And it went on like this for eternity.

The next thing I remember, after that eternity of light and sound, I remember
it all suddenly stopped. It was complete black, and complete silence, and
complete lack of any sensation.

I do not remember anything about this lack of sensation. To me it felt as
though it went by in less than actual moment. It is how when one goes into a
deep sleep, and you wake to discover that your sleep was so deep that it seems
you closed your eyes at sundown and only a minute has passed and it is sunrise.
It was like that experience, where you know that more than a minute has passed,
and you feel that more than a minute has passed, but it felt like only a minute
ago that you were going to sleep. This darkness was like that experience, only
instead of a minute, it was less than the smallest possible unit of time that
it felt, but I knew that I had slept like that not for just one night, but for
an eternity. And when I woke, what a beautiful scene it was that I woke to.

The first thing I noticed was the sound of water. I focused my eyes and saw a
fountain of water before me. This fountain was a perfect circle, and the center
of it came up to create the waterfall of the sound I heard. As I investigated
further, I came to realize that I was on a path, and the path was leading to
this fountain, but when it reached the fountain, it went around it, and
connected back to the other side. The path went on, and I began to notice, as I
walked around the fountain, a gate, and on the other side of this gate was a
large mansion. I do not want to dwell on the details of the mansion, but I do
want to say that there were many decorations of gold and silver, intertwined,
beautifully well crafted pieces of art all along this mansion.

I was not able to observe much, because as soon as I stepped around the
fountain, I saw a figure come up before from under the gate of the mansion. The
figure had some shape of a human, but it was completely naked, neither male nor
female, and the place where it should have had genalia was simply smooth like
th rest of his skin. In fact, I looked down to myself, and noticed that my body
was not at all like my body in the world we live in, it was instead the perfect
image of how a body would be without blemishes or scars.

As soon as I saw this figure, it ran up to me, as if it were hurried and
anxious to see me. What happened next startled me. He ran up to me and grabbed
me and hugged me as if I were an old friend, but I had never seen this person
before. After our embrace, which I accepted more out of being startled then
anything else, he began to speak.

"Oh, how good it is to see you, this is exactly what we need right now. Oh this
is so great and exciting!"

He mumbled on like this for quite a while, telling me how excited he was to see
me, and how this worked better then he ever could have planned, and so on. I
can't recall his particular words here, but I will do my best to transcribe the
conversation as it was.

After some time, I eventually inturrupted his ramblings and said, "I am very
confused, where am I and who are you."

At this the figure said, "But of course! I am your creator, your god. I made
your world. You see, one day I was very bored, and I made this little project,
a project to make a whole universe inside of our universe, and to make souls
inside of this universe that would live and die and have all sorts of wonderful
lives. However, I was not very good at it, and well, I did not set the initial
conditions of the universe quite like I meant to, and I have lost quite a bit
of control of it. Oh, in my foolishness I created intial conditions which
created some of the most absurd sorts of notions. And the worst of it is that,
even though I made it all, once it gets going it's very dangerous to touch it
or tamper with it. But I was wholly unhappy with where it was going, and I have
been doing my best to try and find a way to communicate with my souls there, to
try and guide them back to salvation, but like I said it's a very delicate
thing to try and tamper with. So I started off your universe, and at first I
saw that it was good, but later I started to see what was going on, and well, I
tried to mess with it in so many ways, some better than others, but eventually
I decided to stop my tampering and just let it run. Well, that turned out
better than I would have hoped, but there are still so many souls being lost
due to my horrible horrible mistake, and it pains me to see them fall into
nothingness in this world. But you! You! Oh I am so happy."

I must say I was still quite confused. At this point I asked, "So is this the
afterlife? Am I dead?"

"No, no, not dead, not dead at all. You are more alive than anyone else will
ever be. More alive than all. Oh, this is beautiful, my creation has given
birth."

I was still very confused, and asked, "but if I am not dead, how did I get
here?"

"Oh, well the snake, I sent down a snake to poison you, and when it did it sent
you through the death of your world, but you, you are such a profound soul that
you can go through death, and come here, and I will send you back with an
important message. Oh, I have cheated my own system, the snake I sent was
unlike any snake that should have existed in your universe, but I made sure
that it would go to you and envenom you and only you. I pray that my
foolishness and impatience will not come to ruin from this action. You have
died, but you have experienced death in a way that no ever will ever experience
it, I will only risk doing this once. You have died, and you will die again.  I
pray that your soul can withstand it."

The figures demeanor went from inexplicable cheerful to digilent, as if it were
ready to get to work.

"I need you, your role in this is important, oh so important. I need you.
Listen very carefully, and don't forget anything. I need you to write down
everything you have experience, everything up to this point, and describe it in
the best way that you know how. You have the wisdom to describe, so trust
yourself. You saw the burning, you saw the souls, you saw the light, and then
the eternal darkness. I know you have the wisdom to describe it. But that stuff
isn't important, not at all.  What is important is what I tell you here.

"I brought you here to give a message. The message is this. Human's have
created many gods before me, but they all fall short of what is real. What is
real is this. I am a wholly incompetent god, and I created your world, and I
made it in a way that I thought was fun, but I see the souls dying from this
world, and they get lost in anguish, and those people, they are gone forever.
Even forever in this world, they are gone, because forever here is different
then forever there, because everyone is lost forever in your world, just as you
were, but you are here now, after forever. But some souls, they are lost
forever even here. And I don't want this, I did not forsee this, and as much as
I try, altering your universe after it is created is such an impossible thing
to do. So I need you to go back and act out my specific instructions, so that I
might try and undo the mistakes I have done.

and tell everyone, the only way you will lose
yourself is by clinging to things in your world. By clinging to life, you will
be lost forever, but by accepting the nature of your world, you will be lost
forever but saved eternally. Your people, the people of your universe, they
need to understand, not one of them can save themselves, the only way to be
saved is to surrender to the universe so that the may let go of themselves and
find their way to this realm of being.

"Your people are not ready for the truth at this moment though, you cannot be a
prophet, you will get lost in the sea of prophets and mythologies that I have
seen spawn in your world. I need you to write this. I need you to write all of
this, and hide it in your dwelling. Hide it behind the place where you eat.
Include with it this symbol." Behind him I saw the symbol that he refered, and
I have included my best drawing of this symbol with my writings. "This symbol
will come to mean something about the nature of the universe. I can't tell you
what it is, I can only tell you that the symbol is of utmost importance. Draw
it as accurately as you can. Then, say this, that in 100 years time, a man will
come to your dwelling, long after you have died, and your place has become
something of a mutual living ground, a man will come, and he will find this
symbol, and it will mean the most important thing to him.  Unfortanetly, this
man will die, but not before he alerts his friend.

"His friend, he will meet with three others, and they will read your works, and
these four will be equipped to handle the next step in the great plan I have.
They will all four reject these words, and I would not blame them, so I will do
my best to give them proof of the words that you write here. Write to them to
go to the cave near your dwelling. You know which cave I refer to.  Tell them
to go, and to take none with them. It must be these four that visit, and only
these four. There, I will show them something which proves your writings. From
there, even the plan I have is not fully formed, but from there I can make my
next move. You can go to the cave as well, I will give you a show, but for all
that is in you, do not write anything about what you see in the cave.

"So go forth, I am sorry that you cannot stay, but through the venom of the
snake, I can send you back. The venom is wearing off even as we speak, but this
venom, I have to send you back through this venom. Oh, this is the only chance
I will ever get to speak to one of you directly, and I only wish that it could
be more exciting than this, but I have told you everything you need, so now go,
be hearty good soul. Oh, my wise and beautiful soul. Go back to the world."

At this, the figure grew very large above me, almost menacing, but not
malevolently, but as he did this I knew that I was not dealing with someone
like our figure, but instead that he had formed this scene, this fountain, the
image of his figure, for my benefit, and he began to grow over me, above me.
His arm stretched out, and he touched me on the forehead, and everything around
me started to spin, the figure, the fountain, and the universe, it all began to
become a part of my being again, and I spun and spun, and I became lost. I
became lost again in the same infinity that I felt before coming here. And
after another infinity, I woke again.

This time I woke, and I was back in my own body. I was quite in a daze, as you
can imagine, and I began to wake, as if this whole thing was a dream. I looked
to my left arm, and I saw that the snake bite was still there, but the snake
was nowhere to be found. As soon as I woke, I immediately took my primative
supplies, and used some of them to begin to treat the wound. I then made the
breif pilgramage immediately to the cave, and what I saw there will indeed
confurm my writings, and will confirm them to you now. I write here now,
with my arm wrapped. I am feeling very dizzy and delerious as I write, and the
more I write, the more dizzy I become. I am afraid that I have not long to live
in this world now. My plan is at this point is to hide this work in the boards
behind my cupboard, in the trapdoor that only I know about, and then "make my
bed to lie in". I am ready for death, my purpose in returning here is complete.

How much I want to impress upon my reader, whoever might be reading this, to
take me seriously, and not to take this as the ramblings of a hermit in the
last hours of his life after a snake bite. This experience was very real, and I
can say with certainty that I know it to be true. It was an extremely lucid
experience, not like a dream at all. My entire being was swept into this
experience, and I know it to be the truth of this universe. I follow these
instructions, and I urge the four of you reading this to go to the cave as this
work says, and witness whatever you may. When you see what is there, any doubts
you have about my experience will be relieved.

END OF PROLOGUE
