Damien,

I am compelled to write to you now. I have the strongest compulsion after
seeing what I have seen that you are the person to write to. I will leave the
letter here, and I will place the documents I have uncovered back in their
original place, where I just chanced upon them. They are in the cupboard,
under the floorboard, off to the side closest the oven. There you will find
what I refer to. Go find it and then read the rest of my letter.

To me this is undeniable proof that the flat earth theory is true. But it is
not just about flat earth. I know your position on this, and I am not here to
further our fruitless argument about the flat earth. Instead this is about our
creator. Let me back up.

I came here looking for myself. As people do, and as you for sure know, I have
struggled with the nature of our existance for my entire life. For what reason
would a god, or God if the case may be, place us on this earth? Everything I
have read seems to point to a different answer, but they all feel like they are
missing something. By biggest question has always been, if God is so great and
powerful, why doesn't he just reveal to us the nature of the universe? Why does
he not just give us the "religious experience" that some people claim to have?
Why do those people get prejudice over someone like me?

But now we have the answer! I'm so excited. It turns out, the our creator isn't
able to do that because he is not all powerful. The symbol, the symbol the
hermit gave you, that symbol is the symbol of the Flat Earth Society. He got
this symbol from his vision of the one true god. Read his works and you will
see what I mean. This is undeniable to me. Of course I was skeptical of these
things, (perhaps it was just a hallucination, that's what you always say) but
this symbol was only created by the flat earth society within the last twenty
years, and these writings, well, when I did my research of this establishment
before coming here, I know that this author of the works I have found lived
here at least a hundred years ago. And the symbol, the symbol is embedded in
the works. Why, it works out too perfectly.

But we still need further proof, and that proof is in the cave. I know the
works say for me to avoid the cave at all costs, but I must know what is in
there. If curiosity killed the cat, then maybe I am to die. In fact, I feel as
though perhaps that is my fate. Which is why I write to you before I do
anything. I must write, and I must tell you what I know. Because I have to go
see it. If it is not true, if these works are a bunch of nonsense, as I am sure
you would be inclined to believe, then I will go and seek the cave and find
nothing remarkable there, and well, this will be up to further scrutiny. But if
the works are true, and something terrible happens to me as I go to these
caves, then that will be only further proof of what I read, and if that is the
cost of what should happen, then it will have to be so. I will gladly accept
that sacrifice. I would rather die knowing that I have finally found the
answers to life that I have been looking for than live having not attempting to
find them. It's that sacrifice, the sacrifice to venture to this cave and see
what I may, that I am willing to make.

And if I am to die, then that means that you are to read this, and there will
be four of you. I don't know who the other three will be, but the four of you
will be equipped to further see the truth in these writings.

So if this is the end, I must say, I am very glad to have known you. I don't
really have that many possessions to leave a will to, but enclosed I have
placed my cross necklace. You know the one, the one I wear. You would always
tell me, "If you don't believe in Chirstianity anymore, why do you keep that
cross?" Well, I don't know, and I still don't know, but if this is right, it
seems appropiate that the cross goes to you. Maybe it will have some meaning in
the future."
