Let me tell you about how I became a Nihilist.

I was raised Christian. As I was growing up, I was told that there existed,
some sort of being in heaven, a God, and that he created us. In six days he
made us, and on the seventh day he rested. And then we ate the apple, and then
we made the nation of Isreal, and all teh peoples in the bible, that was
regarded as the absolute history of the world.

Of all the things in the world, you are allowed to question all of them, except
for teh Divine Word of God, handed to us through scripture. These things are
taken to be the absolute truth in the world, and to rebuke or question these
words is to be blasphemous towards the Lord our God and to his Son Jesus
Christ, God become Man, savior of Mankind through his eternal sacrifice and
ressurection.

This was told to me to be the way of the world. And as I child, I accepted it.

I questioned Santa Clause, I asked my parents one day, "Is Santa real" and my
mom said, "Well, honey, what do you think" and I said, "I don't think so." She
looked defeated and said, "No honey, he is not real, we are the ones who put
the presents in the stockings, Santa doesn't do that." And I said, "Hm, thanks
for being honest."

And then I would ask my parents, "Is God real?" And my mom would tell me. "Yes,
of course God is real, he gave us his word through the bible. God wrote the
bible, and through his word we can know the truth."

At this I became puzzled. I didn't even care to draw the distinction between
God and Santa. Surely, it's possible for one thing to be real, and another to
be false. But I still questioned.

I then learned about the Athiest. I said, "Mom, is it true that there are
people in the world that don't believe in God." And my mom said, "Yes, it is
true, there are some people in the world that do not believe in God. And those
people, they are going to Hell. But you don't have to worry about that. All you
have to do is believe in God, and believe in Jesus, and you will go to Heaven.
That's all it takes." And so I said, "But how do we know that there is a
Heaven?" and she replied, "Because that's what it says in the word of God given
to man in the form of the bible." And still I questioned. I could accept the
truth of the world, if this is how it would be so, but I needed more than to
accept it based upon a book that I can read.

And then I was told about the story of Thomas. Thomas did not believe that
Jesus had indeed come back from the dead. He said, "Until I put my fingers
through the holes in his wrists, and until I touch his side, I will not believe
that Jesus rose from the dead." But then Jesus appeared before Thomas, and
Thomas put his fingers through the holes in Jesus wrists, and he touched the
lance wound in his rib, and Thomas said, "Oh, my lord, forgive me for my
doubts, for I have doubted you, but now you show me to be wrong." And thus
Thomas believed

But still, I did not believe. Jesus appeared before Thomas, but he did not
appear before me. Why is Thomas so special that Jesus will appear before him,
but not before me? And so I questioned.

And people will say, "If there is a God, all loving, all caring, all
benevolent, and he made us, created us in his image, and looks over us, and
watches us, then why is there evil in the world?" And the naive answer is,
"because God gave us the free will to do as we please, and the evil in the
world is the spawn of Satan, and God has nothing to do with it." But I say, no,
if there is a God, then he has everything to do with it. He has everything to
do with everything, so he too has everything to do with this.

And I said, "Forget this question of good and evil. Perhaps, because I am
sheltered and have not been truly exposed to evil, perhaps this question does
not concern me as it does other people. But instead of this question, of the
all good and all powerful God that allows there to be evil ni the world, let's
instead ask ourselves, _For what purpose did God create us in the first
place?_" For if we can answer that question, surely all other questions about
God will come from it. And so I asked myself, "For what purpose would God
create us in the first place?"

The first place I looked was in the bible, and towards the people who are well
read in the bible. I asked, "For what reason did God create us." And the answer
I received was this. "God created us so that we may worship him, and his glory,
and his might, because we are sinners, and need God in order to become full."
But I said, "This is the what we has humans gain from the worship of God, but
what does God hope to gain by creating us to do so? What does God gain out of
createing a people that he designed to worship him? If God truly does reside in
Heaven, in the other world, the world that is not like ours, then for what
reason would he create our world, and put us in it, so that we may worship him?
What does God get out of the whole thing?"

And with this, I was met with the eterenal answer that any who attempt to
reveal the ways of God to Man come to when asked enough questions. I was told,
"We are too feeble, too unintelligent, too unwise to understand the doings and
motives of God. We are so much below God as the ant is below us. A human asking
of the doings of God is like an Ant asking the doings of Man. Man could attempt
to communitcate with the ant, but the ant's mind is too simple to understand
the complexities of human behavior. So is our mind to the mind of God."

Alas, I said, you have given me the eternal excuse. You say, "God behaves in
this way" and when I say, "But I wish to understand God more, so that I can
better serve him and become a part of him." And to this I am always met with
the eterenal Excuse for God. "Who is man to question the doings of God?"

And to that I say, "I am that man, the man that would seek to question the
doings of God. I question him, and I wish to understand him. My insect brain
wishes to become something more, so that I might come to understand the doings
of God. I may not fully comprehend, but I want to at least struggle in the
effort. Indulge me in at least that, so that I may come to understand the Lord
my God."

But then I am told, "You should not question the doings of God, you are but a
man, you can only have faith. Faith in the teachings of God is the greatest
trancedence a Man can hope to acheive. In faith, all things become light."

So I say, "I wish to have faith in God. If faith in God is the highest
trancendence a man can achieve, then tell me how to have faith in God, for I
desire to come closer to understanding him" And truely, truely, believe me when
I say that to be true. I want to have faith in God.

And then my fellow Christian will say, "Good, I am glad that you wish to have
faith, for it is in faith you will come to understand all things as best that
we can. Have faith in the bible, have faith in the word, and have faith in the
church, and you will become a good Christian. Have faith in all of these
things, and through this, you will become trancendent before God."

I spit in the face of the Christian who tells me these things. I do not want to
have faith in those things. I did not say that I wanted to have faith in the
bible, I did not say I want to have faith in the word, I did not say I want to
have faith in the church. I will not place my faith in those things. Instead, I
will put my faith in God. So tell me, again, how I may I place my faith in God?

And then I am told, "Through faith you will come to understand."

And I say, "Okay, I am willing to accept. I will play your thought experiment."

"By faith you tell me, that there exists another world, another dimension. And
this is the dimension that God resides in. He resides in this otherworld, and
this other world exists just as much as the world we know exists. I can accept
this. I can even accept this "Otherworld" as being somehow seperate from our
three dimensions of space and fourth dimension of time. I can accept that. And
then I can say that God, existing in this seperate dimension, created us in his
image. He made the sun, and the moon, and the skys and the grass, he made the
plants and the animals, and even man. He made all of the things in that we see.
We don't know how he did it, but he can, and he did. He made all that we see
and know in this world. I can accept that.

"Suppose I always start with this assumption. As a child, I am told that this
faith is the absolute and unwavering faith of the world. So I will accept your
faith. I accept the faith of the bible, and the faith of the word, and the
faith of the church.

"So now I ask, and I might add that this is a completely reasonable question,
"How do we know about this otherworld? What evidence to we have that it exists?
Where does our knowledge that the other world exists come from?"

And now I am told, "We have been told through the word of God, that he created
this world, and everything in it. He revealed the nature of the world through
his prophets who wrote down the word of God."

And now we hit the crux of the issue. I was willing to have faith in God, but
now you tell me that everything we know about God has been told to us through
his prophets. And what is a prophet? A prophet is but a man, is he not? Is he
not made of the same flesh and blood that everything else has been made of? Who
is this prophet to reveal the ways of God to Man? He is only a man.

You can not point to a Prophet and say, "Have faith in him so that you may have
faith in God." You can only point to a Prohpet and say, "Have faith in him, the
man and flesh and blood that is telling you words from your mouth, and you will
have faith in the Prophet. This is your faith. Your faith is blind. It is faith
based not upon God, but upon man, and as such, it is Blasphemy!  The bible is
Blasphemy based upon its own definiton of the word!"

And in my foolishness, I rejected the word of God, the word of the prophets,
on the basis that it is blasphemy. And so I became a Nihilist. I said, "All
words spoken are the words of man, and that which they say is only as valid as
the words that they say."

Let me draw a parable. I can say, 2+2=4, and you can say that I am a wise
man, for I speak the truth. I can say 2+2=5, and you can say, that I am a
foolish man, because I speak lies. But if I say, "God has given to me the
divine nature of His Word, that 2+2=5" you cannot then say, "Because God has
spoken to this man, and we wish to have faith in the words of God, we must base
our lives on the assumption that 2+2=5." But this is what the Christian has
done.

And when a Mathemetician comes along and says, "But I have constructed numbers
according to the mathematical foundation of Set Theory, and I have encoded them
in such a way that I can prove to you that 2+2=4, and I can show you that what
this prohpet says is false," there will be many who will respond. The foolish
man will say, "But the prophet before gave us the word of God, and the word of
God says that 2+2=5. Therefore, you are wrong." The blind man will say, "Look,
the mathemetician is correct, let us worship him now. Our God is incorrect, and
the Mathemetician speaks the new absolute truth of the world" But the truely
wise man will not give any basis to any set of belief, and instead will ask,
"If the Mathemetician says that 2+2=4, why does the Prophet say that 2+2=5?
From where did each of these ideas come?"

And the wise, in so doing, will understand both the words of the Prophet, and
the words of the Mathemetician. He will be able to say, "Alas, both of these
men speak the truth. Though the Mathemetician reveals the truth to us, the
Prophet also reveals the truth. The wise man will not argue with either the
Prophet nor the Mathmatician. Instead, he will kiss each of them, and say,
"Through both of you, I can better understand the truth of the word of god."
For though the truth may not be the same, and even though the truths are
certainly not equal, nor can they be valued as equal, both men reveal some
truth, each in his own way. And together, in the contradiction, they reveal the
deeper truth.

And it is in this way, that the Nihilist can over come the pit of Nihilism and
begin to establish the faith in the true god. It is not by accepting the words
of the prophet on faith, nor by only accepting the words of the Mathemetician
as the absolute facts, but by accepting the truth of both the prophet and the
Mathemetician, and every other speaker of truth, all at the same time, and by
continually seeking to further his understanding of all of these truths, that
he can begin to establish the most true faith in the true god.
