Hi Brett!

u/greydayglo here, otherwise known as Iona, or Iona Dinosaur, or She Rex if I'm
playing roller derby.

Perfect. Psychology is very interesting to me, especially as it has come to
pertain to many, many social issues, so it's something I think about a lot. In
some ways, I think it's particularly useful for those of you who are more STEM
oriented to become more familiar with ideas from psychology, as there are
particular mindsets and social issues that are applicable to the personality
type/type of thinking that seems prominent in that group. (My brother is a
computer programmer, and my sister is an engineer, so I have some familiarity
with this orientation to the world). I would say, my primary interest is in the
idea of....how can people live better lives? More satisfaction, more sense of
fulfillment, things like that. Not necessarily happiness, per se, because I
think happiness as a concept has become this false milestone towards which we
are all supposed to orient ourselves--it's literally not possible to be happy
all the time. It's at best, a transitory state, and the more we chase it, the
further away it goes. I'm not even sure where to start! Freud and Jung are good
historical references, and I think Jung's work in particular has a lot of
merit, but the field of psychology is vast and broad, and important in that
there are many diverse factors impacting the fulfillment of humans, and many
possible strategies to address these. And...it can be frustrating, as well. I
have been thinking a lot about the idea of change, what psychological factors
are necessary for change, is it possible to change, and what factors limit
people's ability to change? Ultimately, I don't think everyone is capable of
change, for many reasons, which is a hard concept to accept in my field of
work. I work in addictions treatment with low-income individuals. This is an
area of humongous social impact, and quite challenging to treat or understand.
I neither want to be too hopeful or too cynical, but I am interested in...what
would be the best possible way to address this huge problem?

Jordan Peterson is an interesting character, and certainly controversial. I
don't know enough about him currently to comment, but I am curious. It's wild
how anything that branches into the territory he covers immediately becomes so
political. And then, of course, people just stop listening and start screeching
at one another on the internet and threatening each other with death, like a
bunch of angry monkeys beating their chests. *eyeroll*

I'm pretty on board with your interpretation of the nature of the universe.
It's always been interesting to me that there are so many competing religions
in the world, all of which hold a great amount of sway over their adherents,
and most of which think that they, alone, hold the truth. How can so many
people claim to hold contrasting truths? It's simple logic to question anyone's
entitlement to absolute truth when they are talking about abstracts and there
are so many conflicting reports. I like to think, rather, that everything is,
like the Buddhists say, the finger pointing at the moon, rather than the moon
itself. Ultimately, we *can't* know. Which is frustrating, for sure. I would
like to know all the answers to all the questions in the Universe, but
accepting that this is simply impossible has been part of my process of
reckoning with this line of inquiry. I'm not personally agnostic in the sense
that I do think there is a spiritual dimension to existence, and whether there
is simply the Universe in a scientific manner or whether there is God, I think
makes little difference at some point. The Universe is vast and intricate and
amazing, and I know that much without really knowing much about the mathematics
or science which helps explain it. How is that not equal to God in some
measure, if we open up our concept of God to admitting that we can understand
nothing about the nature of God, actually? Maybe that's all semantics, I don't
know.

It's snowing like crazy here in New Mexico today. I typically don't work much
on Tuesdays, and am not scheduled until this afternoon. I may call it off
entirely because driving in the snow sucks and I always have lots of things I
would like to accomplish at home. Still sore from roller derby scrimmage on
Sunday...I don't know what it is that we did, but my biceps ended up incredibly
sore, as well as my legs. We are starting our bouts in March, though, so I need
to get good enough to be able to do some credit to my league. My big task right
now is studying for my counselor licensure exam, which I am taking two weeks
from today (and hope fervently it doesn't snow that day, since I have to drive
to Albuquerque for it). This involves a lot of memorizing of facts that I will
not need to know, ever, to be good at my job. Such as, Virginia was the first
state to regulate counselor licensure, and this happened in 1975. Frank Parsons
was the "father" of career counseling and wrote a book in 1913. Please tell me
what this has to do with treating people who are traumatized? Who knows, but
it's the measure of whether or not I am competent enough to be licensed in my
job, and I need to win it in order to keep working. So obviously I am seriously
procrastinating.

What's your life like generally? What do you do with your time, what do you
think about a lot? I never quite know what questions I'm supposed to ask people
I'm corresponding with to keep a conversation going. I can generally come up
with things to ramble about no questions necessary, and I'm a pretty rambly
human. I also do have a lot of long chat and text based conversations with
people, so I do believe that friendships can easily be sustained with no actual
face to face interaction, although the individuals I have this dynamic with are
people I do know irl.

Anyways. Hope you are having a good day. Look forward to hearing more from you.

Take care,

Iona

--

Hey Iona!

It was good hearing from you.

I, too, have many rambly sorts of thoughts that can go on many tangents and
trains, no questions necessary. On the one hand, it's interesting to write it
all out and see where it is that my thoughts will take me, but on the other
hand, I'm very aware that a majority of people couldn't care less about what it
is that I am thinking about in the present moment. And that's totally cool,
because, to be honest, I couldn't care less about which football players are
being traded, or which superheros are going to be in the latest Avengers movie,
or whatever, and I presume that most people share a similar disinterest about
whether or not a human being can ever truly know something, and what the
question of knowledge even means, or other similar philosophical ideas, and
that's okay. It's interesting though, because when I do meet someone that is
welcoming to the idea about convesations about whatever is on our mind, and
we're able to talk to eachother not so much as an argument but more as two
people attempting to understand the others point of view, it's almost always
the case that we form a really deep connection. I'd much rather have a few
friends that I have really strong connections with than a bunch of
acquantances. So yeah, all of that to say, I ramble a lot as well, and I enjoy
reading the ramblings of others.

I'd be very interested in getting some recomendation from you as to where I
should move to next to expand my knowledge of psychology. I found some of
Jung's work rather interesting, and I am even able to apply it (somewhat
hesitantly) to some of the dreams I have been having, but even so, I feel like
I am missing something of what I would consider the "groundwork" of knowledge
when it comes to psychology. Or in other words, the notion of "archetypes" as
Jung puts it is such an abstract idea, and my problem with it is that when I
try and understand it with my STEM minded brain, I don't really know what to
make of it. There are lots of abstract ideas in mathematics and physics that I
am able to grasp because I have an understanding of the way that mathematics is
used to take abstract equations and apply them to example problems. For
instance, Maxwell's equations of Electrodynamics are rather abstract, and at
the abstract level, it's easy enough to understand that "moving electirical
charges create a magnetic field" but it's an entirely different level of
understanding to be able to calculate how much current will be created when you
rotate a magnet inside a coil. It's that sort of "Psychological mathematics"
that I am missing when it comes to understanding Jung's ideas. I can mostly get
behind a theory of the mind which says, "The mind is made up of different
archetypes which perform various functions for the psyche," but I don't know
how I would use that to solve any particular problem of psychology. I'm curious
if you have any input on a good resource which would help there.

Also, I really like the analogy to "the finger pointing at the moon." I've
never heard it put that way before, and it captures the way I see religions
rather nicely. The difference being that we, as humans bound to our
experiences, never get to truly see the moon, we only get to guess what it is
and what it looks like. We are much more like a civilization of blind men
attempting to describe what the moon might be. In fact, surely there must be a
religious folk tale about this. "The blind people and the moon" or something
similar.

I'm with you that the concept that ultimatatly we can't know what is real is
frustrating for sure, but what I have started to come to understand is that
it's only frustrating if we try and convince ourselves that it is somehow
possible to know what is real. Having been raised Christian, and being told
that Christianity *is* the fundamental truth about the world caused me to hold
on to the idea that "it's possible to know what reality is" in an unhealthy
way, and it wasn't until I was able to see it as something fundamentally
unknowable that things started to make sense for me.  Or in other words, I
think understanding that it's a fundamental fact about the human condition that
it is impossible to ever know what form "naked reality" takes, and that the
only thing that we ever know is our own experiences and perception *of*
reality, not that those experiences actully *are* reality, provides something
of a liberating perspective. The journey then is not towards attempting to
discover what is real and what is not, because that is fundamentally
unknowable, but instead it's towards becoming as well versed and well
understood in all ways of thinking and perceiving the world, and discerning
which of these ways match most closely with our experiences of reality, and
also which ways lead to the most productive and fulfilling life. And it
could be the case that there are multiple contradictory ways of thinking that
would be appropiate in one context but meaningless in another, and they each
have their uses.

Still, at the same time, I think it's important to not to delude ourselves with
models of reality which are clearly incongruent with the experiences we have
about reality. I am very much against the sort of "post-modern" idea that "all
ways of thinking are equally valid." Rather, I think that there are various
ways of thinking, all of which attempt to create a model of the world which
fits with our experiences in a satisfactory way, and the degree to which these
models actually apply and acurately describe the doings of the world, the
closer of an approximation that model is towards how the world actually works,
and the more weight we should apply to it when attempting to describe and
reason about and react to the things that happen to us. Granted, most of the
things that happen in life don't require us to go back to the "fundamental
principles of what reality is" or anything like that, but I think it's helpful
to go through and meditate on that and develop that way of thinking because I
have found that it helps equip you with those things that do happen to us,
especially when life throws a curve ball at us.

That also ties in with the question of "what do we mean when we say God".
This is something I've thought about also, and I tend to agree with you that,
when looking at the universe as it's own sort of vast and intricate place, it
becomes difficult to differentiate between "the doings of the universe" or "the
laws of nature" and "God". In fact, I find myself using a lot of the language
that Christians use about God towards the universe. For instance, when
something is out of my control, I'll say something like, "I've done everything
I can, it's in the hands of the universe now," where as a Christian might say
"it's in the hands of God now."

I think there is a really important distinction though, and that is in
understanding what it is we mean when we say something like God. I could create
a definition of God which means "the doings of the world which we will never
have true knowledge of" or something similar, and with this sort of definition,
the concept of "the laws of nature" and "God" become similar ideas, but that's
not what a lot of people mean when they say God. Having been raised in the
Christian church, I've found that what many people would say is that "God" is
an actual being living in some nether dimension, and that from this nether
dimension he literally sculpted the universe into existence. They would then
further say that he imbues each of us with an immutable "soul" and that, based
upon what we believe about the literal divinity of Jesus Christ, we will be
sorted in the end times accordingly and be placed in a literal Heaven or
literal Hell, which are actual "spirit realms" that exist, and are where our
eternal soul will reside for eternity. I know it sounds silly to break it down
like this, but that is what some people honestly believe about the world, and
what I was taught to believe about it growing up.

That's why I'm hestitant to gerimander the definition of God in such a way. I
would like to be able to say that there is something like God in the universe,
which has something to do with "the doings of the universe", but as soon as I
would even begin to say such a thing, these sort of Christians would immediatly
hop on it and interpret it in whatever literal way that they would be compelled
to. Which is fine, I don't really mind if people want to believe that there is
some "spirit man" dwelling out there and watching over us (and I know such a
belief can be particularly helpful to people in struggling situations), but I
would rather not be so readily placed in that box simply because I used the
word God.

But yeah, that's my thoughts on that. When it comes to my life right now I am
big into BJJ. I've been attending classes for about 2 years now and I don't see
myself stopping any time soon. I haven't competed in a while, but I plan on
signing up for tournaments again come spring time. I, generally speaking, have
a very addictive personality, so when something hooks me my life gets pretty
consumed by it. The trick to it is to just make sure I get hooked on something
healthy.  So most of my days consist of getting up, going to work, then
training Jiu Jitsu after work, followed by cooling down and getting ready for
bed. I don't go every single evening (like last night I spent my time cleaning
around the apartment and attending to some chores that needed doing) but with
that and Saturday class I will generally hit five days of training a week. Then
in whatever free time there is I'll usually do something relaxing. I'm
currently reading "The Moral Landscape" by Sam Harris, which I finding
interesting, so a lot of my idle thought is around figuring out how much I
agree with the ideas that he puts forth in that book. I also take to video
games occasionally as well, but I have to watch myself there because I can very
easily get trapped in the video game world, and I would prefer to do more
productive things.

I'm not entirely satisfied with my work right now. I like it where I work and
the people are nice and my boss is generally pretty cool, but I don't feel like
I'm really engaging much with what I do. Most of my work involves fixing bugs
or adding features to an already existing code base, which is fine, but not
particularly interesting. I like to use the analogy to home building. My role
is more like a handyman fixing an already existing house, where I would much
rather be more like an architect, creating and designing new houses from
scratch. It's just the nature of how our company works that there isn't a need
for that. It's good experience, and we have very little office drama or
anything like that, but I know I'll be on the lookout for other opportunities
in time.

But yeah, that's me and my life as it stands in the present in a nutshell.

I'm curious about Roller Derby. I know very little about it, just that it
involves two teams on skates where one team tries to lap the other team, and
that it's very physical. So yeah, I'd be curious what you're thoughts about the
sport are. How long have you been playing, what role do you play (assuming the
sport has roles), what do you like about it, all of that kind of stuff. I love
learning about different aspects of all sorts of competition, and I'd be
interested in what you have to say about it.

I think I'm the same where I don't really know what to ask to keep these sorts
of conversations going, but it seems like we both have a lot of thoughts going
around, so I think coming up with things to talk about won't be much of a
problem. Just hit me up with whatever is on your mind or whatever you want to
talk about.

So yeah, it was good hearing back from you and I look forward to hearing from
you again.

Peace,

Brett


Part of it is that it's not
particularly challenging to me, but I think more of it has to do with the fact
that I don't feel much meaningful engagement to it. I work for a software firm
that writes accounting software for textile companies, so most of my work
consists of either fixing bugs in our code base, or writing feature
enhancements. I like to use the analogy to home building. Essentially, our
clients already have their homes fully built, and sometimes they need the
plumbing fixed, or they want to add a new fixture, or they want something added
and so I can do that for them. But really what I want to do as a software
developer is build the home, not just tweak these minor things, so it leaves
something to be desired.





but I think
understanding "naked reality" it is something that is fundamentally unknowable about the
human condition makes it substantially less frustrating. In fact, when viewed
from a certain perspective, it's almost in a way *more* interesting that our
relationship with the universe is 





to be able to use them to
calculate the forces involved when a magnet is rotated inside of a coil.

able to understand how you can use them to calculate the forces involved of say, a
magnet spinning in a coil, or some other such physical 
like with Jung I am missing the "Psychological Mathematics", so to speak, that
is involved in taking the more abstract ideas and applying them to
psychological problems.

The question of human fullfillment is definitely an interesting one, and I have
also 

I've also noticed that
attempting to have a conversation about such lofty ideas like "the nature of
the universe" generally leads people rolling their eyes and wanting to change
the subject. It's a tricky things. I'm the sort that has just a few friends,
but the friends I do have I am very close with, and I think it's because I am
generally un-interested in whatever it is that everyone wants to talk about.
Like, I really don't care which football player is being traded, or which
superhero movie is starring which actor, or anything like that, so I generally
have a lack of things to talk about with most people. But the people that I do
enjoy a lot are those where we can talk sometimes for hours about some really
complicated idea with lots of nuance, and we each understand that we're not "in
an argument" about it, but instead just going back and forth about the ideas
and trying to really understand and empathize with the others point of view on
it, even if we're not inclined to agree. All of that to say, I 

Anyway, I'm actually really curious about your statement about 

The thing about it is that most people I know tend to get exhausted
when talking in that way. Honestly, I totally understand, because a lot of
times I'll type out my thoughts in a journal, and when I read it back, I think,
"get to the point already." But a lot of times I don't have a point, it's just
a matter of working through and trying to understand the thoughts that are
cycloning through my head.

--

Hey Iona!

It was good hearing from you.

I, too, have many rambly sorts of thoughts that can go on many tangents and trains, no questions necessary. On the one hand, it's interesting to write it all out and see where it is that my thoughts will take me, but on the other hand, I'm very aware that a majority of people couldn't care less about what it is that I am thinking about in the present moment. And that's totally cool, because, to be honest, I couldn't care less about which football players are being traded, or which superheros are going to be in the latest Avengers movie, or whatever, and I presume that most people share a similar disinterest about whether or not a human being can ever truly know something, and what the question of knowledge even means, or other similar philosophical ideas, and that's okay. It's interesting though, because when I do meet someone that is welcoming to the idea about convesations about whatever is on our mind, and we're able to talk to eachother not so much as an argument but more as two people attempting to understand the others point of view, it's almost always the case that we form a really deep connection. I'd much rather have a few friends that I have really strong connections with than a bunch of acquantances. So yeah, all of that to say, I ramble a lot as well, and I enjoy reading the ramblings of others.

I'd be very interested in getting some recomendation from you as to where I should move to next to expand my knowledge of psychology. I found some of Jung's work rather interesting, and I am even able to apply it (somewhat hesitantly) to some of the dreams I have been having, but even so, I feel like I am missing something of what I would consider the "groundwork" of knowledge when it comes to psychology. Or in other words, the notion of "archetypes" as Jung puts it is such an abstract idea, and my problem with it is that when I try and understand it with my STEM minded brain, I don't really know what to make of it. There are lots of abstract ideas in mathematics and physics that I am able to grasp because I have an understanding of the way that mathematics is used to take abstract equations and apply them to example problems. For instance, Maxwell's equations of Electrodynamics are rather abstract, and at the abstract level, it's easy enough to understand that "moving electirical charges create a magnetic field" but it's an entirely different level of understanding to be able to calculate how much current will be created when you rotate a magnet inside a coil. It's that sort of "Psychological mathematics" that I am missing when it comes to understanding Jung's ideas. I can mostly get behind a theory of the mind which says, "The mind is made up of different archetypes which perform various functions for the psyche," but I don't know how I would use that to solve any particular problem of psychology. I'm curious if you have any input on a good resource which would help there.

Also, I really like the analogy to "the finger pointing at the moon." I've never heard it put that way before, and it captures the way I see religions rather nicely. The difference being that we, as humans bound to our experiences, never get to truly see the moon, we only get to guess what it is and what it looks like. We are much more like a civilization of blind men attempting to describe what the moon might be. In fact, surely there must be a religious folk tale about this. "The blind people and the moon" or something similar.

I'm with you that the concept that ultimatatly we can't know what is real is frustrating for sure, but what I have started to come to understand is that it's only frustrating if we try and convince ourselves that it is somehow possible to know what is real. Having been raised Christian, and being told that Christianity *is* the fundamental truth about the world caused me to hold on to the idea that "it's possible to know what reality is" in an unhealthy way, and it wasn't until I was able to see it as something fundamentally unknowable that things started to make sense for me.  Or in other words, I think understanding that it's a fundamental fact about the human condition that it is impossible to ever know what form "naked reality" takes, and that the only thing that we ever know is our own experiences and perception *of* reality, not that those experiences actully *are* reality, provides something of a liberating perspective. The journey then is not towards attempting to discover what is real and what is not, because that is fundamentally unknowable, but instead it's towards becoming as well versed and well understood in all ways of thinking and perceiving the world, and discerning which of these ways match most closely with our experiences of reality, and also which ways lead to the most productive and fulfilling life. And it could be the case that there are multiple contradictory ways of thinking that would be appropiate in one context but meaningless in another, and they each have their uses.

Still, at the same time, I think it's important to not to delude ourselves with models of reality which are clearly incongruent with the experiences we have about reality. I am very much against the sort of "post-modern" idea that "all ways of thinking are equally valid." Rather, I think that there are various ways of thinking, all of which attempt to create a model of the world which fits with our experiences in a satisfactory way, and the degree to which these models actually apply and acurately describe the doings of the world, the closer of an approximation that model is towards how the world actually works, and the more weight we should apply to it when attempting to describe and reason about and react to the things that happen to us. Granted, most of the things that happen in life don't require us to go back to the "fundamental principles of what reality is" or anything like that, but I think it's helpful to go through and meditate on that and develop that way of thinking because I have found that it helps equip you with those things that do happen to us, especially when life throws a curve ball at us.

That also ties in with the question of "what do we mean when we say God".  This is something I've thought about also, and I tend to agree with you that, when looking at the universe as it's own sort of vast and intricate place, it becomes difficult to differentiate between "the doings of the universe" or "the laws of nature" and "God". In fact, I find myself using a lot of the language that Christians use about God towards the universe. For instance, when something is out of my control, I'll say something like, "I've done everything I can, it's in the hands of the universe now," where as a Christian might say "it's in the hands of God now."

I think there is a really important distinction though, and that is in understanding what it is we mean when we say something like God. I could create a definition of God which means "the doings of the world which we will never have true knowledge of" or something similar, and with this sort of definition, the concept of "the laws of nature" and "God" become similar ideas, but that's not what a lot of people mean when they say God. Having been raised in the Christian church, I've found that what many people would say is that "God" is an actual being living in some nether dimension, and that from this nether dimension he literally sculpted the universe into existence. They would then further say that he imbues each of us with an immutable "soul" and that, based upon what we believe about the literal divinity of Jesus Christ, we will be sorted in the end times accordingly and be placed in a literal Heaven or literal Hell, which are actual "spirit realms" that exist, and are where our eternal soul will reside for eternity. I know it sounds silly to break it down like this, but that is what some people honestly believe about the world, and what I was taught to believe about it growing up.

That's why I'm hestitant to gerimander the definition of God in such a way. I would like to be able to say that there is something like God in the universe, which has something to do with "the doings of the universe", but as soon as I would even begin to say such a thing, these sort of Christians would immediatly hop on it and interpret it in whatever literal way that they would be compelled to. Which is fine, I don't really mind if people want to believe that there is some "spirit man" dwelling out there and watching over us (and I know such a belief can be particularly helpful to people in struggling situations), but I would rather not be so readily placed in that box simply because I used the word God.

But yeah, that's my thoughts on that. When it comes to my life right now I am big into BJJ. I've been attending classes for about 2 years now and I don't see myself stopping any time soon. I haven't competed in a while, but I plan on signing up for tournaments again come spring time. I, generally speaking, have a very addictive personality, so when something hooks me my life gets pretty consumed by it. The trick to it is to just make sure I get hooked on something healthy.  So most of my days consist of getting up, going to work, then training Jiu Jitsu after work, followed by cooling down and getting ready for bed. I don't go every single evening (like last night I spent my time cleaning around the apartment and attending to some chores that needed doing) but with that and Saturday class I will generally hit five days of training a week. Then in whatever free time there is I'll usually do something relaxing. I'm currently reading "The Moral Landscape" by Sam Harris, which I finding interesting, so a lot of my idle thought is around figuring out how much I agree with the ideas that he puts forth in that book. I also take to video games occasionally as well, but I have to watch myself there because I can very easily get trapped in the video game world, and I would prefer to do more productive things.

I'm not entirely satisfied with my work right now. I like it where I work and the people are nice and my boss is generally pretty cool, but I don't feel like I'm really engaging much with what I do. Most of my work involves fixing bugs or adding features to an already existing code base, which is fine, but not particularly interesting. I like to use the analogy to home building. My role is more like a handyman fixing an already existing house, where I would much rather be more like an architect, creating and designing new houses from scratch. It's just the nature of how our company works that there isn't a need for that. It's good experience, and we have very little office drama or anything like that, but I know I'll be on the lookout for other opportunities in time.

But yeah, that's me and my life as it stands in the present in a nutshell.

I'm curious about Roller Derby. I know very little about it, just that it involves two teams on skates where one team tries to lap the other team, and that it's very physical. So yeah, I'd be curious what you're thoughts about the sport are. How long have you been playing, what role do you play (assuming the sport has roles), what do you like about it, all of that kind of stuff. I love learning about different aspects of all sorts of competition, and I'd be interested in what you have to say about it.

I think I'm the same where I don't really know what to ask to keep these sorts of conversations going, but it seems like we both have a lot of thoughts going around, so I think coming up with things to talk about won't be much of a problem. Just hit me up with whatever is on your mind or whatever you want to talk about.

So yeah, it was good hearing back from you and I look forward to hearing from you again.

Peace,

Brett

