# AEGIMIUS
(fragments)

Fragment #1--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iii. 587: But the
author of the "Aegimius" says that he (Phrixus) was received without
intermediary because of the fleece [2201]. He says that after the
sacrifice he purified the fleece and so: 'Holding the fleece he walked
into the halls of Aeetes.'


Fragment #2--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 816: The author
of the "Aegimius" says in the second book that Thetis used to throw the
children she had by Peleus into a cauldron of water, because she wished
to learn where they were mortal.... ....And that after many had perished
Peleus was annoyed, and prevented her from throwing Achilles into the
cauldron.


Fragment #3--Apollodorus, ii. 1.3.1: Hesiod and Acusilaus say that she
(Io) was the daughter of Peiren. While she was holding the office of
priestess of Hera, Zeus seduced her, and being discovered by Hera,
touched the girl and changed her into a white cow, while he swore that
he had no intercourse with her. And so Hesiod says that oaths touching
the matter of love do not draw down anger from the gods: 'And thereafter
he ordained that an oath concerning the secret deeds of the Cyprian
should be without penalty for men.'


Fragment #4--Herodian in Stephanus of Byzantium: '(Zeus changed Io) in
the fair island Abantis, which the gods, who are eternally, used to call
Abantis aforetime, but Zeus then called it Euboea after the cow.' [2202]


Fragment #5--Scholiast on Euripides, Phoen. 1116: 'And (Hera) set a
watcher upon her (Io), great and strong Argus, who with four eyes looks
every way. And the goddess stirred in him unwearying strength: sleep
never fell upon his eyes; but he kept sure watch always.'


Fragment #6--Scholiast on Homer, Il. xxiv. 24: 'Slayer of Argus'.
According to Hesiod's tale he (Hermes) slew (Argus) the herdsman of Io.


Fragment #7--Athenaeus, xi. p. 503: And the author of the "Aegimius",
whether he is Hesiod or Cercops of Miletus (says): 'There, some day,
shall be my place of refreshment, O leader of the people.'


Fragment #8--Etym. Gen.: Hesiod (says there were so called) because
they settled in three groups: 'And they all were called the Three-fold
people, because they divided in three the land far from their country.'
For (he says) that three Hellenic tribes settled in Crete, the Pelasgi,
Achaeans and Dorians. And these have been called Three-fold People.




