# FRAGMENTS OF UNKNOWN POSITION

Fragment #1--Diogenes Laertius, viii. 1. 26: [2301] 'So Urania bare
Linus, a very lovely son: and him all men who are singers and harpers do
bewail at feasts and dances, and as they begin and as they end they call
on Linus....'

Clement of Alexandria, Strom. i. p. 121: '....who was skilled in all
manner of wisdom.'


Fragment #2--Scholiast on Homer, Odyssey, iv. 232: 'Unless Phoebus
Apollo should save him from death, or Paean himself who knows the
remedies for all things.'


Fragment #3--Clement of Alexandria, Protrept, c. vii. p. 21: 'For he
alone is king and lord of all the undying gods, and no other vies with
him in power.'


Fragment #4--Anecd. Oxon (Cramer), i. p. 148: '(To cause?) the gifts of
the blessed gods to come near to earth.'


Fragment #5--Clement of Alexandria, Strom. i. p. 123: 'Of the Muses who
make a man very wise, marvellous in utterance.'


Fragment #6--Strabo, x. p. 471: 'But of them (sc. the daughters of
Hecaterus) were born the divine mountain Nymphs and the tribe of
worthless, helpless Satyrs, and the divine Curetes, sportive dancers.'


Fragment #7--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 824: 'Beseeching
the offspring of glorious Cleodaeus.'


Fragment #8--Suidas, s.v.: 'For the Olympian gave might to the sons of
Aeacus, and wisdom to the sons of Amythaon, and wealth to the sons of
Atreus.'


Fragment #9--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad, xiii. 155: 'For through his lack
of wood the timber of the ships rotted.'


Fragment #10--Etymologicum Magnum: 'No longer do they walk with delicate
feet.'


Fragment #11--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad, xxiv. 624: 'First of all they
roasted (pieces of meat), and drew them carefully off the spits.'


Fragment #12--Chrysippus, Fragg. ii. 254. 11: 'For his spirit increased
in his dear breast.'


Fragment #13--Chrysippus, Fragg. ii. 254. 15: 'With such heart grieving
anger in her breast.'


Fragment #14--Strabo, vii. p. 327: 'He went to Dodona and the oak-grove,
the dwelling place of the Pelasgi.'


Fragment #15--Anecd. Oxon (Cramer), iii. p. 318. not.: 'With the
pitiless smoke of black pitch and of cedar.'


Fragment #16--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 757: 'But he
himself in the swelling tide of the rain-swollen river.'


Fragment #17--Stephanus of Byzantium: (The river) Parthenius, 'Flowing
as softly as a dainty maiden goes.'


Fragment #18--Scholiast on Theocritus, xi. 75: 'Foolish the man who
leaves what he has, and follows after what he has not.'


Fragment #19--Harpocration: 'The deeds of the young, the counsels of the
middle-aged, and the prayers of the aged.'


Fragment #20--Porphyr, On Abstinence, ii. 18. p. 134: 'Howsoever the
city does sacrifice, the ancient custom is best.'


Fragment #21--Scholiast on Nicander, Theriaca, 452: 'But you should be
gentle towards your father.'


Fragment #22--Plato, Epist. xi. 358: 'And if I said this, it would seem
a poor thing and hard to understand.'


Fragment #23--Bacchylides, v. 191-3: Thus spake the Boeotian, even
Hesiod [2302], servant of the sweet Muses: 'whomsoever the immortals
honour, the good report of mortals also followeth him.'




DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS

Fragment #1--Galen, de plac. Hipp. et Plat. i. 266: 'And then it was
Zeus took away sense from the heart of Athamas.'


Fragment #2--Scholiast on Homer, Od. vii. 104: 'They grind the yellow
grain at the mill.'


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. ii. 1: 'Then first in Delos did
I and Homer, singers both, raise our strain--stitching song in new
hymns--Phoebus Apollo with the golden sword, whom Leto bare.'


Fragment #4--Julian, Misopogon, p. 369: 'But starvation on a handful is
a cruel thing.'


Fragment #5--Servius on Vergil, Aen. iv. 484: Hesiod says that these
Hesperides........daughters of Night, guarded the golden apples beyond
Ocean: 'Aegle and Erythea and ox-eyed Hesperethusa.' [2401]


Fragment #6--Plato, Republic, iii. 390 E: 'Gifts move the gods, gifts
move worshipful princes.'


Fragment #7--[2402] Clement of Alexandria, Strom. v. p. 256: 'On the
seventh day again the bright light of the sun....'


Fragment #8--Apollonius, Lex. Hom.: 'He brought pure water and mixed it
with Ocean's streams.'


Fragment #9--Stephanus of Byzantium: 'Aspledon and Clymenus and god-like
Amphidocus.' (sons of Orchomenus).


Fragment #10--Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iii. 64: 'Telemon never sated
with battle first brought light to our comrades by slaying blameless
Melanippe, destroyer of men, own sister of the golden-girdled queen.'




WORKS ATTRIBUTED TO HOMER




