# NON-CYCLIC POEMS ATTRIBUTED TO HOMER




THE EXPEDITION OF AMPHIARAUS (fragments)

Fragment #1--Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: Sitting there in the
tanner's yard, Homer recited his poetry to them, the "Expedition of
Amphiarus to Thebes" and the "Hymns to the Gods" composed by him.




THE TAKING OF OECHALIA (fragments)

Fragment #1--Eustathius, 330. 41: An account has there been given of
Eurytus and his daughter Iole, for whose sake Heracles sacked Oechalia.
Homer also seems to have written on this subject, as that historian
shows who relates that Creophylus of Samos once had Homer for his guest
and for a reward received the attribution of the poem which they call
the "Taking of Oechalia". Some, however, assert the opposite; that
Creophylus wrote the poem, and that Homer lent his name in return for
his entertainment. And so Callimachus writes: 'I am the work of that
Samian who once received divine Homer in his house. I sing of Eurytus
and all his woes and of golden-haired Ioleia, and am reputed one of
Homer's works. Dear Heaven! how great an honour this for Creophylus!'


Fragment #2--Cramer, Anec. Oxon. i. 327: 'Ragged garments, even those
which now you see.' This verse ("Odyssey" xiv. 343) we shall also find
in the "Taking of Oechalia".


Fragment #3--Scholaist on Sophocles Trach., 266: There is a disagreement
as to the number of the sons of Eurytus. For Hesiod says Eurytus and
Antioche had as many as four sons; but Creophylus says two.


Fragment #4--Scholiast on Euripides Medea, 273: Didymus contrasts the
following account given by Creophylus, which is as follows: while Medea
was living in Corinth, she poisoned Creon, who was ruler of the city
at that time, and because she feared his friends and kinsfolk, fled to
Athens. However, since her sons were too young to go along with her, she
left them at the altar of Hera Acraea, thinking that their father would
see to their safety. But the relatives of Creon killed them and spread
the story that Medea had killed her own children as well as Creon.




THE PHOCAIS (fragments)

Fragment #1--Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: While living with
Thestorides, Homer composed the "Lesser Iliad" and the "Phocais"; though
the Phocaeans say that he composed the latter among them.




THE MARGITES (fragments)

Fragment #1--Suidas, s.v.: Pigres. A Carian of Halicarnassus and brother
of Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, who distinguished herself in war...
[3401] He also wrote the "Margites" attributed to Homer and the "Battle
of the Frogs and Mice".


Fragment #2--Atilius Fortunatianus, p. 286, Keil: 'There came to
Colophon an old man and divine singer, a servant of the Muses and of
far-shooting Apollo. In his dear hands he held a sweet-toned lyre.'


Fragment #3--Plato, Alcib. ii. p. 147 A: 'He knew many things but knew
all badly...'

Aristotle, Nic. Eth. vi. 7, 1141: 'The gods had taught him neither to
dig nor to plough, nor any other skill; he failed in every craft.'


Fragment #4--Scholiast on Aeschines in Ctes., sec. 160: He refers to
Margites, a man who, though well grown up, did not know whether it was
his father or his mother who gave him birth, and would not lie with his
wife, saying that he was afraid she might give a bad account of him to
her mother.


Fragment #5--Zenobius, v. 68: 'The fox knows many a wile; but the
hedge-hog's one trick [3402] can beat them all.' [3403]




THE CERCOPES (fragments)

Fragment #1--Suidas, s.v.: Cercopes. These were two brothers living upon
the earth who practised every kind of knavery. They were called Cercopes
[3501] because of their cunning doings: one of them was named Passalus
and the other Acmon. Their mother, a daughter of Memnon, seeing their
tricks, told them to keep clear of Black-bottom, that is, of Heracles.
These Cercopes were sons of Theia and Ocean, and are said to have been
turned to stone for trying to deceive Zeus.

'Liars and cheats, skilled in deeds irremediable, accomplished
knaves. Far over the world they roamed deceiving men as they wandered
continually.'




