# THE CATALOGUES OF WOMEN AND EOIAE 
(fragments) [1701]

Fragment #1--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iii. 1086: That
Deucalion was the son of Prometheus and Pronoea, Hesiod states in the
first "Catalogue", as also that Hellen was the son of Deucalion and
Pyrrha.


Fragment #2--Ioannes Lydus [1702], de Mens. i. 13: They came to call
those who followed local manners Latins, but those who followed Hellenic
customs Greeks, after the brothers Latinus and Graecus; as Hesiod says:
'And in the palace Pandora the daughter of noble Deucalion was joined in
love with father Zeus, leader of all the gods, and bare Graecus, staunch
in battle.'


Fragment #3--Constantinus Porphyrogenitus [1703], de Them. 2 p. 48B: The
district Macedonia took its name from Macedon the son of Zeus and Thyia,
Deucalion's daughter, as Hesiod says: 'And she conceived and bare to
Zeus who delights in the thunderbolt two sons, Magnes and Macedon,
rejoicing in horses, who dwell round about Pieria and Olympus....
((LACUNA)) ....And Magnes again (begot) Dictys and godlike Polydectes.'


Fragment #4--Plutarch, Mor. p. 747; Schol. on Pindar Pyth. iv. 263:
'And from Hellen the war-loving king sprang Dorus and Xuthus and Aeolus
delighting in horses. And the sons of Aeolus, kings dealing justice,
were Cretheus, and Athamas, and clever Sisyphus, and wicked Salmoneus
and overbold Perieres.'


Fragment #5--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 266: Those who
were descended from Deucalion used to rule over Thessaly as Hecataeus
and Hesiod say.


Fragment #6--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 482: Aloiadae.
Hesiod said that they were sons of Aloeus,--called so after him,--and of
Iphimedea, but in reality sons of Poseidon and Iphimedea, and that Alus
a city of Aetolia was founded by their father.


Fragment #7--Berlin Papyri, No. 7497; Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 421 [1704]:
(ll. 1-24) '....Eurynome the daughter of Nisus, Pandion's son, to whom
Pallas Athene taught all her art, both wit and wisdom too; for she was
as wise as the gods. A marvellous scent rose from her silvern raiment
as she moved, and beauty was wafted from her eyes. Her, then, Glaucus
sought to win by Athena's advising, and he drove oxen [1705] for her.
But he knew not at all the intent of Zeus who holds the aegis. So
Glaucus came seeking her to wife with gifts; but cloud-driving Zeus,
king of the deathless gods, bent his head in oath that the.... son of
Sisyphus should never have children born of one father [1706]. So she
lay in the arms of Poseidon and bare in the house of Glaucus blameless
Bellerophon, surpassing all men in.... over the boundless sea. And when
he began to roam, his father gave him Pegasus who would bear him most
swiftly on his wings, and flew unwearying everywhere over the earth, for
like the gales he would course along. With him Bellerophon caught and
slew the fire-breathing Chimera. And he wedded the dear child of the
great-hearted Iobates, the worshipful king.... lord (of).... and she
bare....'


Fragment #8--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodes, Arg. iv. 57: Hesiod says
that Endymion was the son of Aethlius the son of Zeus and Calyee, and
received the gift from Zeus: '(To be) keeper of death for his own self
when he was ready to die.'


Fragment #9--Scholiast Ven. on Homer, Il. xi. 750: The two sons of Actor
and Molione... Hesiod has given their descent by calling them after
Actor and Molione; but their father was Poseidon.

Porphyrius [1707], Quaest. Hom. ad Iliad. pert., 265: But Aristarchus is
informed that they were twins, not.... such as were the Dioscuri, but,
on Hesiod's testimony, double in form and with two bodies and joined to
one another.


Fragment #10--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 156: But Hesiod
says that he changed himself in one of his wonted shapes and perched on
the yoke-boss of Heracles' horses, meaning to fight with the hero; but
that Heracles, secretly instructed by Athena, wounded him mortally with
an arrow. And he says as follows: '...and lordly Periclymenus. Happy he!
For earth-shaking Poseidon gave him all manner of gifts. At one time he
would appear among birds, an eagle; and again at another he would be
an ant, a marvel to see; and then a shining swarm of bees; and again at
another time a dread relentless snake. And he possessed all manner of
gifts which cannot be told, and these then ensnared him through the
devising of Athene.'


Fragment #11--Stephanus of Byzantium [1708], s.v.: '(Heracles) slew the
noble sons of steadfast Neleus, eleven of them; but the twelfth, the
horsemen Gerenian Nestor chanced to be staying with the horse-taming
Gerenians. ((LACUNA)) Nestor alone escaped in flowery Gerenon.'


Fragment #12--Eustathius [1709], Hom. 1796.39: 'So well-girded
Polycaste, the youngest daughter of Nestor, Neleus' son, was joined in
love with Telemachus through golden Aphrodite and bare Persepolis.'


Fragment #13--Scholiast on Homer, Od. xii. 69: Tyro the daughter of
Salmoneus, having two sons by Poseidon, Neleus and Pelias, married
Cretheus, and had by him three sons, Aeson, Pheres and Amythaon. And
of Aeson and Polymede, according to Hesiod, Iason was born: 'Aeson, who
begot a son Iason, shepherd of the people, whom Chiron brought up in
woody Pelion.'


Fragment #14--Petrie Papyri (ed. Mahaffy), Pl. III. 3: '....of the
glorious lord ....fair Atalanta, swift of foot, the daughter of
Schoeneus, who had the beaming eyes of the Graces, though she was ripe
for wedlock rejected the company of her equals and sought to avoid
marriage with men who eat bread.'

Scholiast on Homer, Iliad xxiii. 683: Hesiod is therefore later in date
than Homer since he represents Hippomenes as stripped when contending
with Atalanta [1710].

Papiri greci e latini, ii. No. 130 (2nd-3rd century) [1711]: (ll. 1-7)
'Then straightway there rose up against him the trim-ankled maiden
(Atalanta), peerless in beauty: a great throng stood round about her as
she gazed fiercely, and wonder held all men as they looked upon her. As
she moved, the breath of the west wind stirred the shining garment about
her tender bosom; but Hippomenes stood where he was: and much people was
gathered together. All these kept silence; but Schoeneus cried and said:

(ll. 8-20) '"Hear me all, both young and old, while I speak as my spirit
within my breast bids me. Hippomenes seeks my coy-eyed daughter to wife;
but let him now hear my wholesome speech. He shall not win her without
contest; yet, if he be victorious and escape death, and if the deathless
gods who dwell on Olympus grant him to win renown, verily he shall
return to his dear native land, and I will give him my dear child and
strong, swift-footed horses besides which he shall lead home to be
cherished possessions; and may he rejoice in heart possessing these, and
ever remember with gladness the painful contest. May the father of men
and of gods (grant that splendid children may be born to him)' [1712]

((LACUNA))

(ll. 21-27) 'on the right.... and he, rushing upon her,.... drawing back
slightly towards the left. And on them was laid an unenviable struggle:
for she, even fair, swift-footed Atalanta, ran scorning the gifts of
golden Aphrodite; but with him the race was for his life, either to find
his doom, or to escape it. Therefore with thoughts of guile he said to
her:

(ll. 28-29) '"O daughter of Schoeneus, pitiless in heart, receive these
glorious gifts of the goddess, golden Aphrodite...'

((LACUNA))

(ll. 30-36) 'But he, following lightly on his feet, cast the first apple
[1713]: and, swiftly as a Harpy, she turned back and snatched it.
Then he cast the second to the ground with his hand. And now fair,
swift-footed Atalanta had two apples and was near the goal; but
Hippomenes cast the third apple to the ground, and therewith escaped
death and black fate. And he stood panting and...'


Fragment #15--Strabo [1714], i. p. 42: 'And the daughter of Arabus, whom
worthy Hermaon begat with Thronia, daughter of the lord Belus.'


Fragment #16--Eustathius, Hom. 461. 2: 'Argos which was waterless Danaus
made well-watered.'


Fragment #17--Hecataeus [1715] in Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes,
872: Aegyptus himself did not go to Argos, but sent his sons, fifty in
number, as Hesiod represented.


Fragment #18--[1716] Strabo, viii. p. 370: And Apollodorus says that
Hesiod already knew that the whole people were called both Hellenes
and Panhellenes, as when he says of the daughters of Proetus that the
Panhellenes sought them in marriage.

Apollodorus, ii. 2.1.4: Acrisius was king of Argos and Proetus of
Tiryns. And Acrisius had by Eurydice the daughter of Lacedemon, Danae;
and Proetus by Stheneboea 'Lysippe and Iphinoe and Iphianassa'. And
these fell mad, as Hesiod states, because they would not receive the
rites of Dionysus.

Probus [1717] on Vergil, Eclogue vi. 48: These (the daughters of
Proetus), because they had scorned the divinity of Juno, were overcome
with madness, such that they believed they had been turned into
cows, and left Argos their own country. Afterwards they were cured by
Melampus, the son of Amythaon.

Suidas, s.v.: [1718] 'Because of their hideous wantonness they lost
their tender beauty....'

Eustathius, Hom. 1746.7: '....For he shed upon their heads a fearful
itch: and leprosy covered all their flesh, and their hair dropped from
their heads, and their fair scalps were made bare.'


Fragment #19A--[1719] Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1358 fr. 1 (3rd cent. A.D.):
[1720] (ll. 1-32) '....So she (Europa) crossed the briny water from afar
to Crete, beguiled by the wiles of Zeus. Secretly did the Father
snatch her away and gave her a gift, the golden necklace, the toy
which Hephaestus the famed craftsman once made by his cunning skill and
brought and gave it to his father for a possession. And Zeus received
the gift, and gave it in turn to the daughter of proud Phoenix. But
when the Father of men and of gods had mated so far off with trim-ankled
Europa, then he departed back again from the rich-haired girl. So she
bare sons to the almighty Son of Cronos, glorious leaders of wealthy
men--Minos the ruler, and just Rhadamanthys and noble Sarpedon the
blameless and strong. To these did wise Zeus give each a share of his
honour. Verily Sarpedon reigned mightily over wide Lycia and ruled very
many cities filled with people, wielding the sceptre of Zeus: and
great honour followed him, which his father gave him, the great-hearted
shepherd of the people. For wise Zeus ordained that he should live for
three generations of mortal men and not waste away with old age. He sent
him to Troy; and Sarpedon gathered a great host, men chosen out of Lycia
to be allies to the Trojans. These men did Sarpedon lead, skilled in
bitter war. And Zeus, whose wisdom is everlasting, sent him forth from
heaven a star, showing tokens for the return of his dear son........for
well he (Sarpedon) knew in his heart that the sign was indeed from Zeus.
Very greatly did he excel in war together with man-slaying Hector and
brake down the wall, bringing woes upon the Danaans. But so soon as
Patroclus had inspired the Argives with hard courage....'


Fragment #19--Scholiast on Homer, Il. xii. 292: Zeus saw Europa the
daughter of Phoenix gathering flowers in a meadow with some nymphs and
fell in love with her. So he came down and changed himself into a bull
and breathed from his mouth a crocus [1721]. In this way he deceived
Europa, carried her off and crossed the sea to Crete where he had
intercourse with her. Then in this condition he made her live with
Asterion the king of the Cretans. There she conceived and bore three
sons, Minos, Sarpedon and Rhadamanthys. The tale is in Hesiod and
Bacchylides.


Fragment #20--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 178: But
according to Hesiod (Phineus) was the son of Phoenix, Agenor's son and
Cassiopea.


Fragment #21--Apollodorus [1722], iii. 14.4.1: But Hesiod says that he
(Adonis) was the son of Phoenix and Alphesiboea.


Fragment #22--Porphyrius, Quaest. Hom. ad Iliad. pert. p. 189: As it
is said in Hesiod in the "Catalogue of Women" concerning Demodoce the
daughter of Agenor: 'Demodoce whom very many of men on earth, mighty
princes, wooed, promising splendid gifts, because of her exceeding
beauty.'


Fragment #23--Apollodorus, iii. 5.6.2: Hesiod says that (the children of
Amphion and Niobe) were ten sons and ten daughters.

Aelian [1723], Var. Hist. xii. 36: But Hesiod says they were nine boys
and ten girls;--unless after all the verses are not Hesiod but are
falsely ascribed to him as are many others.


Fragment #24--Scholiast on Homer, Il. xxiii. 679: And Hesiod says that
when Oedipus had died at Thebes, Argea the daughter of Adrastus came
with others to the funeral of Oedipus.


Fragment #25--Herodian [1724] in Etymologicum Magnum, p. 60, 40: Tityos
the son of Elara.


Fragment #26--[1725] Argument: Pindar, Ol. xiv: Cephisus is a river in
Orchomenus where also the Graces are worshipped. Eteoclus the son of the
river Cephisus first sacrificed to them, as Hesiod says.

Scholiast on Homer, Il. ii. 522: 'which from Lilaea spouts forth its
sweet flowing water....'

Strabo, ix. 424: '....And which flows on by Panopeus and through fenced
Glechon and through Orchomenus, winding like a snake.'


Fragment #27--Scholiast on Homer, Il. vii. 9: For the father of
Menesthius, Areithous was a Boeotian living at Arnae; and this is in
Boeotia, as also Hesiod says.


Fragment #28--Stephanus of Byzantium: Onchestus: a grove [1726]. It is
situate in the country of Haliartus and was founded by Onchestus the
Boeotian, as Hesiod says.


Fragment #29--Stephanus of Byzantium: There is also a plain of Aega
bordering on Cirrha, according to Hesiod.


Fragment #30--Apollodorus, ii. 1.1.5: But Hesiod says that Pelasgus was
autochthonous.


Fragment #31--Strabo, v. p. 221: That this tribe (the Pelasgi) were from
Arcadia, Ephorus states on the authority of Hesiod; for he says: 'Sons
were born to god-like Lycaon whom Pelasgus once begot.'


Fragment #32--Stephanus of Byzantium: Pallantium. A city of Arcadia, so
named after Pallas, one of Lycaon's sons, according to Hesiod.


Fragment #33--(Unknown): 'Famous Meliboea bare Phellus the good
spear-man.'


Fragment #34--Herodian, On Peculiar Diction, p. 18: In Hesiod in the
second Catalogue: 'Who once hid the torch [1727] within.'


Fragment #35--Herodian, On Peculiar Diction, p. 42: Hesiod in the third
Catalogue writes: 'And a resounding thud of feet rose up.'


Fragment #36--Apollonius Dyscolus [1728], On the Pronoun, p. 125: 'And a
great trouble to themselves.'


Fragment #37--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 45: Neither Homer
nor Hesiod speak of Iphiclus as amongst the Argonauts.


Fragment #38--'Eratosthenes' [1729], Catast. xix. p. 124: The
Ram.]--This it was that transported Phrixus and Helle. It was immortal
and was given them by their mother Nephele, and had a golden fleece, as
Hesiod and Pherecydes say.


Fragment #39--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 181: Hesiod in
the "Great Eoiae" says that Phineus was blinded because he revealed to
Phrixus the road; but in the third "Catalogue", because he preferred
long life to sight.

Hesiod says he had two sons, Thynus and Mariandynus.

Ephorus [1730] in Strabo, vii. 302: Hesiod, in the so-called Journey
round the Earth, says that Phineus was brought by the Harpies 'to the
land of milk-feeders [1731] who have waggons for houses.'


Fragment #40A--(Cp. Fr. 43 and 44) Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1358 fr. 2 (3rd
cent. A.D.): [1732] ((LACUNA--Slight remains of 7 lines))

(ll. 8-35) '(The Sons of Boreas pursued the Harpies) to the lands of the
Massagetae and of the proud Half-Dog men, of the Underground-folk and of
the feeble Pygmies; and to the tribes of the boundless Black-skins
and the Libyans. Huge Earth bare these to Epaphus--soothsaying
people, knowing seercraft by the will of Zeus the lord of oracles, but
deceivers, to the end that men whose thought passes their utterance
[1733] might be subject to the gods and suffer harm--Aethiopians and
Libyans and mare-milking Scythians. For verily Epaphus was the child of
the almighty Son of Cronos, and from him sprang the dark Libyans, and
high-souled Aethiopians, and the Underground-folk and feeble Pygmies.
All these are the offspring of the lord, the Loud-thunderer. Round about
all these (the Sons of Boreas) sped in darting flight.... ....of the
well-horsed Hyperboreans--whom Earth the all-nourishing bare far off by
the tumbling streams of deep-flowing Eridanus........of amber, feeding
her wide-scattered offspring--and about the steep Fawn mountain and
rugged Etna to the isle Ortygia and the people sprung from Laestrygon
who was the son of wide-reigning Poseidon. Twice ranged the Sons of
Boreas along this coast and wheeled round and about yearning to catch
the Harpies, while they strove to escape and avoid them. And they sped
to the tribe of the haughty Cephallenians, the people of patient-souled
Odysseus whom in aftertime Calypso the queenly nymph detained
for Poseidon. Then they came to the land of the lord the son of
Ares........they heard. Yet still (the Sons of Boreas) ever pursued them
with instant feet. So they (the Harpies) sped over the sea and through
the fruitless air...'


Fragment #40--Strabo, vii. p. 300: 'The Aethiopians and Ligurians and
mare-milking Scythians.'


Fragment #41--Apollodorus, i. 9.21.6: As they were being pursued, one
of the Harpies fell into the river Tigris, in Peloponnesus which is
now called Harpys after her. Some call this one Nicothoe, and others
Aellopus. The other who was called Ocypete, or as some say Ocythoe
(though Hesiod calls her Ocypus), fled down the Propontis and reached
as far as to the Echinades islands which are now called because of her,
Strophades (Turning Islands).


Fragment #42--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 297: Hesiod also
says that those with Zetes [1734] turned and prayed to Zeus: 'There they
prayed to the lord of Aenos who reigns on high.'

Apollonius indeed says it was Iris who made Zetes and his following turn
away, but Hesiod says Hermes.

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 296: Others say (the islands)
were called Strophades, because they turned there and prayed Zeus to
seize the Harpies. But according to Hesiod... they were not killed.


Fragment #43--Philodemus [1735], On Piety, 10: Nor let anyone mock at
Hesiod who mentions.... or even the Troglodytes and the Pygmies.


Fragment #44--Strabo, i. p. 43: No one would accuse Hesiod of ignorance
though he speaks of the Half-dog people and the Great-Headed people and
the Pygmies.


Fragment #45--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 284: But Hesiod
says they (the Argonauts) had sailed in through the Phasis.

Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 259: But Hesiod (says)....
they came through the Ocean to Libya, and so, carrying the Argo, reached
our sea.


Fragment #46--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iii. 311:
Apollonius, following Hesiod, says that Circe came to the island over
against Tyrrhenia on the chariot of the Sun. And he called it Hesperian,
because it lies toward the west.


Fragment #47--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 892: He
(Apollonius) followed Hesiod who thus names the island of the Sirens:
'To the island Anthemoessa (Flowery) which the son of Cronos gave them.'

And their names are Thelxiope or Thelxinoe, Molpe and Aglaophonus
[1736].

Scholiast on Homer, Od. xii. 168: Hence Hesiod said that they charmed
even the winds.


Fragment #48--Scholiast on Homer, Od. i. 85: Hesiod says that Ogygia
is within towards the west, but Ogygia lies over against Crete: '...the
Ogygian sea and......the island Ogygia.'


Fragment #49--Scholiast on Homer, Od. vii. 54: Hesiod regarded Arete as
the sister of Alcinous.


Fragment #50--Scholiast on Pindar, Ol. x. 46: Her Hippostratus (did
wed), a scion of Ares, the splendid son of Phyetes, of the line of
Amarynces, leader of the Epeians.


Fragment #51--Apollodorus, i. 8.4.1: When Althea was dead, Oeneus
married Periboea, the daughter of Hipponous. Hesiod says that she
was seduced by Hippostratus the son of Amarynces and that her father
Hipponous sent her from Olenus in Achaea to Oeneus because he was far
away from Hellas, bidding him kill her.

'She used to dwell on the cliff of Olenus by the banks of wide Peirus.'


Fragment #52--Diodorus [1737] v. 81: Macareus was a son of Crinacus the
son of Zeus as Hesiod says... and dwelt in Olenus in the country then
called Ionian, but now Achaean.


Fragment #53--Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. ii. 21: Concerning the Myrmidons
Hesiod speaks thus: 'And she conceived and bare Aeacus, delighting in
horses. Now when he came to the full measure of desired youth, he chafed
at being alone. And the father of men and gods made all the ants that
were in the lovely isle into men and wide-girdled women. These were the
first who fitted with thwarts ships with curved sides, and the first who
used sails, the wings of a sea-going ship.'


Fragment #54--Polybius, v. 2: 'The sons of Aeacus who rejoiced in battle
as though a feast.'


Fragment #55--Porphyrius, Quaest. Hom. ad Iliad. pertin. p. 93: He
has indicated the shameful deed briefly by the phrase 'to lie with her
against her will', and not like Hesiod who recounts at length the story
of Peleus and the wife of Acastus.


Fragment #56--Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iv. 95: 'And this seemed to him
(Acastus) in his mind the best plan; to keep back himself, but to hide
beyond guessing the beautiful knife which the very famous Lame One had
made for him, that in seeking it alone over steep Pelion, he (Peleus)
might be slain forthwith by the mountain-bred Centaurs.'


Fragment #57--Voll. Herculan. (Papyri from Herculaneum), 2nd Collection,
viii. 105: The author of the "Cypria" [1738] says that Thetis avoided
wedlock with Zeus to please Hera; but that Zeus was angry and swore that
she should mate with a mortal. Hesiod also has the like account.


Fragment #58--Strassburg Greek Papyri 55 (2nd century A.D.): (ll. 1-13)
'Peleus the son of Aeacus, dear to the deathless gods, came to Phthia
the mother of flocks, bringing great possessions from spacious Iolcus.
And all the people envied him in their hearts seeing how he had sacked
the well-built city, and accomplished his joyous marriage; and they all
spake this word: "Thrice, yea, four times blessed son of Aeacus, happy
Peleus! For far-seeing Olympian Zeus has given you a wife with many
gifts and the blessed gods have brought your marriage fully to pass, and
in these halls you go up to the holy bed of a daughter of Nereus. Truly
the father, the son of Cronos, made you very pre-eminent among heroes
and honoured above other men who eat bread and consume the fruit of the
ground."'


Fragment #59--[1739] Origen, Against Celsus, iv. 79: 'For in common then
were the banquets, and in common the seats of deathless gods and mortal
men.'


Fragment #60--Scholiast on Homer, Il. xvi. 175: ...whereas Hesiod and
the rest call her (Peleus' daughter) Polydora.


Fragment #61--Eustathius, Hom. 112. 44 sq: It should be observed that
the ancient narrative hands down the account that Patroclus was even
a kinsman of Achilles; for Hesiod says that Menoethius the father of
Patroclus, was a brother of Peleus, so that in that case they were first
cousins.


Fragment #62--Scholiast on Pindar, Ol. x. 83: Some write 'Serus the son
of Halirrhothius', whom Hesiod mentions: 'He (begot) Serus and Alazygus,
goodly sons.' And Serus was the son of Halirrhothius Perieres' son, and
of Alcyone.


Fragment #63--Pausanias [1740], ii. 26. 7: This oracle most clearly
proves that Asclepius was not the son of Arsinoe, but that Hesiod or one
of Hesiod's interpolators composed the verses to please the Messenians.

Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 14: Some say (Asclepius) was the son of
Arsinoe, others of Coronis. But Asclepiades says that Arsinoe was
the daughter of Leucippus, Perieres' son, and that to her and Apollo
Asclepius and a daughter, Eriopis, were born: 'And she bare in the
palace Asclepius, leader of men, and Eriopis with the lovely hair, being
subject in love to Phoebus.'

And of Arsinoe likewise: 'And Arsinoe was joined with the son of Zeus
and Leto and bare a son Asclepius, blameless and strong.' [1741]


Fragment #67--Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes 249: Steischorus says that
while sacrificing to the gods Tyndareus forgot Aphrodite and that
the goddess was angry and made his daughters twice and thrice wed and
deserters of their husbands.... And Hesiod also says:

(ll. 1-7) 'And laughter-loving Aphrodite felt jealous when she looked on
them and cast them into evil report. Then Timandra deserted Echemus
and went and came to Phyleus, dear to the deathless gods; and even so
Clytaemnestra deserted god-like Agamemnon and lay with Aegisthus
and chose a worse mate; and even so Helen dishonoured the couch of
golden-haired Menelaus.'


Fragment #68--[1742] Berlin Papyri, No. 9739: (ll. 1-10)
'....Philoctetes sought her, a leader of spearmen, .... most famous of
all men at shooting from afar and with the sharp spear. And he came
to Tyndareus' bright city for the sake of the Argive maid who had the
beauty of golden Aphrodite, and the sparkling eyes of the Graces; and
the dark-faced daughter of Ocean, very lovely of form, bare her when
she had shared the embraces of Zeus and the king Tyndareus in the bright
palace.... (And.... sought her to wife offering as gifts)

((LACUNA))

(ll. 11-15)....and as many women skilled in blameless arts, each holding
a golden bowl in her hands. And truly Castor and strong Polydeuces
would have made him [1743] their brother perforce, but Agamemnon, being
son-in-law to Tyndareus, wooed her for his brother Menelaus.

(ll. 16-19) And the two sons of Amphiaraus the lord, Oecleus' son,
sought her to wife from Argos very near at hand; yet.... fear of the
blessed gods and the indignation of men caused them also to fail.

((LACUNA))

(l. 20)...but there was no deceitful dealing in the sons of Tyndareus.

(ll. 21-27) And from Ithaca the sacred might of Odysseus, Laertes son,
who knew many-fashioned wiles, sought her to wife. He never sent gifts
for the sake of the neat-ankled maid, for he knew in his heart that
golden-haired Menelaus would win, since he was greatest of the Achaeans
in possessions and was ever sending messages [1744] to horse-taming
Castor and prize-winning Polydeuces.

(ll. 28-30) And....on's son sought her to wife (and brought)
....bridal-gifts.... ....cauldrons....

((LACUNA))

(ll. 31-33)...to horse-taming Castor and prize-winning Polydeuces,
desiring to be the husband of rich-haired Helen, though he had never
seen her beauty, but because he heard the report of others.

(ll. 34-41) And from Phylace two men of exceeding worth sought her to
wife, Podarces son of Iphiclus, Phylacus' son, and Actor's noble
son, overbearing Protesilaus. Both of them kept sending messages to
Lacedaemon, to the house of wise Tyndareus, Oebalus' son, and they
offered many bridal-gifts, for great was the girl's renown, brazen....
....golden....

((LACUNA))

(l. 42)...(desiring) to be the husband of rich-haired Helen.

(ll. 43-49) From Athens the son of Peteous, Menestheus, sought her to
wife, and offered many bridal-gifts; for he possessed very many stored
treasures, gold and cauldrons and tripods, fine things which lay hid in
the house of the lord Peteous, and with them his heart urged him to win
his bride by giving more gifts than any other; for he thought that no
one of all the heroes would surpass him in possessions and gifts.

(ll. 50-51) There came also by ship from Crete to the house of the son
of Oebalus strong Lycomedes for rich-haired Helen's sake.

Berlin Papyri, No. 10560: (ll. 52-54)...sought her to wife. And after
golden-haired Menelaus he offered the greatest gifts of all the suitors,
and very much he desired in his heart to be the husband of Argive Helen
with the rich hair.

(ll. 55-62) And from Salamis Aias, blameless warrior, sought her to
wife, and offered fitting gifts, even wonderful deeds; for he said that
he would drive together and give the shambling oxen and strong sheep of
all those who lived in Troezen and Epidaurus near the sea, and in the
island of Aegina and in Mases, sons of the Achaeans, and shadowy Megara
and frowning Corinthus, and Hermione and Asine which lie along the sea;
for he was famous with the long spear.

(ll. 63-66) But from Euboea Elephenor, leader of men, the son of
Chalcodon, prince of the bold Abantes, sought her to wife. And he
offered very many gifts, and greatly he desired in his heart to be the
husband of rich-haired Helen.

(ll. 67-74) And from Crete the mighty Idomeneus sought her to wife,
Deucalion's son, offspring of renowned Minos. He sent no one to woo her
in his place, but came himself in his black ship of many thwarts over
the Ogygian sea across the dark wave to the home of wise Tyndareus, to
see Argive Helen and that no one else should bring back for him the girl
whose renown spread all over the holy earth.

(l. 75) And at the prompting of Zeus the all-wise came.

((LACUNA--Thirteen lines lost.))

(ll. 89-100) But of all who came for the maid's sake, the lord Tyndareus
sent none away, nor yet received the gift of any, but asked of all the
suitors sure oaths, and bade them swear and vow with unmixed libations
that no one else henceforth should do aught apart from him as touching
the marriage of the maid with shapely arms; but if any man should cast
off fear and reverence and take her by force, he bade all the others
together follow after and make him pay the penalty. And they, each of
them hoping to accomplish his marriage, obeyed him without wavering.
But warlike Menelaus, the son of Atreus, prevailed against them all
together, because he gave the greatest gifts.

(ll. 100-106) But Chiron was tending the son of Peleus, swift-footed
Achilles, pre-eminent among men, on woody Pelion; for he was still a
boy. For neither warlike Menelaus nor any other of men on earth would
have prevailed in suit for Helen, if fleet Achilles had found her unwed.
But, as it was, warlike Menelaus won her before.

II. [1745]

(ll. 1-2) And she (Helen) bare neat-ankled Hermione in the palace, a
child unlooked for.

(ll. 2-13) Now all the gods were divided through strife; for at that
very time Zeus who thunders on high was meditating marvellous deeds,
even to mingle storm and tempest over the boundless earth, and already
he was hastening to make an utter end of the race of mortal men,
declaring that he would destroy the lives of the demi-gods, that the
children of the gods should not mate with wretched mortals, seeing their
fate with their own eyes; but that the blessed gods henceforth even as
aforetime should have their living and their habitations apart from men.
But on those who were born of immortals and of mankind verily Zeus laid
toil and sorrow upon sorrow.

((LACUNA--Two lines missing.))

(ll. 16-30)....nor any one of men.... ....should go upon black ships....
....to be strongest in the might of his hands.... ....of mortal men
declaring to all those things that were, and those that are, and those
that shall be, he brings to pass and glorifies the counsels of his
father Zeus who drives the clouds. For no one, either of the blessed
gods or of mortal men, knew surely that he would contrive through the
sword to send to Hades full many a one of heroes fallen in strife. But
at that time he knew not as yet the intent of his father's mind, and how
men delight in protecting their children from doom. And he delighted in
the desire of his mighty father's heart who rules powerfully over men.

(ll. 31-43) From stately trees the fair leaves fell in abundance
fluttering down to the ground, and the fruit fell to the ground because
Boreas blew very fiercely at the behest of Zeus; the deep seethed and
all things trembled at his blast: the strength of mankind consumed away
and the fruit failed in the season of spring, at that time when the
Hairless One [1746] in a secret place in the mountains gets three young
every three years. In spring he dwells upon the mountain among tangled
thickets and brushwood, keeping afar from and hating the path of men,
in the glens and wooded glades. But when winter comes on, he lies in a
close cave beneath the earth and covers himself with piles of luxuriant
leaves, a dread serpent whose back is speckled with awful spots.

(ll. 44-50) But when he becomes violent and fierce unspeakably, the
arrows of Zeus lay him low.... Only his soul is left on the holy
earth, and that fits gibbering about a small unformed den. And it
comes enfeebled to sacrifices beneath the broad-pathed earth.... and it
lies....'

((LACUNA--Traces of 37 following lines.))


Fragment #69--Tzetzes [1747], Exeg. Iliad. 68. 19H: Agamemnon and
Menelaus likewise according to Hesiod and Aeschylus are regarded as the
sons of Pleisthenes, Atreus' son. And according to Hesiod, Pleisthenes
was a son of Atreus and Aerope, and Agamemnon, Menelaus and Anaxibia
were the children of Pleisthenes and Cleolla the daughter of Dias.


Fragment #70--Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles' Electra, 539: 'And
she (Helen) bare to Menelaus, famous with the spear, Hermione and her
youngest-born, Nicostratus, a scion of Ares.'


Fragment #71--Pausanias, i. 43. 1: I know that Hesiod in the "Catalogue
of Women" represented that Iphigeneia was not killed but, by the will of
Artemis, became Hecate [1748].


Fragment #72--Eustathius, Hom. 13. 44. sq: Butes, it is said, was a son
of Poseidon: so Hesiod in the "Catalogue".


Fragment #73--Pausanias, ii. 6. 5: Hesiod represented Sicyon as the son
of Erechtheus.


Fragment #74--Plato, Minos, p. 320. D: '(Minos) who was most kingly of
mortal kings and reigned over very many people dwelling round about,
holding the sceptre of Zeus wherewith he ruled many.'


Fragment #75--Hesychius [1749]: The athletic contest in memory of
Eurygyes Melesagorus says that Androgeos the son of Minos was called
Eurygyes, and that a contest in his honour is held near his tomb at
Athens in the Ceramicus. And Hesiod writes: 'And Eurygyes [1750], while
yet a lad in holy Athens...'


Fragment #76--Plutarch, Theseus 20: There are many tales.... about
Ariadne...., how that she was deserted by Theseua for love of another
woman: 'For strong love for Aegle the daughter of Panopeus overpowered
him.' For Hereas of Megara says that Peisistratus removed this verse
from the works of Hesiod.

Athenaeus [1751], xiii. 557 A: But Hesiod says that Theseus wedded both
Hippe and Aegle lawfully.


Fragment #77--Strabo, ix. p. 393: The snake of Cychreus: Hesiod says
that it was brought up by Cychreus, and was driven out by Eurylochus as
defiling the island, but that Demeter received it into Eleusis, and that
it became her attendant.


Fragment #78--Argument I. to the Shield of Heracles: But Apollonius of
Rhodes says that it (the "Shield of Heracles") is Hesiod's both from the
general character of the work and from the fact that in the "Catalogue"
we again find Iolaus as charioteer of Heracles.


Fragment #79--Scholiast on Soph. Trach., 266: (ll. 1-6) 'And
fair-girdled Stratonica conceived and bare in the palace Eurytus her
well-loved son. Of him sprang sons, Didaeon and Clytius and god-like
Toxeus and Iphitus, a scion of Ares. And after these Antiope the
queen, daughter of the aged son of Nauboius, bare her youngest child,
golden-haired Iolea.'


Fragment #80--Herodian in Etymologicum Magnum: 'Who bare Autolycus and
Philammon, famous in speech.... All things that he (Autolyeus) took in
his hands, he made to disappear.'


Fragment #81--Apollonius, Hom. Lexicon: 'Aepytus again, begot Tlesenor
and Peirithous.'


Fragment #82--Strabo, vii. p. 322: 'For Locrus truly was leader of the
Lelegian people, whom Zeus the Son of Cronos, whose wisdom is unfailing,
gave to Deucalion, stones gathered out of the earth. So out of stones
mortal men were made, and they were called people.' [1752]


Fragment #83--Tzetzes, Schol. in Exeg. Iliad. 126: '...Ileus whom the
lord Apollo, son of Zeus, loved. And he named him by his name, because
he found a nymph complaisant [1753] and was joined with her in sweet
love, on that day when Poseidon and Apollo raised high the wall of the
well-built city.'


Fragment #84--Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 326: Clymene the daughter of
Minyas the son of Poseidon and of Euryanassa, Hyperphas' daughter, was
wedded to Phylacus the son of Deion, and bare Iphiclus, a boy fleet of
foot. It is said of him that through his power of running he could race
the winds and could move along upon the ears of corn [1754].... The tale
is in Hesiod: 'He would run over the fruit of the asphodel and not break
it; nay, he would run with his feet upon wheaten ears and not hurt the
fruit.'


Fragment #85--Choeroboscus [1755], i. 123, 22H: 'And she bare a son
Thoas.'


Fragment #86--Eustathius, Hom. 1623. 44: Maro [1756], whose father, it
is said, Hesiod relates to have been Euanthes the son of Oenopion, the
son of Dionysus.


Fragment #87--Athenaeus, x. 428 B, C: 'Such gifts as Dionysus gave to
men, a joy and a sorrow both. Who ever drinks to fullness, in him wine
becomes violent and binds together his hands and feet, his tongue also
and his wits with fetters unspeakable: and soft sleep embraces him.'


Fragment #88--Strabo, ix. p. 442: 'Or like her (Coronis) who lived by
the holy Twin Hills in the plain of Dotium over against Amyrus rich in
grapes, and washed her feet in the Boebian lake, a maid unwed.'


Fragment #89--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 48: 'To him, then, there
came a messenger from the sacred feast to goodly Pytho, a crow [1757],
and he told unshorn Phoebus of secret deeds, that Ischys son of Elatus
had wedded Coronis the daughter of Phlegyas of birth divine.


Fragment #90--Athenagoras [1758], Petition for the Christians, 29:
Concerning Asclepius Hesiod says: 'And the father of men and gods
was wrath, and from Olympus he smote the son of Leto with a lurid
thunderbolt and killed him, arousing the anger of Phoebus.'


Fragment #91--Philodemus, On Piety, 34: But Hesiod (says that Apollo)
would have been cast by Zeus into Tartarus [1759]; but Leto interceded
for him, and he became bondman to a mortal.


Fragment #92--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. ix. 6: 'Or like her, beautiful
Cyrene, who dwelt in Phthia by the water of Peneus and had the beauty of
the Graces.'


Fragment #93--Servius on Vergil, Georg. i. 14: He invoked Aristaeus,
that is, the son of Apollo and Cyrene, whom Hesiod calls 'the shepherd
Apollo.' [1760]


Fragment #94--Scholiast on Vergil, Georg. iv. 361: 'But the water stood
all round him, bowed into the semblance of a mountain.' This verse he
has taken over from Hesiod's "Catalogue of Women".


Fragment #95--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad ii. 469: 'Or like her (Antiope)
whom Boeotian Hyria nurtured as a maid.'


Fragment #96--Palaephatus [1761], c. 42: Of Zethus and Amphion. Hesiod
and some others relate that they built the walls of Thebes by playing on
the lyre.


Fragment #97--Scholiast on Soph. Trach., 1167: (ll. 1-11) 'There is a
land Ellopia with much glebe and rich meadows, and rich in flocks and
shambling kine. There dwell men who have many sheep and many oxen, and
they are in number past telling, tribes of mortal men. And there
upon its border is built a city, Dodona [1762]; and Zeus loved it and
(appointed) it to be his oracle, reverenced by men........And they (the
doves) lived in the hollow of an oak. From them men of earth carry away
all kinds of prophecy,--whosoever fares to that spot and questions the
deathless god, and comes bringing gifts with good omens.'


Fragment #98--Berlin Papyri, No. 9777: [1763] (ll. 1-22) '....strife....
Of mortals who would have dared to fight him with the spear and charge
against him, save only Heracles, the great-hearted offspring of Alcaeus?
Such an one was (?) strong Meleager loved of Ares, the golden-haired,
dear son of Oeneus and Althaea. From his fierce eyes there shone forth
portentous fire: and once in high Calydon he slew the destroying beast,
the fierce wild boar with gleaming tusks. In war and in dread strife no
man of the heroes dared to face him and to approach and fight with him
when he appeared in the forefront. But he was slain by the hands and
arrows of Apollo [1764], while he was fighting with the Curetes for
pleasant Calydon. And these others (Althaea) bare to Oeneus, Porthaon's
son; horse-taming Pheres, and Agelaus surpassing all others, Toxeus and
Clymenus and godlike Periphas, and rich-haired Gorga and wise Deianeira,
who was subject in love to mighty Heracles and bare him Hyllus and
Glenus and Ctesippus and Odites. These she bare and in ignorance she did
a fearful thing: when (she had received).... the poisoned robe that held
black doom....'


Fragment #99A--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad. xxiii. 679: And yet Hesiod
says that after he had died in Thebes, Argeia the daughter of Adrastus
together with others (cp. frag. 99) came to the lamentation over
Oedipus.


Fragment #99--[1765] Papyri greci e latine, No. 131 (2nd-3rd century):
[1766] (ll. 1-10) 'And (Eriphyle) bare in the palace Alcmaon [1767],
shepherd of the people, to Amphiaraus. Him (Amphiaraus) did the Cadmean
(Theban) women with trailing robes admire when they saw face to face
his eyes and well-grown frame, as he was busied about the burying of
Oedipus, the man of many woes. ....Once the Danai, servants of Ares,
followed him to Thebes, to win renown........for Polynices. But,
though well he knew from Zeus all things ordained, the earth yawned
and swallowed him up with his horses and jointed chariot, far from
deep-eddying Alpheus.

(ll. 11-20) But Electyron married the all-beauteous daughter of Pelops
and, going up into one bed with her, the son of Perses begat........and
Phylonomus and Celaeneus and Amphimachus and........and Eurybius and
famous.... All these the Taphians, famous shipmen, slew in fight for
oxen with shambling hoofs,.... ....in ships across the sea's wide back.
So Alcmena alone was left to delight her parents........and the daughter
of Electryon....

((LACUNA))

(l. 21)....who was subject in love to the dark-clouded son of Cronos and
bare (famous Heracles).'


Fragment #100--Argument to the Shield of Heracles, i: The beginning
of the "Shield" as far as the 56th verse is current in the fourth
"Catalogue".


Fragment #101 (UNCERTAIN POSITION)--Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1359 fr. 1 (early
3rd cent. A.D.): ((LACUNA--Slight remains of 3 lines))

(ll. 4-17) '...if indeed he (Teuthras) delayed, and if he feared to obey
the word of the immortals who then appeared plainly to them. But her
(Auge) he received and brought up well, and cherished in the palace,
honouring her even as his own daughters.

And Auge bare Telephus of the stock of Areas, king of the Mysians, being
joined in love with the mighty Heracles when he was journeying in quest
of the horses of proud Laomedon--horses the fleetest of foot that
the Asian land nourished,--and destroyed in battle the tribe of the
dauntless Amazons and drove them forth from all that land. But Telephus
routed the spearmen of the bronze-clad Achaeans and made them embark
upon their black ships. Yet when he had brought down many to the ground
which nourishes men, his own might and deadliness were brought low....'


Fragment #102 (UNCERTAIN POSITION)--Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1359 fr. 2 (early
3rd cent. A.D.): ((LACUNA--Remains of 4 lines))

(ll. 5-16) '....Electra.... was subject to the dark-clouded Son of
Cronos and bare Dardanus.... and Eetion.... who once greatly loved
rich-haired Demeter. And cloud-gathering Zeus was wroth and smote him,
Eetion, and laid him low with a flaming thunderbolt, because he sought
to lay hands upon rich-haired Demeter. But Dardanus came to the coast of
the mainland--from him Erichthonius and thereafter Tros were sprung,
and Ilus, and Assaracus, and godlike Ganymede,--when he had left holy
Samothrace in his many-benched ship.

((LACUNA))

Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1359 fr. 3 (early 3rd cent. A.D.): (ll. 17-24)
[1768]....Cleopatra ....the daughter of.... ....But an eagle caught
up Ganymede for Zeus because he vied with the immortals in
beauty........rich-tressed Diomede; and she bare Hyacinthus, the
blameless one and strong........whom, on a time Phoebus himself slew
unwittingly with a ruthless disk....




