# THE GREAT EOIAE 
(fragments)

Fragment #1--Pausanius, ii. 26. 3: Epidaurus. According to the opinion
of the Argives and the epic poem, the "Great Eoiae", Argos the son of
Zeus was father of Epidaurus.


Fragment #2--Anonymous Comment. on Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, iii.
7: And, they say, Hesiod is sufficient to prove that the word PONEROS
(bad) has the same sense as 'laborious' or 'ill-fated'; for in the
"Great Eoiae" he represents Alcmene as saying to Heracles: 'My son,
truly Zeus your father begot you to be the most toilful as the most
excellent...'; and again: 'The Fates (made) you the most toilful and the
most excellent...'


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Pindar, Isthm. v. 53: The story has been
taken from the "Great Eoiae"; for there we find Heracles entertained by
Telamon, standing dressed in his lion-skin and praying, and there also
we find the eagle sent by Zeus, from which Aias took his name [2001].


Fragment #4--Pausanias, iv. 2. 1: But I know that the so-called "Great
Eoiae" say that Polycaon the son of Butes married Euaechme, daughter of
Hyllus, Heracles' son.


Fragment #5--Pausanias, ix. 40. 6: 'And Phylas wedded Leipephile the
daughter of famous Iolaus: and she was like the Olympians in beauty. She
bare him a son Hippotades in the palace, and comely Thero who was like
the beams of the moon. And Thero lay in the embrace of Apollo and bare
horse-taming Chaeron of hardy strength.'


Fragment #6--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iv. 35: 'Or like her in Hyria,
careful-minded Mecionice, who was joined in the love of golden Aphrodite
with the Earth-holder and Earth-Shaker, and bare Euphemus.'


Fragment #7--Pausanias, ix. 36. 7: 'And Hyettus killed Molurus the dear
son of Aristas in his house because he lay with his wife. Then he
left his home and fled from horse-rearing Argos and came to Minyan
Orchomenus. And the hero received him and gave him a portion of his
goods, as was fitting.'


Fragment #8--Pausanias, ii. 2. 3: But in the "Great Eoiae" Peirene is
represented to be the daughter of Oebalius.


Fragment #9--Pausanias, ii. 16. 4: The epic poem, which the Greek call
the "Great Eoiae", says that she (Mycene) was the daughter of Inachus
and wife of Arestor: from her, then, it is said, the city received its
name.


Fragment #10--Pausanias, vi. 21. 10: According to the poem the "Great
Eoiae", these were killed by Oenomaus [2002]: Alcathous the son of
Porthaon next after Marmax, and after Alcathous, Euryalus, Eurymachus
and Crotalus. The man killed next after them, Aerias, we should judge
to have been a Lacedemonian and founder of Aeria. And after Acrias,
they say, Capetus was done to death by Oenomaus, and Lycurgus, Lasius,
Chalcodon and Tricolonus.... And after Tricolonus fate overtook
Aristomachus and Prias on the course, as also Pelagon and Aeolius and
Cronius.


Fragment #11--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 57: In the
"Great Eoiae" it is said that Endymion was transported by Zeus into
heaven, but when he fell in love with Hera, was befooled with a shape of
cloud, and was cast out and went down into Hades.


Fragment #12--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 118: In the
"Great Eoiae" it is related that Melampus, who was very dear to
Apollo, went abroad and stayed with Polyphantes. But when the king had
sacrificed an ox, a serpent crept up to the sacrifice and destroyed
his servants. At this the king was angry and killed the serpent, but
Melampus took and buried it. And its offspring, brought up by him, used
to lick his ears and inspire him with prophecy. And so, when he was
caught while trying to steal the cows of Iphiclus and taken bound to the
city of Aegina, and when the house, in which Iphiclus was, was about
to fall, he told an old woman, one of the servants of Iphiclus, and in
return was released.


Fragment #13--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 828: In the
"Great Eoiae" Scylla is the daughter of Phoebus and Hecate.


Fragment #14--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 181: Hesiod in
the "Great Eoiae" says that Phineus was blinded because he told Phrixus
the way [2003].


Fragment #15--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 1122: Argus.
This is one of the children of Phrixus. These.... ....Hesiod in the
"Great Eoiae" says were born of Iophossa the daughter of Aeetes. And he
says there were four of them, Argus, Phrontis, Melas, and Cytisorus.


Fragment #16--Antoninus Liberalis, xxiii: Battus. Hesiod tells the story
in the "Great Eoiae".... ....Magnes was the son of Argus, the son of
Phrixus and Perimele, Admetus' daughter, and lived in the region of
Thessaly, in the land which men called after him Magnesia. He had a son
of remarkable beauty, Hymenaeus. And when Apollo saw the boy, he was
seized with love for him, and would not leave the house of Magnes. Then
Hermes made designs on Apollo's herd of cattle which were grazing in the
same place as the cattle of Admetus. First he cast upon the dogs which
were guarding them a stupor and strangles, so that the dogs forgot the
cows and lost the power of barking. Then he drove away twelve heifers
and a hundred cows never yoked, and the bull who mounted the cows,
fastening to the tail of each one brushwood to wipe out the footmarks of
the cows.

He drove them through the country of the Pelasgi, and Achaea in the land
of Phthia, and through Locris, and Boeotia and Megaris, and thence into
Peloponnesus by way of Corinth and Larissa, until he brought them to
Tegea. From there he went on by the Lycaean mountains, and past Maenalus
and what are called the watch-posts of Battus. Now this Battus used to
live on the top of the rock and when he heard the voice of the heifers
as they were being driven past, he came out from his own place, and knew
that the cattle were stolen. So he asked for a reward to tell no one
about them. Hermes promised to give it him on these terms, and Battus
swore to say nothing to anyone about the cattle. But when Hermes had
hidden them in the cliff by Coryphasium, and had driven them into a cave
facing towards Italy and Sicily, he changed himself and came again to
Battus and tried whether he would be true to him as he had vowed. So,
offering him a robe as a reward, he asked of him whether he had noticed
stolen cattle being driven past. And Battus took the robe and told him
about the cattle. But Hermes was angry because he was double-tongued,
and struck him with his staff and changed him into a rock. And either
frost or heat never leaves him [2004].




