# THE ASTRONOMY
(fragments)

Fragment #1--Athenaeus xi, p. 491 d: And the author of "The Astronomy",
which is attributed forsooth to Hesiod, always calls them (the Pleiades)
Peleiades: 'but mortals call them Peleiades'; and again, 'the stormy
Peleiades go down'; and again, 'then the Peleiades hide away....'

Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. ii. 16: The Pleiades.... whose stars are
these:--'Lovely Teygata, and dark-faced Electra, and Alcyone, and
bright Asterope, and Celaeno, and Maia, and Merope, whom glorious Atlas
begot....' ((LACUNA)) 'In the mountains of Cyllene she (Maia) bare
Hermes, the herald of the gods.'


Fragment #2--Scholiast on Aratus 254: But Zeus made them (the sisters of
Hyas) into the stars which are called Hyades. Hesiod in his Book about
Stars tells us their names as follows: 'Nymphs like the Graces [1401],
Phaesyle and Coronis and rich-crowned Cleeia and lovely Phaco and
long-robed Eudora, whom the tribes of men upon the earth call Hyades.'


Fragment #3--Pseudo-Eratosthenes Catast. frag. 1: [1402] The Great
Bear.]--Hesiod says she (Callisto) was the daughter of Lycaon and
lived in Arcadia. She chose to occupy herself with wild-beasts in the
mountains together with Artemis, and, when she was seduced by Zeus,
continued some time undetected by the goddess, but afterwards, when she
was already with child, was seen by her bathing and so discovered. Upon
this, the goddess was enraged and changed her into a beast. Thus she
became a bear and gave birth to a son called Arcas. But while she was in
the mountains, she was hunted by some goat-herds and given up with
her babe to Lycaon. Some while after, she thought fit to go into the
forbidden precinct of Zeus, not knowing the law, and being pursued by
her own son and the Arcadians, was about to be killed because of the
said law; but Zeus delivered her because of her connection with him
and put her among the stars, giving her the name Bear because of the
misfortune which had befallen her.

Comm. Supplem. on Aratus, p. 547 M. 8: Of Bootes, also called the
Bear-warden. The story goes that he is Arcas the son of Callisto and
Zeus, and he lived in the country about Lycaeum. After Zeus had seduced
Callisto, Lycaon, pretending not to know of the matter, entertained
Zeus, as Hesiod says, and set before him on the table the babe which he
had cut up.


Fragment #4--Pseudo-Eratosthenes, Catast. fr. xxxii: Orion.]--Hesiod
says that he was the son of Euryale, the daughter of Minos, and of
Poseidon, and that there was given him as a gift the power of walking
upon the waves as though upon land. When he was come to Chios, he
outraged Merope, the daughter of Oenopion, being drunken; but Oenopion
when he learned of it was greatly vexed at the outrage and blinded him
and cast him out of the country. Then he came to Lemnos as a beggar and
there met Hephaestus who took pity on him and gave him Cedalion his own
servant to guide him. So Orion took Cedalion upon his shoulders and used
to carry him about while he pointed out the roads. Then he came to the
east and appears to have met Helius (the Sun) and to have been healed,
and so returned back again to Oenopion to punish him; but Oenopion was
hidden away by his people underground. Being disappointed, then, in his
search for the king, Orion went away to Crete and spent his time hunting
in company with Artemis and Leto. It seems that he threatened to kill
every beast there was on earth; whereupon, in her anger, Earth sent up
against him a scorpion of very great size by which he was stung and so
perished. After this Zeus, at one prayer of Artemis and Leto, put him
among the stars, because of his manliness, and the scorpion also as a
memorial of him and of what had occurred.


Fragment #5--Diodorus iv. 85: Some say that great earthquakes occurred,
which broke through the neck of land and formed the straits [1403], the
sea parting the mainland from the island. But Hesiod, the poet, says
just the opposite: that the sea was open, but Orion piled up the
promontory by Peloris, and founded the close of Poseidon which is
especially esteemed by the people thereabouts. When he had finished
this, he went away to Euboea and settled there, and because of his
renown was taken into the number of the stars in heaven, and won undying
remembrance.




