
# On MacDonald

Since you sent me the email with the quotes from Lewis and Macdonald, I have
since gone out to Half-Price Books and bought the novel Lilith by George
Macdonald. This is what I remember about reading him as a kid (and Lilith is a
different novel than Phantases, of course, but they are in very similar style).

His mastary of the English language is... wanting, to use a nice word. Awful is
a more accurate word. I would go so far as to say he is incompentent when it
comes to making coherent sense with words. At least as far as putting together
sentences, and making those sentences into paragraphs. His chapters might be
very well put together (I have only read two of them, so I can't judge the
overall structure yet), but everything from his word choices to sentence rythem
is lacking in my opinion.

And my criticism of Macdonald is similar to my criticism of Dickins. Did
Dickens write beautiful novels? Of course. Similarly, MacDonald's novels (at
least, his fantasy, I can't speak to his drama's which I have never read) are
worth reading simply for what they are.

But I can't understress just how painful it is to slog through the words. I
find myself reading and re-reading paragraphs, because there is some particular
sentence, which is crucial to understanding what is going on, which is vague
and ambiguous. Vague and ambiguous sentences work well when the subject matter
is concrete, and it is very clear that we are in the real world, and the real
world rules apply. When we are in that realm, I am all for ambiguous and
abstract language.

However, in the world of fantasy, where we have talking ravens and portals to
new dimensions with snake goddesses and a palace to the heavens, I want it to
be absolutely clear what the protagonist is experiencing. I want no ambiguity
in the language.

MacDonald just has to be so clever with his sentence structure though. He puts
colons in spurious places, he splices commas just for the fuck of it, and he
will break apart a sentence into three chunks which are seperated by
semi-colons. Needless to say, MacDonald does not make himself lucid in the
slightest by his words. Which is a shame, because his fantasy novels are worth
diving into.

## tl;dr
If I had to use one last crude analogy, it would be this. Diving in to the work
of a man like Sam Harris has been like diving into a crystal clear lake. I can
see to the floor, I know the depth of the water, and I can explore the work at
my liesure. Exploring MacDonalds work is like wading through mollasses. Sure,
mollasses is sweet, which tastes nice I suppose, but if I am going to be
swimming around, I'm not going to be eating the stuff I'm swimming in.

## A meme
I want to make one last point about a meme which might emerge here, which I
want to dispel up front. MacDonald was a poor writer. It is not because he
wrote in the early 1900s that I have difficulty understanding him. I have read
plenty from other authors of before that time period with absolutely crystal
understanding of all the words and paragraphs. Shakespeare, believe it or not,
is actually really lucid once you understand the vocabulary. The Bronte sisters
were lucid. translations of Russian novels were lucid (Constance Garrett wrote
many lucid translations of Doestoyevsky in 1900-1920 which I have read).
Stuff like Mary Shelly, Bram Stoker, and so forth are all lucid. Not all of it
is worth reading, but it is at least lucid.

## Concrete Example
MacDonald is not lucid. In fact, I would say that sometimes it seems like he
is striving to be the opposite of lucid by creating sentences which are just
plain awful. Let me give a concrete example.

    ... It [a mirror the protagonist found in the attic] had an ebony frame, on
    top of which stood a black eagle with outstretched wings, in his beak a
    golden chain, from whose end hung a black ball.

    I had been looking at rather than into the mirror, when suddenly I became
    aware that it reflected neither the chamber nor my own person. I have an
    impression ...

So this is two sentences from the end of chapter 2 of Lilith. Our protagonist
has found a mirror, and he is investigating it. We spend great detail
describing the eagle on top of the frame, which is great, then the next
sentence is 'I had been looking at...' which my mind parsed out to be 'I had
been looking at [the eagle] rather than into the mirror'. From there, the entire
rest of the paragraph made no sense to me, and I had to go back and figure out
what the fuck was going on with MacDonalds sentence structure in order to make
sense of what is going on here. "I had been looking at rather than into the
mirror" is such an awful phrase, my fingers are in literal pain right now just
from typing it.

The sentence in the quote is literally the first mention of the eagle, then we
suddenly shift to talking about the mirror, but the language Macdonald uses is
not "shifting" in nature. It is written to give the impression that we are
talking about the same thing, wHich is ambiguous rather than lucid.  This works
well for injecting symbolism (it's clear that the black eagle and the mirror
are intimately related in Macdonalds world) but it's not so okay when I'm not
sure if the eagle is literally alive or not. Is the eagle also made out of
ebony, or is it literally an alive eagle which found it's way in to our
protagonists attic, and is about to attack him? Either version could be true,
and we can't look to the text to clear up that ambiguity.

It's pretty clear once you read it and then re-read it that the eagle is
probably a part of the frame, and that it is not alive. But I had to read over
these two sentences (and the sentences around them) at least three or four
times before I finally understood what was happening.

Later, our protagonist sees a raven in the mirror, and the raven actually does
come to life, which is what brings him across the threshold into the fantasy
world. I only mention this to illustrate the point that ambiguitiy is obnoxious
in a fantasy setting.

## Final notes
So yeah, all of that to say, I will certainly work through Lilith so that I
read all 57 chapters rather than just the first 2, and from that point I will
be able to provide more valid criticism of MacDonald. But for now, I just want
to say that his english sucks, and if I could go back in time and learn him
some good grammer, I would.
