In the beginning there was a void. It was not the Void, or The Void, but
instead simply "a void", the only one of its kind, always being nothing and
never being something.

Others have names for this phenemenon, or concept, that vary from religous to
scientific to agnostic to everything that you could perceive in between. Space
is given the name of all things outside the realm of human existance, or any
existance at all, but instead that space where something may reside, but
currently nothing is.

Another name given to this void in eastern culture is the Dao, or the Tao, the
Way, and the juxtuposition of the Yin and the Yang, merged together as One Way,
The Way, the way that is always straight yet ever turning. For in this Eastern
Culture, the Dao is given as the thing that existed before things existed.

In Middle Eastern culture, you have God, Yaweh, the Eternal, the Holy Trinity,
Allah, the Father, and many other names given to this thing that existed before
existance meant anything. However, this God or Father is the same to the Dao in
many ways, of which the one namely that they are both concepts that have the
claim to being more fundamental than the concepts of Space and Vacuum and
Nothingness. They both require intuition in understanding, as they each have
their own difficulties in grasping the various concepts that their respective
works, the Dao Te Ching or the Bible, the Old Testament, the Holy Book, and
many others.

However, in one key way does the Dao exist in a different way than God or
Allah. For the people that advocate for a model of life stem around a Central
figure, usually capitalized as such, would have the people who subscribe to
their philosophy make patently absurd claims like 'there is a God who is above
all else' or 'Jesus was a human being that died for over 48 hours and rose back
from the dead.' Claims like this only serve to hurt the true message of Jesus,
which is that of a mythology, the Son of God who comes down to Earth to
sacrifice himself for the sake of Original Sin as commited by Adam Son of God
and his wife Eve, the first lady of all that lives in the void.

For alas, I stray from the concept of the void. The dao is much mor like the
void than God is, for God created something out of the nothingness that is the
void, while the Dao did and does no such thing. The dao is not a "God", it is
just simply an intuition that seems to apply to a great many things in life,
and in its union creates a beautiful and wonderfully disconcordant harmony.

There is also the view of Tolkien, in the Silmilarrion, he makes the claim that
all of things in Middle Earth began with the music of Spirits, or Auiun, and
that there was nothing but the music of these spirits, not even the sense of
sound, but instead of only the great ebbs and flows of the soul that one might
feel when getting really stoned and listening to Pink Floyd's iconic 'Dark Side
of the Moon' (These are of course my words and not Tolkeins, but I would hope
he would find my sense of humor at least helpful in describing the beginning of
his world of Arda).

Regardless of Tolkein though, there is this always present concept of a void,
and what I like to do is instead of understanding where the void leads at an
academic level, I beleive it is important to live your life in a way where you
can expect a certain level of knowing what the face of death looks like. In
doing that, in understanding that all things came from somewhere, and that all
things will come to pass, one has the sense that you can begin to see yourself
in the view point of one little ape in the vast world of 7 billion and rising
we have today.

Also, if we are going to be completely honest right now, I am high as fuck, so
please take everything I have written so far with that grain of salt.

Before we continue with the free writing, I just want to say one thing. I think
I'm mostly done. I openly wept reading the very last chapter of Book 6 of the
Lord of the Rings, and the Return of the King
