# Lemur Demon Dream
So this is a rather strange article to start. I have so many things to write
about last nights dream, about what just happened, about my meditation waking
up, I don't know where to start because I'm afraid I'm going to miss pieces and
then they will be gone forever.

Okay, so enough of that, that happened just this morning and I still don't know
what to make of it. When I woke up today, I looked outside and saw that it was
light, and like I said, I had these two dreams, both of which had a pretty
profound impact on my psyche, and I mostly sort of layed there, realizing that
I probably wasn't going back to sleep, and playing through both of the dreams
in my head, going over them again and again, because I so very much did not
want to forget them. Eventually, after about twenty minutes of laying there,
when my watch alarm went off in the other room, I got up, grabbed my phone and
recorded the dreams in voice on my phone. The telling of both those dreams took
me about 20 minutes. I could transcribe what I wrote here, but instead of doing
that, I will elect to write through them again, because there were a lot of
details to these dreams that are important to me, and these two dreams I want
to have written down for sure in as complete a way that I can. They are so
profound, and the second one in particular had such a huge impact on me, on top
of this incident with Kaley this morning, it's hard for me to take it in.
"There is so much beauty in the world, it's overwhelming, I can't take it in".

After I recorded the dreams, I put some lounge clothes on and went outside to
meditate. I went to my favorite meditation spot, but this time instead of
sitting at the top of the hill, I went to the bottom, at the shore of the lake,
and I meditated there. I went through a lot of things during that session, and
it was a good reset button for me. Before the meditation, I had the inclination
to act on all of my base desires, my base instincts, after those two dreams, I
wanted to declare things to people and to make things known to them, but after
the meditation, I reset, and I came back to myself. I felt my own body again,
and I stepped out of the dream world of my imagination. Meditation is
important, and I will make an effort to practice some more.

So enough of that, let's get to these dreams. In this case, now, instead of
working backward through the day as I have been, I will place the two dreams in
order, because that is the way they should go.

So both of the dreams happened in the dream version of my parents house, which
as I've said before, is laid out in an identical way to the real version of my
parents house. In fact, this dream version was so much like my parents actual
house, that calling it the dream version would be unneccassary, and you could
just say that it was taking place in my parents house. Still, there were some
details about various furniture and things that were like my parents house when
I was a kid more than things are arranged now, so that is different, but for
the most part it's exactly like my parents house. So the first dream begins,
and I am in our schoolroom. This room is probably the least like anything that
the schoolroom has ever been, it was mostly empty, and there were some sitting
areas on the back wall next to the window.

This first part of the first dream, it started in the school room.
And as I said, the schoolroom was the room in the house that was the most
unlike any iteration of the school room that it has ever been. And I remember,
the first thing that I wanted to do was to let out this demon. Now, this is the
interesting thing about this dream. As I was letting out the demon, or rather,
as I was deciding to do so, I knew what the demon was, what it was like, and
what it would do, and I knew how the dream would go from there, for the most
part. It was like I was putting in a movie, and I knew the subject of the
movie, and I knew how the movie ended, but I wanted to watch the movie again
anyway. And that is how this demon was summoned. I took a book, and I opened
it, and out of it came the demon.

I will now do my best to describe the demon. I have, even still, a pretty clear
vision in my head of what the demon looks like, and I will do my best to do it
justice. So the demon was knee height to me. It had two hind legs, and two
distinct arms, somewhat in proportion to human limbs, but the demon was
equipped to run on it's four limbs. It was most like a lemur, now that I am
able to come up with an animal. I think a lemur is the best analogy for this
demon, at least as far as body dimensions go.

Now, the demon had fur. It had hair, also like a lemur, and it had mostly black
fur, except it had some patterns of white fur amongst the black fur. I am
trying to remember exactly where the white patterns were on the demon, but my
imagination is interfering with my memory right now, and I don't think I will
be able to get it. The key point here is, the demon had a very pale face, a
very human like face. The face was in proportion to the rest of it's body, but
it was like a wrinkly old man. It reminds me a bit of those books that have a
face coming out of them in the movies, kind of similar to that, but very
sinister, and way more animate than that. And none of these things seemed out
of place, the way I am describing them makes it sound like "a lemur with a
human face, how funny that would look" but if I had skills with drawing, I
could draw it, and it would not look funny, but instead it would be something
natural. To talk about its face, I imagine the best way to describe it would be
as the old wise monkey sage that exists in monkey movies, with the hair in
appropiate sagely places on the face of the monkey, but this would be a younger
version of that sage, very alive, and very animate. That is the best I can do
without dwelling on it longer.

Something also, this demon had a tail. This tail was not like a lemur tail, but
instead was shaped like one would expect a demon tail to be shaped. It wriggled
like a snake, and had an arrowhead like ending on the end. It was pitch black,
and was stiff, like a wire. If one were to grab the tail, I could garuntee you
that it would create an extreme reaction out of the demon, and nothing good
would come of it.

To talk a little bit about the personality of this demon, it was a very
playful, and sly demon. As you will see as I describe the dream, the demon is
verying cunning with his words, but at the same time he is very playful. He
likes to joke and play with his prey, and the whole thing is like a fun game to
him.

So I let out the demon. I must remind you, that I was not doing this for any
reason other than "to watch a familiar movie again". As in, I knew how to re
capture the demon, and that was with the image of a girl bouncing a ball
robotically up and down, which I will describe in it's proper place, and I was
more doing this out of intention to let the demon free, and let what happens
happen, rather than for any other reason.

In fact, it is very difficult to describe my exact motivations by what they
were. I think this is the case because I had no motivations to open the demon.
It was just something that came to me as something that I wanted to do, similar
to how one could say "I want to watch Movie X" and place movie X into the
player, and watch it for the next two hours. That person might have seen that
movie before, and they know how it ends, but for whatever reason, they just
decided, "I want to watch that movie right now," so they put it in and watch
it. It was the same for me with this demon. I sort of just decided, without
dwelling on it or having any real reason, that I wanted to summon this demon,
and I knew how to capture the demon once it was out, and I knew the personality
of this demon, but similar to how someone watching a familiar movie might see
something or have some effect to their psyche after they watch a movie again, I
had similar sorts of effects on me.

I have not ever explored this demon in dreams before, and the notion that I
knew this demon and what he was about and what he would do and how to recapture
him was one that was isolated to this particular dream experince. How I knew
these things or where they come from I do not know.

So after the demon was summoned, I summoned it by openning this book, and the
book open, and there was a bit of a dramatic entrance by the demon. The image I
remember from the dream is of a lifeless body of the demon coming out from a
sort of smoke and light show coming from the book, a very dark smoke and light
show, not overly dramatic, and not accompanied by any sort of music other than
the sounds of smoke and light, whatever those sounds are. And out of the smoke,
there was this lifeless statue of a demon, almost like it were a pelt, a
stuffed animal, that one would have proped up in their room if they were a
lemur hunter. Well, this lifeless state only lasted for a breif moment, and
before the smoke could even clear, life instantly sprang into the demon, and it
very breifly looked around before it laughed and scurried off on all fours. And
when it scurried off, I immediately left the room and went into the kitchen
where my parents were.

When I made it to the kitchen, I made them aware of what was happening. I told
them, "Listen, just so you know, I have summoned a demon, so be careful." And
they had a sort of indifference to it. It wasn't that they couldn't be bothered
by it, or that they weren't afraid of it, but they more brushed the topic away,
almost as if to say (although they did not really explicitly say anything)
okay, well, thanks for letting us know, and why did you do that, and I assume
you're going to take care of it. And they said all of that with their body
language, with the way that they continued on sitting at the kitchen table, and
continued on with their business. I have not totally captured their meaning,
but I think that's about the best I can do. So I then mentioned that I am
pretty sure the demon is in the study, and they said, "okay, we'll be here,
thanks for letting us know" in that same sort of way that I described, and so I
made my way, after letting them know about the demon, into the study.

I wish I could recall exactactly what happened in the study. I went in to the
study, and mostly what I remember was looking around at all the corners of the
room, mostly the ceiling corners, looking for the demon. And I remember getting
glimpses of it, but it was definitely scurring around the room, and it was able
to hide itself behind the different furniture and things in the room, and it
was constantly escaping behind furniture, and then coming back into my view.

Now, this is the point that I don't remember. I know we exchanged words back
and forth, but I don't remember what the words were, or what they were related
to. I might listen back to my recording of this whole thing and see if there is
any insight there, but I don't want to do that right now. The biggest thing I
rememebr is that the demon was playing a sort of hide and seek, and I kept
trying to find it, but it kept appearing in the places I wasn't looking, and
when I would redirect myself to look where I saw it, it would manage to scurry
around again and appear in another unexpected place. It was toying with me, and
it was being very playful when it was doing so. You can imagine a scene in a
horror movie where the bad guy is saying "come out come out wherever you are"
to the protaganist who is looking for them.

Anyway, the demon eventually reveals itself to me, and I do remember that it
startled me a bit, sort of like a jump scare, but in a different way, like I
knew he was going to reveal himself to me, I just didn't know when. I do
remember being quite scared and apprehensive to do anything. I remember there
was the scene then, after he had reveal himself, he was trying to swallow me,
and I had managed to avoid his swallow, and he stood almost with a sinster
laugh in the middle of the study, and I knew that trying to confront it was not
the proper thing to do, and I determined that this little game we were playing
was done, and that it was time to go back into the kitchen.

So I exit the study, and I go into the kitchen, where my dad is actually in the
seat my mom usually sits in, and my mom is in Evan's spot. There is no
significance to this, as we would often sit in the "wrong spot," when it's not
dinner time, and this is what they were doing now, they were just sitting in
the spot that was most convienient to sit.

So I exit the study, and observe the demon sort brooding in the study there,
and I knew it was going to give chase to me. So I go back into the kitchen, and
as I come out, I give my parents the update, "Okay, so I have found the demon,
it was definitely in the study, and now it is giving chase to me." and my mom
in particular was really scared, especially when the demon came out somewhat
menecingly, at least, menecingly to our vision, it was just the way the demon
walked to the demon, but regardless, it came out and stood there looking at us,
still being playful, but this time instead of being deceptive, it was sort of
just brooding there, and even making some faces that you could call funny
faces, not silly faces, but faces that in others contexts might be considered
funny. And I remember my mom being scared, like, "look at that, what are you
going to do with that thing, it's going to swallow you!" And I said, no, look,
it is warded off by my attachment to my father.

And this is the part of the dream that I find the most profound, (well, there
is a lot about this dream that is profound, but this is one of the profound
things that I don't fully understand yet). What I did, I noticed taht my mom
was right, and that the demon was preparing to pounce, but I noticed this, and
I began hugging my father, almost embracing him, from the side, covering his
arms with my embrace, it was not a mutual embrace, but more the embrace of a
child who clings to his father. And my father, I remember, was still there, and
he just sort of sat there, like he wasn't sure what I was doing, but since it
seemed to be working, he decided to just sort of sit there.

And that did in fact ward the demon off. It was still ready to pounce, but it
was very noticable that it became apprehensive at my embrace of my father. And
we were safe from it for that breif time.

However, this was ruined just moments later by my mother. She immedietly, as
soon as she realized that the demon was benig warded off ran to us, to embrace
myself and my father together. She surely did this with the intention of "being
safe with us" but I knew this was the wrong thing to do, and as I saw her
running to us, I said "No don't, it will just swallow all of us if you do
that," but she ran to us anyway, and embraced me around my father.

Well, as soon as she was embraced with us, the demon grew extremely large.
Rather, I should say that it's mouth became extremely large, it's mouth began
to open, and until it turned into something that wasn't even like a mouth, it
was more like a funnel, a funnel that, when you looked into it, led into
something akin to infinite darkness. Now, if one were to have looked at this
from the side, looking at it from an entirely emperical point of view, this
mouth was indeed like a giant funnel coming out of the place where the mouth of
the demon should be, but looking into it, it was like the entire thing was not
part of the demon, but instead part of some infinite darkness. It did not lead
to anywhere except darkness. Eternal darkness. And so this demon opened up it's
mouth in this way, and it became very large. I would say that the opening was
about 7 feet in diameter, so it stretched from the floor almost all the way up
to the ceiling, but not quite. It was taller than all of us for sure. And
attached to this newly openend darkness, was the demon, and it was pouncing on
us, and it came up over us, with the funnel of it's newly opened mouth pointed
downward, and it came down onto, over us, and engulfed us in darkness, for a
breif moment.

As soon as all of this happened, I did not have time do anything, but as soon
as it began to engulf us, I disattached from both my mother and my father. I
looked to both of them, particularly my mother, and I explained to her, "when
it was just me and dad, the demon could not get us all, but when you joined, it
could get all of us, did you not see that?" and my mom just looked back at me
sort of dumbfounded.

Let me clarify at this point exactly what happened so that it is clear when I
read it back. The demon engulfed us in the darkness, but before it could I let
go. When I let go, the darkness dissappeared, and the demon was gone as well,
but I knew that the demon was still around. So it was sort of in that darkness
that the demon was able to escape from us. It's something that doesn't make
sense if you were watching the scene from the outside. From the outside, it's
unknown whether the demon went poof, or whether it put the darkness over our
eyes. I'd say the best way to describe it form the outside would be that the
mouth/darkness funnel came over us, and fell all the way through us, and it
looked as though the demon went through the ground. But that's not what
happened. That's just the best way to describe it. Really what happened is that
the demon engulfed us in darkness, and I was able to deny our full engulfing by
removing myself from my parents, and the demon had managed to scurry completely
out of sight of all of us in that moment of darkness that we had. In fact, it
almost did feel like the demon "went through us" and into the ground below, but
I again must emphasize that that is not what happened, and just that it is the
best way I have to describe what really happened.

So I knew I had to act fast. After my breif exchange with my mother, I knew
that I had to capture the demon again. And I was comforted with the fact that I
knew how to do it. But at this point I knew that I had to reflect on it, to
make sure that both I knew how to capture it, and that capturing it was the
best thing to do, so I went outside, through the living room, out our back
door, and into our backyard.

Now, the backyard was still also very much like the actual backyard of my
parents place, but the swing set was still there. That swing set was only
removed a couple of years ago irl, but in the dream, the swing set was still
there.

So I went outside, and I walked onto our porch, and went to the right towards
tho swingset. The swingset was there, it was a square frame, with legs on each
side, and I was facing the opening of it. On the other side of the swingset is
our fence, the fence to our backyard. In between the swing set and the fence,
the demon stood there. It was not moving, it was standing on its two hind legs,
and it had its hands crossed in front of itself, similar to how someone
standing might rest their hands in front of themselves and it's head was bowed
down towards the ground, as if it were waiting for something there. I walked up
to the swingset, but I did not go through it, I went right up to it, but I knew
that I shouldn't go through it. I stood there, and I looked at the demon, and
at that point, I reflected. I was very calm at this point. I reflected on the
demon, on it's nature, on what it was, and I reflected on how to capture it. At
this point, I got a very clear vision, (a vision within a dream, how strange a
thing) of the girl bouncing the ball, up and down mechanically, and I knew that
this girl was what would capture the demon. I then looked at the demon, and I
stared at it, trying to gauge it's intentions, and I knew that he was almost
trying to coerce me, to tempt me, to walk under the swingset. And I will say, I
was drawn to walk under the swingset, with the notion that, "the supersition of
walking under the swingset is silly" but I knew that it was more than just
superstition telling me to not walk under the swingset, so I denied my
rebellious attitude in that moment, and I went back inside.

I knew where I had to go. I went back to the school room, and near the book,
the book I had used to summon, I found a doll. This doll was like a rag doll,
that they sell, not like a barbie, but very much a girl doll. With this doll,
there was also a ball that I found.

Now at this point, as I was gathering the doll and the ball, and I was
arranging them in the way that they needed to be arranged, the demon had
followed me, and was standing outside the doorway to the school room. I just
now put together, that at this point, the demon was always standing on the
other sides of doorways, and almost as if it could not cross them, and was
staring at me and almost trying to entice me to do so.

Anyway, with the demon standing there (and this time I was not at all enticed
to cross the doorway to the demon, I was too focused on the doll and the ball)
I placed doll standing up on it's feet on top of a small piece of wood, and I
raised up its right arm to be parallel to the floor, and under it's right hand
I placed the ball. I dropped the ball and it hit the wood and bounced back up,
and with my other hand, I moved the hand of the doll up and down to keep the
ball bouncing, almost as though I was playing with the doll, and almost as if
it was the doll that was bouncing the ball like a basketball. After only a
couple of bounces, the doll started perpetuating the bounces on it's own. This
doll was like the scene in a wrinkle in time, where all of the girls are
controlled by the overmind thing or whatever, and they are all bouncing balls
in unison with eachother, with a extreme amount of roboticism, but in this case
it was a doll, and it was just one of them, and I started the motion of the
bouncing and the doll continued it when I let go.

When I let go, something I didn't quite expect happened. The result I expected,
but the way that it happened I didn't expect. I was look at this whole thing
with a sort of curiosity, and as I was watching the doll bounce the ball, I
noticed that the doll got larger and larger, as did the ball it was bouncing,
but it was doing so in a very uniform way, and the mechanicalness or roboticsm
of the way it was bouncing the ball didn't change. But as the doll got larger,
it became less and less doll like, less ragdoll like that is and more "lifelike
doll" like if that makes any sense, and the demon, the lemur there, who was
staring at the ground to the school room, and he as completely still, and still
life like, but as the doll got bigger, and less ragdolly, the demon started to
become slightly smaller (remember it is a small demon, about knee height to
begin with) and more and more ragdolly, and by the time the doll reached it's
full height, the demon had become a complete ragdoll, to the point that I knew
that it had lost all of it's abilities to be lifelike at all. The "soul" of the
demon was still in the ragdoll, though, but it's ability to do anything in the
world was trapped.

So at this point, when the demon had fully transformed, I crossed the door to
the demon, and I picked it up, and I looked at it. I took it, along with the
book, the doll, and the ball, and took them all into the closet, and I put the
book away with the doll and the ball, but the demon I still had in my hand, I
as I started to put it away, I knew that it was not wise to hide it in the
closet with these other things.

At this point, as I'm putting all of these things away, my parents came into
the school room, on the other side of teh doorway between the closet (which
this school room closet in the dream was like a walk in closet, which is unlike
IRL) and I heard my mom say, "why are you keeping that ragdoll, just put it
with the other things and keep it in that closet." I knew that that was wrong,
but I put the doll there with the other things, because I knew that it was not
going to do any harm in the immediate, and I had the very strong intention to
go back and grab it.

Well, I did not put the demon ragdoll fully away, but instead left it in the
box with the other things sort of like it was sitting on the edge of the box,
and I walked back into the room.

And I said to my parents, who were both there "I think it is wrong to hide that
demon there, I think I should keep it" and my mom again said, "Why would you do
that, why would you keep such a thing as that, just be rid of it, keep it
hidden in the closet" and as she said that, the ragdoll demon came flying out
of the closet as if it were catapulted. Now, I want to clarify, there is not a
catapult in the closet, and the demon had not "regained it's ability to move"
as in, the demon itself did not propel itself on it's own. But still, however
this happened, it happened, and the demon came flying out of the closet in an
arch, and it landed at my feet, literelly to the point where I could just pick
it up, and hold it. So I picked it up, and I said, "see, it should not be
hidden away, it should be held out like this where everyone can see it." and I
gripped the demon ragdoll by the waist, and held it out for my parents to see.

That was the ending of that dream.
