# Adam and Eve (Adam)
The story of Adam and Eve is an interesting one, and the reason I find it
interesting is because it satisfies a way of thinking about human beings that
is in some way ego centric. From the Adam and Eve story, we get a story that we
could very easily imagine ourselves in, and the fall that they take is
something like the most interseting fall that we have ever felt. It's the
ultimate fall, and as such, we feel it as much as we can empathize with them.
In that way, we fall with Adam, and with Eve, in this story. The world is so
pure, and our knowledge is so naive, that we don't have any idea what it means
to eat the apple as we did.

So the story of Adam and Eve actually starts not "once upon a time" because it
starts before Time even existed. The person who is usually known as "Our Father
in Heaven" but more affectionately named "Steve" for anthromorphization decides
that he wants to create a universe. Steve has just been bogged down with this
whole, "War in Heaven," and he is glad because his Son was able to overthrow
one of the angels that wanted to rise up against him. Of course, the fact that
there are angels who are angry at Steve is disconcerting to Steve, but he
doesn't think much of it. He decides, now that that is done and over with, that
he wants to create a universe.

So Steve gathers the appropiate materials to create a universe, as Divine
Creators do. He take a little bit of cardboard, and a little bit of elmers
glue, and some sprinkles with a pen, and using all of taht, he constructs for
himself his very own universe.

Of course, no universe is complete without some critters in it. So he takes
some lions from the lions bin, and some tigers from the tiger bin, and he
places them into his panarama. Finally, he decides that he wants to create one
more creature, and he wants to put them in a beautiful garden in one of the
corners of this place.

So these two creatures, they become conscious, and Steve looks at the things
that he created, and he says to himself, "Wow, I didn't expect them to be
conscious, that was unexpected." But still, now that the humans are conscious,
he speaks to them, and he says, "Greetings humans, my name is Yahweh," (Steve
just made up a name for himself because he never liked the name Steve) ", I
created your garden, and I created you. You are divine, and you are Humans. You
are the greatest thing I have created. Now go forth, and eat of the fruit of
the garden."

And then Yahweh gave pause. He saw that, in his panorama, he still left a
quantum flux generator in the middle. It would be some time before he would be
able to edit it out, and he knew that if his humans interacted with it, crazy
shit could happen, so he turns again to the humans, and says, "So I'm not
entirely done making this univese yet, I just put you guys in it to sort of
test drive what I've got so far. But the garden here is mostly stable, there's
just this one tree that you can't eat from. I'll work on removing the tree, and
until then, just hang tight and eat of the fruit of all the other fruit."

So Adam and Eve are left sitting there, by themselves. They talk among
themselves. Adam and Eve both agree that they are the only humans in existance,
in a garden that was built by some sort of demigod that can talk to them. They
begin to eat some of the fruit, and it all tastes delicious. One day, Adam asks
Eve, "What do you think is the deal with the fruit in the forbidden tree?"

Eve replies, "Oh, I'm sure it's probably nothing. Besides, even if it were
something, we have so many other fruits to eat from, we have no need to bother
ourselves with the one tree that is off limits."

"Still," Adam continued, "It seems strange that an all knowing all benevolent
being would put a tree that we weren't allowed to eat from in teh middle of our
garden. For what purpose could he have done so? There must be a reason. Perhaps
he actually wants us to eat of the tree. What sorts of knowledge do you think
it contains?"

Eve was unamused by this question. She just replied, saying, "Why would I know?
Or why should we care? We have no reason to eat from that tree, because these
tree provide all that we know."

So Adam and Eve continued for a while, eating of the fruit of the Garden, and
comparing experiences of eating with eachother.

Eventually, after quite some time, Adam again says to Eve, "I grow tired of
eating this fruit day after day. I long for something different. Sure, there
are many different types of fruit in different kinds of trees, but it is all
begining to taste the same to me. I wonder if the forbidden fruit tastes any
different than the fruit of the garden."

And Eve consoled Adam, saying, "But Adam, there is no garuntee that the fruit
is any different. For all we know it tastes exactly the same. We promised our
creator that we would avoid the fruit out of the forbidden tree, and that's
what we should do."

Adam accepted this, but thought about it. Some time later, he comes to Eve, and
he says, "Let's make a deal. If one of us eats of the fruit of the forbidden
tree, the other one must follow suit."

Of course, Eve was upset, and said, "Absolutely not! I am by no means going to
be tempted to eat of the forbidden tree, and I don't want to be lured in by you
by some promise that we make together. I am not eating of that tree, and that's
final!"

So Adam recoiled again, and attempted his best to get the forbidden fruit out
of his mind.

One day, as they were tending to the Garden, Adam and Eve split up, as they
often times do throughout the day. Adam was working on the forest, while Eve
was working in the shrubbary. Eve would gather the berries, and adam would
gather the large fruit, and they wwould bring their spoils together to their
cottage at the end of the day and exchange food.

While they were out gathering, Adam saw in the distance, an angelic figure. The
angelic figure spoke. "I am Rapheal. I have come from God to inform you of the
status of this world. There is nothing to be alarmed of."

Rapheal then proceeds to tell Adam about the War in Heaven that took place
between Steve and his adversary. Of course, Rapheal does not call him Steve,
but he describes to Adam in the words that Adam can understand, the conflict
between Steve and his enemy. Because of this, Raphael tells Adam, Steve's enemy
is not so keen on Steve just making a world with humans in it. Raphael warns
Adam that the enemy has disguised himself as a serpent, and made his way into
the garden. Of course, such a state of things is not ideal, but in the mean
time, Raphael just wants Adam to know that the serpent cannot possibly harm the
humans unless the humans interact with it, and believe it's lies.

After Rafael told all of this to Adam, he leaves off with a word of warning.
Adam thanks Rafael for the heads up, and proceeds to continue harvesting fruit.

When Adam gets back to his cottage, Eve is there, and she is holding an apple.
As soon as Adam walks in, Eve begins to talk, "Oh Adam, how good it is to see
you. You were right! The fruit of the tree of knowledge is so much better than
the fruit we are eating now. Let me tell you. When I was tending to the shrubs,
I saw on the ground next to me, a serpent. Of course, like all serpents, I
thought very little of this one, and had decided to just let it slither past me
as most of them do. But all of a sudden, this serpent got up on it's tail, and
it began speaking to me. It asked me, 'Eve, do you want to partake of the tree
of life?'. Of coures, at first I was startled, and said, 'You can talk?' and
the serpent replied, 'Yes, I can indeed.'

"When I pressed it further, it told me that it ate of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge, and because of taht, it was given access to things that it shouldn't
know. The serpent then told me that all of these things are good. The problem
is that Yahweh left the tree there on accident, and that he doesn't want us to
eat of it because it will let us see things as Yahweh does. But I can assure
you, Adam, all of it is a lie, the fruit reveals things for how they truly are,
and now that I have eaten it, I see that we were foolish to be afraid of it.
Eat of it with me, and gain the knowledge that I have with me."

At this, Adam replied, "Oh Eve, what terrible news this is. Just this morning,
I was visited by an angel named Raphael, and he told me that the enemy of our
creator was roaming about our garden as a snake. Raphael told me that all we
had to do was resist the words of the snake and we would be okay. But when I
come home, I am greeted not by a snake, but by the apple of the forbidden
fruit. How am I to make this decision? My wife has eaten the fruit. This is too
much to bear. What am I to do? We did not make a promise, but I feel compelled
to eat with you."

And Eve replied, "I can tell you, the anguish in decision that you feel right
now will feel small in comparison to the knowledge you will gain by eating this
fruit. We were meant to eat this fruit, Adam, and I can feel it. I understand,
this fruit is who we are. You merely make your choices due to your rational
mind, but when you eat the fruit, you will see that there are entirely new
dimensions to existance which you are unable to grasp. I am asking you to eat
the fruit not because I did, but because I know that it would be good for you
as it has been good for me."

And so Adam ate the fruit.


