## 2


AS ALWAYS, TENSOON’S DAY began in darkness. Part of that was due, of course, to
the fact that he didn’t have any eyes. He could have created a set—he was of
the Third Generation, which was old, even for a kandra. He had digested enough
corpses that he had learned how to create sensory organs intuitively without a
model to copy.

Unfortunately, eyes would have done him little good. He didn’t have a skull,
and he had found that most organs didn’t function well without a full body—and
skeleton—to support them. His own mass would crush eyes if he moved the wrong
way, and it would be very difficult to turn them about to see.

Not that there would be anything to look at. TenSoon moved his bulk slightly,
shifting inside his prison chamber. His body was little more than a grouping of
translucent muscles—like a mass of large snails or slugs, all connected,
somewhat more malleable than the body of a mollusk. With concentration, he
could dissolve one of the muscles and either meld it with another one, or make
something new. Yet, without a skeleton to use, he was all but impotent.

He shifted in his cell again. His very skin had a sense of its own—a kind of
taste. Right now, it tasted the stench of his own excrement on the sides of the
chamber, but he didn’t dare turn off this sense. It was one of his only
connections to the world around him.

The “cell” was actually nothing more than a grate-covered stone pit. It was
barely large enough to hold his mass. His captors dumped food in from the top,
then periodically poured water in to hydrate him and wash his excrement out
through a small drainage hole at the bottom. Both this hole and those in the
locked grate above were too small for him to slide through—a kandra’s body was
supple, but even a pile of muscles could be squeezed only so small.

Most people would have gone mad from the stress of being so confined for . . .
he didn’t even know how long it had been. Months? But TenSoon had the Blessing
of Presence. His mind would not give in easily.

Sometimes he cursed the Blessing for keeping him from the blissful relief of
madness.

Focus, he told himself. He had no brain, not as humans did, but he was able to
think. He didn’t understand this. He wasn’t certain if any kandra did. Perhaps
those of the First Generation knew more—but if so, they didn’t enlighten
everyone else.

They can’t keep you here forever, he told himself. The First Contract says . .
.

But he was beginning to doubt the First Contract—or, rather, that the First
Generation paid any attention to it. But, could he blame them? TenSoon was a
Contract-breaker. By his own admission, he had gone against the will of his
master, helping another instead. This betrayal had ended with his master’s
death.

Yet, even such a shameful act was the least of his crimes. The punishment for
Contract-breaking was death, and if TenSoon’s crimes had stopped there, the
others would have killed him and been done with it. Unfortunately, there was
much more at stake. TenSoon’s testimony—given to the Second Generation in a
closed conference—had revealed a much more dangerous, much more important,
lapse.

TenSoon had betrayed his people’s secret.

They can’t execute me, he thought, using the idea to keep him focused. Not
until they find out who I told.

The secret. The precious, precious secret.

I’ve doomed us all. My entire people. We’ll be slaves again. No, we’re already
slaves. We’ll become something else—automatons, our minds controlled by others.
Captured and used, our bodies no longer our own.

This was what he had done—what he had potentially set in motion. The reason he
deserved imprisonment and death. And yet, he wished to live. He should despise
himself. But, for some reason, he still felt he had done the right thing.

He shifted again, masses of slick muscle rotating around one another. Midshift,
however, he froze. Vibrations. Someone was coming.

He arranged himself, pushing his muscles to the sides of the pit, forming a
depression in the middle of his body. He needed to catch all of the food that
he could—they fed him precious little. However, no slop came pouring down
through the grate. He waited, expectant, until the grate unlocked. Though he
had no ears, he could feel the coarse vibrations as the grate was dragged back,
its rough iron finally dropped against the floor above.

What?

Hooks came next. They looped around his muscles, grabbing him and ripping his
flesh as they pulled him out of the pit. It hurt. Not just the hooks, but the
sudden freedom as his body was spilled across the floor of the prison. He
unwillingly tasted dirt and dried slop. His muscles quivered, the unfettered
motion of being outside the cell felt strange, and he strained, moving his bulk
in ways that he had nearly forgotten.

Then it came. He could taste it in the air. Acid, thick and pungent, presumably
in a gold-lined bucket brought by the prison keepers. They were going to kill
him after all.

But, they can’t! he thought. The First Contract, the law of our people, it—

Something fell on him. Not acid, but something hard. He touched it eagerly,
muscles moving against one another, tasting it, testing it, feeling it. It was
round, with holes, and several sharp edges . . . a skull.

The acid stink grew sharper. Were they stirring it? TenSoon moved quickly,
forming around the skull, filling it. He already had some dissolved flesh
stored inside of an organ-like pouch. He brought this out, oozing it around the
skull, quickly making skin. He left the eyes alone, working on lungs, forming a
tongue, ignoring lips for the moment. He worked with a sense of desperation as
the taste of acid grew strong, and then . . .

It hit him. It seared the muscles on one side of his body, washing over his
bulk, dissolving it. Apparently, the Second Generation had given up on getting
his secrets from him. However, before killing him, they knew they had to give
him an opportunity to speak. The First Contract required it—hence the skull.
However, the guards obviously had orders to kill him before he could actually
say anything in his defense. They followed the form of the law, yet at the very
same time they ignored its intent.

They didn’t realize, however, how quickly TenSoon could work. Few kandra had
spent as much time on Contracts as he had—all of the Second Generation, and
most of the Third, had long ago retired from service. They led easy lives here
in the Homeland.

An easy life taught one very little.

Most kandra took hours to form a body—some younger ones needed days. In
seconds, however, TenSoon had a rudimentary tongue. As the acid moved up his
body, he forced out a trachea, inflated a lung, and croaked out a single word:

“Judgment!”

The pouring stopped. His body continued to burn. He worked through the pain,
forming primitive hearing organs inside the skull cavity.

A voice whispered nearby. “Fool.”

“Judgment!” TenSoon said again.

“Accept death,” the voice hissed quietly. “Do not put yourself in a position to
cause further harm to our people. The First Generation has granted you this
chance to die because of your years of extra service!”

TenSoon paused. A trial would be public. So far, only a select few knew the
extent of his betrayal. He could die, cursed as a Contract-breaker but
retaining some measure of respect for his prior career. Somewhere—likely in a
pit in this very room—there were some who suffered endless captivity, a torture
that would eventually break even the minds of those endowed with the Blessing
of Presence.

Did he want to become one of those? By revealing his actions in an open forum,
he would earn himself an eternity of pain. Forcing a trial would be foolish,
for there was no hope of vindication. His confessions had already damned him.

If he spoke, it would not be to defend himself. It would be for other reasons
entirely.

“Judgment,” he repeated, this time barely whispering.



In some ways, having such power was too overwhelming, I think. This was a power
that would take millennia to understand. Remaking the world would have been
easy, had one been familiar with the power. Yet, I realized the danger inherent
in my ignorance. Like a child suddenly given awesome strength, I could have
pushed too hard, and left the world a broken toy I could never repair.





