## 2

### Epigraph

#### 
* * *



If men read these words, let them know that power is a heavy burden. Seek not
to be bound by its chains. The Terris prophecies say that I will have the power
to save the world.

They hint, however, that I will have the power to destroy it as well.





2


### Kelsier and Dockson talk about big plans
_Character:Kelsier_  
_Place:Luthadel_  
_Character(Reference):Lord Ruler_  
_Place(Reference):Kredik Shaw_  
_Character:Dockson_  
_Character(Reference):Breeze_  
_Character(Reference):Ham_  
_Character(Irrelevent):Trap_  
_Character(Irrelevent):Ruddy_  
_Character(Reference):Clubs_  


#### 

IN KELSIER’S OPINION, THE CITY of Luthadel—seat of the Lord Ruler—was a gloomy
sight. Most of the buildings had been built from stone blocks, with tile roofs
for the wealthy, and simple, peaked wooden roofs for the rest. The structures
were packed closely together, making them seem squat despite the fact that they
were generally three stories high.

The tenements and shops were uniform in appearance; this was not a place to
draw attention to oneself. Unless, of course, you were a member of the high
nobility.

Interspersed throughout the city were a dozen or so monolithic keeps.
Intricate, with rows of spearlike spires or deep archways, these were the homes
of the high nobility. In fact, they were the mark of a high noble family: Any
family who could afford to build a keep and maintain a high-profile presence in
Luthadel was considered to be a Great House.

Most of the open ground in the city was around these keeps. The patches of
space amid the tenements were like clearings in a forest, the keeps themselves
like solitary mounts rising above the rest of the landscape. Black mountains.
Like the rest of the city, the keeps were stained by countless years of
ashfalls.

Every structure in Luthadel—virtually every structure Kelsier had ever seen—had
been blackened to some degree. Even the city wall, upon which Kelsier now
stood, was blackened by a patina of soot. Structures were generally darkest at
the top, where the ash gathered, but rainwaters and evening condensations had
carried the stains over ledges and down walls. Like paint running down a
canvas, the darkness seemed to creep down the sides of buildings in an uneven
gradient.

The streets, of course, were completely black. Kelsier stood waiting, scanning
the city as a group of skaa workers worked in the street below, clearing away
the latest mounds of ash. They’d take it to the River Channerel, which ran
through the center of the city, sending the piles of ash to be washed away,
lest it pile up and eventually bury the city. Sometimes, Kelsier wondered why
the entire empire wasn’t just one big mound of ash. He supposed the ash must
break down into soil eventually. Yet, it took a ridiculous amount of effort to
keep cities and fields clear enough to be used.

Fortunately, there were always enough skaa to do the work. The workers below
him wore simple coats and trousers, ash-stained and worn. Like the plantation
workers he had left behind several weeks before, they worked with beaten-down,
despondent motions. Other groups of skaa passed the workers, responding to the
bells in the distance, chiming the hour and calling them to their morning’s
work at the forges or mills. Luthadel’s main export was metal; the city was
home to hundreds of forges and refineries. However, the surgings of the river
provided excellent locations for mills, both to grind grains and make textiles.

The skaa continued to work. Kelsier turned away from them, looking up into the
distance, toward the city center, where the Lord Ruler’s palace loomed like
some kind of massive, multi-spined insect. Kredik Shaw, the Hill of a Thousand
Spires. The palace was several times the size of any nobleman’s keep, and was
by far the largest building in the city.

Another ashfall began as Kelsier stood contemplating the city, the flakes
falling lightly down upon the streets and buildings. A lot of ashfalls, lately,
he thought, glad for the excuse to pull up the hood on his cloak. The Ashmounts
must be active.

It was unlikely that anyone in Luthadel would recognize him—it had been three
years since his capture. Still, the hood was reassuring. If all went well,
there would come a time when Kelsier would want to be seen and recognized. For
now, anonymity was probably better.

Eventually, a figure approached along the wall. The man, Dockson, was shorter
than Kelsier, and he had a squarish face that seemed well suited to his
moderately stocky build. A nondescript brown hooded cloak covered his black
hair, and he wore the same short half beard that he’d sported since his face
had first put forth whiskers some twenty years before.

He, like Kelsier, wore a nobleman’s suit: colored vest, dark coat and trousers,
and a thin cloak to keep off the ash. The clothing wasn’t rich, but it was
aristocratic—indicative of the Luthadel middle class. Most men of noble birth
weren’t wealthy enough to be considered part of a Great House—yet, in the Final
Empire, nobility wasn’t just about money. It was about lineage and history; the
Lord Ruler was immortal, and he apparently still remembered the men who had
supported him during the early years of his reign. The descendants of those
men, no matter how poor they became, would always be favored.

The clothing would keep passing guard patrols from asking too many questions.
In the cases of Kelsier and Dockson, of course, that clothing was a lie.
Neither was actually noble—though, technically, Kelsier was a half-blood. In
many ways, however, that was worse than being just a normal skaa.

Dockson strolled up next to Kelsier, then leaned against the battlement,
resting a pair of stout arms on the stone. “You’re a few days late, Kell.”

“I decided to make a few extra stops in the plantations to the north.”

“Ah,” Dockson said. “So you did have something to do with Lord Tresting’s
death.”

Kelsier smiled. “You could say that.”

“His murder caused quite a stir among the local nobility.”

“That was kind of the intention,” Kelsier said. “Though, to be honest, I wasn’t
planning anything quite so dramatic. It was almost more of an accident than
anything else.”

Dockson raised an eyebrow. “How do you ‘accidentally’ kill a nobleman in his
own mansion?”

“With a knife in the chest,” Kelsier said lightly. “Or, rather, a pair of
knives in the chest—it always pays to be careful.”

Dockson rolled his eyes.

“His death isn’t exactly a loss, Dox,” Kelsier said. “Even among the nobility,
Tresting had a reputation for cruelty.”

“I don’t care about Tresting,” Dockson said. “I’m just considering the state of
insanity that led me to plan another job with you. Attacking a provincial lord
in his manor house, surrounded by guards . . . Honestly, Kell, I’d nearly
forgotten how foolhardy you can be.”

“Foolhardy?” Kelsier asked with a laugh. “That wasn’t foolhardy—that was just a
small diversion. You should see some of the things I’m planning to do!”

Dockson stood for a moment, then he laughed too. “By the Lord Ruler, it’s good
to have you back, Kell! I’m afraid I’ve grown rather boring during the last few
years.”

“We’ll fix that,” Kelsier promised. He took a deep breath, ash falling lightly
around him. Skaa cleaning crews were already back at work on the streets below,
brushing up the dark ash. Behind, a guard patrol passed, nodding to Kelsier and
Dockson. They waited in silence for the men to pass.

“It’s good to be back,” Kelsier finally said. “There’s something homey about
Luthadel—even if it is a depressing, stark pit of a city. You have the meeting
organized?”

Dockson nodded. “We can’t start until this evening, though. How’d you get in,
anyway? I had men watching the gates.”

“Hmm? Oh, I snuck in last night.”

“But how—” Dockson paused. “Oh, right. That’s going to take some getting used
to.”

Kelsier shrugged. “I don’t see why. You always work with Mistings.”

“Yes, but this is different,” Dockson said. He held up a hand to forestall
further argument. “No need, Kell. I’m not hedging—I just said it would take
some getting used to.”

#### Dockson mentions Breeze and Ham for the first time
“Fine. Who’s coming tonight?”

“Well, Breeze and Ham will be there, of course. They’re very curious about this
mystery job of ours—not to mention rather annoyed that I won’t tell him what
you’ve been up to these last few years.”

#### Learning that their so called "Smoker" has been killed, Kelsier says they should find Clubs to fill the spot
“Good,” Kelsier said with a smile. “Let them wonder. How about Trap?”

Dockson shook his head. “Trap’s dead. The Ministry finally caught up with him a
couple months ago. Didn’t even bother sending him to the Pits—they beheaded him
on the spot.”

Kelsier closed his eyes, exhaling softly. It seemed that the Steel Ministry
caught up with everyone eventually. Sometimes, Kelsier felt that a skaa
Misting’s life wasn’t so much about surviving as it was about picking the right
time to die.

“This leaves us without a Smoker,” Kelsier finally said, opening his eyes. “You
have any suggestions?”

“Ruddy,” Dockson said.

Kelsier shook his head. “No. He’s a good Smoker, but he’s not a good enough
man.”

Dockson smiled. “Not a good enough man to be on a thieving crew . . . Kell, I
have missed working with you. All right, who then?”

Kelsier thought for a moment. “Is Clubs still running that shop of his?”

“As far as I know,” Dockson said slowly.

“He’s supposed to be one of the best Smokers in the city.”

“I suppose,” Dockson said. “But . . . isn’t he supposed to be kind of hard to
work with?”

“He’s not so bad,” Kelsier said. “Not once you get used to him. Besides, I
think he might be . . . amenable to this particular job.”

“All right,” Dockson said, shrugging. “I’ll invite him. I think one of his
relatives is a Tineye. Do you want me to invite him too?”

“Sounds good,” Kelsier said.

“All right,” Dockson said. “Well, beyond that, there’s just Yeden. Assuming
he’s still interested . . .”

“He’ll be there,” Kelsier said.

“He’d better be,” Dockson said. “He’ll be the one paying us, after all.”

Kelsier nodded, then frowned. “You didn’t mention Marsh.”

Dockson shrugged. “I warned you. Your brother never did approve of our methods,
and now . . . well, you know Marsh. He won’t even have anything to do with
Yeden and the rebellion anymore, let alone with a bunch of criminals like us. I
think we’ll have to find someone else to infiltrate the obligators.”

“No,” Kelsier said. “He’ll do it. I’ll just have to stop by to persuade him.”

“If you say so.” Dockson fell silent then, and the two stood for a moment,
leaning against the railing and looking out over the ash-stained city.

Dockson finally shook his head. “This is insane, eh?”

Kelsier smiled. “Feels good, doesn’t it?”

Dockson nodded. “Fantastic.”

“It will be a job like no other,” Kelsier said, looking north—across the city
and toward the twisted building at its center.

Dockson stepped away from the wall. “We have a few hours before the meeting.
There’s something I want to show you. I think there’s still time—if we hurry.”

Kelsier turned with curious eyes. “Well, I was going to go and chastise my
prude of a brother. But . . .”

“This will be worth your time,” Dockson promised.

### Camon fetches Vin a few days after their previous gig
_Character:Vin_  
_Character:Camon_  
_Place:Luthadel_  
_Character(Reference):Reen_  

#### 
Vin sat in the corner of the safe house’s main lair. She kept to the shadows,
as usual; the more she stayed out of sight, the more the others would ignore
her. She couldn’t afford to expend Luck keeping the men’s hands off of her.
She’d barely had time to regenerate what she’d used a few days before, during
the meeting with the obligator.

The usual rabble lounged at tables in the room, playing at dice or discussing
minor jobs. Smoke from a dozen different pipes pooled at the top of the
chamber, and the walls were stained dark from countless years of similar
treatment. The floor was darkened with patches of ash. Like most thieving
crews, Camon’s group wasn’t known for its tidiness.

There was a door at the back of the room, and beyond it lay a twisting stone
stairway that led up to a false rain grate in an alleyway. This room, like so
many others hidden in the imperial capital of Luthadel, wasn’t supposed to
exist.

Rough laughter came from the front of the chamber, where Camon sat with a
half-dozen cronies enjoying a typical afternoon of ale and crass jokes. Camon’s
table sat beside the bar, where the overpriced drinks were simply another way
Camon exploited those who worked for him. The Luthadel criminal element had
learned quite well from the lessons taught by the nobility.

Vin tried her best to remain invisible. Six months before, she wouldn’t have
believed that her life could actually get worse without Reen. Yet, despite her
brother’s abusive anger, he had kept the other crewmembers from having their
way with Vin. There were relatively few women on thieving crews; generally,
those women who got involved with the underworld ended up as whores. Reen had
always told her that a girl needed to be tough—tougher, even, than a man—if she
wanted to survive.

You think some crewleader is going to want a liability like you on his team? he
had said. I don’t even want to have to work with you, and I’m your brother.

Her back still throbbed; Camon had whipped her the day before. The blood would
ruin her shirt, and she wouldn’t be able to afford another one. Camon was
already retaining her wages to pay the debts Reen had left behind.

But, I am strong, she thought.

That was the irony. The beatings almost didn’t hurt anymore, for Reen’s
frequent abuses had left Vin resilient, while at the same time teaching her how
to look pathetic and broken. In a way, the beatings were self-defeating.
Bruises and welts mended, but each new lashing left Vin more hardened.
Stronger.

Camon stood up. He reached into his vest pocket and pulled out his golden
pocket watch. He nodded to one of his companions, then he scanned the room,
searching for . . . her.

His eyes locked on Vin. “It’s time.”

Vin frowned. Time for what?

### Camon seeks to underhand the job by preemption, but Vin is warry of the encounter with the High Prelan
_Character:Vin_  
_Character:Camon_  
_Character(Reference):Theron_  
_Place:Canton of Finance_  
_Character(Reference):Prelan Laird_  
_Character:High Prelan Arriev_  

#### 
The Ministry’s Canton of Finance was an imposing structure—but, then,
everything about the Steel Ministry tended to be imposing.

Tall and blocky, the building had a massive rose window in the front, though
the glass was dark from the outside. Two large banners hung down beside the
window, the soot-stained red cloth proclaiming praises to the Lord Ruler.

Camon studied the building with a critical eye. Vin could sense his
apprehension. The Canton of Finance was hardly the most threatening of Ministry
offices—the Canton of Inquisition, or even the Canton of Orthodoxy, had a far
more ominous reputation. However, voluntarily entering any Ministry office . .
. putting yourself in the power of the obligators . . . well, it was a thing to
do only after serious consideration.

Camon took a deep breath, then strode forward, his dueling cane tapping against
the stones as he walked. He wore his rich nobleman’s suit, and he was
accompanied by a half-dozen crewmembers—including Vin—to act as his “servants.”

Vin followed Camon up the steps, then waited as one of the crewmembers jumped
forward to pull the door open for his “master.” Of the six attendants, only Vin
seemed to have been told nothing of Camon’s plan. Suspiciously, Theron—Camon’s
supposed partner in the Ministry scam—was nowhere to be seen.

Vin entered the Canton building. Vibrant red light, sparkled with lines of
blue, fell from the rose window. A single obligator, with midlevel tattoos
around his eyes, sat behind a desk at the end of the extended entryway.

Camon approached, his cane thumping against the carpet as he walked. “I am Lord
Jedue,” he said.

What are you doing, Camon? Vin thought. You insisted to Theron that you
wouldn’t meet with Prelan Laird in his Canton office. Yet, now you’re here.

The obligator nodded, making a notation in his ledger. He waved to the side.
“You may take one attendant with you into the waiting chamber. The rest must
remain here.”

Camon’s huff of disdain indicated what he thought of that prohibition. The
obligator, however, didn’t look up from his ledger. Camon stood for a moment,
and Vin couldn’t tell if he was genuinely angry or just playing the part of an
arrogant nobleman. Finally, he jabbed a finger at Vin.

“Come,” he said, turning and waddling toward the indicated door.

The room beyond was lavish and plush, and several noblemen lounged in various
postures of waiting. Camon chose a chair and settled into it, then pointed
toward a table set with wine and red-frosted cakes. Vin obediently fetched him
a glass of wine and a plate of food, ignoring her own hunger.

Camon began to pick hungrily at the cakes, smacking quietly as he ate.

He’s nervous. More nervous, even, than before.

“Once we get in, you will say nothing,” Camon grumbled between bites.

“You’re betraying Theron,” Vin whispered.

Camon nodded.

#### Theron's plan
“But, how? Why?” Theron’s plan was complex in execution, but simple in concept.
Every year, the Ministry transferred its new acolyte obligators from a northern
training facility south to Luthadel for final instruction. Theron had
discovered, however, that those acolytes and their overseers brought down with
them large amounts of Ministry funds—disguised as baggage—to be strongholded in
Luthadel.

Banditry was very difficult in the Final Empire, what with the constant patrols
along canal routes. However, if one were running the very canal boats that the
acolytes were sailing upon, a robbery could become possible. Arranged at just
the right time . . . the guards turning on their passengers . . . a man could
make quite a profit, then blame it all on banditry.

“Theron’s crew is weak,” Camon said quietly. “He expended too many resources on
this job.”

“But, the return he’ll make—” Vin said.

#### Camon reveals his counterplan
“Will never happen if I take what I can now, then run,” Camon said, smiling.
“I’ll talk the obligators into a down payment to get my caravan boats afloat,
then disappear and leave Theron to deal with the disaster when the Ministry
realizes that it’s been scammed.”

#### 
Vin stood back, slightly shocked. Setting up a scam like this would have cost
Theron thousands upon thousands of boxings—if the deal fell through now, he
would be ruined. And, with the Ministry hunting him, he wouldn’t even have time
to seek revenge. Camon would make a quick profit, as well as rid himself of one
of his more powerful rivals.

Theron was a fool to bring Camon into this, she thought. But, then, the amount
Theron had promised to pay Camon was great; he probably assumed that Camon’s
greed would keep him honest until Theron himself could pull a double cross.
Camon had simply worked faster than anyone, even Vin, had expected. How could
Theron have known that Camon would undermine the job itself, rather than wait
and try and steal the entire haul from the caravan boats?

Vin’s stomach twisted. It’s just another betrayal, she thought sickly. Why does
it still bother me so? Everyone betrays everyone else. That’s the way life is.
. . .

She wanted to find a corner—someplace cramped and secluded—and hide. Alone.

Anyone will betray you. Anyone.

But there was no place to go. Eventually, a minor obligator entered and called
for Lord Jedue. Vin followed Camon as they were ushered into an audience
chamber.

The man who waited inside, sitting behind the audience desk, was not Prelan
Laird.

Camon paused in the doorway. The room was austere, bearing only the desk and
simple gray carpeting. The stone walls were unadorned, the only window barely a
handspan wide. The obligator who waited for them had some of the most intricate
tattoos around his eyes that Vin had ever seen. She wasn’t even certain what
rank they implied, but they extended all the way back to the obligator’s ears
and up over his forehead.

“Lord Jedue,” the strange obligator said. Like Laird, he wore gray robes, but
he was very different from the stern, bureaucratic men Camon had dealt with
before. This man was lean in a muscular way, and his clean-shaven, triangular
head gave him an almost predatory look.

“I was under the impression that I would be meeting with Prelan Laird,” Camon
said, still not moving into the room.

“Prelan Laird has been called away on other business. I am High Prelan
Arriev—head of the board that was reviewing your proposal. You have a rare
opportunity to address me directly. I normally don’t hear cases in person, but
Laird’s absence has made it necessary for me to share in some of his work.”

Vin’s instincts made her tense. We should go. Now.

Camon stood for a long moment, and Vin could see him considering. Run now? Or,
take a risk for the greater prize? Vin didn’t care about prizes; she just
wanted to live. Camon, however, had not become crewleader without the
occasional gamble. He slowly moved into the room, eyes cautious as he took the
seat opposite the obligator.

“Well, High Prelan Arriev,” Camon said with a careful voice. “I assume that
since I have been called back for another appointment, the board is considering
my offer?”

“Indeed we are,” the obligator said. “Though I must admit, there are some
Council members who are apprehensive about dealing with a family that is so
near to economic disaster. The Ministry generally prefers to be conservative in
its financial operations.”

“I see.”

“But,” Arriev said, “there are others on the board who are quite eager to take
advantage of the savings you offered us.”

“And with which group do you identify, Your Grace?”

“I, as of yet, have not made my decision.” The obligator leaned forward. “Which
is why I noted that you have a rare opportunity. Convince me, Lord Jedue, and
you will have your contract.”

“Surely Prelan Laird outlined the details of our offer,” Camon said.

“Yes, but I would like to hear the arguments from you personally. Humor me.”

Vin frowned. She remained near the back of the room, standing near the door,
still half convinced she should run.

“Well?” Arriev asked.

“We need this contract, Your Grace,” Camon said. “Without it we won’t be able
to continue our canal shipping operations. Your contract would give us a much
needed period of stability—a chance to maintain our caravan boats for a time
while we search for other contracts.”

Arriev studied Camon for a moment. “Surely you can do better than that, Lord
Jedue. Laird said that you were very persuasive—let me hear you prove that you
deserve our patronage.”

Vin prepared her Luck. She could make Arriev more inclined to believe . . . but
something restrained her. The situation felt wrong.

“We are your best choice, Your Grace,” Camon said. “You fear that my house will
suffer economic failure? Well, if it does, what have you lost? At worst, my
narrowboats would stop running, and you would have to find other merchants to
deal with. Yet, if your patronage is enough to maintain my house, then you have
found yourself an enviable long-term contract.”

“I see,” Arriev said lightly. “And why the Ministry? Why not make your deal
with someone else? Surely there are other options for your boats—other groups
who would jump at such rates.”

Camon frowned. “This isn’t about money, Your Grace, it is about the victory—the
showing of confidence—that we would gain by having a Ministry contract. If you
trust us, others will too. I need your support.” Camon was sweating now. He was
probably beginning to regret this gamble. Had he been betrayed? Was Theron
behind the odd meeting?

The obligator waited quietly. He could destroy them, Vin knew. If he even
suspected that they were scamming him, he could give them over to the Canton of
Inquisition. More than one nobleman had entered a Canton building and never
returned.

Gritting her teeth, Vin reached out and used her Luck on the obligator, making
him less suspicious.

Arriev smiled. “Well, you have convinced me,” he suddenly declared.

Camon sighed in relief.

Arriev continued, “Your most recent letter suggested that you need three
thousand boxings as an advance to refurbish your equipment and resume shipping
operations. See the scribe in the main hallway to finish the paperwork so that
you may requisition the necessary funds.”

The obligator pulled a sheet of thick bureaucratic paper from a stack, then
stamped a seal at the bottom. He proffered it to Camon. “Your contract.”

Camon smiled deeply. “I knew coming to the Ministry was the wise choice,” he
said, accepting the contract. He stood, nodding respectfully to the obligator,
then motioned for Vin to open the door for him.

She did so. Something is wrong. Something is very wrong. She paused as Camon
left, looking back at the obligator. He was still smiling.

A happy obligator was always a bad sign.

Yet, no one stopped them as they passed through the waiting room with its noble
occupants. Camon sealed and delivered the contract to the appropriate scribe,
and no soldiers appeared to arrest them. The scribe pulled out a small chest
filled with coins, and then handed it to Camon with an indifferent hand.

Then, they simply left the Canton building, Camon gathering his other
attendants with obvious relief. No cries of alarm. No tromping of soldiers.
They were free. Camon had successfully scammed both the Ministry and another
crew-leader.

Apparently.

### Kelsier and Dockson observe Camon and Vin leave the Canton of Finance being tailed
_Character:Kelsier_  
_Character:Dockson_  
_Place:Outside Canton of Finance_  
_Character(Reference):Camon_  
_Character(Reference):Vin_  

#### 
Kelsier stuffed another one of the little red-frosted cakes into his mouth,
chewing with satisfaction. The fat thief and his scrawny attendant passed
through the waiting room, entering the entryway beyond. The obligator who had
interviewed the two thieves remained in his office, apparently awaiting his
next appointment

“Well?” Dockson asked. “What do you think?”

Kelsier glanced at the cakes. “They’re quite good,” he said, taking another
one. “The Ministry has always had excellent taste—it makes sense that they
would provide superior snacks.”

Dockson rolled his eyes. “About the girl, Kell.”

Kelsier smiled as he piled four of the cakes in his hand, then nodded toward
the doorway. The Canton waiting room was growing too busy for the discussion of
delicate matters. On the way out, he paused and told the obligator secretary in
the corner that they needed to reschedule.

Then the two crossed through the entry chamber—passing the overweight
crewleader, who stood speaking with a scribe. Kelsier stepped out onto the
street, pulled his hood up against the still falling ash, then led the way
across the street. He paused beside an alleyway, standing where he and Dockson
could watch the Canton building’s doors.

Kelsier munched contentedly on his cakes. “How’d you find out about her?” he
asked between bites.

#### It's revealed, all in one that the job Kelsier and Dockson are discussing has to do with the Girl Vin, and that Camon is Kelsier's brother
“Your brother,” Dockson replied. “Camon tried to swindle Marsh a few months
ago, and he brought the girl with him then, too. Actually, Camon’s little
good-luck charm is becoming moderately famous in the right circles. I’m still
not sure if he knows what she is or not. You know how superstitious thieves can
get.”

Kelsier nodded, dusting off his hands. “How’d you know she’d be here today?”

Dockson shrugged. “A few bribes in the right place. I’ve been keeping an eye on
the girl ever since Marsh pointed her out to me. I wanted to give you an
opportunity to see her work for yourself.”

Across the street, the Canton building’s door finally opened, and Camon made
his way down the steps surrounded by a group of “servants.” The small,
short-haired girl was with him. The sight of her made Kelsier frown. She had a
nervous anxiety to her step, and she jumped slightly whenever someone made a
quick move. The right side of her face was still slightly discolored from a
partially healed bruise.

Kelsier eyed the self-important Camon. I’ll have to come up with something
particularly suitable to do to that man.

“Poor thing,” Dockson muttered.

Kelsier nodded. “She’ll be free of him soon enough. It’s a wonder no one
discovered her before this.”

“Your brother was right then?”

Kelsier nodded. “She’s at least a Misting, and if Marsh says she’s more, I’m
inclined to believe him. I’m a bit surprised to see her using Allomancy on a
member of the Ministry, especially inside a Canton building. I’d guess that she
doesn’t know that she’s even using her abilities.”

“Is that possible?” Dockson asked.

Kelsier nodded. “Trace minerals in the water can be burned, if just for a tiny
bit of power. That’s one of the reasons the Lord Ruler built his city here—lots
of metals in the ground. I’d say that . . .”

Kelsier trailed off, frowning slightly. Something was wrong. He glanced toward
Camon and his crew. They were still visible in the near distance, crossing the
street and heading south.

A figure appeared in the Canton building’s doorway. Lean with a confident air,
he bore the tattoos of a high prelan of the Canton of Finance around his eyes.
Probably the very man Camon had met with shortly before. The obligator stepped
out of the building, and a second man exited behind him.

Beside Kelsier, Dockson suddenly grew stiff.

#### A Steel Inquisitor and some obligator's tail Camon and Vin
The second man was tall with a strong build. As he turned, Kelsier was able to
see that a thick metal spike had been pounded tip-first through each of the
man’s eyes. With shafts as wide as an eye socket, the nail-like spikes were
long enough that their sharp points jutted out about an inch from the back of
the man’s clean-shaven skull. The flat spike ends shone like two silvery disks,
sticking out of the sockets in the front, where the eyes should have been.

A Steel Inquisitor.

“What’s that doing here?” Dockson asked.

“Stay calm,” Kelsier said, trying to force himself to do the same. The
Inquisitor looked toward them, spiked eyes regarding Kelsier, before turning in
the direction that Camon and the girl had gone. Like all Inquisitors, he wore
intricate eye tattoos—mostly black, with one stark red line—that marked him as
a high-ranking member of the Canton of Inquisition.

“He’s not here for us,” Kelsier said. “I’m not burning anything—he’ll think
that we’re just ordinary noblemen.”

“The girl,” Dockson said.

Kelsier nodded. “You say Camon’s been running this scam on the Ministry for a
while. Well, the girl must have been detected by one of the obligators. They’re
trained to recognize when an Allomancer tampers with their emotions.”

Dockson frowned thoughtfully. Across the street, the Inquisitor conferred with
the other obligator, then the two of them turned to walk in the direction that
Camon had gone. There was no urgency to their pace.

“They must have sent a tail to follow them,” Dockson said.

“This is the Ministry,” Kelsier said. “There’ll be two tails, at least.”

Dockson nodded. “Camon will lead them directly back to his safe house. Dozens
of men will die. They’re not all the most admirable people, but . . .”

“They fight the Final Empire, in their own way,” Kelsier said. “Besides, I’m
not about to let a possible Mistborn slip away from us—I want to talk to that
girl. Can you deal with those tails?”

#### They agree on a plan to lose the tails and grab the girl
“I said I’d become boring, Kell,” Dockson said. “Not sloppy. I can handle a
couple of Ministry flunkies.”

“Good,” Kelsier said, reaching into his cloak pocket and pulling out a small
vial. A collection of metal flakes floated in an alcohol solution within. Iron,
steel, tin, pewter, copper, bronze, zinc, and brass—the eight basic Allomantic
metals. Kelsier pulled off the stopper and downed the contents in a single
swift gulp.

He pocketed the now empty vial, wiping his mouth. “I’ll handle that
Inquisitor.”

Dockson looked apprehensive. “You’re going to try and take him?”

Kelsier shook his head. “Too dangerous. I’ll just divert him. Now, get going—we
don’t want those tails finding the safe house.”

Dockson nodded. “Meet back at the fifteenth crossroad,” he said before taking
off down the alley and disappearing around a corner.

Kelsier gave his friend a count of ten before reaching within himself and
burning his metals. His body came awash with strength, clarity, and power.

Kelsier smiled; then—burning zinc—he reached out and yanked firmly on the
Inquisitor’s emotions. The creature froze in place, then spun, looking back
toward the Canton building.

Let’s have a chase now, you and I, Kelsier thought.




