## 8
_Location(Reference):River Channerel_  
_Location:The imperial highroad_  
_Character:Vin_  
_Character:Kelsier_  
_Character:Sazed_  
_Location:Fellise_  

* * *


### Epigraph

#### 

“He shall defend their ways, yet shall violate them. He will be their savior,
yet they shall call him heretic. His name shall be Discord, yet they shall love
him for it.”





8


### Kelsier and Vin get over the wall as Vin learns more about Allomancy

#### Vin flies into the air
VIN SHOT INTO THE AIR. She suppressed a scream, remembering to continue Pushing
despite her fear. The stone wall was a blur of motion just a few feet away from
her. The ground disappeared below, and the line of blue pointing toward the
ingot grew fainter and fainter.

What happens if it disappears?

She began to slow. The fainter the line grew, the more her speed decreased.
After just a few moments of flight, she crept to a halt—and was left hanging in
the air above a nearly invisible blue line.

“I’ve always liked the view from up here.”

Vin glanced to the side. Kelsier stood a short distance away; she had been so
focused that she hadn’t noticed that she was hovering just a few feet from the
top of the wall.

“Help!” she said, continuing to Push desperately, lest she fall. The mists
below her shifted and spun, like some dark ocean of damned souls.

#### Kelsier tells Vin about using Anchors to balance yourself
“You don’t have to worry too much,” Kelsier said. “It’s easier to balance in
the air if you have a tripod of anchors, but you can do fine with a single
anchor. Your body is used to balancing itself. Part of what you’ve been doing
since you learned to walk transfers to Allomancy. As long as you stay still,
hanging at the very edge of your Pushing ability, you’ll be pretty stable—your
mind and body will correct any slight deviations from the base center of your
anchor below, keeping you from falling to the sides.

“If you were to Push on something else, or move too much to one side, though .
. . well, you’d lose your anchor below, and wouldn’t be pushing directly up
anymore. Then you’d have problems—you’d tip over like a lead weight on the top
of a very tall pole.”

“Kelsier . . .” Vin said.

“I hope you aren’t afraid of heights, Vin,” Kelsier said. “That’s quite a
disadvantage for a Mistborn.”

“I’m . . . not . . . afraid . . . of . . . heights,” Vin said through gritted
teeth. “But I’m also not accustomed to hanging in the air a hundred feet above
the bloody street!”

Kelsier chuckled, but Vin felt a force tug against her belt, pulling her
through the air toward him. He grabbed her and pulled her up over the stone
railing, then set her down beside him. He reached an arm over the side of the
wall. A second later, the ingot shot up through the air, scraping along the
side of the wall, until it flipped into his waiting hand.

#### Vin curses Kelsier as he jumps down the other side of the wall
“Good job,” he said. “Now we go back down.” He tossed the ingot over his
shoulder, casting it into the dark mists on the other side of the wall.

“We’re really going outside?” Vin asked. “Outside the city walls? At night?”

Kelsier smiled in that infuriating way of his. He walked over and climbed onto
the battlements. “Varying the strength with which you Push or Pull is
difficult, but possible. It’s better to just fall a bit, then Push to slow
yourself. Let go and fall some more, then Push again. If you get the rhythm
right, you’ll reach the ground just fine.”

“Kelsier,” Vin said, approaching the wall. “I don’t . . .”

“You’re at the top of the city wall now, Vin,” he said, stepping out into the
air. He hung, hovering, balanced as he’d explained to her before. “There are
only two ways down. Either you jump off, or you try and explain to that guard
patrol why a Mistborn needs to use their stairwell.”

Vin turned with concern, noting an approaching bob of lanternlight in the dark
mists.

She turned back to Kelsier, but he was gone. She cursed, bending over the side
of the wall and looking down into the mists. She could hear the guards behind
her, speaking softly to one another as they walked along the wall.

Kelsier was right: She didn’t have many options. Angry, she climbed up onto the
battlement. She wasn’t afraid of heights in particular, but who wouldn’t be
apprehensive, standing atop the wall, looking down at her doom? Vin’s heart
fluttered, her stomach twisting.

I hope Kelsier’s out of the way, she thought, checking the blue line to make
certain she was above the ingot. Then, she stepped off.

#### Vin falls haphazardly down the wall
She immediately began to plummet toward the ground. She Pushed reflexively with
her steel, but her trajectory was off; she had fallen to the side of the ingot,
not directly toward it. Consequently, her Push nudged her to the side even
farther, and she began to tumble through the air.

Alarmed, she Pushed again—harder this time, flaring her steel. The sudden
effort launched her back upward. She arced sideways through the air, popping up
into the air alongside the walltop. The passing guards spun with surprise, but
their faces soon became indistinct as Vin fell back down toward the ground.

Mind muddled by terror, she reflexively reached out and Pulled against the
ingot, trying to yank herself toward it. And, of course, it obediently shot up
toward her.

I’m dead.

Then her body lurched, pulled upward by the belt. Her descent slowed until she
was drifting quietly through the air. Kelsier appeared in the mists, standing
on the ground beneath her; he was—of course—smiling.

He let her drop the last few feet, catching her, then setting her upright on
the soft earth. She stood quivering for a moment, breathing in terse, anxious
breaths.

“Well, that was fun,” Kelsier said lightly.

Vin didn’t respond.

Kelsier sat down on a nearby rock, obviously giving her time to gather her
wits. Eventually, she burned pewter, using the sensation of solidness it
provided to steady her nerves.

“You did well,” Kelsier said.

“I nearly died.”

“Everybody does, their first time,” Kelsier said. “Ironpulling and Steelpushing
are dangerous skills. You can impale yourself with a bit of metal that you Pull
into your own body, you can jump and leave your anchor too far behind, or you
can make a dozen other mistakes.

“My experience—limited though it is—has been that it’s better to get into those
extreme circumstances early, when someone can watch over you. Anyway, I assume
you can understand why it’s important for an Allomancer to carry as little
metal on their body as possible.”

#### Kelsier informs Vin that metals inside her body can't be altered by allomancy. She keeps her earring in.
Vin nodded, then paused, reaching up to her ear. “My earring,” she said. “I’ll
have to stop wearing it.”

“Does it have a clip on the back?” Kelsier asked.

Vin shook her head. “It’s just a small stud, and the pin on the back bends
down.”

“Then you’ll be all right,” Kelsier said. “Metal in your body—even if only a
bit of it is in your body—can’t be Pushed or Pulled. Otherwise another
Allomancer could rip the metals out of your stomach while you were burning
them.”

Good to know, Vin thought.

“It’s also why those Inquisitors can walk around so confidently with a pair of
steel spikes sticking out of their heads. The metal pierces their bodies, so it
can’t be affected by another Allomancer. Keep the earring—it’s small, so you
won’t be able to do much with it, but you could use it as a weapon in an
emergency.”

“All right.”

### About Mistwraiths

#### Some background of the world as Vin and Kelsier walk
“Now, you ready to go?”

She looked up at the wall, preparing to jump again, then nodded.

“We’re not going back up,” Kelsier said. “Come on.”

Vin frowned as Kelsier began to walk out into the mists. So, does he have a
destination after all—or has he just decided to wander some more? Oddly, his
affable nonchalance made him very difficult to read.

Vin hurried to keep up, not wanting to be left alone in the mists. The
landscape around Luthadel was barren save for scrub and weeds. Prickles and
dried leaves—both dusted with ash from an earlier ashfall—rubbed against her
legs as they walked. The underbrush crunched as they walked, quiet and a bit
sodden with mist dew.

Occasionally, they passed heaps of ash that had been carted out of the city.
Most of the time, however, ash was thrown into the River Channerel, which
passed through the city. Water broke it down eventually—or, at least, that was
what Vin assumed. Otherwise the entire continent would have been buried long
ago.

Vin stayed close to Kelsier as they walked. Though she had traveled outside
cities before, she had always moved as part of a group of boatmen—the skaa
workers who ran narrow-boats and barges up and down the many canal routes in
the Final Empire. It had been hard work—most noblemen used skaa instead of
horses to pull the boats along the towpath—but there had been a certain freedom
to knowing that she was traveling at all, for most skaa, even skaa thieves,
never left their plantation or town.

The constant movement from city to city had been Reen’s choice; he had been
obsessive about never getting locked down. He usually got them places on canal
boats run by underground crews, never staying in one place for more than a
year. He had kept moving, always going. As if running from something.

#### As they walk, a Mistwraith follows them
They continued to walk. At night, even the barren hills and scrub-covered
plains took on a forbidding air. Vin didn’t speak, though she tried to make as
little noise as possible. She had heard tales of what went abroad in the land
at night, and the cover of the mists—even pierced by tin as it now was—made her
feel as if she were being watched.

The sensation grew more unnerving as they traveled. Soon, she began to hear
noises in the darkness. They were muffled and faint—crackles of weeds, shuffles
in the echoing mist.

You’re just being paranoid! she told herself as she jumped at some
half-imagined sound. Eventually, however, she could stand it no more.

“Kelsier!” she said with an urgent whisper—one that sounded betrayingly loud to
her enhanced ears. “I think there’s something out there.”

“Hum?” Kelsier asked. He looked lost in his thoughts.

“I think something is following us!”

“Oh,” Kelsier said. “Yes, you’re right. It’s a mistwraith.”

Vin stopped dead in her tracks. Kelsier, however, kept going.

“Kelsier!” she said, causing him to pause. “You mean they’re real?”

“Of course they are,” Kelsier said. “Where do you think all the stories came
from?”

Vin stood in dumbfounded shock.

“You want to go look at it?” Kelsier asked.

“Look at the mistwraith?” Vin asked. “Are you—” She stopped.

Kelsier chuckled, strolling back to her. “Mistwraiths might be a bit disturbing
to look at, but they’re relatively harmless. They’re scavengers, mostly. Come
on.”

He began to retrace their footsteps, waving her to follow. Reluctant—but
morbidly curious—Vin followed. Kelsier walked at a brisk pace, leading her to
the top of a relatively scrub-free hill. He crouched down, motioning for Vin to
do likewise.

“Their hearing isn’t very good,” he said as she knelt in the rough, ashen dirt
beside him. “But their sense of smell—or, rather, taste—is quite acute. It’s
probably following our trail, hoping that we’ll discard something edible.”

Vin squinted in the darkness. “I can’t see it,” she said, searching the mists
for a shadowed figure.

“There,” Kelsier said, pointing toward a squat hill.

Vin frowned, imagining a creature crouching atop the hill, watching her as she
looked for it.

Then the hill moved.

Vin jumped slightly. The dark mound—perhaps ten feet tall and twice as
long—lurched forward in a strange, shuffling gait, and Vin leaned forward,
trying to get a better look.

“Flare your tin,” Kelsier suggested.

Vin nodded, calling upon a burst of extra Allomantic power. Everything
immediately became lighter, the mists becoming even less of an obstruction.

#### Vin sees a mistwraith for the first time.
What she saw caused her to shiver—fascinated, revolted, and more than a little
disturbed. The creature had smoky, translucent skin, and Vin could see its
bones. It had dozens upon dozens of limbs, and each one looked as if it had
come from a different animal. There were human hands, bovine hooves, canine
haunches, and others she couldn’t identify.

The mismatched limbs let the creature walk—though it was more of a shamble. It
crawled along slowly, moving like an awkward centipede. Many of the limbs, in
fact, didn’t even look functional—they jutted from the creature’s flesh in a
twisted, unnatural fashion.

Its body was bulbous and elongated. It wasn’t just a blob, though . . . there
was a strange logic to its form. It had a distinct skeletal structure,
and—squinting through tin-enhanced eyes—she thought she could make out
translucent muscles and sinew wrapping the bones. The creature flexed odd
jumbles of muscles as it moved, and appeared to have a dozen different rib
cages. Along the main body, arms and legs hung at unnerving angles.

And heads—she counted six. Despite the translucent skin, she could make out a
horse head sitting beside that of a deer. Another head turned toward her, and
she could see its human skull. The head sat atop a long spinal cord attached to
some kind of animal torso, which was in turn attached to a jumble of strange
bones.

#### Kelsier informs Vin about Mistwraiths
Vin nearly retched. “What . . .? How . . .?”

“Mistwraiths have malleable bodies,” Kelsier said. “They can shape their skin
around any skeletal structure, and can even re-create muscles and organs if
they have a model to mimic.”

“You mean . . .?”

Kelsier nodded. “When they find a corpse, they envelop it and slowly digest the
muscles and organs. Then, they use what they’ve eaten as a pattern, creating an
exact duplicate of the dead creature. They rearrange the parts a little
bit—excreting the bones they don’t want, while adding the ones they do want to
their body—forming a jumble like what you see out there.”

Vin watched the creature shamble across the field, following her tracks. A flap
of slimy skin drooped from its underbelly, trailing along the ground. Tasting
for scents, Vin thought. Following the smell of our passing. She let her tin
return to normal, and the mistwraith once again became a shadowed mound. The
silhouette, however, only seemed to heighten its abnormality.

“Are they intelligent, then?” Vin asked. “If they can split up a . . . body and
put the pieces where they want?”

“Intelligent?” Kelsier asked. “No, not one this young. More instinctual than
intelligent.”

Vin shivered again. “Do people know about these things? I mean, other than the
legends?”

“What do you mean by ‘people’?” Kelsier asked. “A lot of Allomancers know about
them, and I’m sure the Ministry does. Regular people . . . well, they just
don’t go out at night. Most skaa fear and curse mistwraiths, but go their
entire lives without actually seeing one.”

“Lucky for them,” Vin muttered. “Why doesn’t someone do something about these
things?”

Kelsier shrugged. “They’re not that dangerous.”

“That one has a human head!”

“It probably found a corpse,” Kelsier said. “I’ve never heard of a mistwraith
attacking a full-grown, healthy adult. That’s probably why everyone leaves them
alone. And, of course, the high nobility have devised their own uses for the
creatures.”

Vin looked at him questioningly, but he said no more, rising and walking down
the hillside. She shot one more glance at the unnatural creature, then took
off, following Kelsier.

### They meet Sazed and continue towards their destination, Fellise, where imposter Lord Renoux is

#### They continue towards the imperial highroad
“Is that what you brought me out here to see?” Vin asked.

Kelsier chuckled. “Mistwraiths might look eerie, but they’re hardly worth such
a long trip. No, we’re heading over there.”

She followed his gesture, and was able to make out a change in the landscape
ahead. “The imperial highroad? We’ve circled around to the front of the city.”

Kelsier nodded. After a short walk—during which Vin glanced backward no less
than three times to make certain the mistwraith hadn’t gained on them—they left
the scrub and stepped onto the flat, packed earth of the imperial highroad.
Kelsier paused, scanning the road in either direction. Vin frowned, wondering
what he was doing.

#### They meet Sazed, a Terrisman, as they go to Fellise to see the imposter Lord Renoux
Then she saw the carriage. It was parked by the side of the highroad, and Vin
could see that there was a man waiting beside it.

“Ho, Sazed,” Kelsier said, walking forward.

The man bowed. “Master Kelsier,” he said, his smooth voice carrying well in the
night air. It had a higher pitch to it, and he spoke with an almost melodic
accent. “I almost thought that you had decided not to come.”

“You know me, Saze,” Kelsier said, jovially slapping the man on the shoulder.
“I’m the soul of punctuality.” He turned and waved a hand toward Vin. “This
apprehensive little creature is Vin.”

“Ah, yes,” Sazed said, speaking in a slow, well-enunciated way. There was
something strange about his accent. Vin approached cautiously, studying the
man. Sazed had a long, flat face and a willowy body. He was even taller than
Kelsier—tall enough to be a bit abnormal—and his arms were unusually long.

“You’re a Terrisman,” Vin said. His earlobes had been stretched out, and the
ears themselves contained studs that ran around their perimeter. He wore the
lavish, colorful robes of a Terris steward—the garments were made of
embroidered, overlapping V shapes, alternating among the three colors of his
master’s house.

“Yes, child,” Sazed said, bowing. “Have you known many of my people?”

“None,” Vin said. “But I know that the high nobility prefer Terrismen stewards
and attendants.”

“Indeed they do, child,” Sazed said. He turned to Kelsier. “We should go,
Master Kelsier. It is late, and we are still an hour away from Fellise.”

Fellise, Vin thought. So, we’re going to see the impostor Lord Renoux.

Sazed opened the carriage door for them, then closed it after they climbed in.
Vin settled on one of the plush seats as she heard Sazed climb atop the vehicle
and set the horses in motion.


### Kelsier and Vin's interactions in the carraige

#### Kelsier makes note of Vin's personality, always hiding but brave
Kelsier sat quietly in the carriage. The window shades were closed against the
mist, and a small lantern, half shielded, hung in the corner. Vin rode on the
seat directly across from him—her legs tucked up underneath her, her enveloping
mistcloak pulled close, hiding her arms and legs.

She always does that, Kelsier thought. Wherever she is, she tries to be as
small and unnoticeable as possible. So tense. Vin didn’t sit, she crouched. She
didn’t walk, she prowled. Even when she was sitting in the open, she seemed to
be trying to hide.

She’s a brave one, though. During his own training, Kelsier hadn’t been quite
so willing to throw himself off of a city wall—old Gemmel had been forced to
push him.

#### Vin asks Kelsier about his brother Marsh
Vin watched him with those quiet, dark eyes of hers. When she noticed his
attention, she glanced away, huddling down a little more within her cloak.
Unexpectedly, however, she spoke.

“Your brother,” she said in her soft near-whisper of a voice. “You two don’t
get along very well.”

Kelsier raised an eyebrow. “No. We never have, really. It’s a shame. We should,
but we just . . . don’t.”

“He’s older than you?”

Kelsier nodded.

“Did he beat you often?” Vin asked.

Kelsier frowned. “Beat me? No, he didn’t beat me at all.”

“You stopped him, then?” Vin said. “Maybe that’s why he doesn’t like you. How
did you escape? Did you run, or were you just stronger than him?”

“Vin, Marsh never tried to beat me. We argued, true—but we never really wanted
to hurt one another.”

Vin didn’t contradict him, but he could see in her eyes that she didn’t believe
him.

#### About Kelsier's parents
What a life . . . Kelsier thought, falling silent. There were so many children
like Vin in the underground. Of course, most died before reaching her age.
Kelsier had been one of the lucky ones: His mother had been a resourceful
mistress of a high nobleman, a clever woman who had managed to hide the fact
that she was skaa from her lord. Kelsier and Marsh had grown up
privileged—considered illegitimate, but still noble—until their father had
finally discovered the truth.

#### Vin questions Kelsier's motives, always distrusting
“Why did you teach me those things?” Vin asked, interrupting his thoughts.
“About Allomancy, I mean.”

Kelsier frowned. “I promised you that I would.”

“Now that I know your secrets, what is to keep me from running away from you?”

“Nothing,” Kelsier said.

Once again, her distrusting glare told him that she didn’t believe his answer.
“There are metals you didn’t tell me about. Back in our meeting on the first
day, you said there were ten.”

Kelsier nodded, leaning forward. “There are. But I didn’t leave the last two
out because I wanted to keep things from you. They’re just . . . difficult to
get used to. It will be easier if you practice with the basic metals first.
However, if you want to know about the last two, I can teach you once we arrive
in Fellise.”

#### Vin asks about the one who betrayed Kelsier
Vin’s eyes narrowed.

Kelsier rolled his eyes. “I’m not trying to trick you, Vin. People serve on my
crews because they want to, and I’m effective because they can rely on one
another. No distrust, no betrayals.”

“Except one,” Vin whispered. “The betrayal that sent you to the Pits.”

Kelsier froze. “Where did you hear that?”

Vin shrugged.

Kelsier sighed, rubbing his forehead with one hand. That wasn’t what he wanted
to do—he wanted to scratch his scars, the ones that ran all along his fingers
and hands, twisting up his arms toward his shoulders. He resisted.

“That isn’t something worth talking about,” he said.

“But there was a traitor,” Vin said.

#### Kelsier changes the subject, offering Camon's bag of coin to Vin
“We don’t know for certain.” That sounded weak, even to him. “Regardless, my
crews rely on trust. That means no coercions. If you want out, we can go back
to Luthadel right now. I’ll show you the last two metals, then you can be on
your way.”

“I don’t have enough money to survive on my own,” Vin said.

Kelsier reached inside of his cloak and pulled out a bag of coins, then tossed
it onto the seat beside her. “Three thousand boxings. The money I took from
Camon.”

Vin glanced at the bag distrustfully.

“Take it,” Kelsier said. “You’re the one who earned it—from what I’ve been able
to gather, your Allomancy was behind most of Camon’s recent successes, and you
were the one who risked Pushing the emotions of an obligator.”

Vin didn’t move.

#### They turn around, Kelsier reading Vin's reactions and body language
Fine, Kelsier thought, reaching up and knocking on the underside of the
coachman’s chair. The carriage stopped, and Sazed soon appeared at his window.

“Turn the carriage around please, Saze,” Kelsier said. “Take us back to
Luthadel.”

“Yes, Master Kelsier.”

Within moments, the carriage was rolling back in the direction it had come. Vin
watched in silence, but she seemed a little less certain of herself. She eyed
the bag of coins.

“I’m serious, Vin,” Kelsier said. “I can’t have someone on my team who doesn’t
want to work with me. Turning you away isn’t a punishment; it’s just the way
things must be.”

Vin didn’t respond. Letting her go would be a gamble—but forcing her to stay
would be a bigger one. Kelsier sat, trying to read her, trying to understand
her. Would she betray them to the Final Empire if she left? He thought not. She
wasn’t a bad person.

She just thought that everybody else was.

#### Vin and Kelsier go through a game of trust, as Vin decides to stay
“I think your plan is crazy,” she said quietly.

“So do half the people on the crew.”

“You can’t defeat the Final Empire.”

“We don’t have to,” Kelsier said. “We just have to get Yeden an army, then
seize the palace.”

“The Lord Ruler will stop you,” Vin said. “You can’t beat him—he’s immortal.”

“We have the Eleventh Metal,” Kelsier said. “We’ll find a way to kill him.”

“The Ministry is too powerful. They’ll find your army and destroy it.”

Kelsier leaned forward, looking Vin in the eye. “You trusted me enough to jump
off the top of the wall, and I caught you. You’re going to have to trust me
this time too.”

She obviously didn’t like the word “trust” very much. She studied him in the
weak lanternlight, remaining quiet long enough that the silence grew
uncomfortable.

Finally, she snatched the bag of coins, quickly hiding it beneath her cloak.
“I’ll stay,” she said. “But not because I trust you.”

Kelsier raised an eyebrow. “Why, then?”

Vin shrugged, and she sounded perfectly honest when she spoke. “Because I want
to see what happens.”


### 

#### 

_Fellise_  
Having a keep in Luthadel qualified a house for high noble status. However,
having a keep didn’t mean that one had to live in it, especially not all of the
time. Many families also maintained a residence in one of Luthadel’s outskirt
cities.

Less crowded, cleaner, and less strict in its observance of imperial laws,
Fellise was a rich town. Rather than containing imposing, buttressed keeps, it
was filled with lavish manors and villas. Trees even lined some of the streets;
most of them were aspens, whose bone-white bark was somehow resistant to the
discoloring of the ash.

Vin watched the mist-cloaked city through her window, the carriage lantern
extinguished at her request. Burning tin, she was able to study the neatly
organized and well-groomed streets. This was a section of Fellise she had
rarely seen; despite the town’s opulence, its slums were remarkably similar to
the ones in every other city.

Kelsier watched the city through his own window, frowning.

“You disapprove of the waste,” Vin guessed, her voice a whisper. The sound
would carry to Kelsier’s enhanced ears. “You see the riches of this city and
think of the skaa who worked to create it.”

“That’s part of it,” Kelsier said, his own voice barely a whisper. “There’s
more, though. Considering the amount of money spent on it, this city should be
beautiful.”

Vin cocked her head. “It is.”

Kelsier shook his head. “The homes are still stained black. The soil is still
arid and lifeless. The trees still grow leaves of brown.”

“Of course they’re brown. What else would they be?”

“Green,” Kelsier said. “Everything should be green.”

Green? Vin thought. What a strange thought. She tried to imagine trees with
green leaves, but the image seemed silly. Kelsier certainly had his
quirks—though, anyone who had spent so long at the Pits of Hathsin was bound to
be left a bit strange.

He turned back toward her. “Before I forget, there are a couple more things you
should know about Allomancy.”

Vin nodded.

####
“First,” Kelsier said, “remember to burn away any unused metals you have inside
of you at the end of the night. Some of the metals we use can be poisonous if
digested; it’s best not to sleep with them in your stomach.”

“All right,” Vin said.

“Also,” Kelsier said, “never try to burn a metal that isn’t one of the ten. I
warned you that impure metals and alloys can make you sick. Well, if you try to
burn a metal that isn’t Allomantically sound at all, it could be deadly.”

Vin nodded solemnly. Good to know, she thought.

####
“Ah,” Kelsier said, turning back toward the window. “Here we are: the newly
purchased Manor Renoux. You should probably take off your cloak—the people here
are loyal to us, but it always pays to be careful.”

Vin agreed completely. She pulled off the cloak, letting Kelsier tuck it in his
pack. Then she peeked out the carriage window, peering through the mists at the
approaching manor. The grounds had a low stone wall and an iron gate; a pair of
guards opened the way as Sazed identified himself.

The roadway inside was lined with aspens, and atop the hill ahead Vin could see
a large manor house, phantom light spilling from its windows.

Sazed pulled the carriage up before the manor, then handed the reins to a
servant and climbed down. “Welcome to Manor Renoux, Mistress Vin,” he said,
opening the door and gesturing to help her down.

Vin eyed his hand, but didn’t take it, instead scrambling down on her own. The
Terrisman didn’t seem offended by her refusal.

The steps to the manor house were lit by a double line of lantern poles. As
Kelsier hopped from the carriage, Vin could see a group of men gathering at the
top of the white marble stairs. Kelsier climbed the steps with a springy
stride; Vin followed behind, noticing how clean the steps were. They would have
to be scrubbed regularly to keep the ash from staining them. Did the skaa who
maintained the building know that their master was an imposter? How was
Kelsier’s “benevolent” plan to overthrow the Final Empire helping the common
people who cleaned these steps?

Thin and aging, “Lord Renoux” wore a rich suit and a pair of aristocratic
spectacles. A sparse, gray mustache colored his lip, and—despite his age—he
didn’t carry a cane for support. He nodded respectfully to Kelsier, but
maintained a dignified air. Immediately, Vin was struck by one obvious fact:
This man knows what he is doing.

Camon had been skilled at impersonating noblemen, but his self-importance had
always struck Vin as a bit juvenile. While there were noblemen like Camon, the
more impressive ones were like this Lord Renoux: calm, and self-confident. Men
whose nobility was in their bearing rather than their ability to speak
scornfully to those around them. Vin had to resist cringing when the impostor’s
eyes fell on her—he seemed far too much a nobleman, and she had been trained to
reflexively avoid their attention.

“The manor is looking much better,” Kelsier said, shaking hands with Renoux.

“Yes, I’m impressed with its progress,” Renoux said. “My cleaning crews are
quite proficient—give us a bit more time, and the manor will be so grand that I
wouldn’t hesitate to host the Lord Ruler himself.”

Kelsier chuckled. “Wouldn’t that be an odd dinner party.” He stepped back,
gesturing toward Vin. “This is the young lady I spoke of.”

Renoux studied her, and Vin glanced away. She didn’t like it when people looked
at her that way—it made her wonder how they were going to try and use her.

“We will need to speak further of this, Kelsier,” Renoux said, nodding toward
the mansion’s entrance. “The hour is late, but . . .”

Kelsier stepped into the building. “Late? Why, it’s barely midnight. Have your
people prepare some food—Lady Vin and I missed dinner.”

A missed meal was nothing new to Vin. However, Renoux immediately waved to some
servants, and they leapt into motion. Renoux walked into the building, and Vin
followed. She paused in the entryway, however, Sazed waiting patiently behind
her.

Kelsier paused, turning when he noticed that she wasn’t following. “Vin?”

“It’s so . . . clean,” Vin said, unable to think of any other description. On
jobs, she’d occasionally seen the homes of noblemen. However, those times had
happened at night, in dark gloom. She was unprepared for the well-lit sight
before her.

The white marble floors of Manor Renoux seemed to glow, reflecting the light of
a dozen lanterns. Everything was . . . pristine. The walls were white except
where they had been wash-painted with traditional animal murals. A brilliant
chandelier sparkled above a double staircase, and the room’s other
decorations—crystal sculptures, vases set with bundles of aspen
branches—glistened, unmarred by soot, smudge, or fingerprint.

Kelsier chuckled. “Well, her reaction speaks highly of your efforts,” he said
to Lord Renoux.

Vin allowed herself to be led into the building. The group turned right,
entering a room whose whites were muted slightly by the addition of maroon
furnishings and drapes.

####
Renoux paused. “Perhaps the lady could enjoy some refreshment here for a
moment,” he said to Kelsier. “There are some matters of a . . . delicate nature
that I would discuss with you.”

Kelsier shrugged. “Fine with me,” he said, following Renoux toward another
doorway. “Saze, why don’t you keep Vin company while Lord Renoux and I talk?”

“Of course, Master Kelsier.”

Kelsier smiled, eyeing Vin, and somehow she knew that he was leaving Sazed
behind to keep her from eavesdropping.

She shot the departing men an annoyed look. What was that you said about
“trust,” Kelsier? However, she was even more annoyed at herself for getting
unsettled. Why should she care if Kelsier excluded her? She had spent her
entire life being ignored and dismissed. It had never bothered her before when
other crewleaders left her out of their planning sessions.

Vin took a seat in one of the stiffly upholstered maroon chairs, tucking her
feet up beneath her. She knew what the problem was. Kelsier had been showing
her too much respect, making her feel too important. She was beginning to think
that she deserved to be part of his secret confidences. Reen’s laughter in the
back of her mind discredited those thoughts, and she sat, annoyed at both
herself and Kelsier, feeling ashamed, but not exactly certain why.

Renoux’s servants brought her a platter of fruits and breads. They set up a
small stand beside her chair, and even gave her a crystalline cup filled with a
glistening red liquid. She couldn’t tell if it was wine or juice, and she
didn’t intend to find out. She did, however, pick at the food—her instincts
wouldn’t let her pass up a free meal, even if it was prepared by unfamiliar
hands.

Sazed walked over and took a position standing just behind her chair to the
right. He waited with a stiff posture, hands clasped in front of him, eyes
forward. The stance was obviously intended to be respectful, but his looming
posture didn’t help her mood any.

Vin tried to focus on her surroundings, but this only reminded her of how rich
the furnishings were. She was uncomfortable amid such finery; she felt as if
she stood out like a black spot on a clean rug. She didn’t eat the breads for
fear that she would drop crumbs on the floor, and she worried at her feet and
legs—which had been stained with ash while walking through the
countryside—marring the furnishings.

All of this cleanliness came at some skaa’s expense, Vin thought. Why should I
worry about disturbing it? However, she had trouble feeling outraged, for she
knew this was only a front. “Lord Renoux” had to maintain a certain level of
finery. It would be suspicious to do otherwise.

In addition, something else kept her from resenting the waste. The servants
were happy. They went about their duties with a businesslike professionalism,
no sense of drudgery about their efforts. She heard laughter in the outer
hallway. These were not mistreated skaa; whether they had been included in
Kelsier’s plans or not was irrelevant.

####
So, Vin sat and forced herself to eat fruit, yawning occasionally. It was
turning out to be a long night indeed. The servants eventually left her alone,
though Sazed continued to loom just behind her.

I can’t eat like this, she finally thought with frustration. “Could you not
stand over my shoulder like that?”

Sazed nodded. He took two steps forward so that he stood next to her chair,
rather than behind it. He adopted the same stiff posture, looming above her
just as he had before.

Vin frowned in annoyance, then noticed the smile on Sazed’s lips. He glanced
down at her, eyes twinkling at his joke, then walked over and seated himself in
the chair beside hers.

“I’ve never known a Terrisman with a sense of humor before,” Vin said dryly.

Sazed raised an eyebrow. “I was under the impression that you hadn’t known any
Terrismen at all, Mistress Vin.”

Vin paused. “Well, I’ve never heard of one with a sense of humor. You’re
supposed to be completely rigid and formal.”

“We’re just subtle, Mistress,” Sazed said. Though he sat with a stiff posture,
there was still something . . . relaxed about him. It was as if he were as
comfortable when sitting properly as other people were when lounging.

That’s how they’re supposed to be. The perfect serving men, completely loyal to
the Final Empire.

“Is something troubling you, Mistress Vin?” Sazed asked as she studied him.

How much does he know? Perhaps he doesn’t even realize that Renoux is an
imposter. “I was just wondering how you . . . came here,” she finally said.

“You mean, how did a Terrisman steward end up as part of a rebellion intending
to overthrow the Final Empire?” Sazed asked in his soft voice.

Vin flushed. Apparently he was well versed indeed.

“That is an intriguing question, Mistress,” Sazed said. “Certainly, my
situation is not common. I would say that I arrived at it because of belief.”

“Belief?”

“Yes,” Sazed said. “Tell me, Mistress. What is it that you believe?”

Vin frowned. “What kind of question is that?”

“The most important kind, I think.”

Vin sat for a moment, but he obviously expected a reply, so she finally
shrugged. “I don’t know.”

“People often say that,” Sazed said, “but I find that it is rarely true. Do you
believe in the Final Empire?”

“I believe that it is strong,” Vin said.

“Immortal?”

Vin shrugged. “It has been so far.”

“And the Lord Ruler? Is he the Ascended Avatar of God? Do you believe that he,
as the Ministry teaches, is a Sliver of Infinity?”

“I . . . I’ve never thought about it before.”

“Perhaps you should,” Sazed said. “If, upon examination, you find that the
Ministry’s teachings do not suit you, then I would be pleased to offer you an
alternative.”

“What alternative?”

Sazed smiled. “That depends. The right belief is like a good cloak, I think. If
it fits you well, it keeps you warm and safe. The wrong fit, however, can
suffocate.”

####
Vin paused, frowning slightly, but Sazed just smiled. Eventually, she turned
her attention back to her meal. After a short wait, the side door opened, and
Kelsier and Renoux returned.

“Now,” Renoux said as he and Kelsier seated themselves, a group of servants
bringing another plate of food for Kelsier, “let us discuss this child. The man
you were going to have play my heir will not do, you say?”

“Unfortunately,” Kelsier said, making quick work of his food.

“That complicates things greatly,” Renoux said.

Kelsier shrugged. “We’ll just have Vin be your heir.”

Renoux shook his head. “A girl her age could inherit, but it would be
suspicious for me to pick her. There are any number of legitimate male cousins
in the Renoux line who would be far more suitable choices. It was going to be
difficult enough to get a middle-aged man past courtly scrutiny. A young girl .
. . no, too many people would investigate her background. Our forged family
lines will survive passing scrutiny, but if someone were to actually send
messengers to search out her holdings . . .”

Kelsier frowned.

“Besides,” Renoux added. “There is another issue. If I were to name a young,
unmarried girl as my heir, hers would instantly become one of the most
sought-after hands in Luthadel. It would be very difficult for her to spy if
she were to receive that much attention.”

Vin flushed at the thought. Surprisingly, she found her heart sinking as the
old imposter spoke. This was the only part Kelsier gave me in the plan. If I
can’t do it, what good am I to the crew?

“So, what do you suggest?” Kelsier asked.

“Well, she doesn’t have to be my heir,” Renoux said. “What if, instead, she
were simply a young scion I brought with me to Luthadel? Perhaps I promised her
parents—distant but favored cousins—that I would introduce their daughter to
the court? Everyone would assume that my ulterior motive is to marry her off to
a high noble family, thereby gaining myself another connection to those in
power. However, she wouldn’t draw much attention—she would be of low status,
not to mention somewhat rural.”

“Which would explain why she’s a bit less refined than other court members,”
Kelsier said. “No offense, Vin.”

Vin looked up from hiding a piece of napkin-wrapped bread in her shirt pocket.
“Why would I be offended?”

Kelsier smiled. “Never mind.”

Renoux nodded to himself. “Yes, this will work much better. Everyone assumes
that House Renoux will eventually join the high nobility, so they’ll accept Vin
into their ranks out of courtesy. However, she herself will be unimportant
enough that most people will ignore her. That is the ideal situation for what
we will want her to do.”

“I like it,” Kelsier said. “Few people expect a man of your age and mercantile
concerns to bother himself with balls and parties, but having a young socialite
to send instead of a rejection note will serve as an advantage to your
reputation.”

“Indeed,” Renoux said. “She’ll need some refinement, however—and not just in
appearance.”

Vin squirmed a bit beneath their scrutiny. It looked as if her part in the plan
would go forward, and she suddenly realized what that meant. Being around
Renoux made her uncomfortable—and he was a fake nobleman. How would she react
to an entire room full of real ones?

####
“I’m afraid I’ll have to borrow Sazed from you for a while,” Kelsier said.

“Quite all right,” Renoux said. “He’s really not my steward, but yours.”

“Actually,” Kelsier said, “I don’t think he’s anybody’s steward anymore, eh
Saze?”

Sazed cocked his head. “A Terrisman without a master is like a soldier with no
weapon, Master Kelsier. I have enjoyed my time attending to Lord Renoux, as I
am certain that I shall enjoy returning to your service.”

“Oh, you won’t be returning to my service,” Kelsier said.

Sazed raised an eyebrow.

Kelsier nodded toward Vin. “Renoux is right, Saze. Vin needs some coaching, and
I know plenty of high noblemen who are less refined than yourself. Do you think
you could help the girl prepare?”

“I am certain that I could offer the young lady some aid,” Sazed said.

“Good,” Kelsier said, popping one last cake in his mouth, then rising. “I’m
glad that’s settled, because I’m starting to feel tired—and poor Vin looks like
she’s about to nod off in the middle of her fruit plate.”

“I’m fine,” Vin said immediately, the assertion weakened slightly by a stifled
yawn.

“Sazed,” Renoux said, “would you show them to the appropriate guest chambers?”

“Of course, Master Renoux,” Sazed said, rising from his seat in a smooth
motion.

Vin and Kelsier trailed the tall Terrisman from the room as a group of servants
took away the remnants of the meal. I left food behind, Vin noticed, feeling a
bit drowsy. She wasn’t certain what to think of the occurrence.

####
As they crested the stairs and turned into a side hallway, Kelsier fell into
place beside Vin. “I’m sorry for excluding you back there, Vin.”

She shrugged. “There’s no reason for me to know all of your plans.”

“Nonsense,” Kelsier said. “Your decision tonight makes you as much a part of
this team as anyone else. Renoux’s words in private, however, were of a
personal nature. He is a marvelous actor, but he feels very uncomfortable with
people knowing the specifics of how he took Lord Renoux’s place. I promise you,
nothing we discussed has any bearing on your part in the plan.”

Vin continued walking. “I . . . believe you.”

####
“Good,” Kelsier said with a smile, clapping her on the shoulder. “Saze, I know
my way to the men’s guest quarters—I was, after all, the one who bought this
place. I can make my way from here.”

“Very well, Master Kelsier,” Sazed said with a respectful nod. Kelsier shot Vin
a smile, then turned down a hallway, walking with his characteristically lively
step.

Vin watched him go, then followed Sazed down a different side passage,
pondering the Allomancy training, her discussion with Kelsier in the carriage,
and finally Kelsier’s promise just a few moments before. The three thousand
boxings—a fortune in coins—was a strange weight tied to her belt.

Eventually, Sazed opened a particular door for her, walking in to light the
lanterns. “The linens are fresh, and I will send maids to prepare you a bath in
the morning.” He turned, handing her his candle. “Will you require anything
else?”

Vin shook her head. Sazed smiled, bid her good evening, then walked back out in
the hallway. Vin stood quietly for a short moment, studying the room. Then she
turned, glancing once again in the direction Kelsier had gone.

####
“Sazed?” she said, peeking back out into the hallway.

The steward paused, turning back. “Yes, Mistress Vin?”

“Kelsier,” Vin said quietly. “He’s a good man, isn’t he?”

Sazed smiled. “A very good man, Mistress. One of the best I’ve known.”

Vin nodded slightly. “A good man . . .” she said softly. “I don’t think I’ve
ever known one of those before.”

Sazed smiled, then bowed his head respectfully and turned to leave.

Vin let the door swing shut.





THE END OF PART ONE





