# PART FIVE

## 35
_Character:Vin_  
_Character:Sazed_  
_Character(Dead):Kelsier_  
_Character(Reference):Rashek_  
_Character:Ham_  
_Character:Breeze_  
_Character:Dockson_  
_Character:Renoux_  
_Character(Reference):Mare_  
_Character:Spook_  

### Epigraph

#### 

BELIEVERS IN A

FORGOTTEN WORLD





* * *





I know what will happen if I make the wrong choice. I must be strong; I must
not take the power for myself.

For I have seen what will happen if I do.





35


### Vin floats down out of the mist as she contemplates the events that transpired

#### Vin floats in the mist as she thinks about the trust she placed in Kelsier
TO WORK WITH ME, KELSIER had said, I only ask that you promise one thing—to
trust me.

Vin hung in the mist, immobile. It flowed around her like a quiet stream.
Above, ahead, to the sides, and beneath. Mist all around her.

Trust me, Vin, he’d said. You trusted me enough to jump off the wall, and I
caught you. You’re going to have to trust me this time too.

I’ll catch you.

I’ll catch you. . . .

It was as if she were nowhere. Among, and of, the mist. How she envied it. It
didn’t think. Didn’t worry.

Didn’t hurt.

I trusted you, Kelsier, she thought. I actually did—but you let me fall. You
promised that your crews had no betrayals. What of this? What of your betrayal?

She hung, her tin extinguished to let her better see the mists. They were
slightly wet, cool upon her skin. Like the tears of a dead man.

Why does it matter, anymore? she thought, staring upward. Why does anything
matter? What was it you said to me, Kelsier? That I never really understood?
That I still needed to learn about friendship? What about you? You didn’t even
fight him.

He stood there again, in her mind. The Lord Ruler struck him down with a
disdainful blow. The Survivor had died like any other man.

Is this why you were so hesitant to promise that you wouldn’t abandon me?

She wished she could just . . . go. Float away. Become mist. She’d once wished
for freedom—and then had assumed she’d found it. She’d been wrong. This wasn’t
freedom, this grief, this hole within her.

It was the same as before, when Reen had abandoned her. What was the
difference? At least Reen had been honest. He’d always promised that he would
leave. Kelsier had led her along, telling her to trust and to love, but Reen
had always been the truthful one.

“I don’t want to do this anymore,” she whispered to the mists. “Can’t you just
take me?”

The mists gave no answer. They continued to spin playfully, uncaring. Always
changing—yet somehow, always the same.

#### Sazed and Vin discuss Kelsiers death and its ramifications
“Mistress?” called an uncertain voice from below. “Mistress, is that you up
there?”

Vin sighed, burning tin, then extinguishing steel and letting herself drop. Her
mistcloak fluttered as she fell through the mists; she landed quietly on the
rooftop above their safe house. Sazed stood a short distance away, beside the
steel ladder that the lookouts had been using to get atop the building.

“Yes, Saze?” she asked tiredly, reaching out to Pull up the three coins she’d
been using as anchors to stabilize her like the legs of a tripod. One of them
was twisted and bent—the same coin she and Kelsier had gotten into a Pushing
match over so many months ago.

“I’m sorry, Mistress,” Sazed said. “I simply wondered where you had gone.”

She shrugged.

“It is a strangely quiet night, I think,” Sazed said.

“A mournful night.” Hundreds of skaa had been massacred following Kelsier’s
death, and hundreds more had been trampled during the rush to escape.

“I wonder if his death even meant anything,” she said quietly. “We probably
saved a lot fewer than were killed.”

“Slain by evil men, Mistress.”

“Ham often asks if there even is such a thing as ‘evil.’ ”

“Master Hammond likes to ask questions,” Sazed said, “but even he doesn’t
question the answers. There are evil men . . . just as there are good men.”

Vin shook her head. “I was wrong about Kelsier. He wasn’t a good man—he was
just a liar. He never had a plan for defeating the Lord Ruler.”

“Perhaps,” Sazed said. “Or, perhaps he never had an opportunity to fulfill that
plan. Perhaps we just don’t understand the plan.”

“You sound like you still believe in him.” Vin turned and walked to the edge of
the flat-topped roof, staring out over the quiet, shadowy city.

“I do, Mistress,” Sazed said.

“How? How can you?”

Sazed shook his head, walking over to stand beside her. “Belief isn’t simply a
thing for fair times and bright days, I think. What is belief—what is faith—if
you don’t continue in it after failure?”

Vin frowned.

“Anyone can believe in someone, or something, that always succeeds, Mistress.
But failure . . . ah, now, that is hard to believe in, certainly and truly.
Difficult enough to have value, I think.”

Vin shook her head. “Kelsier doesn’t deserve it.”

“You don’t mean that, Mistress,” Sazed said calmly. “You’re angry because of
what happened. You hurt.”

“Oh, I mean it,” Vin said, feeling a tear on her cheek. “He doesn’t deserve our
belief. He never did.”

“The skaa think differently—their legends about him are growing quickly. I
shall have to return here soon and collect them.”

Vin frowned. “You would gather stories about Kelsier?”

“Of course,” Sazed said. “I collect all religions.”

Vin snorted. “This is no religion we’re talking about, Sazed. This is Kelsier.”

“I disagree. He is certainly a religious figure to the skaa.”

“But, we knew him,” Vin said. “He was no prophet or god. He was just a man.”

“So many of them are, I think,” Sazed said quietly.

#### Sazed discusses his plans now, to tell the Skaa of Rashek
Vin just shook her head. They stood there for a moment, watching the night.
“What of the others?” she finally asked.

“They are discussing what to do next,” Sazed said. “I believe it has been
decided that they will leave Luthadel separately and seek refuge in other
towns.”

“And . . . you?”

“I must travel north—to my homeland, to the place of the Keepers—so that I can
share the knowledge that I possess. I must tell my brethren and sisters of the
logbook—especially the words regarding our ancestor, the man named Rashek.
There is much to learn in this story, I think.”

He paused, then glanced at her. “This is not a journey I can take with another,
Mistress. The places of the Keepers must remain secret, even from you.”

Of course, Vin thought. Of course he’d go too.

“I will return,” he promised.

Sure you will. Just like all of the others have.

The crew had made her feel needed for a time, but she’d always known it would
end. It was time to go back to the streets. Time to be alone again.

“Mistress . . .” Sazed said slowly. “Do you hear that?”

### Kelsier's plan to martyr himself and use Renoux as the image of his resurrected self and stir rebellion is revealed

#### Skaa fanatics begin to rise up and speak of Kelsier
She shrugged. But . . . there was something. Voices. Vin frowned, walking to
the other side of the building. They grew louder, becoming easily distinct even
without tin. She peered over the side of the rooftop.

A group of skaa men, perhaps ten in number, stood in the street below. A
thieving crew? Vin wondered as Sazed joined her. The group’s numbers were
swelling as more skaa timidly left their dwellings.

“Come,” said a skaa man who stood at the front of the group. “Fear not the
mist! Didn’t the Survivor name himself Lord of the Mists? Did he not say that
we have nothing to fear from them? Indeed, they will protect us, give us
safety. Give us power, even!”

As more and more skaa left their homes without obvious repercussion, the group
began to swell even further.

“Go get the others,” Vin said.

“Good idea,” Sazed said, moving quickly to the ladder.

“Your friends, your children, your fathers, your mothers, wives, and lovers,”
the skaa man said, lighting a lantern and holding it up. “They lie dead in the
street not a half hour from here. The Lord Ruler doesn’t even have the decency
to clean up his slaughter!”

The crowd began to mutter in agreement.

“Even when the cleaning occurs,” the man said, “will it be the Lord Ruler’s
hands that dig the graves? No! It will be our hands. Lord Kelsier spoke of
this.”

“Lord Kelsier!” several men agreed. The group was getting large now, being
joined by women and youths.

Clanking on the ladder announced Ham’s arrival. He was joined shortly by Sazed,
then Breeze, Dockson, Spook, and even Clubs.

“Lord Kelsier!” proclaimed the man below. Others lit torches, brightening the
mists. “Lord Kelsier fought for us today! He slew an immortal Inquisitor!”

The crowd grumbled in assent.

“But then he died!” someone yelled.

Silence.

“And what did we do to help him?” the leader asked. “Many of us were
there—thousands of us. Did we help? No! We waited and watched, even as he
fought for us. We stood dumbly and let him fall. We watched him die!

“Or did we? What did the Survivor say—that the Lord Ruler could never really
kill him? Kelsier is the Lord of the Mists! Is he not with us now?”

Vin turned to the others. Ham was watching carefully, but Breeze just shrugged.
“The man’s obviously insane. A religious nut.”

“I tell you, friends!” screamed the man below. The crowd was still growing,
more and more torches being lit. “I tell you the truth! Lord Kelsier appeared
to me this very night! He said that he would always be with us. Will we let him
down again?”

“No!” came the reply.

Breeze shook his head. “I didn’t think they had it in them. Too bad it’s such a
small—”

#### They speculate that this was Kelsier's plan all along, to become a martyr
“What’s that?” Dox asked.

Vin turned, frowning. There was a pocket of light in the distance. Like . . .
torches, lit in the mists. Another one appeared to the east, near a skaa slum.
A third appeared. Then a fourth. In a matter of moments, it seemed like the
entire city was glowing.

“You insane genius . . .” Dockson whispered.

“What?” Clubs asked, frowning.

“We missed it,” Dox said. “The atium, the army, the nobility . . . that wasn’t
the job Kelsier was planning. This was his job! Our crew was never supposed to
topple the Final Empire—we were too small. An entire city’s population, however
. . .”

“You’re saying he did this on purpose?” Breeze asked.

“He always asked me the same question,” Sazed said from behind. “He always
asked what gave religions so much power. Each time, I answered him the same. .
. .” Sazed looked at them, cocking his head. “I told him that it was because
their believers had something they felt passionate about. Something . . . or
someone.”

“But, why not tell us?” Breeze asked.

“Because he knew,” Dox said quietly. “He knew something we would never agree
to. He knew that he would have to die.”

Breeze shook his head. “I don’t buy it. Why even bother with us, then? He could
have done this on his own.”

#### Dockson leads Vin to the warehouse where the weapons are stored
Why even bother . . . “Dox,” Vin said, turning. “Where’s that warehouse Kelsier
rented, the one where he held his informant meetings?”

Dockson paused. “Not far away, actually. Two streets down. He said he wanted it
to be near the bolt-lair. . . .”

“Show me!” Vin said, scrambling over the side of the building. The gathered
skaa continued to yell, each cry louder than the one before. The entire street
blazed with light, flickering torches turning the mist into a brilliant haze.

Dockson led her down the street, the rest of the crew trailing behind. The
warehouse was a large, run-down structure squatting disconsolately in the
slum’s industrial section. Vin walked up to it, then flared pewter and smashed
off the lock.

The door slowly swung open. Dockson held up a lantern, and its light revealed
sparkling piles of metal. Weapons. Swords, axes, staves, and helmets glittered
in the light—an incredible silvery hoard.

The crew stared at the room in wonder.

“This is the reason,” Vin said quietly. “He needed the Renoux front to buy
weapons in such numbers. He knew his rebellion would need these if they were
going to succeed in taking the city.”

“Why gather an army, then?” Ham said. “Was it just a front too?”

“I guess,” Vin said.

#### Renoux appears, and is revealed to be a Kandra, a Mistwraith that is to take the appearance of Kelsier born again
“Wrong,” a voice said, echoing through the cavernous warehouse. “There was so
much more to it than that.”

The crew jumped, and Vin flared her metals . . . until she recognized the
voice. “Renoux?”

Dockson held his lantern higher. “Show yourself, creature.”

A figure moved in the far back of the warehouse, staying to shadow. However,
when it spoke, its voice was unmistakable. “He needed the army to provide a
core of trained men for the rebellion. That part of his plan was . . . hampered
by events. That was only one bit of why he needed you, however. The noble
houses needed to fall to leave a void in the political structure. The Garrison
needed to leave the town so that the skaa wouldn’t be slaughtered.”

“He planned this all from the start,” Ham said with wonder. “Kelsier knew that
the skaa wouldn’t rise up. They’d been beaten down for so long, trained to
think that the Lord Ruler owned both their bodies and their souls. He
understood that they would never rebel . . . not unless he gave them a new
god.”

“Yes,” Renoux said, stepping forward. The light glittered off his face, and Vin
gasped in surprise.

“Kelsier!” she screamed.

Ham grabbed her shoulder. “Careful, child. It’s not him.”

The creature looked at her. It wore Kelsier’s face, but the eyes . . . they
were different. The face didn’t bear Kelsier’s characteristic smile. It seemed
hollow. Dead.

“I apologize,” it said. “This was to be my part in the plan, and is the reason
Kelsier originally contracted with me. I was to take his bones once he was
dead, then appear to his followers to give them faith and strength.”

“What are you?” Vin asked with horror.

Renoux-Kelsier looked at her, and then his face shimmered, becoming
transparent. She could see his bones through the gelatinous skin. It reminded
her of . . .

“A mistwraith.”

“A kandra,” the creature said, its skin losing its transparency. “A mistwraith
that has . . . grown up, you might say.”

Vin turned away in revulsion, remembering the creatures she had seen in the
mist. Scavengers, Kelsier had said . . . creatures that digested the bodies of
the dead, stealing their skeletons and images. The legends are even more true
than I thought.

“You were part of this plan too,” the kandra said. “All of you. You ask why he
needed a crew? He needed men of virtue, men who could learn to worry more for
the people than for coin. He put you before armies and crowds, letting you
practice leadership. He was using you . . . but he was also training you.”

The creature looked to Dockson, Breeze, then Ham. “Bureaucrat, politician,
general. For a new nation to be born, it will need men of your individual
talents.” The kandra nodded to a large sheet of paper affixed to a table a
short distance away. “That is for you to follow. I have other business to be
about.”

#### Renoux gives Vin a pouch from Kelsier
It turned as if to leave, then paused beside Vin, turning toward her with its
disturbingly Kelsier-like face. Yet, the creature itself wasn’t like Renoux or
Kelsier. It seemed passionless.

The kandra held up a small pouch. “He asked me to give you this.” It dropped
the pouch into her hand, then continued on, the crew giving it a wide berth as
it left the warehouse.

Breeze started toward the table first, but Ham and Dockson beat him to it. Vin
looked down at the bag. She was . . . afraid to see what it contained. She
hurried forward, joining the crew.

#### They read Kelsier's plan on the map
The sheet was a map of the city, apparently copied from the one Marsh had sent.
Written at the top were some words.

My friends, you have a lot of work to do, and you must do it quickly. You must
organize and distribute the weapons in this warehouse, then you must do the
same in two others like it located in the other slums. There are horses in a
side room for ease of travel.

Once you distribute the weapons, you must secure the city gates and subdue the
remaining members of the Garrison. Breeze, your team will do this—march on the
Garrison first, so that you can take the gates in peace.

There are four Great Houses that retain a strong military presence in the city.
I have marked them on the map. Ham, your team will deal with these. We don’t
want an armed force other than our own inside the city.

Dockson, remain behind while the initial strikes happen. More and more skaa
will come to the warehouses once word gets out. Breeze and Ham’s armies will
include the troops we have trained, as well as augmentations—I hope—from the
skaa gathering in the streets. You will need to make certain that the regular
skaa get their weapons, so that Clubs can lead the assault on the palace
itself.

The Soothing stations should already be gone—Renoux delivered the proper order
to our assassin teams before he came to get you to bring you here. If you have
time, send some of Ham’s Thugs to check out those stations. Breeze, your own
Soothers will be needed amongst the skaa to encourage them to bravery.

I think that’s everything. It was a fun job, wasn’t it? When you remember me,
please remember that. Remember to smile. Now, move quickly.

May you rule in wisdom.



The map had the city divided, with the various divisions labeled with various
crewmembers’ names. Vin noticed that she, along with Sazed, were left out.
“I’ll go back to that group we left by our house,” Clubs said in a grumbling
voice. “Bring them here to get weapons.”

He began to hobble away. “Clubs?” Ham said, turning. “No offense, but . . . why
did he include you as an army leader? What do you know of warfare?”

Clubs snorted, then lifted up his trouser leg, showing the long, twisting scar
that ran up the side of his calf and thigh—obviously the source of his limp.
“Where do you think I got this?” he said, then began to move away.

Ham turned back with wonder. “I don’t believe this is happening.”

Breeze shook his head. “And I assumed that I knew something about manipulating
people. This . . . this is amazing. The economy is on the verge of collapsing,
and the nobility that survive will soon be at open warfare on the countryside.
Kell showed us how to kill Inquisitors—we’ll just need to pull down the others
and behead them. As for the Lord Ruler . . .”

### Vin, armed with the Atium she received from Kelsier, resolves to find her place in the plan.

#### Vin opens the pouch to find Atium, and a note from Kelsier on his assignment to her
Eyes turned on Vin. She looked down at the pouch in her hand, and pulled it
open. A smaller sack, obviously filled with atium beads, fell into her hand. It
was followed by a small bar of metal wrapped in a sheet of paper. The Eleventh
Metal.

Vin unwrapped the paper.

Vin, it read. Your original duty tonight was going to be to assassinate the
high noblemen remaining in the city. But, well, you convinced me that maybe
they should live.

I could never figure out how this blasted metal was supposed to work. It’s safe
to burn—it won’t kill you—but it doesn’t appear to do anything useful. If
you’re reading this, then I failed to figure out how to use it when I faced the
Lord Ruler. I don’t think it matters. The people needed something to believe
in, and this was the only way to give it to them.

Please don’t be angry at me for abandoning you. I was given an extension on
life. I should have died in Mare’s place years ago. I was ready for this.

The others will need you. You’re their Mistborn now—you’ll have to protect them
in the months to come. The nobility will send assassins against our fledgling
kingdom’s rulers.

Farewell. I’ll tell Mare about you. She always wanted a daughter.

“What does it say, Vin?” Ham asked.

“It . . . says that he doesn’t know how the Eleventh Metal works. He’s sorry—he
wasn’t certain how to defeat the Lord Ruler.”

“We’ve got an entire city full of people to fight him,” Dox said. “I seriously
doubt he can kill us all—if we can’t destroy him, we’ll just tie him up and
toss him in a dungeon.”

The others nodded.

#### The crew begins organizing the rebellion
“All right!” Dockson said. “Breeze and Ham, you need to get to those other
warehouses and begin giving out weapons. Spook, go fetch the apprentices—we’ll
need them to run messages. Let’s go!”

Everyone scattered. Soon, the skaa they had seen earlier burst into the
warehouse, holding their torches high, looking in awe at the wealth of
weaponry. Dockson worked efficiently, ordering some of the newcomers to be
distributors, sending others to go gather their friends and family. Men began
to gear up, gathering weapons. Everyone was busy except for Vin.

She looked up at Sazed, who smiled at her. “Sometimes we just have to wait long
enough, Mistress,” he said. “Then we find out why exactly it was that we kept
believing. There is a saying that Master Kelsier was fond of.”

“There’s always another secret,” Vin whispered. “But Saze, everyone has
something to do except me. I was originally supposed to go assassinate
noblemen, but Kell doesn’t want me to do that anymore.”

“They have to be neutralized,” Sazed said, “but not necessarily murdered.
Perhaps your place was simply to show Kelsier that fact?”

Vin shook her head. “No. I have to do more, Saze.” She gripped the empty pouch,
frustrated. Something crinkled inside of it.

#### Vin's resolve to kill the Lord Ruler by first finding out what is in the guarded room of the palace
She looked down, opening the pouch and noticing a piece of paper that she
hadn’t seen before. She pulled it out and unfolded it delicately. It was the
drawing that Kelsier had shown her—the picture of a flower. Mare had always
kept it with her, dreaming of a future where the sun wasn’t red, where plants
were green. . . .

Vin looked up.

Bureaucrat, politician, soldier . . . there’s something else that every kingdom
needs.

A good assassin.

She turned, pulling out a vial of metal and drinking its contents, using the
liquid to wash down a couple beads of atium. She walked over to the pile of
weapons, picking up a small bundle of arrows. They had stone heads. She began
breaking the heads off, leaving about a half inch of wood attached to them,
discarding the fletched shafts.

“Mistress?” Sazed asked with concern.

Vin walked past him, searching through the armaments. She found what she wanted
in a shirtlike piece of armor, constructed from large rings of interlocking
metal. She pried a handful of these free with a dagger and pewter-enhanced
fingers.

“Mistress, what are you doing?”

Vin walked over to a trunk beside the table, within which she had seen a large
collection of powdered metals. She filled her pouch with several handfuls of
pewter dust.

“I’m worried about the Lord Ruler,” she said, taking a file from the box and
scraping off a few flakes of the Eleventh Metal. She paused—eyeing the
unfamiliar, silvery metal—then swallowed the flakes with a gulp from her flask.
She put a couple more flakes in one of her backup metal vials.

“Surely the rebellion can deal with him,” Sazed said. “He is not so strong
without all of his servants, I think.”

“You’re wrong,” Vin said, rising and walking toward the door. “He’s strong,
Saze. Kelsier couldn’t feel him, not like I can. He didn’t know.”

“Where are you going?” Sazed asked behind her.

Vin paused in the doorway, turning, mist curling around her. “Inside the palace
complex, there is a chamber protected by soldiers and Inquisitors. Kelsier
tried to get into it twice.” She turned back toward the dark mists. “Tonight,
I’m going to find out what’s inside of it.”




