## 7
_Character:Marsh_  
_Character:Dockson_  
_Character:Kelsier_  
_Character(Reference):Yeden_  
_Character:Vin_  


* * *

### Epigraph

#### 

Rashek is a tall man—of course, most of these Terrismen are tall. He is young
to receive so much respect from the other packmen. He has charisma, and the
women of court would probably describe him as handsome, in a rugged sort of
way.

Yet, it amazes me that anyone would give heed to a man who speaks such hatred.
He has never seen Khlennium, yet he curses the city. He does not know me, yet I
can already see the anger and hostility in his eyes.





7


### Marsh informs Kelsier his displeasure in using the rebellion Marsh started (and abandonned) for his own personal gains

#### Some words about Marsh
THREE YEARS HADN’T CHANGED MARSH’S appearance much. He was still the stern,
commanding person Kelsier had known since childhood. There was still that glint
of disappointment in his eyes, and he spoke with the same air of disapproval.

Yet, if Dockson were to be believed, Marsh’s attitudes had changed much since
that day three years before. Kelsier still found it hard to believe that his
brother had given up leadership of the skaa rebellion. He had always been so
passionate about his work.

#### Marsh absconds Kelsier for the people he's killed
Apparently, that passion had dimmed. Marsh walked forward, regarding the
charcoal writing board with a critical eye. His clothing was stained slightly
by dark ash, though his face was relatively clean, for a skaa. He stood for a
moment, looking over Kelsier’s notes. Finally, Marsh turned and tossed a sheet
of paper onto the chair beside Kelsier.

“What is this?” Kelsier asked, picking it up.

“The names of the eleven men you slaughtered last night,” Marsh said. “I
thought you might at least want to know.”

Kelsier tossed the paper into the crackling hearth. “They served the Final
Empire.”

“They were men, Kelsier,” Marsh snapped. “They had lives, families. Several of
them were skaa.”

“Traitors.”

“People,” Marsh said. “People who were just trying to do the best with what
life gave them.”

“Well, I’m just doing the same thing,” Kelsier said. “And, fortunately, life
gave me the ability to push men like them off the tops of buildings. If they
want to stand against me like noblemen, then they can die like noblemen.”

Marsh’s expression darkened. “How can you be so flippant about something like
this?”

“Because, Marsh,” Kelsier said, “humor is the only thing I’ve got left. Humor
and determination.”

Marsh snorted quietly.

#### Marsh also absconds Kelsier for tying his rebellion with his job
“You should be happy,” Kelsier said. “After decades of listening to your
lectures, I’ve finally decided to do something worthwhile with my talents. Now
that you’re here to help, I’m sure—”

“I’m not here to help,” Marsh interrupted.

“Then why did you come?”

“To ask you a question.” Marsh stepped forward, stopping right in front of
Kelsier. They were about the same height, but Marsh’s stern personality always
made him seem to loom taller.

“How dare you do this?” Marsh asked quietly. “I dedicated my life to
overthrowing the Final Empire. While you and your thieving friends partied, I
hid runaways. While you planned petty burglaries, I organized raids. While you
lived in luxury, I watched brave people die of starvation.”

Marsh reached up, stabbing a finger at Kelsier’s chest. “How dare you? How dare
you try and hijack the rebellion for one of your little ‘jobs’? How dare you
use this dream as a way of enriching yourself?”

Kelsier pushed Marsh’s finger away. “That’s not what this is about.”

“Oh?” Marsh asked, tapping the word atium on the board. “Why the games,
Kelsier? Why lead Yeden along, pretending to accept him as your ‘employer’? Why
act like you care about the skaa? We both know what you’re really after.”

Kelsier clenched his jaw, a bit of his humor melting away. He always could do
that to me. “You don’t know me anymore, Marsh,” Kelsier said quietly. “This
isn’t about money—I once had more wealth than any man could spend. This job is
about something different.”

Marsh stood close, studying Kelsier’s eyes, as if searching for truth in them.
“You always were a good liar,” he finally said.

Kelsier rolled his eyes. “Fine, think what you want. But don’t preach to me.
Overthrowing the empire might have been your dream once—but now you’ve become a
good little skaa, staying in your shop and fawning over noblemen when they
visit.”

“I’ve faced reality,” Marsh said. “Something you’ve never been good at. Even if
you’re serious about this plan, you’ll fail. Everything the rebellion has
done—the raids, the thefts, the deaths—has accomplished nothing. Our best
efforts were never even a mild annoyance for the Lord Ruler.”

“Ah,” Kelsier said, “but being an annoyance is something that I am very good
at. In fact, I’m far more than just a ‘mild’ annoyance—people tell me I can be
downright frustrating. Might as well use this talent for the cause of good,
eh?”

Marsh sighed, turning away. “This isn’t about a ‘cause,’ Kelsier. It’s about
revenge. It’s about you, just like everything always is. I’ll believe that you
aren’t after the money—I’ll even believe that you intend to deliver Yeden this
army he’s apparently paying you for. But I won’t believe that you care.”

“That’s where you are wrong, Marsh,” Kelsier said quietly. “That’s where you’ve
always been wrong about me.”

#### Kelsier expects Marsh to help
Marsh frowned. “Perhaps. How did this start, anyway? Did Yeden come to you, or
did you go to him?”

“Does it matter?” Kelsier asked. “Look, Marsh. I need someone to infiltrate the
Ministry. This plan won’t go anywhere if we don’t discover a way to keep an eye
on those Inquisitors.”

Marsh turned. “You actually expect me to help you?”

Kelsier nodded. “That’s why you came here, no matter what you say. You once
told me that you thought I could do great things if I ever applied myself to a
worthy goal. Well, that’s what I’m doing now—and you’re going to help.”

#### Reference to some significant other missing
“It’s not that easy anymore, Kell,” Marsh said with a shake of his head. “Some
people are different now. Others are . . . gone.”

Kelsier let the room grow quiet. Even the hearth’s fire was starting to die
out. “I miss her too.”

“I’m sure that you do—but I have to be honest with you, Kell. Despite what she
did . . . sometimes I wish that you hadn’t been the one to survive the Pits.”

“I wish the same thing every day.”

#### Marsh, a Seeker, is hesitant to outright deny his services
Marsh turned, studying Kelsier with his cold, discerning eyes. The eyes of a
Seeker. Whatever he saw reflected inside of Kelsier must have finally met with
his approval.

“I’m leaving,” Marsh said. “But, for some reason you actually seem sincere this
time. I’ll come back and listen to whatever insane plan you’ve concocted. Then
. . . well, we’ll see.”

#### Kelsier notices Vin by burning Iron
Kelsier smiled. Beneath it all, Marsh was a good man—a better one than Kelsier
had ever been. As Marsh turned toward the door, Kelsier caught a flicker of
shadowed movement from beneath the doorway. He immediately burned iron, and the
translucent blue lines shot out from his body, connecting him to nearby sources
of metal. Marsh, of course, had none on his person—not even any coins.
Traveling through skaa sectors of town could be very dangerous for a man who
looked even marginally prosperous.

Someone else, however, hadn’t yet learned not to carry metal on her person. The
blue lines were thin and weak—they didn’t do well penetrating wood—but they
were just strong enough to let Kelsier locate the belt latch of a person out in
the hallway, moving quickly away from the door on silent feet.

Kelsier smiled to himself. The girl was remarkably skilled. Her time on the
streets, however, had also left her with remarkable scars. Hopefully, he would
be able to encourage the skills while helping heal the scars.

“I’ll return tomorrow,” Marsh said as he reached the door.

“Just don’t come by too early,” Kelsier said with a wink. “I’ve got some things
to do tonight.”


### Kelsier begin to teach Vin about the different Allomantic abilities

#### Kelsier approaches Vin in the night after the disscussion with Marsh

Vin waited quietly in her darkened room, listening to footsteps clomp down the
stairs to the ground floor. She crouched beside her door, trying to determine
if both sets had continued down the steps or not. The hallway fell silent, and
eventually she breathed a quiet sigh of relief.

A knock sounded on the door just inches from her head.

Her start of surprise nearly knocked her to the ground. He’s good! she thought.

She quickly ruffled her hair and rubbed her eyes, trying to make it appear as
if she had been sleeping. She untucked her shirt, and waited until the knock
came again before pulling open the door.

Kelsier lounged against the doorframe, backlit by the hallway’s single lantern.
The tall man raised an eyebrow at her disheveled state.

“Yes?” Vin asked, trying to sound drowsy.

“So, what do you think of Marsh?”

“I don’t know,” Vin said, “I didn’t see much of him before he kicked us out.”

Kelsier smiled. “You’re not going to admit that I caught you, are you?”

Vin almost smiled back. Reen’s training came to her rescue. The man who wants
you to trust him is the one you must fear the most. Her brother’s voice almost
seemed to whisper in her head. It had grown stronger since she’d met Kelsier,
as if her instincts were on edge.

#### Kelsier decides to bring Vin along for training in the night
Kelsier studied her for a moment, then stepped back from the doorframe. “Tuck
in that shirt and follow me.”

Vin frowned. “Where are we going?”

“To begin your training.”

“Now?” Vin asked, glancing at the dark shutters to her room.

“Of course,” Kelsier said. “It’s a perfect night for a stroll.”

Vin straightened her clothing, joining him in the hallway. If he actually
planned to begin teaching her, then she wasn’t going to complain, no matter
what the hour. They walked down the steps to the first floor. The workroom was
dark, furniture projects lying half finished in the shadows. The kitchen,
however, was bright with light.

#### Vin contemplates things as they enter the workroom
“Just a minute,” Kelsier said, walking toward the kitchen.

Vin paused just inside the shadows of the workroom, letting Kelsier enter the
kitchen without her. She could just barely see inside. Dockson, Breeze, and Ham
sat with Clubs and his apprentices around a wide table. Wine and ale were
present, though in small amounts, and the men were munching on a simple evening
snack of puffed barley cakes and battered vegetables.

Laughter trickled out into the workroom. Not raucous laughter, such as had
often sounded from Camon’s table. This was something softer—something
indicative of genuine mirth, of good-natured enjoyment.

Vin wasn’t certain what kept her out of the room. She hesitated—as if the light
and the humor were a barrier—and she instead remained in the quiet, solemn
workroom. She watched from the darkness, however, and wasn’t completely able to
suppress her longing.

#### Kelsier hands Vin her Mistborn Robes and vials
Kelsier returned a moment later, carrying his pack and a small cloth bundle.
Vin regarded the bundle with curiosity, and he handed it to her with a smile.
“A present.”

The cloth was slick and soft in Vin’s fingers, and she quickly realized what it
was. She let the gray material unroll in her fingers, revealing a Mistborn
cloak. Like the garment Kelsier had worn the night before, it was tailored
completely from separate, ribbonlike strips of cloth.

“You look surprised,” Kelsier noted.

“I . . . assumed that I’d have to earn this somehow.”

“What’s there to earn?” Kelsier said, pulling out his own cloak. “This is who
you are, Vin.”

She paused, then threw the cloak over her shoulders and tied it on. It felt . .
. different. Thick and heavy on her shoulders, but light and unconstraining
around her arms and legs. The ribbons were sewn together at the top, allowing
her to pull it tight by the mantle if she wished. She felt . . . enveloped.
Protected.

“How does it feel?” Kelsier asked.

“Good,” Vin said simply.

Kelsier nodded, pulling out several glass vials. He handed two to her. “Drink
one; keep the other in case you need it. I’ll show you how to mix new vials
later.”

Vin nodded, downing the first vial and tucking the second into her belt.

“I’m having some new clothing tailored for you,” Kelsier said. “You’ll want to
get into the habit of wearing things that don’t have any metal on them: belts
with no buckles, shoes that slip on and off, trousers without clasps. Perhaps
later, if you’re feeling daring, we’ll get you some women’s clothing.”

Vin flushed slightly.

Kelsier laughed. “I’m just teasing you. However, you’re entering a new world
now—you may find that there are situations where it will be to your advantage
to look less like a crew thief and more like a young lady.”

#### Kelsier tells Vin a bit about attitude as a Mistborn
Vin nodded, following Kelsier as he walked to the shop’s front door. He pushed
the portal open, revealing a wall of darkly shifting mists. He stepped out into
them. Taking a deep breath, Vin followed.

Kelsier shut the door behind them. The cobbled street felt muffled to Vin, the
shifting mists making everything just a bit damp. She couldn’t see far in
either direction, and the street ends seemed to fade into nothingness, paths
into eternity. Above, there was no sky, just swirling currents of gray upon
gray.

“All right, let’s begin,” Kelsier said. His voice felt loud in the quiet, empty
street. There was a confidence to his tone, something that—confronted with the
mists all around—Vin certainly didn’t feel.

“Your first lesson,” Kelsier said, strolling down the street, Vin trailing
along beside him, “isn’t about Allomancy, but attitude.” He swept his hand
forward. “This, Vin. This is ours. The night, the mists—they belong to us. Skaa
avoid the mists as if they were death. Thieves and soldiers go out at night,
but they fear it nonetheless. Noblemen feign nonchalance, but the mist makes
them uncomfortable.”

He turned, regarding her. “The mists are your friend, Vin. They hide you, they
protect you . . . and they give you power. Ministry doctrine—something rarely
shared with skaa—claims that the Mistborn are descendants of the only men who
remained true to the Lord Ruler during the days before his Ascension. Other
legends whisper that we are something beyond even the Lord Ruler’s power,
something that was born on that day when the mists first came upon the land.”

Vin nodded slightly. It seemed odd to hear Kelsier speak so openly. Buildings
filled with sleeping skaa loomed on either side of the street. And yet, the
dark shutters and quiet air made Vin feel as if she and Kelsier were alone.
Alone in the most densely populated, overcrowded city in all of the Final
Empire.

#### Kelsier informs Vin that nobles will tend to ignore the Mistborn
Kelsier continued to walk, the spring in his step incongruent with the dark
gloom.

“Shouldn’t we be worried about soldiers?” Vin asked quietly. Her crews always
had to be careful of nighttime Garrison patrols.

Kelsier shook his head. “Even if we were careless enough to be spotted, no
imperial patrol would dare bother Mistborn. They’d see our cloaks and pretend
not to see us. Remember, nearly all Mistborn are members of the Great
Houses—and the rest are from lesser Luthadel houses. Either way, they’re very
important individuals.”

Vin frowned. “So, the guards just ignore the Mistborn?”

Kelsier shrugged. “It’s bad etiquette to acknowledge that the skulking rooftop
figure you see is actually a very distinguished and proper high lord—or even
high lady. Mistborn are so rare that houses can’t afford to apply gender
prejudices to them.

“Anyway, most Mistborn live two lives—the life of the courtgoing aristocrat,
and the life of the sneaking, spying Allomancer. Mistborn identities are
closely guarded house secrets—rumors regarding who is Mistborn are always a
focus of high noble gossip.”

Kelsier turned down another street, Vin following, still a bit nervous. She
wasn’t certain where he was taking her; it was easy to get lost in the night.
Perhaps he didn’t even have a destination, and was just accustoming her to the
mists.

#### In training, Vin learns of the power of Pewter
“All right,” Kelsier said, “let’s get you used to the basic metals. Can you
feel your metal reserves?”

Vin paused. If she focused, she could distinguish eight sources of power within
her—each one far larger, even, than her two had been on the day when Kelsier
had tested her. She had been reticent to use her Luck much since then. She was
coming to realize that she had been using a weapon she’d never really
understood—a weapon that had accidentally drawn the attention of a Steel
Inquisitor.

“Begin burning them, one at a time,” Kelsier said.

“Burning?”

“That’s what we call it when you activate an Allomantic ability,” Kelsier said.
“You ‘burn’ the metal associated with that power. You’ll see what I mean. Start
with the metals you don’t know about yet—we’ll work on Soothing and Raging
emotions some other time.”

Vin nodded, pausing in the middle of the street. Tentatively, she reached out
to one of the new sources of power. One of them was slightly familiar to her.
Had she used it before without realizing it? What would it do?

Only one way to find out . . . Uncertain what, exactly, she was supposed to do,
Vin gripped the source of power and tried to use it.

Immediately, she felt a flare of heat from within her chest. It wasn’t
discomforting, but it was obvious and distinct. Along with the warmth came
something else—a feeling of rejuvenation, and of power. She felt . . . more
solid, somehow.

“What happened?” Kelsier asked.

“I feel different,” Vin said. She held up her hand, and it seemed as if the
limb reacted just a bit too quickly. The muscles were eager. “My body is
strange. I don’t feel tired anymore, and I feel alert.”

“Ah,” Kelsier said. “That’s pewter. It enhances your physical abilities, making
you stronger, more able to resist fatigue and pain. You’ll react more quickly
when you’re burning it, and your body will be tougher.”

Vin flexed experimentally. Her muscles didn’t seem any bigger, yet she could
feel their strength. It wasn’t just in her muscles, however—it was everything
about her. Her bones, her flesh, her skin. She reached out to her reserve, and
could feel it shrinking.

#### About "Flaring"
“I’m running out,” she said.

Kelsier nodded. “Pewter burns relatively quickly. The vial I gave you was
measured to contain about ten minutes’ worth of continuous burning—though it
will go faster if you flare often and slower if you are careful about when you
use it.”

“Flare?”

“You can burn your metals a little more powerfully if you try,” Kelsier said.
“It makes them run out much faster, and it’s difficult to maintain, but it can
give you an extra boost.”

Vin frowned, trying to do as he said. With a push of effort, she was able to
stoke the flames within her chest, flaring the pewter.

It was like the inhaled breath before a daring leap. A sudden rush of strength
and power. Her body grew tense with anticipation, and for just a moment she
felt invincible. Then it passed, her body relaxing slowly.

Interesting, she thought, noting how quickly her pewter had burned during that
brief moment.

#### About the delicacy of Allomantic metals
“Now, there’s something you need to know about Allomantic metals,” Kelsier said
as they strolled forward in the mists. “The more pure they are, the more
effective they are. The vials we prepare contain absolutely pure metals,
prepared and sold specifically for Allomancers.

“Alloys—like pewter—are even trickier, since the metal percentages have to be
mixed just right, if you want maximum power. In fact, if you aren’t careful
when you buy your metals, you could end up with the wrong alloy entirely.”

Vin frowned. “You mean, someone might scam me?”

“Not intentionally,” Kelsier said. “The thing is, most of the terms that people
use—words like ‘brass,’ ‘pewter,’ and ‘bronze’—are really quite vague, when you
get down to it. Pewter, for instance, is generally accepted as an alloy of tin
mixed with lead, with perhaps some copper or silver, depending on the use and
the circumstances. Allomancer’s pewter, however, is an alloy of ninety-one
percent tin, nine percent lead. If you want maximum strength from your metal,
you have to use those percentages.”

“And . . . if you burn the wrong percentage?” Vin asked.

“If the mixture is only off by a bit, you’ll still get some power out of it,”
Kelsier said. “However, if it’s too far off, burning it will make you sick.”

Vin nodded slowly. “I . . . think I’ve burned this metal before. Once in a
while, in very small amounts.”

“Trace metals,” Kelsier said. “From drinking water contaminated by metals, or
by eating with pewter utensils.”

Vin nodded. Some of the mugs in Camon’s lair had been pewter.

#### About those who burn Pewter, called thugs, and the duality of the metals
“All right,” Kelsier said. “Extinguish the pewter and let’s move on to another
metal.”

Vin did as asked. The withdrawal of power left her feeling weak, tired, and
exposed.

“Now,” Kelsier said, “you should be able to notice a kind of pairing between
your reserves of metal.”

“Like the two emotion metals,” Vin said.

“Exactly. Find the metal linked to pewter.”

“I see it,” Vin said.

“There are two metals for every power,” Kelsier said. “One Pushes, one
Pulls—the second is usually an alloy of the first. For emotions—the external
mental powers—you Pull with zinc and Push with brass. You just used pewter to
Push your body. That’s one of the internal physical powers.”

“Like Ham,” Vin said. “He burns pewter.”

Kelsier nodded. “Mistings who can burn pewter are called Thugs. A crude term, I
suppose—but they tend to be rather crude people. Our dear Hammond is something
of an exception to that rule.”

#### About Tin, the opposite of Pewter, and it's sensory enhancing abilities
“So, what does the other internal physical metal do?”

“Try it and see.”

Vin did so eagerly, and the world suddenly became brighter around her. Or . . .
well, that wasn’t quite right. She could see better, and she could see farther,
but the mists were still there. They were just . . . more translucent. The
ambient light around her seemed brighter, somehow.

There were other changes. She could feel her clothing. She realized that she
had always been able to feel it, but she usually ignored it. Now, however, it
felt closer. She could sense the textures, and was acutely aware of the places
where the cloth was tight on her.

She was hungry. That, too, she had been ignoring—yet now her hunger seemed far
more pressing. Her skin felt wetter, and she could smell the crisp air mixed
with scents of dirt, soot, and refuse.

“Tin enhances your senses,” Kelsier said, his voice suddenly seeming quite
loud. “And it’s one of the slowest-burning metals—the tin in that vial is
enough to keep you going for hours. Most Mistborn leave their tin on whenever
they’re out in the mists—I’ve had mine on since we left the shop.”

Vin nodded. The wealth of sensations was nearly overwhelming. She could hear
creaks and scuffles in the darkness, and they made her want to jump in alarm,
certain that someone was sneaking up behind her.

This is going to take some getting used to.

#### About the dangers of "Flaring" too much
“Leave it burning,” Kelsier said, waving for her to walk beside him as he
continued down the street. “You’ll want to accustom yourself to the enhanced
senses. Just don’t flare it all the time. Not only would you run out of it very
quickly, but perpetually flaring metals does . . . strange things to people.”

“Strange?” Vin asked.

“Metals—especially tin and pewter—stretch your body. Flaring the metals only
pushes this stretching further. Stretch it too far for too long, and things
start to break.”

#### Using Tin, Vin can see stars for the first time
Vin nodded uncomfortably. Kelsier fell quiet, and they continued to walk,
letting Vin explore her new sensations and the detailed world that tin
revealed. Before, her vision had been restricted to a tiny pocket within the
night. Now, however, she saw an entire city enveloped by a blanket of shifting,
swirling mist. She could make out keeps like small, dark mountains in the
distance, and could see specks of light from windows, like pin-pricked holes in
the night. And above . . . she saw lights in the sky.

She stopped, gazing up with wonder. They were faint, blurred to even her
tin-enhanced eyes, but she could just barely make them out. Hundreds of them.
Thousands of them. So small, like the dying embers of candles recently
extinguished.

“Stars,” Kelsier said, strolling up beside her. “You can’t see them very often,
even with tin. It must be a particularly clear night. People used to be able to
look up and see them every night—that was before the mists came, before the
Ashmounts erupted ash and smoke into the sky.”

Vin glanced at him. “How do you know?”

Kelsier smiled. “The Lord Ruler has tried very hard to crush memories of those
days, but still some remain.” He turned, not really having answered her
question, and continued to walk. Vin joined him. Suddenly, with tin, the mists
around her didn’t seem so ominous. She was beginning to see how Kelsier could
walk about at night with such confidence.

#### Vin burns a blue line metal that Kelsier tells her they will get back to
“All right,” Kelsier eventually said. “Let’s try another metal.”

Vin nodded, leaving her tin on but picking another metal to burn as well. When
she did so, a very strange thing happened—a multitude of faint blue lines
sprung from her chest, streaking out into the spinning mists. She froze,
gasping slightly and looking down at her chest. Most of the lines were thin,
like translucent pieces of twine, though a couple were as thick as yarn.

Kelsier chuckled. “Leave that metal and its partner alone for the moment.
They’re a bit more complicated than the others.”

“What . . .?” Vin asked, tracing the lines of blue light with her eyes. They
pointed at random objects. Doors, windows—a couple even pointed at Kelsier.

“We’ll get to it,” he promised. “Extinguish that one and try one of the last
two.”

#### Kelsier informs Vin that Inquisitors are Seekers, burners of Bronze who can sense allomantic usage nearby
Vin extinguished the strange metal and ignored its companion, picking one of
the last metals. Immediately, she felt a strange vibration. Vin paused. The
pulses didn’t make a sound that she could hear, yet she could feel them washing
across her. They seemed to be coming from Kelsier. She looked at him, frowning.

“That’s probably bronze,” Kelsier said. “The internal mental Pulling metal. It
lets you sense when someone is using Allomancy nearby. Seekers, like my
brother, use it. Generally it’s not that useful—unless you happen to be a Steel
Inquisitor searching for skaa Mistings.”

Vin paled. “Inquisitors can use Allomancy?”

Kelsier nodded. “They’re all Seekers—I’m not sure if that’s because Seekers are
chosen to become Inquisitors, or if the process of becoming an Inquisitor
grants the power. Either way, since their main duties are to find half-breed
children and noblemen who use Allomancy improperly, it’s a useful skill for
them to have. Unfortunately, ‘useful’ for them means ‘rather annoying’ for us.”

#### Copper, used by Smokers, that hides allomantic usage
Vin began to nod, then froze. The pulsing had stopped.

“What happened?” she asked.

“I started burning copper,” Kelsier said, “the companion to bronze. When you
burn copper, it hides your use of powers from other Allomancers. You can try
burning it now, if you want, though you won’t sense much.”

Vin did so. The only change was a feeling of slight vibration within her.

“Copper is a vital metal to learn,” Kelsier said. “It will hide you from
Inquisitors. We probably don’t have anything to worry about tonight—the
Inquisitors would assume us to be regular noble Mistborn, out for training.
However, if you’re ever in a skaa guise and need to burn metals, make sure you
turn on your copper first.”

Vin nodded appreciatively.

“In fact,” Kelsier said, “many Mistborn keep their copper on all the time. It
burns slowly, and it makes you invisible to other Allomancers. It hides you
from bronze, and it also prevents others from manipulating your emotions.”

Vin perked up.

“I thought that might interest you,” Kelsier said. “Anyone burning copper is
immune to emotional Allomancy. In addition, copper’s influence occurs in a
bubble around you. This cloud—called a coppercloud—hides anyone inside of it
from the senses of a Seeker, though it won’t make them immune to emotional
Allomancy, like it will you.”

“Clubs,” Vin said. “That’s what a Smoker does.”

Kelsier nodded. “If one of our people is noticed by a Seeker, they can run back
to the lair and disappear. They can also practice their abilities without fear
of being discovered. Allomantic pulses coming from a shop in a skaa sector of
town would be a quick giveaway to a passing Inquisitor.”

#### About the role of Smokers in a crew
“But, you can burn copper,” Vin said. “Why were you so worried about finding a
Smoker for the crew?”

“I can burn copper, true,” Kelsier said. “And so can you. We can use all of the
powers, but we can’t be everywhere. A successful crewleader needs to know how
to divide labor, especially on a job as big as this one. Standard practice has
a coppercloud going at all times in the lair. Clubs doesn’t do it all
himself—several of those apprentices are Smokers too. When you hire a man like
Clubs, it’s understood that he’ll provide you with a base of operations and a
team of Smokers competent enough to keep you hidden at all times.”

#### Vin burns the unknown metal from earlier and almost shoots a nail into herself
Vin nodded. However, she was more interested in copper’s ability to protect her
emotions. She would need to locate enough of it to keep it burning all the
time.

They started walking again, and Kelsier gave her more time to get used to
burning tin. Vin’s mind, however, began to wander. Something didn’t feel . . .
right to her. Why was Kelsier telling her all of these things? It seemed like
he was giving away his secrets too easily.

Except one, she thought suspiciously. The metal with the blue lines. He hasn’t
gone back to it yet. Perhaps that was the thing he was going to keep from her,
the power he would hold in reserve to maintain control over her.

It must be strong. The most powerful of the eight.

As they walked through the quiet streets, Vin reached tentatively inside. She
eyed Kelsier, then carefully burned that unknown metal. Again, the lines sprang
up around her, pointing in seemingly random directions.

The lines moved with her. One end of each thread stayed stuck to her chest,
while the other end remained attached to a given place along the street. New
lines appeared as she walked, and old ones faded, disappearing behind. The
lines came in various widths, and some of them were brighter than others.

Curious, Vin tested the lines with her mind, trying to discover their secret.
She focused on a particularly small and innocent-looking one, and found that
she could feel it individually if she concentrated. She almost felt like she
could touch it. She reached out with her mind and gave it a slight tug.

The line shook, and something immediately flew out of the darkness toward her.
Vin yelped, trying to jump away, but the object—a rusty nail—shot directly
toward her.

Suddenly, something grabbed the nail, ripping it away and throwing it back out
into the darkness.

Vin came up from her roll in a tense crouch, mistcloak fluttering around her.
She scanned the darkness, then glanced at Kelsier, who was chuckling softly.

“I should have known you’d try that,” he said.

Vin flushed in embarrassment.

“Come on,” he said, waving her over. “No harm done.”

“The nail attacked me!” Did that metal bring objects to life? That would be an
incredible power indeed.

“Actually, you kind of attacked yourself,” Kelsier said.

Vin stood carefully, then joined him as he began to walk down the street again.

#### Kelsier talks about consequences
“I’ll explain what you did in a moment,” he promised. “First, there’s something
you have to understand about Allomancy.”

“Another rule?”

“More a philosophy,” Kelsier said. “It has to do with consequences.”

Vin frowned. “What do you mean?”

“Every action we take has consequences, Vin,” Kelsier said. “I’ve found that in
both Allomancy and life, the person who can best judge the consequences of
their actions will be the most successful. Take burning pewter, for instance.
What are its consequences?”

Vin shrugged. “You get stronger.”

“What happens if you’re carrying something heavy when your pewter runs out?”

Vin paused. “I suppose you’d drop it.”

“And, if it’s too heavy, you could hurt yourself seriously. Many a Misting Thug
has shrugged off a dire wound while fighting, only to die from that same wound
once their pewter ran out.”

“I see,” Vin said quietly.

#### About Ironpulling and Steelpushing, the mysterious metals that allow manipulation of other metals
“Ha!”

Vin jumped in shock, throwing her hands up over her enhanced ears. “Ow!” she
complained, glaring at Kelsier.

He smiled. “Burning tin has consequences too. If someone produces a sudden
light or sound, you can be blinded or stunned.”

“But, what does that have to do with those last two metals?”

“Iron and steel give you the ability to manipulate other metals around you,”
Kelsier explained. “With iron, you can Pull a metal source toward yourself.
With steel, you can Push one away. Ah, here we are.”

Kelsier stopped, looking up ahead.

Through the mist, Vin could see the massive city wall looming above them. “What
are we doing here?”

#### Vin tries Steelpushing for the first time
“We’re going to practice Ironpulling and Steelpushing,” Kelsier said. “But
first, some basics.” He pulled something out of his belt—a clip, the smallest
denomination of coin. He held it up before her, standing to the side. “Burn
steel, the opposite of the metal you burned a few moments ago.”

Vin nodded. Again, the blue lines sprang up around her. One of them pointed
directly at the coin in Kelsier’s hand.

“All right,” Kelsier said. “Push on it.”

Vin reached toward the proper thread and Pushed slightly. The coin flipped out
of Kelsier’s fingers, traveling directly away from Vin. She continued to focus
on it, Pushing the coin through the air until it snapped against the wall of a
nearby house.

Vin was thrown violently backward in a sudden, jerking motion. Kelsier caught
her and kept her from falling to the ground.

Vin stumbled and righted herself. Across the street, the coin—now released from
her control—plinked to the ground.

“What happened?” Kelsier asked her.

She shook her head. “I don’t know. I Pushed on the coin, and it flew away. But
when it hit the wall, I was pushed away.”

“Why?”

Vin frowned thoughtfully. “I guess . . . I guess the coin couldn’t go anywhere,
so I had to be the one that moved.”

Kelsier nodded approvingly. “Consequences, Vin. You use your own weight when
you Steelpush. If you’re a lot heavier than your anchor, it will fly away from
you like that coin did. However, if the object is heavier than you are—or if it
runs into something that is—you’ll be Pushed away. Ironpulling is
similar—either you’ll be Pulled toward the object or it will be Pulled toward
you. If your weights are similar, then you’ll both move.

“This is the great art of Allomancy, Vin. Knowing how much, or how little, you
will move when you burn steel or iron will give you a major advantage over your
opponents. You’ll find that these two are the most versatile and useful of your
abilities.”

Vin nodded.

“Now, remember,” he continued. “In both cases, the force of your Push or Pull
is directly away from or toward you. You can’t flip things around with your
mind, controlling them to go wherever you want. That’s not the way that
Allomancy works, because that’s not the way the physical world works. When you
push against something—whether with Allomancy or with your hands—it goes
directly in the opposite direction. Force, reactions, consequences.
Understand?”

Vin nodded again.

#### Vin and Kelsier now practice using Steelpushing to jump over a wall
“Good,” Kelsier said happily. “Now, let’s go jump over that wall.”

“What?”

He left her standing dumbfounded in the street. She watched him approach the
base of the wall, then scurried over to him.

“You’re insane!” she said quietly.

Kelsier smiled. “I think that’s the second time today you’ve said that to me.
You need to pay better attention—if you’d been listening to everyone else,
you’d know that my sanity departed long ago.”

“Kelsier,” she said, looking up at the wall. “I can’t. . . . I mean, I’ve never
really even used Allomancy before this evening!”

“Yes, but you’re such a quick learner,” Kelsier said, pulling something out
from beneath his cloak. It appeared to be a belt. “Here, put this on. It’s got
metal weights strapped to it. If something goes wrong, I’ll probably be able to
catch you.”

“Probably?” Vin asked nervously, strapping on the belt.

Kelsier smiled, then dropped a large metal ingot at his feet. “Put the ingot
directly below you, and remember to Steel-push, not Ironpull. Don’t stop
Pushing until you reach the top of the wall.”

Then he bent down and jumped.

Kelsier shot into the air, his dark form vanishing into the curling mists. Vin
waited for a moment, but he didn’t plummet back down to his doom.

All was still, even to her enhanced ears. The mists whirled playfully around
her. Taunting her. Daring her.

She glanced down at the ingot, burning steel. The blue line glowed with a
faint, ghostly light. She stepped over to the ingot, standing with one foot on
either side of it. She glanced up at the mists, then down one last time.

Finally, she took a deep breath and Pushed against the ingot with all of her
strength.




