## 6

* * *



I never wanted this, true. But somebody has to stop the Deepness. And,
apparently, Terris is the only place this can be done.

On this fact, however, I don’t have to take the word of the philosophers. I can
feel our goal now, can sense it, though the others cannot. It . . . pulses, in
my mind, far off in the mountains.





6



VIN AWOKE TO A QUIET room, red morning sunlight peeking through cracks in the
shutters. She lay in bed for a moment, unsettled. Something felt wrong. It
wasn’t that she was waking up in an unfamiliar place—traveling with Reen had
accustomed her to a nomadic lifestyle. It took her a moment to realize the
source of her discomfort.

The room was empty.

Not only was it empty, it was open. Uncrowded. And it was . . . comfortable.
She lay on an actual mattress, raised on posts, with sheets and a plush quilt.
The room was decorated with a sturdy wooden armoire, and even had a circular
rug. Perhaps another might have found the room cramped and spartan, but to Vin
it seemed lavish.

She sat up, frowning. It felt wrong to have a room all to herself. She had
always been crammed into tight bunkrooms filled with crewmembers. Even while
traveling, she had slept in beggars’ alleys or rebel caves, and Reen had been
there with her. She had always been forced to fight to find privacy. Being
given it so easily seemed to devalue the years she had spent relishing her
brief moments of solitude.

She slipped out of bed, not bothering to open the shutters. The sunlight was
faint, which meant it was still early morning, but she could already hear
people moving in the hallway. She crept to the door, creaking it open and
peeking out.

After leaving Kelsier the night before, Dockson had led Vin to Clubs’s shop.
Because of the late hour, Clubs had immediately led them to their separate
rooms. Vin, however, had not gone to bed immediately. She had waited until
everyone was asleep, then had snuck out to inspect her surroundings.

The residence was almost more of an inn than it was a shop. Though it had a
showroom below and a large workshop in the back, the building’s second floor
was dominated by several long hallways lined with guestrooms. There was a third
floor, and the doors were more widely spaced there, implying larger rooms. She
hadn’t tapped for trapdoors or false walls—the noise might have awakened
someone—but experience told her that it wouldn’t be a proper lair if it didn’t
have at least a secret basement and some bolt-holes.

Overall, she was impressed. The carpentry equipment and half-finished projects
below indicated a reputable, working front. The lair was secure, well stocked,
and well maintained. Watching through the crack in her door, Vin made out a
group of about six groggy young men coming out of the hallway opposite her own.
They wore simple clothing, and made their way down the stairs toward the
workroom.

Apprentice carpenters, Vin thought. That’s Clubs’s front—he’s a skaa craftsman.
Most skaa lived lives of drudgery on the plantations; even those who lived in a
city were generally forced to do menial labor. However, some talented few were
allowed a trade. They were still skaa; they were paid poorly and were always
subject to the whims of the nobility. However, they had a measure of freedom
that most skaa would envy.

Clubs was probably a master carpenter. What would entice such a man—one who
had, by skaa standards, an amazing life—to risk joining the underground?

He is a Misting, Vin thought. Kelsier and Dockson called him a “Smoker.” She
would probably have to figure out what that meant on her own; experience told
her that a powerful man like Kelsier would withhold knowledge from her as long
as he could, stringing her along with occasional tidbits. His knowledge was
what bound her to him—it would be unwise to give away too much too quickly.

Footsteps sounded outside, and Vin continued to peek through the crack.

“You’ll want to get ready, Vin,” Dockson said as he passed her door. He wore a
nobleman’s dress shirt and slacks, and he already looked awake and trim. He
paused, continuing. “There’s a fresh bath for you in the room at the end of the
hallway, and I had Clubs scrounge you up a few changes of clothing. They should
fit well enough until we can get you something more appropriate. Take your time
in the bath—Kell’s planned a meeting for this afternoon, but we can’t start
until Breeze and Ham arrive.”

Dockson smiled, eyeing her through the cracked door, then continued on down the
hallway. Vin flushed at being caught. These are observant men. I’m going to
have to remember that.

The hallway grew quiet. She slipped out her door and crept down to the
indicated room, and was half surprised to find that there was indeed a warm
bath waiting for her. She frowned, studying the tiled chamber and metal tub.
The water smelled scented, after the fashion of noble ladies.

These men are more like noblemen than skaa, Vin thought. She wasn’t certain
what she thought of that. However, they obviously expected her to do as they
did, so she closed and bolted the door, then disrobed and crawled into the tub.



She smelled funny.

Even though the scent was faint, Vin still caught whiffs of herself
occasionally. It was the smell of a passing noblewoman, the scent of a perfumed
drawer opened by her brother’s burgling fingers. The smell grew less noticeable
as the morning progressed, but it still worried her. It would distinguish her
from other skaa. If this crew expected her to take those baths regularly, she
would have to request that the perfumes be removed.

The morning meal was more up to her expectations. Several skaa women of various
ages worked the shop’s kitchen, preparing baywraps—rolls of thin, flat bread
stuffed with boiled barley and vegetables. Vin stood by the kitchen doorway,
watching the women work. None of them smelled like she did, though they were
far more cleanly and well groomed than average skaa.

In fact, there was an odd sense of cleanliness to the entire building. She
hadn’t noticed it the night before, because of the darkness, but the floor was
scrubbed clean. All of the workers—kitchen women or apprentices—had clean faces
and hands. It felt odd to Vin. She was accustomed to her own fingers being
black with ashstains; with Reen, if she’d ever washed her face, she had quickly
rubbed it with ash again. A clean face stood out on the streets.

No ash in the corners, she thought, eyeing the floor. The room is kept swept.
She’d never lived in such a place before. It was almost like living in some
nobleman’s house.

She glanced back at the kitchen women. They wore simple dresses of white and
gray, with scarves around the tops of their heads and long tails of hair
hanging out the back. Vin fingered her own hair. She kept it short, like a
boy’s—her current, ragged cut had been given by one of the other crewmembers.
She wasn’t like these women—she never had been. By Reen’s command, Vin had
lived so that other crewmembers would think of her as a thief first and a girl
second.

But, what am I now? Perfumed by her bath, yet wearing the tan trousers and
buttoning shirt of an apprentice craftsman, she felt distinctly out of place.
And that was bad—if she felt awkward, then she undoubtedly looked awkward too.
Something else to make her stand out.

Vin turned, eyeing the workroom. The apprentices were already about their
morning labors, working on various bits of furniture. They stayed in the back
while Clubs worked in the main showroom, putting detailed finishing touches on
the pieces.

The back kitchen door suddenly slammed open. Vin slipped reflexively to the
side, putting her back to a wall and peeking around into the kitchen.

Ham stood in the kitchen doorway, framed by red sunlight. He wore a loose shirt
and vest, both sleeveless, and carried several large packs. He wasn’t dirtied
by soot—none of the crew had ever been, the few times Vin had seen them.

Ham walked through the kitchen and into the workroom. “So,” he said, dropping
his packs, “anyone know which room is mine?”

“I’ll ask Master Cladent,” one of the apprentices said, moving into the front
room.

Ham smiled, stretching, then turned toward Vin. “Morning, Vin. You know, you
don’t have to hide from me. We’re on the same team.”

Vin relaxed but remained where she was, standing beside a line of mostly
finished chairs. “You’re going to live here too?”

“It always pays to stay near the Smoker,” Ham said, turning and disappearing
back into the kitchen. He returned a moment later with a stack of four large
baywraps. “Anyone know where Kell is?”

“Sleeping,” Vin said. “He came in late last night, and hasn’t gotten up yet.”

Ham grunted, taking a bite of a baywrap. “Dox?”

“In his room on the third floor,” Vin said. “He got up early, came down to get
something to eat, and went back upstairs.” She didn’t add that she knew, from
peeking through the keyhole, that he was sitting at his desk scribbling on some
papers.

Ham raised an eyebrow. “You always keep track of where everyone is like that?”

“Yes.”

Ham paused, then chuckled. “You’re an odd kid, Vin.” He gathered up his packs
as the apprentice returned, and the two moved up the stairs. Vin stood,
listening to their footsteps. They stopped about halfway down the first
hallway, perhaps a few doors from her room.

The scent of steamed barley enticed her. Vin eyed the kitchen. Ham had gone in
and taken food. Was she allowed to do the same?

Trying to look confident, Vin strode into the kitchen. A pile of baywraps sat
on a platter, probably to be delivered to the apprentices as they worked. Vin
picked up two of them. None of the women objected; in fact, a few of them even
nodded respectfully toward her.

I’m an important person now, she thought with a measure of discomfort. Did they
know that she was . . . Mistborn? Or was she simply treated with respect
because she was a guest?

Eventually, Vin took a third baywrap and fled to her room. It was more food
than she could possibly eat; however, she intended to scrape out the barley and
save the flatbread, which would keep well should she need it later.



A knock came at her door. Vin answered it, pulling the door open with a careful
motion. A young man stood outside—the boy who had been with Clubs back at
Camon’s lair the night before.

Thin, tall, and awkward-looking, he was dressed in gray clothing. He was
perhaps fourteen, though his height might have made him look older than he was.
He seemed nervous for some reason.

“Yes?” Vin asked.

“Um . . .”

Vin frowned. “What?”

“You’re wanted,” he said in a thick Eastern accent. “Ups in the where above
with the doing. With Master Jumps to the third floor. Uh, I’ve gotta go.” The
boy blushed, then turned and hurried away, scrambling up the stairs.

Vin stood in the doorway of her room, dumbfounded. Was that supposed to make
any sense? she wondered.

She peeked into the hallway. The boy had seemed like he expected her to follow
him. Finally, she decided to do so, carefully making her way up the steps.

Voices were coming from an open door at the end of the hallway. Vin approached
and peeked around the corner to find a well-decorated room, set with a fine rug
and comfortable-looking chairs. A hearth burned at the side of the room, and
the chairs were arranged to point toward a large charcoal writing board set
atop an easel.

Kelsier stood, leaning one elbow resting against the brick hearth, a cup of
wine in his hand. Angling herself slightly, Vin could see that he was talking
to Breeze. The Soother had arrived well into midday, and had appropriated half
of Clubs’s apprentices to unload his possessions. Vin had watched from her
window as the apprentices had carried the luggage—disguised as boxes of lumber
scraps—up to Breeze’s room. Breeze himself hadn’t bothered to help.

Ham was there, as was Dockson, and Clubs was settling himself into the large,
overstuffed chair farthest from Breeze. The boy who had fetched Vin sat on a
stool beside Clubs, and he was obviously making a point of trying not to look
at her. The final occupied chair held the man Yeden, dressed—as before—in
common skaa worker’s clothing. He sat in his chair without resting against its
back, as if he disapproved of its plushness. His face was darkened with soot,
as Vin expected of a skaa worker.

There were two empty chairs. Kelsier noticed Vin standing by the doorway, and
gave her one of his inviting smiles. “Well, there she is. Come in.”

Vin scanned the room. There was a window, though its shutters were closed
against approaching gloom. The only chairs were the ones in Kelsier’s half
circle. Resigned, she moved forward and took the empty chair beside Dockson. It
was too big for her, and she settled into it with her knees folded beneath her.

“That’s all of us,” Kelsier said.

“Who’s the last chair for?” Ham asked.

Kelsier smiled, winked, but ignored the question. “All right, let’s talk. We’ve
got something of a task ahead of ourselves, and the sooner we begin outlining a
plan, the better.”

“I thought you had a plan,” Yeden said uncomfortably.

“I have a framework,” Kelsier said. “I know what needs to happen, and I have a
few ideas on how to do it. But, you don’t gather a group like this and just
tell them what to do. We need to work this out together, beginning with a list
of problems we need to deal with if we want the plan to work.”

“Well,” Ham said, “let me get the framework straight first. The plan is to
gather Yeden an army, cause chaos in Luthadel, secure the palace, steal the
Lord Ruler’s atium, then leave the government to collapse?”

“Essentially,” Kelsier said.

“Then,” Ham said, “our main problem is the Garrison. If we want chaos in
Luthadel, then we can’t have twenty thousand troops here to keep the peace. Not
to mention the fact that Yeden’s troops will never take the city while there is
any sort of armed resistance on the walls.”

Kelsier nodded. Picking up a piece of chalk, he wrote Luthadel Garrison up on
the board. “What else?”

“We’ll need a way to make said chaos in Luthadel,” Breeze said, gesturing with
a cup of wine. “Your instincts are right, my dear man. This city is where the
Ministry makes its headquarters and the Great Houses run their mercantile
empires. We’ll need to bring Luthadel down if we want to break the Lord Ruler’s
ability to govern.”

“Mentioning the nobility brings up another point,” Dockson added. “The Great
Houses all have guard forces in the city, not to mention their Allomancers. If
we’re going to deliver the city to Yeden, we’ll have to deal with those
noblemen.”

Kelsier nodded, writing Chaos and Great Houses beside Luthadel Garrison on his
board.

“The Ministry,” Clubs said, leaning back in his plush chair so much that Vin
almost couldn’t see his grumpy face. “There’ll be no change in government as
long as the Steel Inquisitors have anything to say about it.”

Kelsier added Ministry to the board. “What else?”

“Atium,” Ham said. “You might as well write it up there—we’ll need to secure
the palace quickly, once general mayhem starts, and make certain nobody else
takes the opportunity to slip into the treasury.”

Kelsier nodded, writing Atium: Secure Treasury on the board.

“We will need to find a way to gather Yeden’s troops,” Breeze added. “We’ll
have to be quiet, but quick, and train them somewhere that the Lord Ruler won’t
find them.”

“We also might want to make certain that the skaa rebellion is ready to take
control of Luthadel,” Dockson added. “Seizing the palace and digging in will
make for a spectacular story, but it would be nice if Yeden and his people were
actually ready to govern, once this is all over.”

Troops and Skaa Rebellion were added to the board. “And,” Kelsier said, “I’m
going to add ‘Lord Ruler.’ We’ll at least want a plan to get him out of the
city, should other options fail.” After writing Lord Ruler on the list, he
turned back toward the group. “Did I forget anything?”

“Well,” Yeden said dryly, “if you’re listing problems we’ll have to overcome,
you should write up there that we’re all bloody insane—though I doubt we can
fix that fact.”

The group chuckled, and Kelsier wrote Yeden’s Bad Attitude on the board. Then
he stepped back, looking over the list. “When you break it down like that, it
doesn’t sound so bad, does it?”

Vin frowned, trying to decide if Kelsier was attempting a joke or not. The list
wasn’t just daunting—it was disturbing. Twenty thousand imperial soldiers? The
collected forces and power of the high nobility? The Ministry? One Steel
Inquisitor was said to be more powerful than a thousand troops.

More discomforting, however, was how matter-of-factly they regarded the issues.
How could they even think of resisting the Lord Ruler? He was . . . well, he
was the Lord. He ruled all of the world. He was the creator, protector, and
punisher of mankind. He had saved them from the Deepness, then had brought the
ash and the mists as a punishment for the people’s lack of faith. Vin wasn’t
particularly religious—intelligent thieves knew to avoid the Steel Ministry—but
even she knew the legends.

And yet, the group regarded their list of “problems” with determination. There
was a grim mirth about them—as if they understood that they had a better chance
of making the sun rise at night than they did of overthrowing the Final Empire.
Yet, they were still going to try.

“By the Lord Ruler,” Vin whispered. “You’re serious. You really mean to do
this.”

“Don’t use his name as an oath, Vin,” Kelsier said. “Even blasphemy honors
him—when you curse by that creature’s name, you acknowledge him as your god.”

Vin fell silent, sitting back in her chair, a bit numb.

“Anyway,” Kelsier said, smiling lightly. “Anyone have any ideas on how to
overcome these problems? Besides Yeden’s attitude, of course—we all know he’s
hopeless.”

The room was quiet and thoughtful.

“Thoughts?” Kelsier asked. “Angles? Impressions?”

Breeze shook his head. “Now that it’s all up there, I can’t help wondering if
the child has a point. This is a daunting task.”

“But it can be done,” Kelsier said. “Let’s start by talking about how to break
the city. What can we do that would be so threatening that it would throw the
nobility into chaos, maybe even get the palace guard out into the city,
exposing them to our troops? Something that would distract the Ministry, and
the Lord Ruler himself, while we move our troops in to attack?”

“Well, a general revolution among the populace comes to mind,” Ham said.

“Won’t work,” Yeden said firmly.

“Why not?” Ham asked. “You know how the people are treated. They live in slums,
work in mills and smithies the entire day, and half of them still starve.”

Yeden shook his head. “Don’t you understand? The rebellion has been trying for
a thousand years to get the skaa in this city to rise up. It never works.
They’re too beaten down—they don’t have the will or the hope to resist. That’s
why I had to come to you to get an army.”

The room fell still. Vin, however, slowly nodded her head. She’d seen it—she’d
felt it. One didn’t fight the Lord Ruler. Even living as a thief, crouching at
the edge of society, she knew that. There would be no rebellion.

“He’s right, I’m afraid,” Kelsier said. “The skaa won’t rise up, not in their
current state. If we’re going to overthrow this government, we’ll need to do it
without the help of the masses. We can probably recruit our soldiers from among
them, but we can’t count on the general populace.”

“Could we cause a disaster of some sort?” Ham asked. “A fire maybe?”

Kelsier shook his head. “It might disrupt trade for a while, but I doubt it
would have the effect we want. Besides, the cost in skaa lives would be too
high. The slums would burn, not stone nobleman keeps.”

Breeze sighed. “What, then, would you have us do?”

Kelsier smiled, eyes twinkling. “What if we turned the Great Houses against
each other?”

Breeze paused. “A house war . . .” he said, taking a speculative sip of his
wine. “It’s been a while since the city had one of those.”

“Which means that tensions have had plenty of time to brew,” Kelsier said. “The
high nobility are growing increasingly powerful—the Lord Ruler barely has
control over them anymore, which is why we have a chance of shattering his
grip. Luthadel’s Great Houses are the key—they control imperial trade, not to
mention enslave the greatest majority of the skaa.”

Kelsier pointed at the board, moving his finger between the line that said
Chaos and the line that said Great Houses.

“If we can turn the houses inside Luthadel against each other, we can bring
down the city. Mistborn will start assassinating house leaders. Fortunes will
collapse. It won’t take long before there is open warfare in the streets. Part
of our contract with Yeden states that we’ll give him an opening to seize the
city for himself. Can you think of a better one than that?”

Breeze nodded with a smile. “It has flair—and I do like the idea of having the
noblemen kill each other.”

“You always like it better when someone else does the work, Breeze,” Ham noted.

“My dear friend,” Breeze replied, “the entire point of life is to find ways to
get others to do your work for you. Don’t you know anything about basic
economics?”

Ham raised an eyebrow. “Actually, I—”

“It was a rhetorical question, Ham,” Breeze interrupted, rolling his eyes.

“Those are the best kind!” Ham replied.

“Philosophy later, Ham,” Kelsier said. “Stay on task. What do you think of my
suggestion?”

“It could work,” Ham said, settling back. “But I can’t see the Lord Ruler
letting things go that far.”

“It’s our job to see that he doesn’t have a choice,” Kelsier said. “He’s known
to let his nobility squabble, probably to keep them off-balance. We fan those
tensions, then we somehow force the Garrison to pull out. When the houses start
fighting in earnest, the Lord Ruler won’t be able to do anything to stop
them—except, perhaps, send his palace guard into the streets, which is exactly
what we want him to do.”

“He could also send for a koloss army,” Ham noted.

“True,” Kelsier said. “But they’re stationed a moderate distance away. That’s a
flaw we need to exploit. Koloss troops make wonderful grunts, but they have to
be kept away from civilized cities. The very center of the Final Empire is
exposed, yet the Lord Ruler is confident in his strength—and why shouldn’t he
be? He hasn’t faced a serious threat in centuries. Most cities only need small
policing forces.”

“Twenty thousand men is hardly a ‘small’ number,” Breeze said.

“It is on a national scale,” Kelsier said, holding up a finger. “The Lord Ruler
keeps most of his troops on the edges of his empire, where the threat of
rebellion is strongest. That’s why we’re going to strike him here, in Luthadel
itself—and that’s why we’re going to succeed.”

“Assuming we can deal with that Garrison,” Dockson noted.

Kelsier nodded, turning to write House War underneath Great Houses and Chaos.
“All right, then. Let’s talk about the Garrison. What are we going to do about
it?”

“Well,” Ham said speculatively, “historically, the best way to deal with a
large force of soldiers is to have your own large force of soldiers. We’re
going to raise Yeden an army—why not let them attack the Garrison? Isn’t that
kind of the point of raising the army in the first place?”

“That won’t work, Hammond,” Breeze said. He regarded his empty cup of wine,
then held it up toward the boy sitting beside Clubs, who immediately scurried
over to refill it.

“If we wanted to defeat the Garrison,” Breeze continued, “we’d need our own
force of at least its same size. We’d probably want one much larger, since our
men will be newly trained. We might be able to raise Yeden an army—we might
even be able to get him one large enough to hold the city for a while. But,
getting him one large enough to take on the Garrison inside its fortifications?
We might as well give up now, if that’s our plan.”

The group fell silent. Vin squirmed in her chair, looking over each man in
turn. Breeze’s words had a profound effect. Ham opened his mouth to speak, then
closed it again, sitting back to reconsider.

“All right,” Kelsier finally said. “We’ll get back to the Garrison in a moment.
Let’s look at our own army. How can we raise one of substantial size and hide
it from the Lord Ruler?”

“Again, that will be difficult,” Breeze said. “There is a very good reason why
the Lord Ruler feels safe in the Central Dominance. There are constant patrols
on the roadways and canals, and you can hardly spend a day traveling without
running into a village or plantation. This isn’t the sort of place where you
can raise an army without attracting notice.”

“The rebellion has those caves up to the north,” Dockson said. “We might be
able to hide some men there.”

Yeden paled. “You know about the Arguois caverns?”

Kelsier rolled his eyes. “Even the Lord Ruler knows about them, Yeden. The
rebels there just aren’t dangerous enough to bother him yet.”

“How many people do you have, Yeden?” Ham asked. “In Luthadel and around it,
caves included? What do we have to start with?”

Yeden shrugged. “Maybe three hundred—including women and children.”

“And how many do you think those caves could hide?” Ham asked.

Yeden shrugged again.

“The caves could support a larger group, for certain,” Kelsier said. “Perhaps
ten thousand. I’ve been there—the rebellion has been hiding people in them for
years, and the Lord Ruler has never bothered to destroy them.”

“I can imagine why,” Ham said. “Cave fighting is nasty business, especially for
the aggressor. The Lord Ruler likes to keep defeats to a minimum—he’s nothing
if not vain. Anyway, ten thousand. That’s a decent number. It could hold the
palace with ease—might even be able to hold the city, if it had the walls.”

Dockson turned to Yeden. “When you asked for an army, what size were you
thinking?”

“Ten thousand sounds like a good number, I suppose,” Yeden said. “Actually . .
. it’s a bit larger than I was thinking.”

Breeze tipped his cup slightly, swirling the wine. “I hate to sound contrary
again—that’s usually Hammond’s job—but I do have to return to our earlier
problem. Ten thousand men. That won’t even frighten the Garrison. We’re talking
about twenty thousand well-armed, well-trained troops.”

“He has a point, Kell,” Dockson said. He had found a small book somewhere, and
had begun taking notes on the meeting.

Kelsier frowned.

Ham nodded. “Any way you look at it, Kell, that Garrison is going to be a tough
stone to break. Perhaps we should just focus on the nobility. Maybe we can
cause enough chaos that even the Garrison won’t be able to suppress it.”

Kelsier shook his head. “Doubtful. The Garrison’s primary duty is to maintain
order in the city. If we can’t deal with those troops, we’ll never pull this
off.” He paused, then eyed Vin. “What do you think, Vin? Any suggestions?”

She froze. Camon had never asked her opinion. What did Kelsier want from her?
She pulled back into her chair slightly as she realized that the other members
of the crew had turned, looking at her.

“I . . .” Vin said slowly.

“Oh, don’t intimidate the poor thing, Kelsier,” Breeze said with a wave of his
hand.

Vin nodded, but Kelsier didn’t turn away from her. “No, really. Tell me what
you’re thinking, Vin. You’ve got a much larger enemy threatening you. What do
you do?”

“Well,” she said slowly. “You don’t fight him, that’s for certain. Even if you
won somehow, you’d be so hurt and broken that you couldn’t fight off anyone
else.”

“Makes sense,” Dockson said. “But we might not have a choice. We have to get
rid of that army somehow.”

“And if it just left the city?” she asked. “That would work too? If I had to
deal with someone big, I’d try and distract him first, get him to leave me
alone.”

Ham chuckled. “Good luck getting the Garrison to leave Luthadel. The Lord Ruler
sends squads out on patrol sometimes, but the only time I know of the entire
Garrison leaving was when that skaa rebellion broke out down in Courteline a
half century ago.”

Dockson shook his head. “Vin’s idea is too good to dismiss that easily, I
think. Really, we can’t fight the Garrison—at least, not while they’re
entrenched. So, we need to get them to leave the city somehow.”

“Yes,” Breeze said, “but it would take a particular crisis to require involving
the Garrison. If the problem weren’t threatening enough, the Lord Ruler
wouldn’t send the entire Garrison. If it were too dangerous, he’d hunker down
and send for his koloss.”

“A rebellion in one of the nearby cities?” Ham suggested.

“That leaves us with the same problem as before,” Kelsier said, shaking his
head. “If we can’t get the skaa here to rebel, we’ll never get ones outside the
city to do so.”

“What about a feint of some sort, then?” Ham asked. “We’re assuming that we’ll
be able to raise a sizable group of soldiers. If they pretend to attack
someplace nearby, perhaps the Lord Ruler would send the Garrison out to help.”

“I doubt he’d send them away to protect another city,” Breeze said. “Not if it
left him exposed in Luthadel.”

The group fell silent, thinking again. Vin glanced around, then found Kelsier’s
eyes on her.

“What?” he asked.

She squirmed a bit, glancing down. “How far away are the Pits of Hathsin?” she
finally asked.

The crew paused.

Finally, Breeze laughed. “Oh, now that’s devious. The nobility don’t know that
the Pits produce atium, so the Lord Ruler couldn’t make much of a fuss—not
without revealing that there’s something very special about those Pits. That
means no koloss.”

“They wouldn’t arrive in time anyway,” Ham said. “The Pits are only a couple of
days away. If they were threatened, the Lord Ruler would have to respond
quickly. The Garrison would be the only force in striking distance.”

Kelsier smiled, eyes alight. “And it wouldn’t take much of an army to threaten
the Pits, either. A thousand men could do it. We send them to attack, then when
the Garrison leaves, we march our second, larger force in and seize Luthadel
itself. By the time the Garrison realized that they’d been duped, they wouldn’t
be able to get back in time to stop us from taking the city walls.”

“Could we keep them, though?” Yeden asked apprehensively.

Ham nodded eagerly. “With ten thousand skaa, I could hold this city against the
Garrison. The Lord Ruler would have to send for his koloss.”

“By then, we’d have the atium,” Kelsier said. “And the Great Houses won’t be in
any position to stop us—they’ll be weakened and frail because of their internal
fighting.”

Dockson was scribbling furiously on his pad. “We’ll need to use Yeden’s caves,
then. They’re within striking distance of both our targets, and they’re closer
to Luthadel than the Pits are. If our army left from there, it could get here
before the Garrison could return from the Pits.”

Kelsier nodded.

Dockson continued to scribble. “I’ll have to start stockpiling supplies in
those caves, maybe make a trip out to check conditions there.”

“And, how are we going to get the soldiers there?” Yeden asked. “That’s a week
outside the city—and skaa aren’t allowed to travel on their own.”

“I’ve already got someone who can help us there,” Kelsier said, writing Attack
Pits of Hathsin beneath Luthadel Garrison on his board. “I have a friend that
can give us a front to run canal boats to the north.”

“Assuming,” Yeden said, “you can even make good on your first and primary
promise. I paid you to gather me an army. Ten thousand men is a great number,
but I’ve still to see an adequate explanation of how you’re going to raise
them. I’ve already told you the kinds of problems we’ve had trying to recruit
in Luthadel.”

“We won’t need the general population to support us,” Kelsier said. “Just a
small percentage of them—there are nearly a million workers in and around
Luthadel. This should actually be the easiest part of the plan, since we happen
to be in the presence of one of the world’s greatest Soothers. Breeze, I’m
counting on you and your Allomancers to force us up a nice selection of
recruits.”

Breeze sipped his wine. “Kelsier, my good man. I wish you wouldn’t use words
like ‘force’ in reference to my talents. I simply encourage people.”

“Well, can you encourage us up an army?” Dockson asked.

“How much time do I have?” Breeze asked.

“A year,” Kelsier said. “We’ll plan this to go off next fall. Assuming the Lord
Ruler does gather his forces to attack Yeden once we take the city, we might as
well make him do it in the winter.”

“Ten thousand men,” Breeze said with a smile, “gathered from a resistant
population in less than a year. It would certainly be a challenge.”

Kelsier chuckled. “From you, that’s as good as a yes. Start in Luthadel, then
move to the surrounding cities. We need people who are close enough to gather
at the caves.”

Breeze nodded.

“We’ll also need weapons and supplies,” Ham said. “And we’ll need to train the
men.”

“I’ve already got a plan to get weapons,” Kelsier said. “Can you find some men
to do the training?”

Ham paused thoughtfully. “Probably. I know some skaa soldiers who fought in one
of the Lord Ruler’s Suppression Campaigns.”

Yeden paled. “Traitors!”

Ham shrugged. “Most of them aren’t proud of what they did,” he said. “But most
of them also like to eat. It’s a hard world, Yeden.”

“My people will never work with such men,” Yeden said.

“They’ll have to,” Kelsier said sternly. “A large number of skaa rebellions
fail because their men are poorly trained. We’re going to give you an army of
well-equipped, well-fed men—and I’ll be damned if I’m going to let you get them
slaughtered because they were never taught which end of the sword to hold.”

Kelsier paused, then eyed Ham. “However, I do suggest that you find men who are
bitter against the Final Empire for what it forced them to do. I don’t trust
men whose loyalty only goes as far as the boxings in their pockets.”

Ham nodded, and Yeden quieted. Kelsier turned, writing Ham: Training and
Breeze: Recruitment beneath Troops on the board.

“I’m interested in your plan to get weapons,” Breeze said. “How, exactly, do
you intend to arm ten thousand men without making the Lord Ruler suspicious? He
keeps a very careful eye on the armament flows.”

“We could make the weapons,” Clubs said. “I have enough extra wood that we
could churn out a war staff or two every day. Could probably get you some
arrows too.”

“I appreciate the offer, Clubs,” Kelsier said. “And I think that’s a good idea.
However, we’re going to need more than staves. We’ll need swords, shields, and
armor—and we need them quickly enough to begin training.”

“How, then, are you going to do it?” Breeze asked.

“The Great Houses can get weapons,” Kelsier said. “They don’t have any problems
arming their personal retinues.”

“You want us to steal from them?”

Kelsier shook his head. “No, for once we’re going to do things somewhat
legally—we’re going to buy our weapons. Or, rather, we’re going to have a
sympathetic nobleman buy them for us.”

Clubs laughed bluntly. “A nobleman sympathetic to the skaa? It will never
happen.”

“Well, ‘never’ happened a short time ago, then,” Kelsier said lightly. “Because
I’ve already found someone to help us.”

The room fell silent save for the crackling of the fireplace. Vin squirmed
slightly in her chair, glancing at the others. They seemed shocked.

“Who?” Ham asked.

“His name is Lord Renoux,” Kelsier said. “He arrived in the area a few days
back. He’s staying in Fellise—he doesn’t quite have enough influence to
establish himself in Luthadel. Besides, I think it’s prudent to keep Renoux’s
activities a bit removed from the Lord Ruler.”

Vin cocked her head. Fellise was a small, suburb-style city an hour outside of
Luthadel; she and Reen had worked there before moving into the capital city.
How had Kelsier recruited this Lord Renoux? Had he bribed the man, or was it
some sort of scam?

“I know of Renoux,” Breeze said slowly. “He’s a Western lord; he has a great
deal of power in the Farmost Dominance.”

Kelsier nodded. “Lord Renoux recently decided to try and elevate his family to
high noble status. His official story is that he came south in order to expand
his mercantile efforts. He hopes that by shipping fine Southern weaponry to the
North, he can earn enough money—and make enough connections—to build himself a
keep in Luthadel by the end of the decade.”

The room was quiet.

“But,” Ham said slowly, “those weapons will be coming to us instead.”

Kelsier nodded. “We’ll have to fake the shipping records, just in case.”

“That’s . . . quite an ambitious front, Kell,” Ham said. “A lord’s family
working on our side.”

“But,” Breeze said, looking confused. “Kelsier, you hate noblemen.”

“This one’s different,” Kelsier said with a sly smile.

The crew studied Kelsier. They didn’t like working with a nobleman; Vin could
tell that much easily. It probably didn’t help that Renoux was so powerful.

Suddenly, Breeze laughed. He leaned back in his chair, downing the last of his
wine. “You blessed madman! You killed him, didn’t you? Renoux—you killed him
and replaced him with an impostor.”

Kelsier’s smile broadened.

Yeden cursed, but Ham simply smiled. “Ah. Now that makes sense. Or, at least,
it makes sense if you’re Kelsier the Foolhardy.”

“Renoux is going to take up permanent residence in Fellise,” Kelsier said.
“He’ll be our front if we need to do anything official. I’ll use him to
purchase armaments and supplies, for instance.”

Breeze nodded thoughtfully. “Efficient.”

“Efficient?” Yeden asked. “You’ve killed a nobleman! A very important one.”

“You’re planning to overthrow the entire empire, Yeden,” Kelsier noted. “Renoux
isn’t going to be the last aristocratic casualty in this little endeavor.”

“Yes, but impersonating him?” Yeden asked. “That sounds a little risky to me.”

“You hired us because you wanted extraordinary results, my dear man,” Breeze
said, sipping his wine. “In our line of work, extraordinary results usually
require extraordinary risks.”

“We minimize them as best we can, Yeden,” Kelsier said. “My actor is very good.
However, these are the sorts of things we’re going to be doing in this job.”

“And if I order you to stop a few of them?” Yeden asked.

“You can shut down the job at any time,” Dockson said, not looking up from his
ledgers. “But as long as it is in motion, Kelsier has final say on plans,
objectives, and procedures. That is how we work; you knew that when you hired
us.”

Yeden shook his head ruefully.

“Well?” Kelsier asked. “Do we continue or not? The call is yours, Yeden.”

“Feel free to call an end to it, friend,” Breeze said with a helpful voice.
“Don’t be afraid of offending us. I, for one, look favorably upon free money.”

Vin saw Yeden pale slightly. In Vin’s estimation, he was fortunate that Kelsier
hadn’t simply taken his money and stabbed him in the chest. But, she was
becoming increasingly convinced that wasn’t the way things worked around here.

“This is insane,” Yeden said.

“Trying to overthrow the Lord Ruler?” Breeze asked. “Why, yes, as a matter of
fact, it is.”

“All right,” Yeden said, sighing. “We continue.”

“Good,” Kelsier said, writing Kelsier: Equipment under Troops. “The Renoux
front will also give us an ‘in’ with Luthadel high society. This will be a very
important advantage—we’ll need to keep careful track of Great House politics if
we’re going to start a war.”

“This house war might not be as easy to pull off as you think, Kelsier,” Breeze
warned. “The current lot of high noblemen is a careful, discriminating group.”

Kelsier smiled. “Then it’s good that you’re here to help, Breeze. You’re an
expert at making people do what you want—together, you and I will plan how to
make the high nobility turn on each other. Major house wars seem to happen
every couple of centuries or so. The current group’s competence will only make
them more dangerous, so getting them riled up shouldn’t be that hard. In fact,
I’ve already started the process. . . .”

Breeze raised an eyebrow, then glanced at Ham. The Thug grumbled a bit, pulling
out a golden ten-boxing coin and flipping it across the room to the
self-satisfied Breeze.

“What was that about?” Dockson asked.

“We had a bet,” Breeze said, “regarding whether or not Kelsier was involved in
last night’s disturbance.”

“Disturbance?” Yeden asked. “What disturbance?”

“Someone attacked House Venture,” Ham said. “The rumors claim that three full
Mistborn were sent to assassinate Straff Venture himself.”

Kelsier snorted. “Three? Straff certainly has an elevated opinion of himself. I
didn’t go anywhere near His Lordship. I was there for the atium—and to make
certain that I was seen.”

“Venture isn’t sure who to blame,” Breeze said. “But because Mistborn were
involved, everyone assumes that it was one of the Great Houses.”

“That was the idea,” Kelsier said happily. “The high nobility take Mistborn
attacks very seriously—they have an unspoken agreement that they won’t use
Mistborn to assassinate each other. A few more strikes like this, and I’ll have
them snapping at each other like frightened animals.”

He turned, adding Breeze: Planning and Kelsier: General Mayhem beneath Great
Houses on the board.

“Anyway,” Kelsier continued, “we’ll need to keep an eye on local politics to
find out which Houses are making alliances. That means sending a spy to some of
their functions.”

“Is that really necessary?” Yeden asked uncomfortably.

Ham nodded. “It’s standard procedure for any Luthadel job, actually. If there
is information to be had, it will pass through the lips of the court’s
powerful. It always pays to keep an open set of ears moving through their
circles.”

“Well, that should be easy,” Breeze said. “We just bring up your impostor and
send him into the parties.”

Kelsier shook his head. “Unfortunately, Lord Renoux himself won’t be able to
come to Luthadel.”

Yeden frowned. “Why not? Won’t your impostor hold up to close scrutiny?”

“Oh, he looks just like Lord Renoux,” Kelsier said. “Exactly like Lord Renoux,
actually. We just can’t let him get near an Inquisitor. . . .”

“Ah,” Breeze said, exchanging a glance with Ham. “One of those. Well, then.”

“What?” Yeden asked. “What does he mean?”

“You don’t want to know,” Breeze said.

“I don’t?”

Breeze shook his head. “You know how unsettled you just were when Kelsier said
he’d replaced Lord Renoux with an impostor? Well, this is about a dozen times
worse. Trust me—the less you know, the more comfortable you’ll be.”

Yeden looked toward Kelsier, who was smiling broadly. Yeden paled, then leaned
back in his chair. “I think you’re probably right.”

Vin frowned, eying the others in the room. They seemed to know what Kelsier was
talking about. She’d have to study this Lord Renoux sometime.

“Anyway,” Kelsier said, “we have to send someone to the social functions. Dox,
therefore, will be playing Renoux’s nephew and heir, a scion of the family who
has recently gained favor with Lord Renoux.”

“Wait a moment, Kell,” Dockson said. “You didn’t tell me about this.”

Kelsier shrugged. “We’re going to need someone to be our dupe with the
nobility. I assumed that you’d fit the role.”

“Can’t be me,” Dockson said. “I got marked during the Eiser job just a couple
months back.”

Kelsier frowned.

“What?” Yeden asked. “Do I want to know what they’re talking about this time?”

“He means that the Ministry is watching for him,” Breeze said. “He pretended to
be a nobleman, and they found out.”

Dockson nodded. “The Lord Ruler himself saw me on one occasion, and he’s got a
flawless memory. Even if I managed to avoid him, someone’s bound to recognize
me eventually.”

“So . . .” Yeden said.

“So,” Kelsier said, “we’ll need someone else to play Lord Renoux’s heir.”

“Don’t look at me,” Yeden said apprehensively.

“Trust me,” Kelsier said flatly, “nobody was. Clubs is out too—he’s far too
prominent a local skaa craftsman.”

“I’m out as well,” Breeze said. “I already have several aliases among the
nobility. I suppose I could use one of them, but I couldn’t go to any major
balls or parties—it would be rather embarrassing if I met someone who knew me
by a different alias.”

Kelsier frowned thoughtfully.

“I could do it,” Ham said. “But you know I’m no good at acting.”

“What about my nephew?” Clubs said, nodding to the young man at his side.

Kelsier studied the boy. “What’s your name, son?”

“Lestibournes.”

Kelsier raised an eyebrow. “That’s a mouthful. You don’t have a nickname?”

“Not of the yetting yet.”

“We’ll have to work on that,” Kelsier said. “Do you always speak in that
Eastern street slang?”

The boy shrugged, obviously nervous at being such a center of attention.
“Wasing the place when I was young.”

Kelsier glanced at Dockson, who shook his head. “I don’t think it’s a good
idea, Kell.”

“Agreed.” Kelsier turned to Vin, then smiled. “I guess that leaves you. How
good are you at imitating a noblewoman?”

Vin paled slightly. “My brother gave me a few lessons. But, I’ve never actually
tried to. . . .”

“You’ll do fine,” Kelsier said, writing Vin: Infiltration underneath Great
Houses. “All right. Yeden, you should probably begin planning how you’re to
keep control of the empire once this is all through.”

Yeden nodded. Vin felt a little sorry for the man, seeing how much the
planning—the sheer outrageousness of it all—seemed to be overwhelming him.
Still, it was hard to feel sympathy for him, considering what Kelsier had just
said regarding her part in all this.

Playing a noblewoman? she thought. Surely there’s someone else who could do a
better job. . . .

Breeze’s attention was still on Yeden and his obvious discomfort. “Don’t look
so solemn, my dear fellow,” Breeze said. “Why, you’ll probably never actually
have to rule the city. Chances are, we’ll all get caught and executed long
before that happens.”

Yeden smiled wanly. “And if we don’t? What’s to keep you all from just knifing
me and taking the empire for yourselves?”

Breeze rolled his eyes. “We’re thieves, my dear man, not politicians. A nation
is far too unwieldy a commodity to be worth our time. Once we have our atium,
we’ll be happy.”

“Not to mention rich,” Ham added.

“The two words are synonyms, Hammond,” Breeze said.

“Besides,” Kelsier said to Yeden. “We won’t be giving you the entire
empire—hopefully, it will shatter once Luthadel destabilizes. You’ll have this
city, and probably a good piece of the Central Dominance—assuming you can bribe
the local armies into supporting you.”

“And . . . the Lord Ruler?” Yeden asked.

Kelsier smiled. “I’m still planning to deal with him personally—I just have to
figure out how to make the Eleventh Metal work.”

“And if you don’t?”

“Well,” Kelsier said, writing Yeden: Preparation and Rule beneath Skaa
Rebellion on the board, “we’ll try and find a way to trick him out of the city.
Perhaps we can get him to go with his army to the Pits and secure things
there.”

“Then what?” Yeden asked.

“You find some way to deal with him,” Kelsier said. “You didn’t hire us to kill
the Lord Ruler, Yeden—that’s just a possible perk I intend to throw in if I
can.”

“I wouldn’t worry too much, Yeden,” Ham added. “He won’t be able to do much
without funds or armies. He’s a powerful Allomancer, but by no means
omnipotent.”

Breeze smiled. “Though, if you think about it, hostile, dethroned pseudodeities
probably make disagreeable neighbors. You’ll have to figure out something to do
with him.”

Yeden didn’t appear to like that idea much, but he didn’t continue the
argument.

Kelsier turned. “That should be it, then.”

“Uh,” Ham said, “what about the Ministry? Shouldn’t we at least find a way to
keep an eye on those Inquisitors?”

Kelsier smiled. “We’ll let my brother deal with them.”

“Like hell you will,” a new voice said from the back of the room.

Vin jumped to her feet, spinning and glancing toward the room’s shadowed
doorway. A man stood there. Tall and broad-shouldered, he had a statuesque
rigidity. He wore modest clothing—a simple shirt and trousers with a loose skaa
jacket. His arms were folded in dissatisfaction, and he had a hard, square face
that looked a bit familiar.

Vin glanced back at Kelsier. The similarity was obvious.

“Marsh?” Yeden said, standing. “Marsh, it is you! He promised you’d be joining
the job, but I . . . well . . . welcome back!”

Marsh’s face remained impassive. “I’m not certain if I’m ‘back’ or not, Yeden.
If you all don’t mind, I’d like to speak privately with my little brother.”

Kelsier didn’t seem intimidated by Marsh’s harsh tone. He nodded to the group.
“We’re done for the evening, folks.”

The others rose slowly, giving Marsh a wide berth as they left. Vin followed
them, pulling the door shut and walking down the stairs to give the appearance
of retiring to her room.

Less than three minutes later she was back at the door, listening carefully to
the conversation going on inside.




