## 14

### 

#### 
* * *



Sometimes I wonder if I’m going mad.

Perhaps it is due to the pressure of knowing that I must somehow bear the
burden of an entire world. Perhaps it is caused by the death I have seen, the
friends I have lost. The friends I have been forced to kill.

Either way, I sometimes see shadows following me. Dark creatures that I don’t
understand, nor wish to understand. Are they, perhaps, some figment of my
overtaxed mind?





### 

#### 
14



IT STARTED RAINING JUST AFTER they located the coin pouch. It wasn’t a hard
rain, but it seemed to clear the mist slightly. Vin shivered, pulling up her
hood, crouching beside Kelsier on a rooftop. He didn’t pay the weather much
heed, so neither did she. A little dampness wouldn’t hurt—in fact, it would
probably help, as the rainfall would cover the sounds of their approach.

Kredik Shaw lay before them. The peaked spires and sheer towers rose like dark
talons in the night. They varied greatly in thickness—some were wide enough to
house stairwells and large rooms, but others were simply thin rods of steel
jutting up into the sky. The variety gave the mass a twisted, off-center
symmetry—an almost-balance.

The spikes and towers had a foreboding cast in the damp, misty night—like the
ash-blackened bones of a long-weathered carcass. Looking at them, Vin thought
she felt something . . . a depression, as if simply being close to the building
was enough to suck away her hope.

#### 
“Our target is a tunnel complex at the base of one of the far right spires,”
Kelsier said, his voice barely carrying over the quiet hush of the falling
rain. “We’re heading for a room at the very center of that complex.”

“What’s inside?”

“I don’t know,” Kelsier said. “That’s what we’re going to find out. Once every
three days—and today isn’t one of them—the Lord Ruler visits this chamber. He
stays for three hours, then leaves. I tried to get in once before. Three years
ago.”

“The job,” Vin whispered. “The one that . . .”

“Got me captured,” Kelsier said with a nod. “Yes. At the time, we thought that
the Lord Ruler stored riches in the room. I don’t think that’s true, now, but
I’m still curious. The way he visits is so regular, so . . . odd. Something’s
in that room, Vin. Something important. Maybe it holds the secret to his power
and immortality.”

“Why do we need to worry about that?” Vin asked. “You have the Eleventh Metal
to defeat him, right?”

Kelsier frowned slightly. Vin waited for an answer, but he didn’t ever give
one. “I failed to get in last time, Vin,” he said instead. “We got close, but
we got there too easily. When we arrived, there were Inquisitors outside the
room. Waiting for us.”

“Someone told them you were coming?”

Kelsier nodded. “We planned that job for months. We were overconfident, but we
had reason to be. Mare and I were the best—the job should have gone
flawlessly.” Kelsier paused, then he turned to Vin. “Tonight, I didn’t plan at
all. We’re just going in—we’ll quiet anyone who tries to stop us, then break
into that room.”

#### 
Vin sat quietly, feeling the chill rainwater on her wet hands and damp arms.
Then she nodded.

Kelsier smiled slightly. “No objections?”

Vin shook her head. “I made you take me with you. It’s not my place to object
now.”

Kelsier chuckled. “Guess I’ve been hanging out with Breeze too long. I just
don’t feel right unless someone tells me I’m crazy.”

#### 
Vin shrugged. However, as she moved on the rooftop, she felt it again—the sense
of depression coming from Kredik Shaw.

“There is something, Kelsier,” she said. “The palace feels . . . wrong,
somehow.”

“That’s the Lord Ruler,” Kelsier said. “He radiates like an incredibly powerful
Soother, smothering the emotions of everyone who gets close to him. Turn on
your copper; that will make you immune.”

Vin nodded, burning copper. Immediately, the sensation went away.

“Good?” Kelsier asked.

She nodded again.

#### 
“All right, then,” he said, giving her a handful of coins. “Stay close to me,
and keep your atium handy—just in case.”

With that, he threw himself off the roof. Vin followed, her cloak tassels
spraying rainwater. She burned pewter as she fell, and hit the ground with
Allomantically strengthened legs.

Kelsier took off at a dash, and she followed. Her speed on the wet cobblestones
would have been reckless, but her pewter-fueled muscles reacted with precision,
strength, and balance. She ran in the wet, misty night, burning tin and
copper—one to let her see, the other to let her hide.

Kelsier rounded the palace complex. Oddly, the grounds had no outer wall. Of
course they don’t. Who would dare attack the Lord Ruler?

Flat space, covered in cobblestones, was all that surrounded the Hill of a
Thousand Spires. No tree, foliage, or structure stood to distract one’s eye
from the disturbing, asymmetric collection of wings, towers, and spires that
was Kredik Shaw.

“Here we go,” Kelsier whispered, his voice carrying to her tin-enhanced ears.
He turned, dashing directly toward a squat, bunkerlike section of the palace.
As they approached, Vin saw a pair of guards standing by an ornate, gatelike
door.

Kelsier was on the men in a flash, cutting one down with slashing knives. The
second man tried to cry out, but Kelsier jumped, slamming both feet into the
man’s chest. Thrown to the side by the inhumanly strong kick, the guard crashed
into the wall, then slumped to the ground. Kelsier was on his feet a second
later, slamming his weight against the door and pushing it open.

#### 
Weak lanternlight spilled out of a stone corridor within. Kelsier ducked
through the door. Vin dimmed her tin, then followed in a crouching dash, her
heart pounding. Never, in all her time as a thief, had she done something like
this. Hers had been a life of sneaky burgling and scamming, not raids or
muggings. As she followed Kelsier down the corridor—their feet and cloaks
leaving a wet trail on the smooth stonework—she nervously pulled out a glass
dagger, gripping the leather-wrapped handle in a sweaty palm.

A man stepped into the hallway just ahead, exiting what appeared to be some
sort of guard chamber. Kelsier jumped forward and elbowed the soldier in the
stomach, then slammed him against the wall. Even as the guard collapsed,
Kelsier ducked into the room.

Vin followed, stepping into chaos. Kelsier Pulled a metal candelabrum from the
corner up into his hands, then began to spin with it, striking down soldier
after soldier. Guards cried out, scrambling and grabbing staves from the side
of the room. A table covered in half-eaten meals was thrown to the side as men
tried to make room.

A soldier turned toward Vin, and she reacted without thinking. She burned steel
and threw out a handful of coins. She Pushed, and the missiles shot forward,
tearing through the guard’s flesh and dropping him.

She burned iron, Pulling the coins back to her hand. She turned with a bloodied
fist, spraying the room with metal, dropping three soldiers. Kelsier felled the
last with his impromptu staff.

I just killed four men, Vin thought, stunned. Before, Reen had always done the
killing.

There was rustling behind. Vin spun to see another squadron of soldiers enter
through a door opposite her. To the side, Kelsier dropped his candelabrum and
stepped forward. The room’s four lanterns suddenly ripped from their mountings,
slamming directly toward him. He ducked to the side, letting the lanterns crash
together.

The room fell dark. Vin burned tin, her eyes adapting to light from the
corridor outside. The guards, however, stumbled to a halt.

Kelsier was amidst them a second later. Daggers flashing in the darkness. Men
screaming. Then all was silent.

Vin stood surrounded by death, bloodied coins dribbling from her stunned
fingers. She kept a tight grip on her dagger, however—if only to steady her
quivering arm.

Kelsier lay a hand on her shoulder, and she jumped.

“These were evil men, Vin,” he said. “Every skaa knows in his heart that it is
the greatest of crimes to take up arms in defense of the Final Empire.”

Vin nodded numbly. She felt . . . wrong. Maybe it was the death, but now that
she was actually within the building, she swore that she could still feel the
Lord Ruler’s power. Something seemed to Push her emotions, making her more
depressed despite her copper.

“Come. Time is short.” Kelsier took off again, hopping lithely over corpses,
and Vin felt herself following.

I made him bring me, she thought. I wanted to fight, like him. I’m going to
have to get used to this.

#### 
They dashed into a second corridor, and Kelsier jumped into the air. He
lurched, then shot forward. Vin did the same, leaping and seeking an anchor far
down the corridor, then using it to Pull herself through the air.

Side corridors whipped past, the air a rushing howl in her tin-enhanced ears.
Ahead, two soldiers stepped into the corridor. Kelsier slammed feet-first into
one, then flipped up and rammed a dagger into the other’s neck. Both men fell.

No metal, Vin thought, dropping to the ground. None of the guards in this place
wear metal. Hazekillers, they were called. Men trained to fight Allomancers.

Kelsier ducked down a side corridor, and Vin had to sprint to keep up with him.
She flared pewter, willing her legs to move faster. Ahead, Kelsier paused, and
Vin lurched to a stop beside him. To their right was an open, arching doorway,
and it shone with a light far brighter than that of the small corridor
lanterns. Vin extinguished her tin, following Kelsier through the archway and
into the room.

#### 
Six braziers burned with open flames at the corners of the large, dome-roofed
chamber. In contrast to the simple corridors, this room was covered with
silver-inlayed murals. Each obviously represented the Lord Ruler; they were
like the windows she had seen earlier, except less abstract. She saw a
mountain. A large cavern. A pool of light.

And something very dark.

Kelsier strode forward, and Vin turned. The center of the room was dominated by
a small structure—a building within the building. Ornate, with carved stone and
flowing patterns, the single-story building stood reverently before them. All
in all, the quiet, empty chamber gave Vin a strange feeling of solemnity.

Kelsier walked forward, bare feet falling on smooth black marble. Vin followed
in a nervous crouch; the room seemed empty, but there had to be other guards.
Kelsier walked up to a large oaken door set into the inner building, its
surface carved with letterings Vin didn’t recognize. He reached out and pulled
open the door.

#### 
A Steel Inquisitor stood inside. The creature smiled, lips curling in an eerie
expression beneath the two massive spikes that had been pounded point-first
through its eyes.

Kelsier paused for just a moment. Then he yelled, “Vin, run!” as the
Inquisitor’s hand snapped forward, grabbing him by the throat.

Vin froze. To the sides, she saw two other black-robed Inquisitors stride
through open archways. Tall, lean, and bald, they were also marked by their
spikes and intricate Ministry eye tattoos.

The closest Inquisitor lifted Kelsier up into the air by his neck. “Kelsier,
the Survivor of Hathsin,” the creature said in a grinding voice. Then he turned
toward Vin. “And . . . you. I’ve been looking for you. I’ll let this one die
quickly if you’ll tell me which nobleman spawned you, half-breed.”

Kelsier coughed, struggling for breath as he pried at the creature’s grip. The
Inquisitor turned, regarding Kelsier with spike-end eyes. Kelsier coughed
again, as if trying to say something, and the Inquisitor curiously pulled
Kelsier a bit closer.

Kelsier’s hand whipped out, ramming a dagger into the creature’s neck. As the
Inquisitor stumbled, Kelsier slammed his fist into the creature’s forearm,
shattering the bone with a snap. The Inquisitor dropped him, and Kelsier fell
to the reflective marble floor, coughing.

Gasping for breath, Kelsier looked up at Vin with intense eyes. “I said run!”
he croaked, tossing something to her.

Vin paused, reaching out to catch the coin pouch. However, it lurched suddenly
in the air, shooting forward. Abruptly, she realized Kelsier wasn’t throwing it
to her, but at her.

The bag hit her in the chest. Pushed by Kelsier’s Allomancy, it hurled her
across the room—past the two surprised Inquisitors—until she finally dropped
awkwardly to the floor, skidding on the marble.

Vin looked up, slightly dazed. In the distance, Kelsier regained his feet. The
main Inquisitor, however, didn’t seem very concerned about the dagger in his
neck. The other two Inquisitors stood between her and Kelsier. One turned
toward her, and Vin felt chilled by its horrifying, unnatural gaze.

“RUN!” The word echoed in the domed chamber. And this time, finally, it struck
home.

### 

#### 
Vin scrambled to her feet—fear shocking her, screaming at her, making her move.
She dashed toward the nearest archway, uncertain if it was the one she had come
in through. She clutched Kelsier’s coin pouch and burned iron, frantically
seeking an anchor down the corridor.

Must get away!

She grabbed the first bit of metal she saw and yanked, tearing herself off the
ground. She shot down the corridor at an uncontrolled speed, terror flaring her
iron.

She lurched suddenly, and everything spun. She hit the ground at an awkward
angle—her head slamming against the rough stone—then lay dizzily, wondering
what had happened. The coin pouch . . . someone had Pulled on it, using its
metal to yank her backward.

Vin rolled over and saw a dark form shooting down the corridor. The
Inquisitor’s robes fluttered as he dropped lightly to his feet a short distance
from Vin. He strode forward, his face impassive.

Vin flared tin and pewter, clearing her mind and pushing away the pain. She
whipped out a few coins, Pushing them at the Inquisitor.

He raised a hand, and both coins froze in the air. Vin’s own Push suddenly
threw her backward, and she tumbled across the stones, skidding and sliding.

She heard the coins pling against the floor as she came to a rest. She shook
her head, a dozen new bruises flaring angrily across her body. The Inquisitor
stepped over the discarded coins, walking toward her with a smooth gait.

I have to get away! Even Kelsier had been afraid to face an Inquisitor. If he
couldn’t fight one, what chance did she have?

None. She dropped the pouch and jumped to her feet, then she ran, ducking
through the first doorway she saw. The room beyond was empty of people, but a
golden altar stood at its center. Between the altar, the four candelabra at the
corners, and the cluttering of other religious paraphernalia, the space was
cramped.

Vin turned, Pulling a candelabrum into her hands, remembering Kelsier’s trick
from before. The Inquisitor stepped into the room, then raised an almost amused
hand, ripping the candelabra from her hands in an easy Allomantic Pull.

He’s so strong! Vin thought with horror. He was probably steadying himself by
Pulling against the lantern brackets behind. However, the force of his
Ironpulls was far more powerful than Kelsier’s had ever been.

Vin jumped, Pulling herself slightly up and over the altar. At the doorway, the
Inquisitor reached over to a bowl that sat atop a short pillar, pulling out
what appeared to be a handful of small metal triangles. They were sharp on all
sides, and they cut the creature’s hand in a dozen different places. He ignored
the wounds, raising a bloody hand toward her.

Vin yelped, ducking behind the altar as pieces of metal sprayed against the
back wall.

“You are trapped,” the Inquisitor said in a scratchy voice. “Come with me.”

Vin glanced to the side. There weren’t any other doors in the room. She peeked
up, glancing at the Inquisitor, and a piece of metal shot at her face. She
Pushed against it, but the Inquisitor was too strong. She had to duck and let
the metal go, lest his power pin her back against the wall.

#### 
I’ll need something to block with. Something that isn’t made of metal.

As she heard the Inquisitor step into the room, she found what she needed—a
large, leather-bound book sitting beside the altar. She grabbed it, then
paused. There was no use in being rich if she died. She pulled out Kelsier’s
vial and downed the atium, then burned it.

The Inquisitor’s shadow stepped around the side of the altar, then the actual
Inquisitor followed a second later. The atium-shadow opened its hand, and a
spray of tiny, translucent daggers shot at her.

Vin raised her book as the real daggers followed. She swung the book through
the shadow trails just as the real daggers shot toward her. She caught every
one, their sharp, jagged edges digging deeply into the book’s leather cover.

The Inquisitor paused, and she was rewarded by what seemed to be a look of
confusion on its twisted face. Then a hundred shadow images shot from his body.

#### 
Lord Ruler! Vin thought. He had atium too.

Not pausing to worry about what that meant, Vin hopped over the altar, carrying
the book with her as protection against further missiles. The Inquisitor spun,
spike-eyes following her as she ducked back into the hallway.

A squad of soldiers stood waiting for her. However, each one bore a
future-shadow. Vin ducked between them, barely watching where their weapons
would fall, somehow avoiding the attacks of twelve different men. And, for a
moment, she almost forgot the pain and fear—and they were replaced by an
incredible sense of power. She dodged effortlessly, staves swinging above and
beside her, each one missing by just inches. She was invincible.

She spun through the ranks of the men, not bothering to kill or hurt them—she
only wanted to escape. As she passed the last one, she turned around a corner.

#### 
And a second Inquisitor, his body springing with shadow images, stepped up and
slammed something sharp into her lower side.

Vin gasped in pain. There was a sickening sound as the creature pulled his
weapon free of her body; it was a length of wood affixed with sharp obsidian
blades. Vin grasped her side, stumbling backward, feeling a terrifying amount
of warm blood seeping from the wound.

The Inquisitor looked familiar. The first one, from the other room, she thought
through the pain. Does . . . that mean that Kelsier is dead?

“Who is your father?” the Inquisitor asked.

Vin kept her hand at her side, trying to stop the blood. It was a large wound.
A bad wound. She had seen such wounds before. They always killed.

Yet, she still stood. Pewter, her confused mind thought. Flare pewter!

She did so, the metal giving her body strength, letting her stay on her feet.
The soldiers stepped back to let the second Inquisitor approach her from the
side. Vin looked in horror from one Inquisitor to the other, both descending
upon her, blood pouring between her fingers and down her side. The lead
Inquisitor still carried the axelike weapon, its edge coated with blood. Her
blood.

I’m going to die, she thought with terror.

#### 
And then she heard it. Rain. It was faint, but her tin-ears picked it out
behind her. She spun, lurching through a door, and was rewarded by the sight of
a large archway on the other side of the room. Mist pooled at the room’s floor,
and rain slapped the stones outside.

Must have been where the guards came from, she thought. She kept her pewter
flared, amazed at how well her body still worked, and stumbled out into the
rain, reflexively clutching the leather book to her chest.

“You think to escape?” the lead Inquisitor asked from behind, his voice amused.

Numbly, Vin reached into the sky and Pulled against one of the palace’s many
spires. She heard the Inquisitor curse as she pitched into the air, hurling up
into the dark night.

The thousand spires rose around her. She Pulled against one, then switched to
another. The rain was strong now, and it made the night black. There was no
mist to reflect ambient light, and the stars were hidden by clouds above. Vin
couldn’t see where she was going; she had to use Allomancy to sense the
metallic tips of the spires, and hope there was nothing in between.

#### 
She hit a spire, catching hold of it in the night and pulling to a stop. Have
to bandage the wound . . . she thought weakly. She was beginning to grow numb,
her head cloudy despite her pewter and tin.

Something slammed against the spire above her, and she heard a low growl. Vin
Pushed off even as she felt the Inquisitor slash the air beside her.

She had one chance. Midjump, she Pulled herself sideways, toward a different
spire. At the same time, she Pushed against the book in her hands—it still had
bits of metal embedded into its cover. The book continued in the direction she
had been going, metal lines glowing weakly in the night. It was the only metal
she had on her.

Vin caught the next spire lightly, trying to make as little sound as possible.
She strained in the night, burning tin, the rainfall becoming a thunder in her
ears. Over it, she thought she heard the distinct sound of something hitting a
spire in the direction she had Pushed the book.

#### 
The Inquisitor had fallen for her ruse. Vin sighed, hanging from the spire,
rain splattering her body. She made sure her copper was still burning, Pulled
lightly against the spire to hold herself in place, and ripped off a piece of
her shirt to bandage the wound. Despite her numb mind, she couldn’t help
noticing how big the gash was.

Oh, Lord, she thought. Without pewter, she would have fallen unconscious long
ago. She should be dead.

Something sounded in the darkness. Vin felt a chill, looking up. All was black
around her.

#### 
It can’t be. He can’t—

Something slammed into her spire. Vin cried out, jumping away. She Pulled
herself toward another spire, caught it weakly, then immediately Pushed off
again. The Inquisitor followed, thuds sounding as he jumped from spire to spire
behind her.

He found me. He couldn’t see me, hear me, or sense me. But he found me.

Vin hit a spire, holding it by one hand, limply hanging in the night. Her
strength was nearly gone. I . . . have to get away . . . hide. . . .

Her hands were numb, and her mind felt nearly the same. Her fingers slipped
from the cold, wet metal of the spire, and she felt herself drop free into the
darkness.

She fell with the rain.

However, she went only a short distance before thudding against something
hard—the roof of a particularly tall bit of the palace. Dazed, she climbed to
her knees, crawling away from the spire, seeking a corner.

Hide . . . hide . . . hide . . .

She crawled weakly to the nook formed by another tower. She huddled against the
dark corner, lying in a deep puddle of ashy rainwater, arms wrapped around
herself. Her body was wet with rain and blood.

She thought, for just a moment, that she might have escaped.

A dark form thumped to the rooftop. The rain was letting up, and her tin
revealed a head set with two spikes, a body cloaked in a dark robe.

She was too weak to move, too weak to do more than shiver in the puddle of
water, clothing plastered to her skin. The Inquisitor turned toward her.

#### 
“Such a small, troubling thing you are,” he said. He stepped forward, but Vin
could barely hear his words.

It was growing dark again . . . no, it was just her mind. Her vision grew dark,
her eyes closing. Her wound didn’t hurt anymore. She couldn’t . . . even . . .
think. . . .

A sound, like shattering branches.

Then arms gripped her. Warm arms, not the arms of death. She forced her eyes
open.

“Kelsier?” she whispered.

But it wasn’t Kelsier’s face that looked back at her, streaked with concern. It
was a different, kinder face. She sighed in relief, drifting away as the strong
arms pulled her close, making her feel oddly safe in the terrible storms of
night.




