# MISTBORN

## PROLOGUE





MISTBORN

Sometimes, I worry that I’m not the hero everyone thinks I am.

The philosophers assure me that this is the time, that the signs have been met.
But I still wonder if they have the wrong man. So many people depend on me.
They say I will hold the future of the entire world on my arms.

What would they think if they knew that their champion—the Hero of Ages, their
savior—doubted himself? Perhaps they wouldn’t be shocked at all. In a way, this
is what worries me most. Maybe, in their hearts, they wonder—just as I do.

When they see me, do they see a liar?





* * *








ASH FELL FROM THE SKY.

Lord Tresting frowned, glancing up at the ruddy midday sky as his servants
scuttled forward, opening a parasol over Tresting and his distinguished guest.
Ashfalls weren’t that uncommon in the Final Empire, but Tresting had hoped to
avoid getting soot stains on his fine new suit coat and red vest, which had
just arrived via canal boat from Luthadel itself. Fortunately, there wasn’t
much wind; the parasol would likely be effective.

Tresting stood with his guest on a small hilltop patio that overlooked the
fields. Hundreds of people in brown smocks worked in the falling ash, caring
for the crops. There was a sluggishness to their efforts—but, of course, that
was the way of the skaa. The peasants were an indolent, unproductive lot. They
didn’t complain, of course; they knew better than that. Instead, they simply
worked with bowed heads, moving about their work with quiet apathy. The passing
whip of a taskmaster would force them into dedicated motion for a few moments,
but as soon as the taskmaster passed, they would return to their languor.

Tresting turned to the man standing beside him on the hill. “One would think,”
Tresting noted, “that a thousand years of working in fields would have bred
them to be a little more effective at it.”

The obligator turned, raising an eyebrow—the motion done as if to highlight his
most distinctive feature, the intricate tattoos that laced the skin around his
eyes. The tattoos were enormous, reaching all the way across his brow and up
the sides of his nose. This was a full prelan—a very important obligator
indeed. Tresting had his own, personal obligators back at the manor, but they
were only minor functionaries, with barely a few marks around their eyes. This
man had arrived from Luthadel with the same canal boat that had brought
Tresting’s new suit.

“You should see city skaa, Tresting,” the obligator said, turning back to watch
the skaa workers. “These are actually quite diligent compared to those inside
Luthadel. You have more . . . direct control over your skaa here. How many
would you say you lose a month?”

“Oh, a half dozen or so,” Tresting said. “Some to beatings, some to
exhaustion.”

“Runaways?”

“Never!” Tresting said. “When I first inherited this land from my father, I had
a few runaways—but I executed their families. The rest quickly lost heart. I’ve
never understood men who have trouble with their skaa—I find the creatures easy
to control, if you show a properly firm hand.”

The obligator nodded, standing quietly in his gray robes. He seemed
pleased—which was a good thing. The skaa weren’t actually Tresting’s property.
Like all skaa, they belonged to the Lord Ruler; Tresting only leased the
workers from his God, much in the same way he paid for the services of His
obligators.

The obligator looked down, checking his pocket watch, then glanced up at the
sun. Despite the ashfall, the sun was bright this day, shining a brilliant
crimson red behind the smoky blackness of the upper sky. Tresting removed a
handkerchief and wiped his brow, thankful for the parasol’s shade against the
midday heat.

“Very well, Tresting,” the obligator said. “I will carry your proposal to Lord
Venture, as requested. He will have a favorable report from me on your
operations here.”

Tresting held in a sigh of relief. An obligator was required to witness any
contract or business deal between noblemen. True, even a lowly obligator like
the ones Tresting employed could serve as such a witness—but it meant so much
more to impress Straff Venture’s own obligator.

The obligator turned toward him. “I will leave back down the canal this
afternoon.”

“So soon?” Tresting asked. “Wouldn’t you care to stay for supper?”

“No,” the obligator replied. “Though there is another matter I wish to discuss
with you. I came not only at the behest of Lord Venture, but to . . . look in
on some matters for the Canton of Inquisition. Rumors say that you like to
dally with your skaa women.”

Tresting felt a chill.

The obligator smiled; he likely meant it to be disarming, but Tresting only
found it eerie. “Don’t worry yourself, Tresting,” the obligator said. “If there
had been any real worries about your actions, a Steel Inquisitor would have
been sent here in my place.”

Tresting nodded slowly. Inquisitor. He’d never seen one of the inhuman
creatures, but he had heard . . . stories.

“I have been satisfied regarding your actions with the skaa women,” the
obligator said, looking back over the fields. “What I’ve seen and heard here
indicate that you always clean up your messes. A man such as
yourself—efficient, productive—could go far in Luthadel. A few more years of
work, some inspired mercantile deals, and who knows?”

The obligator turned away, and Tresting found himself smiling. It wasn’t a
promise, or even an endorsement—for the most part, obligators were more
bureaucrats and witnesses than they were priests—but to hear such praise from
one of the Lord Ruler’s own servants . . . Tresting knew that some nobility
considered the obligators to be unsettling—some men even considered them a
bother—but at that moment, Testing could have kissed his distinguished guest.

Tresting turned back toward the skaa, who worked quietly beneath the bloody sun
and the lazy flakes of ash. Tresting had always been a country nobleman, living
on his plantation, dreaming of perhaps moving into Luthadel itself. He had
heard of the balls and the parties, the glamour and the intrigue, and it
excited him to no end.

I’ll have to celebrate tonight, he thought. There was that young girl in the
fourteenth hovel that he’d been watching for some time. . . .

He smiled again. A few more years of work, the obligator had said. But could
Tresting perhaps speed that up, if he worked a little harder? His skaa
population had been growing lately. Perhaps if he pushed them a bit more, he
could bring in an extra harvest this summer and fulfill his contract with Lord
Venture in extra measure.

Tresting nodded as he watched the crowd of lazy skaa, some working with their
hoes, others on hands and knees, pushing the ash away from the fledgling crops.
They didn’t complain. They didn’t hope. They barely dared think. That was the
way it should be, for they were skaa. They were—

Tresting froze as one of the skaa looked up. The man met Tresting’s eyes, a
spark—no, a fire—of defiance showing in his expression. Tresting had never seen
anything like it, not in the face of a skaa. Tresting stepped backward
reflexively, a chill running through him as the strange, straight-backed skaa
held his eyes.

And smiled.

Tresting looked away. “Kurdon!” he snapped.

The burly taskmaster rushed up the incline. “Yes, my lord?”

Tresting turned, pointing at . . .

He frowned. Where had that skaa been standing? Working with their heads bowed,
bodies stained by soot and sweat, they were so hard to tell apart. Tresting
paused, searching. He thought he knew the place . . . an empty spot, where
nobody now stood.

But, no. That couldn’t be it. The man couldn’t have disappeared from the group
so quickly. Where would he have gone? He must be in there, somewhere, working
with his head now properly bowed. Still, his moment of apparent defiance was
inexcusable.

“My lord?” Kurdon asked again.

The obligator stood at the side, watching curiously. It would not be wise to
let the man know that one of the skaa had acted so brazenly.

“Work the skaa in that southern section a little harder,” Tresting ordered,
pointing. “I see them being sluggish, even for skaa. Beat a few of them.”

Kurdon shrugged, but nodded. It wasn’t much of a reason for a beating—but,
then, he didn’t need much of a reason to give the workers a beating.

They were, after all, only skaa.



Kelsier had heard stories.

He had heard whispers of times when once, long ago, the sun had not been red.
Times when the sky hadn’t been clogged by smoke and ash, when plants hadn’t
struggled to grow, and when skaa hadn’t been slaves. Times before the Lord
Ruler. Those days, however, were nearly forgotten. Even the legends were
growing vague.

Kelsier watched the sun, his eyes following the giant red disk as it crept
toward the western horizon. He stood quietly for a long moment, alone in the
empty fields. The day’s work was done; the skaa had been herded back to their
hovels. Soon the mists would come.

Eventually, Kelsier sighed, then turned to pick his way across the furrows and
pathways, weaving between large heaps of ash. He avoided stepping on the
plants—though he wasn’t sure why he bothered. The crops hardly seemed worth the
effort. Wan, with wilted brown leaves, the plants seemed as depressed as the
people who tended them.

The skaa hovels loomed in the waning light. Already, Kelsier could see the
mists beginning to form, clouding the air, and giving the moundlike buildings a
surreal, intangible look. The hovels stood unguarded; there was no need for
watchers, for no skaa would venture outside once night arrived. Their fear of
the mists was far too strong.

I’ll have to cure them of that someday, Kelsier thought as he approached one of
the larger buildings. But, all things in their own time. He pulled open the
door and slipped inside.

Conversation stopped immediately. Kelsier closed the door, then turned with a
smile to confront the room of about thirty skaa. A firepit burned weakly at the
center, and the large cauldron beside it was filled with vegetable-dappled
water—the beginnings of an evening meal. The soup would be bland, of course.
Still, the smell was enticing.

“Good evening, everyone,” Kelsier said with a smile, resting his pack beside
his feet and leaning against the door. “How was your day?”

His words broke the silence, and the women returned to their dinner
preparations. A group of men sitting at a crude table, however, continued to
regard Kelsier with dissatisfied expressions.

“Our day was filled with work, traveler,” said Tepper, one of the skaa elders.
“Something you managed to avoid.”

“Fieldwork hasn’t ever really suited me,” Kelsier said. “It’s far too hard on
my delicate skin.” He smiled, holding up hands and arms that were lined with
layers and layers of thin scars. They covered his skin, running lengthwise, as
if some beast had repeatedly raked its claws up and down his arms.

Tepper snorted. He was young to be an elder, probably barely into his
forties—at most, he might be five years Kelsier’s senior. However, the scrawny
man held himself with the air of one who liked to be in charge.

“This is no time for levity,” Tepper said sternly. “When we harbor a traveler,
we expect him to behave himself and avoid suspicion. When you ducked away from
the fields this morning, you could have earned a whipping for the men around
you.”

“True,” Kelsier said. “But those men could also have been whipped for standing
in the wrong place, for pausing too long, or for coughing when a taskmaster
walked by. I once saw a man beaten because his master claimed that he had
‘blinked inappropriately.’ ”

Tepper sat with narrow eyes and a stiff posture, his arm resting on the table.
His expression was unyielding.

Kelsier sighed, rolling his eyes. “Fine. If you want me to go, I’ll be off
then.” He slung his pack up on his shoulder and nonchalantly pulled open the
door.

Thick mist immediately began to pour through the portal, drifting lazily across
Kelsier’s body, pooling on the floor and creeping across the dirt like a
hesitant animal. Several people gasped in horror, though most of them were too
stunned to make a sound. Kelsier stood for a moment, staring out into the dark
mists, their shifting currents lit feebly by the cooking pit’s coals.

“Close the door.” Tepper’s words were a plea, not a command.

Kelsier did as requested, pushing the door closed and stemming the flood of
white mist. “The mist is not what you think. You fear it far too much.”

“Men who venture into the mist lose their souls,” a woman whispered. Her words
raised a question. Had Kelsier walked in the mists? What, then, had happened to
his soul?

If you only knew, Kelsier thought. “Well, I guess this means I’m staying.” He
waved for a boy to bring him a stool. “It’s a good thing, too—it would have
been a shame for me to leave before I shared my news.”

More than one person perked up at the comment. This was the real reason they
tolerated him—the reason even the timid peasants would harbor a man such as
Kelsier, a skaa who defied the Lord Ruler’s will by traveling from plantation
to plantation. A renegade he might be—a danger to the entire community—but he
brought news from the outside world.

“I come from the north,” Kelsier said. “From lands where the Lord Ruler’s touch
is less noticeable.” He spoke in a clear voice, and people leaned unconsciously
toward him as they worked. On the next day, Kelsier’s words would be repeated
to the several hundred people who lived in other hovels. The skaa might be
subservient, but they were incurable gossips.

“Local lords rule in the West,” Kelsier said, “and they are far from the iron
grip of the Lord Ruler and his obligators. Some of these distant noblemen are
finding that happy skaa make better workers than mistreated skaa. One man, Lord
Renoux, has even ordered his taskmasters to stop unauthorized beatings. There
are whispers that he’s considering paying wages to his plantation skaa, like
city craftsmen might earn.”

“Nonsense,” Tepper said.

“My apologies,” Kelsier said. “I didn’t realize that Goodman Tepper had been to
Lord Renoux’s estates recently. When you dined with him last, did he tell you
something that he did not tell me?”

Tepper blushed: Skaa did not travel, and they certainly didn’t dine with lords.
“You think me a fool, traveler,” Tepper said, “but I know what you’re doing.
You’re the one they call the Survivor; those scars on your arms give you away.
You’re a troublemaker—you travel the plantations, stirring up discontent. You
eat our food, telling your grand stories and your lies, then you disappear and
leave people like me to deal with the false hopes you give our children.”

Kelsier raised an eyebrow. “Now, now, Goodman Tepper,” he said. “Your worries
are completely unfounded. Why, I have no intention of eating your food. I
brought my own.” With that, Kelsier reached over and tossed his pack onto the
earth before Tepper’s table. The loose bag slumped to the side, dumping an
array of foods to the ground. Fine breads, fruits, and even a few thick, cured
sausages bounced free.

A summerfruit rolled across the packed earthen floor and bumped lightly against
Tepper’s foot. The middle-aged skaa regarded the fruit with stunned eyes.
“That’s nobleman’s food!”

Kelsier snorted. “Barely. You know, for a man of renowned prestige and rank,
your Lord Tresting has remarkably poor taste. His pantry is an embarrassment to
his noble station.”

Tepper paled even further. “That’s where you went this afternoon,” he
whispered. “You went to the manor. You . . . stole from the master!”

“Indeed,” Kelsier said. “And, might I add that while your lord’s taste in food
is deplorable, his eye for soldiers is far more impressive. Sneaking into his
manor during the day was quite a challenge.”

Tepper was still staring at the bag of food. “If the taskmasters find this here
. . .”

“Well, I suggest you make it disappear then,” Kelsier said. “I’d be willing to
bet that it tastes a fair bit better than watered-down farlet soup.”

Two dozen sets of hungry eyes studied the food. If Tepper intended further
arguments, he didn’t make them quickly enough, for his silent pause was taken
as agreement. Within a few minutes, the bag’s contents had been inspected and
distributed, and the pot of soup sat bubbling and ignored as the skaa feasted
on a meal far more exotic.

Kelsier settled back, leaning against the hovel’s wooden wall and watching the
people devour their food. He had spoken correctly: The pantry’s offerings had
been depressingly mundane. However, this was a people who had been fed on
nothing but soup and gruel since they were children. To them, breads and fruits
were rare delicacies—usually eaten only as aging discards brought down by the
house servants.

“Your storytelling was cut short, young man,” an elderly skaa noted, hobbling
over to sit on a stool beside Kelsier.

“Oh, I suspect there will be time for more later,” Kelsier said. “Once all
evidence of my thievery has been properly devoured. Don’t you want any of it?”

“No need,” the old man said. “The last time I tried lords’ food, I had stomach
pains for three days. New tastes are like new ideas, young man—the older you
get, the more difficult they are for you to stomach.”

Kelsier paused. The old man was hardly an imposing sight. His leathered skin
and bald scalp made him look more frail than they did wise. Yet, he had to be
stronger than he looked; few plantation skaa lived to such ages. Many lords
didn’t allow the elderly to remain home from daily work, and the frequent
beatings that made up a skaa’s life took a terrible toll on the elderly.

“What was your name again?” Kelsier asked.

“Mennis.”

Kelsier glanced back at Tepper. “So, Goodman Mennis, tell me something. Why do
you let him lead?”

Mennis shrugged. “When you get to be my age, you have to be very careful where
you waste your energy. Some battles just aren’t worth fighting.” There was an
implication in Mennis’s eyes; he was referring to things greater than his own
struggle with Tepper.

“You’re satisfied with this, then?” Kelsier asked, nodding toward the hovel and
its half-starved, overworked occupants. “You’re content with a life full of
beatings and endless drudgery?”

“At least it’s a life,” Mennis said. “I know what wages malcontent and
rebellion bring. The eye of the Lord Ruler, and the ire of the Steel Ministry,
can be far more terrible than a few whippings. Men like you preach change, but
I wonder. Is this a battle we can really fight?”

“You’re fighting it already, Goodman Mennis. You’re just losing horribly.”
Kelsier shrugged. “But, what do I know? I’m just a traveling miscreant, here to
eat your food and impress your youths.”

Mennis shook his head. “You jest, but Tepper might have been right. I fear your
visit will bring us grief.”

Kelsier smiled. “That’s why I didn’t contradict him—at least, not on the
troublemaker point.” He paused, then smiled more deeply. “In fact, I’d say
calling me a troublemaker is probably the only accurate thing Tepper has said
since I got here.”

“How do you do that?” Mennis asked, frowning.

“What?”

“Smile so much.”

“Oh, I’m just a happy person.”

Mennis glanced down at Kelsier’s hands. “You know, I’ve only seen scars like
those on one other person—and he was dead. His body was returned to Lord
Tresting as proof that his punishment had been carried out.” Mennis looked up
at Kelsier. “He’d been caught speaking of rebellion. Tresting sent him to the
Pits of Hathsin, where he had worked until he died. The lad lasted less than a
month.”

Kelsier glanced down at his hands and forearms. They still burned sometimes,
though he was certain the pain was only in his mind. He looked up at Mennis and
smiled. “You ask why I smile, Goodman Mennis? Well, the Lord Ruler thinks he
has claimed laughter and joy for himself. I’m disinclined to let him do so.
This is one battle that doesn’t take very much effort to fight.”

Mennis stared at Kelsier, and for a moment Kelsier thought the old man might
smile in return. However, Mennis eventually just shook his head. “I don’t know.
I just don’t—”

The scream cut him off. It came from outside, perhaps to the north, though the
mists distorted sounds. The people in the hovel fell silent, listening to the
faint, high-pitched yells. Despite the distance and the mist, Kelsier could
hear the pain contained in those screams.

Kelsier burned tin.

It was simple for him now, after years of practice. The tin sat with other
Allomantic metals within his stomach, swallowed earlier, waiting for him to
draw upon them. He reached inside with his mind and touched the tin, tapping
powers he still barely understood. The tin flared to life within him, burning
his stomach like the sensation of a hot drink swallowed too quickly.

Allomantic power surged through his body, enhancing his senses. The room around
him became crisp, the dull firepit flaring to near blinding brightness. He
could feel the grain in the wood of the stool beneath him. He could still taste
the remnants of the loaf of bread he’d snacked on earlier. Most importantly, he
could hear the screams with supernatural ears. Two separate people were
yelling. One was an older woman, the other a younger woman—perhaps a child. The
younger screams were getting farther and farther away.

“Poor Jess,” a nearby woman said, her voice booming in Kelsier’s enhanced ears.
“That child of hers was a curse. It’s better for skaa not to have pretty
daughters.”

Tepper nodded. “Lord Tresting was sure to send for the girl sooner or later. We
all knew it. Jess knew it.”

“Still a shame, though,” another man said.

The screams continued in the distance. Burning tin, Kelsier was able to judge
the direction accurately. Her voice was moving toward the lord’s manor. The
sounds set something off within him, and he felt his face flush with anger.

Kelsier turned. “Does Lord Tresting ever return the girls after he’s finished
with them?”

Old Mennis shook his head. “Lord Tresting is a law-abiding nobleman—he has the
girls killed after a few weeks. He doesn’t want to catch the eye of the
Inquisitors.”

That was the Lord Ruler’s command. He couldn’t afford to have half-breed
children running around—children who might possess powers that skaa weren’t
even supposed to know existed. . . .

The screams waned, but Kelsier’s anger only built. The yells reminded him of
other screams. A woman’s screams from the past. He stood abruptly, stool
toppling to the ground behind him.

“Careful, lad,” Mennis said apprehensively. “Remember what I said about wasting
energy. You’ll never raise that rebellion of yours if you get yourself killed
tonight.”

Kelsier glanced toward the old man. Then, through the screams and the pain, he
forced himself to smile. “I’m not here to lead a rebellion among you, Goodman
Mennis. I just want to stir up a little trouble.”

“What good could that do?”

Kelsier’s smile deepened. “New days are coming. Survive a little longer, and
you just might see great happenings in the Final Empire. I bid you all thanks
for your hospitality.”

With that, he pulled open the door and strode out into the mist.



Mennis lay awake in the early hours of morning. It seemed that the older he
became, the more difficult it was for him to sleep. This was particularly true
when he was troubled about something, such as the traveler’s failure to return
to the hovel.

Mennis hoped that Kelsier had come to his senses and decided to move on.
However, that prospect seemed unlikely; Mennis had seen the fire in Kelsier’s
eyes. It seemed such a shame that a man who had survived the Pits would instead
find death here, on a random plantation, trying to protect a girl everyone else
had given up for dead.

How would Lord Tresting react? He was said to be particularly harsh with anyone
who interrupted his nighttime enjoyments. If Kelsier had managed to disturb the
master’s pleasures, Tresting might easily decide to punish the rest of his skaa
by association.

Eventually, the other skaa began to awake. Mennis lay on the hard earth—bones
aching, back complaining, muscles exhausted—trying to decide if it was worth
rising. Each day, he nearly gave up. Each day, it was a little harder. One day,
he would just stay in the hovel, waiting until the taskmasters came to kill
those who were too sick or too elderly to work.

But not today. He could see too much fear in the eyes of the skaa—they knew
that Kelsier’s nighttime activities would bring trouble. They needed Mennis;
they looked to him. He needed to get up.

And so he did. Once he started moving, the pains of age decreased slightly, and
he was able to shuffle out of the hovel toward the fields, leaning on a younger
man for support.

It was then that he caught a scent in the air. “What’s that?” he asked. “Do you
smell smoke?”

Shum—the lad upon whom Mennis leaned—paused. The last remnants of the night’s
mist had burned away, and the red sun was rising behind the sky’s usual haze of
blackish clouds.

“I always smell smoke, lately,” Shum said. “The Ashmounts are violent this
year.”

“No,” Mennis said, feeling increasingly apprehensive. “This is different.” He
turned to the north, toward where a group of skaa were gathering. He let go of
Shum, shuffling toward the group, feet kicking up dust and ash as he moved.

At the center of the group of people, he found Jess. Her daughter, the one they
all assumed had been taken by Lord Tresting, stood beside her. The young girl’s
eyes were red from lack of sleep, but she appeared unharmed.

“She came back not long after they took her,” the woman was explaining. “She
came and pounded on the door, crying in the mist. Flen was sure it was just a
mistwraith impersonating her, but I had to let her in! I don’t care what he
says, I’m not giving her up. I brought her out in the sunlight, and she didn’t
disappear. That proves she’s not a mistwraith!”

Mennis stumbled back from the growing crowd. Did none of them see it? No
taskmasters came to break up the group. No soldiers came to make the morning
population counts. Something was very wrong. Mennis continued to the north,
moving frantically toward the manor house.

By the time he arrived, others had noticed the twisting line of smoke that was
just barely visible in the morning light. Mennis wasn’t the first to arrive at
the edge of the short hilltop plateau, but the group made way for him when he
did.

The manor house was gone. Only a blackened, smoldering scar remained.

“By the Lord Ruler!” Mennis whispered. “What happened here?”

“He killed them all.”

Mennis turned. The speaker was Jess’s girl. She stood looking down at the
fallen house, a satisfied expression on her youthful face.

“They were dead when he brought me out,” she said. “All of them—the soldiers,
the taskmasters, the lords . . . dead. Even Lord Tresting and his obligators.
The master had left me, going to investigate when the noises began. On the way
out, I saw him lying in his own blood, stab wounds in his chest. The man who
saved me threw a torch in the building as we left.”

“This man,” Mennis said. “He had scars on his hands and arms, reaching past the
elbows?”

The girl nodded silently.

“What kind of demon was that man?” one of the skaa muttered uncomfortably.

“Mistwraith,” another whispered, apparently forgetting that Kelsier had gone
out during the day.

But he did go out into the mist, Mennis thought. And, how did he accomplish a
feat like this . . .? Lord Tresting kept over two dozen soldiers! Did Kelsier
have a hidden band of rebels, perhaps?

Kelsier’s words from the night before sounded in his ears. New days are coming.
. . .

“But, what of us?” Tepper asked, terrified. “What will happen when the Lord
Ruler hears this? He’ll think that we did it! He’ll send us to the Pits, or
maybe just send his koloss to slaughter us outright! Why would that
troublemaker do something like this? Doesn’t he understand the damage he’s
done?”

“He understands,” Mennis said. “He warned us, Tepper. He came to stir up
trouble.”

“But, why?”

“Because he knew we’d never rebel on our own, so he gave us no choice.”

Tepper paled.

Lord Ruler, Mennis thought. I can’t do this. I can barely get up in the
mornings—I can’t save this people.

But what other choice was there?

Mennis turned. “Gather the people, Tepper. We must flee before word of this
disaster reaches the Lord Ruler.”

“Where will we go?”

“The caves to the east,” Mennis said. “Travelers say there are rebel skaa
hiding in them. Perhaps they’ll take us in.”

Tepper paled further. “But . . . we’d have to travel for days. Spend nights in
the mist.”

“We can do that,” Mennis said, “or we can stay here and die.”

Tepper stood frozen for a moment, and Mennis thought the shock of it all might
have overwhelmed him. Eventually, however, the younger man scurried off to
gather the others, as commanded.

Mennis sighed, looking up toward the trailing line of smoke, cursing the man
Kelsier quietly in his mind.

New days indeed.





