# PART TWO

## 9


### Epigraph

#### Epigraph

REBELS BENEATH

A SKY OF ASH





* * *





In the end, I worry that my arrogance shall destroy us all.




### Vin is goes through training with both Kelsier and Sazed as she is made more ladylike for her role as a mole in nobility

#### Vin and an unknown opponent are in a magic sparring match

9



VIN PUSHED AGAINST THE COIN and threw herself up into the mist. She flew away
from earth and stone, soaring through the dark currents of the sky, wind
fluttering her cloak.

This is freedom, she thought, breathing deeply of the cool, damp air. She
closed her eyes, feeling the passing wind. This was what I was always missing,
yet never knew it.

She opened her eyes as she began to descend. She waited until the last moment,
then flicked a coin. It hit the cobblestones, and she Pushed against it
lightly, slowing her descent. She burned pewter with a flash and hit the ground
running, dashing along Fellise’s quiet streets. The late-autumn air was cool,
but winters were generally mild in the Central Dominance. Some years passed
without even a flake of snow.

She tossed a coin backward, then used it to Push herself slightly up and to the
right. She landed on a low stone wall, barely breaking stride as she ran spryly
along the wall’s top. Burning pewter enhanced more than muscles—it increased
all the body’s physical abilities. Keeping pewter at a low burn gave her a
sense of balance that any night burglar would have envied.

The wall turned north, and Vin paused at the corner. She fell into a crouch,
bare feet and sensitive fingers gripping the chill stone. Her copper on to hide
her Allomancy, she flared tin to strain her senses.

Stillness. Aspens made insubstantial ranks in the mist, like emaciated skaa
standing in their work lines. Estates rolled in the distance—each one walled,
manicured, and well guarded. There were far fewer dots of light in the city
than there were in Luthadel. Many of the homes were only part-time residences,
their masters away visiting some other sliver of the Final Empire.

Blue lines suddenly appeared before her—one end of each pointing at her chest,
the other disappearing into the mists. Vin immediately jumped to the side,
dodging as a pair of coins shot past in the night air, leaving trails in the
mist. She flared pewter, landing on the cobbled street beside the wall. Her
tin-enhanced ears picked out a scraping sound; then a dark form shot into the
sky, a few blue lines pointing to his coin pouch.

Vin dropped a coin and threw herself into the air after her opponent. They
soared for a moment, flying over the grounds of some unsuspecting nobleman.
Vin’s opponent suddenly changed course in the air, jerking toward the mansion
itself. Vin followed, letting go of the coin below her, instead burning iron
and Pulling on one of the mansion’s window latches.

Her opponent hit first, and she heard a thud as he ran into the side of the
building. He was off a second later.

A light brightened, and a confused head poked out of a window as Vin spun in
the air, landing feet-first against the mansion. She immediately kicked off of
the vertical surface, angling herself slightly and Pushing against the same
window latch. Glass cracked, and she shot away into the night before gravity
could reclaim her.

Vin flew through the mists, eyes straining to keep track of her quarry. He shot
a couple of coins back at her, but she Pushed them away with a dismissive
thought. A hazy blue line fell downward—a dropped coin—and her opponent moved
to the side again.

Vin dropped her own coin and Pushed. However, her coin suddenly jerked backward
along the ground—the result of a Push from her opponent. The sudden move
changed the trajectory of Vin’s jump, throwing her sideways. She cursed,
flicking another coin to the side, using it to Push herself back on track. By
then, she’d lost her quarry.

All right . . . she thought, hitting the soft ground just inside the wall. She
emptied a few coins into her hand, then tossed the mostly full pouch into the
air, giving it a strong Push in the direction she had seen her quarry
disappear. The pouch disappeared into the mists, trailing a faint blue
Allomantic line.

A scattering of coins suddenly shot from the bushes ahead, streaking toward her
bag. Vin smiled. Her opponent had assumed that the flying pouch was Vin
herself. He was too far away to see the coins in her hand, just as he had been
too far away for her to see the coins he carried.

A dark figure jumped out of the bushes, hopping up onto the stone wall. Vin
waited quietly as the figure ran along the wall and slipped down onto the other
side.

Vin launched herself straight up into the air, then threw her handful of coins
at the figure passing below. He immediately Pushed, sending the coins streaking
away—but they were only a distraction. Vin landed on the ground before him,
twin glass knives whipping from her sheathes. She lunged, slashing, but her
opponent jumped backward.

Something’s wrong. Vin ducked and threw herself to the side as a handful of
glittering coins—her coins, the ones her opponent had Pushed away—shot back
down from the sky into her opponent’s hand. He turned and sprayed them in her
direction.

Vin dropped her daggers with a quiet yelp, thrusting her hands forward and
Pushing on the coins. Immediately, she was thrown backward as her Push was
matched by her opponent.

One of the coins lurched in the air, hanging directly between the two of them.
The rest of the coins disappeared into the mists, pushed sideways by
conflicting forces.

Vin flared her steel as she flew, and heard her opponent grunt as he was Pushed
backward as well. Her opponent hit the wall. Vin slammed into a tree, but she
flared pewter and ignored the pain. She used the wood to brace herself,
continuing to Push.

The coin quivered in the air, trapped between the amplified strength of two
Allomancers. The pressure increased. Vin gritted her teeth, feeling the small
aspen bend behind her.

Her opponent’s Pushing was relentless.

Will . . . not . . . be beaten! Vin thought, flaring both steel and pewter,
grunting slightly as she threw the entire force of her strength at the coin.

There was a moment of silence. Then Vin lurched backward, the tree cracking
with a loud snap in the night air.

Vin hit the ground in a tumble, splinters of wood scattering around her. Even
tin and pewter weren’t enough to keep her mind clear as she rolled across the
cobblestones, eventually coming to a dizzy rest. A dark figure approached,
mistcloak ribbons billowing around him. Vin lurched to her feet, grasping for
knives she’d forgotten that she’d dropped.

#### The opponent is revaled to be Kelsier, who is training her
Kelsier put down his hood and held her knives toward her. One was broken. “I
know it’s instinctual, Vin, but you don’t have to put your hands forward when
you Push—nor do you have to drop what you’re holding.”

Vin grimaced in the darkness, rubbing her shoulder and nodding as she accepted
the daggers.

“Nice job with the pouch,” Kelsier said. “You had me for a moment.”

“For all the good it did,” Vin grumbled.

“You’ve only been doing this for a few months, Vin,” he said lightly. “All
things considered, your progress is fantastic. I would, however, recommend that
you avoid Push-matches with people who weigh more than you.” He paused, eyeing
Vin’s short figure and thin frame. “Which probably means avoiding them with
pretty much everybody.”

Vin sighed, stretching slightly. She’d have more bruises. At least they won’t
be visible. Now that the bruises Camon had given her face were finally gone,
Sazed had warned her to be careful. Makeup could only cover so much, and she
would have to look like a “proper” young noblewoman if she were going to
infiltrate the court.

“Here,” Kelsier said, handing her something. “A souvenir.”

Vin held up the object—the coin they had Pushed between them. It was bent and
flattened from the pressure.

“I’ll see you back at the mansion,” Kelsier said.

#### Vin thinks through what she is to have to do, comparing Allomancy to her task in nobility
Vin nodded, and Kelsier disappeared into the night. He’s right, she thought.
I’m smaller, I weigh less, and I have a shorter reach than anyone I’m likely to
fight. If I attack someone head on, I’ll lose.

The alternative had always been her method anyway—to struggle quietly, to stay
unseen. She had to learn to use Allomancy the same way. Kelsier kept saying
that she was developing amazingly fast as an Allomancer. He seemed to think it
was his teaching, but Vin felt it was something else. The mists . . . the night
prowling . . . it all felt right to her. She was not worried about mastering
Allomancy in time to help Kelsier against other Mistborn.

It was her other part in the plan that worried her.

Sighing, Vin hopped over the wall to search for her coin pouch. Up at the
mansion—not Renoux’s home, but one owned by some other nobleman—lights were on
and people milled about. None of them ventured deeply into the night. The skaa
would fear mistwraiths; the nobility would have guessed that Mistborn had
caused the disturbance. Neither one was something a sane person would want to
confront.

Vin eventually traced her pouch by steel-line to the upper branches of a tree.
She Pulled it slightly, tugging it down into her hand, then made her way back
out to the street. Kelsier probably would have left the pouch behind—the two
dozen or so clips it contained wouldn’t have been worth his time. However, for
most of her life Vin had scrounged and starved. She just couldn’t force herself
to be wasteful. Even tossing coins to jump with made her uncomfortable.

So, she used her coins sparingly as she traveled back toward Renoux’s mansion,
instead Pushing and Pulling off of buildings and discarded bits of metal. The
half-jumping, half-running gait of a Mistborn came naturally to her now, and
she didn’t have to think much about her movements.

How would she fare, trying to pretend to be a noblewoman? She couldn’t hide her
apprehensions, not from herself. Camon had been good at imitating noblemen
because of his self-confidence, and that was one attribute Vin knew she didn’t
have. Her success with Allomancy only proved that her place was in corners and
shadows, not striding around in pretty dresses at courtly balls.

Kelsier, however, refused to let her back out. Vin landed in a crouch just
outside Mansion Renoux, puffing slightly from exertion. She regarded the lights
with a slight feeling of apprehension.

You’ve got to learn to do this, Vin, Kelsier kept telling her. You’re a
talented Allomancer, but you’ll need more than Steel-pushes to succeed against
the nobility. Until you can move in their society as easily as you do in the
mists, you’ll be at a disadvantage.

Letting out a quiet sigh, Vin rose from her crouch, then took off her mistcloak
and stuffed it away for later retrieval. Then she walked up the steps and into
the building. When she asked after Sazed, the mansion servants directed her to
the kitchens, so she made her way into the closed-off, hidden section of the
mansion that was the servants’ quarters.

Even these parts of the building were kept immaculately clean. Vin was
beginning to understand why Renoux made such a convincing impostor: He didn’t
allow for imperfection. If he maintained his impersonation half as well as he
maintained order in his mansion, then Vin doubted anyone would ever discover
the ruse.

But, she thought, he must have some flaw. Back in the meeting two months ago,
Kelsier said that Renoux wouldn’t be able to withstand scrutiny by an
Inquisitor. Perhaps they’d be able to sense something about his emotions,
something that gives him away?

It was a small item, but Vin had not forgotten it. Despite Kelsier’s words
about honesty and trust, he still had his secrets. Everyone did.

#### Vin finds Sazed in the kitchens, who instructs a barber named Cosahn to cut her hair all lady like
Sazed was, indeed, to be found in the kitchens. He stood with a middle-aged
servant. She was tall for a skaa woman—though standing next to Sazed made her
look diminutive. Vin recognized her as a member of the mansion staff; Cosahn
was her name. Vin had made an effort to memorize all of the names of the local
staff, if only to keep tabs on them.

Sazed looked over as Vin entered. “Ah, Mistress Vin. Your return is quite
timely.” He gestured to his companion. “This is Cosahn.”

Cosahn studied Vin with a businesslike air. Vin longed to return to the mists,
where people couldn’t look at her like that.

“It is long enough now, I think,” Sazed said.

“Probably,” Cosahn said. “But I cannot perform miracles, Master Vaht.”

Sazed nodded. “Vaht” was, apparently, the proper title for a Terrisman steward.
Not quite skaa, but definitely not noblemen, the Terrismen held a very strange
place in imperial society.

Vin studied the two of them suspiciously.

“Your hair, Mistress,” Sazed said with a calm tone. “Cosahn is going to cut it
for you.”

“Oh,” Vin said, reaching up. Her hair was getting a bit long for her
taste—though somehow she doubted that Sazed was going to let her have it
cropped boyishly short.

Cosahn waved to a chair, and Vin reluctantly seated herself. She found it
unnerving to sit docilely while someone worked with shears so close to her
head, but there was no getting around it.

After a few moments of running her hands through Vin’s hair, “tisk”ing quietly,
Cosahn began to snip. “Such beautiful hair,” she said, almost as if to herself,
“thick, with a nice deep black color. It’s a shame to see it cared for so
poorly, Master Vaht. Many courtly women would die for hair like this—it has
just enough body to lie full, but is straight enough to work with easily.”

Sazed smiled. “We’ll have to see that it receives better care in the future,”
he said.

Cosahn continued her work, nodding to herself. Eventually, Sazed walked over
and took a seat just a few feet in front of Vin.

“Kelsier hasn’t returned yet, I assume?” Vin asked.

Sazed shook his head, and Vin sighed. Kelsier didn’t think she was practiced
enough go with him on his nightly raids, many of which he went on directly
following his training sessions with Vin. During the last two months, Kelsier
had put in appearances on the properties of a dozen different noble houses,
both in Luthadel and in Fellise. He varied his disguises and apparent motives,
trying to create an air of confusion among the Great Houses.

#### Sanderson imposes his opinion of religion on us through Sazed
“What?” Vin asked, eyeing Sazed, who was regarding her with a curious look.

The Terrisman nodded his head slightly with respect. “I was wondering if you
might be willing to listen to another proposal.”

Vin sighed, rolling her eyes. “Fine.” It isn’t like I can do anything else but
sit here.

“I think I have the perfect religion for you,” Sazed said, his normally stoic
face revealing a glimmer of eagerness. “It is called ‘Trelagism,’ after the god
Trell. Trell was worshipped by a group known as the Nelazan, a people who lived
far to the north. In their land, the day and night cycle was very odd. During
some months of the year, it was dark for most of the day. During the summer,
however, it only grew dark for a few hours at a time.

“The Nelazan believed that there was beauty in darkness, and that the daylight
was more profane. They saw the stars as the Thousand Eyes of Trell watching
them. The sun was the single, jealous eye of Trell’s brother, Nalt. Since Nalt
only had one eye, he made it blaze brightly to outshine his brother. The
Nelazan, however, were not impressed, and preferred to worship the quiet Trell,
who watched over them even when Nalt obscured the sky.”

Sazed fell silent. Vin wasn’t sure how to respond, so she didn’t say anything.

“It really is a good religion, Mistress Vin,” Sazed said. “Very gentle, yet
very powerful. The Nelazan were not an advanced people, but they were quite
determined. They mapped the entire night sky, counting and placing every major
star. Their ways suit you—especially their preference of the night. I can tell
you more, if you wish.”

Vin shook her head. “That’s all right, Sazed.”

“Not a good fit, then?” Sazed said, frowning slightly. “Ah, well. I shall have
to consider it some more. Thank you, Mistress—you are very patient with me, I
think.”

“Consider it some more?” Vin asked. “That’s the fifth religion you’ve tried to
convert me to, Saze. How many more can there be?”

“Five hundred and sixty two,” Sazed said. “Or, at least, that is the number of
belief systems I know. There are, likely and unfortunately, others that have
passed from this world without leaving traces for my people to collect.”

Vin paused. “And you have all of these religions memorized?”

“As much as is possible,” Sazed said. “Their prayers, their beliefs, their
mythologies. Many are very similar—breakoffs or sects of one another.”

“Even still, how can you remember all of that?”

“I have . . . methods,” Sazed said.

“But, what’s the point?”

Sazed frowned. “The answer should be obvious, I think. People are valuable,
Mistress Vin, and so—therefore—are their beliefs. Since the Ascension a
thousand years ago, so many beliefs have disappeared. The Steel Ministry
forbids the worship of anyone but the Lord Ruler, and the Inquisitors have
quite diligently destroyed hundreds of religions. If someone doesn’t remember
them, then they will simply disappear.”

“You mean,” Vin said incredulously, “you’re trying to get me to believe in
religions that have been dead for a thousand years?”

Sazed nodded.

Is everyone involved with Kelsier insane?

#### Sazed quizes Vin on the background of the world and the nobility
“The Final Empire cannot last forever,” Sazed said quietly. “I do not know if
Master Kelsier will be the one who finally brings its end, but that end will
come. And when it does—when the Steel Ministry no longer holds sway—men will
wish to return to the beliefs of their fathers. On that day they will look to
the Keepers, and on that day we shall return to mankind his forgotten truths.”

“Keepers?” Vin asked as Cosahn moved around to begin snipping at her bangs.
“There are more like you?”

“Not many,” Sazed said. “But some. Enough to pass the truths on to the next
generation.”

Vin sat thoughtfully, resisting the urge to squirm beneath Cosahn’s
ministrations. The woman certainly was taking her time—when Reen had cut Vin’s
hair, he had been finished after just a few quick hacks.

“Shall we go over your lessons while we wait, Mistress Vin?” Sazed asked.

Vin eyed the Terrisman, and he smiled just slightly. He knew that he had her
captive; she couldn’t hide, or even sit at the window, staring out into the
mists. All she could do was sit and listen. “Fine.”

“Can you name all ten Great Houses of Luthadel in order of power?”

“Venture, Hasting, Elariel, Tekiel, Lekal, Erikeller, Erikell, Haught, Urbain,
and Buvidas.”

“Good,” Sazed said. “And you are?”

“I am the Lady Valette Renoux, fourth cousin to Lord Teven Renoux, who owns
this mansion. My parents—Lord Hadren and Lady Fellette Renoux—live in Chakath,
a city in the Western Dominance. Major export, wool. My family works in trading
dyes, specifically blushdip red, from the snails that are common there, and
callowfield yellow, made from tree bark. As part of a trade agreement with
their distant cousin, my parents sent me down here to Luthadel, so I can spend
some time at court.”

Sazed nodded. “And how do you feel about this opportunity?”

“I am amazed and a little overwhelmed,” Vin said. “People will pay attention to
me because they wish to curry favor with Lord Renoux. Since I’m not familiar
with the ways of court, I will be flattered by their attention. I will
ingratiate myself to the court community, but I will stay quiet and out of
trouble.”

“Your memorization skills are admirable, Mistress,” Sazed said. “This humble
attendant wonders how much more successful might you be if you dedicated
yourself to learning, rather than dedicating yourself to avoiding our lessons.”

Vin eyed him. “Do all Terrisman ‘humble attendants’ give their masters as much
lip as you do?”

“Only the successful ones.”

Vin eyed him for a moment, then sighed. “I’m sorry, Saze. I don’t mean to avoid
your lessons. I just . . . the mists . . . I get distracted sometimes.”

“Well, fortunately and honestly, you are very quick to learn. However, the
people of the court have had their entire lives to study etiquette. Even as a
rural noblewoman, there are certain things you would know.”

“I know,” Vin said. “I don’t want to stand out.”

“Oh, you can’t avoid that, Mistress. A newcomer, from a distant part of the
empire? Yes, they will notice you. We just don’t want to make them suspicious.
You must be considered, then dismissed. If you act too much like a fool, that
will be suspect in and of itself.”

Great.

#### Kelsier comes in and fetches Sazed off for a while
Sazed paused, cocking his head slightly. A few seconds later, Vin heard
footsteps in the hallway outside. Kelsier sauntered into the room, bearing a
self-satisfied smile. He pulled off his mistcloak, then paused as he saw Vin.

“What?” she asked, sinking a little further into the chair.

“The haircut looks good,” Kelsier said. “Nice job, Cosahn.”

“It was nothing, Master Kelsier.” Vin could hear the blush in her voice. “I
just work with what I have.”

“Mirror,” Vin said, holding out her hand.

Cosahn handed her one. Vin held it up, and what she saw gave her pause. She
looked . . . like a girl.

Cosahn had done a remarkable job of evening out the hair, and she had managed
to get rid of the snags. Vin had always found that if her hair got too long, it
had a tendency to stand up. Cosahn had done something about this too. Vin’s
hair still wasn’t very long—it barely hung down over her ears—but at least it
lay flat.

You don’t want them to think of you as a girl, Reen’s voice warned. Yet, for
once, she found herself wanting to ignore that voice.

“We might actually turn you into a lady, Vin!” Kelsier said with a laugh,
earning him a glare from Vin.

“First we’ll have to persuade her not to scowl so often, Master Kelsier,” Sazed
noted.

“That’s going to be hard,” Kelsier said. “She’s quite fond of making faces.
Anyway, well done, Cosahn.”

“I’ve still got a little bit of trimming to do, Master Kelsier,” the woman
said.

“By all means, continue,” Kelsier said. “But I’m going to filch Sazed for a
moment.”

Kelsier winked at Vin, smiled at Cosahn, then he and Sazed retreated from the
room—once again leaving Vin where she couldn’t eavesdrop.



### Sazed and Keliser discuss the potential of Vin

#### Sazed and Kelsier discuss Vin
Kelsier peeked into the kitchen, watching Vin sit sullenly in her chair. The
haircut really was good. However, his compliments had an ulterior motive—he
suspected that Vin had spent far too much of her life being told that she was
worthless. Perhaps if she had a bit more self-confidence, she wouldn’t try to
hide so much.

He let the door slide shut, turning to Sazed. The Terrisman waited, as always,
with restful patience.

“How is the training going?” Kelsier asked.

“Very well, Master Kelsier,” Sazed said. “She already knew some things from
training she received at her brother’s hands. Above that, however, she is an
extremely intelligent girl—perceptive and quick to memorize. I didn’t expect
such skill from one who grew up in her circumstances.”

“A lot of the street children are clever,” Kelsier said. “The ones who aren’t
dead.”

Sazed nodded solemnly. “She is extremely reserved, and I sense that she doesn’t
see the full value in my lessons. She is very obedient, but is quick to exploit
mistakes or misunderstandings. If I don’t tell her exactly when and where to
meet, I often have to search the entire mansion for her.”

Kelsier nodded. “I think it’s her way of maintaining a bit of control in her
life. Anyway, what I really wanted to know is whether she’s ready or not.”

“I’m not sure, Master Kelsier,” Sazed replied. “Pure knowledge is not the
equivalent of skill. I’m not certain if she has the . . . poise to imitate a
noblewoman, even a young and inexperienced one. We’ve done practice dinners,
gone over conversational etiquette, and memorized gossip. She seems skilled at
it all, in a controlled situation. She’s even done well sitting in on tea
meetings when Renoux entertains noble guests. However, we won’t really be able
to tell if she can do this until we put her alone in a party full of
aristocrats.”

“I wish she could practice some more,” Kelsier said with a shake of his head.
“But every week we spend preparing increases the chances that the Ministry will
discover our budding army in the caves.”

“It is a test of balance, then,” Sazed said. “We must wait long enough to
gather the men we need, yet move soon enough to avoid discovery.”

Kelsier nodded. “We can’t pause for one crewmember—we’ll have to find someone
else to be our mole if Vin does badly. Poor girl—I wish I had time to train her
better in Allomancy. We’ve barely covered the first four metals. I just don’t
have enough time!”

#### Sazed suggest to have Vin train with other members of the crew
“If I might make a suggestion . . .”

“Of course, Saze.”

“Send the child with some of the Misting crewmembers,” Sazed said. “I hear that
the man Breeze is a very accomplished Soother, and surely the others are
equally skilled. Let them show Mistress Vin how to use her abilities.”

Kelsier paused thoughtfully. “That’s a good idea, Saze.”

“But?”

Kelsier glanced back toward the door, beyond which Vin was still petulantly
getting her haircut. “I’m not sure. Today, when we were training, we got into a
Steelpush shoving match. The kid has to weigh less than half what I do, but she
gave me a decent pummeling anyway.”

“Different people have different strengths in Allomancy,” Sazed said.

“Yes, but the variance isn’t usually this great,” Kelsier said. “Plus, it took
me months and months to learn how to manipulate my Pushes and Pulls. It’s not
as easy as it sounds—even something as simple as Pushing yourself up onto a
rooftop requires an understanding of weight, balance, and trajectory.

“But Vin . . . she seems to know all these things instinctively. True, she can
only use the first four metals with any skill, but the progress she’s made is
amazing.”

“She is a special girl.”

Kelsier nodded. “She deserves more time to learn about her powers. I feel a
little guilty about pulling her into our plans. She’ll probably end up at a
Ministry execution ceremony with the rest of us.”

“But that guilt won’t stop you from using her to spy on the aristocracy.”

Kelsier shook his head. “No,” he said quietly. “It won’t. We’ll need every
advantage we can get. Just . . . watch over her, Saze. From now on, you’ll act
as Vin’s steward and guardian at the functions she attends—it won’t be odd for
her to bring a Terrisman servant with her.”

“Not at all,” Sazed agreed. “In fact, it would be strange to send a girl her
age to courtly functions without an escort.”

Kelsier nodded. “Protect her, Saze. She might be a powerful Allomancer, but
she’s inexperienced. I’ll feel a lot less guilty about sending her into those
aristocratic dens if I know you’re with her.”

“I will protect her with my life, Master Kelsier. I promise you this.”

Kelsier smiled, resting a thankful hand on Sazed’s shoulder. “I feel pity for
the man who gets in your way.”

Sazed bowed his head humbly. He looked innocuous, but Kelsier knew the strength
that Sazed hid. Few men, Allomancers or not, would fare well in a fight with a
Keeper whose anger had been roused. That was probably why the Ministry had
hunted the sect virtually to extinction.

#### They conclude the conversation, Kelsier mentioning a ball that Vin is going to have to attend
“All right,” Kelsier said. “Get back to your teaching. Lord Venture is throwing
a ball at the end of the week, and—ready or not—Vin is going to be there.”




