## 13

### 

#### 
* * *



I know that I shouldn’t let a simple packman perturb me. However, he is from
Terris, where the prophecies originated. If anyone could spot a fraud, would it
not be he?

Nevertheless, I continue my trek, going where the scribbled auguries proclaim
that I will meet my destiny—walking, feeling Rashek’s eyes on my back. Jealous.
Mocking. Hating.





### 

#### 
13



VIN SAT WITH HER LEGS crossed beneath her on one of Lord Renoux’s fine easy
chairs. It felt good to be rid of the bulky dress, instead getting back to a
more familiar shirt and trousers.

However, Sazed’s calm displeasure made her want to squirm. He stood on the
other side of the room, and Vin got the distinct impression that she was in
trouble. Sazed had questioned her in depth, seeking out every detail of her
conversation with Lord Elend. Sazed’s inquiries had been respectful, of course,
but they had also been forceful.

The Terrisman seemed, in Vin’s opinion, unduly worried about her exchange with
the young nobleman. They hadn’t really talked about anything important, and
Elend himself was decidedly unspectacular for a Great House lord.

But, there had been something odd about him—something Vin hadn’t admitted to
Sazed. She’d felt . . . comfortable with Elend. Looking back on the experience,
she realized that for those few moments, she hadn’t really been Lady Valette.
Nor had she been Vin, for that part of her—the timid crewmember—was almost as
fake as Valette was.

No, she’d simply been . . . whoever she was. It was a strange experience. She
had occasionally felt the same way during her time with Kelsier and the others,
but in a more limited manner. How had Elend been able to evoke her true self so
quickly and so thoroughly?

Maybe he used Allomancy on me! she thought with a start. Elend was a high
nobleman; perhaps he was a Soother. Maybe there was more to the conversation
than she had thought.

Vin sat back in her chair, frowning to herself. She’d had copper on, and that
meant he couldn’t have used emotional Allomancy on her. Somehow, he had simply
gotten her to let her guard down. Vin thought back to the experience, thinking
about how oddly comfortable she’d felt. In retrospect, it was clear that she
hadn’t been careful enough.

I’ll be more cautious next time. She assumed that they would meet again. They’d
better.

#### 
A servant entered and whispered quietly to Sazed. A quick burn of tin let Vin
hear the conversation—Kelsier had finally returned.

“Please send word to Lord Renoux,” Sazed said. The white-clothed servant
nodded, leaving the room with a quick step.

“The rest of you may leave,” Sazed said calmly, and the room’s attendants
scampered away. Sazed’s quiet vigil had forced them to stand, waiting in the
tense room, not speaking or moving.

Kelsier and Lord Renoux arrived together, chatting quietly. As always, Renoux
wore a rich suit cut in the unfamiliar Western style. The aging man kept his
gray mustache trimmed thin and neat, and he walked with a confident air. Even
after spending an entire evening among the nobility, Vin was again struck by
his aristocratic bearing.

Kelsier still wore his mistcloak. “Saze?” he said as he entered. “You have
news?”

“I am afraid so, Master Kelsier,” Sazed said. “It appears that Mistress Vin
caught the attention of Lord Elend Venture at the ball tonight.”

“Elend?” Kelsier asked, folding his arms. “Isn’t he the heir?”

“He is indeed,” Renoux said. “I met the lad perhaps four years ago, when his
father visited the West. He struck me as a bit undignified for one of his
station.”

Four years? Vin thought. There’s no way he’s been imitating Lord Renoux for
that long. Kelsier only escaped the Pits two years ago! She eyed the impostor,
but—as always—was unable to detect a flaw in his bearing.

“How attentive was the boy?” Kelsier asked.

“He asked her to dance,” Sazed said. “But Mistress Vin was wise enough to
decline. Apparently, their meeting was a matter of idle happenstance—but I fear
she may have caught his eye.”

Kelsier chuckled. “You taught her too well, Saze. In the future, Vin, perhaps
you should try to be a little less charming.”

“Why?” Vin asked, trying to mask her annoyance. “I thought we wanted me to be
well liked.”

“Not by a man as important as Elend Venture, child,” Lord Renoux said. “We sent
you to court so you could make alliances—not scandals.”

Kelsier nodded. “Venture is young, eligible, and heir to a powerful house. Your
having a relationship with him could make serious problems for us. The women of
the court would be jealous of you, and the older men would disapprove of the
rank difference. You’d alienate yourself from large sections of the court. To
get the information we need, we need the aristocracy to see you as uncertain,
unimportant, and—most importantly—unthreatening.”

“Besides, child,” Lord Renoux said. “It is unlikely that Elend Venture has any
real interest in you. He is known to be a court eccentric—he is probably just
trying to heighten his reputation by doing the unexpected.”

Vin felt her face flush. He’s probably right, she told herself sternly. Still,
she couldn’t help feeling annoyed at the three of them—especially Kelsier, with
his flippant, unconcerned attitude.

“Yes,” Kelsier said, “it’s probably best that you avoid Venture completely. Try
to offend him or something. Give him a couple of those glares you do.”

Vin regarded Kelsier with a flat look.

“That’s the one!” Kelsier said with a laugh.

#### 
Vin clinched her teeth, then forced herself to relax. “I saw my father at the
ball tonight,” she said, hoping to distract Kelsier and the others away from
Lord Venture.

“Really?” Kelsier asked with interest.

Vin nodded. “I recognized him from a time my brother pointed him out to me.”

“What is this?” Renoux asked.

“Vin’s father is an obligator,” Kelsier said. “And, apparently an important one
if he has enough pull to go to a ball like this. Do you know what his name is?”

Vin shook her head.

“Description?” Kelsier asked.

“Uh . . . bald, eye tattoos . . .”

Kelsier chuckled. “Just point him out to me sometime, all right?”

#### 
Vin nodded, and Kelsier turned to Sazed. “Now, did you bring me the names of
which noblemen asked Vin to dance?”

Sazed nodded. “She gave me a list, Master Kelsier. I also have several
interesting tidbits to share from the stewards’ meal.”

#### 
“Good,” Kelsier said, glancing at the grandfather clock in the corner. “You’ll
have to save them for tomorrow morning, though. I’ve got to be going.”

“Going?” Vin asked, perking up. “But you just got in!”

“That’s the funny thing about arriving somewhere, Vin,” he said with a wink.
“Once you’re there, the only thing you can really do is leave again. Get some
sleep—you’re looking a bit ragged.”

Kelsier waved a farewell to the group, then ducked out of the room, whistling
amiably to himself.

### 

#### 
Too nonchalant, Vin thought. And too secretive. He usually tells us which
families he plans to hit.

“I think I will retire,” Vin said, yawning.

Sazed eyed her suspiciously, but let her go as Renoux began speaking quietly to
him. Vin scrambled up the stairs to her room, threw on her mistcloak, and
pushed open her balcony doors.

Mist poured into the room. She flared iron, and was rewarded with the sight of
a fading blue metal line, pointing into the distance.

Let’s see where you’re going, Master Kelsier.

Vin burned steel, Pushing herself into the cold, humid autumn night. Tin
enhanced her eyes, making the wet air tickle her throat as she breathed. She
Pushed hard behind her, then Pulled slightly on the gates below. The maneuver
swung her in a soaring arc over the steel gates, which she then Pushed against
to throw herself farther into the air.

She kept an eye on the trail of blue that pointed toward Kelsier, following him
at enough of a distance to remain unseen. She wasn’t carrying any metal—not
even coins—and she kept her copper burning to hide her use of Allomancy.
Theoretically, only sound could alert Kelsier of her presence, and so she moved
as quietly as possible.

Surprisingly, Kelsier didn’t head into town. After passing the mansion’s gates,
he turned north out of the city. Vin followed, landing and running quietly on
the rough ground.

Where is he going? she thought with confusion. Is he circling Fellise? Heading
for one of the peripheral mansions?

Kelsier continued northward for a short time, then his metal line suddenly
began to grow dim. Vin paused, stopping beside a group of stumpy trees. The
line faded at a rapid rate: Kelsier had suddenly sped up. She cursed to
herself, breaking into a dash.

Ahead, Kelsier’s line vanished into the night. Vin sighed, slowing. She flared
her iron, but it was barely enough to catch a glimpse of him disappearing again
in the distance. She’d never keep up.

#### 
Her flared iron, however, showed her something else. She frowned, continuing
forward until she reached a stationary source of metal—two small bronze bars
stuck into the ground a couple feet from each other. She flipped one up into
her hand, then looked into the swirling mists to the north.

He’s jumping, she thought. But why? Jumping was faster than walking, but there
didn’t seem much point to it in the empty wilderness.

Unless . . .

She walked forward, and she soon found two more bronze bars embedded in the
earth. Vin glanced backward. It was hard to tell in the night, but it seemed
that the four bars made a line that pointed directly toward Luthadel.

So that’s how he does it, she thought. Kelsier had an uncanny ability to move
between Luthadel and Fellise with remarkable speed. She’d assumed that he was
using horses, but it appeared that there was a better way. He—or perhaps
someone before him—had laid down an Allomantic road between the two cities.

#### 
She gripped the first bar in her palm—she’d need it to soften her landing if
she was wrong—then stepped up in front of the second pair of bars and launched
herself into the air.

She Pushed hard, flaring her steel, throwing herself as far up into the sky as
she could. As she flew, she flared her iron, searching for other sources of
metal. They soon appeared—two directly north, and two more in the distance to
either side of her.

The ones on the sides are for course corrections, she realized. She’d have to
keep moving directly north if she wanted to stay on the bronze highway. She
nudged herself slightly to the left—moving so that she passed directly between
the two adjacent bars of the main path—then hurled herself forward again in an
arcing leap.

She got the hang of it quickly, hopping from point to point, never dropping
even close to the ground. In just a few minutes, she had the rhythm down so
well that she barely had to do any corrections from the sides.

Her progress across the scraggly landscape was incredibly swift. The mists blew
by, her mistcloak whipping and flapping behind her. Still, she forced herself
to speed up. She’d spent too long studying the bronze bars. She had to catch up
to Kelsier; otherwise she’d arrive in Luthadel, but not know where to go from
there.

#### 
She began to throw herself from point to point at an almost reckless speed,
watching desperately for some sign of Allomantic motion. After about ten
minutes of leaping, a line of blue finally appeared ahead of her—one pointing
up, rather than down toward bars in the ground. She breathed in relief.

Then a second line appeared, and a third.

Vin frowned, letting herself drop to the ground with a muted thump. She flared
tin, and a massive shadow appeared in the night before her, its top sparkling
with balls of light.

The city wall, she thought with amazement. So soon? I made the trip twice as
fast as a man on horseback!

However, that meant she’d lost Kelsier. Frowning to herself, she used the bar
she’d been carrying to throw herself up onto the battlements. Once she landed
on the damp stone, she reached behind and Pulled the bar up into her hand. Then
she approached the other side of the wall, hopping up and crouching on the
stone railing as she scanned the city.

What now? she thought with annoyance. Head back to Fellise? Stop by Clubs’s
shop and see if he went there?

She sat uncertainly for a moment, then threw herself off the wall and began
making her way across the rooftops. She wandered randomly, pushing off of
window clasps and bits of metal, using the bronze bar—then pulling it back into
her hand—when long jumps were necessary. It wasn’t until she arrived that she
realized she’d unconsciously gone to a specific destination.

#### 
Keep Venture rose before her in the night. The limelights had been
extinguished, and only a few phantom torches burned near guard posts.

Vin crouched on the lip on a rooftop, trying to decide what had led her back to
the massive keep. The cool wind ruffled her hair and cloak, and she thought she
felt a few tiny raindrops on her cheek. She sat for a long moment, her toes
growing cold.

Then she noticed motion to her right. She crouched immediately, flaring her
tin.

Kelsier sat on a rooftop not three houses away, just barely lit by ambient
light. He didn’t seem to have noticed her. He was watching the keep, his face
too distant for her to read his expression.

Vin watched him with suspicious eyes. He’d dismissed her meeting with Elend,
but perhaps it worried him more than he’d admitted. A sudden spike of fear made
her tense.

Could he be here to kill Elend? The assassination of a high noble heir would
certainly create tension amongst the nobility.

Vin waited apprehensively. Eventually, however, Kelsier stood and walked away,
Pushing himself off the rooftop and into the air.

Vin dropped her bronze bar—it would give her away—and dashed after him. Her
iron showed blue lines moving in the distance, and she hurriedly jumped out
over the street and Pushed herself off a sewer grate below, determined not to
lose him again.

He moved toward the center of the city. Vin frowned, trying to guess his
destination. Keep Erikeller was in that direction, and it was a major supplier
of armaments. Perhaps Kelsier planned to do something to interrupt its
supplies, making House Renoux more vital to the local nobility.

Vin landed on a rooftop and paused, watching Kelsier shoot off into the night.
He’s moving fast again. I—

#### 
A hand fell on her shoulder.

Vin yelped, jumping back, flaring pewter.

Kelsier regarded her with a cocked eyebrow. “You’re supposed to be in bed,
young lady.”

Vin glanced to the side, toward the line of metal. “But—”

“My coin pouch,” Kelsier said, smiling. “A good thief can steal clever tricks
as easily as he steals boxings. I’ve started being more careful since you
tailed me last week—at first, I assumed you were a Venture Mistborn.”

“They have some?”

“I’m sure they do,” Kelsier said. “Most of the Great Houses do—but your friend
Elend isn’t one of them. He’s not even a Misting.”

“How do you know? He could be hiding it.”

Kelsier shook his head. “He nearly died in a raid a couple of years ago—if
there were ever a time to show your powers, it would have been then.”

Vin nodded, still looking down, not meeting Kelsier’s eyes.

#### 
He sighed, sitting down on the slanted rooftop, one leg hanging over the side.
“Have a seat.”

Vin settled herself on the tile roof across from him. Above, the cool mists
continued to churn, and it had begun to drizzle slightly—but that wasn’t much
different from the regular nightly humidity.

“I can’t have you tailing me like this, Vin,” Kelsier said. “Do you remember
our discussion about trust?”

“If you trusted me, you’d tell me where you were going.”

“Not necessarily,” Kelsier said. “Maybe I just don’t want you and the others to
worry about me.”

“Everything you do is dangerous,” Vin said. “Why would we worry any more if you
told us specifics?”

“Some tasks are even more dangerous than others,” Kelsier said quietly.

#### 
Vin paused, then glanced to the side, in the direction Kelsier had been going.
Toward the center of the city.

Toward Kredik Shaw, the Hill of a Thousand Spires. The Lord Ruler’s palace.

“You’re going to confront the Lord Ruler!” Vin said quietly. “You said last
week that you were going to pay him a visit.”

“ ‘Visit’ is, perhaps, too strong a word,” Kelsier said. “I am going to the
palace, but I sincerely hope I don’t run into the Lord Ruler himself. I’m not
ready for him yet. Regardless, you are going straight to Clubs’s shop.”

Vin nodded.

Kelsier frowned. “You’re just going to try and follow me again, aren’t you?”

Vin paused, then she nodded again.

“Why?”

“Because I want to help,” Vin said quietly. “So far, my part in this all has
essentially boiled down to going to a party. But, I’m Mistborn—you’ve trained
me yourself. I’m not going to sit back and let everyone else do dangerous work
while I sit, eat dinner, and watch people dance.”

“What you’re doing at those balls is important,” Kelsier said.

Vin nodded, glancing down. She’d just let him go, then she’d follow him. Part
of her reasoning was what she’d said before: She was beginning to feel a
camaraderie for this crew, and it was like nothing she had ever known. She
wanted to be part of what it was doing; she wanted to help.

However, another part of her whispered that Kelsier wasn’t telling her
everything. He might trust her; he might not. However, he certainly had
secrets. The Eleventh Metal, and therefore the Lord Ruler, were involved in
those secrets.

#### 
Kelsier caught her eyes, and he must have seen her intention to follow in them.
He sighed, leaning back. “I’m serious, Vin! You can’t go with me.”

“Why not?” she asked, abandoning pretense. “If what you’re doing is so
dangerous, wouldn’t it be safer if you had another Mistborn watching your
back?”

“You still don’t know all of the metals,” Kelsier said.

“Only because you haven’t taught me.”

“You need more practice.”

“The best practice is doing,” Vin said. “My brother trained me to steal by
taking me on burglaries.”

Kelsier shook his head. “It’s too dangerous.”

“Kelsier,” she said in a serious tone. “We’re planning to overthrow the Final
Empire. I don’t really expect to live until the end of the year anyway.

“You keep telling the others what an advantage it is to have two Mistborn on
the team. Well, it’s not going to be much of an advantage unless you actually
let me be a Mistborn. How long are you going to wait? Until I’m ‘ready’? I
don’t think that will ever happen.”

#### 
Kelsier eyed her for a moment, then he smiled. “When we first met, half the
time I couldn’t get you to say a word. Now you’re lecturing me.”

Vin blushed. Finally, Kelsier sighed, reaching beneath his cloak to pull
something out. “I can’t believe I’m considering this,” he muttered, handing her
the bit of metal.

Vin studied the tiny, silvery ball of metal. It was so reflective and bright
that it almost seemed to be a drop of liquid, yet it was solid to the touch.

“Atium,” Kelsier said. “Tenth, and most powerful, of the known Allomantic
metals. That bead is worth more than the entire bag of boxings I gave you
before.”

“This little bit?” she asked with surprise.

Kelsier nodded. “Atium only comes from one place—the Pits of Hathsin—where the
Lord Ruler controls its production and distribution. The Great Houses get to
buy a monthly stipend of atium, which is one of the main ways the Lord Ruler
controls them. Go ahead and swallow it.”

Vin eyed the bit of metal, uncertain she wanted to waste something so valuable.

“You can’t sell it,” Kelsier said. “Thieving crews try, but they get tracked
down and executed. The Lord Ruler is very protective of his atium supply.”

Vin nodded, then swallowed the metal. Immediately, she felt a new well of power
appear within her, waiting to be burned.

#### 
“All right,” Kelsier said, standing. “Burn it as soon as I start walking.”

Vin nodded. As he began to walk forward, she drew upon her new well of strength
and burned atium.

Kelsier seemed to fuzz slightly to her eyes; then a translucent, wraithlike
image shot out into the mists in front of him. The image looked just like
Kelsier, and it walked just a few steps in front of him. A very faint, trailing
after-image extended from the duplicate back to Kelsier himself.

It was like . . . a reverse shadow. The duplicate did everything Kelsier
did—except, the image moved first. It turned, and then Kelsier followed its
same path.

The image’s mouth began moving. A second later, Kelsier spoke. “Atium lets you
see just a bit into the future. Or, at least, it lets you see what people are
going to do a little bit in the future. In addition, it enhances your mind,
allowing you to deal with the new information, allowing you to react more
quickly and collectedly.”

The shadow stopped, then Kelsier walked up to it, stopping as well. Suddenly,
the shadow reached out and slapped her, and Vin moved reflexively, putting her
hand up just as Kelsier’s real hand began to move. She caught his arm midswing.

“While you’re burning atium,” he said, “nothing can surprise you. You can swing
a dagger, knowing confidently that your enemies will run right into it. You can
dodge attacks with ease because you’ll be able to see where every blow will
fall. Atium makes you quite nearly invincible. It enhances your mind, making
you able to make use of all the new information.”

Suddenly, dozens of other images shot from Kelsier’s body. Each one sprang in a
different direction, some striding across the roof, others jumping into the
air. Vin released his arm, rising and backing away in confusion.

“I just burned atium too,” Kelsier said. “I can see what you’re going to do,
and that changes what I’m going to do—which in turn changes what you’re going
to do. The images reflect each of the possible actions we might take.”

“It’s confusing,” Vin said, watching the insane jumble of images, old ones
constantly fading, new ones constantly appearing.

Kelsier nodded. “The only way to defeat someone who is burning atium is to burn
it yourself—that way, neither of you has an advantage.”

#### 
The images vanished.

“What did you do?” Vin asked with a start.

“Nothing,” Kelsier said. “Your atium probably ran out.”

Vin realized with surprise that he was right—the atium was gone. “It burns so
quickly!”

Kelsier nodded, sitting down again. “That’s probably the fastest fortune you’ve
ever blown, eh?”

Vin nodded, stunned. “It seems like such a waste.”

Kelsier shrugged. “Atium is only valuable because of Allomancy. So, if we
didn’t burn it, it wouldn’t be worth the fortune that it is. Of course, if we
do burn it, we make it even more rare. It’s kind of an interesting
relationship—ask Ham about it sometimes. He loves talking about atium
economics.

“Anyway, any Mistborn you face will probably have atium. However, they’ll be
reluctant to use it. In addition, they won’t have swallowed it yet—atium is
fragile, and your digestive juices will ruin it in a matter of hours. So, you
have to walk a line between conservation and effectiveness. If it looks like
your opponent is using atium, then you’d better use yours too—however, make
sure he doesn’t lure you into using up your reserve before he does.”

#### 
Vin nodded. “Does this mean you’re taking me tonight?”

“I’ll probably regret it,” Kelsier said, sighing. “But I don’t see any way to
make you stay behind—short of tying you up, perhaps. But, I warn you Vin. This
could be dangerous. Very dangerous. I don’t intend to meet the Lord Ruler, but
I do intend to sneak into his stronghold. I think I know where we might find a
clue on how to defeat him.”

Vin smiled, stepping forward as Kelsier waved her toward him. He reached into
his pouch and pulled out a vial, which he handed to her. It was like regular
Allomantic vials, except the liquid inside held only a single drop of metal.
The atium bead was several times larger than the one he had given her to
practice on.

“Don’t use it unless you have to,” Kelsier warned. “You need any other metals?”

Vin nodded. “I burned up most of my steel getting here.”

Kelsier handed her another vial. “First, let’s go retrieve my coin pouch.”




