## 36
_Character:Vin_  
_Location:Kredik Shaw_  
_Character:Trevidian_  
_Character:Kar_  

### Epigraph

#### 
* * *



I have decided that I am thankful for Rashek’s hatred. It does me well to
remember that there are those who abhor me. My place is not to seek popularity
or love; my place is to ensure mankind’s survival.





36


### 

#### Vin riot's the guards at Kredik Shaw to make her entrance
VIN WALKED QUIETLY TOWARD KREDIK Shaw. The sky behind her burned, the mists
reflecting and diffusing the light of a thousand torches. It was like a radiant
dome over the city.

The light was yellow, the color Kelsier had always said the sun should be.

Four nervous guards waited at the same palace doorway that she and Kelsier had
attacked before. They watched her approach. Vin stepped slowly, quietly, on the
mist-wetted stones, her mistcloak rustling solemnly.

One of the guards lowered a spear at her, and Vin stopped right in front of
him.

“I know you,” she said quietly. “You endured the mills, the mines, and the
forges. You knew that someday they would kill you, and leave your families to
starve. So, you went to the Lord Ruler—guilty but determined—and joined his
guards.”

The four men glanced at each other, confused.

“The light behind me comes from a massive skaa rebellion,” she said. “The
entire city is rising up against the Lord Ruler. I don’t blame you men for your
choices, but a time of change is coming. Those rebels could use your training
and your knowledge. Go to them—they gather in the Square of the Survivor.”

“The . . . Square of the Survivor?” a soldier asked.

“The place where the Survivor of Hathsin was killed earlier today.”

The four men exchanged looks, uncertain.

Vin Rioted their emotions slightly. “You don’t have to live with the guilt
anymore.”

Finally, one of the men stepped forward and ripped the symbol off his uniform,
then strode determinedly into the night. The other three paused, then
followed—leaving Vin with an open entrance to the palace.

#### Vin pushes her way down the corridor
Vin walked down the corridor, eventually passing the same guard chamber as
before. She strode inside—stepping past a group of chatting guards without
hurting any of them—and entered the hallway beyond. Behind her, the guards
shook off their surprise and called out in alarm. They burst into the corridor,
but Vin jumped and Pushed against the lantern brackets, hurling herself down
the hallway.

The men’s voices grew distant; even running, they wouldn’t be able to keep up
with her. She reached the end of the corridor, then let herself drop lightly to
the ground, enveloping cloak falling around her body. She continued her
resolute, unhurried pace. There was no reason to run. They’d be waiting for her
anyway.

She passed through the archway, stepping into the dome-roofed central chamber.
Silver murals lined the walls, braziers burned in the corners, the floor was an
ebony marble.

#### Vin outsmarts two inquisitors
And two Inquisitors stood blocking her path.

Vin strode quietly through the room, approaching the building-within-a-building
that was her goal.

“We search all this time,” said an Inquisitor in his grinding voice. “And you
come to us. A second time.”

Vin stopped, standing about twenty feet in front of the pair. They loomed, each
of them nearly two feet taller than she, smiling and confident.

Vin burned atium, then whipped her hands from beneath her cloak, tossing a
double handful of arrowheads into the air. She flared steel, Pushing powerfully
against the rings of metal wrapped loosely around the arrowheads’ broken hafts.
The missiles shot forward, ripping across the room. The lead Inquisitor
chuckled, raising a hand and Pushing disdainfully against the missiles.

His Push ripped the unattached rings free from the hafts, shooting the bits of
metal backward. The arrowheads themselves, however, continued forward—no longer
Pushed from behind, but still carried by a deadly momentum.

The Inquisitor opened his mouth in surprise as two dozen arrowheads struck him.
Several punched completely through his flesh, continuing on to snap against the
stone wall behind him. Several others struck his companion in the legs.

The lead Inquisitor jerked, spasming as he collapsed. The other growled,
staying on his feet, but wobbling a bit on the weakened leg. Vin dashed
forward, flaring her pewter. The remaining Inquisitor moved to block her, but
she reached inside her cloak and threw out a large handful of pewter dust.

The Inquisitor stopped, confused. To his “eyes” he would see nothing but a mess
of blue lines—each one leading to a speck of metal. With so many sources of
metal concentrated in one place, the lines would be virtually blinding.

The Inquisitor spun, angry, as Vin dashed past him. He Pushed against the dust,
blowing it away, but as he did so, Vin whipped out a glass dagger and flipped
it toward him. In the confusing mess of blue lines and atium shadows, he missed
noticing the dagger, and it took him square in the thigh. He fell, cursing in a
crackly voice.

Good thing that worked, Vin thought, leaping over the groaning body of the
first Inquisitor. Wasn’t sure about those eyes of theirs.

#### Vin makes her way into the inner room to find nothing remarkable
She threw her weight against the door, flaring pewter and tossing up another
handful of dust to keep the remaining Inquisitor from targeting any metals on
her body. She didn’t turn back to fight the two further—not with the trouble
one of the creatures had given Kelsier. Her goal this infiltration wasn’t to
kill, but to gather information, then run.

Vin burst into the building-within-a-building, nearly tripping on a rug made
from some exotic fur. She frowned, scanning the chamber urgently, searching for
whatever the Lord Ruler hid inside of it.

It has to be here, she thought desperately. The clue to defeating him—the way
to win this battle. She was counting on the Inquisitors being distracted by
their wounds long enough for her to search out the Lord Ruler’s secret and
escape.

The room had only one exit—the entrance she’d come through—and a hearth burned
in the center of the chamber. The walls were decorated with odd trappings; furs
hung from most places, the pelts dyed in strange patterns. There were a few old
paintings, their colors faded, their canvases yellowed.

Vin searched quickly, urgently, looking for anything that could prove to be a
weapon against the Lord Ruler. Unfortunately, she saw nothing useful; the room
felt foreign, but unremarkable. In fact, it had a comfortable hominess, like a
study or den. It was packed full of strange objects and decorations—like the
horns of some foreign beast and a strange pair of shoes with very wide, flat
bottoms. It was the room of a pack rat, a place to keep memories of the past.

#### Vin sees an old man that an Inquisitor calls the Lord Ruler
She jumped as something moved near the center of the room. A pivoting chair
stood by the hearth, and it spun slowly, revealing the wizened old man who sat
in it. Bald, with liver-spotted skin, he appeared to be in his seventies. He
wore rich, dark clothing, and he frowned angrily at Vin.

That’s it, Vin thought. I’ve failed—there’s nothing here. Time to get out.

Just as she was spinning to dash away, however, rough hands grabbed her from
behind. She cursed, struggling as she glanced down at the Inquisitor’s bloodied
leg. Even with pewter, he shouldn’t have been able to walk on it. She tried to
twist away, but the Inquisitor had her in a powerful grasp.

“What is this?” the old man demanded, standing.

“I’m sorry, Lord Ruler,” the Inquisitor said deferentially.

Lord Ruler! But . . . I saw him. He was a young man.

#### The old man requests the Inquisitor to kill her, but the inquisitor wishes to capture her instead
“Kill her,” the old man said, waving his hand.

“My lord,” the Inquisitor said. “This child is . . . of special interest. Might
I keep her for a time?”

“What special interest?” the Lord Ruler said, sighing as he sat again.

“We wish to petition you, Lord Ruler,” said the Inquisitor. “Regarding the
Canton of Orthodoxy.”

“This again?” the Lord Ruler said wearily.

“Please, my lord,” said the Inquisitor. Vin continued to struggle, flaring her
pewter. The Inquisitor pinned her arms to her sides, however, and her backward
kicking did very little good. He’s so strong! she thought with frustration.

#### Vin burns the Atium. Nothing happens, and two more men appear until her atium goes out, and they vanish again
And then, she remembered it. The Eleventh Metal, its power sitting within her,
forming an unfamiliar reserve. She looked up, glaring at the old man. This had
better work. She burned the Eleventh Metal.

Nothing happened.

Vin struggled in frustration, her heart sinking. And then she saw him. Another
man, standing right beside the Lord Ruler. Where had he come from? She hadn’t
seen him enter.

He had a full beard and wore a thick, woolen outfit with a fur-lined cloak. It
wasn’t rich clothing, but it was well constructed. He stood quietly, seeming .
. . content. He smiled happily.

Vin cocked her head. There was something familiar about the man. His features
looked very similar to those of the man who had killed Kelsier. However, this
man was older and . . . more alive.

Vin turned to the side. There was another unfamiliar man beside her, a young
nobleman. He was a merchant, from the looks of his suit—and a very wealthy one
at that.

What is going on?

The Eleventh Metal burned out. Both newcomers vanished like ghosts.

#### The lord ruler agrees to capture Vin, and the Inquisitor knocks her unconscious
“Very well,” said the elderly Lord Ruler, sighing. “I agree to your request. We
will meet in several hours’ time—Tevidian has already requested a gathering to
discuss matters outside the palace.”

“Ah,” said the second Inquisitor. “Yes . . . it will be good for him to be
there. Good indeed.”

Vin continued to squirm as the Inquisitor pushed her to the ground, then lifted
his hand, gripping something she couldn’t see. He swung, and pain flashed
through her head.

Despite her pewter, all went black.


### 
_Character:Elend_  
_Character:Lord Venture_  
_Character(Reference):Valette_  
_Character(Reference):Temadre_  

#### 
Elend found his father in the north entryway—a smaller, less daunting entrance
to Keep Venture, though only when compared with the majestic grand hall.

“What’s going on?” Elend demanded, pulling on his suit coat, his hair
disheveled from sleep. Lord Venture stood with his guard captains and
canalmasters. Soldiers and servants scattered through the white-and-brown
hallway, rushing about with an air of apprehensive fright.

Lord Venture ignored Elend’s question, calling for a messenger to ride for the
east river docks.

“Father, what’s happening?” Elend repeated.

“Skaa rebellion,” Lord Venture snapped.

What? Elend thought as Lord Venture waved for another group of soldiers to
approach. Impossible. A skaa rebellion in Luthadel itself . . . it was
unthinkable. They didn’t have the disposition to try such a bold move, they
were just . . .

Valette is skaa, he thought. You have to stop thinking like other noblemen,
Elend. You have to open your eyes.

The Garrison was gone, off to slaughter a different group of rebels. The skaa
had been forced to watch those gruesome executions weeks ago, not to mention
the slaughter that had come this day. They had been stressed to the point of
breaking.

Temadre predicted this, Elend realized. So did half a dozen other political
theorists. They said that the Final Empire couldn’t last forever. God at its
head or not, the people would someday rise up. . . . It’s finally happening.
I’m living through it!

And . . . I’m on the wrong side.

“Why the canalmasters?” Elend asked.

“We’re leaving the city,” Lord Venture said tersely.

“Abandon the keep?” Elend asked. “Where’s the honor in that?”

Lord Venture snorted. “This isn’t about bravery, boy. It’s about survival.
Those skaa are attacking the main gates, slaughtering the remnants of the
Garrison. I have no intention of waiting until they come for noble heads.”

“But . . .”

Lord Venture shook his head. “We were leaving anyway. Something . . . happened
at the Pits a few days ago. The Lord Ruler isn’t going to be happy when he
discovers it.” He stepped back, waving over his lead narrowboat captain.

Skaa rebellion, Elend thought, still a little numb. What was it that Temadre
warned in his writings? That, when a real rebellion finally came, the skaa
would slaughter wantonly . . . that every nobleman’s life would be forfeit.

He predicted that the rebellion would die out quickly, but that it would leave
piles of corpses in its wake. Thousands of deaths. Tens of thousands.

“Well, boy?” Lord Venture demanded. “Go and organize your things.”

“I’m not going,” Elend surprised himself by saying.

Lord Venture frowned. “What?”

Elend looked up. “I’m not going, Father.”

“Oh, you’re going,” Lord Venture said, eyeing Elend with one of his glares.

Elend looked into those eyes—eyes that were angry not because they cared for
Elend’s safety, but because Elend dared defy them. And, strangely, Elend didn’t
feel the least bit cowed. Someone has to stop this. The rebellion could do some
good, but only if the skaa don’t insist on slaughtering their allies. And,
that’s what the nobility should be—their allies against the Lord Ruler. He’s
our enemy too.

“Father, I’m serious,” Elend said. “I’m going to stay.”

“Bloody hell, boy! Must you insist on mocking me?”

“This isn’t about balls or luncheons, father. It’s about something more
important.”

Lord Venture paused. “No flippant comments? No buffoonery?”

Elend shook his head.

Suddenly, Lord Venture smiled. “Stay then, boy. That’s a good idea. Someone
should maintain our presence here while I go rally our forces. Yes . . . a very
good idea.”

Elend paused, frowning slightly at the smile in his father’s eyes. The
atium—Father is setting me up to fall in his place! And . . . even if the Lord
Ruler doesn’t kill me, Father assumes I’ll die in the rebellion. Either way,
he’s rid of me.

I’m really not very good at this, am I?

Lord Venture laughed to himself, turning.

“At least leave me some soldiers,” Elend said.

“You can have most of them,” Lord Venture said. “It will be hard enough to get
one boat out in this mess. Good luck, boy. Say hello to the Lord Ruler in my
absence.” He laughed again, moving toward his stallion, which was saddled and
readied outside.

Elend stood in the hall, and suddenly he was the focus of attention. Nervous
guards and servants, realizing that they’d been abandoned, turned to Elend with
desperate eyes.

I’m . . . in charge, Elend thought with shock. Now what? Outside, he could see
the mists flaring with the light of burning fires. Several of the guards were
yelling about an approaching mob of skaa.

Elend walked to the open doorway, staring out into the chaos. The hall grew
quiet behind him, terrified people realizing the extent of their danger.

Elend stood for a long moment. Then he spun. “Captain!” he said. “Gather your
forces and the remaining servants—don’t leave anyone behind—then march to Keep
Lekal.”

“Keep . . . Lekal, my lord?”

“It’s more defensible,” Elend said. “Plus, both of us have too few
soldiers—separated, we’ll be destroyed. Together, we might be able to stand.
We’ll offer our men to the Lekal in exchange for protecting our people.”

“But . . . my lord,” the soldier said. “The Lekal are your enemies.”

Elend nodded. “Yes, but someone needs to make the first overture. Now, get
moving!”

The man saluted, then rushed into motion.

“Oh, and Captain?” Elend said.

The soldier paused.

“Pick out five of your best soldiers to be my honor guard. I’ll be leaving you
in charge—those five and I have another mission.”

“My lord?” the captain asked with confusion. “What mission?”

Elend turned back toward the mists. “We’re going to go turn ourselves in.”


### Vin, captured, is taken to the lord ruler where lots of shit goes down. Tevidian is killed

#### Vin is forced to swallow an unknown metal which drains her reserves
Vin awoke to wetness. She coughed, then groaned, feeling a sharp pain in the
back of her skull. She opened dizzy eyes—blinking away the water that had been
thrown on her—and immediately burned pewter and tin, bringing herself
completely awake.

A pair of rough hands hoisted her into the air. She coughed as the Inquisitor
shoved something into her mouth.

“Swallow,” he ordered, twisting her arm.

Vin cried out, trying without success to resist the pain. Eventually, she gave
in and swallowed the bit of metal.

“Now burn it,” the Inquisitor ordered, twisting harder.

Vin resisted nonetheless, sensing the unfamiliar metal reserve within her. The
Inquisitor could be trying to get her to burn a useless metal, one that would
make her sick—or, worse, kill her.

But, there are easier ways to kill a captive, she thought in agony. Her arm
hurt so much that it felt like it would twist free. Finally, Vin relented,
burning the metal.

Immediately, all of her other metal reserves vanished.

#### Vin searches desperately in her cell for any metal in vain
“Good,” the Inquisitor said, dropping her to the ground. The stones were wet,
pooled with a bucketful of water. The Inquisitor turned, leaving the cell and
slamming its barred door; then he disappeared through a doorway on the other
side of the room.

Vin crawled to her knees, massaging her arm, trying to sort out what was going
on. My metals! She searched desperately inside, but she found nothing. She
couldn’t feel any metals, not even the one she had ingested moments before.

What was it? A twelfth metal? Perhaps Allomancy wasn’t as limited as Kelsier
and the others had always assured her.

She took a few deep breaths, climbing to her knees, calming herself. There was
something . . . Pushing against her. The Lord Ruler’s presence. She could feel
it, though it wasn’t as powerful as it had been earlier, when he had killed
Kelsier. Still, she didn’t have copper to burn—she had no way to hide from the
Lord Ruler’s powerful, almost omnipotent, hand. She felt depression twisting
her, telling her to just lie down, to give up. . . .

No! she thought. I have to get out. I have to stay strong!

She forced herself to stand and inspect her surroundings. Her prison was more
like a cage than a cell. It had bars running along three of the four sides, and
it contained no furniture—not even a sleeping mat. There were two other
cell-cages in the room, one to either side of her.

She had been stripped, they had only left her with her undergarments. The move
was probably to make certain that she didn’t have any hidden metals. She
glanced around the room. It was long and thin, and had stark stone walls. A
stool sat in one corner, but the room was otherwise empty.

If I could find just a bit of metal . . .

She began to search. Instinctively, she tried to burn iron, expecting the blue
lines to appear—but, of course, she had no iron to burn. She shook her head at
the foolish move, but it was simply a sign of how much she’d come to rely on
her Allomancy. She felt . . . blinded. She couldn’t burn tin to listen for
voices. She couldn’t burn pewter to strengthen her against the pain of her
hurting arm and head. She couldn’t burn bronze to search for nearby
Allomancers.

Nothing. She had nothing.

You functioned without Allomancy before, she told herself sternly. You can do
it now.

Even so, she searched the bare floor of her cell, hoping for the chance
existence of a discarded pin or nail. She found nothing, so she turned her
attention to the bars. However, she couldn’t think of a way to get off even a
flake of the iron.

So much metal here, she thought with frustration. And I can’t use any of it!

She sat back on the ground, huddling up against the stone wall, shivering
quietly in her damp clothing. It was still dark outside; the room’s window
casually allowed in a few trails of mist. What had happened with the rebellion?
What about her friends? She thought that the mists outside looked a bit
brighter than usual. Torchlight in the night? Without tin, her senses were too
weak to tell.

What was I thinking? she thought with despair. Did I presume to succeed where
Kelsier had failed? He knew that the Eleventh Metal was useless.

It had done something, true—but it certainly hadn’t killed the Lord Ruler. She
sat, thinking, trying to figure out what had happened. There had been an odd
familiarity about the things the Eleventh Metal had shown her. Not because of
the way the visions had appeared, but because of the way Vin had felt when
burning the metal.

#### Vin speculates about Gold and Atium
Gold. The moment when I burned the Eleventh Metal felt like that time when
Kelsier had me burn gold.

Could it be that the Eleventh Metal wasn’t really “eleventh” at all? Gold and
atium had always seemed oddly paired to Vin. All of the other metals came in
pairs that were similar—a base metal, then its alloy, each doing opposite
things. Iron Pulled, steel Pushed. Zinc Pulled, brass Pushed. It made sense.
All except for atium and gold.

What if the Eleventh Metal was really an alloy of atium or of gold? It would
mean . . . that gold and atium aren’t paired. They do two different things.
Similar, but different. They’re like . . .

Like the other metals, which were grouped into larger bases of four. There were
the physical metals: iron, steel, tin, and pewter. The mental metals: bronze,
copper, zinc, and brass. And . . . there were the time-affecting metals: gold
and its alloy, and atium and its alloy.

That means there’s another metal. One that hasn’t been discovered—probably
because atium and gold are too valuable to forge into different alloys.

But, what good was the knowledge? Her “Eleventh Metal” was probably just a
paired opposite of gold—the metal Kelsier had told her was the most useless of
them all. Gold had shown Vin herself—or, at least, a different version of her
that had felt real enough to touch. But, it had simply been a vision of what
she could have become, had the past been different.

The Eleventh Metal had done something similar: Instead of showing Vin’s own
past, it had shown her similar images from other people. And that told her . .
. nothing. What difference did it make what the Lord Ruler could have been? It
was the current man, the tyrant that ruled the Final Empire, that she had to
defeat.

#### An inquisitor takes vin down a long hallway towards the Lord Ruler
A figure appeared in the doorway—an Inquisitor dressed in a black robe, the
hood up. His face was shadowed, but his spike-heads jutted from the front of
the cowl.

“It is time,” he said. Another Inquisitor waited in the doorway as the first
creature pulled out a set of keys and moved to open Vin’s door.

Vin tensed. The door clicked, and she sprang to her feet, scrambling forward.

Have I always been this slow without pewter? she thought with horror. The
Inquisitor snatched her arm as she passed, his motions unconcerned, almost
casual—and she could see why. His hands moved supernaturally quickly, making
her seem even more sluggish by comparison.

The Inquisitor pulled her up, twisting her and easily holding her. He smiled
with an evil grin, his face pocked with scars. Scars that looked like . . .

Arrowhead wounds, she thought with shock. But . . . healed already? How can it
be?

She struggled, but her weak, pewterless body was no match for the Inquisitor’s
strength. The creature carried her toward the doorway, and the second
Inquisitor stepped back, regarding her with spikes that peeked out from beneath
its cowl. Though the Inquisitor who carried her was smiling, this second one
had a flat line of a mouth.

Vin spat at the second Inquisitor as she passed, her spittle smacking it right
on one of its spike-heads. Her captor carried her out of the chamber and
through a narrow hallway. She cried out for help, knowing that her screams—in
the middle of Kredik Shaw itself—would be useless. At least she succeeded in
annoying the Inquisitor, for he twisted her arm.

“Quiet,” he said as she grunted in pain.

Vin fell silent, instead focusing on their location. They were probably in one
of the lower sections of the palace; the hallways were too long to be in a
tower or spire. The decorations were lavish, but the rooms looked . . . unused.
The carpets were pristine, the furniture unmarked by scuff or scratch. She had
the feeling that the murals were rarely seen, even by those who often passed
through the chambers.

Eventually, the Inquisitors entered a stairwell and began to climb. One of the
spires, she thought.

With each climbing step, Vin could feel the Lord Ruler getting closer. His mere
presence dampened her emotions, stealing her willpower, making her numb to
everything but lonely depression. She sagged in the Inquisitor’s grip, no
longer struggling. It took all of her energy to simply resist the Lord Ruler’s
pressure on her soul.

#### Vin is taken to a large circular throne room of the Lord Ruler
After a short time in the tunnel-like stairwell, the Inquisitors carried her
out into a large, circular room. And, despite the power of the Lord Ruler’s
Soothing, despite her visits to noble keeps, Vin took just a brief moment to
stare at her surroundings. They were majestic like none she’d ever seen.

The room was shaped like a massive, stocky cylinder. The wall—there was only
one, running in a wide circle—was made entirely of glass. Lit by fires from
behind, the room glowed with spectral light. The glass was colored, though it
didn’t depict any specific scene. Instead, it seemed crafted from a single
sheet, the colors blown and melded together in long, thin trails. Like . . .

Like mist, she thought with wonder. Colorful streams of mist, running in a
circle around the entire room.

The Lord Ruler sat in an elevated throne in the very center of the room. He
wasn’t the old Lord Ruler—this was the younger version, the handsome man who
had killed Kelsier.

Some kind of impostor? No, I can feel him—just as I could feel the one before.
They’re the same man. Can he change how he looks, then? Appearing young when he
wishes to put forth a pretty face?

A small group of gray-robed, eye-tattooed obligators stood conversing on the
far side of the room. Seven Inquisitors stood waiting, like a row of shadows
with iron eyes. That made nine of them in all, counting the two that had
escorted Vin. Her scar-faced captor delivered her to one of the others, who
held her with a similarly inescapable grip.

#### Trevadian questions the Lord Ruler's actions as the skaa outside rebel
“Let us be on with this,” said the Lord Ruler.

A regular obligator stepped forward, bowing. With a chill, she realized that
she recognized him.

Lord Prelan Tevidian, she thought, eyeing the thin balding man. My . . .
father.

“My lord,” Tevidian said, “forgive me, but I do not understand. We have already
discussed this matter!”

“The Inquisitors say they have more to add,” the Lord Ruler said in a tired
voice.

Tevidian eyed Vin, frowning in confusion. He doesn’t know who I am, she
thought. He never knew he was a father.

“My lord,” Tevidian said, turning away from her. “Look outside your window! Do
we not have better things to discuss? The entire city is in rebellion! Skaa
torches light up the night, and they dare go out into the mists. They blaspheme
in riots, attacking the keeps of the nobility!”

“Let them,” the Lord Ruler said in an uncaring voice. He seemed so . . . worn.
He sat strongly on his throne, but there was still a weariness to his posture
and his voice.

“But my lord!” Tevidian said. “The Great Houses are falling!”

The Lord Ruler waved a dismissive hand. “It is good for them to get purged
every century or so. It fosters instability, keeps the aristocracy from growing
too confident. Usually, I let them kill each other in one of their foolish
wars, but these riots will work.”

“And . . . if the skaa come to the palace?”

“Then I will deal with them,” the Lord Ruler said softly. “You will not
question this further.”

“Yes, my lord,” Tevidian said, bowing and backing away.

#### The Lord Ruler question Vin of her father as it is revealed to be Tevidian in the room
“Now,” the Lord Ruler said, turning to the Inquisitors. “What is it you wished
to present?”

The scarred Inquisitor stepped forward. “Lord Ruler, we wish to petition that
leadership of your Ministry be taken from these . . . men and granted to the
Inquisitors instead.”

“We have discussed this,” the Lord Ruler said. “You and your brothers are
needed for more important tasks. You are too valuable to waste on simple
administration.”

“But,” the Inquisitor said, “by allowing common men to rule your Ministry, you
have unwittingly allowed corruption and vice to enter the very heart of your
holy palace!”

“Idle claims!” Tevidian spat. “You say such things often, Kar, but you never
offer any proof.”

Kar turned slowly, his eerie smile lit by the twisting, colored windowlight.
Vin shivered. That smile was nearly as unsettling as the Lord Ruler’s Soothing.

“Proof?” Kar asked. “Why, tell me, Lord Prelan. Do you recognize that girl?”

“Bah, of course not!” Tevidian said with a wave of his hand. “What does a skaa
girl have to do with the government of the Ministry?”

“Everything,” Kar said, turning to Vin. “Oh, yes . . . everything. Tell the
Lord Ruler who your father is, child.”

Vin tried to squirm, but the Lord Ruler’s Allomancy was so oppressive, the
Inquisitor’s hands were so strong. “I don’t know,” she managed to say through
gritted teeth.

The Lord Ruler perked up slightly, turning toward her, leaning forward.

“You cannot lie to the Lord Ruler, child,” Kar said in a quiet, rasping voice.
“He has lived for centuries, and has learned to use Allomancy like no mortal
man. He can see things in the way your heart beats, and can read your emotions
in your eyes. He can sense the moment when you lie. He knows . . . oh, yes. He
knows.”

“I never knew my father,” Vin said stubbornly. If the Inquisitor wanted to know
something, then keeping it a secret seemed like a good idea. “I’m just a street
urchin.”

“A Mistborn street urchin?” Kar asked. “Why, that’s interesting. Isn’t it,
Tevidian?”

The lord prelan paused, his frown deepening. The Lord Ruler stood slowly,
walking down the steps of his dais toward Vin.

“Yes, my lord,” Kar said. “You felt her Allomancy earlier. You know that she is
a full Mistborn—an amazingly powerful one. Yet, she claims to have grown up on
the street. What noble house would have abandoned such a child? Why, for her to
have such strength, she must be of an extremely pure line. At least . . . one
of her parents must have been from a very pure line.”

“What are you implying?” Tevidian demanded, paling.

The Lord Ruler ignored them both. He strode through the streaming colors of the
reflective floor, then stopped right in front of Vin.

So close, she thought. His Soothing was so strong that she couldn’t even feel
terror—all she felt was the deep, overpowering, horrible sorrow.

The Lord Ruler reached out with delicate hands, taking her by the cheeks,
tilting her face up to look into his eyes. “Who is your father, girl?” he asked
quietly.

“I . . .” Despair twisted inside of her. Grief, pain, a desire to die.

The Lord Ruler held her face close to his own, looking into her eyes. In that
moment, she knew the truth. She could see a piece of him; she could sense his
power. His . . . godlike power.

He wasn’t worried about the skaa rebellion. Why would he have to worry? If he
wished, he could slaughter every person in the city by himself. Vin knew it to
be the truth. It might take him time, but he could kill forever, tirelessly. He
need fear no rebellion.

He’d never needed to. Kelsier had made a terrible, terrible mistake.

“Your father, child,” the Lord Ruler prompted, his demand like a physical
weight upon her soul.

Vin spoke despite herself. “My . . . brother told me that my father was that
man over there. The lord prelan.” Tears rolled down her cheeks, though when the
Lord Ruler turned from her, she couldn’t quite remember why she had been
crying.

“It’s a lie, my lord!” Tevidian said, backing away. “What does she know? She’s
just a silly child.”

“Tell me truthfully, Tevidian,” the Lord Ruler said, walking slowly toward the
obligator. “Have you ever bedded a skaa woman?”

The obligator paused. “I followed the law! Each time, I had them slain
afterward.”

“You . . . lie,” the Lord Ruler said, as if surprised. “You’re uncertain.”

Tevidian was visibly shaking. “I . . . I think I got them all, my lord. There .
. . there was one I may have been too lax with. I didn’t know she was skaa at
first. The soldier I sent to kill her was too lenient, and he let her go. But I
found her, eventually.”

“Tell me,” the Lord Ruler said. “Did this woman bear any children?”

The room fell silent.

“Yes, my lord,” the high prelan said.

The Lord Ruler closed his eyes, sighing. He turned back toward his throne. “He
is yours,” he said to the Inquisitors.

#### Tevidian is killed
Immediately, six Inquisitors dashed across the room, howling in joy, pulling
obsidian knives from sheaths beneath their robes. Tevidian raised his arms,
crying out as the Inquisitors fell on him, exulting in their brutality. Blood
flew as they plunged their daggers over and over again into the dying man. The
other obligators backed away, looking on in horror.

Kar remained behind, smiling as he watched the massacre, as did the Inquisitor
who was Vin’s captor. One other Inquisitor remained back as well, though Vin
didn’t know why.

#### Kar is granted authority over the Ministry
“Your point is proven, Kar,” the Lord Ruler said, sitting wearily on his
throne. “It seems that I have trusted too much in the . . . obedience of
mankind. I did not make a mistake. I have never made a mistake. However, it is
time for a change. Gather the high prelans and bring them here—rouse them from
their beds, if need be. They will witness as I grant the Canton of Inquisition
command and authority over the Ministry.”

#### Kar requests to question Vin
Kar’s smile deepened.

“The half-breed child will be destroyed.”

“Of course, my lord,” Kar said. “Though . . . there are some questions I wish
to ask her first. She was part of a team of skaa Mistings. If she can help us
locate the others . . .”

“Very well,” the Lord Ruler said. “That is your duty, after all.”






