# The dialouge of Seth and Cain

## Author's preamble
For most works, a preamble should not be neccesary, and the inclusion of one
would indicate some sort of incompletness of the author. If the author must
take time out of the readers life to tell them what he is about to tell them,
it is usually the sign of a poor writer.

But in this case, since the source material is so sacred to some individuals, I
must give a few words about what this is, and what it is not.

I am not recounting historical facts about things that happened six thousand
years ago. I am not placing any significance to these stories any more than I
placing significance on Shakespeare, or on Bach. This story is the result of a
psycholgoical experiment.

I asked myself, "If Cain and Seth were to meet, what would they talk about?"

And so, I told myself that they would talk about their commonalities, notably,
their parents. What this does is it allows me to write and re-write the Adam
and Eve story from many points of view within one dialouge.

Beyond being an intellectual exercise in story telling masterbation, what it
does is it allows me to work with each individual story on it's own, and then
to place it together with the rest to create the most complete picture of the
Garden of Eden that I can imagine in my head.

I also want to make one thing clear. In this story, there is no one "correct"
interpretation. After reading this, one might be left with the feeling that
they have no further insight into anything about anything when it comes to Adam
and Eve. In fact, you might even say that what I wrote is something of an
incoherent mess, and that it should be discarded as mere "Christian
Fan-fiction." If you think so, then I can't convince you otherwise, but what i
want to say is that the story is the story, and anything else that you would
like to discuss about the story could be one way of looking at the story.

But I don't want to get to caught up my own ass here. At the end of the day,
I'm just a guy that wrote the Adam and Eve story from too many different
angles, and felt compelled for whatever reason to compile them all together
into one coherent narrative. The point is, I, as the writer, am not even
omniscient of "what actually happened" within my own story, so neither should
the reader. Instead, this is just the story that I know, that came to me as if
in a dream, that I then used to build this narrative.

Enjoy.

