## 1. The Eden of Eve

Our story begins with the birth of a child named Seth. Seth was born to a man
named Adam and a woman named Eve. As far as Seth was aware, he was an only
child. Or at least, he thought he was the first child.

As an infant, Seth developed as regularly as infants might. He learned how to
do things like babble when he needed to babble, and then he learned to walk
when he needed to walk. Eventually, he learned to talk and reason, and from
there he began to learn about the world around him.

Some of the earliest memories that Seth has are of learning to herd the sheep,
and harvest the crops at the farm of his parents. His father did most of the
sheparding work, and his mother did most of the farm work. Seth would help each
of them in their own time, as they required.

As Seth grew in age, so did he mature in his understanding of the world around
him.

One day, just like any other day in that time, Seth was helping his mother
harvest the crops because it was the season for harvesting, and when the end of
the day began to approach, Seth's mother addressed him.

"Seth," Eve began. "I greatly appreciate your help with these crops. You're
service here is most appreciated."

"Of course, mother," Seth replied. "I'm always happy to help."

Seth was around eight years of age when this occured.

"Come, let's finish for the day. Join me in the hut, I would like to tell you a
story."

Seth, after he finished shearing off the last of the crops that he was
gathering for the day, stowed away his farming tools, and made his way inside
the cottage his mother told him to meet her in, and met her there.

Inside, his mother had began to brew some tea. She took it out, and handed it
to Seth.

"Seth," Eve began. "Let me tell you the story of how your father and I came to
be."

Seth graciously accepted the tea, and began to sip from it.

"You see, up to this point, I am sure you are thinking that your father and I
were born, just like you were, and that we each have parents of our own, who
conceived of each of us just as we have conceived of you."

Seth paused for a moment before he replied. "I haven't thought about it much,
but now that you mention it, I have always assumed you had a mother and father
just like I do. Are you here to tell me that this is not the case?"

Eve slowly nodded her head. "Yes, Seth. Your father and I agreed that when you
were old enough, we would tell you the story of how we came to be. I have
decided that you are old enough, and so I will tell you know the story of the
Garden of Eden."

Eve took her seat and began to settle in with her tea. She began her story.

"So as I said, both me and your father were not born in the same way that you
were. Your father and I, well, we are both the first male and the first female
ever to exist on this planet earth."

Seth took in the information, but wasn't sure what to make of it just yet. Eve
continued.

"You see, the earliest that your father or I can remember is to a faraway
place, some place full of light, and glorious sound, that fills your every
essence with pure joy. After that, the first thing both of us remember
consciously was being in a garden together, with the bodies we have now,
standing next to eachother, naked.

"I was greatly confused when I first saw your father. Mind you, at the time I
did not know that he would be your father. In fact, I remember both him and I
being greatly confused. The first thing I remember was your father asking me,
'Who are you?' to which I replied, 'I don't know, and who are you?' and he
replied, 'I don't know'

"So obviously, both of realized that the other was in similar predicament.

"But we quickly came to realize that all around us was a beautiful garden. Only
a brief moment after this realization, both your father and I heard a voice
from the sky. It told us...

"'I am Yahweh, creator and giver of life. You are my creation, each of you made
perfectly in my image. You are to explore the garden I have made for you, and
name all of the living beasts on the ground and the birds of the air and the
fish of the water and the trees with their fruit. After you have named these
things, you are to have dominion over them, and consume them for your
nourishment. All of these things I have made for you. However, there is one
plant that you shall not eat of. The mushrooms of awakening, which grow in the
center of the garden, you shall not eat of, for they are forbidden from you to
eat. But all else is yours to enjoy.'

"So Yahweh spoke to your father and I. Your father's immediate reaction was to
ask a question of Yahweh, but when there was no immediate answer, he turned to
me, and said, 'Did you hear that voice?'

"Of course, I had heard the voice, and replied to him, 'Yes, I did. Did you
hear it too? What did it tell you?'

"At this point, both your father and I corraborated our stories. We both came
to an understanding about what we had heard.

"So, your father and I began our lives together. We became as two fawns, each
finding the other for the first time. We would spend days roaming the garden,
seeing the amazing and fanciful things that were there to behold. We would swim
in the lakes, and name the fishes that swam under us as we did. We would run
through the meadows, and identify the beasts of the trees, and the flowers of
the fields. Your father loved me, and I loved him. It was a truly joyous time
to be alive."

Eve stopped her story for a moment. She looked over at Seth and saw that he was
completely entranced.

"Oh, but look at me, I caught myself daydreaming. How silly of me."

Eve continued her story. "Well, one day, your father and I were visited by an
angel, the angel Raphael. He told us the dangers of one who fought against
Yahweh in the wars of the angels in heaven. His name was Lucifer, now called
Satan, and he was said to have been outcast to a place called Pandemonium,
along with all the other traitorous angels that fell with him. We asked him
questions about the garden, about our creator Yahweh, and also some other
things, and Raphael answered our questions as best he was able.

"So having been warned of Satan, your father and I decided on our course of
action. Your father thought that it would be wise if he and I stayed together.
But I argued that if we were to change our habits, then Satan had in some way
already won. Your father did not like it, but we agreed to continue to live our
lives fearless of this fallen angel that Raphael told us about.

"Oh, if only I had listened to your father, things might not have turned out
this way. I tell you, one day, when I was gathering berries in the shrubs of
the garden, I saw a snake slither by my feet. Now, snakes were nothing new to
me at the time, I had seen a snake before, but then this snake walked up to me
on it's four legs and looked me squarely in the eyes. Then I tell you, Seth,
the snake began to speak to me. It said,

"'It is a rare day that a snake such as myself runs across such a beautiful
creature as you. The sight of you gives me the greatest pleasure any snake
could ever know.'

"Of course, I was startled at this. You see, Seth, while I had seen a snake
before, I had never seen a snake actually _talk_ to me before.

"I replied, 'Oh my, a talking snake! How ever did you learn how to speak?'

"'Oh, how, you ask?' the snake replied. 'Well, I only ate of the mushrooms of
the center of the garden, and from them I gained the knowledge to speak. Come
with me now, you should try some.'

"Of course, I was wary. Immediately I told the snake, 'No, my creator named
Yahweh told me to never eat of the mushrooms of the center of the garden. I
shall not disobey him.'

"And then the snake replied, clever as he is, 'Ah, but you see, I come from
Yahweh as well. He has sent me to tell you that it is now time for you to eat
of the mushrooms of the center of the garden. Come with me, and partake of
them.'

"The snake then began to slither away towards the center of the garden where
the mushrooms were, and me, still entranced by the idea of a talking snake,
followed it. I had no reason to disbelieve that the snake was telling the
truth.

"So I followed the snake to the center of the garden. When I got there, there
was a great tree, and wrapped around the tree, the snake had coiled itself all
the way to the top. Then, from the top of the tree, the snake lowered it's
head, and said to me, 'Eve, from words of Yahweh himself, I instruct you to eat
of the mushrooms of awakening, so that you may awake from your sleep and gain
the knowledge of all that there is to know in this world!'

"Again, I had no reason to disbelieve that the snake was not sent by Yahweh, so
I gathered some mushrooms from the base of the tree, and ate them.

"'Good' the snake replied. 'Now, take some and go to your husband Adam. Yahweh
requests that he eat of the mushrooms of awakening just as you have.'

"So I gathered some of the mushrooms, and began to make my way back to our
cottage.

"When I arrived at our place, I waited for your father to return from hunting.
When he returned, I said to him, 'Oh Adam, I have wondourous news for you.
Yahweh has spoken to me and has instructed me that we are to eat of the
mushrooms. I have gathered them and brought them here.'

"At this, your father turned white, and after he gathered himself, he asked,
'You have not eaten of the mushrooms, have you?

"When I told him that yes, I had eaten the mushrooms already, it was then that
he told me what he had learned earlier that day.

"He said, 'Oh, no, my innocent, naive, wife. The snake that told you to eat of
the mushrooms of awakening did not come from Yahweh. I have only just now
finished speaking with Raphael. He came down again and found me to tell me that
Satan himself has entered the garden disguised as a snake, and that we need to
be aware that as long we do not obey his commands he is powerless against us.
But now, you have already obeyed his words, and so now he has power over us.'

"I looked back at your father somberly. I began to weep.

Eve paused for a moment. Seth could see that she had a tear in her eye in that
moment of simply retelling the story.

"Your father," Eve continued, after gathering herself for a minute. "Bless him,
your father then said, 'I do not want to fall, but I fear that now that you
have fallen it is only a matter of time before I do as well. I do not resent
you for being deceived by the serpent, if I were in your place I may have done
the same. And if that were so, I know you would have the decency to share in
the fall with me. Your burden is not yours alone own to bear, I must take it
with you.'

"With that, your father took the mushrooms from my hands as I was sobbing, and
ate of them. After he did, we looked at eachother, and saw that the other was
naked, and we were ashamed, so we hid ourselves.

"It wasn't until a bit later that we heard the voice of Yahweh again. He asked
us 'why are you hiding?' and we replied, 'we are hiding because we are naked
and ashamed.'

"Yahweh sighed, and told us, 'Indeed, if you are ashamed of your nudity, than
the fallen one has come to you, and I am too late. You have eaten of the
mushrooms of awakening, and that which is awoken cannot be put back to sleep.
Leave now, you are exiled from my garden. From this point forward, you are to
till the ground for nourishment, and gather the livestock for sustenance. You
are to labor for your living, and pay your dues for your transgression. Leave
this garden, and never return.'

"So Yahweh spoke to us. Shortly after that, we were addressed by the archangel
Michael. He came to us, and annonced to us, 'I am the archangel Micheal. I am
here to escort you from the Garden of Eden and in to the land of the living.
This will be your last moments here, and you are never to return.

"We understood the words of the archangel. He escorted us to the gates of the
garden, and instructed us to walk outside of them. Behind us, he sealed the
gates and locked them with seven total locks. Then, seven angels came down from
heaven, and received the key to each lock, and each left individually back up
to heaven with the lock in hand. After this display of angelic prowess was
concluded, Michael turned to us.

"Michael began, 'Now, Adam, go forth. Be fruitful, and multiply. For your kind
will surely have a great history on this planet. But forever will you be one
step removed from your creator Yahweh, because in this place he cannot
interfere. Fear not, though, for in time, Yahweh will send his son, to come
down from heaven and live as one of you. Through his actions he will save
mankind from your original sin.'

"So Michael instructed us. And that concludes the story of the Garden of Eden
as I experineced it."

Eve finished her story and took a long look in to Seth's eyes. She could see
that he was falling asleep, so she asked him, "How did you like the story,
Seth?"

Seth, now being asked a direct question, opened his eyes suddenly, and said,
"No mom, I wasn't falling asleep, it's a great story!"

Eve laughed, and said, "Good Seth. Well, you've had a long day with me, you
must be tired. I will leave you here for the night so that you can have great
dreams for the morning. Good night, Seth."

With that, Eve kissed the forehead of the exhausted Seth, and layed him down on
the bed that was in the cottage. She left, and extinguished the candles as she
did. She made her way back to the main house, where Adam was waiting for her to
join him in bed.

