## 2. The Cain of Adam

Seth awoke that morning feeling rejuvinated and ready to return to his parents.
When he did, they welcomed him back with open arms as they always do and they
continued to live out their lives. Much of their days were spent tending to the
livestock or cultivating the farms, and as Seth continued to age, he began to
understand that he would be the successor of all that his parents owned. As
such, he continued to maintain a sense of responsibility when it came to
understanding how to manage the farms and the livestock on his own without the
aid of his parents.

And so he learned from each of them how to maintain all of the land that Yahweh
had given them.

Years went by. In those years, Seth had many more conversations with both his
father and his mother about various topics. Most times, the conversations were
about what had occurred in the day, or in the state of the farms. Seth had also
heard the Garden of Eden story from his father. His father's version was much
like his mother's.

Then, when Seth was twelve years of age, after he and his father had finished
herding the sheep and the livestock for the day, his father paused as he and
Seth were returning tools to their proper place, when Adam said to Seth, "Come
with me, let's walk."

When Seth had finished putting up his equipment, he followed his father out the
door and in to the plains.

After they had walked for some minutes, Adam spoke up.

"So I am afraid your mother and I have not been entirely honest with you over
these years. We agreed that when you were old enough, I would tell you the
story about your brothers."

Seth was confused. "But I don't have brothers. What are you talking about? I am
your only child, am I not?"

Adam looked deeply into Seth's eyes. "No, I tell you, you are not. The reason
you do not know your brothers is because a great tragedy took place before you
were born. Let me now tell you of the tragedy of Cain and Abel."

So Adam began the story of Cain and Abel as he understood it.

"After your mother and I were exiled from the garden of Eden, we took Michael's
words to heart. He told us to be fruitful and multiply, and so we did. Our
first child was your brother Cain.

"Cain was a great child, and your mother loved him very much. From the moment
he was suckling her breast, he was with her as she was farming. His first word
was 'Crop' and he learned when he was two how to handle the farm equipment
with the help of his mother. He was born and raised greatly by his mother, and
he became a great farmer because of it.

"Many years later, your mother and I decided to bear a child again. This time
we conceived, and your brother, Abel, was born. Cain was a teenager as Abel was
an infant, and did not take kindly to competing with Abel for the attention of
his... well your... mother."

Adam paused, and looked Seth in the eyes before continuing his story.

"Because of Cain's jealousy, as soon as Abel was finished breastfeeding, your
mother handed him off to me so that I could raise him while she gave her
attention back to Cain. I took the responsibility of raising Abel, just as she
had taken the responsibility of raising Cain.

"I taught your brother Abel everything I knew about gathering livestock. He
became a natural shepard. In fact, it was even Abel's idea to form a
relationship with a particular breed of dog that was surprising proficient at
being trained to gather sheep with little fuss. Abel was truly a great
sheaperd, and he greatly surpassed me in his abilities."

"What happened to them, my brothers, I mean?" Seth asked.

"Well..." Adam began to trail off. "There is no easy way to put this, so I will
just lay it out to you bluntly. Your brother Cain murdured your brother Abel."

Seth looked shocked. "Murdered? But what would compell him to do such a thing?
You must explain."

Adam looked to his son. "You see, Cain was jealous of Abel even after he had
finished breastfeeding from your mother. Abel grew up to be a talented and
proficient shepard, and all he knew how to do was gather crops with his mother.
He resented us for raising him as he did, and he accused us of favoring Abel
over him when it came to things like love and affection.

"Your mother and I thought it might just simply be a phase, that as both he and
Abel grew older, he would come to be more understanding of his brother. But he
did not. In time, he only grew more resentful, and in his resentment he brought
himself to hatred. Over the years, I saw him transform from a happy farmer to a
bitter young man, and all the while he continued to curse both us and his
brother for his position in life.

"It was one harvest, when we were gathering the goods from both the crops and
the livestock to make a sacrifice to Yahweh that your brother finally acted
out. During the sacrifice, I said, 'Thank the lord for our son Abel, that he
has gathered these sheep here today to give thanks and sacrifice to our lord
Yahweh.'

"To this, Cain replied, 'But what of my sacrifice of wheat and barley? Does
Yahweh not appreciate those things as well?' And Seth, I told him, 'Well your
sacrifice is surely looked upon with favor to the Lord, but I wanted to
recognize Abel's sacrifice specifically this year, as he has been working hard
and has become quite successful in the fields.'

"At this, something inside of Cain changed. I saw it happen in real time. He
began yelling at me. He grew menacing, and began shouting at me. I would tell
you everything he yelled at me, but I must be honest with you Seth when I tell
you that I don't remember the words that he said. It's been over twenty years
since this happened, so I am foggy on the details."

Adam paused and looked up at Seth. "Are you following me so far."

Seth nodded. Adam continued his story.

"Anyway, after Cain was finished yelling at me, he started yelling at his
brother. Cain had gotten upset with Abel before, but not like this. This was
something else entirely.

"Your mother, seeing that what was happening to Cain,
attempted to interfere. She stepped between Abel and Cain, and told your
brother Cain, 'Young man, you must lower your voice and cease threatening your
brother Abel in this way. You are not to speak to him like that at
any point, much less in the presence of our lord Yahweh in a time of sacrifice.
Confess remorse for your actions and pray to the Lord for forgiveness so that
we may resume our ceremony.' So your mother said, or something of the sort.

"Of course, your mother's decision to interfere was the correct one, but then
what happened next surprised both of us. Cain began to yell at his mother. He
called her terrible names, and began to defile her with his words as he
blasphemed the Lord God in front of his mother and everyone there. Again, you
must forgive me, I don't remember the details, but as soon as he started
yelling at his mother, I decided to step in.

"'Cain,' I told him, as I got between him and his... your... mother. 'You are
to cease blaspheming the Lord's name in this place, and you are to apolgize to
your brother for your behavior.'

"At this, Cain looked at both of us. I tell you, I remember vividly, something
of a serene calm seemed to come over him as he turned to both of us and said,
'Mother, father, I am supremely sorry for my actions, I don't know what sort of
devilry has overcome me. Oh my, I have just realized what I have done and what
I have said, and I have acted so immature. Please, both of you, forgive me for
this, I did not mean to tell you how I felt in this way.'

"Your mother and I both forgave him, and then he continued. 'Please, leave me
alone with my brother Abel so I might make ammends with him as I have made
ammends with you.'

"So, your mother and I seeing a change in heart in our child, decided to leave
that place so that Abel and Cain might reconcile."

Adam paused for a moment, and looked back at Seth.

"Well?" Seth asked, "What happened?"

Adam looked back at his son. "Seth, there was no way for your mother or I to
know what would happen next."

Adam paused again, and looked into Seth's eyes. "Son, this is the time when
Cain slew your brother Abel. I don't want to get into the details, because the
manner in which your brother Cain destroyed and defiled the corpse of your
brother Abel is beyond words."

Seth and Adam stopped where they were walking. They had ended up walking to the
top of a mountain, where they could both see the sunset in the distance. The
landscape stood out to both of them burnt orange under the setting sun.

"Suffice it to say," Adam continued after a breif pause, "when your mother and
I had heard of what your brother Cain had done, we were all together alarmed,
furious, deeply saddened, and greatly troubled. The most immediate danger was
the threat that Cain posed to your mother and I. Immeditaly I had to take
action.

"I lunged on to your brother, my son Cain, and I pinned him down, and tied him
up. With his arms behind his back, I told him this. I said, 'You are my son,
your mother and I raised you, and I will not bring myself to kill you for this
evil that you have committed. But know this. You are never to set foot on my
land or my farms ever again. You must find your own farms, and your own land,
and live for yourself. Because you are never welcome to on my property ever
again.'

"With that being said, I untied him cautiously, and your mother and I watched
as he walked away from this land, never to be seen again by any of us."

Adam looked again at Seth. The sun was almost nearly set, and both Adam and
Seth were beginning to lose vision of eachother in the darkness that was
emerging.

"Let us make our way back to the house, there is not much more to the story."

"Is my brother Cain still alive somewhere?" Seth asked.

"I don't know," Adam replied. "I believe so, but I can't know for sure. I am
certain that we have not seen him near this property, so your mother and I are
inclined to believe that he at least obeyed us in exile and has not yet
returned.

"After Cain left, we took your brother Abel and took his body and brought it to
the alter and gave it to God. Your mother and I, after some time, came to
remember our responsibilty as given to us by the Archangel Michael, and decided
to have a third child. That child was you, Seth."

Seth looked back at his father. He could barely see him in the night sky, but
he saw his silohette as they made their way back to the cottage.

"Your mother and I decided to raise you together this time. We agreed that
after you were done breastfeeding, you would have as much time with me as you
did with her. So far, we feel it is working out."

Seth agreed. He enjoyed the relationship he had with both his mother and his
father. He wouldn't trade his existance for anything.

"You are a good child Seth, and it's a great tragedy what happened to your
brothers. Your mother and I wanted you to know when you were ready."

"Will I ever meet Cain?" Seth asked.

"Oh, I would say not," said Adam. "I cannot overstate how vile some of the
things that he said after he killed your brother were. I dare say that he was
truly posssessed by the lord Lucifer himself to do the things that he did. It
is tragic that the Devil has found his way in to our lives so long after our
fall in the Garden of Eden, but alas, we must continue to show our faith in
Yahweh that this is all part of his great plan. If you ever see your brother,
you should assume that he is dangerous and cunning. It is even possible that he
has been entirely possessed by the lord Lucifer himself. It is not worth the
risk to interact with him."

Seth pondered this for some time. Suddenly, as they made their way back to the
cottage, Seth realized that he was dreadfully tired, and was nearly ready to
collapse on the path that he and his father were walking.

Adam picked up Seth and carried him to the cottage. There, he lay Seth down,
kissed him on the forehead, and said, "Good night, my son. May your dreams
reveal to you the truth as I have told it to you."

With that, Adam closed the door as he left the cottage, and made his way back
to the house, where Eve was waiting for him to join her in bed.

