## 3. Seth's Demons

When Seth awoke the next morning, he walked outside to find his mother working
on the farms.

"Good morning mother," Seth annonced across the way as he stepped out of the
cottage.

"Good morning, son," Eve replied as she continued working the farm equipment.

Seth got ready, and began to help her with the equipment.

"So father told me about my brothers," Seth said out loud to his mother.

"I know," Eve replied to her son. "Your father and I agreed that your were
ready to hear the story. If there is anything you want to know, you can always
ask."

Seth paused before he replied, "I think father covered it pretty well. I just
want to know. What was Abel like?"

Eve paused. "Well, he was a great shepard, much like your father is, and much
like you are becoming. Your father and I both loved him very much."

"And what about Cain?" Seth asked his mother.

Eve paused. "We loved your brother Cain very much as well. We loved them both."

Seth left the conversation at that.

A couple more years went by.

In those years, Seth continued to grow. He gained knowledge about the farms
from his mother, and skills in shepherding from his father. He continued to
help them both maintain the land, and uphold the livestock.

When Seth was fourteen years of age, he got an idea in his mind. During dinner
with both his mother and father there, he posed a proposition to them.

Seth began, after they had finished eating dinner for the day. "Mother, father,
I have something I want to ask of you."

Adam and Eve put down their silverware. Eve spoke up, "What is it Seth? What is
it you want to ask of your father and I?"

"Well," Seth began, "I have been doing some thinking, and well, both you and
father have seen other regions besides this farm. Not only have you both seen
the Garden of Eden, but you have roamed the lands extensively before you have
setlled here, where the land is ripe and the livestock is plentiful.

"But I have lived here my whole life. I have not seen even outside of my own
backyard, much less have I seen anything as fantastical as the Garden. I wish
to go on a pilgramage, so that I might see the land around us, and come to
discover what else the world might have to offer."

At this, Adam and Eve looked at eachother. In their eye contact, they spoke an
entire conversation to eachother. After that conversation, Adam turned his eyes
to Seth, and said, "Son, I must tell you, your mother and I are in favor of
this pilgramage. However, we must also warn you that such a thing is very
dangerous, and without the proper precautions, you will be trampled by the wild
beasts of the forest, and be left starving by the lack of reliable nutrition.

"Still," Adam continued, "we want to encourage you on this pilgramage,
if it is truly what you want to do. Nothing but good things can come of this,
if we are to take the proper steps to ensure your safety."

Adam turned back to Eve, and Eve then spoke up. "Oh, my son, Seth, how much you
have grown. Yes, it is at this age that you should go out and see the world for
yourself. How exciting that will be for you!"

So Seth, seeing that he had met the approval of both his parents, planned with
his father the best ways to prepare for his pilgramge, gathering weapons to
defend himself with, and gathering a sack of preserved meat and food to carry
with him for nutrition.

After some days of gathering supplies and preparing himself, Seth made off for
his pilgramage.

"Go, my son," Adam said as Seth was preparing to walk off. "Discover the world
for all it has to offer, that you may see it for what it is."

"Yes," Eve chimed in. "Narrow is the path that leads to salvation, in God, my
son, should you walk through that path."

"Thank you mother, thank you father." Seth told both his parents. "I am
grateful for your permission to attend this pligramage. I will return in my
time. I await to see your faces again."

"And we will await you with open arms," Adam said as Seth hugged both his
father and his mother before heading out.

Seth walked away into the distance as the sun rose behind him. In the dawn of
the early morning he could still see the dew where he placed his feet in the
grass. He made his way west with the sun at his back to begin his pilgramage.

After a few days of walking, making camp, eating, and continuing on, Seth began
to grow weary of his journey. So far, all of the scenery had been the same, and
he felt that he was possibly wasting his time doing nothing at all. But he
continued to walk forward anyway, resolving not to give up his pilgramage after
only a few days. He had packed out over eighty days worth of food, so he
decided he would turn around as he approached forty days out, and he was not
near the turning point yet.

After a couple of weeks, though, Seth grew disheartened, and nearly turned
around and made his return journey right then. However, the thought of
returning to his parents after only thirty days seemed defeatist, so he elected
to continue on despite the dullness of it all.

Then, as Seth reached the edge of the forest that surrounded his parents farms,
he hiked his way to the top of a mountain, and looked out over a new crest that
he had just arrived at.

The landscape in front of Seth was swamp as far as Seth could see.

This was the most alive, and vibrant, swamp that Seth had ever seen. In fact,
it was the only swamp Seth had ever seen. In the water he saw that there was
algea growing with seaweed, along with all sorts of minnows and amphibous
creatures. He saw frogs hopping on lilypads, and toads eating insects with
their long tongues. On the ground he saw all sorts of leaves, with reptiles and
birds walking and flying about. And in the trees he could see certain kinds of
maginificent birds of prey each in their own nest.

Out in the distance of the swamp, Seth was also able to make out something that
looked to him like a small hut.

This new landscape was a lot for Seth to take in. All his life, he had lived in
the farms, with a view of vast meadows and rolling hills to give him company.
Now, on his journey, he had found an entire habitat that he had no idea
existed. Seth was experiencing a truly orginal experience that he had never had
before, and he was doing so without the guidance of his parents.

Frightful, yet very curious, Seth began to make his way down from the summit of
the hill he was on, and in to the water of the swamp. When Seth made it to the
shore where the water of the swamp met land, he slowly placed first one foot,
and then the other, in to the shallow water. When he was confindent that he
could put his full weight in to the ground without falling through, he took
first one step out, then another, followed by a third, until Seth was
confindent enough to begin walking through the swamp. Seth resumed his
pilgramage, now walking through swamp instead of forest.

Seth made himself familiar with his surroundings. He noticed that the few trees
which did grow were covered in this slimy substance that was later to be named
moss, and he also noticed that there were many flying insects that hovered over
the surface of the water which he was hiking through. He also felt by his feet
that sometimes a fish would swim through his feet, which would startle Seth as
he felt an alarming sensation at his ankles. Seth prayed that the fish would
not harm him, and continued walking through the water.

Seth began walking at first with little sense of direction, and as he
eventually became more comfortable in the swamps, he remembered the hut he saw
in the distance as he looked on from the top of the cliff. Seth looked out
again for the hut, but was not able to see it again from the place he currently
stood. Still, he decided that he would make his way in the direction he
rememebered seeing the hut, if nothing else for the sake of having a definite
direction to walk.

Seth continued to make his way through the swamp towards the direction where he
remembered that he saw the hut. As he did, he couldn't help but wonder if his
parents knew about this place at all. His parents had told him about the
Garden, and also about a place that they described to him as "the desert" which
contained nothing but vast ammounts of what they called sand which spanned
endlessly in every direction, but they had not told him about this swamp.

Seth was idly pondering the question of whether or not his parents had ever
seen the swamp before when he was jolted into high alert by a voice that
shouted at him from some distance off.

"You there," the voice yelled at Seth. "What business have you trespassing on
my swamp?"

Seth turned first to his left, then to his right, but he could not identify
where the voice was coming from.

"Answer me." The voice yelled again.

Seth was not sure what to do. "I come in peace," Seth yelled. "I am here on a
pilgramage. I mean you no harm."

Seth heard silence return to him. Seth looked around again and again saw no
one. Then, Seth looked in front of himself, and saw a person in front of him.

"Hello friend," the man approached Seth. "If you come in peace, then I must
cordially invite you to join me in my humble abode."

Seth was frozen in place. He was not sure how to respond. Seth looked at the
features of this person that was approaching him. He was tall and well built,
but also with many scars. The largeness of the man reminded him of his father,
but this man was larger than even his own father.

Seth eventually came to himself, and mustered up a response. "Yes, I would like
that. I saw your hut from the hill up there, and was trying to find it. I am
glad we have met."

The stranger replied, "I see we can agree to be friends, then. Please, follow
me."

Seth followed the stranger in to his hut. When they made their way inside, Seth
was quite impressed with how sophisticated it was. In one corner, the stranger
had arranged an entire brick oven. When they entered the cottage, Seth could
smell the aroma of warm bread being baked.

"There is some land to the south and west of here where I am able to grow some
of the best wheat and barely," the stranger began, as they made their way in to
the hut. "I was in the process of baking some bread when I saw you moving
outside. It is nearly finished now, would you like to try some?"

Seth accepted the offer of the stranger, and received some bread.

"Take this bread and eat. This is the work of my flesh, which I share eagerly
with you. May your stomach forever be full with the bread I have given you."

The stranger also made his way to a barrel that was tucked away in another part
of the hut. Inside of it, the stranger explained, he had been able to prepare
the barley of his fields, and create a strong drink that he like to call
"beer". The stranger offered Seth a glass of it, and Seth agreed to it.

"Take this cup, and drink. This cup is the work of my blood, which I also share
eagerly with you. May your thirst forever be quenched with the with the drink I
have given you."

Seth received the drink, and drank of it as well.

Having now received some bread and enjoyed some beer, Seth was startled back to
reality as the stranger broke the silence between the two of them.

"So I have offered you my food and drink, but I have not gotten your name. What
name do you go by, my friend."

In between bites, Seth replied, "My name is Seth. I come from the fields over
the way. What might your name be?"

The stranger looked back at Seth, "What a nice name that is, Seth. My name is
not near so nice. My name is Cain."

Seth froze in his train of thought. Immediately, he threw the bread he was
holding in his right hand to the floor and spat out the beer he was drinking.

"Cain!" Seth exclaimed. "The Cain! I don't suppose the name Abel would mean
anything to you, would it?"

Cain looked back at Seth with a calm but stoic gaze. After some time locking
eyes like that, Cain replied, "The name Abel does mean a quite deal to me,
actually, but I must ask, what might the names Cain and Abel mean to you?"

Seth, however, did not have the mind to reply to Cain's question. Instead, he
said, "Begone, you devil possessed monster! Do not tempt me with your bread or
your barley. I will not let myself be deceived by your trickery as my mother
was!"

"Mother?" Cain picked out the word and began running calculations in his head.
In a short amount of time, he put together the correct puzzle pieces. "But
Seth, calm yourself, we are brothers!"

"You are no brother to me!" Seth shouted. "You killed Abel in cold blood and
insulted both of my parents in front of God and everybody. You are the
possessed reincarnation of the fallen angel Lucifer himself, and you will not
persuade me with your lies or your trickery. Do not attempt any sorcery around
me, because I am aware of your presence, and will not be convinced by your
words."

Cain stared back at a resolute Seth. After some seconds, Cain started laughing.
At first, the laugh was a small chuckle, but after a couple more seconds, the
laughter transformed into a full belly laugh. Seth stared incredulously back
at Cain as he watched Cain laugh.

"Oh, the incarnation of the prince Lucifer himself." Cain muttered between fits
of laughter. "Oh, if only that were so, I might be so fortunate."

Seth looked back at his laughing brother. "So you admit to being the prince
Lucifer then?"

Cain replied, "Oh, my dear, naive, little brother. Oh how my parents... our
parents... have led you so far astray. What can I say our do to convince you
that I am not the incarnation of the fallen angel Satan himself?"

Seth turned back to his brother. "Father told me to be wary of your deception.
There is no way for me to know for sure that you are not the Prince of
Darkness, so I must act under the assumption that whatever you have me do could
be to my demise."

Cain chuckled again. "Ah, the principle to be called Pascal's wager, but in
reverse. I see your mental gymnastics has outdone itself, my young brother
Seth. How old are you now? It's been nearly twenty years since I was exiled
from my parents, so that makes you no older than fifteen, if I had to guess."

Cain looked in to Seth's eyes, and Seth looked away, "Is it fifteen exactly
then? Fifteen years old. That would make sense. That is the age I went on my
pilgramage as well. Tell me, even if you still wish to believe that I am the
Lord of Darkness Lucifer himself, will you at least listen to what I have to
say, and then, after I have finished telling you my story, if you still believe
me to be the King of Pandamonium, you are welcome to leave me and never
interact with me again. How is that?"

Seth eyed Cain cautiously. "And give me one reason not to walk out of here
right now and never see you again?"

Cain looked back, "Because deep down, you know that maybe I really am just your
older brother Cain, that I'm not the re-incarnation of Satan himself, and that
stories you have been told about me have been exaggerated and told from a
biased perspective. Of course, if I were Satan, I would certainly convince you
to listen to my story, and I would do so by appealing to your sense of humanity
as I am right now. However, since I am not Satan, I will leave the choice to you.
If you want to listen to my story, then say so, and I will gladly tell you my
tale. But if you do not care to hear my tale of woe, and instead would like to
label me as the possessed reincarnation of the lord of darkness himself, then
we are in agreement that you should leave this place and never return. Either
one works for me. So how do those options sound?"

Seth thought for a moment about where he was. He was silent for several seconds
as he thought through all of the different facts that he knew about where he
was right now. He knew that he had encountered a man that he thought was a
complete stranger only some minutes previous, and in the course of only very
breif and fleeting moments, he has come upon a whirlwind of discoveries that
his brain quite simply was having a difficult time handling. On the one hand,
he cautioned to his fathers warning, that Cain was a dangerous man, and that
everything outside of the space of the known was potentially ready to ensare
you. But then, on the other hand, he thought to the stories that his parents
had told him, and he thought about his great curiosity in regards to his
brothers. His parents had told him about the existance of two older brothers
that were born before him, but Seth had never gotten to meet either one of
them. One of them, he was told, was dead, but the other was sitting right there
in front of Seth, ready to tell his story to Seth. Seth wasn't even entirely
sure what it meant to be possessed by the Lord of Darkness Lucifer himself, and
when he examined the man that sat across from him, he did not see what looked
like anything other than a man eager to share his tale. After thinking through
what had happened so far, Seth eventually made a reply.

"Why did you kill Abel?" Seth asked.

Cain smiled, and said, "I am glad you decided to listen to my story."

"Don't for a second think that just because I am listening to your story it
means that I don't still believe you are possessed." Seth snapped.  "Perhaps
that's what led you to kill him. I don't know, that's why I'm asking. I'm still
wary of you, and will at any moment leave here if I suspect that you are the
devil attempting to lure me in to some sort of trap."

"Very well then," Cain returned. "Devil or no, I will tell you my tale of woe."

