## 5. Cain's Demons
Seth wasn't sure what to say at this point. He spent a good ammount of time
simply sitting in the hut of his older brother and absorbing the information he
was hearing.

Cain's version of the story of what happened between him and Abel corraborated
with his Father's story. That means that either Cain either really is just
simply the older brother of Seth, or it means that he's a very well-informed
devil. Seth wanted to be sure, so after he came to himself, he gathered the
nerve to break the silence and speak to his older brother.

"Your story, Cain, has me convinced that you are my brother, and not the devil,
but before I can be totally sure, I must ask you one question."

"Name it," Cain replied casually.

"I want you to tell me about mother."

"Mother?" Cain looked back at his younger brother with a look of slight
confusion. "Why do you want me to describe mother to you?"

"Because," Seth argued, "If the person you describe is anything like the mother
I know, then I will have an easier time believing you are not the devil. So
describe her to me so that you may ease my conscious."

"Very well," Cain began. "Well, what is there to say? I have not seen her in
over twenty years, but I suppose I can reveal to you the things I do remember
about her.

"When I go back in to my earliest memories, I have this strange feeling of
warmth and redness come to me. It's as if, before I had the capacity to form
words, I still had the capacity to remember sensations, and so I remember the
sensations that I experienced as a child growing up by the breast of our
mother.

"My earliest concrete memories are of working with my mother in the farms. We
would wake up before sunrise, and eat some breakfast with eggs and toast, and
after eating we would go out in the sunrise and tend the fields. In the spring
times, we would plant and rotate crops, and in the fall times we would
harvest.

"Her hair is the most beautiful color, and when you look in to her eyes, it's
as if you can see all the greatest patterns of the world unfold within her
iris. She is loving to her children and her husband, yet stern in her
discipline. At least, that's what I remember.

"But beyond her appearances, she was quite a lovely human being. Always
charming, wise, and educated. She knew how to handle herself in the world, and
I always admired her for that."

Cain paused before continuing, "Of course, towards the end of our
relationship, I started to disagree with her about the nature of the universe,
and that created some strange tension in our bond. But even in that time, she
still put out this aura of love and kindness that I hold inside of myself still
to this day."

Cain paused for a final time. "I think that about covers everything I can say
about my mother that would resonate with you. Again, I must remind you that I
have not seen her in twenty years, so I might not be able to recall my memory
of her to your complete satisfaction. But still, that is what I have to say of
her. Does this satisfy you?"

Seth looked in to the eyes of Cain. Cain looked back at Seth. Cain could tell
that Seth was still wary.

Seth weighed all of the things that Cain was saying in his head. Eventually,
after all of the whirlwind of thoughts went through Seth's mind, he asked Cain,
"So let's suppose you are simply my older brother Cain, no demonic possession
involved. What did you do after you went in to exile?"

Cain paused, and smiled. Cain looked towards Seth, and saw a change in his
eyes, he went from looking through Cain to looking at Cain, and Cain noticed.
Cain noticed that Seth was now looking at him as if he were a person, and no
longer as if he were the devil.

"At first it was rough," Cain answered. "But in time, you come to live with it.
The first three to five years were tough. I had to live off the berries
of the land and off the beasts of the forest, it took me time to find a good
place to settle. There were moments where I thought to myself, 'If only I
hadn't have killed him, I wouldn't be in this predicament at all.' But you
quickly learn that such thoughts don't aid in survival, and you keep making a
life for yourself one step at a time."

There was a pause in the room.

"I would spend hours in a day searching for bushes with adequete berries to
eat, and when I would find them I would only find a handful before I had to
resume searching.

"There were days I became severly depressed. Looking back on it, it's only
natural that such at thing would happen. I had killed my brother and been
exiled from my family. Not only were those things severe in and of themselves,
but also, I was simply alone now. And not only was I alone, but I had no God to
pray to, and family to return to.

"Exile is different than pilgramage. When you go on a pilgramage, you know you
have a place to return to. When you are exiled, I was not sure if I would find
a place to settle and make a life for myself, or if I would die, alone and in
the wild. It's a much more terrifying kind of existance.

"So of course I was depressed. I was alone in the world, and committed the
same, and I would argue worse, orginal sin as both my parents talk about, and
especially without female companionship, I had very little purpose or drive to
continue my seemingly endless struggle to survive.

"But I carried on, as you can see. I am here. After some years, I decided to
move on from my struggles as a nomad, and to make a habitat for myself where I
can live comfortably. It's not much, but it allows me a place to store my tools
and equipment, and it also gives me a place to shelter myself in my sleep. The
facts of my regretable past no longer weighed me down. Instead, I was able to
see myself in the present, and in the present I knew I could build myself a
hut, and so I did."

Seth looked back at Cain.

"I don't think it's possible to use words to describe the kinds of things
I was feeling when I was exiled," Cain continued. "In the future, our children
and our childrens children might come up with words like depression or anxiety
or they might come up with acronyms like Post Tramatic Stress Disorder to
describe the sorts of things that I was going through, but you have to remember
that I have no way to label these things, and had to question my whole reason
for being alive after I was exiled.

"To think, Seth," Cain trailed on, "that after thirty some years of living,
believing that you will become the successor to the land that your parents have
cultivated with your brother Abel, only to have that all turned up side down
within one fist fight, let me tell you that even words like Depression and PTSD
do not even begin to describe the sorts of psychological phenomenon that I went
through that day.

"The only way I can describe it is that it was like a whole whirlwind of
whisps, all colors of the rainbow, were circling around me in perfect unison,
and then because I wanted to keep that rainbow for myself, I grabbed a knife,
and I cut off the whisps at the stem and grasped them in my hands. But when I
did that, the colors went away, and the whisps died, and all you have left is
the dead whisps in your hand, and the only thing you want is for them to reveal
color again, but you know that they never will again. That is one way I can
describe the feeling that I felt in that moment.

Cain paused before continuing with another example. "It was like the bottom of
an infinite sheet of glass shattered underneath from me, and where I was once
standing on what I thought was solid ground I have come to realize is extremely
fragile glass that shatters as soon as I touch it. I want to grab on to the
hole that I fell through, but everywhere you grab, it's as if the glass
shatters in your hands, and cuts you, and the more you try to get back to
standing on top of the glass so you can stop drowning, the sharper the glass
gets, and the more you hurt yourself, and the more you question the entire
reason to exist in the first place.

"I started to reason that maybe standing on top of the glass is no more
interesting than drowning under it, and I thought maybe drowning under the
glass would give me some kind of realease. I wouldn't save myself the pain of
drowning (once that starts it's impossible to escape) but if nothing else
perhaps I could escape the constant struggle I was experiencing in trying to
simply find my feet and return to solid ground. I was hurt, and I found myself
evaluating whether or not it was worth bearing the burden of that pain for the
sake of maintaining my life.

"Of course, I didn't actually fall through a sheet of glass in actuality, but
imagary like this is the only way I know how to describe it. It was a very dark
time in my life."

Seeing that Seth was still interested Cain continued. "The stress I felt was
not only psychological, but also physical. I lost my desire to eat. I attempted
to hunt food, but I found no motivation to chase wounded animals. It felt like
too much work. I was exhausted and hurt at all times. My feet transformed from
the soft feet of a comfortable farmer to the bruised and scarred feet of a time
traveled forest dweller. I felt defeated and bruised, and at times I fantasized
about curling in a ball and entering a state of homeostasis.

"The food I did gather I had no desire to eat, and I had to force myself to eat
just to stay alive.  There were times I thought I would throw up by eating a
simple berry, but I resisted the sensations of vomiting and proceeded to shove
as much healthy food into my mouth as my stomach could stand to bear.

"Of course, there were times when my appetite would not cooperate no matter how
much I tried to concentrate, and the inevitable purge of all food that I had
been attempting to eat would arrive and I could do nothing but watch as my hard
earned work attempting to eat something, anything, to sustain the most basic
levels of energy that all humans need to survive was being hurled violently
from my stomach and out my throat on to the ground below. I could do nothing
but be disgusted at the good nutrition that was being wasted on the ground
below me.

"I made the mistake once of attempting to eat the vomit, just because it was
there and available, and I felt I didn't have the energy to lift a spear to
hunt a boar. While I was able to pick out most of a rather large chunk of
undigested meat that was still good to eat out of the remains of the stomach
acid on the ground, the next day I became violently ill. I got the shivers, and
could not stop shaking. I grew astoundingly weak, and it took the most
gargantuan of efforts to do even the simplest of tasks like standing up off of
the ground.

"There were times, such as that one, where I thought I might die, but in all
instances, what I found, no matter how close to death I came, I was always able
to find a way to navigate myself in a direction where death would not find me."

Cain paused again for a moment to think about where he wanted to take the rest
of the conversation. He thought for a moment about his mindset during this
portion of his exile, and he knew where he wanted to take the conversation.

Cain: Well, it seems as though time is still moving along as it always has, and
it still seems that I exist, so as long as I exist I have made the decision
that my direction that I choose to walk will always be dictated by working
towards the best kind of existance that I can conceive of in that moment. It's
what I've been doing so far, and so far it seems to have worked pretty well.

Cain and Seth paused for a moment to examine the hut around them. The
homeliness, the craftsmanship, and the cleanliness that went in to the
construction of the building became the forefront thought on the minds of both
Seth and Cain in that moment.

Cain: Well, obviously, I overcame my depression in this way. The levels of
anxiety that I faced, though extreme, and at times, absolutely paralyzing,
ultimately did not kill me. I am now a stronger man as a result of having
survived the things that I have.

Cain: Do not misunderstand me, I would not wish the feelings that I went
through on anyone. Such psychological deconstruction and existential dread is
so severe that on the twisted or warped would wish such a thing on any human
being. Things like depression and anxiety are awful, and now that I have worked
past them I see that there is a way of living my life which isn't framed around
avoiding those things.

Cain: But such a journey takes time, and, well, I hope at least that there has
been at least some evidence of the time I have taken on that journey.

Cain and Seth stopped at that point in the conversation. Seth was getting very
cozy in the cottage of Cain, and was beginning to sip on his tea.


