# Cain's Eden

"Let me tell you, Seth, the origins of my understanding of the world around me.

"I, as it seems also, you, grew up believing our parents story. Namely, I truly
and honestly believed that a diety named Yahweh created existance as we know
it, and that our parents, Adam and Eve, were the first woman and the first man
to exist ever.

"But let me ask you, Seth, when you look deeply in to your soul, is that what
you see? Are you able to cooraborate that story with the world you see around
you?"

Cain paused while Seth pondered this for a moment.

Seth began, "I suppose I do, as I see no reason for mother and father to lie to
both me and you as you suggest."

Cain chuckled. "Of course not. You still haven't seen the pattern of their
discussions, have you? You see, many things that you take as fundamental truths
when you are young you will come to understand as lies when you mature. It's in
how we respond to these lies that defines who we are as individuals."

Seth looked back at his older brother. He wasn't sure what to make of this
whole conversation.

"Think about it," Cain continued. "Mother and Father both have told you stories
about the world that they originally lied to you about. They hid the story of
how I killed your brother from you until you were much older. They also hid the
story of the Garden of Eden from you. Mother and Father have always lied to you
about various stories, why would it be so strange that they have more lies that
they have yet to reveal to you?"

Seth thought about it for a moment, and eventually conceded that Cain was
making quite a good point. After all, his parents had every reason to lie to
him, he was still young, and they had more important things to teach Seth, like
how to shepherd the sheep, and how to rotate crops and till the ground. There
might have been many inconsequential details about his parents past that they
weren't revealing to Seth. There was no reason to believe that this wasn't the
case.

Seth thought through the posibilities for a moment. Although he had conceded
the point that perhaps his parents were being dishonest still, in spite of the
fact that they have also been honest to Seth in some ways, he could not think
of a reasonable alternative story for why it seemed as though him, Cain, and
their parents were the only people that existed on the planet.

So Seth asked Cain, "Tell me your version of the story. How did our parents
come to be, and how did this universe come to be?"

Cain looked back at Seth, and laughed. "Well, I would not presume to know how
the universe came to be. If we could answer that question, we could answer a
great deal many others that I have on my mind. But I can tell you how I believe
our parents came to be...

"Look at us, Seth. Compare our anatomy with the anatomy of a monkey. You and I,
and Mother and Father, we are all very similar in the fact that our shape and
form is rather similar to that of a primate. Yes, it is true that we have less
hair on our bodies, and we compensate for this by covering ourselves with
clothing, but it is undeniable that the shape of our bodies, not only the way
we carry our four limbs but also our internal structure of organs and tissue,
has many similarities with monkies, and in particular, chimpanzees."

Seth was listening to his brother intently, but he wasn't sure where this was
going. Sure, Chimpanzee's were fascinating animals, and Seth had encountered a
couple in his time, but he wasn't sure why his brother Cain was talking about
them now. Still curious, though, Seth let his brother continue.

"Because of our striking similarities to chimpanzee's, my current working
theory is this..." Cain resumed explaining. "Our mother and father were both
the result of a certain kind of chimpanzee eating a particular strain of
mushroom. When this happened, they had something of a religious experience,
which gave them awareness of their own existance. We are the first creatures
ever to become aware of our own consciousness, and it's because of these
mushrooms that we can do it."

Cain paused as he let his statement sink in for a moment. Seth sat in silence.

Seth unsure if Cain was finished or just getting started eventually broke the
silence. "But that is silliness. Are you going to sit there and tell me that we
are no different than Chimpanzees? Clearly we are much smarter and much more
sophisticated than those beasts. How can you claim that we are something so
undomesticated?"

Cain replied, "Oh, I think that the mushrooms that Mother and Father ate did a
great deal as far as seperating our perception of existance from our bodies to
our minds. We are much more than a Chimpanzee could ever hope to become." Cain
looked at Seth and could see that he still wasn't understanding. "Seth, let me
tell you what I found on my pilgramage.

"When I was about the same age as you are now," Cain began, "I decided to go
on a pilgramage, much as you have. When I was on that pilgramage, I wandered in
to a forest. In that forest I lived for nearly one hundred days, and for one
hundred days I explored the leaves and the shrubs of the ground for
nourishment.

"As I was experimenting with new food sources in this forest, I came across
mushrooms which reminded me of the mushrooms mother and father told me about in
their story, from the Garden of Eden.

"As I stood there, I thought, 'perhaps I have accidentally wandered in to the
Garden that Mother and Father talk about in their stories, and I have
accidentally stumbled upon the tree that my mother gathered the original
forbidden mushrooms from.

"So I gathered some of the mushrooms, and I ate of them."

"But why?" Seth inturrupted. "You knew of their dangers, you knew the story
that mother and father told you. Why would you risk it?"

"Risk it?" Cain replied. "When I came upon these mushrooms, I didn't see a
risk. Instead, I saw a potential source of food. Of course, I was aware that
these mushrooms resembled the description that mother and father had told us
about, but that was the only thing that was detering me from eating them. I
don't think I have layed the scene out well enough for you to understand, Seth.

"I was hungry and was looking for food. I had food in my cart, but not near
enough to last me the full seven times seventy days, so I knew that I had to
find other sources of food. I had slain a couple of beasts of the land and
eaten of them, but I could tell that these beasts were not clean, and I became
sickly after eating of them.

"I investigated the ground around me, and even though mother had taught me
many things about how the land behaves at their farms, I knew little about what
sorts of plants grew in the wild. Some plants I would gather and bring with me,
and even upon just touching them, they would give me a rash, so I knew that
eating of the plants haphazardly was certainly dangerous.

"It was around this point that I came upon the mushrooms. Having been
dissapointed by two sources of food so far, I could feel my belly growling for
anything that might satiate my hunger. When I stumbled upon the mushrooms, let
me tell you, at first I was wary, because I did not know if these fungus would
agree with my digestive systems or not. But it was actually our parents story
which led me to convince myself to eat them.

"The way I reasoned was this. I thought, 'If mother and father have already
eaten of these mushrooms, then that means that they are at the very least
digestable, and they won't kill me or make me ill if I eat them.' So that was
the first train of thought.

"Then I thought, 'Well, even if Yahweh did instruct my mother and father never
to eat of the mushrooms of awakening, I personally have never received such
instructions, and I am hungry now with something edible sitting in front of me.
It would be foolish to neglect it over something like a strange story that
mother and father told me in what seemed like at the time decades ago.' And
that was my next train of thought.

"Finally, I reasoned, 'If mother and father have both eaten these mushrooms,
whatever happened as a result has already happened. We have already disobeyed
Yahweh's command, so it would actually be unwise *not* to eat of the mushrooms
anymore, because they contain the seeds of knowledge that both our mother and
father can never escape.' And that was my third argument.

"With these three trains of logic in my head, I decided that it would be better
to eat of the mushrooms than to starve alone in the forest."

Cain looked at Seth. He wasn't sure if Seth was understanding now, or if the
incredulous look on his face just went away, but either way he decided to
continue.

"Seth, let me tell you," Cain resumed, "what happened next was the most
profound thing I have ever experienced."

Cain stopped talking and there was silence. Seth was sitting in anticipation,
and eventually said, "Well? Continue your story. What were the mushrooms like?"

At this, Cain looked at Seth, and then he said, "It is impossible to describe
with words what the experience was like, but I will attempt it." Cain began.

"Immediately after I ate them, I resumed walking in the forest, and I returned
to the place where I had made camp. That day, I had already gathered some
firewood, and I had some meat prepared which I had removed from my bag and
restored. As I returned to my camp, I set up a fire, and as I was cooking my
meat so that I may eat it, I began to hear a voice from the fire. I don't
remember what the voice said to me, but it was not anything like the language
that you and I use today. It was like something else, an entirely new language
that I could somehow understand, but I can't recite to you now.

"After the flames had revealed themselves to me as such, I was able to step
back and see the creator of the universe in the flames. It seemed to me that
the flames were just as alive as the trees, or the beasts, or anything else
that is alive on the ground. And not just the flames, but everything. The trees
around me spoke to me as though they were born out of the goddess of nature
herself, and the waters of the lake engulfed me as I felt the movements of the
currents and the fish come to life in a similar way. Everything that I saw, and
everything that I looked at, seemed to be the most beautiful, the most well
placed, and the most intricate thing that I had ever seen in my life. And in it
all, in the patterns and in the essence of all the things that persisted around
me, I began to see our Lord and Creator.

"And let me tell you, Seth, when you actually see the energy that created all
of this vast and expansive universe, when you get to touch it, even if only for
a moment, the source of all that comes to life in this world, that thing that
you feel is like Yahweh in some ways, but not at all like Yahweh in the ways
that you think are important. Yahweh is not a being. He is not alive like you
or I are alive. God, and I don't mean the God that our parents told us about,
I mean the real and true God that I experienced after eating those mushrooms,
that God is something that is inside of everything. God is better described
better by the patterns and rules which govern this universe than as a
benevolent and omniscient architect like our parents would have you believe."

Cain paused before continuing. "That night when I went to sleep, I had the most
profound dream I have ever experienced in my life. It was so vivid yet surreal.
I was something like the master of my entire being, and I was able to see
myself from the third person, as if I had a third eye and was able to gaze upon
myself from that third eye. I could will something to move in my dream the same
way I can will my index finger to move, and by doing so I had fine grained
control over every aspect of the dream. I was connected on a deep and visceral
level to everything that existed in the dream, but I understood at the same
time that I was not having a dream, and instead I was having a vision that felt
so real that it was impossible to distinguish where reality stopped and where
fantasy began.

"Unfortunately, I don't remember many details of exactly what sorts of vision I
had. Surely, as people become more sophisticated, they will be able to eat of
these things, as well as whatever else is out there in the world to eat and
partake of in this way, and they will be able to do things like draw or animate
the things that they see. But Seth, I am nothing but a lowly farmer, I know
nothing of painting or drawing. I am having enough difficulty speaking to you
right now, because speech is something that I have not practiced in twenty
years. But trust me when I say that from this experience, along with everything
else that I found on my pilgramage, that I began to accept the fact that our
parents are lying to us, and that the world is a much more intrecate and
fascinating place than they would have you or I believe."

Cain stopped for a moment to let Seth take it all in.

"So you can only imagine," Cain resumed, "that when I returned to mother and
father with this new conception of what Yahweh was, they didn't take too kindly
to it. I tried to tell them, I tried to explain to them what I saw as my idea
of how we should conduct ourselves in the universe, but both mother and father
were too closed off to the idea."

Cain paused at this point for a long time, and Seth took everything that Cain
was saying and processesd it as best he could.

Seth was wrestling with his brothers words. It was already difficult enough for
Seth to convince himself to even concede that his brother was a simple human
being just as he was, but the way his brother was talking made Seth wary of his
choice. Seth wanted to interject, but his mind was so muddled with ideas that
he couldn't come up with the right thing to say. Eventually, in an attempt to
understand his brother, he asked the question, "So if you say that you met, or
touched, or came in contact with, the essence and being of the universe, why
not just call that thing God? Why make all of this fuss? Why insist that the
'God' or 'Yahweh' that our parents talk about isn't real, but then continue to
go on about the beauty and trancendence of this other essence that you claim is
indistinguishable from reality? It's as if you reject God, but then fill in the
empty spot with something that is just like God. Why belabor yourself like
this?"

Cain considered Seth's question, and then began his response. "I can't speak
for you, I, as any human being, can only speak for myself. But, I can say, in
speaking for myself, I have learned something very important. Each individual
must find God himself. No one can be shown God. No one can be taken to God.
Each individual must find God in himself, and in seeking it out, and listening
very closly for it, they will find that which resonates most deeply to them,
when the word God is used.

"But our parents would like to turn this process on its head. 'Yahweh' is
something that mother and father both created each in their own image, so that
he may aid them and guide them to a place where they may live. 'Yahweh' is the
version of God which resonate most strongly with our parents. But when 'Yahweh'
is described to me, it does not resonate with me, and so, I must go out and
find something that does.

"And when I found it, or rather, when the mushrooms revealed to me the closest
thing that I have found and experienced that resemebles God as our parents
describe him, I discovered that what I thought our parents were saying when
they said 'Yahweh' was something totally different than what I actually
experienced in that moment. 'Yahweh' or 'God' was something that I felt. But he
wasn't a diety, he was something more like the aura that surrounds everything.
God revealed himself to me as something like a ghost or a spirit which
permeates everything. Perhaps that would be better labeled as the Holy Spirit.

"Regardless of the exact nature of my religious experience, something I learned
vicerally in the aftermath of that experience was that each of us, as an
individual, must grapple with the anatomy of our souls, and no two human beings
will every be exactly alike when it comes to projecting our subconscious into
our conscious thought.

"Our parents would label their God 'Yahweh' and I would label God something
more like 'The doings of the Universe'.

"And if I had my way, such a distinction would not matter. But to mother and
father, it matters..."

Cain mostly trailed off at that point. Seth remained silent. This time, he felt
as though the words of his brother really resonated. Seth also felt at times
that there must be something more to understand about Yahweh than what he heard
from his parents. He felt as though he hadn't spent the time to develop his
sense of the universe enough to bring to life his own conception of what his
parents called 'God' in his own mind. He was beginning to realize that he was
merely accepting his parents words on their own merit, and he began to
understand that he would have to fully capture and encapsulate his own sense of
what "God" might mean to him. The hollow shell of an archetype that Seth had
called to this point "God" seemed to implode in on itself, and in it's place
there were only the cogs and gears at work in Seth's mind that were attempting
to put in the place something more of substance where that hollow shell used to
be. But the image was not complete, it wasn't even really begun, and the idea
of defining God seemed to Seth to be the most overwhelming thing that any man
could attempt to do. In just a few short moments, Seth was starting to realize
that even though his pilgramage was approaching it's completion, the work and
insight that was gained from this journey would take years, even decades, to
fully process and integrate into his daily living.

Seth contemplated all of this in silence before all of it finally overfilled
his thoughts, and he burst out at his brother in a long stream of unbridled
thought.

"So what if 'Yahweh' isn't God, or God isn't 'Yahweh'? You say you have
experineced him, but I have not. I only know the 'Yahweh' that our parents have
told us, but now you are telling me this isn't enough? If it's not enough, then
tell me, Cain, what more can you tell me to make it enough? If understanding
'Yahweh' is not the only thing required to discovering God, then what more need
I to do to discover God?"

Cain listened to his brothers question, then replied, "Well, one suggestion I
would have would be for you to also eat of the mushrooms that I ate of, and for
you to see Yahweh for yourself." Cain paused, then continued, "But I do think I
must give a word of warning, the experince from the mushrooms, although I have
described it in ways that make it sound nothing but profound and insightful, is
also very tumultuous. If you are not in the right mindset, I fear the
experience could lead to great pain. You must not eat the mushrooms
whimsically."

Cain finished before Seth replied. "Alas, I would like to eat of the mushrooms
of awakening, as you have and as our parents have, but I feel very strongly
about obeying Yahweh's word. I understand you, Cain, I think I finally
understand what you are trying to say." Seth paused for a moment and
re-orginized his eye contact on to Cain. "I must find for myself what I think
God is, and while I know that my current projection of 'Yahweh' is incomplete,
I also feel very strongly that disobeying the word of the Lord is possibly the
greatest shortcoming a man can fall to, so I see no reason to risk disobeying
the Lord by eating the mushrooms when we were told explicitly by him not to eat
of them."

Cain waited as Seth finished, and then made his reply. "I will be honest when I
say to you, if you feel that you should not eat the mushrooms, then it is wise
that you should not eat the mushrooms. I would otherwise be tempted to try and
convince you otherwise, but I fear that going in to a mushroom trip with that
sort of mindset could only lead to troubling things.

"But," Cain continued, "If you do not wish to eat of the mushrooms, than I can
offer you no more advice to revealing that which is most like 'God' to you as I
discovered him. I am afraid that I have told you all that I have to help you,
and it's up to you and your essence as a human being to determine the rest."

Seth listened to his brother and knew that what he was saying was true. Seth
understood that, and felt lost. How could he find God? How would he know when
he found him? What kinds of steps even went in to something like that?

Suddenly, as if struck by lightning, Seth got an idea. He began to speak his
idea to his brother. He said, "Cain, you must return with me to the farm.

But when I
talked to them about this, they didn't want to hear it. The didn't even want to
conjecture. Mother and father were so hopelessly attached to the twisted and
perverted reality that they created for themselves that when I tried to talk to
them about that which is truly divine and transcendent, they rejected what I
had to say.

"You know how the rest goes from there..." Cain trailed off. "And let me tell
you, Seth, I wish I had the answers to your questions, but I don't. I wish I
could tell you where the universe came from, but I am not wise enough to answer
that question. In fact, there may never be one wise enough to answer that
question. But I do know that, for whatever reason, you and I both exist, and
our parents exist, and we have the capability to ask these questions. Where
this capability originates from, I don't know. It's even impossible to say
whether or not we will ever know.

--

But what I do know is that we have that, and
as long as we have that, we can still strive to one day reach for the hand of
God.

"But," Cain's voice was getting more excited now, "in that uncertainty, that's
how we develop as human beings. Every one of us, we are each like our own
divine landscape, and on this landscape, inside of all of us, there are
players, actors of a drama. 

--

"So you ate the mushrooms of awakening that come from the devil?" Seth asked.
"Maybe you _are_ possessed then."

Cain chuckled, "Oh, back to this game again? Well if I'm possessed by the devil
because I ate the mushrooms that I found on the ground, then both of our
parents are as well. And on some level, you must have eaten something before
that has been prepared poorly. You certainly wouldn't say that the devil is at
work when you get food poisoning, but it could be said to resemble demonic
possession. Why should the eating of mushrooms be any more insidious than the
eating of wheat or barley which has spoiled?"

Seth listened to his brother Cain and Seth immediately recognized that by
accusing his brother of demonic possession again, he was regressing in the
conversation. Seth returned to the present and looked at his brother Cain again
before interjecting again.

"And

was
regressing in the conversation. 

After I did that, though, the next day, after I had gone to
sleep and experienced the most profound dream that I don't remember of my life,
I woke up with a renewed sense of clarity and purpose. I was no longer the only
human being on this planet to be born of a Mother and Father, I saw myself as
part of something much larger than either myself, or Mother and Father, or any
of it.  We were the beginning of a new kind of animal, and by eating the
mushrooms, I was able to understand that Yahweh could not exist in the way that
my parents think he does, but he exists in a totally different and
psychological way."

At this, Cain gave pause, and Seth interjected. "That seems like an awfully
strange thing to say. As far as I understand, the diety Yahweh is an actually
diety that exists, and created the world as I see it in front of me. Are you
going to tell me that you don't believe that is true either?"

Cain thought for a moment on the question. "No, of course I don't believe in
the literal existance of Yahweh. What I believe is that the name "Yahweh" is
significant to our parent in some way, and when they pray and sacrifice to
"Yahweh", what they are doing is invoking something inside of themselves,
somethnig that they found by eating the mushrooms, and they are invoking in a
way that even they, themselves believe this invocated psychological entity to
be "real" in the same way that you or I is real."

Seth was clearly uncomfortable by the things that Cain was saying



