# Seth and Cain directed writing prompt

The stage is set! Seth has just broken free from his father and found a way out
on his own. However, shortly after Seth's newly found enthusiasm, he begins to
grow weary on his journey. Seth tries to cross a river with his wagon but he
can't. when beelzabub forces Seth to cross the river against his best wishes,
Seth begins to drift out in to the forest before collapsing. Seth comes to in
the small shanty of a man.

(This will not be a prompt so much as it will be a combination of writing and
free-writing)

To this point, the reader understands everything to be as it is set. None of
the stories of the angelic war will be told explictely, but to this point many
mentions to Raphael, Gabriel, Michael, Lucifer, and other angels has been made,
so we know Seth is aware about something that the background of what his
parents have told him. We have not layed out the Garden of Eden story yet, and
it is not the job to spell it out here beyond Seth mentioning something about a
garden and a snake. The reader has no reason to suspect that the Adam and the
Eve of this story are lying to Seth.

When we come upon our stranger, the reader will likely know straight away that
it is Cain. I have not decided yet how much Seth should know about his
background. Probably nothing when I think about it. Seth believes he is the
third human being to ever exist at this point, so the fact that there is
another man here should be disconcerting.

So let us begin with the story told from a third person perspective.

The story
================================================================================

Seth heard the waves of the ocean crash on the shores as he opened his eyes.
_Strange,_ Seth thought _That when I open my eyes the world stays black._

Seth didn't let the thought bother him. Something about this place seemed way
to serene to consider such small trivialities such as whether or not opening
your eyes did anything. Seth felt content.

Seth felt the ocean at his toes. He looked down towards his feet. The ocean was
made out of crimson. Or was it burgandy? Maroon. It seemed insignificant to
Seth.

_Maybe it's blood?_ Seth thought. The thought was idle enough, but immeditaly
it seemed to form in itself. Seth examined more closely the liquid sloshing at
his feet. _There is no way it is blood._ Seth reasoned. _Blood is meant to go
inside the body, not without. It must be something else._

Having reasoned thus, Seth relaxed again. The roar of the waves felt nice. The
waves flowed gently over his ankles. With each undulation of current Seth just
simply let the sensation flow over his ankles without a care whether it went
this way or that. It was simple sensations. Nothing more.

_What was all that crazy talk about blood? Pah!_ It seemed so silly to Seth now
that he thought that the sea might have been made of blood. _How would there
even be that much volume of blood? You would have to conduct the genocide of
millions of people to fill the oceans this full. No, there must be another
explanation._

Seth relaxed yet again, the time apprehensively. _If it's not blood then what
is it?_ Seth let the puzzle just sit in his mind and closed his eyes again. It
felt too good to just simply exist to Seth for him to care about trivialites
like bloody oceans. _If it's blood than it is blood. Let the oceans worry about
the oceans._

As much as Seth wanted to relax though, the feel of disconcertion remained. _I
can only do what I can do. And what can I do now? I can only stand here and
exist._

Seth finally was able to relax in to himself. He felt the weights of his ego
collapse. Seth didn't even remember that there was something bothering him
before. _There was something about water, and something about the color red. I
don't remember. I just want to relax._

"Seth!"

The voice seemed as though it were in his imagination at first.

"Seth! Come back! It's dangerous to leave! Return home!"

The voice became louder as it continued its stream of words.

"Evilness lurks! Satan awakes! Lucifer roams the lands! You will be hurt. You
will be killed. Don't go Seth! Return Home!"

Seth opened his eyes and began to look around. He saw in the distance,
attempting to run towards him but making no progress in the slog of the bloody
ocean, his mother. She was entirely naked.

"Seth! Come in to me Seth! Receive yourself back to me! Home is where you
belong! It's dangerous. Come back and I will keep you warm!"

"MOM!" Seth yelled out loud, finally able to use his voice.

"Seth!" The image of Seth's mother replied. "Come!" She extended out her hands.

In reaction, and completely by instinct, Seth reached out to his mother. He
attempted to move to run towards her, but as soon as he did, he felt the bottom
of the ocean floor come out from under him. Where he was once standing
comfortably in ankle deep water he was now falling underwater with no ledge to
grab on. Even as he fell and reached behind himself to catch where he was
previously standing, Seth realized that the floor was simply gone now, and that
there was nothing to do except fall in to the ocean of blood helplessly.

After the spinning went away, Seth gathered himself. Seth looked up towards the
surface of the water and saw the refracted image of his mother reaching down
for him.

"Grab my hand Seth! I can rescue you!"

Seth extended his hand towards his mother's but was unable to reach. Seth
stretched using more of his effort but only gained inches where he needed
yards. It seemed that the more he reached for her, the further she became.

Seth began to feel helpless. He thought he could breathe but at the same time
he knew he was drowning. He felt he could reach his mother but his hand was
being extended in vain.

Then Seth felt his a strong and loving hand grip his own. Forearm to forearm he
grasped this hand and felt as it pulled him above the surface of the water.

As Seth emerged, he opened his eyes and immediately went to gesture to hug his
mother. He was afraid and wanted nothing more than to feel her embrace. But as
he made the motion, as his vision came back to himself and his surroundings
became known, Seth saw that the hand that carried him out was not the hand of
his mother, but instead was the hand a strong man.

"Welcome back, Seth," the man sneered with a grimace. "This should bring you
back."

Just at that moment Seth felt as the man lifted Seth with his right arm and
stabbed Seth with one swift left-handed motion all the way through Seth's right
hip. The pain shot a pillar of light orginating from the hips and extending all
the way up through the sky and all the way down to depths below the ocean. For
one moment, and just one moment, Seth became this pillar of light, containing
nothing but the sharp sensation of pierced pain.

--

Seth awoke to the sound of screaming. It took him some moments before he
realized that it was his own. Then the pain came in to him.

His hip. Seth felt as though someone had taken a horn and pierced all the way
through his hip.

"Stay calm, it won't make it any better if you scream."

The voice seemed to stable and too collected to Seth.

# Screen play

[The scene: Cain has just finished stiching up Seth's wound. Seth has gone back
to sleep and had another vision. Upon waking, Cain is waiting for him.]

[Enter Seth on a bed with Cain sitting beside him with tossing an apple]

Cain: Such a peaceful sleep this boy may take. Knowest not does he the
near-death that he hath faced. My friend has perhaps become overzealous in his
patrols. No matter. Let the concern of the beasts be of the beast so that man
may concern himself with the concern of man. The wound hath been stitched, my
job is done.

[Seth wakes]

Seth: What happened? Be this Hell?

[Cain laughs]

Cain: It could be argued that the spawn of Satan grows down here, but this is
not hell.

Seth: Heaven then?

Cain: Nay. Though you may have struggled to remain the Land of the Living still
becomes you. You have still some life left in this world of reality before you
start deluging yourself with fantasy realms.

Seth: If this be neither heaven nor hell then how can one such as you be? To my
best knoweledge it is only myself my mom and our father, the three of us come
forth from as creations of Yahweh. Yet there is one standing before me I know
not how speaking to me as one that resides in this world. I must be in a world
beyond for this to be so.

Cain: Contain yourself Seth. You must still be weary headed from the pain you
have been through. You lost a lot of blood.

Seth: Blood?

Cain: Yes, blood. You are fortunate I recovered you when I did. Had I not been
there to save you you might be still creating the pool of blood that I found
you in.

Seth: Pool of blood? But there was an ocean, not just a pool. And it was bright
and warm, and my mother was there.

Cain: Mother? No, not a mother, just a woeful inhabit of earth, as you are.
Nothing more.

Seth: But who be you? I trust not your words and will riddle myself to believe
you are the devil. Are you one of this world?

Cain: Of course. Feel my wrists. (Seth feels) Are these not the arms of a man
standing before you know in the flesh? Why must you insist on falsities when
the truth of the situation is right here to be verified? Touch me and judge for
yourself whether I be Demon or Man.

Seth: I know not how my senses betray me so. I feel you just as I might feel a
man yet I must know demon you must be.

Cain [Aside]: Oh, this poor foolish boy, so caught up in the fancy's of youth
to experience the world without prejudice. I must guide him and instruct him if
he is to grow from boy to man as I wish him to become.

Cain: Come, cease your nonsense talk. I am a man as I stand before you, naked
and unashamed. I have much to teach you. You must grow to learn. Stand. Walk
with me.

[Seth stands and walks away from the bed. Cain and Seth walk towards the other
end of the stage]

Cain: There is much to say but let us speak not. I will instead show and let
you see so you may find the words yourself.

[Cain gestures as if opening a door to the outside. Seth stands and beholds in
awe as Cain watches.]

Seth: But what is this? I know not what I am looking at. Such is an alter, but
a greater alter than I have could have ever imagined even in my wildest dreams.
I look out to the east at the rising sun and see the glory of the alter on top
of the mountain in the distance. It glows with a halo, as if beconning us to
walk towards it. And what is this. Below the alter is not just the cermonial
stage, but an entire array of blocks. Why, this alter is not standing on top of
a mountain at all, but instead it is positioned above a vast web of blocks. So
many blocks of marble, all carved to perfection. Each block contains a groove,
and each groove patterns a flow of water down a very specific path. It grows
with purpose, with reason. I know not why such patterns fascinate me! I have
never seen anything of this such before. To see but one stream of water flow
from the height to the floor is beauty enough, but for all the multitudes of
blocks to pour down in every direction is too much for me to comprehend! Oh, I
am growing faint.

Cain: Do not collapse friend. We have much to see and this is only the
beginning. Allow yourself not to lose your composure. Such is a boyish trend to
see the sights of our wonderous world and take them in awe. But all of these
things, though complicated, may be explained.

Seth: Explained how? You seek to bring me to understand the vast multitude of
direction and order that must be put forth in order for such a thing to exist.
My brain is only a human brain, and I cannot know the workings of our Lord
Yahweh.

Cain: Yahweh did not create these things Seth. Look at them. Take this stone.
See how it is so perfect on it's edges. See how the stone glistens against the
glare of the sun. Such a piece was crafted by human hands, not divine. It has
not the roughness of those things that have divine quality.

Seth: But all things must come from the Lord! Man is only a conduit to shape
the creation of the Lord so that we may bring him glory.

Cain: Believe that if you may, but these slabs were not put here by God. These
were put here by men, men like me if not like you, and they did so with a
thought and a creation in mind. Yahweh, I'm afriad to inform you, is not the
only one who can create.

Seth: But that is blasphemy. Only in Yahweh can man bring any thing of value in
to the world. If this was not made by Yahweh then it was the work of the Devil!

Cain: Always so quick to the devil with you. Very well, call it the work of the
devil. Better you believe in the devil than continue on with the meaningless
prattle. There is more to show. Come Seth.

[Exit Cain]

Seth: Who is this man who would say such things? Fancys of man who might
create? Though I know he must be demon, demon now I put my trust, for nowhere
else I have to turn. I am weak, this man is strong. Let's see what we have to
see and go from there.

[Exit Seth]
