As the author of Seth and Cain one would presume that he would have some sort
of semblance of an idea about what is going on with the story. The cold hard
truth of the situation, however, is that he does not have any idea bout what is
going on with anything and istead is simply fumbling around various visions in
order to try and make a smublance of a coherent story out of it. While in his
most narsistic times he would call this a prophetic trait, in reality what this
amounts to is a complete lack of coherent physical framework on which to base
this unruly disaster.

How many chapters should this goddamn thing last? What is the tone of the
novel? Should it be called a nevel or novella? Is it a two part ordeal or a
single part piece?

All of these things are legitmate questions, and none of these things are
answerable by the author.

If such is the case, what bastion do we have to trust that this lunatic of a
writer is going to deliver anythirg of substance? By what metric do we say that
the work he is creating is worth creating? How can we place any trust upon a
man who would choose to contemplate his story rather than write what he knows
needs to be written.

So enough of cthese unanswered questions. Enough of pretending like something
is known that is not known or something is not known that is known. These
nonsensical ideas only serve to hinder the act of making words go on to pages.
Here is the chronology as it is understood by those that concern themselves
with such things.


