# AGAMEMNON


                            DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

                       _Watchman_
                       CLYTÆMNESTRA
                       AGAMEMNON
                       _Chorus of Argive Elders_
                       _Herald_ (TALTHYBIOS)
                       CASSANDRA
                       ÆGISTHOS


_ARGUMENT.—Ten years had passed since Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of
Mykenæ, had led the Hellenes to Troïa to take vengeance on Alexandros
(also known as Paris), son of Priam. For Paris had basely wronged
Menelaos, king of Sparta, Agamemnon's brother, in that, being received
by him as a guest, he enticed his wife Helena to leave her lord and go
with him to Troïa. And now the tenth year had come, and Paris was slain,
and the city of the Troïans was taken and destroyed, and Agamemnon and
the Hellenes were on their way homeward with the spoil and prisoners
they had taken. But meanwhile Clytæmnestra too, Agamemnon's queen, had
been unfaithful, and had taken as her paramour Ægisthos, son of that
Thyestes whom Atreus, his brother, had made to eat, unknowing, of the
flesh of his own children. And now, partly led by her adulterer, and
partly seeking to avenge the death of her daughter Iphigeneia, whom
Agamemnon had sacrificed to appease the wrath of Artemis, and partly
also jealous because he was bringing back Cassandra, the daughter of
Priam, as his concubine, she plotted with Ægisthos against her husband's
life. But this was done secretly, and she stationed a guard on the roof
of the royal palace to give notice when he saw the beacon-fires, by
which Agamemnon had promised that he would send tidings that Troïa was
taken._

_Note._—The unfaithfulness of Clytæmnestra and the murder of Agamemnon
had entered into the Homeric cycle of the legends of the house of
Atreus. In the _Odyssey_, however, Ægisthos is the chief agent in this
crime (_Odyss._ iii. 264, iv. 91, 532, xi. 409); and the manner of it
differs from that which Æschylos has adopted. Clytæmnestra first appears
as slaying both her husband and Cassandra in Pindar (_Pyth._ xi. 26).


     SCENE.—Argos. _The Palace of_ AGAMEMNON; _statues of the Gods
             in front. Watchman on the roof. Time, night._

 _Watchman._ I ask the Gods a respite from these toils,
 This keeping at my post the whole year round,
 Wherein, upon the Atreidæ's roof reclined,
 Like dog, upon my elbow, I have learnt
 To know night's goodly company of stars,
 And those bright lords that deck the firmament,
 And winter bring to men, and harvest-tide;
 [The rising and the setting of the stars.]
 And now I watch for sign of beacon-torch,
 The flash of fire that bringeth news from Troïa,
 And tidings of its capture. So prevails
 *A woman's manly-purposed, hoping heart;                  10
 And when I keep my bed of little ease,
 Drenched with the dew, unvisited by dreams,
 (For fear, instead of sleep, my comrade is,
 So that in sound sleep ne'er I close mine eyes,)
 And when I think to sing a tune, or hum,
 (My medicine of song to ward off sleep,)
 Then weep I, wailing for this house's chance,
 No more, as erst, right well administered.
 Well! may I now find blest release from toils,                       20
 When fire from out the dark brings tidings good.

                            [_Pauses, then springs up suddenly, seeing a
                                light in the distance_

 Hail! thou torch-bearer of the night, that shedd'st
 Light as of morn, and bringest full array
 Of many choral bands in Argos met,
 Because of this success. Hurrah! hurrah!
 So clearly tell I Agamemnon's queen,
 With all speed rising from her couch to raise
 Shrill cry of triumph o'er this beacon-fire
 Throughout the house, since Ilion's citadel
 Is taken, as full well that bright blaze shows.                      30
 I, for my part, will dance my prelude now;

                                                     [_Leaps and dances_

 For I shall score my lord's new turn of luck,
 This beacon-blaze may throw of triple six.[271]
 Well, would that I with this mine hand may touch
 The dear hand of our king when he comes home!
 As to all else, the word is “Hush!” An ox[272]
 Rests on my tongue; had the house a voice
 'Twould tell too clear a tale. I'm fain to speak
 To those who know, forget with those who know not.

                                                                 [_Exit_

  _Enter Chorus of twelve Argive elders, chanting as they march to take
        up their position in the centre of the stage. A procession of
        women bearing torches is seen in the distance_

 Lo! the tenth year now is passing                                    40
 Since, of Priam great avengers,
 Menelaos, Agamemnon,
 Double-throned and doubled-sceptred,
 Power from sovran Zeus deriving—
 Mighty pair of the Atreidæ—
 Raised a fleet of thousand vessels
 Of the Argives from our country,
 Potent helpers in their warfare,
 Shouting cry of Ares fiercely;
 E'en as vultures shriek who hover,
 Wheeling, whirling o'er their eyrie,                                 50
 In wild sorrow for their nestlings,
 With their oars of stout wings rowing,
 Having lost the toil that bound them
 To their callow fledglings' couches.
 But on high One,—or Apollo,
 Zeus, or Pan,—the shrill cry hearing,
 Cry of birds that are his clients,[273]
 Sendeth forth on men transgressing,
 Erinnys, slow but sure avenger;
 So against young Alexandros[274]
 Atreus' sons the great King sendeth,
 Zeus, of host and guest protector:                                   60
 He, for bride with many a lover,
 Will to Danai give and Troïans
 Many conflicts, men's limbs straining,
 When the knee in dust is crouching,
 And the spear-shaft in the onset
 Of the battle snaps asunder.
 But as things are now, so are they,
 So, as destined, shall the end be.
 Nor by tears, nor yet libations
 Shall he soothe the wrath unbending
 Caused by sacred rites left fireless.[275]                           70
 We, with old frame little honoured,
 Left behind that host are staying,
 Resting strength that equals childhood's
 On our staff: for in the bosom
 *Of the boy, life's young sap rushing,
 Is of old age but the equal;
 Ares not as yet is found there:
 And the man in age exceeding,
 When the leaf is sere and withered,
 Goes with three feet on his journey;[276]                            80
 Not more Ares-like than boyhood,
 Like a day-seen dream he wanders.

                      [_Enter_ CLYTÆMNESTRA, _followed by the procession
                          of torch-bearers_

 Thou, of Tyndareus the daughter,
 Queen of Argos, Clytæmnestra,
 What has happened? what news cometh?
 What perceiving, on what tidings
 Leaning, dost thou put in motion
 All this solemn, great procession?
 Of the Gods who guard the city,
 Those above and those beneath us,
 Of the heaven, and of the market,                                    90
 Lo! with thy gifts blaze the altars;
 And through all the expanse of Heaven,
 Here and there, the torch-fire rises,
 With the flowing, pure persuasion
 Of the holy unguent nourished,
 *And the chrism rich and kingly
 From the treasure-store's recesses.
 Telling what of this thou canst tell,
 What is right for thee to utter,
 Be a healer of my trouble,
 Trouble now my soul disturbing,                                     100
 *While anon fond hope displaying
 Sacrificial signs propitious,
 Wards off care that no rest knoweth,
 Sorrow mind and heart corroding.

                     [_The Chorus, taking their places round the central
                         thymele, begin their song_[277]


                                STROPHE

 Able am I to utter, setting forth
         The might from omens sprung
 *What met the heroes as they journeyed on,
         (For still, by God's great gift,
         My age, yet linked with strength,
         *Breathes suasive power of song,)
 How the Achæans' twin-throned majesty,
 Accordant rulers of the youth of Hellas,                            110
         With spear and vengeful hand,
 Were sent by fierce, strong bird 'gainst Teucrian shore,
 Kings of the birds to kings of ships appearing,
         One black, with white tail one,
 Near to the palace, on the spear-hand side,
         On station seen of all,
 A pregnant hare devouring with her young,
         Robbed of all runs to come:
 Wail as for Linos, wail, wail bitterly,
         And yet may good prevail![278]                              120


                              ANTISTROPHE

 And the wise prophet of the army seeing
         The brave Atreidæ twain
 Of diverse mood, knew those that tore the hare,
         And those that led the host;
         And thus divining spake:
         “One day this armament
 Shall Priam's city sack, and all the herds
 Owned by the people, countless, by the towers,
         Fate shall with force lay low.
 Only take heed lest any wrath of Gods                               130
 Blunt the great curb of Troïa yet encamped,
         Struck down before its time;
 For Artemis the chaste that house doth hate,
         Her father's wingèd hounds,
 Who slay the mother with her unborn young,
         And loathes the eagles' feast.
 Wail as for Linos, wail, wail bitterly;
         And yet may good prevail!


                                 EPODE

 “*For she, the fair One, though so kind of heart
 *To fresh-dropt dew from mighty lion's womb,[279]
         And young that suck the teats
         Of all that roam the fields,                                140
         *Yet prays Him bring to pass
        The portents of those birds,
 The omens good yet also full of dread.
         And Pæan I invoke
 As Healer, lest she on the Danai send
         Delays that keep the ships
         Long time with hostile blasts,
 So urging on a new, strange sacrifice,
         Unblest, unfestivalled,[280]
 By natural growth artificer of strife,
 Bearing far other fruit than wife's true fear,
         For there abideth yet,
         Fearful, recurring still,
 Ruling the house, full subtle, unforgetting,
         Vengeance for children slain.”[281]                         150
 Such things, with great good mingled, Calchas spake,
         In voice that pierced the air,
 As destined by the birds that crossed our path
         To this our kingly house:
         And in accord with them,
 Wail as for Linos, wail, wail bitterly;
         And yet may good prevail.


                               STROPHE I

         O Zeus—whate'er He be,[282]
         If that Name please Him well,
         By that on Him I call:
 Weighing all other names I fail to guess
 Aught else but Zeus, if I would cast aside,
         Clearly, in every deed,
 From off my soul this idle weight of care.                          160


                             ANTISTROPHE I

         Nor He who erst was great,[283]
         Full of the might to war,
         *Avails now; He is gone;
 And He who next came hath departed too,
 His victor meeting; but if one to Zeus,
          High triumph-praise should sing,
 His shall be all the wisdom of the wise;


                               STROPHE II

 Yea, Zeus, who leadeth men in wisdom's way,                         170
         And fixeth fast the law,
         That pain is gain;
 And slowly dropping on the heart in sleep
         Comes woe-recording care,
 And makes the unwilling yield to wiser thoughts:
 And doubtless this too comes from grace of Gods,
 *Seated in might upon their awful thrones.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 And then of those Achæan ships the chief,[284]
         The elder, blaming not
         Or seer or priest;
 But tempered to the fate that on him smote....                      180
         When that Achæan host
 Were vexed with adverse winds and failing stores,
 Still kept where Chalkis in the distance lies,
 And the vexed waves in Aulis ebb and flow;


                              STROPHE III

 And breezes from the Strymon sweeping down,
 Breeding delays and hunger, driving forth
         Our men in wandering course,
         On seas without a port.
 Sparing nor ships, nor rope, nor sailing gear,
 With doubled months wore down the Argive host;                      190
         And when, for that wild storm,
 Of one more charm far harder for our chiefs
 The prophet told, and spake of Artemis,[285]
         In tone so piercing shrill,
 The Atreidæ smote their staves upon the ground,
 And could not stay their tears.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

 And then the old king lifted up his voice,
 And spake, “Great woe it is to disobey;
         Great too to slay my child,                                 200
         The pride and joy of home,
 Polluting with the streams of maiden's blood
 Her father's hands upon the altar steps.
         What course is free from ill?
 How lose my ships and fail of mine allies?
 'Tis meet that they with strong desire should seek
         A rite the winds to soothe,
 E'en though it be with blood of maiden pure;
         May all end well at last!”                                  210


                              STROPHE III

         So when he himself had harnessed
         To the yoke of Fate unbending,
         With a blast of strange, new feeling,
         Sweeping o'er his heart and spirit,
         Aweless, godless, and unholy,
         He his thoughts and purpose altered
         To full measure of all daring,
         (Still base counsel's fatal frenzy,
         Wretched primal source of evils,
         Gives to mortal hearts strange boldness,)
         And at last his heart he hardened
         His own child to slay as victim,
         Help in war that they were waging,
         To avenge a woman's frailty,
         Victim for the good ship's safety.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

         All her prayers and eager callings,                         220
         On the tender name of Father,
         All her young and maiden freshness,
         They but set at nought, those rulers,
         In their passion for the battle.
         And her father gave commandment
         To the servants of the Goddess,
         When the prayer was o'er, to lift her,
         Like a kid, above the altar,
         In her garments wrapt, face downwards,—[286]
         Yea, to seize with all their courage,
         And that o'er her lips of beauty
         Should be set a watch to hinder
         Words of curse against the houses,
         With the gag's strength silence-working.[287]


                               STROPHE IV

             And she upon the ground
         Pouring rich folds of veil in saffron dyed,                 230
         Cast at each one of those who sacrificed
             A piteous glance that pierced,
             Fair as a pictured form;[288]
             And wishing,—all in vain,—
             To speak; for oftentimes
         In those her father's hospitable halls
 She sang, a maiden pure with chastest song,
         *And her dear father's life
 That poured its threefold cup of praise to God,[289]
         Crowned with all choicest good,
         She with a daughter's love
         Was wont to celebrate.


                             ANTISTROPHE IV

         What then ensued mine eyes
 Saw not, nor may I tell, but Calchas' arts                          240
 Were found not fruitless. Justice turns the scale
         For those to whom through pain
         At last comes wisdom's gain.
         *But for our future fate,
         *Since help for it is none,
 *Good-bye to it before it comes, and this
 Has the same end as wailing premature;
        For with to-morrow's dawn
 It will come clear; may good luck crown our fate!
         So prays the one true guard,
         Nearest and dearest found,
         Of this our Apian land.[290]

                  [_The Chief of the Chorus turns to_ CLYTÆMNESTRA, _and
                      her train of handmaids, who are seen
                      approaching_

 _Chor._ I come, O Clytæmnestra, honouring
 Thy majesty: 'tis meet to pay respect
 To a chief's wife, the man's throne empty left:                     250
 But whether thou hast heard good news, or else
 In hopes of tidings glad dost sacrifice,
 I fain would hear, yet will not silence blame.

 _Clytæm._ May Morning, as the proverb runs, appear
 Bearing glad tidings from his mother Night![291]
 Joy thou shalt learn beyond thy hope to hear;
 For Argives now have taken Priam's city.

 _Chor._ What? Thy words sound so strange they flit by me.

 _Clytæm._ The Achæans hold Troïa. Speak I clear enough?      260

 _Chor._ Joy creeps upon me, drawing forth my tears.

 _Clytæm._ Of loyal heart thine eyes give token true.

 _Chor._ What witness sure hast thou of these events?

 _Clytæm._ Full clear (how else?) unless the God deceive.[292]

 _Chor._ Reliest thou on dreams or visions seen?

 _Clytæm._ I place no trust in mind weighed down with sleep.[293]

 _Chor._ Hath then some wingless omen charmed thy soul?[294]

 _Clytæm._ My mind thou scorn'st, as though 'twere but a girl's.

 _Chor._ What time has passed since they the city sacked?

 _Clytæm._ This very night, the mother of this morn.          270

 _Chor._ What herald could arrive with speed like this?

 _Clytæm._ Hephæstos flashing forth bright flames from Ida:
 Beacon to beacon from that courier-fire
 Sent on its tidings; Ida to the rock[295]
 Hermæan named, in Lemnos: from the isle
 The height of Athos, dear to Zeus, received
 A third great torch of flame, and lifted up,
 So as on high to skim the broad sea's back,
 The stalwart fire rejoicing went its way;
 The pine-wood, like a sun, sent forth its light
 Of golden radiance to Makistos' watch;                              280
 And he, with no delay, nor unawares
 Conquered by sleep, performed his courier's part:
 Far off the torch-light, to Eurîpos' straits
 Advancing, tells it to Messapion's guards:
 They, in their turn, lit up and passed it on,
 Kindling a pile of dry and aged heath.
 Still strong and fresh the torch, not yet grown dim,
 Leaping across Asôpos' plain in guise
 Like a bright moon, towards Kithæron's rock,
 Roused the next station of the courier flame.                       290
 And that far-travelled light the sentries there
 Refused not, burning more than all yet named:
 And then the light swooped o'er Gorgôpis' lake,
 And passing on to Ægiplanctos' mount,
 Bade the bright fire's due order tarry not;
 And they, enkindling boundless store, send on
 A mighty beard of flame, and then it passed
 The headland e'en that looks on Saron's gulf,
 Still blazing. On it swept, until it came
 To Arachnæan heights, the watch-tower near;                         300
 Then here on the Atreidæ's roof it swoops,
 This light, of Ida's fire no doubtful heir.
 Such is the order of my torch-race games;
 One from another taking up the course,[296]
 But here the winner is both first and last;
 And this sure proof and token now I tell thee,
 Seeing that my lord hath sent it me from Troïa.

 _Chor._ I to the Gods, O Queen, will pray hereafter,
 But fain would I hear all thy tale again,
 E'en as thou tell'st, and satiate my wonder.                        310

 _Clytæm._ This very day the Achæans Troïa hold.
 I trow full diverse cry pervades the town:
 Pour in the same vase vinegar and oil,
 *And you would call them enemies, not friends;
 And so from conquerors and from captives now
 The cries of varied fortune one may hear.
 For these, low-fallen on the carcases
 Of husbands and of brothers, children too
 By aged fathers, mourn their dear ones' death,
 And that with throats that are no longer free.                      320
 And those the hungry toil of sleepless guard,
 After the battle, at their breakfast sets;
 Not billeted in order fixed and clear,
 But just as each his own chance fortune grasps,
 They in the captive houses of the Troïans
 Dwell, freed at last from all the night's chill frosts,
 And dews of heaven, for now, poor wretches, they
 Will sleep all night without the sentry's watch;
 And if they reverence well the guardian Gods
 Of that new-conquered country, and their shrines,                   330
 Then they, the captors, will not captured be.
 Ah! let no evil lust attack the host
 Conquered by greed, to plunder what they ought not:
 For yet they need return in safety home,
 Doubling the goal to run their backward race.[297]
 *But should the host come sinning 'gainst the Gods,
 Then would the curse of those that perishèd
 Be watchful, e'en though no quick ill might fall.
 Such thoughts are mine, mere woman though I be.
 May good prevail beyond all doubtful chance!                        340
 For I have got the blessing of great joy.

 _Chor._ Thou, lady, kindly, like a sage, dost speak,
 And I, on hearing thy sure evidence,
 Prepare myself to give the Gods due thanks;
 For they have wrought full meed for all our toil.

                                        [_Exit_ CLYTÆM. _with her train_

         O Zeus our King! O Night beloved,
         Mighty winner of great glories,
         Who upon the towers of Troïa
         Casted'st snare of closest meshes,
         So that none full-grown or youthful                         350
         Could o'erleap the net of bondage,
         Woe of universal capture;—
         Zeus, of host and guest protector,
         Who hath brought these things, I worship;
         He long since on Alexandros
         Stretched his bow that so his arrow
         Might not sweep at random, missing,
         Or beyond the stars shoot idly.


                               STROPHE I

 Yes, one may say, 'tis Zeus whose blow they feel;
        This one may clearly trace:
        They fared as He decreed:
        Yea, one there was who said,                                 360
 “The Gods deign not to care for mortal men[298]
 By whom the grace of things inviolable
        Is trampled under foot.”
        No fear of God had he:
 *Now is it to the children manifest[299]
         Of those who, overbold,
 Breathed rebel War beyond the bounds of Right,
 Their houses overfilled with precious store
         *Above the golden mean.
 *Ah! let our life be free from all that hurts,           370
         So that for one who gains
         Wisdom in heart and soul,
         That lot may be enough.
 Since still there is no bulwark strong in wealth
         Against destruction's doom,
 For one who in the pride of wantonness
 Spurns the great altar of the Right and Just.


                             ANTISTROPHE I

 Him woeful, subtle Impulse urges on,
         Resistless in her might,
         Atè's far-scheming child:
         All remedy is vain.
 It is not hidden, but is manifest,
 That mischief with its horrid gleaming light;                       380
         And, like to worthless bronze,[300]
         By friction tried and tests,
 It turns to tarnished blackness in its hue:
         Since, boy-like, he pursues
 A bird upon its flight, and so doth bring
 Upon his city shame intolerable:
         And no God hears his prayer,
         But bringeth low the unjust,
         Who deals with deeds like this.
         Thus Paris came to the Atreidæ's home,                      390
         And stole its queen away,
 And so left brand of shame indelible
 Upon the board where host and guest had sat.


                               STROPHE II

 She, leaving to her countrymen at home
 Wild din of spear and shield and ships of war,
         And bringing, as her dower,
         To Ilion doom of death,
 Passed very swiftly through the palace gates,
         Daring what none should dare;
         And many a wailing cry
 They raised, the minstrel prophets of the house,
         “Woe for that kingly home!
 Woe for that kingly home and for its chiefs!                        400
 Woe for the marriage-bed and traces left
         Of wife who loved her lord!”
 *There stands he silent; foully wronged and yet
         *Uttering no word of scorn,[301]
 *In deepest woe perceiving she is gone;
         And in his yearning love
         For one beyond the sea,
 A ghost shall seem to queen it o'er the house;
         The grace of sculptured forms[302]
         Is loathèd by her lord,
 And in the penury of life's bright eyes
         All Aphroditè's charm
         To utter wreck has gone.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 And phantom shades that hover round in dreams                       410
 Come full of sorrow, bringing vain delight;
         For vain it is, when one
         Sees seeming shows of good,
 And gliding through his hands the dream is gone,
         After a moment's space,
         On wings that follow still
 Upon the path where sleep goes to and fro.
         Such are the woes at home
 Upon the altar hearth, and worse than these.
 But on a wider scale for those who went
         From Hellas' ancient shore,
 A sore distress that causeth pain of heart                          420
         Is seen in every house.
 Yea, many things there are that touch the quick:
         For those whom each did send
         He knoweth; but, instead
 Of living men, there come to each man's home
         Funeral urns alone,
         And ashes of the dead.


                              STROPHE III

 For Ares, trafficking for golden coin
         The lifeless shapes of men,
 And in the rush of battle holding scales,
         Sends now from Ilion
         Dust from the funeral pyre,
 A burden sore to loving friends at home,
         And bitterly bewailed,
         Filling the brazen urn
 With well-smoothed ashes in the place of men;                       430
         And with high praise they mourn
 This hero skilled and valiant in the fight,
 And that who in the battle nobly fell,
         All for another's wife:
 And other words some murmur secretly;
         And jealous discontent
 Against the Atreidæ, champions in the suit,
         Creeps on all stealthily;
         And some around the wall,
 In full and goodly form have sepulture
         There upon Ilion's soil,                                    440
 And their foes' land inters its conquerors.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

 And so the murmurs of their subjects rise
         With sullen discontent,
 And do the dread work of a people's curse;
         And now my boding fear
         Awaits some news of ill,
 As yet enwrapt in blackness of the night.
         Not heedless are the Gods
         Of shedders of much blood,
 And the dark-robed Erinnyes in due time,
         By adverse chance of life,                                  450
 Place him who prospers in unrighteousness
 In gloom obscure; and once among the unseen,
         There is no help for him:
 Fame in excess is but a perilous thing;
         For on men's quivering eyes
 Is hurled by Zeus the blinding thunderbolt.
         I praise the good success
         That rouses not God's wrath;
 Ne'er be it mine a city to lay waste.[303]
         Nor, as a prisoner, see
 My life wear on beneath another's power!


                                 EPODE

 And now at bidding of the courier flame,
         The herald of good news,
 A rumour swift spreads through the city streets,                    460
 But who knows clearly whether it be true,
 Or whether God has mingled lies with it?
 Who is so childish or so reft of sense,
         As with his heart a-glow
 At that fresh uttered message of the flame,
 Then to wax sad at changing rumour's sound?
 It suits the mood that sways a woman's mind
 To pour thanksgiving ere the truth is seen:
 Quickly, with rapid steps, too credulous,
 The limit which a woman sets to trust
         Advances evermore;[304]
         And with swift doom of death                                470
 A rumour spread by woman perishes.

                     [_As the Chorus ends, a Herald is seen approaching,
                         his head wreathed with olive_[305]

 Soon we shall know the sequence of the torches
 Light-giving, and of all the beacon-fires,
 If they be true; or if, as 'twere a dream,
 This sweet light coming hath beguiled our minds.
 I see a herald coming from the shore,
 With olive boughs o'ershadowed, and the dust,[306]
 Dry sister-twin of mire,[307] announces this,
 That neither without voice, nor kindling blaze
 Of wood upon the mountains, he will signal                          480
 With smoke from fire, but either he will come,
 With clear speech bidding us rejoice, or else ... [_pauses_
 The word opposed to this I much mislike.
 Nay, may good issue good beginnings crown!
 Who for our city utters other prayers,
 May he himself his soul's great error reap!

 _Herald._ Hail, soil of this my Argive fatherland.
 Now in the light of the tenth year I reach thee,
 Though many hopes are shattered, gaining one.
 For never did I think in Argive land
 To die, and share the tomb that most I craved.                      490
 Now hail! thou land; and hail! thou light of day:
 Zeus our great ruler, and thou Pythian king,
 No longer darting arrows from thy bow.[308]
 Full hostile wast thou by Scamandros' banks,
 Now be thou Saviour, yea, and Healer found,
 O king Apollo! and the Gods of war,
 These I invoke; my patron Hermes too,
 Dear herald, whom all heralds reverence,—
 Those heroes, too, that sent us,[309]—graciously
 To welcome back the host that war has spared.                       500
 Hail, O ye royal dwellings, home beloved!
 Ye solemn thrones, and Gods who face the sun![310]
 If e'er of old, with cheerful glances now
 After long time receive our king's array.
 For he is come, in darkness bringing light
 To you and all, our monarch, Agamemnon.
 Salute him with all grace; for so 'tis meet,
 Since he hath dug up Troïa with the spade
 Of Zeus the Avenger, and the plain laid waste;
 Fallen their altars and the shrines of Gods;                        510
 The seed of all the land is rooted out,
 This yoke of bondage casting over Troïa,
 Our chief, the elder of the Atreidæ, comes,
 A man full blest, and worthiest of high honour
 Of all that are. For neither Paris' self,
 Nor his accomplice city now can boast
 Their deed exceeds its punishment. For he,
 Found guilty on the charge of rape and theft,[311]
 Hath lost his prize and brought his father's house,
 With lands and all, to waste and utter wreck;
 And Priam's sons have double forfeit paid.[312]                     520

 _Chor._ Joy, joy, thou herald of the Achæan host!

 _Her._ All joy is mine: I shrink from death no more.

 _Chor._ Did love for this thy fatherland so try thee?

 _Her._ So that mine eyes weep tears for very joy,*

 _Chor._ Disease full sweet then this ye suffered from ...

 _Her._ How so? When taught, I shall thy meaning master.

 _Chor._ Ye longed for us who yearned for you in turn.

 _Her._ Say'st thou this land its yearning host yearned o'er?

 _Chor._ Yea, so that oft I groaned in gloom of heart.

 _Her._ Whence came these bodings that an army hates?         530

 _Chor._ Silence I've held long since a charm for ill.

 _Her._ How, when your lords were absent, feared ye any?

 _Chor._ To use thy words, death now would welcome be.

 _Her._ Good is the issue; but in so long time
 Some things, one well might say, have prospered well,
 And some give cause for murmurs. Save the Gods,
 Who free from sorrow lives out all his life?
 For should I tell of toils, and how we lodged
 Full hardly, seldom putting in to shore,[313]
 And then with couch full hard.... What gave us not
 Good cause for mourning? What ill had we not                        540
 As daily portion? And what passed on land,
 That brought yet greater hardship: for our beds
 Were under our foes' walls, and meadow mists
 From heaven and earth still left us wringing wet,
 A constant mischief to our garments, making
 Our hair as shaggy as the beasts'.[314] And if
 One spoke of winter frosts that killed the birds,
 By Ida's snow-storms made intolerable,[315]
 Or heat, when Ocean in its noontide couch
 Windless reclined and slept without a wave....
 But why lament o'er this? Our toil is past;                         550
 Past too is theirs who in the warfare fell,
 So that no care have they to rise again.
 Why should I count the number of the dead,
 Or he that lives mourn o'er a past mischance?
 To change and chance I bid a long Farewell:
 With us, the remnant of the Argive host,
 Good fortune wins, no ills as counterpoise.
 So it is meet to this bright sun we boast,
 Who travel homeward over land and sea;
 “The Argive host who now have captured Troïa,                       560
 These spoils of battle[316] to the Gods of Hellas
 Hang on their pegs, enduring prize and joy.”[317]
 Hearing these things we ought to bless our country
 And our commanders; and the grace of Zeus
 That wrought this shall be honoured. My tale's told.

 _Chor._ Thy words o'ercome me, and I say not nay;
 To learn good keeps youth's freshness with the old.
 'Tis meet these things should be a special care
 To Clytæmnestra and the house, and yet
 That they should make me sharer in their joy.

                          _Enter_ CLYTÆMNESTRA

 _Clytæm._ I long ago for gladness raised my cry,             570
 When the first fiery courier came by night,
 Telling of Troïa taken and laid waste:
 And then one girding at me spake, “Dost think,
 Trusting in beacons, Troïa is laid waste?
 This heart elate is just a woman's way.”
 In words like these they made me out distraught;
 Yet still I sacrificed, and with a strain
 Shrill as a woman's, they, now here, now there,
 Throughout the city hymns of blessing raised
 In shrines of Gods, and lulled to gentle sleep
 The fragrant flame that on the incense fed.                         580
 And now why need'st thou lengthen out thy words?
 I from the king himself the tale shall learn;
 And that I show all zeal to welcome back
 My honoured lord on his return (for what
 Is brighter joy for wife to see than this,
 When God has brought her husband back from war,
 To open wide her gates?) tell my lord this,
 “To come with all his speed, the city's idol;”
 And “may he find a faithful wife at home,
 Such as he left her, noble watch-dog still                          590
 For him, and hostile to his enemies;
 And like in all things else, who has not broken
 One seal of his in all this length of time.”[318]
 No pleasure have I known, nor scandal ill
 With any other more than ... stains on bronze.[319]
 Such is my vaunt, and being full of truth,
 Not shameful for a noble wife to speak.[320] [_Exit_

 _Chor._ [_to Herald_.] She hath thus spoken in thy hearing now
 A goodly word for good interpreters.
 But tell me, herald, tell of Menelaos,                              600
 If, coming home again in safety he
 Is with you, the dear strength of this our land.

 _Her._ I cannot make report of false good news,
 So that my friends should long rejoice in it.

 _Chor._ Ah! could'st thou good news speak, and also true!
 These things asunder are not well concealed.

 _Her._ The chief has vanished from the Achæan host,
 He and his ship. I speak no falsehood here.

 _Chor._ In sight of all when he from Ilion sailed?
 Or did a storm's wide evil part him from you?                       610

 _Her._ Like skilful archer thou hast hit the mark,
 And in few words has told of evil long.

 _Chor._ And was it of him as alive or dead
 The whisper of the other sailors ran?

 _Her._ None to that question answer clear can give,
 Save the Sun-God who feeds the life of earth.

 _Chor._ How say'st thou? Did a storm come on our fleet,
 And do its work through anger of the Gods?

 _Her._ It is not meet a day of tidings good
 To mar with evil news. Apart for each                               620
 Is special worship. But when courier brings
 With louring face the ills men pray against,
 And tells a city that its host has fallen,
 That for the State there is a general wound,
 That many a man from many a home is driven,
 As banned by double scourge that Ares loves,
 Woe doubly-barbed, Death's two-horsed chariot this....
 When with such griefs as freight a herald comes,
 'Tis meet to chant the Erinnyes' dolorous song;
 But for glad messenger of good deeds wrought
 That bring deliverance, coming to a town                            630
 Rejoicing in its triumph, ... how shall I
 Blend good with evil, telling of a storm
 That smote the Achæans, not without God's wrath?
 For they a compact swore who erst were foes,
 Ocean and Fire, and their pledges gave,
 Wrecking the ill-starred army of the Argives;
 And in the night rose ill of raging storm:
 For Thrakian tempests shattered all the ships,
 Each on the other. Some thus crashed and bruised,
 By the storm stricken and the surging foam
 Of wind-tost waves, soon vanished out of sight,                     640
 Whirled by an evil pilot. And when rose
 The sun's bright orb, behold, the Ægæan sea
 Blossomed with wrecks of ships and dead Achæans.
 And as for us and our uninjured ship,
 Surely 'twas some one stole or begged us off,
 Some God, not man, presiding at the helm;
 And on our ship with good will Fortune sat,
 Giver of safety, so that nor in haven
 Felt we the breakers, nor on rough rock-beach
 Ran we aground. But when we had escaped                             650
 The hell of waters, then in clear, bright day,
 Not trusting in our fortune, we in thought
 O'er new ills brooded of our host destroyed,
 And eke most roughly handled. And if still
 Breathe any of them they report of us
 As having perished. How else should they speak?
 And we in our turn deem that they are so.
 God send good ending! Look you, first and chief,
 For Menelaos' coming; and indeed,
 If any sunbeam know of him alive
 And well, by help of Zeus who has not willed                        660
 As yet to blot out all the regal race,
 Some hope there is that he'll come back again.
 Know, hearing this, that thou the truth hast heard.

                                                          [_Exit Herald_


                               STROPHE I

 _Chor._ Who was it named her with such wondrous truth?
         (Could it be One unseen,
 In strange prevision of her destined work,
         Guiding the tongue through chance?)
 Who gave that war-wed, strife-upstirring one
 The name of Helen, ominous of ill?[321]                             670
         For all too plainly she
         Hath been to men, and ships,
         And towers, as doom of Hell.
 From bower of gorgeous curtains forth she sailed
 With breeze of Zephyr Titan-born and strong;[322]
         And hosts of many men,
         Hunters that bore the shield,
 Went on the track of those who steered their boat
 Unseen to leafy banks of Simois,
         On her account who came,
 Dire cause of strife with bloodshed in her train.                   680


                             ANTISTROPHE I

 And so the wrath which works its vengeance out
         Dear bride to Ilion brought,
 (Ah, all too truly named!) exacting still[323]
         After long lapse of time
 The penalty of foul dishonour done
 To friendship's board and Zeus, of host and guest
         The God, from those who paid
         Their loud-voiced honour then
         Unto that bridal strain,
 That hymeneal chorus which to chant
 Fell to the lot of all the bridegroom's kin.[324]
         But learning other song,
         Priam's ancient city now                                    690
 Bewaileth sore, and calls on Paris' name,
 Wedded in fatal wedlock; all the time
         *Enduring tear-fraught life
 *For all the blood its citizens had lost.


                               STROPHE II

         So once a lion's cub,
         A mischief in his house,
         As foster child one reared,[325]
         While still it loved the teats;
         In life's preluding dawn
         Tame, by the children loved,                                700
         And fondled by the old,[326]
         Oft in his arms 'twas held,
         Like infant newly born,
 With eyes that brightened to the hand that stroked,
 And fawning at the hest of hunger keen.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

         But when full-grown, it showed
         The nature of its sires;
         For it unbidden made
         A feast in recompense
         Of all their fostering care,
         *By banquet of slain sheep;                      710
         With blood the house was stained,
         A curse no slaves could check,
         Great mischief murderous:
 By God's decree a priest of Atè thus
 Was reared, and grew within the man's own house.


                              STROPHE III

 So I would tell that thus to Ilion came
 Mood as of calm when all the air is still,
 The gentle pride and joy of kingly state,
         A tender glance of eye,
 The full-blown blossom of a passionate love,
         Thrilling the very soul;                                    720
         And yet she turned aside,
 And wrought a bitter end of marriage feast,
         Coming to Priam's race,
         Ill sojourner, ill friend,
 Sent by great Zeus, the God of host and guest—
 Erinnys, for whom wives weep many tears.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

 There lives an old saw, framed in ancient days,[327]
 In memories of men, that high estate
 Full-grown brings forth its young, nor childless dies,
         But that from good success
 Springs to the race a woe insatiable.                               730
         But I, apart from all,
         Hold this my creed alone:
 For impious act it is that offspring breeds,
         Like to their parent stock:
         For still in every house
 That loves the right their fate for evermore
 Rejoiceth in an issue fair and good.


                               STROPHE IV

         But Recklessness of old
 Is wont to breed another Recklessness,
         Sporting its youth in human miseries,
 Or now, or then, whene'er the fixed hour comes:                     740
         That in its youth, in turn,
         Doth full-flushed Lust beget,
 And that dread demon-power unconquerable,
         Daring that fears not God,—
 Two curses black within the homes of men,
         Like those that gendered them.


                             ANTISTROPHE IV

         But Justice shineth bright
 In dwellings that are dark and dim with smoke,
         And honours life law-ruled,
 While gold-decked homes conjoined with hands defiled                750
         She with averted eyes
         Hath left, and draweth near
 To holier things, nor worships might of wealth,
         If counterfeit its praise;
 But still directeth all the course of things
         Towards its destined goal.

                         [AGAMEMNON _is seen approaching in his
                             chariot, followed by another chariot, in
                             which_ CASSANDRA _is standing, carrying
                             her prophet's wand in her hand, and
                             wearing fillets round her temples, and by
                             a great train of soldiers bearing trophies.
                             As they come on the stage the Chorus
                             sings its welcome_

 Come then, king, thou son of Atreus,
 Waster of the towers of Troïa,
 What of greeting and of homage
 Shall I give, nor overshooting,
 Nor due need of honour missing?
 Men there are who, right transgressing,
 Honour semblance more than being.                                   760
   O'er the sufferer all are ready
 Wail of bitter grief to utter,
 Though the biting pang of sorrow
 Never to their heart approaches;
 So with counterfeit rejoicing
 Men strain faces that are smileless;
 But when one his own sheep knoweth,
 Then men's eyes cannot deceive him,
 When they deem with kindly purpose,                                 770
 And with fondness weak to flatter.
 Thou, when thou did'st lead thine army
 For Helen's sake—(I will not hide it)—
 Wast to me as one whose features
 Have been limned by unskilled artist,
 Guiding ill the helm of reason,
 Giving men to death's doom sentenced
 *Courage which their will rejected.[328]
         Now nor from the spirit's surface,
         Nor with touch of thought unfriendly,
         All the toil, I say, is welcome,
         If men bring it to good issue.
         And thou soon shalt know, enquiring                         780
         Him who rightly, him who wrongly
         Of thy citizens fulfilleth
         Task of office for the city.[329]

 _Agam._ First Argos, and the Gods who guard the land,
 'Tis right to greet; to them in part I owe
 This my return, and vengeance that I took
 On Priam's city. Not on hearsay proof
 Judging the cause, with one consent the Gods
 Cast in their votes into the urn of blood
 For Ilion's ruin and her people's death;
 *I' the other urn Hope touched the rim alone,            790
 Still far from being filled full.[330] And even yet
 The captured city by its smoke is seen,
 *The incense clouds of Atè live on still;
 And, in the act of dying with its prey,
 From richest store the dust sends savours sweet.
 For these things it is meet to give the Gods
 Thank-offerings long-enduring; for our nets
 Of vengeance we set close, and for a woman
 Our Argive monster laid the city low,[331]
 Foaled by the mare, a people bearing shield,
 Taking its leap when set the Pleiades;[332]
 And, bounding o'er the tower, that ravenous lion                    800
 Lapped up its fill of blood of kingly race.
 This prelude to the Gods I lengthen out;
 And as concerns thy feeling (this I well
 Remember hearing) I with thee agree,
 And thou in me may'st find an advocate.
 With but few men is it their natural bent
 To honour without grudging prosperous friend:
 For ill-souled envy that the heart besets,
 Doubles his woe who suffers that disease:
 He by his own griefs first is overwhelmed,
 And groans at sight of others' happier lot.                         810
 *And I with good cause say, (for well I know,)
 They are but friendship's mirror, phantom shade,
 Who seemed to be my most devoted friends.
 Odysseus only, who against his will[333]
 Sailed with us, still was found true trace-fellow:
 And this I say of him or dead or living.
 But as for all that touches on the State,
 Or on the Gods, in full assembly we,
 Calling our council, will deliberate:                               820
 For what goes well we should with care provide
 How longest it may last; and where there needs
 A healing charm, there we with all good-will,
 By surgery or cautery will try
 To turn away the mischief of disease.
 And now will I to home and household hearth
 Move on, and first give thanks unto the Gods
 Who led me forth, and brought me back again.
 Since Victory follows, long may she remain!

          _Enter_ CLYTÆMNESTRA, _followed by female attendants
                       carrying purple tapestry_

 _Clytæm._ Ye citizens, ye Argive senators,
 I will not shrink from telling you the tale
 Of wife's true love. As time wears on one drops                     830
 All over-shyness. Not learning it from others,
 I will narrate my own unhappy life,
 The whole long time my lord at Ilion stayed.
 For first, that wife should sit at home alone
 Without her husband is a monstrous grief,
 Hearing full many an ill report of him,
 Now one and now another coming still,
 Bringing news home, worse trouble upon bad.
 Yea, if my lord had met as many wounds
 As rumour told of, floating to our house,                           840
 He had been riddled more than any net;
 And had he died, as tidings still poured in,
 Then he, a second Geryon[334] with three lives,
 Had boasted of a threefold coverlet
 Of earth above, (I will not say below him,)[335]
 Dying one death for each of those his forms;
 And so, because of all these ill reports,
 Full many a noose around my neck have others
 Loosed by main force, when I had hung myself.
 And for this cause no son is with me now,                           850
 Holding in trust the pledges of our love,
 As he should be, Orestes. Wonder not;
 For now a kind ally doth nurture him,
 Strophios the Phokian, telling me of woes
 Of twofold aspect, danger on thy side
 At Ilion, and lest loud-voiced anarchy
 Should overthrow thy council, since 'tis still
 The wont of men to kick at those who fall.
 No trace of guile bears this excuse of mine;
 As for myself, the fountains of my tears
 Have flowed till they are dry, no drop remains,                     860
 And mine eyes suffer from o'er-late repose,
 Watching with tears the beacons set for thee,[336]
 Left still unheeded. And in dreams full oft
 I from my sleep was startled by the gnat
 With thin wings buzzing, seeing in the night
 Ills that stretched far beyond the time of sleep.[337]
 Now, having borne all this, with mind at ease,
 I hail my lord as watch-dog of the fold,
 The stay that saves the ship, of lofty roof                         870
 Main column-prop, a father's only child,
 Land that beyond all hope the sailor sees,
 Morn of great brightness following after storm,
 Clear-flowing fount to thirsty traveller.[338]
 Yes, it is pleasant to escape all straits:
 With words of welcome such as these I greet thee;
 May jealous Heaven forgive them! for we bore
 Full many an evil in the past; and now,
 Dear husband, leave thy car, nor on the ground,
 O King, set thou the foot that Ilion trampled.                      880
 Why linger ye, [_turning to her attendants_,] ye maids, whose task it
    was
 To strew the pathway with your tapestries?
 Let the whole road be straightway purple-strown,
 That Justice lead to home he looked not for.
 All else my care, by slumber not subdued,
 Will with God's help work out what fate decrees.[339]

           (_The handmaids advance, and are about to lay the
                     purple carpets on the ground_)

 _Agam._ O child of Leda, guardian of my home,
 Thy speech hath with my absence well agreed—
 For long indeed thou mad'st it—but fit praise
 Is boon that I must seek at other hands.                            890
 I pray thee, do not in thy woman's fashion
 Pamper my pride, nor in barbaric guise
 Prostrate on earth raise full-mouthed cries to me;
 Make not my path offensive to the Gods
 By spreading it with carpets.[340] They alone
 May claim that honour; but for mortal men
 To walk on fair embroidery, to me
 Seems nowise without peril. So I bid you
 To honour me as man, and not as God.
 Apart from all foot-mats and tapestry
 My fame speaks loudly; and God's greatest gift                      900
 Is not to err from wisdom. We must bless
 Him only who ends life in fair estate.[341]
 Should I thus act throughout, good hope were mine.

 _Clytæm._ Nay, say not this my purposes to thwart.

 _Agam._ Know I change not for the worse my purpose.

 _Clytæm._ In fear, perchance, thou vowèd'st thus to act.

 _Agam._ If any, I, with good ground spoke my will.[342]

 _Clytæm._ What think'st thou Priam, had he wrought such deeds...?

 _Agam._ Full gladly he, I trow, had trod on carpets.

 _Clytæm._ Then shrink not thou through fear of men's dispraise.910

 _Agam._ And yet a people's whisper hath great might.[343]

 _Clytæm._ Who is not envied is not enviable.

 _Agam._ 'Tis not a woman's part to crave for strife.

 _Clytæm._ True, yet the prosperous e'en should sometimes yield.

 _Agam._ Dost thou then prize that victory in the strife?

 _Clytæm._ Nay, list; with all good-will yield me this boon.

 _Agam._ Well, then, if thou wilt have it so, with speed
 Let some one loose my buskins[344] (servants they
 Doing the foot's true work), and as I tread
 Upon these robes sea-purpled, may no wrath
 From glance of Gods smite on me from afar!                          920
 Great shame I feel to trample with my foot
 This wealth of carpets, costliest work of looms;
 So far for this. This stranger [_pointing to_ CASSANDRA] lead thou in
 With kindliness. On him who gently wields
 His power God's eye looks kindly from afar.
 None of their own will choose a bondslave's life;
 And she, the chosen flower of many spoils,
 Has followed with me as the army's gift.
 But since I turn, obeying thee in this,
 I'll to my palace go, on purple treading.                           930

 _Clytæm._ There is a sea,—and who shall drain it dry?
 Producing still new store of purple juice,
 Precious as silver, staining many a robe.
 And in our house, with God's help, O my king,
 'Tis ours to boast our palace knows no stint.
 Trampling of many robes would I have vowed,
 Had that been ordered me in oracles,
 When for my lord's return I then did plan
 My votive gifts. For while the root lives on,
 The foliage stretches even to the house,
 And spreads its shade against the dog-star's rage;                  940
 So when thou comest to thy hearth and home,
 Thou show'st that warmth hath come in winter time;
 And when from unripe clusters Zeus matures
 The wine,[345] then is there coolness in the house,
 If the true master dwelleth in his home.
 Ah, Zeus! the All-worker, Zeus, work out for me
 All that I pray for; let it be thy care
 To look to what Thou purposest to work.[346]

                         [_Exeunt_ AGAMEMNON, _walking on the tapestry_,
                             CLYTÆMNESTRA, _and her attendants_


                               STROPHE I

 _Chor._ Why thus continually
 Do haunting phantoms hover at the gate
         Of my foreboding heart?                                     950
 Why floats prophetic song, unbought, unbidden?
           Why doth no steadfast trust
         Sit on my mind's dear throne,
 To fling it from me as a vision dim?
 Long time hath passed since stern-ropes of our ships
 Were fastened on the sand, when our great host
             Of those that sailed in ships
             Had come to Ilion's towers:[347]


                             ANTISTROPHE I

         And now from these mine eyes                                960
 I learn, myself reporting to myself,
         Their safe return; and yet
 My mind within itself, taught by itself,
         Chanteth Erinnys' dirge,
         The lyreless melody,
 And hath no strength of wonted confidence.
 Not vain these inner pulses, as my heart
 Whirls eddying in breast oracular.
         I, against hope, will pray
         It prove false oracle.                                      970


                               STROPHE II

         Of high, o'erflowing health
 There is no bound that stays the wish for more,
 For evermore disease, as neighbour close
         Whom but a wall divides,
 Upon it presses; and man's prosperous state
         *Moves on its course, and strikes
         Upon an unseen rock;
 But if his fear for safety of his freight,
 A part, from well-poised sling, shall sacrifice,                    980
         Then the whole house sinks not,
         O'erfilled with wretchedness,
         Nor does he swamp his boat:
         So, too, abundant gift
 From Zeus in bounteous fulness, and the fruit
         Of glebe at harvest tide
 Have caused to cease sore hunger's pestilence;


                             ANTISTROPHE II

         But blood that once hath flowed
 In purple stains of death upon the ground
 At a man's feet, who then can bid it back
         By any charm of song?
 Else him who knew to call the dead to life[348]
         *Zeus had not sternly checked,                   990
         *As warning unto all;
 But unless Fate, firm-fixed, had barred our fate
 From any chance of succour from the Gods,
         Then had my heart poured forth
         Its thoughts, outstripping speech.[349]
         But now in gloom it wails
         Sore vexed, with little hope
 At any time hereafter fitting end                                  1000
         To find, unravelling,
 My soul within me burning with hot thoughts.

                        _Re-enter_ CLYTÆMNESTRA

 _Clytæm._ [_to_ CASSANDRA, _who has remained in the
 chariot during the choral ode_]
 Thou too—I mean Cassandra—go within;
 Since Zeus hath made it thine, and not in wrath,
 To share the lustral waters in our house,
 Standing with many a slave the altar nigh
 Of Zeus, who guards our goods.[350] Now get thee down
 From out this car, nor look so over proud.
 They say that e'en Alcmena's son endured[351]
 Being sold a slave, constrained to bear the yoke:
 And if the doom of this ill chance should come,
 Great boon it is to meet with lords who own
 Ancestral wealth. But whoso reap full crops                        1010
 They never dared to hope for, these in all,
 And beyond measure, to their slaves are harsh:[352]
 From us thou hast what usage doth prescribe.

 _Chor._ So ends she, speaking words full clear to thee:
 And seeing thou art in the toils of fate,
 If thou obey, thou wilt obey; and yet,
 Perchance, obey thou wilt not.

 _Clytæm._ Nay, but unless she, like a swallow, speaks
 A barbarous tongue unknown, I speaking now
 Within her apprehension, bid obey.                                 1020

 _Chor._ [_to_ CASSANDRA, _still standing motionless_] Go with her. What
    she bids is now the best;
 Obey her: leave thy seat upon this car.

 _Clytæm._ I have no leisure here to stay without:
 For as regards our central altar, there
 The sheep stand by as victims for the fire;
 For never had we hoped such thanks to give:
 If thou wilt do this, make no more delay;
 But if thou understandest not my words,
 Then wave thy foreign hand in lieu of speech.

                                  [CASSANDRA _shudders as in horror, but
                                      makes no sign_

 _Chor._ The stranger seems a clear interpreter
 To need. Her look is like a captured deer's.                       1030

 _Clytæm._ Nay, she is mad, and follows evil thoughts,
 Since, leaving now her city, newly-captured,
 She comes, and knows not how to take the curb,
 Ere she foam out her passion in her blood.
 I will not bear the shame of uttering more.        [_Exit_

 _Chor._ And I—I pity her, and will not rage:
 Come, thou poor sufferer, empty leave thy car;
 Yield to thy doom, and handsel now the yoke.

                              [CASSANDRA _leaves the chariot, and bursts
                                  into a cry of wailing_


                               STROPHE I

 _Cass._ Woe! woe, and well-a-day!
                 Apollo! O Apollo!                                  1040

 _Chor._ Why criest thou so loud on Loxias?
 The wailing cry of mourner suits not him.


                             ANTISTROPHE I

 _Cass._ Woe! woe, and well-a-day!
                 Apollo! O Apollo!

 _Chor._ Again with boding words she calls the God,
 Though all unmeet as helper to men's groans.


                               STROPHE II

 _Cass._ Apollo! O Apollo!
 God of all paths, Apollo true to me;
 For still thou dost appal me and destroy.[353]

 _Chor._ She seems her own ills like to prophesy:            1050
 The God's great gift is in the slave's mind yet.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 _Cass._ Apollo! O Apollo!
 God of all paths, Apollo true to me;
 What path hast led me? To what roof hast brought?

 _Chor._ To that of the Atreidæ. This I tell,
 If thou know'st not. Thou wilt not find it false.


                              STROPHE III

 _Cass._      Ah! Ah! Ah me!
 Say rather to a house God hates—that knows
         Murder, self-slaughter, ropes,[354]
 *A human shamble, staining earth with blood.            1060

 _Chor._ Keen scented seems this stranger, like a hound,
 And sniffs to see whose murder she may find.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

 _Cass._        Ah! Ah! Ah me!
 Lo! [_looking wildly, and pointing to the house_,] there the witnesses
    whose word I trust,—
         Those babes who wail their death,
 The roasted flesh that made a father's meal.

 _Chor._ We of a truth had heard thy seeress fame,
 But prophets now are not the race we seek.[355]


                               STROPHE IV

 _Cass._ Ah me! O horror! What ill schemes she now?
         What is this new great woe?                                1070
 Great evil plots she in this very house,
 Hard for its friends to bear, immedicable;
         And help stands far aloof.

 _Chor._ These oracles of thine surpass my ken;
 Those I know well. The whole town rings with them.[356]


                             ANTISTROPHE IV

 _Cass._ Ah me! O daring one! what work'st thou here,
         Who having in his bath
 Tended thy spouse, thy lord, then ... How tell the rest?
 For quick it comes, and hand is following hand,
         Stretched out to strike the blow.                          1080

 _Chor._ Still I discern not; after words so dark
 I am perplexed with thy dim oracles.


                               STROPHE V

 _Cass._ Ah, horror, horror! What is this I see?
         Is it a snare of Hell?
 Nay, the true net is she who shares his bed,
         Who shares in working death.
 Ha! let the Band insatiable in hate[357]
 Howl for the race its wild exulting cry
         O'er sacrifice that calls
         For death by storm of stones.


                               STROPHE VI

 _Chor._ What dire Erinnys bidd'st thou o'er our house
 To raise shrill cry? Thy speech but little cheers;
         And to my heart there rush
         Blood-drops of saffron hue,[358]                           1090
         *Which, when from deadly wound
 They fall, together with life's setting rays
 End, as it fails, their own appointed course:
         And mischief comes apace.


                             ANTISTROPHE V

 _Cass._ See, see, I say, from that fell heifer there
         Keep thou the bull:[359] in robes
 Entangling him, she with her weapon gores
         Him with the swarthy horns;[360]
 Lo! in that bath with water filled he falls,
 Smitten to death, and I to thee set forth
         Crime of a bath of blood,
         By murderous guile devised.


                             ANTISTROPHE VI

 _Chor._ I may not boast that I keen insight have
 In words oracular; yet bode I ill.                                 1100
         What tidings good are brought
         By any oracles
         To mortal men? These arts,
         In days of evil sore, with many words,
 Do still but bring a vague, portentous fear
         For men to learn and know.


                              STROPHE VII

 _Cass._ Woe, woe! for all sore ills that fall on me!
 It is my grief thou speak'st of, blending it
         With his.[361] [_Pausing, and then crying out_.]
             Ah! wherefore then
         Hast thou[362] thus brought me here,
         Only to die with thee?
         What other doom is mine?


                              STROPHE VIII

 _Chor._ Frenzied art thou, and by some God's might swayed,  1110
         And utterest for thyself
 A melody which is no melody,
         Like to that tawny one,
         Insatiate in her wail,
 The nightingale, who still with sorrowing soul,
         And “Itys, Itys,” cry,[363]
 Bemoans a life o'erflourishing in ills.


                            ANTISTROPHE VII

 _Cass._ Ah, for the doom of clear-voiced nightingale!
 The Gods gave her a body bearing wings,
         And life of pleasant days
         With no fresh cause to weep:
         But for me waiteth still
         Stroke from the two-edged sword.


                            ANTISTROPHE VIII

 _Chor._ From what source hast thou these dread agonies
         Sent on thee by thy God,
 Yet vague and little meaning; and thy cries                        1120
         Dire with ill-omened shrieks
         Dost utter as a chant,
 And blendest with them strains of shrillest grief?
         Whence treadest thou this track
 Of evil-boding path of prophecy?


                               STROPHE IX

 _Cass._ Woe for the marriage-ties, the marriage-ties
 Of Paris that brought ruin on his friends!
         Woe for my native stream,
         Scamandros, that I loved!
 Once on thy banks my maiden youth was reared,
         (Ah, miserable me!)
 Now by Cokytos and by Acheron's shores
 I seem too likely soon to utter song
         Of wild, prophetic speech.


                               STROPHE X

 _Chor._ What hast thou spoken now
         With utterance all too clear?
 *Even a boy its gist might understand;
         I to the quick am pierced
         With throe of deadly pain,
 Whilst thou thy moaning cries art uttering
         Over thy sore mischance,
         Wondrous for me to hear.


                             ANTISTROPHE IX

 _Cass._ Woe for the toil and trouble, toil and trouble
 Of city that is utterly destroyed!
         Woe for the victims slain
         Of herds that roamed the fields,                           1140
 My father's sacrifice to save his towers!
         No healing charm they brought
 To save the city from its present doom:
 And I with hot thoughts wild myself shall cast
         Full soon upon the ground.


                             ANTISTROPHE X

 _Chor._ This that thou utterest now
         With all before agrees.
 Some Power above dooms thee with purpose ill,
         Down-swooping heavily,
         To utter with thy voice
 Sorrows of deepest woe, and bringing death.
         And what the end shall be
         Perplexes in the extreme.

 _Cass._ Nay, now no more from out of maiden veils
 My oracle shall glance, like bride fresh wed;[364]                 1150
 But seems as though 'twould rush with speedy gales
 In full, clear brightness to the morning dawn;
 So that a greater war than this shall surge
 Like wave against the sunlight.[365] Now I'll teach
 No more in parables. Bear witness ye,
 As running with me, that I scent the track
 Of evil deeds that long ago were wrought:
 For never are they absent from this house,
 That choral band which chants in full accord,
 Yet no good music; good is not their theme.
 And now, as having drunk men's blood,[366] and so
 Grown wilder, bolder, see, the revelling band,                     1160
 Erinnyes of the race, still haunt the halls,
 Not easy to dismiss. And so they sing,
 Close cleaving to the house, its primal woe,[367]
 And vent their loathing in alternate strains
 On marriage-bed of brother ruthless found
 To that defiler. *Miss I now, or hit,
 Like archer skilled? or am I seeress false,
 A babbler vain that knocks at every door?
 Yea, swear beforehand, ere I die, I know
 (And not by rumour only) all the sins
 Of ancient days that haunt and vex this house.

 _Chor._ How could an oath, how firm soe'er confirmed,
 Bring aught of healing? Lo, I marvel at thee,                      1170
 That thou, though born far off beyond the sea,
 Should'st tell an alien city's tale as clear
 As though thyself had stood by all the while.

 _Cass._ The seer Apollo set me to this task.

 _Chor._ Was he a God, so smitten with desire?

 _Cass._ There was a time when shame restrained my speech.

 _Chor._ True; they who prosper still are shy and coy.

 _Cass._ He wrestled hard, breathing hot love on me.

 _Chor._ And were ye one in act whence children spring?

 _Cass._ I promised Loxias, then I broke my vow.

 _Chor._ Wast thou e'en then possessed with arts divine?     1180

 _Cass._ E'en then my country's woes I prophesied.

 _Chor._ How wast thou then unscathed by Loxias' wrath?

 _Cass._ I for that fault with no man gained belief.

 _Chor._ To us, at least, thou seem'st to speak the truth.

 _Cass._ [_Again speaking wildly, as in an ecstasy._] Ah, woe is me!
    Woe's me! Oh, ills on ills!
 Again the dread pang of true prophet's gift
 With preludes of great evil dizzies me.
 See ye those children sitting on the house
 In fashion like to phantom forms of dreams?                        1190
 Infants who perished at their own kin's hands,
 Their palms filled full with meat of their own flesh,
 Loom on my sight, the heart and entrails bearing,
 (A sorry burden that!) on which of old
 Their father fed.[368] And in revenge for this,
 I say a lion, dwelling in his lair,
 With not a spark of courage, stay-at-home,
 Plots 'gainst my master, now he's home returned,
 (Yes mine—for still I must the slave's yoke bear;)
 And the ship's ruler, Ilion's conqueror,
 Knows not what things the tongue of that lewd bitch
 Has spoken and spun out in welcome smooth,                         1200
 And, like a secret Atè, will work out
 With dire success: thus 'tis she plans: the man
 Is murdered by the woman. By what name
 Shall I that loathèd monster rightly call?
 An Amphisbæna? or a Skylla dwelling[369]
 Among the rocks, the sailors' enemy?
 Hades' fierce raging mother, breathing out
 Against her friends a curse implacable?
 Ah, how she raised her cry, (oh, daring one!)
 As for the rout of battle, and she feigns
 To hail with joy her husband's safe return!
 And if thou dost not credit this, what then?
 What will be will. Soon, present, pitying me                       1210
 Thou'lt own I am too true a prophetess.

 _Chor._ Thyestes' banquet on his children's flesh
 I know and shudder at, and fear o'ercomes me,
 Hearing not counterfeits of fact, but truths;
 Yet in the rest I hear and miss my path.

 _Cass._ I say thou'lt witness Agamemnon's death.

 _Chor._ Hush, wretched woman, close those lips of thine!

 _Cass._ For this my speech no healing God's at hand.

 _Chor._ True, if it must be; but may God avert it!          1220

 _Cass._ Thou utterest prayers, but others murder plot.

 _Chor._ And by what man is this dire evil wrought?

 _Cass._ Sure, thou hast seen my bodings all amiss.

 _Chor._ I see not his device who works the deed.

 _Cass._ And yet I speak the Hellenic tongue right well.

 _Chor._ So does the Pythian, yet her words are hard.

 _Cass._ [_In another access of frenzy._] Ah me, this fire!
           It comes upon me now!
 Ah me, Apollo, wolf-slayer! woe is me!
 This biped lioness who takes to bed
 A wolf in absence of the noble lion,                               1230
 Will slay me, wretched me. And, as one
 Mixing a poisoned draught, she boasts that she
 Will put my price into her cup of wrath,
 Sharpening her sword to smite her spouse with death,
 So paying him for bringing me. Oh, why
 Do I still wear what all men flout and scorn,
 My wand and seeress wreaths around my neck?[370]
 Thee, ere myself I die I will destroy: [_breaks her wand_]
 Perish ye thus: [_casting off her wreaths_] I soon shall follow you:
 Make rich another Atè[371] in my place;
 Behold Apollo's self is stripping me                               1240
 Of my divining garments, and that too,
 When he has seen me even in this garb
 Scorned without cause among my friends and kin,
 *By foes, with no diversity of mood.
 Reviled as vagrant, wandering prophetess,
 Poor, wretched, famished, I endured to live:
 And now the Seer who me a seeress made
 Hath brought me to this lot of deadly doom.
 Now for my father's altar there awaits me
 A butcher's block, where I am smitten down
 By slaughtering stroke, and with hot gush of blood.
 But the Gods will not slight us when we're dead;                   1250
 Another yet shall come as champion for us,
 A son who slays his mother, to avenge
 His father; and the exiled wanderer
 Far from his home, shall one day come again,
 Upon these woes to set the coping-stone:
 For the high Gods have sworn a mighty oath,
 His father's fall, laid low, shall bring him back.
 Why then do I thus groan in this new home,[372]
 When, to begin with, Ilion's town I saw
 Faring as it did fare, and they who held
 That town are gone by judgment of the Gods?                        1260
 I too will fare as they, and venture death:
 So I these gates of Hades now address,
 And pray for blow that bringeth death at once,
 That so with no fierce spasm, while the blood
 Flows in calm death, I then may close mine eyes.

                                  [_Goes towards the door of the palace_

 _Chor._ O thou most wretched, yet again most wise:
 Long hast thou spoken, lady, but if well
 Thou know'st thy doom, why to the altar go'st thou,
 Like heifer driven of God, so confidently?[373]                    1270

 _Cass._ For me, my friends, there is no time to 'scape.[374]

 _Chor._ Yea; but he gains in time who comes the last.

 _Cass._ The day is come: small gain for me in flight.

 _Chor._ Know then thou sufferest with a heart full brave.

 _Cass._ Such words as these the happy never hear.

 _Chor._ Yet mortal man may welcome noble death.

 _Cass._ [_Shrinking back from opening the door._] Woe's me for thee and
    thy brave sons, my father![375]

 _Chor._ What cometh now? What fear oppresseth thee?

 _Cass._ [_Again going to the door and then shuddering in another burst
    of frenzy._] Fie on't, fie!

 _Chor._ Whence comes this “Fie?” unless from mind that loathes?

 _Cass._ The house is tainted with the scent of death.       1280

 _Chor._ How so? This smells of victims on the hearth.

 _Cass._ Nay, it is like the blast from out a grave.

 _Chor._ No Syrian ritual tell'st thou for our house.[376]

 _Cass._ Well then I go, and e'en within will wail
 My fate and Agamemnon's. And for me,
 Enough of life. Ah, friends! Ah! not for nought
 I shrink in fear, as bird shrinks from the brake.[377]
 When I am dead do ye this witness bear,
 When in revenge for me, a woman, Death
 A woman smites, and man shall fall for man                         1290
 In evil wedlock wed. This friendly office,
 As one about to die, I pray you do me.

 _Chor._ Thy doom foretold, poor sufferer, moves my pity.

 _Cass._ I fain would speak once more, yet not to wail
 Mine own death-song; but to the Sun I pray,
 To his last rays, that my avengers wreak
 Upon my hated murderers judgment due
 For me, who die a slave's death, easy prey.
 Ah, life of man! when most it prospereth,
 *It is but limned in outline;[378] and when brought
 To low estate, then doth the sponge, full soaked,                  1300
 Wipe out the picture with its frequent touch:
 And this I count more piteous e'en than that.[379]

                              [_Passes through the door into the palace_

 _Chor._ 'Tis true of all men that they never set
 A limit to good fortune; none doth say,
         As bidding it depart,
 *And warding it from palaces of pride,
         “Enter thou here no more.”
 To this our lord the Blest Ones gave to take
         Priam's city; and he comes
 Safe to his home and honoured by the Gods;
         But if he now shall pay
 The forfeit of blood-guiltiness of old,
 And, dying, so work out for those who died,
 By his own death another penalty,                                  1310
         Who then of mortal men,
         Hearing such things as this,
         Can boast that he was born
         With fate from evil free?

 _Agam._ [_from within._] Ah, me! I am struck down with deadly stroke.

 _Chor._ Hush! who cries out with deadly stroke sore smitten?

 _Agam._ Ah me, again! struck down a second time!

                                                                 [_Dies_

 _Chor._ By the king's groans I judge the deed is done;
 But let us now confer for counsels safe.[380]

 _Chor. a._ I give you my advice to summon here,
 Here to the palace, all the citizens.                              1320

 _Chor. b._ I think it best to rush at once on them,
 And take them in the act with sword yet wet.

 _Chor. c._ And I too give like counsel, and I vote
 For deed of some kind. 'Tis no time to pause.

 _Chor. d._ Who will see, may.—They but the prelude work
 Of tyranny usurped o'er all the State.

 _Chor. e._ Yes, we are slow, but they who trample down
 The thought of hesitation slumber not.

 _Chor. f._ I know not what advice to find or speak:
 He who can act knows how to counsel too.                           1330

 _Chor. g._ I too think with thee; for I have no hope
 With words to raise the dead again to life.

 _Chor. h._ What! Shall we drag our life on and submit
 To these usurpers that defile the house?

 _Chor. i._ Nay, that we cannot bear: To die were better;
 For death is gentler far than tyranny.

 _Chor. k._ Shall we upon this evidence of groans
 Guess, as divining that our lord is dead?

 _Chor. l._ When we know clearly, then should we discuss:
 To guess is one thing, and to know another.                        1340

 _Chor._[381] So vote I too, and on the winning side,
 Taking the votes all round that we should learn
 How he, the son of Atreus, fareth now.

  _Enter_ CLYTÆMNESTRA _from the palace, in robes with stains of blood,
        followed by soldiers and attendants. The open doors show the
        corpses of_ AGAMEMNON _and_ CASSANDRA, _the former lying in a
        silvered bath_

 _Clytæm._ Though many words before to suit the time
 Were spoken, now I shall not be ashamed
 The contrary to utter: How could one
 By open show of enmity to foes
 Who seemed as friends, fence in the snares of death
 Too high to be o'erleapt? But as for me,
 Not without forethought for this long time past,
 This conflict comes to me from triumph old[382]
 Of his, though slowly wrought. I stand where I                     1350
 Did smite him down, with all my task well done.
 So did I it, (the deed deny I not,)
 That he could nor avert his doom nor flee:
 I cast around him drag-net as for fish,
 With not one outlet, evil wealth of robe:
 And twice I smote him, and with two deep groans
 He dropped his limbs: And when he thus fell down
 I gave him yet a third, thank-offering true[383]
 To Hades of the dark, who guards the dead.
 So fallen, he gasps out his struggling soul,
 And breathing forth a sharp, quick gush of blood,
 He showers dark drops of gory rain on me,                          1360
 Who no less joy felt in them than the corn,
 When the blade bears, in glad shower given of God.
 Since this is so, ye Argive elders here,
 Ye, as ye will, may hail the deed, but I
 Boast of it. And were't fitting now to pour
 Libation o'er the dead,[384] 'twere justly done,
 Yea more than justly; such a goblet full,
 Of ills hath he filled up with curses dire
 At home, and now has come to drain it off.

 _Chor._ We marvel at the boldness of thy tongue             1370
 Who o'er thy husband's corpse speak'st vaunt like this.

 _Clytæm._ Ye test me as a woman weak of mind;
 But I with dauntless heart to you that know
 Say this, and whether thou dost praise or blame,
 Is all alike:—here Agamemnon lies,
 My husband, now a corpse, of this right hand,
 As artist just, the handiwork: so stands it.


                                STROPHE

 _Chor._ What evil thing, O Queen, or reared on earth,
         Or draught from salt sea-wave                              1380
         Hast thou fed on, to bring
         Such incense on thyself,[385]
         A people's loud-voiced curse?
         'Twas thou did'st sentence him,
         'Twas thou did'st strike him down;
         But thou shall exiled be,
     Hated with strong hate of the citizens.

 _Clytæm._ Ha! now on me thou lay'st the exile's doom,
 My subjects' hate, and people's loud-voiced curse,
 Though ne'er did'st thou oppose my husband there,
 Who, with no more regard than had been due
 To a brute's death, although he called his own
 Full many a fleecy sheep in pastures bred,
 Yet sacrificed his child, the dear-loved fruit                     1390
 Of all my travail-pangs, to be a charm
 Against the winds of Thrakia. Shouldst thou not
 Have banished him from out this land of ours,
 As meed for all his crimes? Yet hearing now
 My deeds, thou art a judge full stern. But I
 Tell thee to speak thy threats, as knowing well
 I am prepared that thou on equal terms
 Should'st rule, if thou dost conquer. But if God
 Should otherwise decree, then thou shall learn,
 Late though it be, the lesson to be wise.


                              ANTISTROPHE

 _Chor._ Yea, thou art stout of heart, and speak'st big words;1400
         And maddened is thy soul
         As by a murderous hate;
         And still upon thy brow
         Is seen, not yet avenged,
         The stain of blood-spot foul;
         And yet it needs must be,
         One day thou, reft of friends,
 Shall pay the penalty of blow for blow.

 _Clytæm._ Now hear thou too my oaths of solemn dread:
 By my accomplished vengeance for my child,
 By Atè and Erinnys, unto whom
 I slew him as a victim, I look not
 That fear should come beneath this roof of mine,
 So long as on my hearth Ægisthos kindles                           1410
 The flaming fire, as well disposed to me
 As he hath been aforetime. He to us
 Is no slight shield of stoutest confidence.
 There lies he, [_pointing to the corpse of_ AGAMEMNON,] one who foully
    wronged his wife,
 The darling of the Chryseïds at Troïa;
 And there [_pointing to_ CASSANDRA] this captive slave, this auguress,
 His concubine, this seeress trustworthy,
 *Who shared his bed, and yet was as well known
 To the sailors as their benches!... They have fared
 Not otherwise than they deserved: for he
 Lies as you see. And she who, like a swan,[386]
 Has chanted out her last and dying song,                           1420
 Lies close to him she loved, and so has brought
 The zest of a new pleasure to my bed.


                             STROPHE I[387]

 _Chor._ Ah me, would death might come
 Quickly, with no sharp throe of agony,
         Nor long bed-ridden pain,
         Bringing the endless sleep;
 Since he, the watchman most benign of all,
         Hath now been smitten low,
 And by a woman's means hath much endured,
 And at a woman's hand hath lost his life!


                               STROPHE II

 Alas! alas! O Helen, evil-souled,                                  1430
         Who, though but one, hast slain
 Many, yea, very many lives at Troïa.[388]
        ·      ·       ·       ·       ·


                              STROPHE III

 *But now for blood that may not be washed out
         *Thou hast to full bloom brought
 *A deed of guilt for ever memorable,
         For strife was in the house,
         Wrought out in fullest strength,
         Woe for a husband's life.


                               STROPHE IV

 _Clytæm._ Nay, pray not thou for destiny of death,
         Oppressed with what thou see'st;
 Nor turn thou against Helena thy wrath,                            1440
         As though she murderess were,
 And, though but one, had many Danaï's souls
 Brought low in death, and wrought o'erwhelming woe.


                             ANTISTROPHE I

 _Chor._ O Power that dost attack
 Our palace and the two Tantalidæ,[389]
         *And dost through women wield
         *A might that grieves my heart![390]
 And o'er the body, like a raven foul,
         Against all laws of right,
 *Standing, she boasteth in her pride of heart[391]
 That she can chant her pæan hymn of praise.                        1450


                             ANTISTROPHE IV

 _Clytæm._ Now thou dost guide aright thy speech and thought,
         Invoking that dread Power,
 *The thrice-gorged evil genius of this house;
         For he it is who feeds
 In the heart's depth the raging lust of blood:
 Ere the old wound is healed, new bloodshed comes.


                               STROPHE V

 _Chor._ Yes, of a Power thou tell'st
 *Mighty and very wrathful to this house;
 Ah me! ah me! an evil tale enough                                  1460
         Of baleful chance of doom,
         Insatiable of ill:
         Yet, ah! it is through Zeus,
 The all-appointing and all-working One;
         For what with mortal men
         Is wrought apart from Zeus?
 What of all this is not by God decreed?[392]


                               STROPHE VI

         Ah me! ah me!
 My king, my king, how shall I weep for thee?
 What shall I speak from heart that truly loves?
 And now thou liest there, breathing out thy life,                  1470
         In impious deed of death,
         In this fell spider's web,—


                              STROPHE VII

         (Yes, woe is me! woe, woe!
 Woe for this couch of thine dishonourable!)—
         Slain by a subtle death,[393]
 With sword two-edged which her right hand did wield.


                              STROPHE VIII

 _Clytæm._ Thou speak'st big words, as if the deed were mine;
         Yet think thou not of me,
         As Agamemnon's spouse;
 But in the semblance of this dead man's wife,
 The old and keen Avenger of the house
 Of Atreus, that cruel banqueter of old,
         Hath wrought out vengeance full
         On him who lieth here,                                     1480
         And full-grown victim slain
         Over the younger victims of the past.[394]


                             ANTISTROPHE V

 _Chor._ That thou art guiltless found
 Of this foul murder who will witness bear?
 How can it be so, how? And yet, perchance,
         As helper to the deed,
         Might come the avenging Fiend
         Of that ancestral time;
 And in this rush of murders of near kin
         Dark Ares presses on,
         Where he will vengeance work
 For clotted gore of children slain as food.                        1490


                             ANTISTROPHE VI

         Ah me! ah me!
 My king, my king, how shall I weep for thee?
 What shall I speak from heart that truly loves?
 And now thou liest there, breathing out thy life,
         In impious deed of death,
         In this fell spider's web,—


                            ANTISTROPHE VII

         (Yes, woe is me! woe, woe!
 Woe for this couch of thine dishonourable!)—
         Slain by a subtle death,
 With sword two-edged which her right hand did wield.


                            ANTISTROPHE VIII

 _Clytæm._ Nay, not dishonourable
         His death doth seem to me:
         Did he not work a doom,
         In this our house with guile?[395]                         1500
 Mine own dear child, begotten of this man,
 Iphigeneia, wept with many a tear,
 He slew; now slain himself in recompense,
         Let him not boast in Hell,
         Since he the forfeit pays,
         Pierced by the sword in death,
 For all the evil that his hand began.


                               STROPHE IX

 _Chor._ I stand perplexed in soul, deprived of power
         Of quick and ready thought,
         Where now to turn, since thus                              1510
         Our home is falling low.
 I shrink in fear from the fierce pelting storm
 Of blood that shakes the basement of the house:
         No more it rains in drops:
 And for another deed of mischief dire,
         Fate whets the righteous doom
         On other whetstones still.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 O Earth! O Earth! Oh, would thou had'st received me,
         Ere I saw him on couch
 Of bath with silvered walls thus stretched in death!
 Who now will bury him, who wail? Wilt thou,
 When thou hast slain thy husband, have the heart                   1520
 To mourn his death, and for thy monstrous deeds
 Do graceless grace? And who will chant the dirge
         With tears in truth of heart,
         Over our godlike chief?


                               STROPHE X

 _Clytæm._ It is not thine to speak;
         'Twas at our hands he fell,
         Yea, he fell low in death,
         And we will bury him,                                      1530
 Not with the bitter tears of those who weep
         As inmates of the house;
 But she, his child, Iphigeneia, there
 Shall meet her father, and with greeting kind,
 E'en as is fit, by that swift-flowing ford,
         Dark stream of bitter woes,
         Shall clasp him in her arms,
         And give a daughter's kiss.


                             ANTISTROPHE IX

 _Chor._ Lo! still reproach upon reproach doth come;
         Hard are these things to judge:
         The spoiler still is spoiled,
         The slayer pays his debt;
 Yea, while Zeus liveth through the ages, this                      1540
 Lives also, that the doer dree his weird;
         For this is law fast fixed.
 Who now can drive from out the kingly house
         The brood of curses dark?
         The race to Atè cleaves.


                             ANTISTROPHE X

 _Clytæm._ Yes, thou hast touched with truth
         That word oracular;
         But I for my part wish,
         (Binding with strongest oath
 The evil dæmon of the Pleisthenids,)[396]
         Though hard it be to bear,
 To rest content with this our present lot;
 And, for the future, that he go to vex
 Another race with homicidal deaths.                                1550
         Lo! 'tis enough for me,
         Though small my share of wealth,
         At last to have freed my house
 From madness that sets each man's hand 'gainst each.

                            _Enter_ ÆGISTHOS

 _Ægis._ Hail, kindly light of day that vengeance brings!
 Now I can say the Gods on high look down,
 Avenging men, upon the woes of earth,
 Since lying in the robes the Erinnyes wove
 I see this man, right welcome sight to me,
 Paying for deeds his father's hand had wrought.                    1560
 Atreus, our country's ruler, this man's father,
 Drove out my sire Thyestes, his own brother,
 (To tell the whole truth,) quarrelling for rule,
 An exile from his country and his home.
 And coming back a suppliant on the hearth,
 The poor Thyestes found a lot secure,
 Nor did he, dying, stain the soil with blood,
 There in his home. But this man's godless sire,[397]
 Atreus, more prompt than kindly in his deeds,
 On plea of keeping festal day with cheer,
 To my sire banquet gave of children's flesh,                       1570
 His own. The feet and finger-tips of hands
 *He, sitting at the top, apart concealed;
 And straight the other, in his blindness taking
 The parts that could not be discerned, did eat
 A meal which, as thou see'st, perdition works
 For all his kin. And learning afterwards
 The deed of dread, he groaned and backward fell,
 Vomits the feast of blood, and imprecates
 On Pelops' sons a doom intolerable,
 And makes the o'erturning of the festive board,
 With fullest justice, as a general curse,
 That so might fall the race of Pleisthenes.                        1580
 And now thou see'st how here accordingly
 This man lies fallen; I, of fullest right,
 The weaver of the plot of murderous doom.
 For me, a babe in swaddling-clothes, he banished
 With my poor father, me, his thirteenth child;
 And Vengeance brought me back, of full age grown:
 And e'en far off I wrought against this man,
 And planned the whole scheme of this dark device.
 And so e'en death were now right good for me,
 Seeing him into the nets of Vengeance fallen.

 _Chor._ I honour not this arrogance in guilt,               1590
 Ægisthos. Thou confessest thou hast slain
 Of thy free will our chieftain here,—that thou
 Alone did'st plot this murder lamentable;
 Be sure, I say, thy head shall not escape
 The righteous curse a people hurls with stones.

 _Ægisth._ Dost thou say this, though seated on the bench
 Of lowest oarsmen, while the upper row
 Commands the ship?[398] But thou shalt find, though old,
 How hard it is at such an age to learn,
 When the word is, “keep temper.” But a prison
 And fasting pains are admirably apt,                               1600
 As prophet-healers even for old age.
 Dost see, and not see this? Against the pricks
 Kick not,[399] lest thou perchance should'st smart for it.

 _Chor._ Thou, thou, O Queen, when thy lord came from war,
 While keeping house, thy husband's bed defiling,
 Did'st scheme this death for this our hero-chief.

 _Ægisth._ These words of thine shall parents prove of tears:
 But this thy tongue is Orpheus' opposite;
 He with his voice led all things on for joy,
 But thou, provoking with thy childish cries,
 Shalt now be led; and then, being kept in check,
 Thou shall appear in somewhat gentler mood.                        1610

 _Chor._ As though thou should'st o'er Argives ruler be,
 Who even when thou plotted'st this man's death
 Did'st lack good heart to do the deed thyself?

 _Ægisth._ E'en so; to work this fraud was clearly part
 Fit for a woman. I was foe, of old
 Suspected. But now will I with his wealth
 See whether I his subjects may command,
 And him who will not hearken I will yoke
 In heavy harness as a full-fed colt,
 Nowise as trace-horse;[400] but sharp hunger joined
 With darksome dungeon shall behold him tamed.                      1620

 _Chor._ Why did'st not thou then, coward as thou art,
 Thyself destroy him? but a woman with thee,
 Pollution to our land and our land's Gods,
 She slew him. Does Orestes see the light,
 Perchance, that he, brought back by Fortune's grace,
 May for both these prove slayer strong to smite?

 _Ægisth._ Well, since thou think'st to act, not merely talk,
 Thou shall know clearly....

                                   [_Calling his Guards from the palace_

 On then, my troops, the time for deeds is come.

 _Chor._ On then, let each man grasp his sword in hand.

 _Ægisth._ With sword in hand, I too shrink not from death.  1630

 _Chor._ Thou talkest of thy death; we hail the word;
 And make our own the fortune it implies.

 _Clytæm._ Nay, let us not do other evil deeds,
 Thou dearest of all friends. An ill-starred harvest
 It is to have reaped so many. Enough of woe:
 Let no more blood be shed: Go thou—[_to the Chorus_]—go ye,
 Ye aged sires, to your allotted homes,
 Ere ye do aught amiss and dree your weird:
 *This that we have done ought to have sufficed;
 But should it prove we've had enough of ills,
 We will accept it gladly, stricken low
 In evil doom by heavy hand of God.
 This is a woman's counsel, if there be
 That deigns to hear it.

 _Ægisth._ But that these should fling
 The blossoms of their idle speech at me,                           1640
 And utter words like these, so tempting Fate,
 And fail of counsel wise, and flout their master...!

 _Chor._ It suits not Argives on the vile to fawn.

 _Ægisth._ Be sure, hereafter I will hunt thee down.

 _Chor._ Not so, if God should guide Orestes back.

 _Ægisth._ Right well I know how exiles feed on hopes.

 _Chor._ Prosper, wax fat, do foul wrong—'tis thy day.

 _Ægisth._ Know thou shalt pay full price for this thy folly.

 _Chor._ Be bold, and boast, like cock beside his mate.

 _Clytæm._ Nay, care not thou for these vain howlings; I
 And thou together, ruling o'er the house,
 Will settle all things rightly.             [_Exeunt_

-----

Footnote 271:

  The form of gambling from which the phrase is taken, had clearly
  become common in Attica among the class to which the watchman was
  supposed to belong, and had given rise to proverbial phrases like that
  in the text. The Greeks themselves supposed it to have been invented
  by the Lydians (Herod. i. 94), or Palamedes, one of the heroes of the
  tale of Troïa, but it enters also into Egyptian legends (Herod. ii.
  122), and its prevalence from remote antiquity in the farther East, as
  in the Indian story of Nala and Damayanti, makes it probable that it
  originated there. The game was commonly played, as the phrase shows,
  with three dice, the highest throw being that which gave three sixes.
  Æschylos, it may be noted, appears in a lost drama, which bore the
  title of _Palamedes_, to have brought the game itself into his plot.
  It is referred to, as invented by that hero, in a fragment of
  Sophocles (_Fr._ 380), and again in the proverb,—

         “The dice of Zeus have ever lucky throws.”—(_Fr._ 763.)

Footnote 272:

  Here, also, the watchman takes up another common proverbial phrase,
  belonging to the same group as that of “kicking against the pricks” in
  v. 1624. He has his reasons for silence, weighty as would be the tread
  of an ox to close his lips.

Footnote 273:

  The vultures stand, _i.e._, to the rulers of Heaven, in the same
  relation as the foreign sojourners in Athens, the _Metoics_, did to
  the citizens under whose protection they placed themselves.

Footnote 274:

  Alexandros, the other name of Paris, the seducer of Helen.

Footnote 275:

  The words, perhaps, refer to the grief of Menelaos, as leading him to
  neglect the wonted sacrifices to Zeus, but it seems better to see in
  them a reference to the sin of Paris. He, at least, who had carried
  off his host's wife, had not offered acceptable sacrifices, had
  neglected all sacrifices to Zeus Xenios, the God of host and guest.
  The allusion to the sacrifice of Iphigeneia, which some (Donaldson and
  Paley) have found here, and the wrath of Clytæmnestra, which Agamemnon
  will fail to soothe, seems more far-fetched.

Footnote 276:

  An allusion, such as the audience would catch and delight in, to the
  well-known enigma of the Sphinx. See Sophocles (_Trans._), p. 1.

Footnote 277:

  The Chorus, though too old to take part in the expedition, are yet
  able to tell both of what passed as the expedition started, and of the
  terrible fulfilment of the omens which they had seen. The two eagles
  are, of course, in the symbolism of prophecy, the two chieftains,
  Menelaos and Agamemnon. The “white feathers” of the one may point to
  the less heroic character of Menelaos: so in v. 123, they are of
  “diverse mood.” The hare whom they devour is, in the first instance,
  Troïa, and so far the omen is good, portending the success of the
  expedition; but, as Artemis hates the fierceness of the eagles, so
  there is, in the eyes of the seer, a dark token of danger from her
  wrath against the Atreidæ. Either their victory will be sullied by
  cruelty which will bring down vengeance, or else there is some secret
  sin in the past which must be atoned for by a terrible sacrifice. In
  the legend followed by Sophocles (_Electr._ 566), Agamemnon had
  offended Artemis by slaying a doe sacred to her, as he was hunting. In
  the manifold meanings of such omens there is, probably, a latent
  suggestion of the sacrifice of Iphigeneia by the two chieftains,
  though this was at the time hidden from the seer. The fact that they
  are seen on the right, not on the left hand, was itself ominous of
  good.

Footnote 278:

  The song of Linos, originally the dirge with which men mourned for the
  death of Linos, the minstrel-son of Apollo and Urania, brother of
  Orpheus, who was slain by Heracles—a type, like Thammuz and Adonis, of
  life prematurely closed and bright hopes never to be fulfilled,—had
  come to be the representative of all songs of mourning. So Hesiod (in
  Eustath. on Hom. _Il._, vii. 569) speaks of the name, as applied to
  all funeral dirges over poets and minstrels. So Herodotos (ii. 79)
  compares it, as the type of this kind of music among the Greeks, with
  what he found in Egypt connected with the name of Maneros, the only
  son of the first king of Egypt, who died in the bloom of youth. The
  name had, therefore, as definite a connotation for a Greek audience as
  the words _Miserere_ or _Jubilate_ would have for us, and ought not, I
  believe, to disappear from the translation.

Footnote 279:

  The comparison of a lion's whelps to dew-drops, bold as the figure is,
  has something in it analogous to that with which we are more familiar,
  describing the children, or the army of a king, as the “dew” from “the
  womb of the morning” (Ps. cx. 3).

Footnote 280:

  The sacrifice, _i.e._, was to be such as could not, according to the
  customary ritual, form a feast for the worshippers.

Footnote 281:

  The dark words look at once before and after, back to the murder of
  the sons of Thyestes, forward, though of this the seer knew not, to
  the sacrifice of Iphigeneia. Clytæmnestra is the embodiment of the
  Vengeance of which the Chorus speaks.

Footnote 282:

  As a part of the drama the whole passage that follows is an assertion
  by the Chorus that in this their trouble they will turn to no other
  God, invoke no other name, but that of the Supreme Zeus. But it can
  hardly be doubted that they have a meaning beyond this, and are the
  utterance by the poet of his own theology. In the second part of the
  Promethean trilogy (all that we now know of it) he had represented
  Zeus as ruling in the might of despotic sovereignty, the
  representative of a Power which men could not resist, but also could
  not love, inflicting needless sufferings on the sons of men. Now he
  has grown wiser. The sovereignty of Zeus is accepted as part of the
  present order of the world; trust in Him brings peace; the pain which
  He permits is the one only way to wisdom. The stress laid upon the
  name of Zeus implies a wish to cleave to the religion inherited from
  the older Hellenes, as contrasted with those with which their
  intercourse with the East had made the Athenians familiar. Like the
  voice which came to Epimenides, as he was building a sanctuary to the
  Muses, bidding him dedicate it not to them but to Zeus (Diog. Laert.
  i. 10), it represents a faint approximation to a truer, more
  monotheistic creed than that of the popular mythology.

Footnote 283:

  The two mighty ones who have passed away are Uranos and Cronos, the
  representatives in Greek mythology of the earlier stages of the
  world's history, (1) mere material creation, (2) an ideal period of
  harmony, a golden, Saturnian age, preceding the present order of
  divine government with its mingled good and evil. Comp. Hesiod.
  _Theogon._, 459.

Footnote 284:

  The Chorus returns, after its deeper speculative thoughts, to its
  interrupted narrative.

Footnote 285:

  The seer saw his augury fulfilled. When he uttered the name of Artemis
  it was pregnant with all the woe which he had foreboded at the outset.

Footnote 286:

  So that the blood may fall upon the altar, as the knife was drawn
  across the throat.

Footnote 287:

  The whole passage should be compared with the magnificent description
  in Lucretius i. 84-101.

Footnote 288:

  Beautiful as a picture, and as motionless and silent also. The art,
  young as it was, had already reached the stage when it supplied to the
  poet an ideal standard of perfection. Other allusions to it are found
  in vv. 774, 1300.

Footnote 289:

  The words point to the ritual of Greek feasts, which assigned the
  first libation to Zeus and the Olympian Gods, the second to the
  Heroes, the third to Zeus in his special character as Saviour and
  Preserver; the last was commonly accompanied by a pæan, hymn of
  praise. The life of Agamemnon is described as one which had good cause
  to offer many such libations. Iphigeneia had sung many such pæans.

Footnote 290:

  The mythical explanation of this title for the Argive territory is
  found in the _Suppl._ v. 256, and its real meaning is discussed in a
  note to that passage.

Footnote 291:

  To speak of Morning as the child of Night was, we may well believe,
  among the earliest parables of nature. In its mythical form it appears
  in Hesiod (_Theogon._ 123), but its traces are found wherever, as
  among Hebrews, Athenians, Germans, men reckoned by nights rather than
  by days, and spoke of “the evening and the morning” rather than of
  “day and night.”

Footnote 292:

  The God thought of is, as in v. 272, Hephæstos, as being Lord of the
  Fire, that had brought the tidings.

Footnote 293:

  It is not without significance that Clytæmnestra scorns the channel of
  divine instruction of which the Chorus had spoken with such reverence.
  The dramatist puts into her mouth the language of those who scoffed at
  the notion that truth might come to the soul in “visions of the
  night,” when “deep sleep falleth upon men.” So Sophocles puts like
  thoughts into the mouth of Jocasta (_Œd. King_, vv. 709, 858).

Footnote 294:

  Omens came from the flight of birds. An omen which was not
  trustworthy, or belonged to some lower form of divination, might
  therefore be spoken of as “wingless.” But the word may possibly be
  intensive, not negative, “swift-winged,” and then refer generically to
  that form of divination.

Footnote 295:

  The description that follows, over and above its general interest,
  had, probably, for an Athenian audience, that of representing the
  actual succession of beacon-stations, by which they, in the course of
  the wars, under Pericles, had actually received intelligence from the
  coasts of Asia. A glance at the map will show the fitness of the
  places named—Ida, Lemnos, Athos, Makistos (a mountain in Eubœa),
  Messapion (on the coast of Bœotia), over the plains of the Asôpos to
  Kithæron, in the south of the same province, then over Gorgopis, a bay
  of the Corinthian Gulf, to Ægiplanctos in Megaris, then across to a
  headland overlooking the Saronic Gulf, to the Arachnæan hill in
  Argolis. The word “_courier_-fire” connects itself also with the
  system of posts or messengers, which the Persian kings seem to have
  been the first to organise, and which impressed the minds both of
  Hebrews (Esth. viii. 14) and Greeks (Herod. viii. 98) by their regular
  transmission of the king's edicts, or of special news.

Footnote 296:

  Our ignorance of the details of the _Lampadephoria_, or “torch-race
  games,” in honour of the fire-God, Prometheus, makes the allusion to
  them somewhat obscure. As described by Pausanias (I. xxx. 2), the
  runners started with lighted torches from the altar of Prometheus in
  the Academeia and ran towards the city. The first who reached the goal
  with his torch still burning became the winner. If all the torches
  were extinguished, then all were losers. As so described, however,
  there is no succession, no taking the torch from one and passing it on
  to another, like that described here and in the well-known line of
  Lucretius (ii. 78),

             “Et quasi cursores vitaï lampada tradunt.”
             (And they, as runners, pass the torch of life.)

  On the other hand, there are descriptions which show that such a
  transfer was the chief element of the game. This is, indeed, implied
  both in this passage and in the comparison between the game and the
  Persian courier-system in Herod. viii. 98. The two views may be
  reconciled by supposing (1) that there were sets of runners, vying
  with each other as such, rather than individually, or (2) that a
  runner whose speed failed him though his torch kept burning, was
  allowed to hand it on to another who was more likely to win the race,
  but whose torch was out. The next line seems meant to indicate where
  the comparison failed. In the torch-race which Clytæmnestra describes
  there had been no contest. One and the self-same fire (the idea of
  succession passing into that of continuity) had started and had
  reached the goal, and so had won the prize. An alternative rendering
  would be,—

             “He wins who is first in, though starting last.”

Footnote 297:

  The complete foot-race was always to the column which marked the end
  of the course, round it, and back again. In getting to Troïa,
  therefore, but half the race was done.

Footnote 298:

  Dramatically the words refer to the practical impiety of evildoers
  like Paris, with, perhaps, a half-latent allusion to that of
  Clytæmnestra. But it can hardly be doubted that for the Athenian
  audience it would have a more special significance, as a protest
  against the growing scepticism, what in a later age would have been
  called the Epicureanism, of the age of Pericles. It is the assertion
  of the belief of Æschylos in the moral government of the world. The
  very vagueness of the singular, “One there was,” would lead the
  hearers to think of some teacher like Anaxagoras, whom they suspected
  of Atheism.

Footnote 299:

  The Chorus sees in the overthrow of Troïa, an instance of this
  righteous retribution. The audience were, perhaps, intended to think
  also of the punishment which had fallen on the Persians for the
  sacrilegious acts of their fathers. The “things inviolable” are the
  sanctities of the ties of marriage and hospitality, both of which
  Paris had set at nought.

Footnote 300:

  Here, and again in v. 612, we have a similitude drawn from the
  metallurgy of Greek artists. Good bronze, made of copper and tin,
  takes the green rust which collectors prize, but when rubbed, the
  brightness reappears. If zinc be substituted for tin, as in our brass,
  or mixed largely with it, the surface loses its polish, oxidizes and
  becomes black. It is, however, doubtful whether this combination of
  metals was at the time in use, and the words may simply refer to
  different degrees of excellence in bronze properly so called.

Footnote 301:

  In a corrupt passage like this, the text of which has been so
  variously restored and rendered, it may be well to give at least one
  alternative version:

              “There stands she silent, with no honour met,
                  Nor yet with words of scorn,
              Sweetest to see of all that he has lost.”

  The words, as so taken, refer to the vision of Helen, described in the
  lines that follow. Another, for the line “In deepest woe,” &c., ...
  would give,

               “Believing not he sees the lost one there.”

Footnote 302:

  The art of Pheidias had already made it natural at Athens to speak of
  kings as decorating their palaces with the life-size busts or statues
  of those they loved.

Footnote 303:

  Here again one may note a protest against the aggressive policy of
  Pericles, an assertion of the principle that a nation should be
  content with independence, without aiming at supremacy.

Footnote 304:

  Perhaps passively, “Soon suffers trespassers.”

Footnote 305:

  As the play opens on the morning of the day on which Troïa was taken,
  and now we have the arrivals, first, of the herald, and then of
  Agamemnon, after the capture has been completed, and the spoil
  divided, and the fleet escaped a storm, an interval of some days must
  be supposed between the two parts of the play, the imaginary law of
  the unities notwithstanding.

Footnote 306:

  The customary adornment of heralds who brought good news. Comp.
  Sophocles, _Œd. K._ v. 83. The custom prevailed for many centuries,
  and is recognised by Dante, _Purg._ ii. 70, as usual in his time in
  Italy.

Footnote 307:

  So in the _Seven against Thebes_ (v. 494), smoke is called “the sister
  of fire.”

Footnote 308:

  A probable reference, not only to the story, but to the actual words
  of Homer, _Il._ i. 45-52.

Footnote 309:

  Specially the Dioscuri, Castor and Polydeukes.

Footnote 310:

  Such a position (especially in the case of Zeus or Apollo) was common
  in the temples both of Greece and Rome, and had a very obvious
  signification. As the play was performed, the actual hour of the day
  probably coincided with that required by the dramatic sequence of
  events, and the statues of the Gods were so placed on the stage as to
  catch the rays of the morning sun when the herald entered. Hence the
  allusion to the bright “cheerful glances” would have a visible as well
  as ethical fitness.

Footnote 311:

  It formed part of the guilt of Paris, that, besides his seduction of
  Helena, he had carried off part of the treasures of Menelaos.

Footnote 312:

  The idea of a payment twofold the amount of the wrong done, as a
  complete satisfaction to the sufferer, was common in the early
  jurisprudence both of Greeks and Hebrews (Exod. xxii. 4-7). In some
  cases it was even more, as in the four or fivefold restitution of
  Exod. xxii. 1. In the grand opening of Isaiah's message of glad
  tidings the fact that Jerusalem has received “double for all her sins”
  is made the ground on the strength of which she may now hope for
  pardon. Comp. also Isa. lxi. 7; Zech. ix. 12.

Footnote 313:

  Perhaps—

             “Full hardly, and the close and crowded decks.”

Footnote 314:

  So stress is laid upon this form of hardship, as rising from the
  climate of Troïa, by Sophocles, _Aias_, 1206.

Footnote 315:

  One may conjecture that here also, as with the passage describing the
  succession of beacon fires (vv. 281-314), the description would have
  for an Athenian audience the interest of recalling personal
  reminiscences of some recent campaign in Thrakè, or on the coasts of
  Asia.

Footnote 316:

  We may, perhaps, think of the herald, as he speaks, placing some
  representative trophy upon the pegs on the pedestals of the statues of
  the great Gods of Hellas, whom he had invoked on his entrance.

Footnote 317:

  Or,

             “So that to this bright morn our sons may boast,
             As they o'er land and ocean take their flight,
             'The Argive host of old, who captured Troïa,
             These spoils of battle to the Gods of Hellas,
             Hung on their pegs, a trophy of old days.'”

Footnote 318:

  The husband, on his departure, sealed up his special treasures. It was
  the glory of the faithful wife or the trusty steward to keep these
  seals unbroken.

Footnote 319:

  There is an ambiguity, possibly an intentional one, in the comparison
  which Clytæmnestra uses. If there was no such art as that of “staining
  bronze” (or copper) known at the time, the words would be a natural
  phrase enough to describe what was represented as an impossibility.
  Later on in the history of art, however, as in the time of Plutarch, a
  process so described (perhaps analogous to enamelling) is mentioned
  (_De Pyth. Orac_. § 2) as common. If we suppose the art to have been a
  mystery known to the few, but not to the many, in the time of
  Æschylos, then the words would have for the hearers the point of a
  _double entendre_. She seems to the mass to disclaim what yet, to
  those in the secret she acknowledges.

  Another rendering refers “bronze” to the “sword,” and makes the stains
  those of blood; as though she said, “I am as guiltless of adultery as
  of murder,” while yet she knew that she had committed the one, and
  meant to commit the other. The possibility of such a meaning is
  certainly in the words, and with a sharp-witted audience catching at
  ænigmas and dark sayings may have added to their suggestiveness. The
  ambiguous comment of the Chorus shows that they read, as between the
  lines, the shameful secret which they knew, but of which the Herald
  was ignorant.

Footnote 320:

  The last two lines are by some editors assigned to the Herald.

Footnote 321:

  It need hardly be said that it is as difficult to render a
  _paronomasia_ of this kind as it is to reproduce those, more or less
  analogous, which we find in the prophets of the Old Testament (comp.
  especially Micah i.); but it seems better to substitute something
  which approaches, however imperfectly, to an equivalent than to
  obscure the reference to the _nomen et omen_ by abandoning the attempt
  to translate it. “Hell of men, and hell of ships, and hell of towers,”
  has been the rendering adopted by many previous translators. The Greek
  fondness for this play on names is seen in Sophocles, _Aias_, v. 401.

Footnote 322:

  Zephyros, Boreas, and the other great winds were represented in the
  _Theogony_ of Hesiod (v. 134) as the offspring of Astræos and Eôs, and
  Astræos was a Titan. The west wind was, of course, favourable to Paris
  as he went with Helen from Greece to Troïa.

Footnote 323:

  Here again the translator has to meet the difficulty of a pun. As an
  alternative we might take—

                      “To Ilion brought, well-named,
                      A marriage marring all.”

Footnote 324:

  The sons of Priam are thought of as taking part in the celebration of
  Helen's marriage with Paris, and as, therefore, involving themselves
  in the guilt and the penalty of his crime.

Footnote 325:

  Here, too, it may be well to give an alternative rendering—

                       “A mischief in his house,
                       A man reared, not on milk.”

  Home-reared lions seem to have been common as pets, both among Greeks
  and Latins (Arist., _Hist. Anim._ ix. 31; Plutarch, _de Cohib. irâ_, §
  14, p. 822), sometimes, as in Martial's Epigram, ii. 25, with fatal
  consequences. The text shows the practice to have been common enough
  in the time of Pericles to supply a similitude.

Footnote 326:

  There may, possibly, be a half allusion here to the passage in the
  _Iliad_ (vv. 154-160), which describes the fascination which the
  beauty of Helen exercised on the Troïan elders.

Footnote 327:

  The poet becomes a prophet, and asserts what it has been given him to
  know of the righteous government of God. The dominant creed of Greece
  at the time was, that the Gods were envious of man's prosperity, that
  this alone, apart from moral evil, was enough to draw down their
  wrath, and bring a curse upon the prosperous house. So, _e.g._, Amasis
  tells Polycrates (Herod. iii. 40) that the unseen Divinity that rules
  the world is envious, that power and glory are inevitably the
  precursors of destruction. Comp. also the speech of Artabanos (Herod.
  vii. 10, 46). Against this, in the tone of one who speaks singlehanded
  for the truth, Æschylos, through the Chorus, enters his protest.

Footnote 328:

  _Sc._, Agamemnon, by the sacrifice of Iphigeneia, had induced his
  troops to persevere in an expedition from which, in their inmost
  hearts, they shrank back with strong dislike. A conjectural reading
  gives,

                 “By the sacrifice he offered
                 Giving death-doomed men false boldness.”

Footnote 329:

  The tone of ambiguous irony mingles, it will be seen, even here, with
  the praises of the Chorus.

Footnote 330:

  Possibly an allusion to Pandora's box. Here, too, Hope alone was left,
  but it only came up to where the curve of the rim began, not to its
  top. The imagery is drawn from the older method of voting, in which
  (as in _Eumenides_, v. 678) the votes for condemnation and acquittal
  were cast into separate urns.

Footnote 331:

  The lion, as the symbol of the house of Atreus, still seen in the
  sculptures of Mykenæ; the horse, in allusion to the stratagem by which
  Troïa had been taken.

Footnote 332:

  At the end of autumn, and therefore at a season when a storm like that
  described by the herald would be a probable incident enough.

Footnote 333:

  So in Sophocles, Philoctetes (v. 1025) taunts Odysseus:—

             “And yet thou sailedst with them by constraint,
             By tricks fast bound.”

Footnote 334:

  Geryon appears in the myth of Hercules as a monster with three heads
  and three bodies, ruling over the island Erytheia, in the far West,
  beyond Hesperia. To destroy him and seize his cattle was one of the
  “twelve labours,” with which Hesiod (_Theogon._ vv. 287-294) had
  already made men familiar.

Footnote 335:

  When a man is buried, there is earth above and earth below him.
  Clytæmnestra having used the words “coverlet,” pauses to make her
  language accurate to the very letter. She is speaking only of the
  earth which would have been laid over her husband's corpse, had he
  died as often as he was reported to have done. She will not utter
  anything so ominous as an allusion to the depths below him stretching
  down to Hades.

Footnote 336:

  Or—

               “Weeping because the torches in thy house
               No more were lighted as they were of yore.”

Footnote 337:

  The words touch upon the psychological fact that in dreams, as in
  other abnormal states of the mind, the usual measures of time
  disappear, and we seem to pass through the experiences of many years
  in the slumber of a few minutes.

Footnote 338:

  The rhetoric of the passage, with all its multiplied similitudes, fine
  as it is in itself, receives its dramatic significance by being put
  into the lips of Clytæmnestra. She “doth protest too much.” A true
  wife would have been content with fewer words.

Footnote 339:

  The last three lines of the speech are of course intentionally
  ambiguous, carrying one meaning to the ear of Agamemnon, and another
  to that of the audience.

Footnote 340:

  There is obviously a side-thrust, such as an Athenian audience would
  catch at, at the token of homage which the Persian kings required of
  their subjects, the prostration at their feet, the earth spread over
  with costly robes. Of the latter custom we have examples in the
  history of Jehu (2 Kings ix. 13), in our Lord's entry into Jerusalem
  (Mark xi. 8), in the usages of modern Persian kings (Malcolm's
  _Persia_, i. 580); perhaps also in the true rendering of Ps. xlv. 14.
  “She shall be brought unto the king _on_ raiment of needle-work.” In
  the march of Xerxes across the Hellespont myrtle-boughs strown on the
  bridge of boats took the place of robes (Herod. vii. 54). To the Greek
  character, with its strong love of independence, such customs were
  hateful. The case of Pausanias, who offended the national feeling by
  assuming the outward state of the Persian kings, must have been
  recalled to the minds of the Athenians, intentionally or otherwise, by
  such a passage as this.e bridge of boats took the place of robes
  (Herod. vii. 54). To

Footnote 341:

  The “old saying, famed of many men,” which we find in the _Trachiniæ_
  of Sophocles (v. 1), and in the counsel of Solon to Crœsos (Herod. i.
  32).

Footnote 342:

  He who had suffered so much from the wrath of Artemis at Aulis knew
  what it was to rouse the wrath and jealousy of the Gods.

Footnote 343:

  An echo of a line in Hesiod (_Works and Days_, 763)—

               “No whispered rumours which the many spread
               Can ever wholly perish.”

Footnote 344:

  Here, too, we may trace a reference to the Oriental custom of
  recognising the sanctity of a consecrated place by taking the shoes
  from off the feet, as in Exod. iii. 5, in the services of the
  Tabernacle and Temple, through all their history (Juven., _Sat._ vi.
  159), in all mosques to the present day. Agamemnon, yielding to the
  temptress, seeks to make a compromise with his conscience. He will
  walk upon the tapestry, but will treat it as if it, of right, belonged
  to the Gods, and were a consecrated thing. It is probably in
  connection with this incident that Æschylos was said to have been the
  first to bring actors on the stage in these boots or buskins (Suidas.
  s. v. άρβύλη).

Footnote 345:

  The words of Isaiah (xviii. 5), “when the sour grape is ripening in
  the flower,” present an almost verbal parallel.

Footnote 346:

  The ever-recurring ambiguity of Clytæmnestra's language is again
  traceable, as is also her fondness for rhetorical similitudes.

Footnote 347:

  The Chorus speaks in perplexity. In cannot get rid of its forebodings,
  and yet it would seem as if the time for the fulfilment of the dark
  words of Calchas must have passed long since. It actually sees the
  safe return of the leader of the host, yet still its fears haunt it.

Footnote 348:

  Asclepios, whom Zeus smote with his thunderbolt for having restored
  Hippolytos to life.

Footnote 349:

  The Chorus, in spite of their suspicions and forebodings, have given
  the king no warning. They excuse themselves by the plea of necessity,
  the sovereign decree of Zeus overruling all man's attempts to
  withstand it.

Footnote 350:

  Cassandra is summoned to an act of worship. The household is gathered,
  the altar to Zeus Ktesios (the God of the family property, slaves
  included), standing in the servants' hall, is ready. The new slave
  must come in and take her place with the others.

Footnote 351:

  As in the story which forms the groundwork of the _Trachiniæ_ of
  Sophocles, vv. 250-280, that Heracles had been sold to Omphale as a
  slave, in penalty for the murder of Iphitos.

Footnote 352:

  Political as well as dramatic. The Eupatrid poet appeals to public
  opinion against the _nouveaux riches_, the tanners and lamp-makers,
  who were already beginning to push themselves forward towards
  prominence and power. The way was thus prepared in the first play of
  the Trilogy for what is known to have been the main object of the
  last. Comp. Arist., _Rhet._ ii. 32.

Footnote 353:

  Here again the translator has the task of finding an English
  _paronomasia_ which approximates to that of the Greek, between Apollo
  and ἀπόλλων _the destroyer_. To Apollo, as the God of paths
  (_Aguieus_), an altar stood, column-fashion, before the street-door of
  every house, and to such an altar, placed by the door of Agamemnon's
  palace, Cassandra turns, with the twofold play upon the name.

Footnote 354:

  This refers, probably, to the death of Hippodameia, the wife of
  Pelops, who killed herself, in remorse for the death of Chrysippos, or
  fear of her husband's anger. The horrors of the royal house of Argos
  pass, one by one, before the vision of the prophetess, and this leads
  the procession, followed by the spectres of the murdered children of
  Thyestes.

Footnote 355:

  The Chorus, as in their last ode, had made up their minds, though
  foreboding ill, to let destiny take its course. They do not wish that
  policy of non-interference to be changed by any too clear vision of
  the future.

Footnote 356:

  The Chorus understands the vision of the _clairvoyante_ as regards the
  past tragedy of the house of Atreus, but not that which seems to
  portend another actually imminent.

Footnote 357:

  Fresh visions come before the eyes of the seeress. She beholds the
  company of Erinnyes hovering over the accursed house, and calls on
  them to continue their work till the new crime has met with its due
  punishment. The murder which she sees as if already wrought, demands
  death by stoning.

Footnote 358:

  The “yellow” look of fear is thought of as being caused by an actual
  change in the colour of the blood as it flows through the veins to the
  heart.

Footnote 359:

  Here there is prevision as well as clairvoyance. The deed is not yet
  done. The sacrifice and the feast are still going on, yet she sees the
  crime in all its circumstances.

Footnote 360:

  As before (v. 115) the black eagle had been the symbol of the
  warrior-chief, so here the black-horned bull, that being one of the
  notes of the best breed of cattle. A various reading gives “with _her_
  swarthy horn.”

Footnote 361:

  What the Chorus had just said as to the fruitlessness of prophetic
  insight tallied all too well with her own bitter experience.

Footnote 362:

  The ecstasy of horror interrupts the tenor of her speech, and the
  second “thou” is addressed not to the Chorus, but to Agamemnon, whose
  death Cassandra has just witnessed in her vision.

Footnote 363:

  The song of the nightingale, represented by these sounds, was
  connected with a long legend, specially Attic in its origin.
  Philomela, daughter of Pandion, king of Attica, suffered outrage at
  the hands of Tereus, who was married to her sister Procne, and was
  then changed into a nightingale, destined ever to lament over the fate
  of Itys her sister's son. The earliest form of the story appears in
  the _Odyssey_ (xix. 518). Comp. Sophocles, _Electr._ v. 148.

Footnote 364:

  In the marriage-rites of the Greeks of the time of Æschylos, the bride
  for three days after the wedding wore her veil; then, as now no longer
  shrinking from her matron life, she laid it aside and looked on her
  husband with unveiled face.

Footnote 365:

  The picture might be drawn by any artist of power, but we may,
  perhaps, trace a reproduction of one of the grandest passages in the
  _Iliad_ (iv. 422-426).

Footnote 366:

  So in the _Eumenides_ (v. 293), the Erinnyes appear as vampires,
  drinking the blood of their victims.

Footnote 367:

  The death of Myrtilos as the first crime in the long history of the
  house of Pelops. Comp. Soth. _Electr._ v. 470. The “defiler” is
  Thyestes, who seduced Aerope, the wife of Atreus.

Footnote 368:

  The horror of the Thyestes banquet again haunts her as the source of
  all the evils that followed, of the deaths both of Iphigenia and
  Agamemnon. The “stay-at-home” is Ægisthos.

Footnote 369:

  Both words point to the Sindbad-like stories of distant marvels
  brought back by Greek sailors. The Amphisbæna (double-goer), wriggling
  itself backward and forward, believed to have a head at each
  extremity, was looked upon as at once the most subtle and the most
  venomous of serpents. Skylla, already famous in its mythical form from
  the story in the _Odyssey_ (xii. 85-100), was probably a “development”
  of the monstrous cuttle-fish of the straits of Messina.

Footnote 370:

  As in Homer (_Il._ i. 14) so here, the servant of Apollo bears the
  wand of augury, and fillets or wreaths round head and arms. The
  divining garments, in like manner, were of white linen.

Footnote 371:

  If we adopt this reading, we must think of Cassandra as identifying
  herself with the woe (Atè) which makes up her life, just as afterwards
  Clytæmnestra speaks of herself as one with the avenging Demon
  (Alastor) of the house of Atreus (1473). The alternative reading
  gives—

                 “Make rich in woe another in my place.”

Footnote 372:

  Perhaps, “in home not mine.”

Footnote 373:

  When the victim, instead of shrinking and struggling, went, as with
  good courage, to the altar, it was noted as a sign of divine impulse.
  Such a strange, new courage the Chorus notices in Cassandra.

Footnote 374:

  Possibly,

                “My one escape, my friends, is but delay.”

Footnote 375:

  The implied thoughts of the words is that Priam and his sons, though
  they had died nobly, were yet miserable, and not happy.

Footnote 376:

  The Syrian ritual had, it would seem, become proverbial for its lavish
  use of frankincense and other spices.

Footnote 377:

  The close parallel of Shakespeare's _Henry VI._, Act. v. sc. 6, is
  worth quoting—

               “The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
               With trembling eyes misdoubteth every bush”

Footnote 378:

  The older reading gives—

                      “A shadow might o'erturn it.”

Footnote 379:

  Her own doom, hard as it was, touches her less than the common lot of
  human suffering and mutability.

Footnote 380:

  So far the dialogue has been sustained by the Coryphæos, or leader of
  the Chorus. Now each member of it speaks and gives his counsel.

Footnote 381:

  The Coryphæos again takes up his part, sums up, and pronounces his
  decision.

Footnote 382:

  _i.e._, He had had his triumph over her when, forgetful of her
  mother's feelings, he had sacrificed Iphigeneia. She has now repaid
  him to the full.

Footnote 383:

  The third libation at all feasts was to Zeus, as the Preserver or
  Guardian Deity. Clytæmnestra boasts that her third blow was as an
  offering to a God of other kind, to Him who had in his keeping not the
  living, but the dead.

Footnote 384:

  So in the _Choëphori_ (vv. 351, 476), the custom of pouring libations
  on the burial-place of the dead is recognised as an element of their
  blessedness or shame in Hades, and Agamemnon is represented as lacking
  the honour which comes from them till he receives it at the hand of
  Orestes.

Footnote 385:

  Incense was placed on the head of the victim. The Chorus tell
  Clytæmnestra that she has brought upon her own head the incense, not
  of praise and admiration, but of hatred and wrath, as though some
  poison had driven her mad.

Footnote 386:

  The species of swan referred to is said to be the _Cygnus Musicus_.
  Aristotle (_Hist. Anim._ ix. 12) describes swans of some kind as
  having been heard by sailors near the coast of Libya, “singing with a
  lamentable cry.” Mrs. Somerville (_Phys. Geog._, c. xxxiii. 3)
  describes their note as “like that of a violin.” The same fact is
  reported of the swans of Iceland and other regions of the far North.
  The strange, tender beauty of the passage in the _Phædo_ of Plato (p.
  85, a), which speaks of them as singing when at the point of death,
  has done more than anything else to make the illustration one of the
  commonplaces of rhetoric and poetry.

Footnote 387:

  The structure of the lyrical dialogue that follows is rather
  complicated, and different editors have adopted different
  arrangements. I have followed Paley's.

Footnote 388:

  Several lines seem to have dropped out by some accident of
  transcription.

Footnote 389:

  Agamemnon and Menelaos, as descended from Tantalos, the father of
  Pelops.

Footnote 390:

  In each case women, Helen and Clytæmnestra, had been the unconscious
  instruments of the divine Nemesis, to which the Chorus traces the ruin
  of the house of Atreus.

Footnote 391:

  Or, with another reading,—

     “He (_sc._ the avenging Demon) boasteth in his pride of heart.”

Footnote 392:

  It is characteristic of the teaching of Æschylos that the Chorus
  passes from the thought of the agency of any lower Power to the
  supreme will of Zeus.

Footnote 393:

  Or, “Dying, as dies a slave.”

Footnote 394:

  Clytæmnestra still harps (though in ambiguous words, which may refer
  also to the murder of the children of Thyestes) upon the death of
  Iphigeneia as the crime which it had been her work to avenge.

Footnote 395:

  Perhaps, “And that, too, not a slave's.”

Footnote 396:

  Here the genealogy is carried one step further to Pleisthenes, the
  father of Tantalos.

Footnote 397:

  Ægisthos, in his version of the story, suppresses the adultery of
  Thyestes with the wife of Atreus, which led the latter to his horrible
  revenge.

Footnote 398:

  The image is taken from the trireme with its three benches full of
  rowers. The Chorus is compared to the men on the lowest, Ægisthos and
  Clytæmnestra to those on the uppermost bench.

Footnote 399:

  The earliest occurrence of the proverb with which we are familiar
  through the history of St. Paul's conversion, Acts ix. 5, xxvi. 14.

Footnote 400:

  The trace-horse, as not under the pressure of the collar, was taken as
  the type of free, those that wore the yoke, of enforced submission.




