# PROMETHEUS BOUND


                            DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

                        PROMETHEUS
                        HERMES
                        OKEANOS
                        STRENGTH
                        HEPHÆSTOS
                        FORCE
                        _Chorus of Ocean Nymphs_


_ARGUMENT.—In the old time, when Cronos was sovereign of the Gods, Zeus,
whom he had begotten, rose up against him, and the Gods were divided in
their counsels, some, the Titans chiefly, siding with the father, and
some with the son. And Prometheus, the son of Earth or Themis, though
one of the Titans, supported Zeus, as did also Okeanos, and by his
counsels Zeus obtained the victory, and Cronos was chained in Tartaros,
and the Titans buried under mountains, or kept in bonds in Hades. And
then Prometheus, seeing the miseries of the race of men, of whom Zeus
took little heed, stole the fire which till then had belonged to none
but Hephæstos and was used only for the Gods, and gave it to mankind,
and taught them many arts whereby their wretchedness was lessened. But
Zeus being wroth with Prometheus for this deed, sent Hephæstos, with his
two helpers, Strength and Force, to fetter him to a rock on Caucasos._

_And in yet another story was the cruelty of the Gods made known. For
Zeus loved Io, the daughter of Inachos, king of Argos, and she was
haunted by visions of the night, telling her of his passion, and she
told her father thereof. And Inachos, sending to the God at Delphi, was
told to drive Io forth from her home. And Zeus gave her the horns of a
cow, and Hera, who hated her because she was dear to Zeus, sent with her
a gadfly that stung her, and gave her no rest, and drove her over many
lands._

_Note._—The play is believed to have been the second of a Trilogy, of
which the first was _Prometheus the Fire-giver_, and the third
_Prometheus Unbound_.




                            PROMETHEUS BOUND


        SCENE.—SKYTHIA, _on the heights of Caucasos. The Euxine
                         seen in the distance_

          _Enter_ HEPHÆSTOS, STRENGTH, _and_ FORCE, _leading_
                      PROMETHEUS _in chains_[136]

 _Strength._ Lo! to a plain, earth's boundary remote,
 We now are come,—the tract as Skythian known,
 A desert inaccessible: and now,
 Hephæstos, it is thine to do the hests
 The Father gave thee, to these lofty crags
 To bind this crafty trickster fast in chains
 Of adamantine bonds that none can break;
 For he thy choice flower stealing, the bright glory
 Of fire that all arts spring from, hath bestowed it
 On mortal men. And so for fault like this
 He now must pay the Gods due penalty,
 That he may learn to bear the sovereign rule                         10
 Of Zeus, and cease from his philanthropy.

 _Heph._ O Strength, and thou, O Force, the hest of Zeus,
 As far as touches you, attains its end,
 And nothing hinders. Yet my courage fails
 To bind a God of mine own kin by force
 To this bare rock where tempests wildly sweep;
 And yet I needs must muster courage for it:
 'Tis no slight thing the Father's words to scorn.
 O thou of Themis [_to_ PROMETHEUS] wise in counsel son,
 Full deep of purpose, lo! against my will,[137]
 I fetter thee against thy will with bonds
 Of bronze that none can loose, to this lone height,                  20
 Where thou shalt know nor voice nor face of man,
 But scorching in the hot blaze of the sun,
 Shalt lose thy skin's fair beauty. Thou shalt long
 For starry-mantled night to hide day's sheen,
 For sun to melt the rime of early dawn;
 And evermore the weight of present ill
 Shall wear thee down. Unborn as yet is he
 Who shall release thee: this the fate thou gain'st
 As due reward for thy philanthropy.
 For thou, a God not fearing wrath of Gods,
 In thy transgression gav'st their power to men;                      30
 And therefore on this rock of little ease
 Thou still shalt keep thy watch, nor lying down,
 Nor knowing sleep, nor ever bending knee;
 And many groans and wailings profitless
 Thy lips shall utter; for the mind of Zeus
 Remains inexorable. Who holds a power
 But newly gained[138] is ever stern of mood.

 _Strength._ Let be! Why linger in this idle pity?
 Why dost not hate a God to Gods a foe,
 Who gave thy choicest prize to mortal men?

 _Heph._ Strange is the power of kin and intercourse.[139]

 _Strength._ I own it; yet to slight the Father's words,       40
 How may that be? Is not that fear the worse?

 _Heph._ Still art thou ruthless, full of savagery.

 _Strength._ There is no help in weeping over him:
 Spend not thy toil on things that profit not.

 _Heph._ O handicraft to me intolerable!

 _Strength._ Why loath'st thou it? Of these thy present griefs
 That craft of thine is not one whit the cause.

 _Heph._ And yet I would some other had that skill.

 _Strength._ *All things bring toil except for Gods to reign;[140]
 For none but Zeus can boast of freedom true.                         50

 _Heph._ Too well I see the proof, and gainsay not.

 _Strength._ Wilt thou not speed to fix the chains on him,
 Lest He, the Father, see thee loitering here?

 _Heph._ Well, here the handcuffs thou may'st see prepared.

 _Strength._ In thine hands take him. Then with all thy might
 Strike with thine hammer; nail him to the rocks.

 _Heph._ The work goes on, I ween, and not in vain.

 _Strength._ Strike harder, rivet, give no whit of ease:
 A wondrous knack has he to find resource,
 Even where all might seem to baffle him.

 _Heph._ Lo! this his arm is fixed inextricably.               60

 _Strength._ Now rivet thou this other fast, that he
 May learn, though sharp, that he than Zeus is duller.

 _Heph._ No one but he could justly blame my work.

 _Strength._ Now drive the stern jaw of the adamant wedge
 Right through his chest with all the strength thou hast.

 _Heph._ Ah me! Prometheus, for thy woes I groan.

 _Strength._ Again, thou'rt loth, and for the foes of Zeus
 Thou groanest: take good heed to it lest thou
 Ere long with cause thyself commiserate.

 _Heph._ Thou see'st a sight unsightly to our eyes.

 _Strength._ I see this man obtaining his deserts:             70
 Nay, cast thy breast-chains round about his ribs.

 _Heph._ I must needs do it. Spare thine o'er much bidding;
 Go thou below and rivet both his legs.[141]

 _Strength._ Nay, I will bid thee, urge thee to thy work.

 _Heph._ There, it is done, and that with no long toil.

 _Strength._ Now with thy full power fix the galling fetters:
 Thou hast a stern o'erlooker of thy work.

 _Heph._ Thy tongue but utters words that match thy form.[142]

 _Strength._ Choose thou the melting mood; but chide not me
 For my self-will and wrath and ruthlessness.                         80

 _Heph._ Now let us go, his limbs are bound in chains.

 _Strength._ Here then wax proud, and stealing what belongs
 To the Gods, to mortals give it. What can they
 Avail to rescue thee from these thy woes?
 Falsely the Gods have given thee thy name,
 Prometheus, Forethought; forethought thou dost need
 To free thyself from this rare handiwork.

                             [_Exeunt_ HEPHÆSTOS, STRENGTH, _and_ FORCE,
                                 _leaving_ PROMETHEUS _on the rock_

 _Prom._[143] Thou firmament of God, and swift-winged winds,
 Ye springs of rivers, and of ocean waves
 That smile innumerous! Mother of us all,                             90
 O Earth, and Sun's all-seeing eye, behold,
 I pray, what I a God from Gods endure.
         Behold in what foul case
         I for ten thousand years
         Shall struggle in my woe,
         In these unseemly chains.
 Such doom the new-made Monarch of the Blest
         Hath now devised for me.
 Woe, woe! The present and the oncoming pang
         I wail, as I search out
 The place and hour when end of all these ills
         Shall dawn on me at last.                                   100
 What say I? All too clearly I foresee
 The things that come, and nought of pain shall be
 By me unlooked-for; but I needs must bear
 My destiny as best I may, knowing well
 The might resistless of Necessity.
 And neither may I speak of this my fate,
 Nor hold my peace. For I, poor I, through giving
 Great gifts to mortal men, am prisoner made
 In these fast fetters; yea, in fennel stalk[144]
 I snatched the hidden spring of stolen fire,
 Which is to men a teacher of all arts,                              110
 Their chief resource. And now this penalty
 Of that offence I pay, fast riveted
 In chains beneath the open firmament.
         Ha! ha! What now?
 What sound, what odour floats invisibly?[145]
 Is it of God or man, or blending both?
 And has one come to the remotest rock
 To look upon my woes? Or what wills he?
 Behold me bound, a God to evil doomed,
         The foe of Zeus, and held
         In hatred by all Gods                                       120
         Who tread the courts of Zeus:
         And this for my great love,
         Too great, for mortal men.
         Ah me! what rustling sounds
         Hear I of birds not far?
         With the light whirr of wings
         The air re-echoeth:
 All that draws nigh to me is cause of fear.[146]

              _Enter Chorus of_ Ocean Nymphs, _with wings,
                       floating in the air_[147]

 _Chor._ Nay, fear thou nought: in love
         All our array of wings
         In eager race hath come                                     130
 To this high peak, full hardly gaining o'er
         Our Father's mind and will;
 And the swift-rushing breezes bore me on:
 For lo! the echoing sound of blows on iron
 Pierced to our cave's recess, and put to flight
         My shamefast modesty,
 And I in unshod haste, on winged car,
         To thee rushed hitherward.

 _Prom._ Ah me! ah me!
 Offspring of Tethys blest with many a child,                        140
 Daughters of Old Okeanos that rolls
 Round all the earth with never-sleeping stream,
         Behold ye me, and see
         With what chains fettered fast,
 I on the topmost crags of this ravine
 Shall keep my sentry-post unenviable.

 _Chor._ I see it, O Prometheus, and a mist
 Of fear and full of tears comes o'er mine eyes,
         Thy frame beholding thus,
         Writhing on these high rocks                                150
         In adamantine ills.
 New pilots now o'er high Olympos rule,
         And with new-fashioned laws
         Zeus reigns, down-trampling right,
 And all the ancient powers He sweeps away.

 _Prom._ Ah! would that 'neath the Earth, 'neath Hades too,
 Home of the dead, far down to Tartaros                              160
 Unfathomable He in fetters fast
         In wrath had hurled me down:
         So neither had a God
 Nor any other mocked at these my woes;
 But now, the wretched plaything of the winds,
 I suffer ills at which my foes rejoice.

 _Chor._ Nay, which of all the Gods
 Is so hard-hearted as to joy in this?
 Who, Zeus excepted, doth not pity thee
         In these thine ills? But He,
         Ruthless, with soul unbent,
 Subdues the heavenly host, nor will He cease[148]                   170
 Until his heart be satiate with power,
 Or some one seize with subtle stratagem
 The sovran might that so resistless seemed.

 _Prom._ Nay, of a truth, though put to evil shame,
         In massive fetters bound,
         The Ruler of the Gods
 Shall yet have need of me, yes, e'en of me,
         To tell the counsel new
         That seeks to strip from him
 His sceptre and his might of sovereignty.
         In vain will He with words
         Or suasion's honeyed charms                                 180
         Soothe me, nor will I tell
         Through fear of his stern threats,
         Ere He shall set me free
         From these my bonds, and make,
         Of his own choice, amends
         For all these outrages.

 _Chor._ Full rash art thou, and yield'st
 In not a jot to bitterest form of woe;
 Thou art o'er-free and reckless in thy speech:
         But piercing fear hath stirred
         My inmost soul to strife;
 For I fear greatly touching thy distress,
 As to what haven of these woes of thine                             190
 Thou now must steer: the son of Cronos hath
         A stubborn mood and heart inexorable.

 _Prom._ I know that Zeus is hard,
 And keeps the Right supremely to himself;
         But then, I trow, He'll be
         Full pliant in his will,
         When He is thus crushed down.
         Then, calming down his mood
         Of hard and bitter wrath,
         He'll hasten unto me,
         As I to him shall haste,                                    200
         For friendship and for peace.

 _Chor._ Hide it not from us, tell us all the tale:
 For what offence Zeus, having seized thee thus,
 So wantonly and bitterly insults thee:
 If the tale hurt thee not, inform thou us.

 _Prom._ Painful are these things to me e'en to speak:
 Painful is silence; everywhere is woe.
 For when the high Gods fell on mood of wrath,
 And hot debate of mutual strife was stirred,
 Some wishing to hurl Cronos from his throne,
 That Zeus, forsooth, might reign; while others strove,
 Eager that Zeus might never rule the Gods:                          210
 Then I, full strongly seeking to persuade
 The Titans, yea, the sons of Heaven and Earth,
 Failed of my purpose. Scorning subtle arts,
 With counsels violent, they thought that they
 By force would gain full easy mastery.
 But then not once or twice my mother Themis
 And Earth, one form though bearing many names,[149]
 Had prophesied the future, how 'twould run,
 That not by strength nor yet by violence,                           220
 But guile, should those who prospered gain the day.
 And when in my words I this counsel gave,
 They deigned not e'en to glance at it at all.
 And then of all that offered, it seemed best
 To join my mother, and of mine own will,
 Not against his will, take my side with Zeus,
 And by my counsels, mine, the dark deep pit
 Of Tartaros the ancient Cronos holds,
 Himself and his allies. Thus profiting
 By me, the mighty ruler of the Gods                                 230
 Repays me with these evil penalties:
 For somehow this disease in sovereignty
 Inheres, of never trusting to one's friends.[150]
 And since ye ask me under what pretence
 He thus maltreats me, I will show it you:
 For soon as He upon his father's throne
 Had sat secure, forthwith to divers Gods
 He divers gifts distributed, and his realm
 Began to order. But of mortal men
 He took no heed, but purposed utterly                               240
 To crush their race and plant another new;
 And, I excepted, none dared cross his will;
 But I did dare, and mortal men I freed
 From passing on to Hades thunder-stricken;
 And therefore am I bound beneath these woes,
 Dreadful to suffer, pitiable to see:
 And I, who in my pity thought of men
 More than myself, have not been worthy deemed
 To gain like favour, but all ruthlessly
 I thus am chained, foul shame this sight to Zeus.

 _Chor._ Iron-hearted must he be and made of rock             250
 Who is not moved, Prometheus, by thy woes:
 Fain could I wish I ne'er had seen such things,
 And, seeing them, am wounded to the heart.

 _Prom._ Yea, I am piteous for my friends to see.

 _Chor._ Did'st thou not go to farther lengths than this?

 _Prom._ I made men cease from contemplating death.[151]

 _Chor._ What medicine did'st thou find for that disease?

 _Prom._ Blind hopes I gave to live and dwell with them.

 _Chor._ Great service that thou did'st for mortal men!

 _Prom._ And more than that, I gave them fire, yes I.         260

 _Chor._ Do short-lived men the flaming fire possess?

 _Prom._ Yea, and full many an art they'll learn from it.

 _Chor._ And is it then on charges such as these
 That Zeus maltreats thee, and no respite gives
 Of many woes? And has thy pain no end?

 _Prom._ End there is none, except as pleases Him.

 _Chor._ How shall it please? What hope hast thou? See'st not
 That thou hast sinned? Yet to say how thou sinned'st
 Gives me no pleasure, and is pain to thee.
 Well! let us leave these things, and, if we may,
 Seek out some means to 'scape from this thy woe.                    270

 _Prom._ 'Tis a light thing for one who has his foot
 Beyond the reach of evil to exhort
 And counsel him who suffers. This to me
 Was all well known. Yea, willing, willingly
 I sinned, nor will deny it. Helping men,
 I for myself found trouble: yet I thought not
 That I with such dread penalties as these
 Should wither here on these high-towering crags,
 Lighting on this lone hill and neighbourless.
 Wherefore wail not for these my present woes,
 But, drawing nigh, my coming fortunes hear,                         280
 That ye may learn the whole tale to the end.
 Nay, hearken, hearken; show your sympathy
 With him who suffers now. 'Tis thus that woe,
 Wandering, now falls on this one, now on that.

 _Chor._ Not to unwilling hearers hast thou uttered,
         Prometheus, thy request,
 And now with nimble foot abounding
         My swiftly rushing car,
 And the pure æther, path of birds of heaven,                        290
 I will draw near this rough and rocky land,
         For much do I desire
 To hear this tale, full measure, of thy woes.

         _Enter_ OKEANOS, _on a car drawn by a winged gryphon_

 _Okean._ Lo, I come to thee, Prometheus,
         Reaching goal of distant journey,[152]
         Guiding this my winged courser
         By my will, without a bridle;
         And thy sorrows move my pity.
         Force, in part, I deem, of kindred
         Leads me on, nor know I any,
         Whom, apart from kin, I honour                              300
         More than thee, in fuller measure.
         This thou shall own true and earnest:
         I deal not in glozing speeches.
         Come then, tell me how to help thee;
         Ne'er shalt thou say that one more friendly
         Is found than unto thee is Okean.

 _Prom._ Let be. What boots it? Thou then too art come
 To gaze upon my sufferings. How did'st dare
 Leaving the stream that bears thy name, and caves
 Hewn in the living rock, this land to visit,
 Mother of iron? What then, art thou come
 To gaze upon my fall and offer pity?                                310
 Behold this sight: see here the friend of Zeus,
 Who helped to seat him in his sovereignty,
 With what foul outrage I am crushed by him!

 _Okean._ I see, Prometheus, and I wish to give thee
 My best advice, all subtle though thou be.
 Know thou thyself,[153] and fit thy soul to moods
 To thee full new. New king the Gods have now;
 But if thou utter words thus rough and sharp,
 Perchance, though sitting far away on high,                         320
 Zeus yet may hear thee, and his present wrath
 Seem to thee but as child's play of distress.
 Nay, thou poor sufferer, quit the rage thou hast,
 And seek a remedy for these thine ills.
 A tale thrice-told, perchance I seem to speak:
 Lo! this, Prometheus, is the punishment
 Of thine o'er lofty speech, nor art thou yet
 Humbled, nor yieldest to thy miseries,
 And fain would'st add fresh evils unto these.
 But thou, if thou wilt take me as thy teacher,                      330
 Wilt not kick out against the pricks;[154] seeing well
 A monarch reigns who gives account to none.
 And now I go, and will an effort make,
 If I, perchance, may free thee from thy woes;
 Be still then, hush thy petulance of speech,
 Or knowest thou not, o'er-clever as thou art,
 That idle tongues must still their forfeit pay?

 _Prom._ I envy thee, seeing thou art free from blame
 Though thou shared'st all, and in my cause wast bold;[155]
 Nay, let me be, nor trouble thou thyself;                           340
 Thou wilt not, canst not soothe Him; very hard
 Is He of soothing. Look to it thyself,
 Lest thou some mischief meet with in the way.

 _Okean._ It is thy wont thy neighbours' minds to school
 Far better than thine own. From deeds, not words,
 I draw my proof. But do not draw me back
 When I am hasting on, for lo, I deem,
 I deem that Zeus will grant this boon to me,
 That I should free thee from these woes of thine.

 _Prom._ I thank thee much, yea, ne'er will cease to thank;
 For thou no whit of zeal dost lack; yet take,
 I pray, no trouble for me; all in vain
 Thy trouble, nothing helping, e'en if thou                          350
 Should'st care to take the trouble. Nay, be still;
 Keep out of harm's way; sufferer though I be,
 I would not therefore wish to give my woes
 A wider range o'er others. No, not so:
 For lo! my mind is wearied with the grief
 Of that my kinsman Atlas,[156] who doth stand
 In the far West, supporting on his shoulders
 The pillars of the earth and heaven, a burden
 His arms can ill but hold: I pity too
 The giant dweller of Kilikian caves,                                360
 Dread portent, with his hundred hands, subdued
 By force, the mighty Typhon,[157] who arose
 'Gainst all the Gods, with sharp and dreadful jaws
 Hissing out slaughter, and from out his eyes
 There flashed the terrible brightness as of one
 Who would lay low the sovereignty of Zeus.
 But the unsleeping dart of Zeus came on him,
 Down-swooping thunderbolt that breathes out flame,
 Which from his lofty boastings startled him,
 For he i' the heart was struck, to ashes burnt,                     370
 His strength all thunder-shattered; and he lies
 A helpless, powerless carcase, near the strait
 Of the great sea, fast pressed beneath the roots
 Of ancient Ætna, where on highest peak
 Hephæstos sits and smites his iron red-hot,
 From whence hereafter streams of fire shall burst,[158]
 Devouring with fierce jaws the golden plains
 Of fruitful, fair Sikelia. Such the wrath
 That Typhon shall belch forth with bursts of storm,
 Hot, breathing fire, and unapproachable,
 Though burnt and charred by thunderbolts of Zeus.                   380
 Not inexperienced art thou, nor dost need
 My teaching: save thyself, as thou know'st how;
 And I will drink my fortune to the dregs,
 Till from his wrath the mind of Zeus shall rest.[159]

 _Okean._ Know'st thou not this, Prometheus, even this,
 Of wrath's disease wise words the healers are?

 _Prom._ Yea, could one soothe the troubled heart in time,
 Nor seek by force to tame the soul's proud flesh.

 _Okean._ But in due forethought with bold daring blent,
 What mischief see'st thou lurking? Tell me this.                    390

 _Prom._ Toil bootless, and simplicity full fond.

 _Okean._ Let me, I pray, that sickness suffer, since
 'Tis best being wise to have not wisdom's show.

 _Prom._ Nay, but this error shall be deemed as mine.

 _Okean._ Thy word then clearly sends me home at once.

 _Prom._ Yea, lest thy pity for me make a foe....

 _Okean._ What! of that new king on his mighty throne?

 _Prom._ Look to it, lest his heart be vexed with thee.

 _Okean._ Thy fate, Prometheus, teaches me that lesson.

 _Prom._ Away, withdraw! keep thou the mind thou hast.        400

 _Okean._ Thou urgest me who am in act to haste;
 For this my bird four-footed flaps with wings
 The clear path of the æther; and full fain
 Would he bend knee in his own stall at home. [_Exit_.


                               STROPHE I

 _Chor._ I grieve, Prometheus, for thy dreary fate,
         Shedding from tender eyes
         The dew of plenteous tears;
 With streams, as when the watery south wind blows,
         My cheek is wet;                                            410
 For lo! these things are all unenviable,
 And Zeus, by his own laws his sway maintaining,
         Shows to the elder Gods
         A mood of haughtiness.


                             ANTISTROPHE I

 And all the country echoeth with the moan,
         And poureth many a tear
         For that magnific power
 Of ancient days far-seen that thou did'st share
         With those of one blood sprung;
 And all the mortal men who hold the plain                           420
 Of holy Asia as their land of sojourn,
         They grieve in sympathy
         For thy woes lamentable.


                               STROPHE II

 And they, the maiden band who find their home
         On distant Colchian coasts,
         Fearless of fight,[160]
 Or Skythian horde in earth's remotest clime,
         By far Mæotic lake;[161]


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 *And warlike glory of Arabia's tribes,[162]
         Who nigh to Caucasos                                        430
         In rock-fort dwell,
 An army fearful, with sharp-pointed spear
         Raging in war's array.


                              STROPHE III

 One other Titan only have I seen,
         One other of the Gods,
 Thus bound in woes of adamantine strength—
         Atlas, who ever groans
 Beneath the burden of a crushing might,
         The out-spread vault of heaven.


                            ANTISTROPHE III

 And lo! the ocean billows murmur loud                               440
         In one accord with him;[163]
 The sea-depths groan, and Hades' swarthy pit
         Re-echoeth the sound,
 And fountains of clear rivers, as they flow,
         Bewail his bitter griefs.

 _Prom._ Think not it is through pride or stiff self-will
 That I am silent. But my heart is worn,
 Self-contemplating, as I see myself
 Thus outraged. Yet what other hand than mine
 Gave these young Gods in fulness all their gifts?
 But these I speak not of; for I should tell
 To you that know them. But those woes of men,[164]                  450
 List ye to them,—how they, before as babes,
 By me were roused to reason, taught to think;
 And this I say, not finding fault with men,
 But showing my good-will in all I gave.
 For first, though seeing, all in vain they saw,
 And hearing, heard not rightly. But, like forms
 Of phantom-dreams, throughout their life's whole length
 They muddled all at random; did not know
 Houses of brick that catch the sunlight's warmth,
 Nor yet the work of carpentry. They dwelt
 In hollowed holes, like swarms of tiny ants,                        460
 In sunless depths of caverns; and they had
 No certain signs of winter, nor of spring
 Flower-laden, nor of summer with her fruits;
 But without counsel fared their whole life long,
 Until I showed the risings of the stars,
 And settings hard to recognise.[165] And I
 Found Number for them, chief device of all,
 *Groupings of letters, Memory's handmaid that,
 And mother of the Muses.[166] And I first
 Bound in the yoke wild steeds, submissive made                      470
 Or to the collar or men's limbs, that so
 They might in man's place bear his greatest toils;
 And horses trained to love the rein I yoked
 To chariots, glory of wealth's pride of state;[167]
 Nor was it any one but I that found
 Sea-crossing, canvas-wingèd cars of ships:
 Such rare designs inventing (wretched me!)
 For mortal men, I yet have no device
 By which to free myself from this my woe.[168]

 _Chor._ Foul shame thou sufferest: of thy sense bereaved,    480
 Thou errest greatly: and, like leech unskilled,
 Thou losest heart when smitten with disease,
 And know'st not how to find the remedies
 Wherewith to heal thine own soul's sicknesses.

 _Prom._ Hearing what yet remains thou'lt wonder more,
 What arts and what resources I devised:
 And this the chief: if any one fell ill,
 There was no help for him, nor healing food,
 Nor unguent, nor yet potion; but for want
 Of drugs they wasted, till I showed to them
 The blendings of all mild medicaments,[169]                         490
 Wherewith they ward the attacks of sickness sore.
 I gave them many modes of prophecy;[170]
 And I first taught them what dreams needs must prove
 True visions, and made known the ominous sounds
 Full hard to know; and tokens by the way,
 And flights of taloned birds I clearly marked,—
 Those on the right propitious to mankind,
 And those sinister,—and what form of life
 They each maintain, and what their enmities
 Each with the other, and their loves and friendships;               500
 And of the inward parts the plumpness smooth.
 And with what colour they the Gods would please,
 And the streaked comeliness of gall and liver:
 And with burnt limbs enwrapt in fat, and chine,
 I led men on to art full difficult:
 And I gave eyes to omens drawn from fire,
 Till then dim-visioned. So far then for this.
 And 'neath the earth the hidden boons for men,
 Bronze, iron, silver, gold, who else could say                      510
 That he, ere I did, found them? None, I know,
 Unless he fain would babble idle words.
 In one short word, then, learn the truth condensed,—
 Allarts of mortals from Prometheus spring.

 _Chor._ Nay, be not thou to men so over-kind,
 While thou thyself art in sore evil case;
 For I am sanguine that thou too, released
 From bonds, shall be as strong as Zeus himself.

 _Prom._ It is not thus that Fate's decree is fixed;
 But I, long crushed with twice ten thousand woes                    520
 And bitter pains, shall then escape my bonds;
 Art is far weaker than Necessity.

 _Chor._ Who guides the helm, then, of Necessity?

 _Prom._ Fates triple-formed, Errinyes unforgetting.

 _Chor._ Is Zeus, then, weaker in his might than these?

 _Prom._ Not even He can 'scape the thing decreed.

 _Chor._ What is decreed for Zeus but still to reign?

 _Prom._ Thou may'st no further learn, ask thou no more.

 _Chor._ 'Tis doubtless some dread secret which thou hidest.

 _Prom._ Of other theme make mention, for the time            530
 Is not yet come to utter this, but still
 It must be hidden to the uttermost;
 For by thus keeping it it is that I
 Escape my bondage foul, and these my pains.


                               STROPHE I

 _Chor._ Ah! ne'er may Zeus the Lord,
         Whose sovran sway rules all,
         His strength in conflict set
         Against my feeble will!
         Nor may I fail to serve
         The Gods with holy feast
         Of whole burnt-offerings,
         Where the stream ever flows
         That bears my father's name,
         The great Okeanos!
         Nor may I sin in speech!                                    540
         May this grace more and more
         Sink deep into my soul
         And never fade away!


                             ANTISTROPHE I

         Sweet is it in strong hope
         To spend long years of life,
         With bright and cheering joy
         Our heart's thoughts nourishing.
         I shudder, seeing thee
         Thus vexed and harassed sore.
         By twice ten thousand woes;
         For thou in pride of heart,
         Having no fear of Zeus,                                     550
         In thine own obstinacy,
         Dost show for mortal men,
         Prometheus, love o'ermuch.


                               STROPHE II

         See how that boon, dear friends,
         For thee is bootless found.
         Say, where is any help?
         What aid from mortals comes?
 Hast thou not seen this brief and powerless life,
 Fleeting as dreams, with which man's purblind race
         Is fast in fetters bound?                                   560
         Never shall counsels vain
         Of mortal men break through
         The harmony of Zeus.


                             ANTISTROPHE II

         This lesson have I learnt
         Beholding thy sad fate,
         Prometheus! Other strains
         Come back upon my mind,
 When I sang wedding hymns around thy bath,
 And at thy bridal bed, when thou did'st take
         In wedlock's holy bands
         One of the same sire born,
         Our own Hesione,                                            570
         Persuading her with gifts
         As wife to share thy couch.

         _Enter_ IO _in form like a fair woman with a heifer's
            horns_,[171] _followed by the Spectre of_ ARGOS

 _Io._ What land is this? What people? Whom shall I
         Say that I see thus vexed
         With bit and curb of rock?
         For what offence dost thou
         Bear fatal punishment?
         Tell me to what far land
         I've wandered here in woe.
           Ah me! ah me!
 Again the gadfly stings me miserable.
         Spectre of Argos, thou, the earth-born one—
         Ah, keep him off, O Earth!
 I fear to look upon that herdsman dread,                            580
         Him with ten thousand eyes:
 Ah lo! he cometh with his crafty look,
 Whom Earth refuses even dead to hold;[172]
         But coming from beneath
         He hunts me miserable,
 And drives me famished o'er the sea-beach sand.


                                STROPHE

 And still his waxened reed-pipe soundeth clear
         A soft and slumberous strain;
         O heavens! O ye Gods!                                       590
 Whither do these long wanderings lead me on?
 For what offence, O son of Cronos, what,
         Hast thou thus bound me fast
         In these great miseries?
           Ah me! ah me!
 And why with terror of the gadfly's sting
 Dost thou thus vex me, frenzied in my soul?
 Burn me with fire, or bury me in earth,
 Or to wild sea-beasts give me as a prey:
         Nay, grudge me not, O King,
         An answer to my prayers:                                    600
 Enough my many-wandered wanderings
         Have exercised my soul,
         Nor have I power to learn
         How to avert the woe.

 (_To Prometheus_.) Hear'st thou the voice of maiden crowned with horns?

 _Prom._ Surely I heard the maid by gadfly driven,
 Daughter of Inachos, who warmed the heart
 Of Zeus with love, and now through Hera's hate
 Is tried, perforce, with wanderings over-long?


                              ANTISTROPHE

 _Io._ How is it that thou speak'st my father's name?
         Tell me, the suffering one,                                 610
         Who art thou, who, poor wretch,
 Who thus so truly nam'st me miserable,
         And tell'st the plague from Heaven,
         Which with its haunting stings
         Wears me to death? Ah woe!
 And I with famished and unseemly bounds
 Rush madly, driven by Hera's jealous craft.
 Ah, who of all that suffer, born to woe,                            620
 Have trouble like the pain that I endure?
         But thou, make clear to me,
         What yet for me remains,
 What remedy, what healing for my pangs.
         Show me, if thou dost know:
         Speak out and tell to me,
         The maid by wanderings vexed.

 _Prom._ I will say plainly all thou seek'st to know;
 Not in dark tangled riddles, but plain speech,
 As it is meet that friends to friends should speak;
 Thou see'st Prometheus who gave fire to men.                        630

 _Io._ O thou to men as benefactor known,
 Why, poor Prometheus, sufferest thou this pain?

 _Prom._ I have but now mine own woes ceased to wail.

 _Io._ Wilt thou not then bestow this boon on me?

 _Prom._ Say what thou seek'st, for I will tell thee all.

 _Io._ Tell me, who fettered thee in this ravine?

 _Prom._ The counsel was of Zeus, the hand Hephæstos'.

 _Io._ Of what offence dost thou the forfeit pay?

 _Prom._ Thus much alone am I content to tell.

 _Io._ Tell me, at least, besides, what end shall come        640
 To my drear wanderings; when the time shall be.

 _Prom._ Not to know this is better than to know.

 _Io._ Nay, hide not from me what I have to bear.

 _Prom._ It is not that I grudge the boon to thee.

 _Io._ Why then delayest thou to tell the whole?

 _Prom._ Not from ill will, but loth to vex thy soul.

 _Io._ Nay, care thou not beyond what pleases me.

 _Prom._ If thou desire it I must speak. Hear then.

 _Chor._ Not yet though; grant me share of pleasure too.
 Let us first ask the tale of her great woe,                         650
 While she unfolds her life's consuming chances;
 Her future sufferings let her learn from thee.

 _Prom._ 'Tis thy work, Io, to grant these their wish,
 On other grounds and as thy father's kin:[173]
 For to bewail and moan one's evil chance,
 Here where one trusts to gain a pitying tear
 From those who hear,—this is not labour lost.

 _Io._ I know not how to disobey your wish;
 So ye shall learn the whole that ye desire
 In speech full clear. And yet I blush to tell                       660
 The storm that came from God, and brought the loss
 Of maiden face, what way it seized on me.
 For nightly visions coming evermore
 Into my virgin bower, sought to woo me
 With glozing words. “O virgin greatly blest,
 Why art thou still a virgin when thou might'st
 Attain to highest wedlock? For with dart
 Of passion for thee Zeus doth glow, and fain
 Would make thee his. And thou, O child, spurn not
 The bed of Zeus, but go to Lerna's field,                           670
 Where feed thy father's flocks and herds,
 That so the eye of Zeus may find repose
 From this his craving.” With such visions I
 Was haunted every evening, till I dared
 To tell my father all these dreams of night,
 And he to Pytho and Dodona sent
 Full many to consult the Gods, that he,
 Might learn what deeds and words would please Heaven's lords.
 And they came bringing speech of oracles
 Shot with dark sayings, dim and hard to know.                       680
 At last a clear word came to Inachos
 Charging him plainly, and commanding him
 To thrust me from my country and my home,
 To stray at large[174] to utmost bounds of earth;
 And, should he gainsay, that the fiery bolt
 Of Zeus should come and sweep away his race.
 And he, by Loxias' oracles induced,
 Thrust me, against his will, against mine too,
 And drove me from my home; but spite of all,
 The curb of Zeus constrained him this to do.                        690
 And then forthwith my face and mind were changed;
 And hornèd, as ye see me, stung to the quick
 By biting gadfly, I with maddened leap
 Rushed to Kerchneia's fair and limpid stream,
 And fount of Lerna.[175] And a giant herdsman,
 Argos, full rough of temper, followed me,
 With many an eye beholding, on my track:
 And him a sudden and unlooked-for doom
 Deprived of life. And I, by gadfly stung,
 By scourge from Heaven am driven from land to land.                 700
 What has been done thou hearest. And if thou
 Can'st tell what yet remains of woe, declare it;
 Nor in thy pity soothe me with false words;
 For hollow words, I deem, are worst of ills.

 _Chor._ Away, away, let be:
         Ne'er thought I that such tales
 Would ever, ever come unto mine ears;
 Nor that such terrors, woes and outrages,
         Hard to look on, hard to bear,                              710
 Would chill my soul with sharp goad, double-edged.
         Ah fate! Ah fate!
 I shudder, seeing Io's fortune strange.

 _Prom._ Thou art too quick in groaning, full of fear:
 Wait thou a while until thou hear the rest.

 _Chor._ Speak thou and tell. Unto the sick 'tis sweet
 Clearly to know what yet remains of pain.

 _Prom._ Your former wish ye gained full easily.
 Your first desire was to learn of her                               720
 The tale she tells of her own sufferings;
 Now therefore hear the woes that yet remain
 For this poor maid to bear at Hera's hands.
 And thou, O child of Inachos! take heed
 To these my words, that thou may'st hear the goal
 Of all thy wanderings. First then, turning hence
 Towards the sunrise, tread the untilled plains,
 And thou shalt reach the Skythian nomads, those[176]
 Who on smooth-rolling waggons dwell aloft
 In wicker houses, with far-darting bows                             730
 Duly equipped. Approach thou not to these,
 But trending round the coasts on which the surf
 Beats with loud murmurs,[177] traverse thou that clime.
 On the left hand there dwell the Chalybes,[178]
 Who work in iron. Of these do thou beware,
 For fierce are they and most inhospitable;
 And thou wilt reach the river fierce and strong,
 True to its name.[179] This seek not thou to cross,
 For it is hard to ford, until thou come
 To Caucasos itself, of all high hills
 The highest, where a river pours its strength
 From the high peaks themselves. And thou must cross                 740
 Those summits near the stars, must onward go
 Towards the south, where thou shalt find the host
 Of the Amâzons, hating men, whose home
 Shall one day be around Thermôdon's bank,
 By Themiskyra,[180] where the ravenous jaws
 Of Salmydessos ope upon the sea,
 Treacherous to sailors, stepdame stern to ships.[181]
 And they with right good-will shall be thy guides;
 And thou, hard by a broad pool's narrow gates,
 Wilt pass to the Kimmerian isthmus. Leaving
 This boldly, thou must cross Mæotic channel;[182]                   750
 And there shall be great fame 'mong mortal men
 Of this thy journey, and the Bosporos[183]
 Shall take its name from thee. And Europe's plain
 Then quitting, thou shalt gain the Asian coast.
 Doth not the all-ruling monarch of the Gods
 Seem all ways cruel? For, although a God,
 He, seeking to embrace this mortal maid,
 Imposed these wanderings on her. Thou hast found,
 O maiden! bitter suitor for thy hand;
 For great as are the ills thou now hast heard,
 Know that as yet not e'en the prelude's known.                      760

 _Io._ Ah woe! woe! woe!

 _Prom._ Again thou groan'st and criest. What wilt do
 When thou shall learn the evils yet to come?

 _Chor._ What! are there troubles still to come for her?

 _Prom._ Yea, stormy sea of woe most lamentable.

 _Io._ What gain is it to live? Why cast I not
 Myself at once from this high precipice,
 And, dashed to earth, be free from all my woes?
 Far better were it once for all to die
 Than all one's days to suffer pain and grief.                       770

 _Prom._ My struggles then full hardly thou would'st bear,
 For whom there is no destiny of death;
 For that might bring a respite from my woes:
 But now there is no limit to my pangs
 Till Zeus be hurled out from his sovereignty.

 _Io._ What! shall Zeus e'er be hurled from his high state?

 _Prom._ Thou would'st rejoice, I trow, to see that fall.

 _Io._ How should I not, when Zeus so foully wrongs me?

 _Prom._ That this is so thou now may'st hear from me.

 _Io._ Who then shall rob him of his sceptred sway?           780

 _Prom._ Himself shall do it by his own rash plans.

 _Io._ But how? Tell this, unless it bringeth harm.

 _Prom._ He shall wed one for whom one day he'll grieve.

 _Io._ Heaven-born or mortal? Tell, if tell thou may'st.

 _Prom._ Why ask'st thou who? I may not tell thee that.

 _Io._ Shall his bride hurl him from his throne of might?

 _Prom._ Yea; she shall bear child mightier than his sire.

 _Io._ Has he no way to turn aside that doom?

 _Prom._ No, none; unless I from my bonds be loosed.[184]

 _Io._ Who then shall loose thee 'gainst the will of Zeus?    790

 _Prom._ It must be one of thy posterity.

 _Io._ What, shall a child of mine free thee from ills?

 _Prom._ Yea, the third generation after ten.[185]

 _Io._ No more thine oracles are clear to me.

 *_Prom._ Nay, seek not thou thine own drear fate to know.

 _Io._ Do not, a boon presenting, then withdraw it.

 _Prom._ Of two alternatives, I'll give thee choice.

 _Io._ Tell me of what, then give me leave to choose.

 _Prom._ I give it then. Choose, or that I should tell
 Thy woes to come, or who shall set me free.                         800

 _Chor._ Of these be willing one request to grant
 To her, and one to me; nor scorn my words:
 Tell her what yet of wanderings she must bear,
 And me who shall release thee. This I crave.

 _Prom._ Since ye are eager, I will not refuse
 To utter fully all that ye desire.
 Thee, Io, first I'll tell thy wanderings wild,
 Thou, write it in the tablets of thy mind.
 When thou shalt cross the straits, of continents
 The boundary,[186] take thou the onward path
 On to the fiery-hued and sun-tracked East.                          810
 [And first of all, to frozen Northern blasts
 Thou'lt come, and there beware the rushing whirl,
 Lest it should come upon thee suddenly,
 And sweep thee onward with the cloud-rack wild;][187]
 Crossing the sea-surf till thou come at last
 Unto Kisthene's Gorgoneian plains,
 Where dwell the grey-haired virgin Phorkides,[188]
 Three, swan-shaped, with one eye between them all
 And but one tooth; whom nor the sun beholds
 With radiant beams, nor yet the moon by night:
 And near them are their wingèd sisters three,
 The Gorgons, serpent-tressed, and hating men,
 Whom mortal wight may not behold and live.                          820
 *Such is one ill I bid thee guard against;
 Now hear another monstrous sight: Beware
 The sharp-beaked hounds of Zeus that never bark,[189]
 The Gryphons, and the one-eyed, mounted host
 Of Arimaspians, who around the stream
 That flows o'er gold, the ford of Pluto, dwell:[190]
 Draw not thou nigh to them. But distant land
 Thou shalt approach, the swarthy tribes who dwell
 By the sun's fountain,[191] Æthiopia's stream:
 By its banks wend thy way until thou come
 To that great fall where from the Bybline hills                     830
 The Neilos pours its pure and holy flood;
 And it shall guide thee to Neilotic land,
 Three-angled, where, O Io, 'tis decreed
 For thee and for thy progeny to found
 A far-off colony. And if of this
 Aught seem to thee as stammering speech obscure,
 Ask yet again and learn it thoroughly:
 Far more of leisure have I than I like.

 _Chor._ If thou hast aught to add, aught left untold
 Of her sore-wasting wanderings, speak it out;                       840
 But if thou hast said all, then grant to us
 The boon we asked. Thou dost not, sure, forget it.

 _Prom._ The whole course of her journeying she hath heard,
 And that she know she hath not heard in vain
 I will tell out what troubles she hath borne
 Before she came here, giving her sure proof
 Of these my words. The greater bulk of things
 I will pass o'er, and to the very goal
 Of all thy wanderings go. For when thou cam'st
 To the Molossian plains, and by the grove[192]
 Of lofty-ridged Dodona, and the shrine
 Oracular of Zeus Thesprotian,                                       850
 And the strange portent of the talking oaks,
 By which full clearly, not in riddle dark,
 Thou wast addressed as noble spouse of Zeus,—
 If aught of pleasure such things give to thee,—
 Thence strung to frenzy, thou did'st rush along
 The sea-coast's path to Rhea's mighty gulf,[193]
 In backward way from whence thou now art vexed,
 And for all time to come that reach of sea,
 Know well, from thee Ionian shall be called,
 To all men record of thy journeyings.                               860
 These then are tokens to thee that my mind
 Sees somewhat more than that is manifest.

 What follows (_to the Chorus_) I will speak to you and her
 In common, on the track of former words
 Returning once again. A city stands,
 Canôbos, at its country's furthest bound,
 Hard by the mouth and silt-bank of the Nile;
 There Zeus shall give thee back thy mind again,[194]
 With hand that works no terror touching thee,—
 Touch only—and thou then shalt bear a child
 Of Zeus begotten, Epaphos, “Touch-born,”                            870
 Swarthy of hue, whose lot shall be to reap
 The whole plain watered by the broad-streamed Neilos:
 And in the generation fifth from him
 A household numbering fifty shall return
 Against their will to Argos, in their flight
 From wedlock with their cousins.[195] And they too,
 (Kites but a little space behind the doves)
 With eager hopes pursuing marriage rites
 Beyond pursuit shall come; and God shall grudge
 To give up their sweet bodies. And the land
 Pelasgian[196] shall receive them, when by stroke
 Of woman's murderous hand these men shall lie
 Smitten to death by daring deed of night:                           880
 For every bride shall take her husband's life,
 And dip in blood the sharp two-edgèd sword
 (So to my foes may Kypris show herself!)[197]
 Yet one of that fair band shall love persuade
 Her husband not to slaughter, and her will
 Shall lose its edge; and she shall make her choice
 Rather as weak than murderous to be known.
 And she at Argos shall a royal seed
 Bring forth (long speech 'twould take to tell this clear)           890
 Famed for his arrows, who shall set me free[198]
 From these my woes. Such was the oracle
 Mine ancient mother Themis, Titan-born,
 Gave to me; but the manner and the means,—
 That needs a lengthy tale to tell the whole,
 And thou can'st nothing gain by learning it.

 _Io._ Eleleu! Oh, Eleleu![199]
 The throbbing pain inflames me, and the mood
         Of frenzy-smitten rage;
         The gadfly's pointed sting,
         Not forged with fire, attacks,
 And my heart beats against my breast with fear.                     900
         Mine eyes whirl round and round:
         Out of my course I'm borne
 By the wild spirit of fierce agony,
         And cannot curb my lips,
 And turbid speech at random dashes on
 Upon the waves of dread calamity.


                               STROPHE I

 _Chor._ Wise, very wise was he
 Who first in thought conceived this maxim sage,
         And spread it with his speech,[200]—
 That the best wedlock is with equals found,
 And that a craftsman, born to work with hands,
         Should not desire to wed
 Or with the soft luxurious heirs of wealth,                         910
 Or with the race that boast their lineage high.


                             ANTISTROPHE I

         Oh ne'er, oh ne'er, dread Fates,
 May ye behold me as the bride of Zeus,
         The partner of his couch,
 Nor may I wed with any heaven-born spouse!
 For I shrink back, beholding Io's lot
         Of loveless maidenhood,
 Consumed and smitten low exceedingly
 By the wild wanderings from great Hera sent!


                               STROPHE II

 To me, when wedlock is on equal terms,                              920
         It gives no cause to fear:
 Ne'er may the love of any of the Gods,
         The strong Gods, look on me
         With glance I cannot 'scape!


                             ANTISTROPHE II

 That fate is war that none can war against,
         Source of resourceless ill;
 Nor know I what might then become of me:
         I see not how to 'scape
         The counsel deep of Zeus.

 _Prom._ Yea, of a truth shall Zeus, though stiff of will,
 Be brought full low. Such bed of wedlock now
 Is he preparing, one to cast him forth                              930
 In darkness from his sovereignty and throne.
 And then the curse his father Cronos spake
 Shall have its dread completion, even that
 He uttered when he left his ancient throne;
 And from these troubles no one of the Gods
 But me can clearly show the way to 'scape.
 I know the time and manner: therefore now
 Let him sit fearless, in his peals on high
 Putting his trust, and shaking in his hands
 His darts fire-breathing. Nought shall they avail
 To hinder him from falling shamefully                               940
 A fall intolerable. Such a combatant
 He arms against himself, a marvel dread,
 Who shall a fire discover mightier far
 Than the red levin, and a sound more dread
 Than roaring of the thunder, and shall shiver
 That plague sea-born that causeth earth to quake,
 The trident, weapon of Poseidon's strength:
 And stumbling on this evil, he shall learn
 How far apart a king's lot from a slave's.

 _Chor._ What thou dost wish thou mutterest against Zeus.

 _Prom._ Things that shall be, and things I wish, I speak.    950

 _Chor._ And must we look for one to master Zeus?

 _Prom._ Yea, troubles harder far than these are his.

 _Chor._ Art not afraid to vent such words as these?

 _Prom._ What can I fear whose fate is not to die?

 _Chor._ But He may send on thee worse pain than this.

 _Prom._ So let Him do: nought finds me unprepared.

 _Chor._ Wisdom is theirs who Adrasteia worship.[201]

 _Prom._ Worship then, praise and flatter him that rules;
 My care for Zeus is nought, and less than nought:
 Let Him act, let Him rule this little while,                        960
 E'en as He will; for long He shall not rule
 Over the Gods. But lo! I see at hand
 The courier of the Gods, the minister
 Of our new sovereign. Doubtless he has come
 To bring me tidings of some new device.

                             _Enter_ HERMES

 _Herm._ Thee do I speak to,—thee, the teacher wise,
 The bitterly o'er-bitter, who 'gainst Gods
 Hast sinned in giving gifts to short-lived men—
 I speak to thee, the filcher of bright fire.
 The Father bids thee say what marriage thou
 Dost vaunt, and who shall hurl Him from his might;
 And this too not in dark mysterious speech,                         970
 But tell each point out clearly. Give me not,
 Prometheus, task of double journey. Zeus
 Thou see'st, is not with such words appeased.

 _Prom._ Stately of utterance, full of haughtiness
 Thy speech, as fits a messenger of Gods.
 Ye yet are young in your new rule, and think
 To dwell in painless towers. Have I not
 Seen two great rulers driven forth from thence?[202]
 And now the third, who reigneth, I shall see
 In basest, quickest fall. Seem I to thee                            980
 To shrink and quail before these new-made Gods?
 Far, very far from that am I. But thou,
 Track once again the path by which thou camest;
 Thou shalt learn nought of what thou askest me.

 _Herm._ It was by such self-will as this before
 That thou did'st bring these sufferings on thyself.

 _Prom._ I for my part, be sure, would never change
 My evil state for that thy bondslave's lot.

 _Herm._ To be the bondslave of this rock, I trow,
 Is better than to be Zeus' trusty herald!                           990

 _Prom._ So it is meet the insulter to insult.

 _Herm._ Thou waxest proud, 'twould seem, of this thy doom.

 _Prom._ Wax proud! God grant that I may see my foes
 Thus waxing proud, and thee among the rest!

 _Herm._ Dost blame me then for thy calamities?

 _Prom._ In one short sentence—all the Gods I hate,
 Who my good turns with evil turns repay.

 _Herm._ Thy words prove thee with no slight madness plagued.

 _Prom._ If to hate foes be madness, mad I am.

 _Herm._ Not one could bear thee wert thou prosperous.       1000

 _Prom._ Ah me!

 _Herm._ That word is all unknown to Zeus.

 _Prom._ Time waxing old can many a lesson teach.

 _Herm._ Yet thou at least hast not true wisdom learnt.

 _Prom._ I had not else addressed a slave like thee.

 _Herm._ Thou wilt say nought the Father asks, 'twould seem.

 _Prom._ Fine debt I owe him, favour to repay.

 _Herm._ Me as a boy thou scornest then, forsooth.

 _Prom._ And art thou not a boy, and sillier far,
 If that thou thinkest to learn aught from me?
 There is no torture nor device by which                            1010
 Zeus can impel me to disclose these things
 Before these bonds that outrage me be loosed.
 Let then the blazing levin-flash be hurled;
 With white-winged snow-storm and with earth-born thunders
 Let Him disturb and trouble all that is;
 Nought of these things shall force me to declare
 Whose hand shall drive him from his sovereignty.

 _Herm._ See if thou findest any help in this.

 _Prom._ Long since all this I've seen, and formed my plans. 1020

 _Herm._ O fool, take heart, take heart at last in time,
 To form right thoughts for these thy present woes.

 _Prom._ Like one who soothes a wave, thy speech in vain
 Vexes my soul. But deem not thou that I,
 Fearing the will of Zeus, shall e'er become
 As womanised in mind, or shall entreat
 Him whom I greatly loathe, with upturned hand,
 In woman's fashion, from these bonds of mine
 To set me free. Far, far am I from that.

 _Herm._ It seems that I, saying much, shall speak in vain;
 For thou in nought by prayers art pacified,
 Or softened in thy heart, but like a colt                          1030
 Fresh harnessed, thou dost champ thy bit, and strive,
 And fight against the reins. Yet thou art stiff
 In weak device; for self-will, by itself,
 In one who is not wise, is less than nought.
 Look to it, if thou disobey my words,
 How great a storm and triple wave of ills,[203]
 Not to be 'scaped, shall come on thee; for first,
 With thunder and the levin's blazing flash
 The Father this ravine of rock shall crush,
 And shall thy carcase hide, and stern embrace
 Of stony arms shall keep thee in thy place.                        1040
 And having traversed space of time full long,
 Thou shalt come back to light, and then his hound,
 The wingèd hound of Zeus, the ravening eagle,
 Shall greedily make banquet of thy flesh,
 Coming all day an uninvited guest,
 And glut himself upon thy liver dark.
 And of that anguish look not for the end,
 Before some God shall come to bear thy woes,
 And will to pass to Hades' sunless realm,
 And the dark cloudy depths of Tartaros.[204]                       1050
 Wherefore take heed. No feigned boast is this,
 But spoken all too truly; for the lips
 Of Zeus know not to speak a lying speech,
 But will perform each single word. And thou,
 Search well, be wise, nor think that self-willed pride
 Shall ever better prove than counsel good.

 _Chor._ To us doth Hermes seem to utter words
 Not out of season; for he bids thee quit
 Thy self-willed pride and seek for counsel good.
 Hearken thou to him. To the wise of soul
 It is foul shame to sin persistently.                              1060

         _Prom._ To me who knew it all
         He hath this message borne;
         And that a foe from foes
         Should suffer is not strange.
         Therefore on me be hurled
         The sharp-edged wreath of fire;
         And let heaven's vault be stirred
         With thunder and the blasts
         Of fiercest winds; and Earth
         From its foundations strong,
         E'en to its deepest roots,
         Let storm-wind make to rock;
         And let the Ocean wave,
         With wild and foaming surge,
         Be heaped up to the paths                                  1070
         Where move the stars of heaven;
         And to dark Tartaros
         Let Him my carcase hurl,
 With mighty blasts of force:
 Yet me He shall not slay.

 _Herm._ Such words and thoughts from one
 Brain-stricken one may hear.
 What space divides his state
 From frenzy? What repose
 Hath he from maddened rage?
 But ye who pitying stand
 And share his bitter griefs,                                       1080
 Quickly from hence depart,
 Lest the relentless roar
 Of thunder stun your soul.

 _Chor._ With other words attempt
 To counsel and persuade,
 And I will hear: for now
 Thou hast this word thrust in
 That we may never bear.
 How dost thou bid me train
 My soul to baseness vile?
 With him I will endure
 Whatever is decreed.
 Traitors I've learnt to hate,
 Nor is there any plague                                            1090
 That more than this I loathe.

 _Herm._ Nay then, remember ye
 What now I say, nor blame
 Your fortune: never say
 That Zeus hath cast you down
 To evil not foreseen.
 Not so; ye cast yourselves:
 For now with open eyes,
 Not taken unawares,
 In Atè's endless net
 Ye shall entangled be
 By folly of your own.

                            [_A pause, and then flashes of lightning and
                                peals of thunder_[205]

 _Prom._ Yea, now in very deed,
 No more in word alone,
 The earth shakes to and fro,
 And the loud thunder's voice
 Bellows hard by, and blaze
 The flashing levin-fires;
 And tempests whirl the dust,
 And gusts of all wild winds
 On one another leap,
 In wild conflicting blasts,
 And sky with sea is blent:
 Such is the storm from Zeus                                        1110
 That comes as working fear,
 In terrors manifest.
 O Mother venerable!
 O Æther! rolling round
 The common light of all,
 See'st thou what wrongs I bear?

-----

Footnote 136:

  The scene seems at first an exception to the early conventional rule,
  which forbade the introduction of a third actor on the Greek stage.
  But it has been noticed that (1) Force does not speak, and (2)
  Prometheus does not speak till Strength and Force have retired, and
  that it is therefore probable that the whole work of nailing is done
  on a lay figure or effigy of some kind, and that one of the two who
  had before taken part in the dialogue then speaks behind it in the
  character of Prometheus. So the same actor must have appeared in
  succession as Okeanos, Io, and Hermes.

Footnote 137:

  Prometheus (_Forethought_) is the son of Themis (_Right_) the second
  occupant of the Pythian Oracle (_Eumen_. v. 2). His sympathy with man
  leads him to impart the gift which raised them out of savage animal
  life, and for this Zeus, who appears throughout the play as a hard
  taskmaster, sentences him to fetters. Hephæstos, from whom this fire
  had been stolen, has a touch of pity for him. Strength, who comes as
  the servant, not of Hephæstos, but of Zeus himself, acts, as such,
  with merciless cruelty.

Footnote 138:

  The generalised statement refers to Zeus, as having but recently
  expelled Cronos from his throne in Heaven.

Footnote 139:

  Hephæstos, as the great fire-worker, had taught Prometheus to use the
  fire which he afterwards bestowed on men.

Footnote 140:

  Perhaps, “All might is ours except o'er Gods to rule.”

Footnote 141:

  The words indicate that the effigy of Prometheus, now nailed to the
  rock, was, as being that of a Titan, of colossal size.

Footnote 142:

  The touch is characteristic as showing that here, as in the
  _Eumenides_, Æschylos relied on the horribleness of the masks, as part
  of the machinery of his plays.

Footnote 143:

  The silence of Prometheus up to this point was partly, as has been
  said, consequent on the conventional laws of the Greek drama, but it
  is also a touch of supreme insight into the heroic temper. In the
  presence of his torturers, the Titan will not utter even a groan. When
  they are gone, he appeals to the sympathy of Nature.

Footnote 144:

  The legend is from Hesiod (_Theogon._, v. 567). The fennel, or
  _narthex_, seems to have been a large umbelliferous plant, with a
  large stem filled with a sort of pith, which was used when dry as
  tinder. Stalks were carried as wands (the _thyrsi_) by the men and
  women who joined in Bacchanalian processions. In modern botany, the
  name is given to the plant which produces Asafœtida, and the stem of
  which, from its resinous character, would burn freely, and so connect
  itself with the Promethean myth. On the other hand, the Narthex
  Asafœtida is found at present only in Persia, Afghanistan, and the
  Punjaub.

Footnote 145:

  The ocean nymphs, like other divine ones, would be anointed with
  ambrosial unguents, and the odour would be wafted before them by the
  rustling of their wings. This too we may think of as part of the
  “stage effects” of the play.

Footnote 146:

  The words are not those of a vague terror only. The sufferer knows
  that his tormentor is to come to him before long on wings, and
  therefore the sound as of the flight of birds is full of terrors.

Footnote 147:

  By the same stage mechanism the Chorus remains in the air till verse
  280, when, at the request of Prometheus, they alight.

Footnote 148:

  Here, as throughout the play, the poet puts into the mouth of his
  _dramatis personæ_ words which must have seemed to the devouter
  Athenians sacrilegious enough to call for an indictment before the
  Areiopagos. But the final play of the Trilogy came, we may believe, as
  the _Eumenides_ did in its turn, as a reconciliation of the
  conflicting thoughts that rise in men's minds out of the seeming
  anomalies of the world.

Footnote 149:

  The words leave it uncertain whether Themis is identified with Earth,
  or, as in the _Eumenides_ (v. 2) distinguished from her. The Titans as
  a class, then, children of Okeanos and Chthôn (another name for _Land_
  or _Earth_), are the kindred rather than the brothers of Prometheus.

Footnote 150:

  The generalising words here, as in v. 35, appeal to the Athenian
  hatred of all that was represented by the words _tyrant_ and
  _tyranny_.

Footnote 151:

  The state described is that of men who “through fear of death are all
  their lifetime subject to bondage.” That state, the parent of all
  superstition, fostered the slavish awe in which Zeus delighted.
  Prometheus, representing the active intellect of man, bestows new
  powers, new interests, new hopes, which at last divert them from that
  fear.

Footnote 152:

  The home of Okeanos was in the far west, at the boundary of the great
  stream surrounding the whole world, from which he took his name.

Footnote 153:

  One of the sayings of the Seven Sages, already recognised and quoted
  as a familiar proverb.

Footnote 154:

  See note on _Agam._ 1602.

Footnote 155:

  In the mythos, Okeanos had given his daughter Hesione in marriage to
  Prometheus after the theft of fire, and thus had identified himself
  with his transgression.

Footnote 156:

  In the _Theogony_ of Hesiod (v. 509), Prometheus and Atlas appear as
  the sons of two sisters. As other Titans were thought of as buried
  under volcanoes, so this one was identified with the mountain which
  had been seen by travellers to Western Africa, or in the seas beyond
  it, rising like a column to support the vault of heaven. In Herodotos
  (iv. 174) and all later writers, the name is given to the chain of
  mountains in Lybia, as being the “pillar of the firmament;” but
  Humboldt and others identify it with the lonely peak of Teneriffe, as
  seen by Phœnikian or Hellenic voyagers. Teneriffe, too, like most of
  the other Titan mountains, was at one time volcanic. Homer (_Odyss._
  i. 53) represents him as holding the pillars which separate heaven
  from earth; Hesiod (_Theogon._ v. 517) as himself standing near the
  Hesperides (this too points to Teneriffe), sustaining the heavens with
  his head and shoulders.

Footnote 157:

  The volcanic character of the whole of Asia Minor, and the liability
  to earthquakes which has marked nearly every period of its history,
  led men to connect it also with the traditions of the Titans, some
  accordingly placing the home of Typhon in Phrygia, some near Sardis,
  some, as here, in Kilikia. Hesiod (_Theogon._ v. 820) describes Typhon
  (or Typhoeus) as a serpent-monster hissing out fire; Pindar (_Pyth._
  i. 30, viii. 21) as lying with his head and breast crushed beneath the
  weight of Ætna, and his feet extending to Cumæ.

Footnote 158:

  The words point probably to an eruption, then fresh in men's memories,
  which had happened B.C. 476.

Footnote 159:

  By some editors this speech from “No, not so,” to “thou know'st how,”
  is assigned to Okeanos.

Footnote 160:

  These are, of course, the Amazons, who were believed to have come
  through Thrakè from the Tauric Chersonesos, and had left traces of
  their name and habits in the Attic traditions of Theseus.

Footnote 161:

  Beyond the plains of Skythia, and the lake Mæotis (the sea of Azov)
  there would be the great river Okeanos, which was believed to flow
  round the earth.

Footnote 162:

  Sarmatia has been conjectured instead of Arabia. No Greek author
  sanctions the extension of the latter name to so remote a region as
  that north of the Caspian.

Footnote 163:

  The Greek leaves the object of the sympathy undefined, but it seems
  better to refer it to that which Atlas receives from the waste of
  waters around, and the dark world beneath, than to the pity shown to
  Prometheus. This has already been dwelt on in line 421.

Footnote 164:

  The passage that follows has for modern palæontologists the interest
  of coinciding with their views as to the progress of human society,
  and the condition of mankind during what has been called the “Stone”
  period. Comp. Lucretius, v. 955-984.

Footnote 165:

  Comp. Mr. Blakesley's note on Herod. ii. 4, as showing that here there
  was the greater risk of faulty observation.

Footnote 166:

  Another reading gives perhaps a better sense—

                                  “Memory, handmaid true
                  And mother of the Muses.”

Footnote 167:

  In Greece, as throughout the East, the ox was used for all
  agricultural labours, the horse by the noble and the rich, either in
  war chariots, or stately processions, or in chariot races in the great
  games.

Footnote 168:

  Compare with this the account of the inventions of Palamedes in
  Sophocles, _Fragm._ 379.

Footnote 169:

  Here we can recognise the knowledge of one who had studied in the
  schools of Pythagoras, or had at any rate picked up their terminology.
  A more immediate connexion may perhaps be traced with the influence of
  Epimenides, who was said to have spent many years in searching out the
  healing virtues of plants, and to have written books about them.

Footnote 170:

  The lines that follow form almost a manual of the art of divination as
  then practised. The “ominous sounds” include chance words, strange
  cries, any unexpected utterance that connected itself with men's fears
  for the future. The flights of birds were watched by the diviner as he
  faced the north, and so the region on the right hand was that of the
  sunrise, light, blessedness; on the left there were darkness and gloom
  and death.

Footnote 171:

  So Io was represented, we are told, by Greek sculptors (Herod. ii.
  41), as Isis was by those of Egypt. The points of contact between the
  myth of Io and that of Prometheus, as adopted, or perhaps developed,
  by Æschylos are—(1) that from her the destined deliverer of the
  chained Titan is to come; (2) that both were suffering from the
  cruelty of Zeus; (3) that the wanderings of Io gave scope for the wild
  tales of far countries on which the imagination of the Athenians fed
  greedily. But, as the _Suppliants_ may serve to show, the story itself
  had a strange fascination for him. In the birth of Epaphos, and Io's
  release from her frenzy, he saw, it may be, a reconciliation of what
  had seemed hard to reconcile, a solution of the problems of the world,
  like in kind to that which was shadowed forth in the lost _Prometheus
  Unbound_.

Footnote 172:

  Argos had been slain by Hermes, and his eyes transferred by Hera to
  the tail of the peacock, and that bird was henceforth sacred to her.

Footnote 173:

  Inachos the father of Io (identified with the Argive river of the same
  name), was, like all rivers, a son of Okeanos, and therefore brother
  to the nymphs who had come to see Prometheus.

Footnote 174:

  The words used have an almost technical meaning as applied to animals
  that were consecrated to the service of a God, and set free to wander
  where they liked. The fate of Io, as at once devoted to Zeus and
  animalised in form, was thus shadowed forth in the very language of
  the Oracle.

Footnote 175:

  Lerna was the lake near the mouth of the Inachos, close to the sea.
  Kerchneia may perhaps be identified with the Kenchreæ, the haven of
  Korinth in later geographies.

Footnote 176:

  The wicker huts used by Skythian or Thrakian nomads (the Calmucks of
  modern geographers) are described by Herodotos (iv. 46) and are still
  in use.

Footnote 177:

  _Sc._, the N.E. boundary of the Euxine, where spurs of the Caucasos
  ridge approach the sea.

Footnote 178:

  The Chalybes are placed by geographers to the south of Colchis. The
  description of the text indicates a locality farther to the north.

Footnote 179:

  Probably the Araxes, which the Greeks would connect with a word
  conveying the idea of a torrent dashing on the rocks. The description
  seems to imply a river flowing into the Euxine from the Caucasos, and
  the condition is fulfilled by the Hypanis or _Kouban_.

Footnote 180:

  When the Amazons appear in contact with Greek history, they are found
  in Thrace. But they had come from the coast of Pontos, and near the
  mouth of the Thermodon (_Thermeh_). The words of Prometheus point to
  yet earlier migrations from the East.

Footnote 181:

  Here, as in Soph. _Antig._ (970) the name Salmydessos represents the
  rockbound, havenless coast from the promontory of Thynias to the
  entrance of the Bosporos, which had given to the Black Sea its earlier
  name of Axenos, the “inhospitable.”

Footnote 182:

  The track is here in some confusion. From the Amazons south of the
  Caucasos, Io is to find her way to the Tauric Chersonese (the Crimea)
  and the Kimmerian Bosporos, which flows into the Sea of Azov, and so
  to return to Asia.

Footnote 183:

  Here, as in a hundred other instances, a false etymology has become
  the parent of a myth. The name Bosporos is probably Asiatic not Greek,
  and has an entirely different signification.

Footnote 184:

  The lines refer to the story that Zeus loved Thetis the daughter of
  Nereus, and followed her to Caucasos, but abstained from marriage with
  her because Prometheus warned him that the child born of that union
  should overthrow his father. Here the future is used of what was still
  contingent only. In the lost play of the Trilogy the myth was possibly
  brought to its conclusion and connected with the release of
  Prometheus.

Footnote 185:

  Heracles, whose genealogy was traced through Alcmena, Perseus, Danae,
  Danaos and seven other names, to Epaphos and Io.

Footnote 186:

  Probably the Kimmerian Bosporos. The Tanais or Phasis has, however,
  been conjectured.

Footnote 187:

  The history of the passage in brackets is curious enough to call for a
  note. They are not in any extant MS., but they are found in a passage
  quoted by Galen (v. p. 454), as from the _Prometheus Bound_, and are
  inserted here by Mr. Paley.

Footnote 188:

  Kisthene belongs to the geography of legend, lying somewhere on the
  shore of the great ocean-river in Lybia or Æthiopia, at the end of the
  world, a great mountain in the far West, beyond the Hesperides, the
  dwelling-place, as here, of the Gorgons, the daughters of Phorkys.
  Those first-named are the Graiæ.

Footnote 189:

  Here, like the “wingèd hound” of v. 1043, for the eagles that are the
  messengers of Zeus.

Footnote 190:

  We are carried back again from the fabled West to the fabled East. The
  Arimaspians, with one eye, and the Grypes or Gryphons (the griffins of
  mediæval heraldry), quadrupeds with the wings and beaks of eagles,
  were placed by most writers (Herod. iv. 13, 27) in the north of
  Europe, in or beyond the _terra incognita_ of Skythia. The mention of
  the “ford of Pluto” and Æthiopia, however, may possibly imply (if we
  identify it, as Mr. Paley does, with the Tartessos of Spain, or
  Bœtis—_Guadalquivir_) that Æschylos followed another legend which
  placed them in the West. There is possibly a _paronomasia_ between
  Pluto, the God of Hades, and Plutos, the ideal God of riches.

Footnote 191:

  The name was applied by later writers (Quintus Curtius, iv. 7, 22;
  Lucretius, vi. 848) to the fountain in the temple of Jupiter Ammon in
  the great Oasis. The “river Æthiops” may be purely imaginary, but it
  may also suggest the possibility of some vague knowledge of the Niger,
  or more probably of the Nile itself in the upper regions of its
  course. The “Bybline hills” carry the name Byblos, which we only read
  of as belonging to a town in the Delta, to the Second Cataract.

Footnote 192:

  Comp. Sophocles, _Trachin._, v. 1168.

Footnote 193:

  The Adriatic or Ionian Gulf.

Footnote 194:

  In the _Suppliants_, Zeus is said to have soothed her, and restored
  her to her human consciousness by his “divine breathings.” The thought
  underlying the legend may be taken either as a distortion of some
  primitive tradition, or as one of the “unconscious prophecies” of
  heathenism. The deliverer is not to be born after the common manner of
  men, and is to have a divine as well as a human parentage.

Footnote 195:

  See the argument of the _Suppliants_, who, as the daughters of Danaos,
  descended from Epaphos, are here referred to. The passage is
  noticeable as showing that the theme of that tragedy was already
  present to the poet's thoughts.

Footnote 196:

  Argos. So in the _Suppliants_, Pelasgos is the mythical king of the
  Apian land who receives them.

Footnote 197:

  Hypermnæstra, who spared Lynceus, and by him became the mother of Abas
  and a line of Argive kings.

Footnote 198:

  Heracles, who came to Caucasos, and with his arrows slew the eagle
  that devoured Prometheus.

Footnote 199:

  The word is simply an interjection of pain, but one so characteristic
  that I have thought it better to reproduce it than to give any English
  equivalent.

Footnote 200:

  The maxim, “Marry with a woman thine equal,” was ascribed to Pittacos.

Footnote 201:

  The Euhemerism of later scholiasts derived the name from a king
  Adrastos, who was said to have been the first to build a temple to
  Nemesis, and so the power thus worshipped was called after his name. A
  better etymology leads us to see in it the idea of the “inevitable”
  law of retribution working unseen by men, and independently even of
  the arbitrary will of the Gods, and bringing destruction upon the
  proud and haughty.

Footnote 202:

  Comp. _Agam._ 162-6.

Footnote 203:

  Either a mere epithet of intensity, as in our “thrice blest,” or
  rising from the supposed fact that every third wave was larger and
  more impetuous than the others, like _fluctus decumanus_ of the
  Latins, or from the sequence of three great waves which some have
  noted as a common phenomenon in storms.

Footnote 204:

  Here again we have a strange shadowing forth of the mystery of
  Atonement, and what we have learnt to call “vicarious” satisfaction.
  In the later legend, Cheiron, suffering from the agony of his wounds,
  resigns his immortality, and submits to die in place of the
  ever-living death to which Prometheus was doomed.

Footnote 205:

  It is noticeable that both Æschylos and Sophocles have left us
  tragedies which end in a thunderstorm as an element of effect. But the
  contrast between the _Prometheus_ and the _Œdipus at Colonos_ as to
  the impression left in the one case of serene reconciliation, and in
  the other of violent antagonism, is hardly less striking than the
  resemblance in the outward phenomena which are common to the two.




