# III

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES




## SIXTEENTH LECTURE

GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

_Psychoanalysis and Psychiatry_


I am very glad to welcome you back to continue our discussions. I last
lectured to you on the psychoanalytic treatment of errors and of the
dream. To-day I should like to introduce you to an understanding of
neurotic phenomena, which, as you soon will discover, have much in
common with both of those topics. But I shall tell you in advance that I
cannot leave you to take the same attitude toward me that you had
before. At that time I was anxious to take no step without complete
reference to your judgment. I discussed much with you, I listened to
your objections, in short, I deferred to you and to your "normal common
sense." That is no longer possible, and for a very simple reason. As
phenomena, the dream and errors were not strange to you. One might say
that you had as much experience as I, or that you could easily acquire
as much. But neuroses are foreign to you; since you are not doctors
yourselves you have had access to them only through what I have told
you. Of what use is the best judgment if it is not supported by
familiarity with the material in question?

Do not, however, understand this as an announcement of dogmatic lectures
which demand your unconditional belief. That would be a gross
misunderstanding. I do not wish to convince you. I am out to stimulate
your interest and shake your prejudices. If, in consequence of not
knowing the facts, you are not in a position to judge, neither should
you believe nor condemn. Listen and allow yourselves to be influenced by
what I tell you. One cannot be so easily convinced; at least if he comes
by convictions without effort, they soon prove to be valueless and
unable to hold their own. He only has a right to conviction who has
handled the same material for many years and who in so doing has gone
through the same new and surprising experiences again and again. Why, in
matters of intellect these lightning conversions, these momentary
repulsions? Do you not feel that a _coup de foudre_, that love at first
sight, originates in quite a different field, namely, in that of the
emotions? We do not even demand that our patients should become
convinced of and predisposed to psychoanalysis. When they do, they seem
suspicious to us. The attitude we prefer in them is one of benevolent
scepticism. Will you not also try to let the psychoanalytic conception
develop in your mind beside the popular or "psychiatric"? They will
influence each other, mutually measure their strength, and some day work
themselves into a decision on your part.

On the other hand, you must not think for a moment that what I present
to you as the psychoanalytic conception is a purely speculative system.
Indeed, it is a sum total of experiences and observations, either their
direct expression or their elaboration. Whether this elaboration is done
adequately and whether the method is justifiable will be tested in the
further progress of the science. After two and a half decades, now that
I am fairly advanced in years, I may say that it was particularly
difficult, intensive and all-absorbing work which yielded these
observations. I have often had the impression that our opponents were
unwilling to take into consideration this objective origin of our
statements, as if they thought it were only a question of subjective
ideas arising haphazard, ideas to which another may oppose his every
passing whim. This antagonistic behavior is not entirely comprehensible
to me. Perhaps the physician's habit of steering clear of his neurotic
patients and listening so very casually to what they have to say allows
him to lose sight of the possibility of deriving anything valuable from
his patients' communications, and therefore, of making penetrating
observations on them. I take this opportunity of promising you that I
shall carry on little controversy in the course of my lectures, least of
all with individual controversialists. I have never been able to
convince myself of the truth of the saying that controversy is the
father of all things. I believe that it comes down to us from the Greek
sophist philosophy and errs as does the latter through the overvaluation
of dialectics. To me, on the contrary, it seems as if the so-called
scientific criticism were on the whole unfruitful, quite apart from the
fact that it is almost always carried on in a most personal spirit. For
my part, up to a few years ago, I could even boast that I had entered
into a regular scientific dispute with only one scholar (Lowenfeld, of
Munich). The end of this was that we became friends and have remained
friends to this day. But I did not repeat this attempt for a long time,
because I was not certain that the outcome would be the same.

Now you will surely judge that so to reject the discussion of literature
must evidence stubborness, a very special obtuseness against objections,
or, as the kindly colloquialisms of science have it, "a complete
personal bias." In answer, I would say that should you attain to a
conviction by such hard labor, you would thereby derive a certain right
to sustain it with some tenacity. Furthermore, I should like to
emphasize the fact that I have modified my views on certain important
points in the course of my researches, changed them and replaced them by
new ones, and that I naturally made a public statement of that fact each
time. What has been the result of this frankness? Some paid no attention
at all to my self-corrections and even to-day criticize me for
assertions which have long since ceased to have the same meaning for me.
Others reproach me for just this deviation, and on account of it declare
me unreliable. For is anyone who has changed his opinions several times
still trustworthy; is not his latest assertion, as well, open to error?
At the same time he who holds unswervingly to what he has once said, or
cannot be made to give it up quickly enough, is called stubborn and
biased. In the face of these contradictory criticisms, what else can one
do but be himself and act according to his own dictates? That is what I
have decided to do, and I will not allow myself to be restrained from
modifying and adapting my theories as the progress of my experience
demands. In the basic ideas I have hitherto found nothing to change, and
I hope that such will continue to be the case.

Now I shall present to you the psychoanalytic conception of neurotic
manifestations. The natural thing for me to do is to connect them to the
phenomena we have previously treated, for the sake of their analogy as
well as their contrast. I will select as symptomatic an act of frequent
occurrence in my office hour. Of course, the analyst cannot do much for
those who seek him in his medical capacity, and lay the woes of a
lifetime before him in fifteen minutes. His deeper knowledge makes it
difficult for him to deliver a snap decision as do other
physicians--"There is nothing wrong with you"--and to give the advice,
"Go to a watering-place for a while." One of our colleagues, in answer
to the question as to what he did with his office patients, said,
shrugging his shoulders, that he simply "fines them so many kronen for
their mischief-making." So it will not surprise you to hear that even in
the case of very busy analysts, the hours for consultation are not very
crowded. I have had the ordinary door between my waiting room and my
office doubled and strengthened by a covering of felt. The purpose of
this little arrangement cannot be doubted. Now it happens over and over
again that people who are admitted from my waiting room omit to close
the door behind them; in fact, they almost always leave both doors open.
As soon as I have noticed this I insist rather gruffly that he or she go
back in order to rectify the omission, even though it be an elegant
gentleman or a lady in all her finery. This gives an impression of
misapplied pedantry. I have, in fact, occasionally discredited myself by
such a demand, since the individual concerned was one of those who
cannot touch even a door knob, and prefer as well to have their
attendants spared this contact. But most frequently I was right, for he
who conducts himself in this way, and leaves the door from the waiting
room into the physician's consultation room open, belongs to the rabble
and deserves to be received inhospitably. Do not, I beg you, defend him
until you have heard what follows. For the fact is that this negligence
of the patient's only occurs when he has been alone in the waiting room
and so leaves an empty room behind him, never when others, strangers,
have been waiting with him. If that latter is the case, he knows very
well that it is in his interest not to be listened to while he is
talking to the physician, and never omits to close both the doors with
care.

This omission of the patient's is so predetermined that it becomes
neither accidental nor meaningless, indeed, not even unimportant, for,
as we shall see, it throws light upon the relation of this patient to
the physician. He is one of the great number of those who seek
authority, who want to be dazzled, intimidated. Perhaps he had inquired
by telephone as to what time he had best call, he had prepared himself
to come on a crowd of suppliants somewhat like those in front of a
branch milk station. He now enters an empty waiting room which is,
moreover, most modestly furnished, and he is disappointed. He must
demand reparation from the physician for the wasted respect that he had
tendered him, and so he omits to close the door between the reception
room and the office. By this, he means to say to the physician: "Oh,
well, there is no one here anyway, and probably no one will come as long
as I am here." He would also be quite unmannerly and supercilious during
the consultation if his presumption were not at once restrained by a
sharp reminder.

You will find nothing in the analysis of this little symptomatic act
which was not previously known to you. That is to say, it asserts that
this act is not accidental, but has a motive, a meaning, a purpose, that
it has its assignable connections psychologically, and that it serves as
a small indication of a more important psychological process. But above
all it implies that the process thus intimated is not known to the
consciousness of the individual in whom it takes place, for none of the
patients who left the two doors open would have admitted that they meant
by this omission to show me their contempt. Some could probably recall a
slight sense of disappointment at entering an empty waiting room, but
the connection between this impression and the symptomatic act which
followed--of these, his consciousness was surely not aware.

Now let us place, side by side with this small analysis of a symptomatic
act, an observation on a pathological case. I choose one which is fresh
in my mind and which can also be described with relative brevity. A
certain measure of minuteness of detail is unavoidable in any such
account.

A young officer, home on a short leave of absence, asked me to see his
mother-in-law who, in spite of the happiest circumstances, was
embittering her own and her people's existence by a senseless idea. I am
introduced to a well preserved lady of fifty-three with pleasant, simple
manners, who gives the following account without any hesitation: She is
most happily married and lives in the country with her husband, who
operates a large factory. She cannot say enough for the kind
thoughtfulness of her husband. They had married for love thirty years
ago, and since then there had never been a shadow, a quarrel or cause
for jealousy. Now, even though her two children are well married, the
husband and father does not yet want to retire, from a feeling of duty.
A year ago there happened the incredible thing, incomprehensible to
herself as well. She gave complete credence to an anonymous letter which
accused her excellent husband of having an affair with a young girl--and
since then her happiness is destroyed. The more detailed circumstances
were somewhat as follows: She had a chambermaid with whom she had
perhaps too often discussed intimate matters. This girl pursued another
young woman with positively malicious enmity because the latter had
progressed so much further in life, despite the fact that she was of no
better origin. Instead of going into domestic service, the girl had
obtained a business training, had entered the factory and in consequence
of the short-handedness due to the drafting of the clerks into the army
had advanced to a good position. She now lives in the factory itself,
meets all the gentlemen socially, and is even addressed as "Miss." The
girl who had remained behind in life was of course ready to speak all
possible evil of her one-time schoolmate. One day our patient and her
chambermaid were talking of an old gentleman who had been visiting at
the house, and of whom it was known that he did not live with his wife,
but kept another woman as his mistress. She does not know how it
happened that she suddenly remarked, "That would be the most awful thing
that could happen to me, if I should ever hear that my good husband also
had a mistress." The next day she received an anonymous letter through
the mail which, in a disguised handwriting, carried this very
communication which she had conjured up. She concluded--it seems
justifiably--that the letter was the handiwork of her malignant
chambermaid, for the letter named as the husband's mistress the
self-same woman whom the maid persecuted with her hatred. Our patient,
in spite of the fact that she immediately saw through the intrigue and
had seen enough in her town to know how little credence such cowardly
denunciations deserve, was nevertheless at once prostrated by the
letter. She became dreadfully excited and promptly sent for her husband
in order to heap the bitterest reproaches upon him. Her husband
laughingly denied the accusation and did the best that could be done. He
called in the family physician, who was as well the doctor in attendance
at the factory, and the latter added his efforts to quiet the unhappy
woman. Their further procedure was also entirely reasonable. The
chambermaid was dismissed, but the pretended rival was not. Since then,
the patient claims she has repeatedly so far calmed herself as no longer
to believe the contents of the anonymous letter, but this relief was
neither thoroughgoing nor lasting. It was enough to hear the name of the
young lady spoken or to meet her on the street in order to precipitate a
new attack of suspicion, pain and reproach.

This, now, is the case history of this good woman. It does not need much
psychiatric experience to understand that her portrayal of her own case
was, if anything, rather too mild in contrast to other nervous patients.
The picture, we say, was dissimulated; in reality she had never overcome
her belief in the accusation of the anonymous letter.

Now what position does a psychiatrist take toward such a case? We
already know what he would do in the case of the symptomatic act of the
patient who does not close the doors to the waiting room. He declares it
an accident without psychological interest, with which he need not
concern himself. But this attitude cannot be maintained toward the
pathological case of the jealous woman. The symptomatic act seems no
great matter, but the symptom itself claims attention by reason of its
gravity. It is bound up with intense subjective suffering while
objectively it threatens to break up a home; therefore its claim to
psychiatric interest cannot be put aside. The first endeavor of the
psychiatrist is to characterize the symptom by some distinctive feature.
The idea with which this woman torments herself cannot in itself be
called nonsensical, for it does happen that elderly married men have
affairs with young girls. But there is something else about it that is
nonsensical and incredible. The patient has no reason beyond the
declaration in the anonymous letter to believe that her tender and
faithful husband belongs to this sort of married men, otherwise not
uncommon. She knows that this letter in itself carries no proof; she can
satisfactorily explain its origin; therefore she ought to be able to
persuade herself that she has no reason to be jealous. Indeed she does
this, but in spite of it she suffers every bit as much as she would if
she acknowledged this jealousy as fully justified. We are agreed to call
ideas of this sort, which are inaccessible to arguments based on logic
or on facts, "_obsessions_." Thus the good lady suffers from an
"_obsession of jealousy_" that is surely a distinctive characterization
for this pathological case.

Having reached this first certainty, our psychiatric interest will have
become aroused. If we cannot do away with a delusion by taking reality
into account, it can hardly have arisen from reality. But the delusion,
what is its origin? There are delusions of the most widely varied
content. Why is it that in our case the content should be jealousy? In
what types of persons are obsessions liable to occur, and, in
particular, obsessions of jealousy? We would like to turn to the
psychiatrist with such questions, but here he leaves us in the lurch.
There is only one of our queries which he heeds. He will examine the
family history of this woman and _perhaps_ will give us the answer: "The
people who develop obsessions are those in whose families similar and
other psychic disturbances have repeatedly occurred." In other words, if
this lady develops an obsession she does so because she was predisposed
to it by reason of her heredity. That is certainly something, but is it
all that we want to know? Is it all that was effective in causing this
breakdown? Shall we be content to assume that it is immaterial,
accidental and inexplicable why the obsession of jealousy develops
rather than any other? And may we also accept this sentence about the
dominance of the influence of heredity in its negative meaning, that is,
that no matter what experiences came to this human being she was
predestined to develop some kind of obsession? You will want to know why
scientific psychiatry will give no further explanation. And I reply, "He
is a rascal who gives more than he owns." The psychiatrist does not know
of any path that leads him further in the explanation of such a case. He
must content himself with the diagnosis and a prognosis which, despite a
wealth of experience, is uncertain.

Yet, can psychoanalysis do more at this point? Indeed yes! I hope to
show you that even in so inaccessible a case as this it can discover
something which makes the further understanding possible. May I ask you
first to note the apparently insignificant fact that the patient
actually provoked the anonymous letter which now supports her delusion.
The day before, she announces to the intriguing chambermaid that if her
husband were to have an affair with a young girl it would be the worst
misfortune that could befall her. By so doing she really gave the maid
the idea of sending her the anonymous letter. The obsession thus attains
a certain independence from the letter; it existed in the patient
beforehand--perhaps as a dread; or was it a wish? Consider, moreover,
these additional details yielded by an analysis of only two hours. The
patient was indeed most helpful when, after telling her story, she was
urged to communicate her further thoughts, ideas and recollections. She
declared that nothing came to her mind, that she had already told
everything. After two hours the undertaking had really to be given up
because she announced that she already felt cured and was sure that the
morbid idea would not return. Of course, she said this because of this
resistance and her fear of continuing the analysis. In these two hours,
however, she had let fall certain remarks which made possible definite
interpretation, indeed made it incontestable; and this interpretation
throws a clear light on the origin of her obsession of jealousy. Namely,
she herself was very much infatuated with a certain young man, the very
same son-in-law upon whose urging she had come to consult me
professionally. She knew nothing of this infatuation, or at least only a
very little. Because of the existing relationship, it was very easy for
this infatuation to masquerade under the guise of harmless tenderness.
With all our further experience it is not difficult to feel our way
toward an understanding of the psychic life of this honest woman and
good mother. Such an infatuation, a monstrous, impossible thing, could
not be allowed to become conscious. But it continued to exist and
unconsciously exerted a heavy pressure. Something had to happen, some
sort of relief had to be found and the mechanism of displacement which
so constantly takes part in the origin of obsessional jealousy offered
the most immediate mitigation. If not only she, old woman that she was,
was in love with a young man but if also her old husband had an affair
with a young girl, then she would be freed from the voice of her
conscience which accused her of infidelity. The phantasy of her
husband's infidelity was thus like a cooling salve on her burning wound.
Of her own love she never became conscious, but the reflection of it,
which would bring her such advantages, now became compulsive,
obsessional and conscious. Naturally all arguments directed against the
obsession were of no avail since they were directed only to the
reflection, and not to the original force to which it owed its strength
and which, unimpeachable, lay buried in the unconscious.

Let us now piece together these fragments to see what a short and
impeded psychoanalysis can nevertheless contribute to the understanding
of this case. It is assumed of course that our inquiries were carefully
conducted, a point which I cannot at this place submit to your judgment.
In the first place, the obsession becomes no longer nonsensical nor
incomprehensible, it is full of meaning, well motivated and an integral
part of the patient's emotional experience. Secondly, it is a necessary
reaction toward an unconscious psychological process, revealed in other
ways, and it is to this very circumstance that it owes its obsessional
nature, that is, its resistance to arguments based on logic or fact. In
itself the obsession is something wished for, a kind of consolation.
Finally, the experiences underlying the condition are such as
unmistakably determine an obsession of jealousy and no other. You will
also recognize the part played by the two important analogies in the
analysis of the symptomatic act with reference to its meaning and intent
and also to its relation to an unconscious factor in the situation.

Naturally, we have not yet answered all the questions which may be put
on the basis of this case. Rather the case bristles with further
problems of a kind which we have not yet been able to solve in any way,
and of others which could not be solved because of the disadvantage of
the circumstances under which we were working. For example: why is this
happily married woman open to an infatuation for her son-in-law, and why
does the relief which could have been obtained in other ways come to her
by way of this mirror-image, this projection of her own condition upon
her husband? I trust you will not think that it is idle and wanton to
open such problems. Already we have much material at our disposal for
their possible solution. This woman is in that critical age when her
sexual needs undergo a sudden and unwelcome exaggeration. This might in
itself be sufficient. In addition, her good and faithful mate may for
many years have been lacking in that sufficient sexual capacity which
the well-preserved woman needs for her satisfaction. We have learned by
experience to know that those very men whose faithfulness is thus placed
beyond a doubt are most gentle in their treatment of their wives and
unusually forbearing toward their nervous complaints. Furthermore, the
fact that it was just the young husband of a daughter who became the
object of her abnormal infatuation is by no means insignificant. A
strong erotic attachment to the daughter, which in the last analysis
leads back to the mother's sexual constitution, will often find a way to
live on under such a disguise. May I perhaps remind you in this
connection that the relationship between mother and son-in-law has
seemed particularly delicate since all time and is one which among
primitive peoples gave rise to very powerful taboos and avoidances.[37]
It often transgresses our cultural standards positively as well as
negatively. I cannot tell you of course which of these three factors
were at work in our case; whether two of them only, or whether all of
them coöperated, for as you know I did not have the opportunity to
continue the analysis beyond two hours.

I realize at this point, ladies and gentlemen, that I have been speaking
entirely of things for which your understanding was not prepared. I did
this in order to carry through the comparison of psychiatry and
psychoanalysis. May I now ask one thing of you? Have you noticed any
contradiction between them? Psychiatry does not apply the technical
methods of psychoanalysis, and neglects to look for any significance in
the content of the obsession. Instead of first seeking out more specific
and immediate causes, psychiatry refers us to the very general and
remote source--heredity. But does this imply a contradiction, a conflict
between them? Do they not rather supplement one another? For does the
hereditary factor deny the significance of the experience, is it not
rather true that both operate together in the most effective way? You
must admit that there is nothing in the nature of psychiatric work which
must repudiate psychoanalytic research. Therefore, it is the
psychiatrists who oppose psychoanalysis, not psychiatry itself.
Psychoanalysis stands in about the same relation to psychiatry as does
histology to anatomy. The one studies the outer forms of organs, the
other the closer structure of tissues and cells. A contradiction between
two types of study, where one simplifies the other, is not easily
conceivable. You know that anatomy to-day forms the basis of scientific
medicine, but there was a time when the dissection of human corpses to
learn the inner structure of the body was as much frowned upon as the
practice of psychoanalysis, which seeks to ascertain the inner workings
of the human soul, seems proscribed to-day. And presumably a not too
distant time will bring us to the realization that a psychiatry which
aspires to scientific depth is not possible without a real knowledge of
the deeper unconscious processes in the psychic life.

Perhaps this much-attacked psychoanalysis has now found some friends
among you who are anxious to see it justify itself as well from another
aspect, namely, the therapeutic side. You know that the therapy of
psychiatry has hitherto not been able to influence obsessions. Can
psychoanalysis perhaps do so, thanks to its insight into the mechanism
of these symptoms? No, ladies and gentlemen, it cannot; for the present
at least it is just as powerless in the face of these maladies as every
other therapy. We can understand what it was that happened within the
patient, but we have no means of making the patient himself understand
this. In fact, I told you that I could not extend the analysis of the
obsession beyond the first steps. Would you therefore assert that
analysis is objectionable in such cases because it remains without
result? I think not. We have the right, indeed we have the duty to
pursue scientific research without regard to an immediate practical
effect. Some day, though we do not know when or where, every little
scrap of knowledge will have been translated into skill, even into
therapeutic skill. If psychoanalysis were as unsuccessful in all other
forms of nervous and psychological disease as it is in the case of the
obsession, it would nevertheless remain fully justified as an
irreplaceable method of scientific research. It is true that we would
then not be in a position to practice it, for the human subjects from
which we must learn, live and will in their own right; they must have
motives of their own in order to assist in the work, but they would deny
themselves to us. Therefore let me conclude this session by telling you
that there are comprehensive groups of nervous diseases concerning which
our better understanding has actually been translated into therapeutic
power; moreover, that in disturbances which are most difficult to reach
we can under certain conditions secure results which are second to none
in the field of internal therapeutics.




