## Chapter XXXVII: Conversion Of The Barbarians To Christianity.--Part III.

The different motives which influenced the reason, or the passions, of
the Barbarian converts, cannot easily be ascertained. They were often
capricious and accidental; a dream, an omen, the report of a miracle,
the example of some priest, or hero, the charms of a believing wife,
and, above all, the fortunate event of a prayer, or vow, which, in a
moment of danger, they had addressed to the God of the Christians. [80]
The early prejudices of education were insensibly erased by the habits
of frequent and familiar society, the moral precepts of the gospel
were protected by the extravagant virtues of the monks; and a spiritual
theology was supported by the visible power of relics, and the pomp of
religious worship. But the rational and ingenious mode of persuasion,
which a Saxon bishop [81] suggested to a popular saint, might sometimes
be employed by the missionaries, who labored for the conversion of
infidels. "Admit," says the sagacious disputant, "whatever they are
pleased to assert of the fabulous, and carnal, genealogy of their gods
and goddesses, who are propagated from each other. From this principle
deduce their imperfect nature, and human infirmities, the assurance they
were born, and the probability that they will die. At what time, by
what means, from what cause, were the eldest of the gods or goddesses
produced? Do they still continue, or have they ceased, to propagate? If
they have ceased, summon your antagonists to declare the reason of this
strange alteration. If they still continue, the number of the gods must
become infinite; and shall we not risk, by the indiscreet worship of
some impotent deity, to excite the resentment of his jealous superior?
The visible heavens and earth, the whole system of the universe, which
may be conceived by the mind, is it created or eternal? If created, how,
or where, could the gods themselves exist before creation? If eternal,
how could they assume the empire of an independent and preexisting
world? Urge these arguments with temper and moderation; insinuate, at
seasonable intervals, the truth and beauty of the Christian revelation;
and endeavor to make the unbelievers ashamed, without making them
angry." This metaphysical reasoning, too refined, perhaps, for the
Barbarians of Germany, was fortified by the grosser weight of authority
and popular consent. The advantage of temporal prosperity had deserted
the Pagan cause, and passed over to the service of Christianity. The
Romans themselves, the most powerful and enlightened nation of the
globe, had renounced their ancient superstition; and, if the ruin
of their empire seemed to accuse the efficacy of the new faith, the
disgrace was already retrieved by the conversion of the victorious
Goths. The valiant and fortunate Barbarians, who subdued the provinces
of the West, successively received, and reflected, the same edifying
example. Before the age of Charlemagne, the Christian nations of Europe
might exult in the exclusive possession of the temperate climates, of
the fertile lands, which produced corn, wine, and oil; while the savage
idolaters, and their helpless idols, were confined to the extremities of
the earth, the dark and frozen regions of the North. [82]

[Footnote 80: To such a cause has Socrates (l. vii. c. 30) ascribed the
conversion of the Burgundians, whose Christian piety is celebrated by
Orosius, (l. vii. c. 19.)]

[Footnote 81: See an original and curious epistle from Daniel, the first
bishop of Winchester, (Beda, Hist. Eccles. Anglorum, l. v. c. 18, p.
203, edit Smith,) to St. Boniface, who preached the gospel among the
savages of Hesse and Thuringia. Epistol. Bonifacii, lxvii., in the
Maxima Bibliotheca Patrum, tom. xiii. p. 93]

[Footnote 82: The sword of Charlemagne added weight to the argument; but
when Daniel wrote this epistle, (A.D. 723,) the Mahometans, who reigned
from India to Spain, might have retorted it against the Christians.]

Christianity, which opened the gates of Heaven to the Barbarians,
introduced an important change in their moral and political condition.
They received, at the same time, the use of letters, so essential to a
religion whose doctrines are contained in a sacred book; and while they
studied the divine truth, their minds were insensibly enlarged by the
distant view of history, of nature, of the arts, and of society.
The version of the Scriptures into their native tongue, which had
facilitated their conversion, must excite among their clergy some
curiosity to read the original text, to understand the sacred liturgy of
the church, and to examine, in the writings of the fathers, the chain
of ecclesiastical tradition. These spiritual gifts were preserved in the
Greek and Latin languages, which concealed the inestimable monuments of
ancient learning. The immortal productions of Virgil, Cicero, and Livy,
which were accessible to the Christian Barbarians, maintained a silent
intercourse between the reign of Augustus and the times of Clovis and
Charlemagne. The emulation of mankind was encouraged by the remembrance
of a more perfect state; and the flame of science was secretly kept
alive, to warm and enlighten the mature age of the Western world.

In the most corrupt state of Christianity, the Barbarians might learn
justice from the law, and mercy from the gospel; and if the knowledge of
their duty was insufficient to guide their actions, or to regulate their
passions, they were sometimes restrained by conscience, and frequently
punished by remorse. But the direct authority of religion was less
effectual than the holy communion, which united them with their
Christian brethren in spiritual friendship. The influence of these
sentiments contributed to secure their fidelity in the service, or the
alliance, of the Romans, to alleviate the horrors of war, to moderate
the insolence of conquest, and to preserve, in the downfall of the
empire, a permanent respect for the name and institutions of Rome. In
the days of Paganism, the priests of Gaul and Germany reigned over the
people, and controlled the jurisdiction of the magistrates; and the
zealous proselytes transferred an equal, or more ample, measure of
devout obedience, to the pontiffs of the Christian faith. The sacred
character of the bishops was supported by their temporal possessions;
they obtained an honorable seat in the legislative assemblies of
soldiers and freemen; and it was their interest, as well as their duty,
to mollify, by peaceful counsels, the fierce spirit of the Barbarians.
The perpetual correspondence of the Latin clergy, the frequent
pilgrimages to Rome and Jerusalem, and the growing authority of the
popes, cemented the union of the Christian republic, and gradually
produced the similar manners, and common jurisprudence, which have
distinguished, from the rest of mankind, the independent, and even
hostile, nations of modern Europe.

But the operation of these causes was checked and retarded by the
unfortunate accident, which infused a deadly poison into the cup of
Salvation. Whatever might be the early sentiments of Ulphilas, his
connections with the empire and the church were formed during the reign
of Arianism. The apostle of the Goths subscribed the creed of Rimini;
professed with freedom, and perhaps with sincerity, that the Son was not
equal, or consubstantial to the Father; [83] communicated these errors
to the clergy and people; and infected the Barbaric world with a heresy,
[84] which the great Theodosius proscribed and extinguished among the
Romans. The temper and understanding of the new proselytes were not
adapted to metaphysical subtilties; but they strenuously maintained,
what they had piously received, as the pure and genuine doctrines of
Christianity. The advantage of preaching and expounding the Scriptures
in the Teutonic language promoted the apostolic labors of Ulphilas and
his successors; and they ordained a competent number of bishops and
presbyters for the instruction of the kindred tribes. The Ostrogoths,
the Burgundians, the Suevi, and the Vandals, who had listened to the
eloquence of the Latin clergy, [85] preferred the more intelligible
lessons of their domestic teachers; and Arianism was adopted as the
national faith of the warlike converts, who were seated on the ruins
of the Western empire. This irreconcilable difference of religion was a
perpetual source of jealousy and hatred; and the reproach of Barbarian
was imbittered by the more odious epithet of Heretic. The heroes of
the North, who had submitted, with some reluctance, to believe that all
their ancestors were in hell, [86] were astonished and exasperated to
learn, that they themselves had only changed the mode of their eternal
condemnation. Instead of the smooth applause, which Christian kings are
accustomed to expect from their royal prelates, the orthodox bishops
and their clergy were in a state of opposition to the Arian courts;
and their indiscreet opposition frequently became criminal, and might
sometimes be dangerous. [87] The pulpit, that safe and sacred organ of
sedition, resounded with the names of Pharaoh and Holofernes; [88] the
public discontent was inflamed by the hope or promise of a glorious
deliverance; and the seditious saints were tempted to promote the
accomplishment of their own predictions. Notwithstanding these
provocations, the Catholics of Gaul, Spain, and Italy, enjoyed, under
the reign of the Arians, the free and peaceful exercise of their
religion. Their haughty masters respected the zeal of a numerous people,
resolved to die at the foot of their altars; and the example of their
devout constancy was admired and imitated by the Barbarians themselves.
The conquerors evaded, however, the disgraceful reproach, or confession,
of fear, by attributing their toleration to the liberal motives
of reason and humanity; and while they affected the language, they
imperceptiby imbibed the spirit, of genuine Christianity.

[Footnote 83: The opinions of Ulphilas and the Goths inclined to
semi-Arianism, since they would not say that the Son was a creature,
though they held communion with those who maintained that heresy. Their
apostle represented the whole controversy as a question of trifling
moment, which had been raised by the passions of the clergy. Theodoret
l. iv. c. 37.]

[Footnote 84: The Arianism of the Goths has been imputed to the emperor
Valens: "Itaque justo Dei judicio ipsi eum vivum incenderunt, qui
propter eum etiam mortui, vitio erroris arsuri sunt." Orosius, l. vii.
c. 33, p. 554. This cruel sentence is confirmed by Tillemont, (Mem.
Eccles. tom. vi. p. 604-610,) who coolly observes, "un seul homme
entraina dans l'enfer un nombre infini de Septentrionaux, &c." Salvian
(de Gubern. Dei, l. v p. 150, 151) pities and excuses their involuntary
error.]

[Footnote 85: Orosius affirms, in the year 416, (l. vii. c. 41, p. 580,)
that the Churches of Christ (of the Catholics) were filled with Huns,
Suevi, Vandals, Burgundians.]

[Footnote 86: Radbod, king of the Frisons, was so much scandalized by
this rash declaration of a missionary, that he drew back his foot after
he had entered the baptismal font. See Fleury, Hist. Eccles. tom. ix p.
167.]

[Footnote 87: The epistles of Sidonius, bishop of Clermont, under the
Visigotha, and of Avitus, bishop of Vienna, under the Burgundians,
explain sometimes in dark hints, the general dispositions of the
Catholics. The history of Clovis and Theodoric will suggest some
particular facts]

[Footnote 88: Genseric confessed the resemblance, by the severity with
which he punished such indiscreet allusions. Victor Vitensis, l. 7, p.
10.]

The peace of the church was sometimes interrupted. The Catholics were
indiscreet, the Barbarians were impatient; and the partial acts of
severity or injustice, which had been recommended by the Arian clergy,
were exaggerated by the orthodox writers. The guilt of persecution may
be imputed to Euric, king of the Visigoths; who suspended the exercise
of ecclesiastical, or, at least, of episcopal functions; and punished
the popular bishops of Aquitain with imprisonment, exile, and
confiscation. [89] But the cruel and absurd enterprise of subduing the
minds of a whole people was undertaken by the Vandals alone. Genseric
himself, in his early youth, had renounced the orthodox communion; and
the apostate could neither grant, nor expect, a sincere forgiveness. He
was exasperated to find that the Africans, who had fled before him in
the field, still presumed to dispute his will in synods and churches;
and his ferocious mind was incapable of fear or of compassion. His
Catholic subjects were oppressed by intolerant laws and arbitrary
punishments. The language of Genseric was furious and formidable;
the knowledge of his intentions might justify the most unfavorable
interpretation of his actions; and the Arians were reproached with the
frequent executions which stained the palace and the dominions of the
tyrant. Arms and ambition were, however, the ruling passions of the
monarch of the sea. But Hunneric, his inglorious son, who seemed
to inherit only his vices, tormented the Catholics with the same
unrelenting fury which had been fatal to his brother, his nephews,
and the friends and favorites of his father; and even to the Arian
patriarch, who was inhumanly burnt alive in the midst of Carthage.
The religious war was preceded and prepared by an insidious truce;
persecution was made the serious and important business of the Vandal
court; and the loathsome disease which hastened the death of Hunneric,
revenged the injuries, without contributing to the deliverance, of the
church. The throne of Africa was successively filled by the two nephews
of Hunneric; by Gundamund, who reigned about twelve, and by Thrasimund,
who governed the nation about twenty-seven, years. Their administration
was hostile and oppressive to the orthodox party. Gundamund appeared to
emulate, or even to surpass, the cruelty of his uncle; and, if at length
he relented, if he recalled the bishops, and restored the freedom of
Athanasian worship, a premature death intercepted the benefits of his
tardy clemency. His brother, Thrasimund, was the greatest and most
accomplished of the Vandal kings, whom he excelled in beauty, prudence,
and magnanimity of soul. But this magnanimous character was degraded
by his intolerant zeal and deceitful clemency. Instead of threats and
tortures, he employed the gentle, but efficacious, powers of seduction.
Wealth, dignity, and the royal favor, were the liberal rewards of
apostasy; the Catholics, who had violated the laws, might purchase
their pardon by the renunciation of their faith; and whenever
Thrasimund meditated any rigorous measure, he patiently waited till
the indiscretion of his adversaries furnished him with a specious
opportunity. Bigotry was his last sentiment in the hour of death; and he
exacted from his successor a solemn oath, that he would never tolerate
the sectaries of Athanasius. But his successor, Hilderic, the gentle son
of the savage Hunneric, preferred the duties of humanity and justice to
the vain obligation of an impious oath; and his accession was gloriously
marked by the restoration of peace and universal freedom. The throne of
that virtuous, though feeble monarch, was usurped by his cousin Gelimer,
a zealous Arian: but the Vandal kingdom, before he could enjoy or abuse
his power, was subverted by the arms of Belisarius; and the orthodox
party retaliated the injuries which they had endured. [90]

[Footnote 89: Such are the contemporary complaints of Sidonius, bishop
of Clermont (l. vii. c. 6, p. 182, &c., edit. Sirmond.) Gregory of Tours
who quotes this Epistle, (l. ii. c. 25, in tom. ii. p. 174,) extorts an
unwarrantable assertion, that of the nine vacancies in Aquitain, some
had been produced by episcopal martyrdoms]

[Footnote 90: The original monuments of the Vandal persecution are
preserved in the five books of the history of Victor Vitensis, (de
Persecutione Vandalica,) a bishop who was exiled by Hunneric; in the
life of St. Fulgentius, who was distinguished in the persecution of
Thrasimund (in Biblioth. Max. Patrum, tom. ix. p. 4-16;) and in the
first book of the Vandalic War, by the impartial Procopius, (c. 7, 8,
p. 196, 197, 198, 199.) Dom Ruinart, the last editor of Victor, has
illustrated the whole subject with a copious and learned apparatus of
notes and supplement (Paris, 1694.)] The passionate declamations of the
Catholics, the sole historians of this persecution, cannot afford
any distinct series of causes and events; any impartial view of the
characters, or counsels; but the most remarkable circumstances that
deserve either credit or notice, may be referred to the following heads;
I. In the original law, which is still extant, [91] Hunneric expressly
declares, (and the declaration appears to be correct,) that he had
faithfully transcribed the regulations and penalties of the Imperial
edicts, against the heretical congregations, the clergy, and the people,
who dissented from the established religion. If the rights of conscience
had been understood, the Catholics must have condemned their past
conduct or acquiesced in their actual suffering. But they still
persisted to refuse the indulgence which they claimed. While they
trembled under the lash of persecution, they praised the laudable
severity of Hunneric himself, who burnt or banished great numbers
of Manichaeans; [92] and they rejected, with horror, the ignominious
compromise, that the disciples of Arius and of Athanasius should enjoy a
reciprocal and similar toleration in the territories of the Romans, and
in those of the Vandals. [93] II. The practice of a conference,
which the Catholics had so frequently used to insult and punish their
obstinate antagonists, was retorted against themselves. [94] At the
command of Hunneric, four hundred and sixty-six orthodox bishops
assembled at Carthage; but when they were admitted into the hall of
audience, they had the mortification of beholding the Arian Cyrila
exalted on the patriarchal throne. The disputants were separated, after
the mutual and ordinary reproaches of noise and silence, of delay and
precipitation, of military force and of popular clamor. One martyr and
one confessor were selected among the Catholic bishops; twenty-eight
escaped by flight, and eighty-eight by conformity; forty-six were sent
into Corsica to cut timber for the royal navy; and three hundred and two
were banished to the different parts of Africa, exposed to the insults
of their enemies, and carefully deprived of all the temporal and
spiritual comforts of life. [95] The hardships of ten years' exile must
have reduced their numbers; and if they had complied with the law of
Thrasimund, which prohibited any episcopal consecrations, the orthodox
church of Africa must have expired with the lives of its actual members.
They disobeyed, and their disobedience was punished by a second exile
of two hundred and twenty bishops into Sardinia; where they languished
fifteen years, till the accession of the gracious Hilderic. [96] The two
islands were judiciously chosen by the malice of their Arian tyrants.
Seneca, from his own experience, has deplored and exaggerated the
miserable state of Corsica, [97] and the plenty of Sardinia was
overbalanced by the unwholesome quality of the air. [98] III. The zeal
of Generic and his successors, for the conversion of the Catholics, must
have rendered them still more jealous to guard the purity of the Vandal
faith. Before the churches were finally shut, it was a crime to appear
in a Barbarian dress; and those who presumed to neglect the royal
mandate were rudely dragged backwards by their long hair. [99] The
palatine officers, who refused to profess the religion of their prince,
were ignominiously stripped of their honors and employments; banished
to Sardinia and Sicily; or condemned to the servile labors of slaves
and peasants in the fields of Utica. In the districts which had been
peculiarly allotted to the Vandals, the exercise of the Catholic worship
was more strictly prohibited; and severe penalties were denounced
against the guilt both of the missionary and the proselyte. By these
arts, the faith of the Barbarians was preserved, and their zeal was
inflamed: they discharged, with devout fury, the office of spies,
informers, or executioners; and whenever their cavalry took the field,
it was the favorite amusement of the march to defile the churches, and
to insult the clergy of the adverse faction. [100] IV. The citizens who
had been educated in the luxury of the Roman province, were delivered,
with exquisite cruelty, to the Moors of the desert. A venerable train of
bishops, presbyters, and deacons, with a faithful crowd of four thousand
and ninety-six persons, whose guilt is not precisely ascertained, were
torn from their native homes, by the command of Hunneric. During the
night they were confined, like a herd of cattle, amidst their own
ordure: during the day they pursued their march over the burning sands;
and if they fainted under the heat and fatigue, they were goaded, or
dragged along, till they expired in the hands of their tormentors. [101]
These unhappy exiles, when they reached the Moorish huts, might excite
the compassion of a people, whose native humanity was neither improved
by reason, nor corrupted by fanaticism: but if they escaped the dangers,
they were condemned to share the distress of a savage life. V. It is
incumbent on the authors of persecution previously to reflect, whether
they are determined to support it in the last extreme. They excite the
flame which they strive to extinguish; and it soon becomes necessary to
chastise the contumacy, as well as the crime, of the offender. The fine,
which he is unable or unwilling to discharge, exposes his person to the
severity of the law; and his contempt of lighter penalties suggests the
use and propriety of capital punishment. Through the veil of fiction and
declamation we may clearly perceive, that the Catholics more especially
under the reign of Hunneric, endured the most cruel and ignominious
treatment. [102] Respectable citizens, noble matrons, and consecrated
virgins, were stripped naked, and raised in the air by pulleys, with
a weight suspended at their feet. In this painful attitude their naked
bodies were torn with scourges, or burnt in the most tender parts with
red-hot plates of iron. The amputation of the ears the nose, the tongue,
and the right hand, was inflicted by the Arians; and although the
precise number cannot be defined, it is evident that many persons, among
whom a bishop [103] and a proconsul [104] may be named, were entitled to
the crown of martyrdom. The same honor has been ascribed to the memory
of Count Sebastian, who professed the Nicene creed with unshaken
constancy; and Genseric might detest, as a heretic, the brave and
ambitious fugitive whom he dreaded as a rival. [105] VI. A new mode of
conversion, which might subdue the feeble, and alarm the timorous, was
employed by the Arian ministers. They imposed, by fraud or violence, the
rites of baptism; and punished the apostasy of the Catholics, if they
disclaimed this odious and profane ceremony, which scandalously violated
the freedom of the will, and the unity of the sacrament. [106] The
hostile sects had formerly allowed the validity of each other's baptism;
and the innovation, so fiercely maintained by the Vandals, can be
imputed only to the example and advice of the Donatists. VII. The Arian
clergy surpassed in religious cruelty the king and his Vandals; but they
were incapable of cultivating the spiritual vineyard, which they were so
desirous to possess. A patriarch [107] might seat himself on the throne
of Carthage; some bishops, in the principal cities, might usurp the
place of their rivals; but the smallness of their numbers, and their
ignorance of the Latin language, [108] disqualified the Barbarians for
the ecclesiastical ministry of a great church; and the Africans, after
the loss of their orthodox pastors, were deprived of the public exercise
of Christianity. VIII. The emperors were the natural protectors of the
Homoousian doctrine; and the faithful people of Africa, both as Romans
and as Catholics, preferred their lawful sovereignty to the usurpation
of the Barbarous heretics. During an interval of peace and friendship,
Hunneric restored the cathedral of Carthage; at the intercession of
Zeno, who reigned in the East, and of Placidia, the daughter and relict
of emperors, and the sister of the queen of the Vandals. [109] But this
decent regard was of short duration; and the haughty tyrant displayed
his contempt for the religion of the empire, by studiously arranging the
bloody images of persecution, in all the principal streets through which
the Roman ambassador must pass in his way to the palace. [110] An oath
was required from the bishops, who were assembled at Carthage, that they
would support the succession of his son Hilderic, and that they would
renounce all foreign or transmarine correspondence. This engagement,
consistent, as it should seem, with their moral and religious duties,
was refused by the more sagacious members [111] of the assembly. Their
refusal, faintly colored by the pretence that it is unlawful for a
Christian to swear, must provoke the suspicions of a jealous tyrant.

[Footnote 91: Victor, iv. 2, p. 65. Hunneric refuses the name of
Catholics to the Homoousians. He describes, as the veri Divinae
Majestatis cultores, his own party, who professed the faith, confirmed
by more than a thousand bishops, in the synods of Rimini and Seleucia.]

[Footnote 92: Victor, ii, 1, p. 21, 22: Laudabilior... videbatur. In
the Mss which omit this word, the passage is unintelligible. See Ruinart
Not. p. 164.]

[Footnote 93: Victor, ii. p. 22, 23. The clergy of Carthage called these
conditions periculosoe; and they seem, indeed, to have been proposed as
a snare to entrap the Catholic bishops.]

[Footnote 94: See the narrative of this conference, and the treatment of
the bishops, in Victor, ii. 13-18, p. 35-42 and the whole fourth book p.
63-171. The third book, p. 42-62, is entirely filled by their apology or
confession of faith.]

[Footnote 95: See the list of the African bishops, in Victor, p.
117-140, and Ruinart's notes, p. 215-397. The schismatic name of Donatus
frequently occurs, and they appear to have adopted (like our fanatics
of the last age) the pious appellations of Deodatus, Deogratias,
Quidvultdeus, Habetdeum, &c. Note: These names appear to have been
introduced by the Donatists.--M.]

[Footnote 96: Fulgent. Vit. c. 16-29. Thrasimund affected the praise
of moderation and learning; and Fulgentius addressed three books of
controversy to the Arian tyrant, whom he styles piissime Rex. Biblioth.
Maxim. Patrum, tom. ix. p. 41. Only sixty bishops are mentioned as
exiles in the life of Fulgentius; they are increased to one hundred and
twenty by Victor Tunnunensis and Isidore; but the number of two hundred
and twenty is specified in the Historia Miscella, and a short authentic
chronicle of the times. See Ruinart, p. 570, 571.]

[Footnote 97: See the base and insipid epigrams of the Stoic, who could
not support exile with more fortitude than Ovid. Corsica might not
produce corn, wine, or oil; but it could not be destitute of grass,
water, and even fire.]

[Footnote 98: Si ob gravitatem coeli interissent vile damnum. Tacit.
Annal. ii. 85. In this application, Thrasimund would have adopted the
reading of some critics, utile damnum.]

[Footnote 99: See these preludes of a general persecution, in Victor,
ii. 3, 4, 7 and the two edicts of Hunneric, l. ii. p. 35, l. iv. p. 64.]

[Footnote 100: See Procopius de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 7, p. 197, 198.
A Moorish prince endeavored to propitiate the God of the Christians, by
his diligence to erase the marks of the Vandal sacrilege.]

[Footnote 101: See this story in Victor. ii. 8-12, p. 30-34. Victor
describes the distress of these confessors as an eye-witness.]

[Footnote 102: See the fifth book of Victor. His passionate complaints
are confirmed by the sober testimony of Procopius, and the public
declaration of the emperor Justinian. Cod. l. i. tit. xxvii.]

[Footnote 103: Victor, ii. 18, p. 41.]

[Footnote 104: Victor, v. 4, p. 74, 75. His name was Victorianus, and
he was a wealthy citizen of Adrumetum, who enjoyed the confidence of the
king; by whose favor he had obtained the office, or at least the title,
of proconsul of Africa.]

[Footnote 105: Victor, i. 6, p. 8, 9. After relating the firm resistance
and dexterous reply of Count Sebastian, he adds, quare alio generis
argumento postea bellicosum virum eccidit.]

[Footnote 106: Victor, v. 12, 13. Tillemont, Mem. Eccles. tom. vi. p.
609.]

[Footnote 107: Primate was more properly the title of the bishop of
Carthage; but the name of patriarch was given by the sects and nations
to their principal ecclesiastic. See Thomassin, Discipline de l'Eglise,
tom. i. p. 155, 158.]

[Footnote 108: The patriarch Cyrila himself publicly declared, that he
did not understand Latin (Victor, ii. 18, p. 42:) Nescio Latine; and he
might converse with tolerable ease, without being capable of disputing
or preaching in that language. His Vandal clergy were still more
ignorant; and small confidence could be placed in the Africans who had
conformed.]

[Footnote 109: Victor, ii. 1, 2, p. 22.]

[Footnote 110: Victor, v. 7, p. 77. He appeals to the ambassador
himself, whose name was Uranius.]

[Footnote 111: Astutiores, Victor, iv. 4, p. 70. He plainly intimates
that their quotation of the gospel "Non jurabitis in toto," was only
meant to elude the obligation of an inconvenient oath. The forty-six
bishops who refused were banished to Corsica; the three hundred and two
who swore were distributed through the provinces of Africa.]




