## Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates.--Part II.

Britain had none but domestic enemies to dread; and as long as the
governors preserved their fidelity, and the troops their discipline,
the incursions of the naked savages of Scotland or Ireland could never
materially affect the safety of the province.

The peace of the continent, and the defence of the principal rivers
which bounded the empire, were objects of far greater difficulty and
importance. The policy of Diocletian, which inspired the councils of his
associates, provided for the public tranquility, by encouraging a
spirit of dissension among the barbarians, and by strengthening the
fortifications of the Roman limit. In the East he fixed a line of camps
from Egypt to the Persian dominions, and for every camp, he instituted
an adequate number of stationary troops, commanded by their respective
officers, and supplied with every kind of arms, from the new arsenals
which he had formed at Antioch, Emesa, and Damascus. [32] Nor was the
precaution of the emperor less watchful against the well-known valor
of the barbarians of Europe. From the mouth of the Rhine to that of
the Danube, the ancient camps, towns, and citidels, were diligently
reestablished, and, in the most exposed places, new ones were skilfully
constructed: the strictest vigilance was introduced among the garrisons
of the frontier, and every expedient was practised that could render
the long chain of fortifications firm and impenetrable. [33] A barrier so
respectable was seldom violated, and the barbarians often turned against
each other their disappointed rage. The Goths, the Vandals, the
Gepidae, the Burgundians, the Alemanni, wasted each other's strength by
destructive hostilities: and whosoever vanquished, they vanquished
the enemies of Rome. The subjects of Diocletian enjoyed the bloody
spectacle, and congratulated each other, that the mischiefs of civil war
were now experienced only by the barbarians. [34]

[Footnote 32: John Malala, in Chron, Antiochen. tom. i. p. 408, 409.]

[Footnote 33: Zosim. l. i. p. 3. That partial historian seems to
celebrate the vigilance of Diocletian with a design of exposing the
negligence of Constantine; we may, however, listen to an orator: "Nam
quid ego alarum et cohortium castra percenseam, toto Rheni et Istri et
Euphraus limite restituta." Panegyr. Vet. iv. 18.]

[Footnote 34: Ruunt omnes in sanguinem suum populi, quibus ron
contigilesse Romanis, obstinataeque feritatis poenas nunc sponte
persolvunt. Panegyr. Vet. iii. 16. Mamertinus illustrates the fact by
the example of almost all the nations in the world.]

Notwithstanding the policy of Diocletian, it was impossible to maintain
an equal and undisturbed tranquillity during a reign of twenty years,
and along a frontier of many hundred miles. Sometimes the barbarians
suspended their domestic animosities, and the relaxed vigilance of
the garrisons sometimes gave a passage to their strength or dexterity.
Whenever the provinces were invaded, Diocletian conducted himself with
that calm dignity which he always affected or possessed; reserved his
presence for such occasions as were worthy of his interposition, never
exposed his person or reputation to any unnecessary danger, insured his
success by every means that prudence could suggest, and displayed,
with ostentation, the consequences of his victory. In wars of a more
difficult nature, and more doubtful event, he employed the rough valor
of Maximian; and that faithful soldier was content to ascribe his
own victories to the wise counsels and auspicious influence of his
benefactor. But after the adoption of the two Caesars, the emperors
themselves, retiring to a less laborious scene of action, devolved
on their adopted sons the defence of the Danube and of the Rhine. The
vigilant Galerius was never reduced to the necessity of vanquishing
an army of barbarians on the Roman territory. [35] The brave and active
Contsantius delivered Gaul from a very furious inroad of the Alemanni;
and his victories of Langres and Vindonissa appear to have been actions
of considerable danger and merit. As he traversed the open country with
a feeble guard, he was encompassed on a sudden by the superior multitude
of the enemy. He retreated with difficulty towards Langres; but, in the
general consternation, the citizens refused to open their gates, and the
wounded prince was drawn up the wall by the means of a rope. But, on the
news of his distress, the Roman troops hastened from all sides to his
relief, and before the evening he had satisfied his honor and revenge by
the slaughter of six thousand Alemanni. [36] From the monuments of those
times, the obscure traces of several other victories over the barbarians
of Sarmatia and Germany might possibly be collected; but the tedious
search would not be rewarded either with amusement or with instruction.

[Footnote 35: He complained, though not with the strictest truth,
"Jam fluxisse annos quindecim in quibus, in Illyrico, ad ripam Danubii
relegatus cum gentibus barbaris luctaret." Lactant. de M. P. c. 18.]

[Footnote 36: In the Greek text of Eusebius, we read six thousand, a
number which I have preferred to the sixty thousand of Jerome, Orosius
Eutropius, and his Greek translator Paeanius.]

The conduct which the emperor Probus had adopted in the disposal of the
vanquished, was imitated by Diocletian and his associates. The captive
barbarians, exchanging death for slavery, were distributed among the
provincials, and assigned to those districts (in Gaul, the territories
of Amiens, Beauvais, Cambray, Treves, Langres, and Troyes, are
particularly specified [37] which had been depopulated by the calamities
of war. They were usefully employed as shepherds and husbandmen, but
were denied the exercise of arms, except when it was found expedient
to enroll them in the military service. Nor did the emperors refuse the
property of lands, with a less servile tenure, to such of the barbarians
as solicited the protection of Rome. They granted a settlement to
several colonies of the Carpi, the Bastarnae, and the Sarmatians; and,
by a dangerous indulgence, permitted them in some measure to retain
their national manners and independence. [38] Among the provincials, it
was a subject of flattering exultation, that the barbarian, so lately an
object of terror, now cultivated their lands, drove their cattle to the
neighboring fair, and contributed by his labor to the public plenty.
They congratulated their masters on the powerful accession of subjects
and soldiers; but they forgot to observe, that multitudes of secret
enemies, insolent from favor, or desperate from oppression, were
introduced into the heart of the empire. [39]

[Footnote 37: Panegyr. Vet. vii. 21.]

[Footnote 38: There was a settlement of the Sarmatians in the
neighborhood of Treves, which seems to have been deserted by those lazy
barbarians. Ausonius speaks of them in his Mosella:---- "Unde iter
ingrediens nemorosa per avia solum, Et nulla humani spectans vestigia
cultus; ........ Arvaque Sauromatum nuper metata colonis."]

[Footnote 39: There was a town of the Carpi in the Lower Maesia. See the
rhetorical exultation of Eumenius.]

While the Caesars exercised their valor on the banks of the Rhine
and Danube, the presence of the emperors was required on the southern
confines of the Roman world. From the Nile to Mount Atlas Africa was in
arms. A confederacy of five Moorish nations issued from their deserts
to invade the peaceful provinces. [40] Julian had assumed the purple at
Carthage. [41] Achilleus at Alexandria, and even the Blemmyes, renewed,
or rather continued, their incursions into the Upper Egypt. Scarcely
any circumstances have been preserved of the exploits of Maximian in the
western parts of Africa; but it appears, by the event, that the progress
of his arms was rapid and decisive, that he vanquished the fiercest
barbarians of Mauritania, and that he removed them from the mountains,
whose inaccessible strength had inspired their inhabitants with
a lawless confidence, and habituated them to a life of rapine and
violence. [42] Diocletian, on his side, opened the campaign in Egypt by
the siege of Alexandria, cut off the aqueducts which conveyed the waters
of the Nile into every quarter of that immense city, [43] and rendering
his camp impregnable to the sallies of the besieged multitude, he pushed
his reiterated attacks with caution and vigor. After a siege of eight
months, Alexandria, wasted by the sword and by fire, implored the
clemency of the conqueror, but it experienced the full extent of his
severity. Many thousands of the citizens perished in a promiscuous
slaughter, and there were few obnoxious persons in Egypt who escaped a
sentence either of death or at least of exile. [44] The fate of Busiris
and of Coptos was still more melancholy than that of Alexandria: those
proud cities, the former distinguished by its antiquity, the latter
enriched by the passage of the Indian trade, were utterly destroyed by
the arms and by the severe order of Diocletian. [45] The character of the
Egyptian nation, insensible to kindness, but extremely susceptible
of fear, could alone justify this excessive rigor. The seditions of
Alexandria had often affected the tranquillity and subsistence of Rome
itself. Since the usurpation of Firmus, the province of Upper Egypt,
incessantly relapsing into rebellion, had embraced the alliance of the
savages of Aethiopia. The number of the Blemmyes, scattered between
the Island of Meroe and the Red Sea, was very inconsiderable, their
disposition was unwarlike, their weapons rude and inoffensive. [46] Yet
in the public disorders, these barbarians, whom antiquity, shocked
with the deformity of their figure, had almost excluded from the human
species, presumed to rank themselves among the enemies of Rome. [47] Such
had been the unworthy allies of the Egyptians; and while the attention
of the state was engaged in more serious wars, their vexations inroads
might again harass the repose of the province. With a view of opposing
to the Blemmyes a suitable adversary, Diocletian persuaded the Nobatae,
or people of Nubia, to remove from their ancient habitations in the
deserts of Libya, and resigned to them an extensive but unprofitable
territory above Syene and the cataracts of the Nile, with the
stipulation, that they should ever respect and guard the frontier of
the empire. The treaty long subsisted; and till the establishment of
Christianity introduced stricter notions of religious worship, it was
annually ratified by a solemn sacrifice in the Isle of Elephantine, in
which the Romans, as well as the barbarians, adored the same visible or
invisible powers of the universe. [48]

[Footnote 40: Scaliger (Animadvers. ad Euseb. p. 243) decides, in his
usual manner, that the Quinque gentiani, or five African nations, were
the five great cities, the Pentapolis of the inoffensive province of
Cyrene.]

[Footnote 41: After his defeat, Julian stabbed himself with a
dagger, and immediately leaped into the flames. Victor in Epitome.]

[Footnote 42: Tu ferocissimos Mauritaniae populos inaccessis
montium jugis et naturali munitione fidentes, expugnasti, recepisti,
transtulisti. Panegyr Vet. vi. 8.]

[Footnote 43: See the description of Alexandria, in Hirtius de Bel.
Alexandrin c. 5.]

[Footnote 44: Eutrop. ix. 24. Orosius, vii. 25. John Malala in Chron.
Antioch. p. 409, 410. Yet Eumenius assures us, that Egypt was pacified
by the clemency of Diocletian.]

[Footnote 45: Eusebius (in Chron.) places their destruction several
years sooner and at a time when Egypt itself was in a state of rebellion
against the Romans.]

[Footnote 46: Strabo, l. xvii. p. 172. Pomponius Mela, l. i. c. 4.
His words are curious: "Intra, si credere libet vix, homines magisque
semiferi Aegipanes, et Blemmyes, et Satyri."]

[Footnote 47: Ausus sese inserere fortunae et provocare arma Romana.]

[Footnote 48: See Procopius de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 19. Note: Compare,
on the epoch of the final extirpation of the rites of Paganism from
the Isle of Philae, (Elephantine,) which subsisted till the edict of
Theodosius, in the sixth century, a dissertation of M. Letronne,
on certain Greek inscriptions. The dissertation contains some very
interesting observations on the conduct and policy of Diocletian
in Egypt. Mater pour l'Hist. du Christianisme en Egypte, Nubie et
Abyssinie, Paris 1817--M.]

At the same time that Diocletian chastised the past crimes of the
Egyptians, he provided for their future safety and happiness by many
wise regulations, which were confirmed and enforced under the succeeding
reigns. [49] One very remarkable edict which he published, instead of
being condemned as the effect of jealous tyranny, deserves to be
applauded as an act of prudence and humanity. He caused a diligent
inquiry to be made "for all the ancient books which treated of the
admirable art of making gold and silver, and without pity, committed
them to the flames; apprehensive, as we are assumed, lest the opulence
of the Egyptians should inspire them with confidence to rebel against
the empire." [50] But if Diocletian had been convinced of the reality of
that valuable art, far from extinguishing the memory, he would have
converted the operation of it to the benefit of the public revenue. It
is much more likely, that his good sense discovered to him the folly of
such magnificent pretensions, and that he was desirous of preserving the
reason and fortunes of his subjects from the mischievous pursuit. It may
be remarked, that these ancient books, so liberally ascribed to
Pythagoras, to Solomon, or to Hermes, were the pious frauds of more
recent adepts. The Greeks were inattentive either to the use or to the
abuse of chemistry. In that immense register, where Pliny has deposited
the discoveries, the arts, and the errors of mankind, there is not the
least mention of the transmutation of metals; and the persecution of
Diocletian is the first authentic event in the history of alchemy. The
conquest of Egypt by the Arabs diffused that vain science over the
globe. Congenial to the avarice of the human heart, it was studied in
China as in Europe, with equal eagerness, and with equal success. The
darkness of the middle ages insured a favorable reception to every tale
of wonder, and the revival of learning gave new vigor to hope, and
suggested more specious arts of deception. Philosophy, with the aid of
experience, has at length banished the study of alchemy; and the present
age, however desirous of riches, is content to seek them by the humbler
means of commerce and industry. [51]

[Footnote 49: He fixed the public allowance of corn, for the people
of Alexandria, at two millions of medimni; about four hundred thousand
quarters. Chron. Paschal. p. 276 Procop. Hist. Arcan. c. 26.]

[Footnote 50: John Antioch, in Excerp. Valesian. p. 834. Suidas in
Diocletian.]

[Footnote 51: See a short history and confutation of Alchemy, in the
works of that philosophical compiler, La Mothe le Vayer, tom. i. p. 32--353.]

The reduction of Egypt was immediately followed by the Persian war. It
was reserved for the reign of Diocletian to vanquish that powerful
nation, and to extort a confession from the successors of Artaxerxes, of
the superior majesty of the Roman empire.

We have observed, under the reign of Valerian, that Armenia was subdued
by the perfidy and the arms of the Persians, and that, after the
assassination of Chosroes, his son Tiridates, the infant heir of the
monarchy, was saved by the fidelity of his friends, and educated under
the protection of the emperors. Tiridates derived from his exile such
advantages as he could never have obtained on the throne of Armenia; the
early knowledge of adversity, of mankind, and of the Roman discipline.
He signalized his youth by deeds of valor, and displayed a matchless
dexterity, as well as strength, in every martial exercise, and even in
the less honorable contests of the Olympian games. [52] Those qualities
were more nobly exerted in the defence of his benefactor Licinius. [53]
That officer, in the sedition which occasioned the death of Probus,
was exposed to the most imminent danger, and the enraged soldiers were
forcing their way into his tent, when they were checked by the single
arm of the Armenian prince. The gratitude of Tiridates contributed soon
afterwards to his restoration. Licinius was in every station the friend
and companion of Galerius, and the merit of Galerius, long before he
was raised to the dignity of Caesar, had been known and esteemed by
Diocletian. In the third year of that emperor's reign Tiridates was
invested with the kingdom of Armenia. The justice of the measure was
not less evident than its expediency. It was time to rescue from the
usurpation of the Persian monarch an important territory, which, since
the reign of Nero, had been always granted under the protection of the
empire to a younger branch of the house of Arsaces. [54]

[Footnote 52: See the education and strength of Tiridates in the
Armenian history of Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c. 76. He could seize two
wild bulls by the horns, and break them off with his hands.]

[Footnote 53: If we give credit to the younger Victor, who supposes that
in the year 323 Licinius was only sixty years of age, he could scarcely
be the same person as the patron of Tiridates; but we know from much
better authority, (Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. x. c. 8,) that Licinius
was at that time in the last period of old age: sixteen years before, he
is represented with gray hairs, and as the contemporary of Galerius. See
Lactant. c. 32. Licinius was probably born about the year 250.]

[Footnote 54: See the sixty-second and sixty-third books of Dion
Cassius.]

When Tiridates appeared on the frontiers of Armenia, he was received
with an unfeigned transport of joy and loyalty. During twenty-six years,
the country had experienced the real and imaginary hardships of a
foreign yoke. The Persian monarchs adorned their new conquest with
magnificent buildings; but those monuments had been erected at the
expense of the people, and were abhorred as badges of slavery. The
apprehension of a revolt had inspired the most rigorous precautions:
oppression had been aggravated by insult, and the consciousness of the
public hatred had been productive of every measure that could render it
still more implacable. We have already remarked the intolerant spirit of
the Magian religion. The statues of the deified kings of Armenia, and
the sacred images of the sun and moon, were broke in pieces by the zeal
of the conqueror; and the perpetual fire of Ormuzd was kindled and
preserved upon an altar erected on the summit of Mount Bagavan. [55] It
was natural, that a people exasperated by so many injuries, should arm
with zeal in the cause of their independence, their religion, and their
hereditary sovereign. The torrent bore down every obstacle, and the
Persian garrisons retreated before its fury. The nobles of Armenia flew
to the standard of Tiridates, all alleging their past merit, offering
their future service, and soliciting from the new king those honors and
rewards from which they had been excluded with disdain under the foreign
government. [56] The command of the army was bestowed on Artavasdes,
whose father had saved the infancy of Tiridates, and whose family had
been massacred for that generous action. The brother of Artavasdes
obtained the government of a province. One of the first military
dignities was conferred on the satrap Otas, a man of singular temperance
and fortitude, who presented to the king his sister [57] and a
considerable treasure, both of which, in a sequestered fortress, Otas
had preserved from violation. Among the Armenian nobles appeared an
ally, whose fortunes are too remarkable to pass unnoticed. His name was
Mamgo, [571] his origin was Scythian, and the horde which acknowledge his
authority had encamped a very few years before on the skirts of the
Chinese empire, [58] which at that time extended as far as the
neighborhood of Sogdiana. [59] Having incurred the displeasure of his
master, Mamgo, with his followers, retired to the banks of the Oxus, and
implored the protection of Sapor. The emperor of China claimed the
fugitive, and alleged the rights of sovereignty. The Persian monarch
pleaded the laws of hospitality, and with some difficulty avoided a war,
by the promise that he would banish Mamgo to the uttermost parts of the
West, a punishment, as he described it, not less dreadful than death
itself. Armenia was chosen for the place of exile, and a large district
was assigned to the Scythian horde, on which they might feed their
flocks and herds, and remove their encampment from one place to another,
according to the different seasons of the year.

They were employed to repel the invasion of Tiridates; but their leader,
after weighing the obligations and injuries which he had received from
the Persian monarch, resolved to abandon his party.

The Armenian prince, who was well acquainted with this merit as well
as power of Mamgo, treated him with distinguished respect; and, by
admitting him into his confidence, acquired a brave and faithful
servant, who contributed very effectually to his restoration. [60]

[Footnote 55: Moses of Chorene. Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 74. The statues
had been erected by Valarsaces, who reigned in Armenia about 130 years
before Christ, and was the first king of the family of Arsaces, (see
Moses, Hist. Armen. l. ii. 2, 3.) The deification of the Arsacides is
mentioned by Justin, (xli. 5,) and by Ammianus Marcellinus, (xxiii. 6.)]

[Footnote 56: The Armenian nobility was numerous and powerful. Moses
mentions many families which were distinguished under the reign of
Valarsaces, (l. ii. 7,) and which still subsisted in his own time,
about the middle of the fifth century. See the preface of his Editors.]

[Footnote 57: She was named Chosroiduchta, and had not the os patulum
like other women. (Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 79.) I do not understand the
expression. * Note: Os patulum signifies merely a large and widely
opening mouth. Ovid (Metam. xv. 513) says, speaking of the monster who
attacked Hippolytus, patulo partem maris evomit ore. Probably a wide
mouth was a common defect among the Armenian women.--G.]

[Footnote 571: Mamgo (according to M. St. Martin, note to Le Beau. ii.
213) belonged to the imperial race of Hon, who had filled the throne of
China for four hundred years. Dethroned by the usurping race of Wei,
Mamgo found a hospitable reception in Persia in the reign of Ardeschir.
The emperor of china having demanded the surrender of the fugitive and
his partisans, Sapor, then king, threatened with war both by Rome and
China, counselled Mamgo to retire into Armenia. "I have expelled him
from my dominions, (he answered the Chinese ambassador;) I have banished
him to the extremity of the earth, where the sun sets; I have dismissed
him to certain death." Compare Mem. sur l'Armenie, ii. 25.--M.]

[Footnote 58: In the Armenian history, (l. ii. 78,) as well as in
the Geography, (p. 367,) China is called Zenia, or Zenastan. It is
characterized by the production of silk, by the opulence of the natives,
and by their love of peace, above all the other nations of the earth. *
Note: See St. Martin, Mem. sur l'Armenie, i. 304.]

[Footnote 59: Vou-ti, the first emperor of the seventh dynasty, who then
reigned in China, had political transactions with Fergana, a province
of Sogdiana, and is said to have received a Roman embassy, (Histoire
des Huns, tom. i. p. 38.) In those ages the Chinese kept a garrison at
Kashgar, and one of their generals, about the time of Trajan, marched as
far as the Caspian Sea. With regard to the intercourse between China and
the Western countries, a curious memoir of M. de Guignes may be
consulted, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxii. p. 355. * Note:
The Chinese Annals mention, under the ninth year of Yan-hi, which
corresponds with the year 166 J. C., an embassy which arrived from
Tathsin, and was sent by a prince called An-thun, who can be no other
than Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, who then ruled over the Romans. St.
Martin, Mem. sur l'Armaenic. ii. 30. See also Klaproth, Tableaux
Historiques de l'Asie, p. 69. The embassy came by Jy-nan, Tonquin.--M.]

[Footnote 60: See Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 81.]

For a while, fortune appeared to favor the enterprising valor of
Tiridates. He not only expelled the enemies of his family and country
from the whole extent of Armenia, but in the prosecution of his revenge
he carried his arms, or at least his incursions, into the heart of
Assyria. The historian, who has preserved the name of Tiridates from
oblivion, celebrates, with a degree of national enthusiasm, his personal
prowess: and, in the true spirit of eastern romance, describes the
giants and the elephants that fell beneath his invincible arm. It is
from other information that we discover the distracted state of the
Persian monarchy, to which the king of Armenia was indebted for some
part of his advantages. The throne was disputed by the ambition of
contending brothers; and Hormuz, after exerting without success the
strength of his own party, had recourse to the dangerous assistance of
the barbarians who inhabited the banks of the Caspian Sea. [61] The
civil war was, however, soon terminated, either by a victor or by a
reconciliation; and Narses, who was universally acknowledged as king of
Persia, directed his whole force against the foreign enemy. The contest
then became too unequal; nor was the valor of the hero able to withstand
the power of the monarch, Tiridates, a second time expelled from the
throne of Armenia, once more took refuge in the court of the emperors.
[611] Narses soon reestablished his authority over the revolted province;
and loudly complaining of the protection afforded by the Romans to
rebels and fugitives, aspired to the conquest of the East. [62]

[Footnote 61: Ipsos Persas ipsumque Regem ascitis Saccis, et Russis, et
Gellis, petit frater Ormies. Panegyric. Vet. iii. 1. The Saccae were a
nation of wandering Scythians, who encamped towards the sources of the
Oxus and the Jaxartes. The Gelli where the inhabitants of Ghilan, along
the Caspian Sea, and who so long, under the name of Dilemines, infested
the Persian monarchy. See d'Herbelot, Bibliotheque]

[Footnote 611: M St. Martin represents this differently. Le roi de Perse
* * * profits d'un voyage que Tiridate avoit fait a Rome pour attaquer
ce royaume. This reads like the evasion of the national historians to
disguise the fact discreditable to their hero. See Mem. sur l'Armenie,
i. 304.--M.]

[Footnote 62: Moses of Chorene takes no notice of this second
revolution, which I have been obliged to collect from a passage of
Ammianus Marcellinus, (l. xxiii. c. 5.) Lactantius speaks of the
ambition of Narses: "Concitatus domesticis exemplis avi sui Saporis ad
occupandum orientem magnis copiis inhiabat." De Mort. Persecut. c. 9.]

Neither prudence nor honor could permit the emperors to forsake the
cause of the Armenian king, and it was resolved to exert the force of
the empire in the Persian war. Diocletian, with the calm dignity which
he constantly assumed, fixed his own station in the city of Antioch,
from whence he prepared and directed the military operations. [63] The
conduct of the legions was intrusted to the intrepid valor of Galerius,
who, for that important purpose, was removed from the banks of the
Danube to those of the Euphrates. The armies soon encountered each other
in the plains of Mesopotamia, and two battles were fought with various
and doubtful success; but the third engagement was of a more decisive
nature; and the Roman army received a total overthrow, which is
attributed to the rashness of Galerius, who, with an inconsiderable body
of troops, attacked the innumerable host of the Persians. [64] But the
consideration of the country that was the scene of action, may suggest
another reason for his defeat. The same ground on which Galerius was
vanquished, had been rendered memorable by the death of Crassus, and the
slaughter of ten legions. It was a plain of more than sixty miles, which
extended from the hills of Carrhae to the Euphrates; a smooth and barren
surface of sandy desert, without a hillock, without a tree, and without
a spring of fresh water. [65] The steady infantry of the Romans, fainting
with heat and thirst, could neither hope for victory if they preserved
their ranks, nor break their ranks without exposing themselves to the
most imminent danger. In this situation they were gradually encompassed
by the superior numbers, harassed by the rapid evolutions, and destroyed
by the arrows of the barbarian cavalry.

The king of Armenia had signalized his valor in the battle, and acquired
personal glory by the public misfortune. He was pursued as far as the
Euphrates; his horse was wounded, and it appeared impossible for him to
escape the victorious enemy. In this extremity Tiridates embraced the
only refuge which appeared before him: he dismounted and plunged into
the stream. His armor was heavy, the river very deep, and at those
parts at least half a mile in breadth; [66] yet such was his strength and
dexterity, that he reached in safety the opposite bank. [67] With regard
to the Roman general, we are ignorant of the circumstances of his
escape; but when he returned to Antioch, Diocletian received him, not
with the tenderness of a friend and colleague, but with the indignation
of an offended sovereign. The haughtiest of men, clothed in his purple,
but humbled by the sense of his fault and misfortune, was obliged to
follow the emperor's chariot above a mile on foot, and to exhibit,
before the whole court, the spectacle of his disgrace. [68]

[Footnote 63: We may readily believe, that Lactantius ascribes to
cowardice the conduct of Diocletian. Julian, in his oration, says,
that he remained with all the forces of the empire; a very hyperbolical
expression.]

[Footnote 64: Our five abbreviators, Eutropius, Festus, the two Victors,
and Orosius, all relate the last and great battle; but Orosius is the
only one who speaks of the two former.]

[Footnote 65: The nature of the country is finely described by Plutarch,
in the life of Crassus; and by Xenophon, in the first book of the
Anabasis]

[Footnote 66: See Foster's Dissertation in the second volume of the
translation of the Anabasis by Spelman; which I will venture to
recommend as one of the best versions extant.]

[Footnote 67: Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 76. I have transferred this exploit
of Tiridates from an imaginary defeat to the real one of Galerius.]

[Footnote 68: Ammian. Marcellin. l. xiv. The mile, in the hands of
Eutropoius, (ix. 24,) of Festus (c. 25,) and of Orosius, (vii 25),
easily increased to several miles]

As soon as Diocletian had indulged his private resentment, and asserted
the majesty of supreme power, he yielded to the submissive entreaties of
the Caesar, and permitted him to retrieve his own honor, as well as that
of the Roman arms. In the room of the unwarlike troops of Asia, which
had most probably served in the first expedition, a second army was
drawn from the veterans and new levies of the Illyrian frontier, and
a considerable body of Gothic auxiliaries were taken into the Imperial
pay. [69] At the head of a chosen army of twenty-five thousand men,
Galerius again passed the Euphrates; but, instead of exposing his
legions in the open plains of Mesopotamia he advanced through the
mountains of Armenia, where he found the inhabitants devoted to his
cause, and the country as favorable to the operations of infantry as it
was inconvenient for the motions of cavalry. [70] Adversity had confirmed
the Roman discipline, while the barbarians, elated by success, were
become so negligent and remiss, that in the moment when they least
expected it, they were surprised by the active conduct of Galerius, who,
attended only by two horsemen, had with his own eyes secretly examined
the state and position of their camp. A surprise, especially in the
night time, was for the most part fatal to a Persian army. "Their horses
were tied, and generally shackled, to prevent their running away; and
if an alarm happened, a Persian had his housing to fix, his horse to
bridle, and his corselet to put on, before he could mount." [71] On this
occasion, the impetuous attack of Galerius spread disorder and dismay
over the camp of the barbarians. A slight resistance was followed by
a dreadful carnage, and, in the general confusion, the wounded monarch
(for Narses commanded his armies in person) fled towards the deserts
of Media. His sumptuous tents, and those of his satraps, afforded an
immense booty to the conqueror; and an incident is mentioned, which
proves the rustic but martial ignorance of the legions in the elegant
superfluities of life. A bag of shining leather, filled with pearls,
fell into the hands of a private soldier; he carefully preserved the
bag, but he threw away its contents, judging that whatever was of no use
could not possibly be of any value. [72] The principal loss of Narses was
of a much more affecting nature. Several of his wives, his sisters, and
children, who had attended the army, were made captives in the defeat.
But though the character of Galerius had in general very little affinity
with that of Alexander, he imitated, after his victory, the amiable
behavior of the Macedonian towards the family of Darius. The wives and
children of Narses were protected from violence and rapine, conveyed
to a place of safety, and treated with every mark of respect and
tenderness, that was due from a generous enemy to their age, their sex,
and their royal dignity. [73]

[Footnote 69: Aurelius Victor. Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 21.]

[Footnote 70: Aurelius Victor says, "Per Armeniam in hostes contendit,
quae fermo sola, seu facilior vincendi via est." He followed the conduct
of Trajan, and the idea of Julius Caesar.]

[Footnote 71: Xenophon's Anabasis, l. iii. For that reason the Persian
cavalry encamped sixty stadia from the enemy.]

[Footnote 72: The story is told by Ammianus, l. xxii. Instead of saccum,
some read scutum.]

[Footnote 73: The Persians confessed the Roman superiority in morals
as well as in arms. Eutrop. ix. 24. But this respect and gratitude of
enemies is very seldom to be found in their own accounts.]




