## Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.--Part II.

The Huns, who under the reign of Valens threatened the empire of Rome,
had been formidable, in a much earlier period, to the empire of China.
[27] Their ancient, perhaps their original, seat was an extensive,
though dry and barren, tract of country, immediately on the north side
of the great wall. Their place is at present occupied by the forty-nine
Hords or Banners of the Mongous, a pastoral nation, which consists of
about two hundred thousand families. [28] But the valor of the Huns had
extended the narrow limits of their dominions; and their rustic chiefs,
who assumed the appellation of Tanjou, gradually became the conquerors,
and the sovereigns of a formidable empire. Towards the East, their
victorious arms were stopped only by the ocean; and the tribes, which
are thinly scattered between the Amoor and the extreme peninsula of
Corea, adhered, with reluctance, to the standard of the Huns. On the
West, near the head of the Irtish, in the valleys of Imaus, they found
a more ample space, and more numerous enemies. One of the lieutenants
of the Tanjou subdued, in a single expedition, twenty-six nations; the
Igours, [29] distinguished above the Tartar race by the use of letters,
were in the number of his vassals; and, by the strange connection of
human events, the flight of one of those vagrant tribes recalled the
victorious Parthians from the invasion of Syria. [30] On the side of
the North, the ocean was assigned as the limit of the power of the Huns.
Without enemies to resist their progress, or witnesses to contradict
their vanity, they might securely achieve a real, or imaginary, conquest
of the frozen regions of Siberia. The Northren Sea was fixed as the
remote boundary of their empire. But the name of that sea, on whose
shores the patriot Sovou embraced the life of a shepherd and an exile,
[31] may be transferred, with much more probability, to the Baikal, a
capacious basin, above three hundred miles in length, which disdains the
modest appellation of a lake [32] and which actually communicates with
the seas of the North, by the long course of the Angara, the Tongusha,
and the Jenissea. The submission of so many distant nations might
flatter the pride of the Tanjou; but the valor of the Huns could be
rewarded only by the enjoyment of the wealth and luxury of the empire of
the South. In the third century [32a] before the Christian aera, a
wall of fifteen hundred miles in length was constructed, to defend
the frontiers of China against the inroads of the Huns; [33] but this
stupendous work, which holds a conspicuous place in the map of the
world, has never contributed to the safety of an unwarlike people.
The cavalry of the Tanjou frequently consisted of two or three hundred
thousand men, formidable by the matchless dexterity with which they
managed their bows and their horses: by their hardy patience in
supporting the inclemency of the weather; and by the incredible speed of
their march, which was seldom checked by torrents, or precipices, by the
deepest rivers, or by the most lofty mountains. They spread themselves
at once over the face of the country; and their rapid impetuosity
surprised, astonished, and disconcerted the grave and elaborate tactics
of a Chinese army. The emperor Kaoti, [34] a soldier of fortune, whose
personal merit had raised him to the throne, marched against the Huns
with those veteran troops which had been trained in the civil wars of
China. But he was soon surrounded by the Barbarians; and, after a siege
of seven days, the monarch, hopeless of relief, was reduced to purchase
his deliverance by an ignominious capitulation. The successors of Kaoti,
whose lives were dedicated to the arts of peace, or the luxury of
the palace, submitted to a more permanent disgrace. They too hastily
confessed the insufficiency of arms and fortifications. They were too
easily convinced, that while the blazing signals announced on every side
the approach of the Huns, the Chinese troops, who slept with the helmet
on their head, and the cuirass on their back, were destroyed by the
incessant labor of ineffectual marches. [35] A regular payment of money,
and silk, was stipulated as the condition of a temporary and precarious
peace; and the wretched expedient of disguising a real tribute, under
the names of a gift or subsidy, was practised by the emperors of China
as well as by those of Rome. But there still remained a more disgraceful
article of tribute, which violated the sacred feelings of humanity and
nature. The hardships of the savage life, which destroy in their infancy
the children who are born with a less healthy and robust constitution,
introduced a remarkable disproportion between the numbers of the two
sexes. The Tartars are an ugly and even deformed race; and while they
consider their own women as the instruments of domestic labor, their
desires, or rather their appetites, are directed to the enjoyment of
more elegant beauty. A select band of the fairest maidens of China was
annually devoted to the rude embraces of the Huns; [36] and the alliance
of the haughty Tanjous was secured by their marriage with the genuine,
or adopted, daughters of the Imperial family, which vainly attempted
to escape the sacrilegious pollution. The situation of these unhappy
victims is described in the verses of a Chinese princess, who laments
that she had been condemned by her parents to a distant exile, under a
Barbarian husband; who complains that sour milk was her only drink, raw
flesh her only food, a tent her only palace; and who expresses, in
a strain of pathetic simplicity, the natural wish, that she were
transformed into a bird, to fly back to her dear country; the object of
her tender and perpetual regret. [37]

[Footnote 27: M. de Guignes (tom. ii. p. 1--124) has given the original
history of the ancient Hiong-nou, or Huns. The Chinese geography of
their country (tom. i. part. p. lv.--lxiii.) seems to comprise a part of
their conquests. * Note: The theory of De Guignes on the early history
of the Huns is, in general, rejected by modern writers. De Guignes
advanced no valid proof of the identity of the Hioung-nou of the
Chinese writers with the Huns, except the similarity of name. Schlozer,
(Allgemeine Nordische Geschichte, p. 252,) Klaproth, (Tableaux
Historiques de l'Asie, p. 246,) St. Martin, iv. 61, and A. Remusat,
(Recherches sur les Langues Tartares, D. P. xlvi, and p. 328; though in
the latter passage he considers the theory of De Guignes not absolutely
disproved,) concur in considering the Huns as belonging to the Finnish
stock, distinct from the Moguls the Mandscheus, and the Turks. The
Hiong-nou, according to Klaproth, were Turks. The names of the Hunnish
chiefs could not be pronounced by a Turk; and, according to the same
author, the Hioung-nou, which is explained in Chinese as detestable
slaves, as early as the year 91 J. C., were dispersed by the Chinese,
and assumed the name of Yue-po or Yue-pan. M. St. Martin does not
consider it impossible that the appellation of Hioung-nou may have
belonged to the Huns. But all agree in considering the Madjar or Magyar
of modern Hungary the descendants of the Huns. Their language (compare
Gibbon, c. lv. n. 22) is nearly related to the Lapponian and Vogoul. The
noble forms of the modern Hungarians, so strongly contrasted with the
hideous pictures which the fears and the hatred of the Romans give
of the Huns, M. Klaproth accounts for by the intermingling with other
races, Turkish and Slavonian. The present state of the question is
thus stated in the last edition of Malte Brun, and a new and ingenious
hypothesis suggested to resolve all the difficulties of the question.
Were the Huns Finns? This obscure question has not been debated till
very recently, and is yet very far from being decided. We are of opinion
that it will be so hereafter in the same manner as that with regard to
the Scythians. We shall trace in the portrait of Attila a dominant tribe
or Mongols, or Kalmucks, with all the hereditary ugliness of that race;
but in the mass of the Hunnish army and nation will be recognized the
Chuni and the Ounni of the Greek Geography. the Kuns of the Hungarians,
the European Huns, and a race in close relationship with the Flemish
stock. Malte Brun, vi. p. 94. This theory is more fully and ably
developed, p. 743. Whoever has seen the emperor of Austria's Hungarian
guard, will not readily admit their descent from the Huns described by
Sidonius Appolinaris.--M]

[Footnote 28: See in Duhalde (tom. iv. p. 18--65) a circumstantial
description, with a correct map, of the country of the Mongous.]

[Footnote 29: The Igours, or Vigours, were divided into three branches;
hunters, shepherds, and husbandmen; and the last class was despised by
the two former. See Abulghazi, part ii. c. 7. * Note: On the Ouigour
or Igour characters, see the work of M. A. Remusat, Sur les Langues
Tartares. He conceives the Ouigour alphabet of sixteen letters to
have been formed from the Syriac, and introduced by the Nestorian
Christians.--Ch. ii. M.]

[Footnote 30: Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxv. p.
17--33. The comprehensive view of M. de Guignes has compared these
distant events.]

[Footnote 31: The fame of Sovou, or So-ou, his merit, and his singular
adventurers, are still celebrated in China. See the Eloge de Moukden,
p. 20, and notes, p. 241--247; and Memoires sur la Chine, tom. iii. p.
317--360.]

[Footnote 32: See Isbrand Ives in Harris's Collection, vol. ii. p. 931;
Bell's Travels, vol. i. p. 247--254; and Gmelin, in the Hist. Generale
des Voyages, tom. xviii. 283--329. They all remark the vulgar opinion
that the holy sea grows angry and tempestuous if any one presumes to
call it a lake. This grammatical nicety often excites a dispute between
the absurd superstition of the mariners and the absurd obstinacy of
travellers.]

[Footnote 32a: 224 years before Christ. It was built by Chi-hoang-ti
of the Dynasty Thsin. It is from twenty to twenty-five feet high.
Ce monument, aussi gigantesque qu'impuissant, arreterait bien les
incursions de quelques Nomades; mais il n'a jamais empeche les invasions
des Turcs, des Mongols, et des Mandchous. Abe Remusat Rech. Asiat. 2d
ser. vol. i. p. 58--M.]

[Footnote 33: The construction of the wall of China is mentioned by
Duhalde (tom. ii. p. 45) and De Guignes, (tom. ii. p. 59.)]

[Footnote 34: See the life of Lieoupang, or Kaoti, in the Hist, de la
Chine, published at Paris, 1777, &c., tom. i. p. 442--522. This
voluminous work is the translation (by the P. de Mailla) of the Tong-
Kien-Kang-Mou, the celebrated abridgment of the great History of
Semakouang (A.D. 1084) and his continuators.]

[Footnote 35: See a free and ample memorial, presented by a Mandarin to
the emperor Venti, (before Christ 180--157,) in Duhalde, (tom. ii. p.
412--426,) from a collection of State papers marked with the red pencil
by Kamhi himself, (p. 354--612.) Another memorial from the minister of
war (Kang-Mou, tom. ii. p 555) supplies some curious circumstances of
the manners of the Huns.]

[Footnote 36: A supply of women is mentioned as a customary article of
treaty and tribute, (Hist. de la Conquete de la Chine, par les Tartares
Mantcheoux, tom. i. p. 186, 187, with the note of the editor.)]

[Footnote 37: De Guignes, Hist. des Huns, tom. ii. p. 62.]

The conquest of China has been twice achieved by the pastoral tribes of
the North: the forces of the Huns were not inferior to those of the
Moguls, or of the Mantcheoux; and their ambition might entertain the
most sanguine hopes of success. But their pride was humbled, and their
progress was checked, by the arms and policy of Vouti, [38] the fifth
emperor of the powerful dynasty of the Han. In his long reign of fifty-
four years, the Barbarians of the southern provinces submitted to the
laws and manners of China; and the ancient limits of the monarchy were
enlarged, from the great river of Kiang, to the port of Canton. Instead
of confining himself to the timid operations of a defensive war, his
lieutenants penetrated many hundred miles into the country of the Huns.
In those boundless deserts, where it is impossible to form magazines,
and difficult to transport a sufficient supply of provisions, the armies
of Vouti were repeatedly exposed to intolerable hardships: and, of one
hundred and forty thousand soldiers, who marched against the Barbarians,
thirty thousand only returned in safety to the feet of their master.
These losses, however, were compensated by splendid and decisive
success. The Chinese generals improved the superiority which they
derived from the temper of their arms, their chariots of war, and the
service of their Tartar auxiliaries. The camp of the Tanjou was
surprised in the midst of sleep and intemperance; and, though the
monarch of the Huns bravely cut his way through the ranks of the enemy,
he left above fifteen thousand of his subjects on the field of battle.
Yet this signal victory, which was preceded and followed by many bloody
engagements, contributed much less to the destruction of the power of
the Huns than the effectual policy which was employed to detach the
tributary nations from their obedience. Intimidated by the arms, or
allured by the promises, of Vouti and his successors, the most
considerable tribes, both of the East and of the West, disclaimed the
authority of the Tanjou. While some acknowledged themselves the allies
or vassals of the empire, they all became the implacable enemies of the
Huns; and the numbers of that haughty people, as soon as they were
reduced to their native strength, might, perhaps, have been contained
within the walls of one of the great and populous cities of China. [39]
The desertion of his subjects, and the perplexity of a civil war, at
length compelled the Tanjou himself to renounce the dignity of an
independent sovereign, and the freedom of a warlike and high-spirited
nation. He was received at Sigan, the capital of the monarchy, by the
troops, the mandarins, and the emperor himself, with all the honors that
could adorn and disguise the triumph of Chinese vanity. [40] A
magnificent palace was prepared for his reception; his place was
assigned above all the princes of the royal family; and the patience of
the Barbarian king was exhausted by the ceremonies of a banquet, which
consisted of eight courses of meat, and of nine solemn pieces of music.
But he performed, on his knees, the duty of a respectful homage to the
emperor of China; pronounced, in his own name, and in the name of his
successors, a perpetual oath of fidelity; and gratefully accepted a
seal, which was bestowed as the emblem of his regal dependence. After
this humiliating submission, the Tanjous sometimes departed from their
allegiance and seized the favorable moments of war and rapine; but the
monarchy of the Huns gradually declined, till it was broken, by civil
dissension, into two hostile and separate kingdoms. One of the princes
of the nation was urged, by fear and ambition, to retire towards the
South with eight hords, which composed between forty and fifty thousand
families. He obtained, with the title of Tanjou, a convenient territory
on the verge of the Chinese provinces; and his constant attachment to
the service of the empire was secured by weakness, and the desire of
revenge. From the time of this fatal schism, the Huns of the North
continued to languish about fifty years; till they were oppressed on
every side by their foreign and domestic enemies. The proud inscription
[41] of a column, erected on a lofty mountain, announced to posterity,
that a Chinese army had marched seven hundred miles into the heart of
their country. The Sienpi, [42] a tribe of Oriental Tartars, retaliated
the injuries which they had formerly sustained; and the power of the
Tanjous, after a reign of thirteen hundred years, was utterly destroyed
before the end of the first century of the Christian aera. [43]

[Footnote 38: See the reign of the emperor Vouti, in the Kang-Mou,
tom. iii. p. 1--98. His various and inconsistent character seems to be
impartially drawn.]

[Footnote 39: This expression is used in the memorial to the emperor
Venti, (Duhalde, tom. ii. p. 411.) Without adopting the exaggerations
of Marco Polo and Isaac Vossius, we may rationally allow for Pekin two
millions of inhabitants. The cities of the South, which contain the
manufactures of China, are still more populous.]

[Footnote 40: See the Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 150, and the subsequent
events under the proper years. This memorable festival is celebrated in
the Eloge de Moukden, and explained in a note by the P. Gaubil, p. 89,
90.]

[Footnote 41: This inscription was composed on the spot by Parkou,
President of the Tribunal of History (Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 392.)
Similar monuments have been discovered in many parts of Tartary,
(Histoire des Huns, tom. ii. p. 122.)]

[Footnote 42: M. de Guignes (tom. i. p. 189) has inserted a short
account of the Sienpi.]

[Footnote 43: The aera of the Huns is placed, by the Chinese, 1210 years
before Christ. But the series of their kings does not commence till the
year 230, (Hist. des Huns, tom. ii. p. 21, 123.)]

The fate of the vanquished Huns was diversified by the various influence
of character and situation. [44] Above one hundred thousand persons,
the poorest, indeed, and the most pusillanimous of the people, were
contented to remain in their native country, to renounce their peculiar
name and origin, and to mingle with the victorious nation of the Sienpi.
Fifty-eight hords, about two hundred thousand men, ambitious of a more
honorable servitude, retired towards the South; implored the protection
of the emperors of China; and were permitted to inhabit, and to guard,
the extreme frontiers of the province of Chansi and the territory of
Ortous. But the most warlike and powerful tribes of the Huns maintained,
in their adverse fortune, the undaunted spirit of their ancestors. The
Western world was open to their valor; and they resolved, under the
conduct of their hereditary chieftains, to conquer and subdue some
remote country, which was still inaccessible to the arms of the Sienpi,
and to the laws of China. [45] The course of their emigration soon
carried them beyond the mountains of Imaus, and the limits of the
Chinese geography; but we are able to distinguish the two great
divisions of these formidable exiles, which directed their march towards
the Oxus, and towards the Volga. The first of these colonies established
their dominion in the fruitful and extensive plains of Sogdiana, on the
eastern side of the Caspian; where they preserved the name of Huns,
with the epithet of Euthalites, or Nepthalites. [45a] Their manners
were softened, and even their features were insensibly improved, by
the mildness of the climate, and their long residence in a flourishing
province, [46] which might still retain a faint impression of the arts
of Greece. [47] The white Huns, a name which they derived from the
change of their complexions, soon abandoned the pastoral life of
Scythia. Gorgo, which, under the appellation of Carizme, has since
enjoyed a temporary splendor, was the residence of the king, who
exercised a legal authority over an obedient people. Their luxury was
maintained by the labor of the Sogdians; and the only vestige of their
ancient barbarism, was the custom which obliged all the companions,
perhaps to the number of twenty, who had shared the liberality of a
wealthy lord, to be buried alive in the same grave. [48] The vicinity
of the Huns to the provinces of Persia, involved them in frequent and
bloody contests with the power of that monarchy. But they respected,
in peace, the faith of treaties; in war, she dictates of humanity;
and their memorable victory over Peroses, or Firuz, displayed the
moderation, as well as the valor, of the Barbarians. The second division
of their countrymen, the Huns, who gradually advanced towards the
North-west, were exercised by the hardships of a colder climate, and a
more laborious march. Necessity compelled them to exchange the silks of
China for the furs of Siberia; the imperfect rudiments of civilized life
were obliterated; and the native fierceness of the Huns was exasperated
by their intercourse with the savage tribes, who were compared, with
some propriety, to the wild beasts of the desert. Their independent
spirit soon rejected the hereditary succession of the Tanjous; and while
each horde was governed by its peculiar mursa, their tumultuary council
directed the public measures of the whole nation. As late as the
thirteenth century, their transient residence on the eastern banks of
the Volga was attested by the name of Great Hungary. [49] In the winter,
they descended with their flocks and herds towards the mouth of that
mighty river; and their summer excursions reached as high as the
latitude of Saratoff, or perhaps the conflux of the Kama. Such at least
were the recent limits of the black Calmucks, [50] who remained about a
century under the protection of Russia; and who have since returned to
their native seats on the frontiers of the Chinese empire. The march,
and the return, of those wandering Tartars, whose united camp consists
of fifty thousand tents or families, illustrate the distant emigrations
of the ancient Huns. [51]

[Footnote 44: The various accidents, the downfall, and the flight of the
Huns, are related in the Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 88, 91, 95, 139, &c. The
small numbers of each horde may be due to their losses and divisions.]

[Footnote 45: M. de Guignes has skilfully traced the footsteps of the
Huns through the vast deserts of Tartary, (tom. ii. p. 123, 277, &c.,
325, &c.)]

[Footnote 45a: The Armenian authors often mention this people under the
name of Hepthal. St. Martin considers that the name of Nepthalites is an
error of a copyist. St. Martin, iv. 254.--M.]

[Footnote 46: Mohammed, sultan of Carizme, reigned in Sogdiana when
it was invaded (A.D. 1218) by Zingis and his moguls. The Oriental
historians (see D'Herbelot, Petit de la Croix, &c.,) celebrate the
populous cities which he ruined, and the fruitful country which he
desolated. In the next century, the same provinces of Chorasmia and
Nawaralnahr were described by Abulfeda, (Hudson, Geograph. Minor. tom.
iii.) Their actual misery may be seen in the Genealogical History of the
Tartars, p. 423--469.]

[Footnote 47: Justin (xli. 6) has left a short abridgment of the Greek
kings of Bactriana. To their industry I should ascribe the new and
extraordinary trade, which transported the merchandises of India into
Europe, by the Oxus, the Caspian, the Cyrus, the Phasis, and the
Euxine. The other ways, both of the land and sea, were possessed by the
Seleucides and the Ptolemies. (See l'Esprit des Loix, l. xxi.)]

[Footnote 48: Procopius de Bell. Persico, l. i. c. 3, p. 9.]

[Footnote 49: In the thirteenth century, the monk Rubruquis (who
traversed the immense plain of Kipzak, in his journey to the court of
the Great Khan) observed the remarkable name of Hungary, with the traces
of a common language and origin, (Hist. des Voyages, tom. vii. p. 269.)]

[Footnote 50: Bell, (vol. i. p. 29--34,) and the editors of the
Genealogical History, (p. 539,) have described the Calmucks of the Volga
in the beginning of the present century.]

[Footnote 51: This great transmigration of 300,000 Calmucks, or
Torgouts, happened in the year 1771. The original narrative of
Kien-long, the reigning emperor of China, which was intended for the
inscription of a column, has been translated by the missionaries of
Pekin, (Memoires sur la Chine, tom. i. p. 401--418.) The emperor affects
the smooth and specious language of the Son of Heaven, and the Father of
his People.]

It is impossible to fill the dark interval of time, which elapsed, after
the Huns of the Volga were lost in the eyes of the Chinese, and before
they showed themselves to those of the Romans. There is some reason,
however, to apprehend, that the same force which had driven them from
their native seats, still continued to impel their march towards the
frontiers of Europe. The power of the Sienpi, their implacable enemies,
which extended above three thousand miles from East to West, [52] must
have gradually oppressed them by the weight and terror of a formidable
neighborhood; and the flight of the tribes of Scythia would inevitably
tend to increase the strength or to contract the territories, of the
Huns. The harsh and obscure appellations of those tribes would offend
the ear, without informing the understanding, of the reader; but I
cannot suppress the very natural suspicion, that the Huns of the North
derived a considerable reenforcement from the ruin of the dynasty of
the South, which, in the course of the third century, submitted to the
dominion of China; that the bravest warriors marched away in search
of their free and adventurous countrymen; and that, as they had been
divided by prosperity, they were easily reunited by the common hardships
of their adverse fortune. [53] The Huns, with their flocks and herds,
their wives and children, their dependents and allies, were transported
to the west of the Volga, and they boldly advanced to invade the country
of the Alani, a pastoral people, who occupied, or wasted, an extensive
tract of the deserts of Scythia. The plains between the Volga and the
Tanais were covered with the tents of the Alani, but their name and
manners were diffused over the wide extent of their conquests; and the
painted tribes of the Agathyrsi and Geloni were confounded among their
vassals. Towards the North, they penetrated into the frozen regions of
Siberia, among the savages who were accustomed, in their rage or hunger,
to the taste of human flesh; and their Southern inroads were pushed as
far as the confines of Persia and India. The mixture of Samartic and
German blood had contributed to improve the features of the Alani, [53a]
to whiten their swarthy complexions, and to tinge their hair with a
yellowish cast, which is seldom found in the Tartar race. They were less
deformed in their persons, less brutish in their manners, than the Huns;
but they did not yield to those formidable Barbarians in their martial
and independent spirit; in the love of freedom, which rejected even the
use of domestic slaves; and in the love of arms, which considered war
and rapine as the pleasure and the glory of mankind. A naked cimeter,
fixed in the ground, was the only object of their religious worship; the
scalps of their enemies formed the costly trappings of their horses;
and they viewed, with pity and contempt, the pusillanimous warriors, who
patiently expected the infirmities of age, and the tortures of lingering
disease. [54] On the banks of the Tanais, the military power of the Huns
and the Alani encountered each other with equal valor, but with unequal
success. The Huns prevailed in the bloody contest; the king of the Alani
was slain; and the remains of the vanquished nation were dispersed
by the ordinary alternative of flight or submission. [55] A colony of
exiles found a secure refuge in the mountains of Caucasus, between the
Euxine and the Caspian, where they still preserve their name and their
independence. Another colony advanced, with more intrepid courage,
towards the shores of the Baltic; associated themselves with the
Northern tribes of Germany; and shared the spoil of the Roman provinces
of Gaul and Spain. But the greatest part of the nation of the Alani
embraced the offers of an honorable and advantageous union; and the
Huns, who esteemed the valor of their less fortunate enemies, proceeded,
with an increase of numbers and confidence, to invade the limits of the
Gothic empire.

[Footnote 52: The Khan-Mou (tom. iii. p. 447) ascribes to their
conquests a space of 14,000 lis. According to the present standard, 200
lis (or more accurately 193) are equal to one degree of latitude; and
one English mile consequently exceeds three miles of China. But there
are strong reasons to believe that the ancient li scarcely equalled
one half of the modern. See the elaborate researches of M. D'Anville,
a geographer who is not a stranger in any age or climate of the globe.
(Memoires de l'Acad. tom. ii. p. 125-502. Itineraires, p. 154-167.)]

[Footnote 53: See Histoire des Huns, tom. ii. p. 125--144. The
subsequent history (p. 145--277) of three or four Hunnic dynasties
evidently proves that their martial spirit was not impaired by a long
residence in China.]

[Footnote 53a: Compare M. Klaproth's curious speculations on the Alani.
He supposes them to have been the people, known by the Chinese, at the
time of their first expeditions to the West, under the name of Yath-sai
or A-lanna, the Alanan of Persian tradition, as preserved in Ferdusi;
the same, according to Ammianus, with the Massagetae, and with the
Albani. The remains of the nation still exist in the Ossetae of Mount
Caucasus. Klaproth, Tableaux Historiques de l'Asie, p. 174.--M. Compare
Shafarik Slawische alterthumer, i. p. 350.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 54: Utque hominibus quietis et placidis otium est voluptabile,
ita illos pericula juvent et bella. Judicatur ibi beatus qui in proelio
profuderit animam: senescentes etiam et fortuitis mortibus mundo
digressos, ut degeneres et ignavos, conviciis atrocibus insectantur.
[Ammian. xxxi. 11.] We must think highly of the conquerors of such men.]

[Footnote 55: On the subject of the Alani, see Ammianus, (xxxi. 2,)
Jornandes, (de Rebus Geticis, c. 24,) M. de Guignes, (Hist. des Huns,
tom. ii. p. 279,) and the Genealogical History of the Tartars, (tom. ii.
p. 617.)]

The great Hermanric, whose dominions extended from the Baltic to the
Euxine, enjoyed, in the full maturity of age and reputation, the fruit
of his victories, when he was alarmed by the formidable approach of
a host of unknown enemies, [56] on whom his barbarous subjects might,
without injustice, bestow the epithet of Barbarians. The numbers, the
strength, the rapid motions, and the implacable cruelty of the Huns,
were felt, and dreaded, and magnified, by the astonished Goths; who
beheld their fields and villages consumed with flames, and deluged with
indiscriminate slaughter. To these real terrors they added the surprise
and abhorrence which were excited by the shrill voice, the uncouth
gestures, and the strange deformity of the Huns. [56a] These savages
of Scythia were compared (and the picture had some resemblance) to
the animals who walk very awkwardly on two legs and to the misshapen
figures, the Termini, which were often placed on the bridges of
antiquity. They were distinguished from the rest of the human species by
their broad shoulders, flat noses, and small black eyes, deeply buried
in the head; and as they were almost destitute of beards, they never
enjoyed either the manly grace of youth, or the venerable aspect of age.
[57] A fabulous origin was assigned, worthy of their form and manners;
that the witches of Scythia, who, for their foul and deadly practices,
had been driven from society, had copulated in the desert with infernal
spirits; and that the Huns were the offspring of this execrable
conjunction. [58] The tale, so full of horror and absurdity, was
greedily embraced by the credulous hatred of the Goths; but, while it
gratified their hatred, it increased their fear, since the posterity
of daemons and witches might be supposed to inherit some share of the
praeternatural powers, as well as of the malignant temper, of their
parents. Against these enemies, Hermanric prepared to exert the united
forces of the Gothic state; but he soon discovered that his vassal
tribes, provoked by oppression, were much more inclined to second, than
to repel, the invasion of the Huns. One of the chiefs of the Roxolani
[59] had formerly deserted the standard of Hermanric, and the cruel
tyrant had condemned the innocent wife of the traitor to be torn asunder
by wild horses. The brothers of that unfortunate woman seized the
favorable moment of revenge.

The aged king of the Goths languished some time after the dangerous
wound which he received from their daggers; but the conduct of the war
was retarded by his infirmities; and the public councils of the nation
were distracted by a spirit of jealousy and discord. His death, which
has been imputed to his own despair, left the reins of government in
the hands of Withimer, who, with the doubtful aid of some Scythian
mercenaries, maintained the unequal contest against the arms of the Huns
and the Alani, till he was defeated and slain in a decisive battle. The
Ostrogoths submitted to their fate; and the royal race of the Amali will
hereafter be found among the subjects of the haughty Attila. But the
person of Witheric, the infant king, was saved by the diligence of
Alatheus and Saphrax; two warriors of approved valor and fiedlity, who,
by cautious marches, conducted the independent remains of the nation of
the Ostrogoths towards the Danastus, or Niester; a considerable river,
which now separates the Turkish dominions from the empire of Russia. On
the banks of the Niester, the prudent Athanaric, more attentive to his
own than to the general safety, had fixed the camp of the Visigoths;
with the firm resolution of opposing the victorious Barbarians, whom he
thought it less advisable to provoke. The ordinary speed of the Huns was
checked by the weight of baggage, and the encumbrance of captives;
but their military skill deceived, and almost destroyed, the army of
Athanaric. While the Judge of the Visigoths defended the banks of the
Niester, he was encompassed and attacked by a numerous detachment
of cavalry, who, by the light of the moon, had passed the river in a
fordable place; and it was not without the utmost efforts of courage
and conduct, that he was able to effect his retreat towards the hilly
country. The undaunted general had already formed a new and judicious
plan of defensive war; and the strong lines, which he was preparing to
construct between the mountains, the Pruth, and the Danube, would have
secured the extensive and fertile territory that bears the modern name
of Walachia, from the destructive inroads of the Huns. [60] But the
hopes and measures of the Judge of the Visigoths was soon disappointed,
by the trembling impatience of his dismayed countrymen; who were
persuaded by their fears, that the interposition of the Danube was the
only barrier that could save them from the rapid pursuit, and invincible
valor, of the Barbarians of Scythia. Under the command of Fritigern and
Alavivus, [61] the body of the nation hastily advanced to the banks of
the great river, and implored the protection of the Roman emperor of the
East. Athanaric himself, still anxious to avoid the guilt of perjury,
retired, with a band of faithful followers, into the mountainous country
of Caucaland; which appears to have been guarded, and almost concealed,
by the impenetrable forests of Transylvania. [62] [62a]

[Footnote 56: As we are possessed of the authentic history of the
Huns, it would be impertinent to repeat, or to refute, the fables which
misrepresent their origin and progress, their passage of the mud or
water of the Maeotis, in pursuit of an ox or stag, les Indes qu'ils
avoient decouvertes, &c., (Zosimus, l. iv. p. 224. Sozomen, l. vi.
c. 37. Procopius, Hist. Miscell. c. 5. Jornandes, c. 24. Grandeur et
Decadence, &c., des Romains, c. 17.)]

[Footnote 56a: Art added to their native ugliness; in fact, it is
difficult to ascribe the proper share in the features of this hideous
picture to nature, to the barbarous skill with which they were
self-disfigured, or to the terror and hatred of the Romans. Their noses
were flattened by their nurses, their cheeks were gashed by an iron
instrument, that the scars might look more fearful, and prevent the
growth of the beard. Jornandes and Sidonius Apollinaris:--

     Obtundit teneras circumdata fascia nares,
     Ut galeis cedant.

Yet he adds that their forms were robust and manly, their height of a
middle size, but, from the habit of riding, disproportioned.

     Stant pectora vasta,
     Insignes humer, succincta sub ilibus alvus.
     Forma quidem pediti media est, procera sed extat
     Si cernas equites, sic longi saepe putantur
     Si sedeant.]

[Footnote 57: Prodigiosae formae, et pandi; ut bipedes existimes
bestias; vel quales in commarginandis pontibus, effigiati stipites
dolantur incompte. Ammian. xxxi. i. Jornandes (c. 24) draws a strong
caricature of a Calmuck face. Species pavenda nigredine... quaedam
deformis offa, non fecies; habensque magis puncta quam lumina. See
Buffon. Hist. Naturelle, tom. iii. 380.]

[Footnote 58: This execrable origin, which Jornandes (c. 24) describes
with the rancor of a Goth, might be originally derived from a more
pleasing fable of the Greeks. (Herodot. l. iv. c. 9, &c.)]

[Footnote 59: The Roxolani may be the fathers of the the Russians,
(D'Anville, Empire de Russie, p. 1--10,) whose residence (A.D. 862)
about Novogrod Veliki cannot be very remote from that which the
Geographer of Ravenna (i. 12, iv. 4, 46, v. 28, 30) assigns to the
Roxolani, (A.D. 886.) * Note: See, on the origin of the Russ, Schlozer,
Nordische Geschichte, p. 78--M.]

[Footnote 60: The text of Ammianus seems to be imperfect or corrupt;
but the nature of the ground explains, and almost defines, the Gothic
rampart. Memoires de l'Academie, &c., tom. xxviii. p. 444--462.]

[Footnote 61: M. de Buat (Hist. des Peuples de l'Europe, tom. vi. p.
407) has conceived a strange idea, that Alavivus was the same person
as Ulphilas, the Gothic bishop; and that Ulphilas, the grandson of a
Cappadocian captive, became a temporal prince of the Goths.]

[Footnote 62: Ammianus (xxxi. 3) and Jornandes (de Rebus Geticis, c. 24)
describe the subversion of the Gothic empire by the Huns.]

[Footnote 62a: The most probable opinion as to the position of this
land is that of M. Malte-Brun. He thinks that Caucaland is the
territory of the Cacoenses, placed by Ptolemy (l. iii. c. 8) towards
the Carpathian Mountains, on the side of the present Transylvania, and
therefore the canton of Cacava, to the south of Hermanstadt, the capital
of the principality. Caucaland it is evident, is the Gothic form of
these different names. St. Martin, iv 103.--M.]




