## Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines.--Part III.

Domestic peace and union were the natural consequences of the moderate
and comprehensive policy embraced by the Romans. If we turn our eyes
towards the monarchies of Asia, we shall behold despotism in the centre,
and weakness in the extremities; the collection of the revenue, or the
administration of justice, enforced by the presence of an army; hostile
barbarians established in the heart of the country, hereditary satraps
usurping the dominion of the provinces, and subjects inclined to
rebellion, though incapable of freedom. But the obedience of the Roman
world was uniform, voluntary, and permanent. The vanquished nations,
blended into one great people, resigned the hope, nay, even the wish, of
resuming their independence, and scarcely considered their own existence
as distinct from the existence of Rome. The established authority of the
emperors pervaded without an effort the wide extent of their dominions,
and was exercised with the same facility on the banks of the Thames,
or of the Nile, as on those of the Tyber. The legions were destined to
serve against the public enemy, and the civil magistrate seldom required
the aid of a military force. [63] In this state of general security,
the leisure, as well as opulence, both of the prince and people, were
devoted to improve and to adorn the Roman empire.

[Footnote 63: Joseph. de Bell. Judaico, l. ii. c. 16. The oration of
Agrippa, or rather of the historian, is a fine picture of the Roman
empire.]

Among the innumerable monuments of architecture constructed by the
Romans, how many have escaped the notice of history, how few have
resisted the ravages of time and barbarism! And yet, even the majestic
ruins that are still scattered over Italy and the provinces, would be
sufficient to prove that those countries were once the seat of a polite
and powerful empire. Their greatness alone, or their beauty, might
deserve our attention: but they are rendered more interesting, by two
important circumstances, which connect the agreeable history of the arts
with the more useful history of human manners. Many of those works were
erected at private expense, and almost all were intended for public
benefit.

It is natural to suppose that the greatest number, as well as the most
considerable of the Roman edifices, were raised by the emperors, who
possessed so unbounded a command both of men and money. Augustus was
accustomed to boast that he had found his capital of brick, and that
he had left it of marble. [64] The strict economy of Vespasian was the
source of his magnificence. The works of Trajan bear the stamp of his
genius. The public monuments with which Hadrian adorned every province
of the empire, were executed not only by his orders, but under his
immediate inspection. He was himself an artist; and he loved the arts,
as they conduced to the glory of the monarch. They were encouraged by
the Antonines, as they contributed to the happiness of the people. But
if the emperors were the first, they were not the only architects
of their dominions. Their example was universally imitated by their
principal subjects, who were not afraid of declaring to the world that
they had spirit to conceive, and wealth to accomplish, the noblest
undertakings. Scarcely had the proud structure of the Coliseum been
dedicated at Rome, before the edifices, of a smaller scale indeed, but
of the same design and materials, were erected for the use, and at the
expense, of the cities of Capua and Verona. [65] The inscription of the
stupendous bridge of Alcantara attests that it was thrown over the Tagus
by the contribution of a few Lusitanian communities. When Pliny was
intrusted with the government of Bithynia and Pontus, provinces by
no means the richest or most considerable of the empire, he found the
cities within his jurisdiction striving with each other in every useful
and ornamental work, that might deserve the curiosity of strangers, or
the gratitude of their citizens. It was the duty of the proconsul to
supply their deficiencies, to direct their taste, and sometimes to
moderate their emulation. [66] The opulent senators of Rome and the
provinces esteemed it an honor, and almost an obligation, to adorn the
splendor of their age and country; and the influence of fashion very
frequently supplied the want of taste or generosity. Among a crowd of
these private benefactors, we may select Herodes Atticus, an Athenian
citizen, who lived in the age of the Antonines. Whatever might be the
motive of his conduct, his magnificence would have been worthy of the
greatest kings.

[Footnote 64: Sueton. in August. c. 28. Augustus built in Rome the
temple and forum of Mars the Avenger; the temple of Jupiter Tonans in
the Capitol; that of Apollo Palatine, with public libraries; the portico
and basilica of Caius and Lucius; the porticos of Livia and Octavia; and
the theatre of Marcellus. The example of the sovereign was imitated by
his ministers and generals; and his friend Agrippa left behind him the
immortal monument of the Pantheon.] [See Theatre Of Marcellus: Augustus
built in Rome the theatre of Marcellus.]

[Footnote 65: See Maffei, Veroni Illustrata, l. iv. p. 68.]

[Footnote 66: See the xth book of Pliny's Epistles. He mentions the
following works carried on at the expense of the cities. At Nicomedia, a
new forum, an aqueduct, and a canal, left unfinished by a king; at Nice,
a gymnasium, and a theatre, which had already cost near ninety thousand
pounds; baths at Prusa and Claudiopolis, and an aqueduct of sixteen
miles in length for the use of Sinope.]


The family of Herod, at least after it had been favored by fortune, was
lineally descended from Cimon and Miltiades, Theseus and Cecrops, Aeacus
and Jupiter. But the posterity of so many gods and heroes was fallen
into the most abject state. His grandfather had suffered by the hands
of justice, and Julius Atticus, his father, must have ended his life in
poverty and contempt, had he not discovered an immense treasure buried
under an old house, the last remains of his patrimony. According to the
rigor of the law, the emperor might have asserted his claim, and the
prudent Atticus prevented, by a frank confession, the officiousness of
informers. But the equitable Nerva, who then filled the throne, refused
to accept any part of it, and commanded him to use, without scruple,
the present of fortune. The cautious Athenian still insisted, that the
treasure was too considerable for a subject, and that he knew not how
to use it. Abuse it then, replied the monarch, with a good-natured
peevishness; for it is your own. [67] Many will be of opinion, that
Atticus literally obeyed the emperor's last instructions; since he
expended the greatest part of his fortune, which was much increased by
an advantageous marriage, in the service of the public. He had obtained
for his son Herod the prefecture of the free cities of Asia; and the
young magistrate, observing that the town of Troas was indifferently
supplied with water, obtained from the munificence of Hadrian three
hundred myriads of drachms, (about a hundred thousand pounds,) for the
construction of a new aqueduct. But in the execution of the work, the
charge amounted to more than double the estimate, and the officers of
the revenue began to murmur, till the generous Atticus silenced their
complaints, by requesting that he might be permitted to take upon
himself the whole additional expense. [68]

[Footnote 67: Hadrian afterwards made a very equitable regulation, which
divided all treasure-trove between the right of property and that of
discovery. Hist. August. p. 9.]

[Footnote 68: Philostrat. in Vit. Sophist. l. ii. p. 548.]

The ablest preceptors of Greece and Asia had been invited by liberal
rewards to direct the education of young Herod. Their pupil soon became
a celebrated orator, according to the useless rhetoric of that age,
which, confining itself to the schools, disdained to visit either the
Forum or the Senate.

He was honored with the consulship at Rome: but the greatest part of his
life was spent in a philosophic retirement at Athens, and his adjacent
villas; perpetually surrounded by sophists, who acknowledged, without
reluctance, the superiority of a rich and generous rival. [69] The
monuments of his genius have perished; some considerable ruins still
preserve the fame of his taste and munificence: modern travellers have
measured the remains of the stadium which he constructed at Athens. It
was six hundred feet in length, built entirely of white marble, capable
of admitting the whole body of the people, and finished in four years,
whilst Herod was president of the Athenian games. To the memory of his
wife Regilla he dedicated a theatre, scarcely to be paralleled in the
empire: no wood except cedar, very curiously carved, was employed in
any part of the building. The Odeum, [691] designed by Pericles for musical
performances, and the rehearsal of new tragedies, had been a trophy of
the victory of the arts over barbaric greatness; as the timbers employed
in the construction consisted chiefly of the masts of the Persian
vessels. Notwithstanding the repairs bestowed on that ancient edifice by
a king of Cappadocia, it was again fallen to decay. Herod restored
its ancient beauty and magnificence. Nor was the liberality of that
illustrious citizen confined to the walls of Athens. The most splendid
ornaments bestowed on the temple of Neptune in the Isthmus, a theatre at
Corinth, a stadium at Delphi, a bath at Thermopylae, and an aqueduct
at Canusium in Italy, were insufficient to exhaust his treasures.
The people of Epirus, Thessaly, Euboea, Boeotia, and Peloponnesus,
experienced his favors; and many inscriptions of the cities of Greece
and Asia gratefully style Herodes Atticus their patron and benefactor.
[70]

[Footnote 69: Aulus Gellius, in Noct. Attic. i. 2, ix. 2, xviii. 10,
xix. 12. Phil ostrat. p. 564.]

[Footnote 691: The Odeum served for the rehearsal of new comedies as well
as tragedies; they were read or repeated, before representation, without
music or decorations, &c. No piece could be represented in the theatre
if it had not been previously approved by judges for this purpose.
The king of Cappadocia who restored the Odeum, which had been burnt by
Sylla, was Araobarzanes. See Martini, Dissertation on the Odeons of the
Ancients, Leipsic. 1767, p. 10--91.--W.]

[Footnote 70: See Philostrat. l. ii. p. 548, 560. Pausanias, l. i. and
vii. 10. The life of Herodes, in the xxxth volume of the Memoirs of the
Academy of Inscriptions.]

In the commonwealths of Athens and Rome, the modest simplicity of
private houses announced the equal condition of freedom; whilst the
sovereignty of the people was represented in the majestic edifices
designed to the public use; [71] nor was this republican spirit totally
extinguished by the introduction of wealth and monarchy. It was in works
of national honor and benefit, that the most virtuous of the emperors
affected to display their magnificence. The golden palace of Nero
excited a just indignation, but the vast extent of ground which had been
usurped by his selfish luxury was more nobly filled under the succeeding
reigns by the Coliseum, the baths of Titus, the Claudian portico, and
the temples dedicated to the goddess of Peace, and to the genius of
Rome. [72] These monuments of architecture, the property of the Roman
people, were adorned with the most beautiful productions of Grecian
painting and sculpture; and in the temple of Peace, a very curious
library was open to the curiosity of the learned. [721] At a small distance
from thence was situated the Forum of Trajan. It was surrounded by a
lofty portico, in the form of a quadrangle, into which four triumphal
arches opened a noble and spacious entrance: in the centre arose a
column of marble, whose height, of one hundred and ten feet, denoted the
elevation of the hill that had been cut away. This column, which still
subsists in its ancient beauty, exhibited an exact representation of the
Dacian victories of its founder. The veteran soldier contemplated the
story of his own campaigns, and by an easy illusion of national vanity,
the peaceful citizen associated himself to the honors of the triumph.
All the other quarters of the capital, and all the provinces of
the empire, were embellished by the same liberal spirit of public
magnificence, and were filled with amphitheatres, theatres, temples,
porticoes, triumphal arches, baths and aqueducts, all variously
conducive to the health, the devotion, and the pleasures of the meanest
citizen. The last mentioned of those edifices deserve our peculiar
attention. The boldness of the enterprise, the solidity of the
execution, and the uses to which they were subservient, rank the
aqueducts among the noblest monuments of Roman genius and power. The
aqueducts of the capital claim a just preeminence; but the curious
traveller, who, without the light of history, should examine those of
Spoleto, of Metz, or of Segovia, would very naturally conclude that
those provincial towns had formerly been the residence of some potent
monarch. The solitudes of Asia and Africa were once covered with
flourishing cities, whose populousness, and even whose existence, was
derived from such artificial supplies of a perennial stream of fresh
water. [73]

[Footnote 71: It is particularly remarked of Athens by Dicaearchus, de
Statu Graeciae, p. 8, inter Geographos Minores, edit. Hudson.]

[Footnote 72: Donatus de Roma Vetere, l. iii. c. 4, 5, 6. Nardini Roma
Antica, l. iii. 11, 12, 13, and a Ms. description of ancient Rome, by
Bernardus Oricellarius, or Rucellai, of which I obtained a copy from
the library of the Canon Ricardi at Florence. Two celebrated pictures of
Timanthes and of Protogenes are mentioned by Pliny, as in the Temple of
Peace; and the Laocoon was found in the baths of Titus.]

[Footnote 721: The Emperor Vespasian, who had caused the Temple of Peace
to be built, transported to it the greatest part of the pictures,
statues, and other works of art which had escaped the civil tumults. It
was there that every day the artists and the learned of Rome assembled;
and it is on the site of this temple that a multitude of antiques
have been dug up. See notes of Reimar on Dion Cassius, lxvi. c. 15, p.
1083.--W.]

[Footnote 73: Montfaucon l'Antiquite Expliquee, tom. iv. p. 2, l. i.
c. 9. Fabretti has composed a very learned treatise on the aqueducts of
Rome.]

We have computed the inhabitants, and contemplated the public works,
of the Roman empire. The observation of the number and greatness of its
cities will serve to confirm the former, and to multiply the latter. It
may not be unpleasing to collect a few scattered instances relative
to that subject without forgetting, however, that from the vanity of
nations and the poverty of language, the vague appellation of city has
been indifferently bestowed on Rome and upon Laurentum.

I. Ancient Italy is said to have contained eleven hundred and
ninety-seven cities; and for whatsoever aera of antiquity the expression
might be intended, [74] there is not any reason to believe the country
less populous in the age of the Antonines, than in that of Romulus.
The petty states of Latium were contained within the metropolis of the
empire, by whose superior influence they had been attracted. [741] Those
parts of Italy which have so long languished under the lazy tyranny
of priests and viceroys, had been afflicted only by the more tolerable
calamities of war; and the first symptoms of decay which they
experienced, were amply compensated by the rapid improvements of the
Cisalpine Gaul. The splendor of Verona may be traced in its remains: yet
Verona was less celebrated than Aquileia or Padua, Milan or Ravenna. II.
The spirit of improvement had passed the Alps, and been felt even in the
woods of Britain, which were gradually cleared away to open a free space
for convenient and elegant habitations. York was the seat of government;
London was already enriched by commerce; and Bath was celebrated for the
salutary effects of its medicinal waters. Gaul could boast of her twelve
hundred cities; [75] and though, in the northern parts, many of them,
without excepting Paris itself, were little more than the rude and
imperfect townships of a rising people, the southern provinces imitated
the wealth and elegance of Italy. [76] Many were the cities of Gaul,
Marseilles, Arles, Nismes, Narbonne, Thoulouse, Bourdeaux, Autun,
Vienna, Lyons, Langres, and Treves, whose ancient condition might
sustain an equal, and perhaps advantageous comparison with their present
state. With regard to Spain, that country flourished as a province, and
has declined as a kingdom. Exhausted by the abuse of her strength, by
America, and by superstition, her pride might possibly be confounded, if
we required such a list of three hundred and sixty cities, as Pliny has
exhibited under the reign of Vespasian. [77] III. Three hundred African
cities had once acknowledged the authority of Carthage, [78] nor is it
likely that their numbers diminished under the administration of the
emperors: Carthage itself rose with new splendor from its ashes; and
that capital, as well as Capua and Corinth, soon recovered all the
advantages which can be separated from independent sovereignty. IV. The
provinces of the East present the contrast of Roman magnificence with
Turkish barbarism. The ruins of antiquity scattered over uncultivated
fields, and ascribed, by ignorance to the power of magic, scarcely
afford a shelter to the oppressed peasant or wandering Arab. Under
the reign of the Caesars, the proper Asia alone contained five hundred
populous cities, [79] enriched with all the gifts of nature, and adorned
with all the refinements of art. Eleven cities of Asia had once disputed
the honor of dedicating a temple of Tiberius, and their respective
merits were examined by the senate. [80] Four of them were immediately
rejected as unequal to the burden; and among these was Laodicea, whose
splendor is still displayed in its ruins. [81] Laodicea collected a
very considerable revenue from its flocks of sheep, celebrated for the
fineness of their wool, and had received, a little before the contest,
a legacy of above four hundred thousand pounds by the testament of a
generous citizen. [82] If such was the poverty of Laodicea, what must
have been the wealth of those cities, whose claim appeared preferable,
and particularly of Pergamus, of Smyrna, and of Ephesus, who so long
disputed with each other the titular primacy of Asia? [83] The capitals
of Syria and Egypt held a still superior rank in the empire; Antioch and
Alexandria looked down with disdain on a crowd of dependent cities, [84]
and yielded, with reluctance, to the majesty of Rome itself.

[Footnote 74: Aelian. Hist. Var. lib. ix. c. 16. He lived in the time of
Alexander Severus. See Fabricius, Biblioth. Graeca, l. iv. c. 21.]

[Footnote 741: This may in some degree account for the difficulty started
by Livy, as to the incredibly numerous armies raised by the small states
around Rome where, in his time, a scanty stock of free soldiers among
a larger population of Roman slaves broke the solitude. Vix seminario
exiguo militum relicto servitia Romana ab solitudine vindicant, Liv. vi.
vii. Compare Appian Bel Civ. i. 7.--M. subst. for G.]

[Footnote 75: Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. The number, however, is
mentioned, and should be received with a degree of latitude. Note:
Without doubt no reliance can be placed on this passage of Josephus. The
historian makes Agrippa give advice to the Jews, as to the power of
the Romans; and the speech is full of declamation which can furnish no
conclusions to history. While enumerating the nations subject to the
Romans, he speaks of the Gauls as submitting to 1200 soldiers, (which is
false, as there were eight legions in Gaul, Tac. iv. 5,) while there are
nearly twelve hundred cities.--G. Josephus (infra) places these eight
legions on the Rhine, as Tacitus does.--M.]

[Footnote 76: Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5.]

[Footnote 77: Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 3, 4, iv. 35. The list seems
authentic and accurate; the division of the provinces, and the different
condition of the cities, are minutely distinguished.]

[Footnote 78: Strabon. Geograph. l. xvii. p. 1189.]

[Footnote 79: Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. Philostrat. in Vit. Sophist.
l. ii. p. 548, edit. Olear.]

[Footnote 80: Tacit. Annal. iv. 55. I have taken some pains in
consulting and comparing modern travellers, with regard to the fate
of those eleven cities of Asia. Seven or eight are totally destroyed:
Hypaepe, Tralles, Laodicea, Hium, Halicarnassus, Miletus, Ephesus, and
we may add Sardes. Of the remaining three, Pergamus is a straggling
village of two or three thousand inhabitants; Magnesia, under the name
of Guzelhissar, a town of some consequence; and Smyrna, a great city,
peopled by a hundred thousand souls. But even at Smyrna, while the
Franks have maintained a commerce, the Turks have ruined the arts.]

[Footnote 81: See a very exact and pleasing description of the ruins of
Laodicea, in Chandler's Travels through Asia Minor, p. 225, &c.]

[Footnote 82: Strabo, l. xii. p. 866. He had studied at Tralles.]

[Footnote 83: See a Dissertation of M. de Boze, Mem. de l'Academie,
tom. xviii. Aristides pronounced an oration, which is still extant, to
recommend concord to the rival cities.]

[Footnote 84: The inhabitants of Egypt, exclusive of Alexandria,
amounted to seven millions and a half, (Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii. 16.)
Under the military government of the Mamelukes, Syria was supposed to
contain sixty thousand villages, (Histoire de Timur Bec, l. v. c. 20.)]




