## Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.--Part IX.

From this impartial though imperfect survey of the progress of
Christianity, it may perhaps seem probable, that the number of its
proselytes has been excessively magnified by fear on the one side, and
by devotion on the other. According to the irreproachable testimony of
Origen, [183] the proportion of the faithful was very inconsiderable,
when compared with the multitude of an unbelieving world; but, as we are
left without any distinct information, it is impossible to determine,
and it is difficult even to conjecture, the real numbers of the
primitive Christians. The most favorable calculation, however, that can
be deduced from the examples of Antioch and of Rome, will not permit
us to imagine that more than a themselves under the banner of the cross
before the important conversion of Constantine. But their habits of
faith, of zeal, and of union, seemed to multiply their numbers; and the
same causes which contributed to their future increase, served to render
their actual strength more apparent and more formidable.

[Footnote 183: Origen contra Celsum, l. viii. p. 424.]

Such is the constitution of civil society, that whilst a few persons are
distinguished by riches, by honors, and by knowledge, the body of the
people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance and poverty. The Christian
religion, which addressed itself to the whole human race, must
consequently collect a far greater number of proselytes from the
lower than from the superior ranks of life. This innocent and natural
circumstance has been improved into a very odious imputation, which
seems to be less strenuously denied by the apologists, than it is urged
by the adversaries, of the faith; that the new sect of Christians was
almost entirely composed of the dregs of the populace, of peasants and
mechanics, of boys and women, of beggars and slaves, the last of whom
might sometimes introduce the missionaries into the rich and noble
families to which they belonged. These obscure teachers (such was the
charge of malice and infidelity) are as mute in public as they are
loquacious and dogmatical in private. Whilst they cautiously avoid
the dangerous encounter of philosophers, they mingle with the rude and
illiterate crowd, and insinuate themselves into those minds, whom their
age, their sex, or their education, has the best disposed to receive the
impression of superstitious terrors. [184]

[Footnote 184: Minucius Felix, c. 8, with Wowerus's notes. Celsus ap.
Origen, l. iii. p. 138, 142. Julian ap. Cyril. l. vi. p. 206, edit.
Spanheim.]

This unfavorable picture, though not devoid of a faint resemblance,
betrays, by its dark coloring and distorted features, the pencil of an
enemy. As the humble faith of Christ diffused itself through the world,
it was embraced by several persons who derived some consequence from the
advantages of nature or fortune. Aristides, who presented an eloquent
apology to the emperor Hadrian, was an Athenian philosopher. [185] Justin
Martyr had sought divine knowledge in the schools of Zeno, of Aristotle,
of Pythagoras, and of Plato, before he fortunately was accosted by the
old man, or rather the angel, who turned his attention to the study
of the Jewish prophets. [186] Clemens of Alexandria had acquired much
various reading in the Greek, and Tertullian in the Latin, language.
Julius Africanus and Origen possessed a very considerable share of
the learning of their times; and although the style of Cyprian is very
different from that of Lactantius, we might almost discover that both
those writers had been public teachers of rhetoric. Even the study of
philosophy was at length introduced among the Christians, but it was not
always productive of the most salutary effects; knowledge was as often
the parent of heresy as of devotion, and the description which was
designed for the followers of Artemon, may, with equal propriety,
be applied to the various sects that resisted the successors of the
apostles. "They presume to alter the Holy Scriptures, to abandon the
ancient rule of faith, and to form their opinions according to the
subtile precepts of logic. The science of the church is neglected for
the study of geometry, and they lose sight of heaven while they are
employed in measuring the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands.
Aristotle and Theophrastus are the objects of their admiration; and they
express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen. Their errors are
derived from the abuse of the arts and sciences of the infidels, and
they corrupt the simplicity of the gospel by the refinements of human
reason." [187]

[Footnote 185: Euseb. Hist. Eccles. iv. 3. Hieronym. Epist. 83.]

[Footnote 186: The story is prettily told in Justin's Dialogues.
Tillemont, (Mem Ecclesiast. tom. ii. p. 384,) who relates it after him
is sure that the old man was a disguised angel.]

[Footnote 187: Eusebius, v. 28. It may be hoped, that none, except the
heretics, gave occasion to the complaint of Celsus, (ap. Origen, l. ii.
p. 77,) that the Christians were perpetually correcting and altering
their Gospels. * Note: Origen states in reply, that he knows of none who
had altered the Gospels except the Marcionites, the Valentinians, and
perhaps some followers of Lucanus.--M.]

Nor can it be affirmed with truth, that the advantages of birth and
fortune were always separated from the profession of Christianity.
Several Roman citizens were brought before the tribunal of Pliny, and he
soon discovered, that a great number of persons of every order of men
in Bithynia had deserted the religion of their ancestors. [188] His
unsuspected testimony may, in this instance, obtain more credit than the
bold challenge of Tertullian, when he addresses himself to the fears as
well as the humanity of the proconsul of Africa, by assuring him, that
if he persists in his cruel intentions, he must decimate Carthage,
and that he will find among the guilty many persons of his own rank,
senators and matrons of nobles' extraction, and the friends or relations
of his most intimate friends. [189] It appears, however, that about forty
years afterwards the emperor Valerian was persuaded of the truth of this
assertion, since in one of his rescripts he evidently supposes, that
senators, Roman knights, and ladies of quality, were engaged in the
Christian sect. [190] The church still continued to increase its
outward splendor as it lost its internal purity; and, in the reign
of Diocletian, the palace, the courts of justice, and even the army,
concealed a multitude of Christians, who endeavored to reconcile the
interests of the present with those of a future life.

[Footnote 188: Plin. Epist. x. 97. Fuerunt alii similis amentiae, cives
Romani---Multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque sexus, etiam
vocuntur in periculum et vocabuntur.]

[Footnote 189: Tertullian ad Scapulum. Yet even his rhetoric rises no
higher than to claim a tenth part of Carthage.]

[Footnote 190: Cyprian. Epist. 70.]

And yet these exceptions are either too few in number, or too recent in
time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance and obscurity which
has been so arrogantly cast on the first proselytes of Christianity. [1901]
Instead of employing in our defence the fictions of later ages, it will
be more prudent to convert the occasion of scandal into a subject of
edification. Our serious thoughts will suggest to us, that the apostles
themselves were chosen by Providence among the fishermen of Galilee,
and that the lower we depress the temporal condition of the first
Christians, the more reason we shall find to admire their merit and
success. It is incumbent on us diligently to remember, that the kingdom
of heaven was promised to the poor in spirit, and that minds afflicted
by calamity and the contempt of mankind, cheerfully listen to the divine
promise of future happiness; while, on the contrary, the fortunate are
satisfied with the possession of this world; and the wise abuse in doubt
and dispute their vain superiority of reason and knowledge.

[Footnote 1901: This incomplete enumeration ought to be increased by the
names of several Pagans converted at the dawn of Christianity, and whose
conversion weakens the reproach which the historian appears to support.
Such are, the Proconsul Sergius Paulus, converted at Paphos, (Acts
xiii. 7--12.) Dionysius, member of the Areopagus, converted with several
others, al Athens, (Acts xvii. 34;) several persons at the court of
Nero, (Philip. iv 22;) Erastus, receiver at Corinth, (Rom. xvi.23;)
some Asiarchs, (Acts xix. 31) As to the philosophers, we may add Tatian,
Athenagoras, Theophilus of Antioch, Hegesippus, Melito, Miltiades,
Pantaenus, Ammenius, all distinguished for their genius and
learning.--G.]

We stand in need of such reflections to comfort us for the loss of some
illustrious characters, which in our eyes might have seemed the most
worthy of the heavenly present. The names of Seneca, of the elder and
the younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of Plutarch, of Galen, of the slave
Epictetus, and of the emperor Marcus Antoninus, adorn the age in which
they flourished, and exalt the dignity of human nature. They filled with
glory their respective stations, either in active or contemplative life;
their excellent understandings were improved by study; Philosophy had
purified their minds from the prejudices of the popular superstition;
and their days were spent in the pursuit of truth and the practice of
virtue. Yet all these sages (it is no less an object of surprise than of
concern) overlooked or rejected the perfection of the Christian system.
Their language or their silence equally discover their contempt for the
growing sect, which in their time had diffused itself over the Roman
empire. Those among them who condescended to mention the Christians,
consider them only as obstinate and perverse enthusiasts, who exacted an
implicit submission to their mysterious doctrines, without being able
to produce a single argument that could engage the attention of men of
sense and learning. [191]

[Footnote 191: Dr. Lardner, in his first and second volumes of Jewish
and Christian testimonies, collects and illustrates those of Pliny
the younger, of Tacitus, of Galen, of Marcus Antoninus, and perhaps of
Epictetus, (for it is doubtful whether that philosopher means to speak
of the Christians.) The new sect is totally unnoticed by Seneca, the
elder Pliny, and Plutarch.]

It is at least doubtful whether any of these
philosophers perused the apologies [1911] which the primitive Christians
repeatedly published in behalf of themselves and of their religion; but
it is much to be lamented that such a cause was not defended by
abler advocates. They expose with superfluous with and eloquence the
extravagance of Polytheism. They interest our compassion by displaying
the innocence and sufferings of their injured brethren. But when they
would demonstrate the divine origin of Christianity, they insist much
more strongly on the predictions which announced, than on the miracles
which accompanied, the appearance of the Messiah. Their favorite
argument might serve to edify a Christian or to convert a Jew,
since both the one and the other acknowledge the authority of those
prophecies, and both are obliged, with devout reverence, to search for
their sense and their accomplishment. But this mode of persuasion loses
much of its weight and influence, when it is addressed to those who
neither understand nor respect the Mosaic dispensation and the prophetic
style. [192] In the unskilful hands of Justin and of the succeeding
apologists, the sublime meaning of the Hebrew oracles evaporates in
distant types, affected conceits, and cold allegories; and even their
authenticity was rendered suspicious to an unenlightened Gentile, by the
mixture of pious forgeries, which, under the names of Orpheus, Hermes,
and the Sibyls, [193] were obtruded on him as of equal value with the
genuine inspirations of Heaven. The adoption of fraud and sophistry
in the defence of revelation too often reminds us of the injudicious
conduct of those poets who load their invulnerable heroes with a useless
weight of cumbersome and brittle armor.

[Footnote 1911: The emperors Hadrian, Antoninus &c., read with astonishment
the apologies of Justin Martyr, of Aristides, of Melito, &c. (See St.
Hieron. ad mag. orat. Orosius, lviii. c. 13.) Eusebius says expressly,
that the cause of Christianity was defended before the senate, in a very
elegant discourse, by Apollonius the Martyr.--G. ----Gibbon, in his
severer spirit of criticism, may have questioned the authority of Jerome
and Eusebius. There are some difficulties about Apollonius, which
Heinichen (note in loc. Eusebii) would solve, by suppose lag him to have
been, as Jerome states, a senator.--M.]

[Footnote 192: If the famous prophecy of the Seventy Weeks had been
alleged to a Roman philosopher, would he not have replied in the words
of Cicero, "Quae tandem ista auguratio est, annorum potius quam aut
raensium aut dierum?" De Divinatione, ii. 30. Observe with what
irreverence Lucian, (in Alexandro, c. 13.) and his friend Celsus ap.
Origen, (l. vii. p. 327,) express themselves concerning the Hebrew
prophets.]

[Footnote 193: The philosophers who derided the more ancient predictions
of the Sibyls, would easily have detected the Jewish and Christian
forgeries, which have been so triumphantly quoted by the fathers, from
Justin Martyr to Lactantius. When the Sibylline verses had performed
their appointed task, they, like the system of the millennium, were
quietly laid aside. The Christian Sybil had unluckily fixed the ruin of
Rome for the year 195, A. U. C. 948.]

But how shall we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and
philosophic world, to those evidences which were represented by the hand
of Omnipotence, not to their reason, but to their senses? During the age
of Christ, of his apostles, and of their first disciples, the doctrine
which they preached was confirmed by innumerable prodigies. The lame
walked, the blind saw, the sick were healed, the dead were raised,
daemons were expelled, and the laws of Nature were frequently suspended
for the benefit of the church. But the sages of Greece and Rome turned
aside from the awful spectacle, and, pursuing the ordinary occupations
of life and study, appeared unconscious of any alterations in the moral
or physical government of the world. Under the reign of Tiberius, the
whole earth, [194] or at least a celebrated province of the Roman empire,
[195] was involved in a preternatural darkness of three hours. Even this
miraculous event, which ought to have excited the wonder, the curiosity,
and the devotion of mankind, passed without notice in an age of science
and history. [196] It happened during the lifetime of Seneca and the
elder Pliny, who must have experienced the immediate effects, or
received the earliest intelligence, of the prodigy. Each of these
philosophers, in a laborious work, has recorded all the great phenomena
of Nature, earthquakes, meteors comets, and eclipses, which his
indefatigable curiosity could collect. [197] Both the one and the other
have omitted to mention the greatest phenomenon to which the mortal eye
has been witness since the creation of the globe. A distinct chapter
of Pliny [198] is designed for eclipses of an extraordinary nature and
unusual duration; but he contents himself with describing the singular
defect of light which followed the murder of Caesar, when, during the
greatest part of a year, the orb of the sun appeared pale and without
splendor. The season of obscurity, which cannot surely be compared with
the preternatural darkness of the Passion, had been already celebrated
by most of the poets [199] and historians of that memorable age. [200]

[Footnote 194: The fathers, as they are drawn out in battle array by
Dom Calmet, (Dissertations sur la Bible, tom. iii. p. 295--308,) seem to
cover the whole earth with darkness, in which they are followed by most
of the moderns.]

[Footnote 195: Origen ad Matth. c. 27, and a few modern critics, Beza,
Le Clerc, Lardner, &c., are desirous of confining it to the land of
Judea.]

[Footnote 196: The celebrated passage of Phlegon is now wisely
abandoned. When Tertullian assures the Pagans that the mention of the
prodigy is found in Arcanis (not Archivis) vestris, (see his Apology, c.
21,) he probably appeals to the Sibylline verses, which relate it
exactly in the words of the Gospel. * Note: According to some learned
theologians a misunderstanding of the text in the Gospel has given rise
to this mistake, which has employed and wearied so many laborious
commentators, though Origen had already taken the pains to preinform
them. The expression does not mean, they assert, an eclipse, but any
kind of obscurity occasioned in the atmosphere, whether by clouds or any
other cause. As this obscuration of the sun rarely took place in
Palestine, where in the middle of April the sky was usually clear, it
assumed, in the eyes of the Jews and Christians, an importance
conformable to the received notion, that the sun concealed at midday was
a sinister presage. See Amos viii. 9, 10. The word is often taken in
this sense by contemporary writers; the Apocalypse says the sun was
concealed, when speaking of an obscuration caused by smoke and dust.
(Revel. ix. 2.) Moreover, the Hebrew word ophal, which in the LXX.
answers to the Greek, signifies any darkness; and the Evangelists, who
have modelled the sense of their expressions by those of the LXX., must
have taken it in the same latitude. This darkening of the sky usually
precedes earthquakes. (Matt. xxvii. 51.) The Heathen authors furnish us
a number of examples, of which a miraculous explanation was given at the
time. See Ovid. ii. v. 33, l. xv. v. 785. Pliny, Hist. Nat. l. ii. c 30.
Wetstein has collected all these examples in his edition of the New
Testament. We need not, then, be astonished at the silence of the Pagan
authors concerning a phenomenon which did not extend beyond Jerusalem,
and which might have nothing contrary to the laws of nature; although
the Christians and the Jews may have regarded it as a sinister presage.
See Michaelia Notes on New Testament, v. i. p. 290. Paulus, Commentary
on New Testament, iii. p. 760.--G.]

[Footnote 197: Seneca, Quaest. Natur. l. i. 15, vi. l. vii. 17. Plin.
Hist. Natur. l. ii.]

[Footnote 198: Plin. Hist. Natur. ii. 30.]

[Footnote 199: Virgil. Georgic. i. 466. Tibullus, l. i. Eleg. v. ver.
75. Ovid Metamorph. xv. 782. Lucan. Pharsal. i. 540. The last of these
poets places this prodigy before the civil war.]

[Footnote 200: See a public epistle of M. Antony in Joseph. Antiquit.
xiv. 12. Plutarch in Caesar. p. 471. Appian. Bell. Civil. l. iv. Dion
Cassius, l. xlv. p. 431. Julius Obsequens, c. 128. His little treatise
is an abstract of Livy's prodigies.]


