## Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Aemilianus, Valerian And Gallienus.--Part IV.

In the general calamities of mankind, the death of an individual,
however exalted, the ruin of an edifice, however famous, are passed over
with careless inattention. Yet we cannot forget that the temple of
Diana at Ephesus, after having risen with increasing splendor from seven
repeated misfortunes, [128] was finally burnt by the Goths in their
third naval invasion. The arts of Greece, and the wealth of Asia,
had conspired to erect that sacred and magnificent structure. It was
supported by a hundred and twenty-seven marble columns of the Ionic
order. They were the gifts of devout monarchs, and each was sixty feet
high. The altar was adorned with the masterly sculptures of Praxiteles,
who had, perhaps, selected from the favorite legends of the place the
birth of the divine children of Latona, the concealment of Apollo
after the slaughter of the Cyclops, and the clemency of Bacchus to the
vanquished Amazons. [129] Yet the length of the temple of Ephesus was
only four hundred and twenty-five feet, about two thirds of the measure
of the church of St. Peter's at Rome. [130] In the other dimensions,
it was still more inferior to that sublime production of modern
architecture. The spreading arms of a Christian cross require a much
greater breadth than the oblong temples of the Pagans; and the boldest
artists of antiquity would have been startled at the proposal of raising
in the air a dome of the size and proportions of the Pantheon. The
temple of Diana was, however, admired as one of the wonders of the
world. Successive empires, the Persian, the Macedonian, and the Roman,
had revered its sanctity and enriched its splendor. [131] But the rude
savages of the Baltic were destitute of a taste for the elegant arts,
and they despised the ideal terrors of a foreign superstition. [132]

[Footnote 128: Hist. Aug. p. 178. Jornandes, c. 20.]

[Footnote 129: Strabo, l. xiv. p. 640. Vitruvius, l. i. c. i. praefat l
vii. Tacit Annal. iii. 61. Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 14.]

[Footnote 130: The length of St. Peter's is 840 Roman palms; each palm
is very little short of nine English inches. See Greaves's Miscellanies
vol. i. p. 233; on the Roman Foot. * Note: St. Paul's Cathedral is 500
feet. Dallaway on Architecture--M.]

[Footnote 131: The policy, however, of the Romans induced them to
abridge the extent of the sanctuary or asylum, which by successive
privileges had spread itself two stadia round the temple. Strabo, l.
xiv. p. 641. Tacit. Annal. iii. 60, &c.]

[Footnote 132: They offered no sacrifices to the Grecian gods. See
Epistol Gregor. Thaumat.]

Another circumstance is related of these invasions, which might deserve
our notice, were it not justly to be suspected as the fanciful conceit
of a recent sophist. We are told, that in the sack of Athens the Goths
had collected all the libraries, and were on the point of setting fire
to this funeral pile of Grecian learning, had not one of their chiefs,
of more refined policy than his brethren, dissuaded them from the
design; by the profound observation, that as long as the Greeks were
addicted to the study of books, they would never apply themselves to the
exercise of arms. [133] The sagacious counsellor (should the truth of
the fact be admitted) reasoned like an ignorant barbarian. In the most
polite and powerful nations, genius of every kind has displayed itself
about the same period; and the age of science has generally been the age
of military virtue and success.

[Footnote 133: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 635. Such an anecdote was perfectly
suited to the taste of Montaigne. He makes use of it in his agreeable
Essay on Pedantry, l. i. c. 24.]


IV. The new sovereign of Persia, Artaxerxes and his son Sapor, had
triumphed (as we have already seen) over the house of Arsaces. Of the
many princes of that ancient race. Chosroes, king of Armenia, had alone
preserved both his life and his independence. He defended himself by the
natural strength of his country; by the perpetual resort of fugitives
and malecontents; by the alliance of the Romans, and above all, by his
own courage.

Invincible in arms, during a thirty years' war, he was at length
assassinated by the emissaries of Sapor, king of Persia. The patriotic
satraps of Armenia, who asserted the freedom and dignity of the crown,
implored the protection of Rome in favor of Tiridates, the lawful heir.
But the son of Chosroes was an infant, the allies were at a distance,
and the Persian monarch advanced towards the frontier at the head of an
irresistible force. Young Tiridates, the future hope of his country,
was saved by the fidelity of a servant, and Armenia continued above
twenty-seven years a reluctant province of the great monarchy of Persia.
[134] Elated with this easy conquest, and presuming on the distresses or
the degeneracy of the Romans, Sapor obliged the strong garrisons of
Carrhae and Nisibis [1341] to surrender, and spread devastation and
terror on either side of the Euphrates.

[Footnote 134: Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 71, 73, 74. Zonaras, l. xii.
p. 628. The anthentic relation of the Armenian historian serves to
rectify the confused account of the Greek. The latter talks of the
children of Tiridates, who at that time was himself an infant. (Compare
St Martin Memoires sur l'Armenie, i. p. 301.--M.)]

[Footnote 1341: Nisibis, according to Persian authors, was taken by a
miracle, the wall fell, in compliance with the prayers of the army.
Malcolm's Persia, l. 76.--M]

The loss of an important frontier, the ruin of a faithful and natural
ally, and the rapid success of Sapor's ambition, affected Rome with a
deep sense of the insult as well as of the danger. Valerian flattered
himself, that the vigilance of his lieutenants would sufficiently
provide for the safety of the Rhine and of the Danube; but he resolved,
notwithstanding his advanced age, to march in person to the defence of
the Euphrates.

During his progress through Asia Minor, the naval enterprises of the
Goths were suspended, and the afflicted province enjoyed a transient
and fallacious calm. He passed the Euphrates, encountered the Persian
monarch near the walls of Edessa, was vanquished, and taken prisoner by
Sapor. The particulars of this great event are darkly and imperfectly
represented; yet, by the glimmering light which is afforded us, we
may discover a long series of imprudence, of error, and of deserved
misfortunes on the side of the Roman emperor. He reposed an implicit
confidence in Macrianus, his Praetorian praefect. [135] That worthless
minister rendered his master formidable only to the oppressed subjects,
and contemptible to the enemies of Rome. [136] By his weak or wicked
counsels, the Imperial army was betrayed into a situation where valor
and military skill were equally unavailing. [137] The vigorous attempt of
the Romans to cut their way through the Persian host was repulsed with
great slaughter; [138] and Sapor, who encompassed the camp with superior
numbers, patiently waited till the increasing rage of famine and
pestilence had insured his victory. The licentious murmurs of the
legions soon accused Valerian as the cause of their calamities; their
seditious clamors demanded an instant capitulation. An immense sum of
gold was offered to purchase the permission of a disgraceful retreat.
But the Persian, conscious of his superiority, refused the money with
disdain; and detaining the deputies, advanced in order of battle to the
foot of the Roman rampart, and insisted on a personal conference with
the emperor. Valerian was reduced to the necessity of intrusting his
life and dignity to the faith of an enemy. The interview ended as it was
natural to expect. The emperor was made a prisoner, and his astonished
troops laid down their arms. [139] In such a moment of triumph, the
pride and policy of Sapor prompted him to fill the vacant throne with
a successor entirely dependent on his pleasure. Cyriades, an obscure
fugitive of Antioch, stained with every vice, was chosen to dishonor the
Roman purple; and the will of the Persian victor could not fail of being
ratified by the acclamations, however reluctant, of the captive army.
[140]

[Footnote 135: Hist. Aug. p. 191. As Macrianus was an enemy to the
Christians, they charged him with being a magician.]

[Footnote 136: Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]

[Footnote 137: Hist. Aug. p. 174.]

[Footnote 138: Victor in Caesar. Eutropius, ix. 7.]

[Footnote 139: Zosimus, l. i. p. 33. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630. Peter
Patricius, in the Excerpta Legat. p. 29.]

[Footnote 140: Hist. August. p. 185. The reign of Cyriades appears in
that collection prior to the death of Valerian; but I have preferred
a probable series of events to the doubtful chronology of a most
inaccurate writer]

The Imperial slave was eager to secure the favor of his master by an act
of treason to his native country. He conducted Sapor over the Euphrates,
and, by the way of Chalcis, to the metropolis of the East. So rapid were
the motions of the Persian cavalry, that, if we may credit a very
judicious historian, [141] the city of Antioch was surprised when the
idle multitude was fondly gazing on the amusements of the theatre. The
splendid buildings of Antioch, private as well as public, were either
pillaged or destroyed; and the numerous inhabitants were put to the
sword, or led away into captivity. [142] The tide of devastation was
stopped for a moment by the resolution of the high priest of Emesa.
Arrayed in his sacerdotal robes, he appeared at the head of a great body
of fanatic peasants, armed only with slings, and defended his god and
his property from the sacrilegious hands of the followers of Zoroaster.
[143] But the ruin of Tarsus, and of many other cities, furnishes a
melancholy proof that, except in this singular instance, the conquest of
Syria and Cilicia scarcely interrupted the progress of the Persian arms.
The advantages of the narrow passes of Mount Taurus were abandoned, in
which an invader, whose principal force consisted in his cavalry, would
have been engaged in a very unequal combat: and Sapor was permitted to
form the siege of Caesarea, the capital of Cappadocia; a city, though of
the second rank, which was supposed to contain four hundred thousand
inhabitants. Demosthenes commanded in the place, not so much by the
commission of the emperor, as in the voluntary defence of his country.
For a long time he deferred its fate; and when at last Caesarea was
betrayed by the perfidy of a physician, he cut his way through the
Persians, who had been ordered to exert their utmost diligence to take
him alive. This heroic chief escaped the power of a foe who might either
have honored or punished his obstinate valor; but many thousands of his
fellow-citizens were involved in a general massacre, and Sapor is
accused of treating his prisoners with wanton and unrelenting cruelty.
[144] Much should undoubtedly be allowed for national animosity, much
for humbled pride and impotent revenge; yet, upon the whole, it is
certain, that the same prince, who, in Armenia, had displayed the mild
aspect of a legislator, showed himself to the Romans under the stern
features of a conqueror. He despaired of making any permanent
establishment in the empire, and sought only to leave behind him a
wasted desert, whilst he transported into Persia the people and the
treasures of the provinces. [145]

[Footnote 141: The sack of Antioch, anticipated by some historians,
is assigned, by the decisive testimony of Ammianus Marcellinus, to the
reign of Gallienus, xxiii. 5. * Note: Heyne, in his note on Zosimus,
contests this opinion of Gibbon and observes, that the testimony of
Ammianus is in fact by no means clear, decisive. Gallienus and Valerian
reigned together. Zosimus, in a passage, l. iiii. 32, 8, distinctly
places this event before the capture of Valerian.--M.]

[Footnote 142: Zosimus, l. i. p. 35.]

[Footnote 143: John Malala, tom. i. p. 391. He corrupts this probable
event by some fabulous circumstances.]

[Footnote 144: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630. Deep valleys were filled up with
the slain. Crowds of prisoners were driven to water like beasts, and
many perished for want of food.]

[Footnote 145: Zosimus, l. i. p. 25 asserts, that Sapor, had he not
preferred spoil to conquest, might have remained master of Asia.]

At the time when the East trembled at the name of Sapor, he received
a present not unworthy of the greatest kings; a long train of camels,
laden with the most rare and valuable merchandises. The rich offering
was accompanied with an epistle, respectful, but not servile, from
Odenathus, one of the noblest and most opulent senators of Palmyra. "Who
is this Odenathus," (said the haughty victor, and he commanded that the
present should be cast into the Euphrates,) "that he thus insolently
presumes to write to his lord? If he entertains a hope of mitigating his
punishment, let him fall prostrate before the foot of our throne, with
his hands bound behind his back. Should he hesitate, swift destruction
shall be poured on his head, on his whole race, and on his country."
[146] The desperate extremity to which the Palmyrenian was reduced,
called into action all the latent powers of his soul. He met Sapor; but
he met him in arms.

Infusing his own spirit into a little army collected from the villages
of Syria [147] and the tents of the desert, [148] he hovered round the
Persian host, harassed their retreat, carried off part of the treasure,
and, what was dearer than any treasure, several of the women of the
great king; who was at last obliged to repass the Euphrates with some
marks of haste and confusion. [149] By this exploit, Odenathus laid
the foundations of his future fame and fortunes. The majesty of Rome,
oppressed by a Persian, was protected by a Syrian or Arab of Palmyra.

[Footnote 146: Peter Patricius in Excerpt. Leg. p. 29.]

[Footnote 147: Syrorum agrestium manu. Sextus Rufus, c. 23. Rufus Victor
the Augustan History, (p. 192,) and several inscriptions, agree in
making Odenathus a citizen of Palmyra.]

[Footnote 148: He possessed so powerful an interest among the wandering
tribes, that Procopius (Bell. Persic. l. ii. c. 5) and John Malala,
(tom. i. p. 391) style him Prince of the Saracens.]

[Footnote 149: Peter Patricius, p. 25.]

The voice of history, which is often little more than the organ of
hatred or flattery, reproaches Sapor with a proud abuse of the rights
of conquest. We are told that Valerian, in chains, but invested with the
Imperial purple, was exposed to the multitude, a constant spectacle
of fallen greatness; and that whenever the Persian monarch mounted
on horseback, he placed his foot on the neck of a Roman emperor.
Notwithstanding all the remonstrances of his allies, who repeatedly
advised him to remember the vicissitudes of fortune, to dread the
returning power of Rome, and to make his illustrious captive the pledge
of peace, not the object of insult, Sapor still remained inflexible.
When Valerian sunk under the weight of shame and grief, his skin,
stuffed with straw, and formed into the likeness of a human figure, was
preserved for ages in the most celebrated temple of Persia; a more real
monument of triumph, than the fancied trophies of brass and marble so
often erected by Roman vanity. [150] The tale is moral and pathetic, but
the truth [1501] of it may very fairly be called in question. The letters
still extant from the princes of the East to Sapor are manifest
forgeries; [151] nor is it natural to suppose that a jealous monarch
should, even in the person of a rival, thus publicly degrade the majesty
of kings. Whatever treatment the unfortunate Valerian might experience
in Persia, it is at least certain that the only emperor of Rome who had
ever fallen into the hands of the enemy, languished away his life in
hopeless captivity.

[Footnote 150: The Pagan writers lament, the Christian insult, the
misfortunes of Valerian. Their various testimonies are accurately
collected by Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 739, &c. So little has been
preserved of eastern history before Mahomet, that the modern Persians
are totally ignorant of the victory Sapor, an event so glorious to their
nation. See Bibliotheque Orientale. * Note: Malcolm appears to write
from Persian authorities, i. 76.--M.]

[Footnote 1501: Yet Gibbon himself records a speech of the emperor Galerius,
which alludes to the cruelties exercised against the living, and the
indignities to which they exposed the dead Valerian, vol. ii. ch. 13.
Respect for the kingly character would by no means prevent an eastern
monarch from ratifying his pride and his vengeance on a fallen foe.--M.]

[Footnote 151: One of these epistles is from Artavasdes, king of
Armenia; since Armenia was then a province of Persia, the king, the
kingdom, and the epistle must be fictitious.]

The emperor Gallienus, who had long supported with impatience
the censorial severity of his father and colleague, received the
intelligence of his misfortunes with secret pleasure and avowed
indifference. "I knew that my father was a mortal," said he; "and since
he has acted as it becomes a brave man, I am satisfied." Whilst Rome
lamented the fate of her sovereign, the savage coldness of his son was
extolled by the servile courtiers as the perfect firmness of a hero
and a stoic. [152] It is difficult to paint the light, the various,
the inconstant character of Gallienus, which he displayed without
constraint, as soon as he became sole possessor of the empire. In every
art that he attempted, his lively genius enabled him to succeed; and as
his genius was destitute of judgment, he attempted every art, except
the important ones of war and government. He was a master of several
curious, but useless sciences, a ready orator, an elegant poet, [153] a
skilful gardener, an excellent cook, and most contemptible prince. When
the great emergencies of the state required his presence and attention,
he was engaged in conversation with the philosopher Plotinus, [154]
wasting his time in trifling or licentious pleasures, preparing his
initiation to the Grecian mysteries, or soliciting a place in the
Arcopagus of Athens. His profuse magnificence insulted the general
poverty; the solemn ridicule of his triumphs impressed a deeper sense
of the public disgrace. [155] The repeated intelligence of invasions,
defeats, and rebellions, he received with a careless smile; and singling
out, with affected contempt, some particular production of the lost
province, he carelessly asked, whether Rome must be ruined, unless it
was supplied with linen from Egypt, and arras cloth from Gaul. There
were, however, a few short moments in the life of Gallienus, when,
exasperated by some recent injury, he suddenly appeared the intrepid
soldier and the cruel tyrant; till, satiated with blood, or fatigued by
resistance, he insensibly sunk into the natural mildness and indolence
of his character. [156]

[Footnote 152: See his life in the Augustan History.]

[Footnote 153: There is still extant a very pretty Epithalamium,
composed by Gallienus for the nuptials of his nephews:--"Ite ait, O
juvenes, pariter sudate medullis Omnibus, inter vos: non murmura vestra
columbae, Brachia non hederae, non vincant oscula conchae."]

[Footnote 154: He was on the point of giving Plotinus a ruined city of
Campania to try the experiment of realizing Plato's Republic. See the
Life of Plotinus, by Porphyry, in Fabricius's Biblioth. Graec. l. iv.]
[Footnote 155: A medal which bears the head of Gallienus has perplexed
the antiquarians by its legend and reverse; the former Gallienoe
Augustoe, the latter Ubique Pax. M. Spanheim supposes that the coin was
struck by some of the enemies of Gallienus, and was designed as a severe
satire on that effeminate prince. But as the use of irony may seem
unworthy of the gravity of the Roman mint, M. de Vallemont has deduced
from a passage of Trebellius Pollio (Hist. Aug. p. 198) an ingenious
and natural solution. Galliena was first cousin to the emperor. By
delivering Africa from the usurper Celsus, she deserved the title of
Augusta. On a medal in the French king's collection, we read a similar
inscription of Faustina Augusta round the head of Marcus Aurelius.
With regard to the Ubique Pax, it is easily explained by the vanity of
Gallienus, who seized, perhaps, the occasion of some momentary calm. See
Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres, Janvier, 1700, p. 21--34.]

[Footnote 156: This singular character has, I believe, been fairly
transmitted to us. The reign of his immediate successor was short and
busy; and the historians who wrote before the elevation of the family of
Constantine could not have the most remote interest to misrepresent the
character of Gallienus.]

At the time when the reins of government were held with so loose a hand,
it is not surprising, that a crowd of usurpers should start up in every
province of the empire against the son of Valerian. It was probably some
ingenious fancy, of comparing the thirty tyrants of Rome with the thirty
tyrants of Athens, that induced the writers of the Augustan History to
select that celebrated number, which has been gradually received into
a popular appellation. [157] But in every light the parallel is idle and
defective. What resemblance can we discover between a council of thirty
persons, the united oppressors of a single city, and an uncertain list
of independent rivals, who rose and fell in irregular succession through
the extent of a vast empire? Nor can the number of thirty be completed,
unless we include in the account the women and children who were honored
with the Imperial title. The reign of Gallienus, distracted as it was,
produced only nineteen pretenders to the throne: Cyriades, Macrianus,
Balista, Odenathus, and Zenobia, in the East; in Gaul, and the western
provinces, Posthumus, Lollianus, Victorinus, and his mother Victoria,
Marius, and Tetricus; in Illyricum and the confines of the Danube,
Ingenuus, Regillianus, and Aureolus; in Pontus, [158] Saturninus; in
Isauria, Trebellianus; Piso in Thessaly; Valens in Achaia; Aemilianus in
Egypt; and Celsus in Africa. [1581] To illustrate the obscure monuments of
the life and death of each individual, would prove a laborious task,
alike barren of instruction and of amusement. We may content ourselves
with investigating some general characters, that most strongly mark the
condition of the times, and the manners of the men, their pretensions,
their motives, their fate, and their destructive consequences of their
usurpation. [159]

[Footnote 157: Pollio expresses the most minute anxiety to complete the
number. * Note: Compare a dissertation of Manso on the thirty tyrants at
the end of his Leben Constantius des Grossen. Breslau, 1817.--M.]

[Footnote 158: The place of his reign is somewhat doubtful; but there
was a tyrant in Pontus, and we are acquainted with the seat of all the
others.]

[Footnote 1581: Captain Smyth, in his "Catalogue of Medals," p.
307, substitutes two new names to make up the number of nineteen, for
those of Odenathus and Zenobia. He subjoins this list:--1. 2. 3. Of
those whose coins Those whose coins Those of whom no are undoubtedly
true. are suspected. coins are known. Posthumus. Cyriades. Valens.
Laelianus, (Lollianus, G.) Ingenuus. Balista Victorinus Celsus.
Saturninus. Marius. Piso Frugi. Trebellianus. Tetricus.
--M. 1815 Macrianus. Quietus. Regalianus (Regillianus, G.) Alex.
Aemilianus. Aureolus. Sulpicius Antoninus]

[Footnote 159: Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 1163, reckons them somewhat
differently.]

It is sufficiently known, that the odious appellation of Tyrant was
often employed by the ancients to express the illegal seizure of
supreme power, without any reference to the abuse of it. Several of the
pretenders, who raised the standard of rebellion against the emperor
Gallienus, were shining models of virtue, and almost all possessed a
considerable share of vigor and ability. Their merit had recommended
them to the favor of Valerian, and gradually promoted them to the most
important commands of the empire. The generals, who assumed the title of
Augustus, were either respected by their troops for their able conduct
and severe discipline, or admired for valor and success in war, or
beloved for frankness and generosity. The field of victory was often
the scene of their election; and even the armorer Marius, the most
contemptible of all the candidates for the purple, was distinguished,
however by intrepid courage, matchless strength, and blunt honesty.
[160] His mean and recent trade cast, indeed, an air of ridicule on his
elevation; [1601] but his birth could not be more obscure than was that of
the greater part of his rivals, who were born of peasants, and enlisted
in the army as private soldiers. In times of confusion, every active
genius finds the place assigned him by nature: in a general state
of war, military merit is the road to glory and to greatness. Of the
nineteen tyrants Tetricus only was a senator; Piso alone was a noble.
The blood of Numa, through twenty-eight successive generations, ran in
the veins of Calphurnius Piso, [161] who, by female alliances, claimed
a right of exhibiting, in his house, the images of Crassus and of the
great Pompey. [162] His ancestors had been repeatedly dignified with all
the honors which the commonwealth could bestow; and of all the ancient
families of Rome, the Calphurnian alone had survived the tyranny of the
Caesars. The personal qualities of Piso added new lustre to his race.
The usurper Valens, by whose order he was killed, confessed, with deep
remorse, that even an enemy ought to have respected the sanctity of
Piso; and although he died in arms against Gallienus, the senate, with
the emperor's generous permission, decreed the triumphal ornaments
to the memory of so virtuous a rebel. [163] [See Roman Coins: From The
British Museum. Number four depicts Crassus.]

[Footnote 160: See the speech of Marius in the Augustan History, p. 197.
The accidental identity of names was the only circumstance that could
tempt Pollio to imitate Sallust.]

[Footnote 1601: Marius was killed by a soldier, who had formerly served
as a workman in his shop, and who exclaimed, as he struck, "Behold the
sword which thyself hast forged." Trob vita.--G.]

[Footnote 161: "Vos, O Pompilius sanguis!" is Horace's address to
the Pisos See Art. Poet. v. 292, with Dacier's and Sanadon's notes.]

[Footnote 162: Tacit. Annal. xv. 48. Hist. i. 15. In the former of
these passages we may venture to change paterna into materna. In every
generation from Augustus to Alexander Severus, one or more Pisos appear
as consuls. A Piso was deemed worthy of the throne by Augustus, (Tacit.
Annal. i. 13;) a second headed a formidable conspiracy against Nero; and
a third was adopted, and declared Caesar, by Galba.]

[Footnote 163: Hist. August. p. 195. The senate, in a moment of
enthusiasm, seems to have presumed on the approbation of Gallienus.]

The lieutenants of Valerian were grateful to the father, whom they
esteemed. They disdained to serve the luxurious indolence of his
unworthy son. The throne of the Roman world was unsupported by any
principle of loyalty; and treason against such a prince might easily be
considered as patriotism to the state. Yet if we examine with candor the
conduct of these usurpers, it will appear, that they were much oftener
driven into rebellion by their fears, than urged to it by their
ambition. They dreaded the cruel suspicions of Gallienus; they equally
dreaded the capricious violence of their troops. If the dangerous favor
of the army had imprudently declared them deserving of the purple, they
were marked for sure destruction; and even prudence would counsel them
to secure a short enjoyment of empire, and rather to try the fortune of
war than to expect the hand of an executioner.

When the clamor of the soldiers invested the reluctant victims with the
ensigns of sovereign authority, they sometimes mourned in secret their
approaching fate. "You have lost," said Saturninus, on the day of his
elevation, "you have lost a useful commander, and you have made a very
wretched emperor." [164]

[Footnote 164: Hist. August p. 196.]

The apprehensions of Saturninus were justified by the repeated
experience of revolutions. Of the nineteen tyrants who started up under
the reign of Gallienus, there was not one who enjoyed a life of peace,
or a natural death. As soon as they were invested with the bloody
purple, they inspired their adherents with the same fears and ambition
which had occasioned their own revolt. Encompassed with domestic
conspiracy, military sedition, and civil war, they trembled on the edge
of precipices, in which, after a longer or shorter term of anxiety, they
were inevitably lost. These precarious monarchs received, however, such
honors as the flattery of their respective armies and provinces could
bestow; but their claim, founded on rebellion, could never obtain the
sanction of law or history. Italy, Rome, and the senate, constantly
adhered to the cause of Gallienus, and he alone was considered as
the sovereign of the empire. That prince condescended, indeed, to
acknowledge the victorious arms of Odenathus, who deserved the honorable
distinction, by the respectful conduct which he always maintained
towards the son of Valerian. With the general applause of the Romans,
and the consent of Gallienus, the senate conferred the title of Augustus
on the brave Palmyrenian; and seemed to intrust him with the government
of the East, which he already possessed, in so independent a manner,
that, like a private succession, he bequeathed it to his illustrious
widow, Zenobia. [165]

[Footnote 165: The association of the brave Palmyrenian was the most
popular act of the whole reign of Gallienus. Hist. August. p. 180.]

The rapid and perpetual transitions from the cottage to the throne, and
from the throne to the grave, might have amused an indifferent
philosopher; were it possible for a philosopher to remain indifferent
amidst the general calamities of human kind. The election of these
precarious emperors, their power and their death, were equally
destructive to their subjects and adherents. The price of their fatal
elevation was instantly discharged to the troops by an immense donative,
drawn from the bowels of the exhausted people. However virtuous was
their character, however pure their intentions, they found themselves
reduced to the hard necessity of supporting their usurpation by frequent
acts of rapine and cruelty. When they fell, they involved armies and
provinces in their fall. There is still extant a most savage mandate
from Gallienus to one of his ministers, after the suppression of
Ingenuus, who had assumed the purple in Illyricum.

"It is not enough," says that soft but inhuman prince, "that you
exterminate such as have appeared in arms; the chance of battle might
have served me as effectually. The male sex of every age must be
extirpated; provided that, in the execution of the children and old men,
you can contrive means to save our reputation. Let every one die who has
dropped an expression, who has entertained a thought against me, against
me, the son of Valerian, the father and brother of so many princes. [166]
Remember that Ingenuus was made emperor: tear, kill, hew in pieces.
I write to you with my own hand, and would inspire you with my own
feelings." [167] Whilst the public forces of the state were dissipated
in private quarrels, the defenceless provinces lay exposed to every
invader. The bravest usurpers were compelled, by the perplexity of their
situation, to conclude ignominious treaties with the common enemy, to
purchase with oppressive tributes the neutrality or services of the
Barbarians, and to introduce hostile and independent nations into the
heart of the Roman monarchy. [168]

[Footnote 166: Gallienus had given the titles of Caesar and Augustus to
his son Saloninus, slain at Cologne by the usurper Posthumus. A second
son of Gallienus succeeded to the name and rank of his elder brother
Valerian, the brother of Gallienus, was also associated to the empire:
several other brothers, sisters, nephews, and nieces of the emperor
formed a very numerous royal family. See Tillemont, tom iii, and M. de
Brequigny in the Memoires de l'Academie, tom xxxii p. 262.]

[Footnote 167: Hist. August. p. 188.]

[Footnote 168: Regillianus had some bands of Roxolani in his service;
Posthumus a body of Franks. It was, perhaps, in the character of
auxiliaries that the latter introduced themselves into Spain.]

Such were the barbarians, and such the tyrants, who, under the reigns
of Valerian and Gallienus, dismembered the provinces, and reduced the
empire to the lowest pitch of disgrace and ruin, from whence it seemed
impossible that it should ever emerge. As far as the barrenness of
materials would permit, we have attempted to trace, with order and
perspicuity, the general events of that calamitous period. There still
remain some particular facts; I. The disorders of Sicily; II. The
tumults of Alexandria; and, III. The rebellion of the Isaurians, which
may serve to reflect a strong light on the horrid picture.


I. Whenever numerous troops of banditti, multiplied by success and
impunity, publicly defy, instead of eluding the justice of their
country, we may safely infer, that the excessive weakness of the
government is felt and abused by the lowest ranks of the community.
The situation of Sicily preserved it from the Barbarians; nor could the
disarmed province have supported a usurper. The sufferings of that once
flourishing and still fertile island were inflicted by baser hands. A
licentious crowd of slaves and peasants reigned for a while over the
plundered country, and renewed the memory of the servile wars of more
ancient times. [169] Devastations, of which the husbandman was either the
victim or the accomplice, must have ruined the agriculture of Sicily;
and as the principal estates were the property of the opulent senators
of Rome, who often enclosed within a farm the territory of an old
republic, it is not improbable, that this private injury might affect
the capital more deeply, than all the conquests of the Goths or the
Persians.

[Footnote 169: The Augustan History, p. 177. See Diodor. Sicul. l.
xxxiv.]


II. The foundation of Alexandria was a noble design, at once
conceived and executed by the son of Philip. The beautiful and regular
form of that great city, second only to Rome itself, comprehended a
circumference of fifteen miles; [170] it was peopled by three hundred
thousand free inhabitants, besides at least an equal number of slaves.
[171] The lucrative trade of Arabia and India flowed through the port of
Alexandria, to the capital and provinces of the empire. [1711] Idleness was
unknown. Some were employed in blowing of glass, others in weaving of
linen, others again manufacturing the papyrus. Either sex, and every
age, was engaged in the pursuits of industry, nor did even the blind or
the lame want occupations suited to their condition. [172] But the people
of Alexandria, a various mixture of nations, united the vanity and
inconstancy of the Greeks with the superstition and obstinacy of the
Egyptians. The most trifling occasion, a transient scarcity of flesh
or lentils, the neglect of an accustomed salutation, a mistake of
precedency in the public baths, or even a religious dispute, [173] were
at any time sufficient to kindle a sedition among that vast multitude,
whose resentments were furious and implacable. [174] After the captivity
of Valerian and the insolence of his son had relaxed the authority of
the laws, the Alexandrians abandoned themselves to the ungoverned rage
of their passions, and their unhappy country was the theatre of a civil
war, which continued (with a few short and suspicious truces) above
twelve years. [175] All intercourse was cut off between the several
quarters of the afflicted city, every street was polluted with blood,
every building of strength converted into a citadel; nor did the tumults
subside till a considerable part of Alexandria was irretrievably ruined.
The spacious and magnificent district of Bruchion, [1751] with its palaces
and musaeum, the residence of the kings and philosophers of Egypt, is
described above a century afterwards, as already reduced to its present
state of dreary solitude. [176]

[Footnote 170: Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 10.]

[Footnote 171: Diodor. Sicul. l. xvii. p. 590, edit. Wesseling.]

[Footnote 1711: Berenice, or Myos-Hormos, on the Red Sea, received the
eastern commodities. From thence they were transported to the Nile, and
down the Nile to Alexandria.--M.]

[Footnote 172: See a very curious letter of Hadrian, in the Augustan
History, p. 245.]

[Footnote 173: Such as the sacrilegious murder of a divine cat. See
Diodor. Sicul. l. i. * Note: The hostility between the Jewish and
Grecian part of the population afterwards between the two former and the
Christian, were unfailing causes of tumult, sedition, and massacre. In
no place were the religious disputes, after the establishment of
Christianity, more frequent or more sanguinary. See Philo. de Legat.
Hist. of Jews, ii. 171, iii. 111, 198. Gibbon, iii c. xxi. viii. c.
xlvii.--M.]

[Footnote 174: Hist. August. p. 195. This long and terrible sedition was
first occasioned by a dispute between a soldier and a townsman about a
pair of shoes.]

[Footnote 175: Dionysius apud. Euses. Hist. Eccles. vii. p. 21. Ammian
xxii. 16.]

[Footnote 1751: The Bruchion was a quarter of Alexandria which extended
along the largest of the two ports, and contained many palaces,
inhabited by the Ptolemies. D'Anv. Geogr. Anc. iii. 10.--G.]

[Footnote 176: Scaliger. Animadver. ad Euseb. Chron. p. 258. Three
dissertations of M. Bonamy, in the Mem. de l'Academie, tom. ix.]


III. The obscure rebellion of Trebellianus, who assumed the purple in
Isauria, a petty province of Asia Minor, was attended with strange and
memorable consequences. The pageant of royalty was soon destroyed by an
officer of Gallienus; but his followers, despairing of mercy, resolved
to shake off their allegiance, not only to the emperor, but to the
empire, and suddenly returned to the savage manners from which they
had never perfectly been reclaimed. Their craggy rocks, a branch of the
wide-extended Taurus, protected their inaccessible retreat. The tillage
of some fertile valleys [177] supplied them with necessaries, and a habit
of rapine with the luxuries of life. In the heart of the Roman monarchy,
the Isaurians long continued a nation of wild barbarians. Succeeding
princes, unable to reduce them to obedience, either by arms or policy,
were compelled to acknowledge their weakness, by surrounding the hostile
and independent spot with a strong chain of fortifications, [178] which
often proved insufficient to restrain the incursions of these domestic
foes. The Isaurians, gradually extending their territory to the
sea-coast, subdued the western and mountainous part of Cilicia, formerly
the nest of those daring pirates, against whom the republic had once
been obliged to exert its utmost force, under the conduct of the great
Pompey. [179]

[Footnote 177: Strabo, l. xiii. p. 569.]

[Footnote 178: Hist. August. p. 197.]

[Footnote 179: See Cellarius, Geogr Antiq. tom. ii. p. 137, upon the
limits of Isauria.]

Our habits of thinking so fondly connect the order of the universe with
the fate of man, that this gloomy period of history has been decorated
with inundations, earthquakes, uncommon meteors, preternatural darkness,
and a crowd of prodigies fictitious or exaggerated. [180] But a long
and general famine was a calamity of a more serious kind. It was the
inevitable consequence of rapine and oppression, which extirpated the
produce of the present, and the hope of future harvests. Famine is
almost always followed by epidemical diseases, the effect of scanty and
unwholesome food. Other causes must, however, have contributed to the
furious plague, which, from the year two hundred and fifty to the
year two hundred and sixty-five, raged without interruption in every
province, every city, and almost every family, of the Roman empire.
During some time five thousand persons died daily in Rome; and many
towns, that had escaped the hands of the Barbarians, were entirely
depopulated. [181]

[Footnote 180: Hist August p 177.]

[Footnote 181: Hist. August. p. 177. Zosimus, l. i. p. 24. Zonaras,
l. xii. p. 623. Euseb. Chronicon. Victor in Epitom. Victor in Caesar.
Eutropius, ix. 5. Orosius, vii. 21.]

We have the knowledge of a very curious circumstance, of some use
perhaps in the melancholy calculation of human calamities. An exact
register was kept at Alexandria of all the citizens entitled to receive
the distribution of corn. It was found, that the ancient number of those
comprised between the ages of forty and seventy, had been equal to the
whole sum of claimants, from fourteen to fourscore years of age,
who remained alive after the reign of Gallienus. [182] Applying this
authentic fact to the most correct tables of mortality, it evidently
proves, that above half the people of Alexandria had perished; and
could we venture to extend the analogy to the other provinces, we might
suspect, that war, pestilence, and famine, had consumed, in a few
years, the moiety of the human species. [183]

[Footnote 182: Euseb. Hist. Eccles. vii. 21. The fact is taken from the
Letters of Dionysius, who, in the time of those troubles, was bishop of
Alexandria.]

[Footnote 183: In a great number of parishes, 11,000 persons were found
between fourteen and eighty; 5365 between forty and seventy. See Buffon,
Histoire Naturelle, tom. ii. p. 590.]




