## Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The Antonines.--Part II.

It was an ancient tradition, that when the Capitol was founded by one of
the Roman kings, the god Terminus (who presided over boundaries, and
was represented, according to the fashion of that age, by a large stone)
alone, among all the inferior deities, refused to yield his place to
Jupiter himself. A favorable inference was drawn from his obstinacy,
which was interpreted by the augurs as a sure presage that the
boundaries of the Roman power would never recede. [22] During many ages,
the prediction, as it is usual, contributed to its own accomplishment.
But though Terminus had resisted the Majesty of Jupiter, he submitted
to the authority of the emperor Hadrian. [23] The resignation of all
the eastern conquests of Trajan was the first measure of his reign.
He restored to the Parthians the election of an independent sovereign;
withdrew the Roman garrisons from the provinces of Armenia, Mesopotamia,
and Assyria; and, in compliance with the precept of Augustus, once more
established the Euphrates as the frontier of the empire. [24] Censure,
which arraigns the public actions and the private motives of princes,
has ascribed to envy, a conduct which might be attributed to the
prudence and moderation of Hadrian. The various character of that
emperor, capable, by turns, of the meanest and the most generous
sentiments, may afford some color to the suspicion. It was, however,
scarcely in his power to place the superiority of his predecessor in a
more conspicuous light, than by thus confessing himself unequal to the
task of defending the conquests of Trajan.

[Footnote 22: Ovid. Fast. l. ii. ver. 667. See Livy, and Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, under the reign of Tarquin.]

[Footnote 23: St. Augustin is highly delighted with the proof of the
weakness of Terminus, and the vanity of the Augurs. See De Civitate Dei,
iv. 29. * Note: The turn of Gibbon's sentence is Augustin's: "Plus
Hadrianum regem hominum, quam regem Deorum timuisse videatur."--M]

[Footnote 24: See the Augustan History, p. 5, Jerome's Chronicle, and
all the Epitomizers. It is somewhat surprising, that this memorable
event should be omitted by Dion, or rather by Xiphilin.]

The martial and ambitious of spirit Trajan formed a very singular
contrast with the moderation of his successor. The restless activity of
Hadrian was not less remarkable when compared with the gentle repose of
Antoninus Pius. The life of the former was almost a perpetual journey;
and as he possessed the various talents of the soldier, the statesman,
and the scholar, he gratified his curiosity in the discharge of his
duty.

Careless of the difference of seasons and of climates, he marched on
foot, and bare-headed, over the snows of Caledonia, and the sultry
plains of the Upper Egypt; nor was there a province of the empire which,
in the course of his reign, was not honored with the presence of the
monarch. [25] But the tranquil life of Antoninus Pius was spent in the
bosom of Italy, and, during the twenty-three years that he directed
the public administration, the longest journeys of that amiable prince
extended no farther than from his palace in Rome to the retirement of
his Lanuvian villa. [26]

[Footnote 25: Dion, l. lxix. p. 1158. Hist. August. p. 5, 8. If all our
historians were lost, medals, inscriptions, and other monuments, would
be sufficient to record the travels of Hadrian. Note: The journeys of
Hadrian are traced in a note on Solvet's translation of Hegewisch, Essai
sur l'Epoque de Histoire Romaine la plus heureuse pour Genre Humain
Paris, 1834, p. 123.--M.]

[Footnote 26: See the Augustan History and the Epitomes.]

Notwithstanding this difference in their personal conduct, the general
system of Augustus was equally adopted and uniformly pursued by Hadrian
and by the two Antonines. They persisted in the design of maintaining
the dignity of the empire, without attempting to enlarge its limits. By
every honorable expedient they invited the friendship of the barbarians;
and endeavored to convince mankind that the Roman power, raised above
the temptation of conquest, was actuated only by the love of order
and justice. During a long period of forty-three years, their virtuous
labors were crowned with success; and if we except a few slight
hostilities, that served to exercise the legions of the frontier,
the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius offer the fair prospect of
universal peace. [27] The Roman name was revered among the most remote
nations of the earth. The fiercest barbarians frequently submitted their
differences to the arbitration of the emperor; and we are informed by a
contemporary historian that he had seen ambassadors who were refused
the honor which they came to solicit of being admitted into the rank of
subjects. [28]

[Footnote 27: We must, however, remember, that in the time
of Hadrian, a rebellion of the Jews raged with religious fury, though
only in a single province. Pausanias (l. viii. c. 43) mentions two
necessary and successful wars, conducted by the generals of Pius: 1st.
Against the wandering Moors, who were driven into the solitudes of
Atlas. 2d. Against the Brigantes of Britain, who had invaded the Roman
province. Both these wars (with several other hostilities) are mentioned
in the Augustan History, p. 19.]

[Footnote 28: Appian of Alexandria, in the preface to his History of the
Roman Wars.]


PART II.

The terror of the Roman arms added weight and dignity to the moderation
of the emperors. They preserved peace by a constant preparation for war;
and while justice regulated their conduct, they announced to the nations
on their confines, that they were as little disposed to endure, as to
offer an injury. The military strength, which it had been sufficient
for Hadrian and the elder Antoninus to display, was exerted against the
Parthians and the Germans by the emperor Marcus. The hostilities of the
barbarians provoked the resentment of that philosophic monarch, and, in
the prosecution of a just defence, Marcus and his generals obtained
many signal victories, both on the Euphrates and on the Danube. [29] The
military establishment of the Roman empire, which thus assured either
its tranquillity or success, will now become the proper and important
object of our attention.

[Footnote 29: Dion, l. lxxi. Hist. August. in Marco. The Parthian
victories gave birth to a crowd of contemptible historians, whose memory
has been rescued from oblivion and exposed to ridicule, in a very lively
piece of criticism of Lucian.]

In the purer ages of the commonwealth, the use of arms was reserved for
those ranks of citizens who had a country to love, a property to defend,
and some share in enacting those laws, which it was their interest as
well as duty to maintain. But in proportion as the public freedom was
lost in extent of conquest, war was gradually improved into an art, and
degraded into a trade. [30] The legions themselves, even at the time
when they were recruited in the most distant provinces, were supposed
to consist of Roman citizens. That distinction was generally considered,
either as a legal qualification or as a proper recompense for the
soldier; but a more serious regard was paid to the essential merit
of age, strength, and military stature. [31] In all levies, a just
preference was given to the climates of the North over those of the
South: the race of men born to the exercise of arms was sought for in
the country rather than in cities; and it was very reasonably presumed,
that the hardy occupations of smiths, carpenters, and huntsmen, would
supply more vigor and resolution than the sedentary trades which are
employed in the service of luxury. [32] After every qualification of
property had been laid aside, the armies of the Roman emperors were
still commanded, for the most part, by officers of liberal birth and
education; but the common soldiers, like the mercenary troops of modern
Europe, were drawn from the meanest, and very frequently from the most
profligate, of mankind.

[Footnote 30: The poorest rank of soldiers possessed above forty pounds
sterling, (Dionys. Halicarn. iv. 17,) a very high qualification at a
time when money was so scarce, that an ounce of silver was equivalent
to seventy pounds weight of brass. The populace, excluded by the ancient
constitution, were indiscriminately admitted by Marius. See Sallust. de
Bell. Jugurth. c. 91. * Note: On the uncertainty of all these estimates,
and the difficulty of fixing the relative value of brass and silver,
compare Niebuhr, vol. i. p. 473, &c. Eng. trans. p. 452. According to
Niebuhr, the relative disproportion in value, between the two metals,
arose, in a great degree from the abundance of brass or copper.--M.
Compare also Dureau 'de la Malle Economie Politique des Romains
especially L. l. c. ix.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 31: Caesar formed his legion Alauda of Gauls and strangers;
but it was during the license of civil war; and after the victory, he
gave them the freedom of the city for their reward.]

[Footnote 32: See Vegetius, de Re Militari, l. i. c. 2--7.]

That public virtue, which among the ancients was denominated patriotism,
is derived from a strong sense of our own interest in the preservation
and prosperity of the free government of which we are members. Such
a sentiment, which had rendered the legions of the republic almost
invincible, could make but a very feeble impression on the mercenary
servants of a despotic prince; and it became necessary to supply
that defect by other motives, of a different, but not less forcible
nature--honor and religion. The peasant, or mechanic, imbibed the useful
prejudice that he was advanced to the more dignified profession of arms,
in which his rank and reputation would depend on his own valor; and
that, although the prowess of a private soldier must often escape
the notice of fame, his own behavior might sometimes confer glory or
disgrace on the company, the legion, or even the army, to whose honors
he was associated. On his first entrance into the service, an oath was
administered to him with every circumstance of solemnity. He promised
never to desert his standard, to submit his own will to the commands of
his leaders, and to sacrifice his life for the safety of the emperor and
the empire. [33] The attachment of the Roman troops to their standards
was inspired by the united influence of religion and of honor. The
golden eagle, which glittered in the front of the legion, was the object
of their fondest devotion; nor was it esteemed less impious than it was
ignominious, to abandon that sacred ensign in the hour of danger. [34]
These motives, which derived their strength from the imagination, were
enforced by fears and hopes of a more substantial kind. Regular pay,
occasional donatives, and a stated recompense, after the appointed time
of service, alleviated the hardships of the military life, [35] whilst,
on the other hand, it was impossible for cowardice or disobedience
to escape the severest punishment. The centurions were authorized to
chastise with blows, the generals had a right to punish with death;
and it was an inflexible maxim of Roman discipline, that a good soldier
should dread his officers far more than the enemy. From such laudable
arts did the valor of the Imperial troops receive a degree of firmness
and docility unattainable by the impetuous and irregular passions of
barbarians.

[Footnote 33: The oath of service and fidelity to the emperor was
annually renewed by the troops on the first of January.]

[Footnote 34: Tacitus calls the Roman eagles, Bellorum Deos. They were
placed in a chapel in the camp, and with the other deities received the
religious worship of the troops. * Note: See also Dio. Cass. xl. c. 18.
--M.]

[Footnote 35: See Gronovius de Pecunia vetere, l. iii. p. 120, &c. The
emperor Domitian raised the annual stipend of the legionaries to twelve
pieces of gold, which, in his time, was equivalent to about ten of
our guineas. This pay, somewhat higher than our own, had been, and was
afterwards, gradually increased, according to the progress of wealth and
military government. After twenty years' service, the veteran received
three thousand denarii, (about one hundred pounds sterling,) or a
proportionable allowance of land. The pay and advantages of the guards
were, in general, about double those of the legions.]

And yet so sensible were the Romans of the imperfection of valor without
skill and practice, that, in their language, the name of an army was
borrowed from the word which signified exercise. [36] Military exercises
were the important and unremitted object of their discipline. The
recruits and young soldiers were constantly trained, both in the morning
and in the evening, nor was age or knowledge allowed to excuse the
veterans from the daily repetition of what they had completely learnt.
Large sheds were erected in the winter-quarters of the troops, that
their useful labors might not receive any interruption from the most
tempestuous weather; and it was carefully observed, that the arms
destined to this imitation of war, should be of double the weight which
was required in real action. [37] It is not the purpose of this work to
enter into any minute description of the Roman exercises. We shall only
remark, that they comprehended whatever could add strength to the body,
activity to the limbs, or grace to the motions. The soldiers were
diligently instructed to march, to run, to leap, to swim, to carry heavy
burdens, to handle every species of arms that was used either for
offence or for defence, either in distant engagement or in a closer
onset; to form a variety of evolutions; and to move to the sound of
flutes in the Pyrrhic or martial dance. [38] In the midst of peace, the
Roman troops familiarized themselves with the practice of war; and it is
prettily remarked by an ancient historian who had fought against them,
that the effusion of blood was the only circumstance which distinguished
a field of battle from a field of exercise. [39] It was the policy of
the ablest generals, and even of the emperors themselves, to encourage
these military studies by their presence and example; and we are
informed that Hadrian, as well as Trajan, frequently condescended to
instruct the unexperienced soldiers, to reward the diligent, and
sometimes to dispute with them the prize of superior strength or
dexterity. [40] Under the reigns of those princes, the science of
tactics was cultivated with success; and as long as the empire retained
any vigor, their military instructions were respected as the most
perfect model of Roman discipline.

[Footnote 36: Exercitus ab exercitando, Varro de Lingua Latina, l.
iv. Cicero in Tusculan. l. ii. 37. 15. There is room for a very
interesting work, which should lay open the connection between the
languages and manners of nations. * Note I am not aware of the
existence, at present, of such a work; but the profound observations of
the late William von Humboldt, in the introduction to his posthumously
published Essay on the Language of the Island of Java, (uber die
Kawi-sprache, Berlin, 1836,) may cause regret that this task was not
completed by that accomplished and universal scholar.--M.]

[Footnote 37: Vegatius, l. ii. and the rest of his first book.]

[Footnote 38: The Pyrrhic dance is extremely well illustrated by M.
le Beau, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxxv. p. 262, &c. That
learned academician, in a series of memoirs, has collected all the
passages of the ancients that relate to the Roman legion.]

[Footnote 39: Joseph. de Bell. Judaico, l. iii. c. 5. We are indebted to
this Jew for some very curious details of Roman discipline.]

[Footnote 40: Plin. Panegyr. c. 13. Life of Hadrian, in the Augustan
History.]

Nine centuries of war had gradually introduced into the service many
alterations and improvements. The legions, as they are described by
Polybius, [41] in the time of the Punic wars, differed very materially
from those which achieved the victories of Caesar, or defended the
monarchy of Hadrian and the Antonines.

The constitution of the Imperial legion may be described in a few words.
[42] The heavy-armed infantry, which composed its principal strength, [43]
was divided into ten cohorts, and fifty-five companies, under the orders
of a correspondent number of tribunes and centurions. The first cohort,
which always claimed the post of honor and the custody of the eagle, was
formed of eleven hundred and five soldiers, the most approved for valor
and fidelity. The remaining nine cohorts consisted each of five hundred
and fifty-five; and the whole body of legionary infantry amounted to six
thousand one hundred men. Their arms were uniform, and admirably adapted
to the nature of their service: an open helmet, with a lofty crest;
a breastplate, or coat of mail; greaves on their legs, and an ample
buckler on their left arm. The buckler was of an oblong and concave
figure, four feet in length, and two and a half in breadth, framed of a
light wood, covered with a bull's hide, and strongly guarded with plates
of brass. Besides a lighter spear, the legionary soldier grasped in
his right hand the formidable pilum, a ponderous javelin, whose
utmost length was about six feet, and which was terminated by a massy
triangular point of steel of eighteen inches. [44] This instrument was
indeed much inferior to our modern fire-arms; since it was exhausted
by a single discharge, at the distance of only ten or twelve paces.
Yet when it was launched by a firm and skilful hand, there was not any
cavalry that durst venture within its reach, nor any shield or corselet
that could sustain the impetuosity of its weight. As soon as the Roman
had darted his pilum, he drew his sword, and rushed forwards to close
with the enemy. His sword was a short well-tempered Spanish blade, that
carried a double edge, and was alike suited to the purpose of striking
or of pushing; but the soldier was always instructed to prefer the
latter use of his weapon, as his own body remained less exposed, whilst
he inflicted a more dangerous wound on his adversary. [45] The legion was
usually drawn up eight deep; and the regular distance of three feet
was left between the files as well as ranks. [46] A body of troops,
habituated to preserve this open order, in a long front and a rapid
charge, found themselves prepared to execute every disposition which the
circumstances of war, or the skill of their leader, might suggest. The
soldier possessed a free space for his arms and motions, and sufficient
intervals were allowed, through which seasonable reenforcements might be
introduced to the relief of the exhausted combatants. [47] The tactics of
the Greeks and Macedonians were formed on very different principles. The
strength of the phalanx depended on sixteen ranks of long pikes,
wedged together in the closest array. [48] But it was soon discovered by
reflection, as well as by the event, that the strength of the phalanx
was unable to contend with the activity of the legion. [49

[Footnote 41: See an admirable digression on the Roman discipline, in
the sixth book of his History.]

[Footnote 42: Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 4, &c. Considerable
part of his very perplexed abridgment was taken from the regulations of
Trajan and Hadrian; and the legion, as he describes it, cannot suit any
other age of the Roman empire.]

[Footnote 43: Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 1. In the purer age of
Caesar and Cicero, the word miles was almost confined to the infantry.
Under the lower empire, and the times of chivalry, it was appropriated
almost as exclusively to the men at arms, who fought on horseback.]

[Footnote 44: In the time of Polybius and Dionysius of Halicarnassus,
(l. v. c. 45,) the steel point of the pilum seems to have been much
longer. In the time of Vegetius, it was reduced to a foot, or even nine
inches. I have chosen a medium.]

[Footnote 45: For the legionary arms, see Lipsius de Militia Romana, l.
iii. c. 2--7.]

[Footnote 46: See the beautiful comparison of Virgil, Georgic ii. v.
279.]

[Footnote 47: M. Guichard, Memoires Militaires, tom. i. c. 4, and
Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 293--311, has treated the subject like a
scholar and an officer.]

[Footnote 48: See Arrian's Tactics. With the true partiality of a Greek,
Arrian rather chose to describe the phalanx, of which he had read, than
the legions which he had commanded.]

[Footnote 49: Polyb. l. xvii. (xviii. 9.)]

The cavalry, without which the force of the legion would have remained
imperfect, was divided into ten troops or squadrons; the first, as the
companion of the first cohort, consisted of a hundred and thirty-two
men; whilst each of the other nine amounted only to sixty-six. The
entire establishment formed a regiment, if we may use the modern
expression, of seven hundred and twenty-six horse, naturally connected
with its respective legion, but occasionally separated to act in the
line, and to compose a part of the wings of the army. [50] The cavalry of
the emperors was no longer composed, like that of the ancient republic,
of the noblest youths of Rome and Italy, who, by performing their
military service on horseback, prepared themselves for the offices
of senator and consul; and solicited, by deeds of valor, the future
suffrages of their countrymen. [51] Since the alteration of manners and
government, the most wealthy of the equestrian order were engaged in
the administration of justice, and of the revenue; [52] and whenever they
embraced the profession of arms, they were immediately intrusted with a
troop of horse, or a cohort of foot. [53] Trajan and Hadrian formed their
cavalry from the same provinces, and the same class of their subjects,
which recruited the ranks of the legion. The horses were bred, for
the most part, in Spain or Cappadocia. The Roman troopers despised the
complete armor with which the cavalry of the East was encumbered. Their
more useful arms consisted in a helmet, an oblong shield, light boots,
and a coat of mail. A javelin, and a long broad sword, were their
principal weapons of offence. The use of lances and of iron maces they
seem to have borrowed from the barbarians. [54]

[Footnote 50: Veget. de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 6. His positive
testimony, which might be supported by circumstantial evidence, ought
surely to silence those critics who refuse the Imperial legion its
proper body of cavalry. Note: See also Joseph. B. J. iii. vi. 2.--M.]

[Footnote 51: See Livy almost throughout, particularly xlii. 61.]


[Footnote 52: Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 2. The true sense of that very
curious passage was first discovered and illustrated by M. de Beaufort,
Republique Romaine, l. ii. c. 2.]

[Footnote 53: As in the instance of Horace and Agricola. This appears to
have been a defect in the Roman discipline; which Hadrian endeavored to
remedy by ascertaining the legal age of a tribune. * Note: These details
are not altogether accurate. Although, in the latter days of the
republic, and under the first emperors, the young Roman nobles obtained
the command of a squadron or a cohort with greater facility than in the
former times, they never obtained it without passing through a tolerably
long military service. Usually they served first in the praetorian
cohort, which was intrusted with the guard of the general: they were
received into the companionship (contubernium) of some superior officer,
and were there formed for duty. Thus Julius Caesar, though sprung from a
great family, served first as contubernalis under the praetor, M.
Thermus, and later under Servilius the Isaurian. (Suet. Jul. 2, 5. Plut.
in Par. p. 516. Ed. Froben.) The example of Horace, which Gibbon adduces
to prove that young knights were made tribunes immediately on entering
the service, proves nothing. In the first place, Horace was not a
knight; he was the son of a freedman of Venusia, in Apulia, who
exercised the humble office of coactor exauctionum, (collector of
payments at auctions.) (Sat. i. vi. 45, or 86.) Moreover, when the poet
was made tribune, Brutus, whose army was nearly entirely composed of
Orientals, gave this title to all the Romans of consideration who joined
him. The emperors were still less difficult in their choice; the number
of tribunes was augmented; the title and honors were conferred on
persons whom they wished to attack to the court. Augustus conferred on
the sons of senators, sometimes the tribunate, sometimes the command of
a squadron. Claudius gave to the knights who entered into the service,
first the command of a cohort of auxiliaries, later that of a squadron,
and at length, for the first time, the tribunate. (Suet in Claud. with
the notes of Ernesti.) The abuses that arose caused by the edict of
Hadrian, which fixed the age at which that honor could be attained.
(Spart. in Had. &c.) This edict was subsequently obeyed; for the emperor
Valerian, in a letter addressed to Mulvius Gallinnus, praetorian
praefect, excuses himself for having violated it in favor of the young
Probus afterwards emperor, on whom he had conferred the tribunate at an
earlier age on account of his rare talents. (Vopisc. in Prob. iv.)--W.
and G. Agricola, though already invested with the title of tribune, was
contubernalis in Britain with Suetonius Paulinus. Tac. Agr. v.--M.]

[Footnote 54: See Arrian's Tactics.]

The safety and honor of the empire was principally intrusted to the
legions, but the policy of Rome condescended to adopt every useful
instrument of war. Considerable levies were regularly made among the
provincials, who had not yet deserved the honorable distinction of
Romans. Many dependent princes and communities, dispersed round the
frontiers, were permitted, for a while, to hold their freedom and
security by the tenure of military service. [55] Even select troops of
hostile barbarians were frequently compelled or persuaded to consume
their dangerous valor in remote climates, and for the benefit of
the state. [56] All these were included under the general name of
auxiliaries; and howsoever they might vary according to the difference
of times and circumstances, their numbers were seldom much inferior to
those of the legions themselves. [57] Among the auxiliaries, the bravest
and most faithful bands were placed under the command of praefects and
centurions, and severely trained in the arts of Roman discipline; but
the far greater part retained those arms, to which the nature of their
country, or their early habits of life, more peculiarly adapted them.
By this institution, each legion, to whom a certain proportion of
auxiliaries was allotted, contained within itself every species of
lighter troops, and of missile weapons; and was capable of encountering
every nation, with the advantages of its respective arms and discipline.
[58] Nor was the legion destitute of what, in modern language, would be
styled a train of artillery. It consisted in ten military engines of the
largest, and fifty-five of a smaller size; but all of which, either
in an oblique or horizontal manner, discharged stones and darts with
irresistible violence. [59]

[Footnote 55: Such, in particular, was the
state of the Batavians. Tacit. Germania, c. 29.]

[Footnote 56: Marcus Antoninus obliged the vanquished Quadi and
Marcomanni to supply him with a large body of troops, which he
immediately sent into Britain. Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. (c. 16.)]

[Footnote 57: Tacit. Annal. iv. 5. Those who fix a regular proportion of
as many foot, and twice as many horse, confound the auxiliaries of the
emperors with the Italian allies of the republic.]

[Footnote 58: Vegetius, ii. 2. Arrian, in his order of march and battle
against the Alani.]

[Footnote 59: The subject of the ancient machines is treated with great
knowledge and ingenuity by the Chevalier Folard, (Polybe, tom. ii. p.
233-290.) He prefers them in many respects to our modern cannon and
mortars. We may observe, that the use of them in the field gradually
became more prevalent, in proportion as personal valor and military
skill declined with the Roman empire. When men were no longer found,
their place was supplied by machines. See Vegetius, ii. 25. Arrian.]




