## Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Aemilianus, Valerian And Gallienus.--Part III.

The Romans had long experienced the daring valor of the people of
Lower Germany. The union of their strength threatened Gaul with a more
formidable invasion, and required the presence of Gallienus, the heir
and colleague of Imperial power. [75] Whilst that prince, and his infant
son Salonius, displayed, in the court of Treves, the majesty of the
empire its armies were ably conducted by their general, Posthumus, who,
though he afterwards betrayed the family of Valerian, was ever faithful
to the great interests of the monarchy. The treacherous language of
panegyrics and medals darkly announces a long series of victories.
Trophies and titles attest (if such evidence can attest) the fame of
Posthumus, who is repeatedly styled the Conqueror of the Germans, and
the Savior of Gaul. [76]

[Footnote 75: Zosimus, l. i. p. 27.]

[Footnote 76: M. de Brequigny (in the Memoires de l'Academie, tom. xxx.)
has given us a very curious life of Posthumus. A series of the Augustan
History from Medals and Inscriptions has been more than once planned,
and is still much wanted. * Note: M. Eckhel, Keeper of the Cabinet of
Medals, and Professor of Antiquities at Vienna, lately deceased, has
supplied this want by his excellent work, Doctrina veterum Nummorum,
conscripta a Jos. Eckhel, 8 vol. in 4to Vindobona, 1797.--G. Captain
Smyth has likewise printed (privately) a valuable Descriptive Catologue
of a series of Large Brass Medals of this period Bedford, 1834.--M.
1845.]

But a single fact, the only one indeed of which we have any distinct
knowledge, erases, in a great measure, these monuments of vanity and
adulation. The Rhine, though dignified with the title of Safeguard of
the provinces, was an imperfect barrier against the daring spirit of
enterprise with which the Franks were actuated. Their rapid devastations
stretched from the river to the foot of the Pyrenees; nor were they
stopped by those mountains. Spain, which had never dreaded, was unable
to resist, the inroads of the Germans. During twelve years, the greatest
part of the reign of Gallie nus, that opulent country was the theatre of
unequal and destructive hostilities. Tarragona, the flourishing capital
of a peaceful province, was sacked and almost destroyed; [77] and so
late as the days of Orosius, who wrote in the fifth century, wretched
cottages, scattered amidst the ruins of magnificent cities, still
recorded the rage of the barbarians. [78] When the exhausted country no
longer supplied a variety of plunder, the Franks seized on some vessels
in the ports of Spain, [79] and transported themselves into Mauritania.
The distant province was astonished with the fury of these barbarians,
who seemed to fall from a new world, as their name, manners, and
complexion, were equally unknown on the coast of Africa. [80]

[Footnote 77: Aurel. Victor, c. 33. Instead of Poene direpto, both the
sense and the expression require deleto; though indeed, for different
reasons, it is alike difficult to correct the text of the best, and of
the worst, writers.]

[Footnote 78: In the time of Ausonius (the end of the fourth century)
Ilerda or Lerida was in a very ruinous state, (Auson. Epist. xxv. 58,)
which probably was the consequence of this invasion.]

[Footnote 79: Valesius is therefore mistaken in supposing that the
Franks had invaded Spain by sea.]

[Footnote 80: Aurel. Victor. Eutrop. ix. 6.]


II. In that part of Upper Saxony, beyond the Elbe, which is at present
called the Marquisate of Lusace, there existed, in ancient times, a
sacred wood, the awful seat of the superstition of the Suevi. None were
permitted to enter the holy precincts, without confessing, by their
servile bonds and suppliant posture, the immediate presence of the
sovereign Deity. [81] Patriotism contributed, as well as devotion,
to consecrate the Sonnenwald, or wood of the Semnones. [82] It was
universally believed, that the nation had received its first existence
on that sacred spot. At stated periods, the numerous tribes who gloried
in the Suevic blood, resorted thither by their ambassadors; and the
memory of their common extraction was perpetrated by barbaric rites and
human sacrifices. The wide-extended name of Suevi filled the interior
countries of Germany, from the banks of the Oder to those of the Danube.
They were distinguished from the other Germans by their peculiar mode
of dressing their long hair, which they gathered into a rude knot on the
crown of the head; and they delighted in an ornament that showed their
ranks more lofty and terrible in the eyes of the enemy. [83] Jealous as
the Germans were of military renown, they all confessed the superior
valor of the Suevi; and the tribes of the Usipetes and Tencteri, who,
with a vast army, encountered the dictator Caesar, declared that they
esteemed it not a disgrace to have fled before a people to whose arms
the immortal gods themselves were unequal. [84]

[Footnote 81: Tacit.Germania, 38.]

[Footnote 82: Cluver. Germ. Antiq. iii. 25.]

[Footnote 83: Sic Suevi a ceteris Germanis, sic Suerorum ingenui a
servis separantur. A proud separation!]

[Footnote 84: Caesar in Bello Gallico, iv. 7.]

In the reign of the emperor Caracalla, an innumerable swarm of Suevi
appeared on the banks of the Mein, and in the neighborhood of the Roman
provinces, in quest either of food, of plunder, or of glory. [85] The
hasty army of volunteers gradually coalesced into a great and permanent
nation, and as it was composed from so many different tribes, assumed
the name of Alemanni, [851] or Allmen; to denote at once their various
lineage and their common bravery. [86] The latter was soon felt by
the Romans in many a hostile inroad. The Alemanni fought chiefly on
horseback; but their cavalry was rendered still more formidable by a
mixture of light infantry, selected from the bravest and most active of
the youth, whom frequent exercise had inured to accompany the horsemen
in the longest march, the most rapid charge, or the most precipitate
retreat. [87]

[Footnote 85: Victor in Caracal. Dion Cassius, lxvii. p. 1350.]

[Footnote 851: The nation of the Alemanni was not originally formed by the
Suavi properly so called; these have always preserved their own name.
Shortly afterwards they made (A. D. 357) an irruption into Rhaetia, and
it was not long after that they were reunited with the Alemanni. Still
they have always been a distinct people; at the present day, the people
who inhabit the north-west of the Black Forest call themselves Schwaben,
Suabians, Sueves, while those who inhabit near the Rhine, in Ortenau,
the Brisgaw, the Margraviate of Baden, do not consider themselves
Suabians, and are by origin Alemanni. The Teucteri and the Usipetae,
inhabitants of the interior and of the north of Westphalia, formed, says
Gatterer, the nucleus of the Alemannic nation; they occupied the country
where the name of the Alemanni first appears, as conquered in 213, by
Caracalla. They were well trained to fight on horseback, (according to
Tacitus, Germ. c. 32;) and Aurelius Victor gives the same praise to the
Alemanni: finally, they never made part of the Frankish league. The
Alemanni became subsequently a centre round which gathered a multitude
of German tribes, See Eumen. Panegyr. c. 2. Amm. Marc. xviii. 2, xxix.
4.--G. ----The question whether the Suevi was a generic name
comprehending the clans which peopled central Germany, is rather hastily
decided by M. Guizot Mr. Greenwood, who has studied the modern German
writers on their own origin, supposes the Suevi, Alemanni, and
Marcomanni, one people, under different appellations. History of
Germany, vol i.--M.]

[Footnote 86: This etymology (far different from those which amuse the
fancy of the learned) is preserved by Asinius Quadratus, an original
historian, quoted by Agathias, i. c. 5.]

[Footnote 87: The Suevi engaged Caesar in this manner, and the manoeuvre
deserved the approbation of the conqueror, (in Bello Gallico, i. 48.)]

This warlike people of Germans had been astonished by the immense
preparations of Alexander Severus; they were dismayed by the arms of his
successor, a barbarian equal in valor and fierceness to themselves.
But still hovering on the frontiers of the empire, they increased the
general disorder that ensued after the death of Decius. They inflicted
severe wounds on the rich provinces of Gaul; they were the first who
removed the veil that covered the feeble majesty of Italy. A numerous
body of the Alemanni penetrated across the Danube and through the
Rhaetian Alps into the plains of Lombardy, advanced as far as Ravenna,
and displayed the victorious banners of barbarians almost in sight of
Rome. [88]

[Footnote 88: Hist. August. p. 215, 216. Dexippus in the Excerpts.
Legationam, p. 8. Hieronym. Chron. Orosius, vii. 22.]

The insult and the danger rekindled in the senate some sparks of their
ancient virtue. Both the emperors were engaged in far distant wars,
Valerian in the East, and Gallienus on the Rhine. All the hopes and
resources of the Romans were in themselves. In this emergency, the
senators resumed the defence of the republic, drew out the Praetorian
guards, who had been left to garrison the capital, and filled up their
numbers, by enlisting into the public service the stoutest and most
willing of the Plebeians. The Alemanni, astonished with the sudden
appearance of an army more numerous than their own, retired into
Germany, laden with spoil; and their retreat was esteemed as a victory
by the unwarlike Romans. [89]

[Footnote 89: Zosimus, l. i. p. 34.]

When Gallienus received the intelligence that his capital was delivered
from the barbarians, he was much less delighted than alarmed with the
courage of the senate, since it might one day prompt them to rescue the
public from domestic tyranny as well as from foreign invasion. His timid
ingratitude was published to his subjects, in an edict which prohibited
the senators from exercising any military employment, and even from
approaching the camps of the legions. But his fears were groundless.
The rich and luxurious nobles, sinking into their natural character,
accepted, as a favor, this disgraceful exemption from military service;
and as long as they were indulged in the enjoyment of their baths, their
theatres, and their villas, they cheerfully resigned the more dangerous
cares of empire to the rough hands of peasants and soldiers. [90]

[Footnote 90: Aurel. Victor, in Gallieno et Probo. His complaints
breathe as uncommon spirit of freedom.]

Another invasion of the Alemanni, of a more formidable aspect, but more
glorious event, is mentioned by a writer of the lower empire. Three
hundred thousand are said to have been vanquished, in a battle near
Milan, by Gallienus in person, at the head of only ten thousand Romans.
[91] We may, however, with great probability, ascribe this incredible
victory either to the credulity of the historian, or to some exaggerated
exploits of one of the emperor's lieutenants. It was by arms of a very
different nature, that Gallienus endeavored to protect Italy from the
fury of the Germans. He espoused Pipa, the daughter of a king of the
Marcomanni, a Suevic tribe, which was often confounded with the Alemanni
in their wars and conquests. [92] To the father, as the price of his
alliance, he granted an ample settlement in Pannonia. The native charms
of unpolished beauty seem to have fixed the daughter in the affections
of the inconstant emperor, and the bands of policy were more firmly
connected by those of love. But the haughty prejudice of Rome still
refused the name of marriage to the profane mixture of a citizen and a
barbarian; and has stigmatized the German princess with the opprobrious
title of concubine of Gallienus. [93]

[Footnote 91: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 631.]

[Footnote 92: One of the Victors calls him king of the Marcomanni; the
other of the Germans.]

[Footnote 93: See Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 398,
&c.]

III. We have already traced the emigration of the Goths from
Scandinavia, or at least from Prussia, to the mouth of the Borysthenes,
and have followed their victorious arms from the Borysthenes to the
Danube. Under the reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, the frontier of the
last-mentioned river was perpetually infested by the inroads of Germans
and Sarmatians; but it was defended by the Romans with more than usual
firmness and success. The provinces that were the seat of war, recruited
the armies of Rome with an inexhaustible supply of hardy soldiers;
and more than one of these Illyrian peasants attained the station, and
displayed the abilities, of a general. Though flying parties of
the barbarians, who incessantly hovered on the banks of the Danube,
penetrated sometimes to the confines of Italy and Macedonia, their
progress was commonly checked, or their return intercepted, by the
Imperial lieutenants. [94] But the great stream of the Gothic hostilities
was diverted into a very different channel. The Goths, in their new
settlement of the Ukraine, soon became masters of the northern coast of
the Euxine: to the south of that inland sea were situated the soft and
wealthy provinces of Asia Minor, which possessed all that could attract,
and nothing that could resist, a barbarian conqueror.

[Footnote 94: See the lives of Claudius, Aurelian, and Probus, in the
Augustan History.]

The banks of the Borysthenes are only sixty miles distant from the
narrow entrance [95] of the peninsula of Crim Tartary, known to the
ancients under the name of Chersonesus Taurica. [96] On that inhospitable
shore, Euripides, embellishing with exquisite art the tales of
antiquity, has placed the scene of one of his most affecting tragedies.
[97] The bloody sacrifices of Diana, the arrival of Orestes and Pylades,
and the triumph of virtue and religion over savage fierceness, serve to
represent an historical truth, that the Tauri, the original inhabitants
of the peninsula, were, in some degree, reclaimed from their brutal
manners by a gradual intercourse with the Grecian colonies, which
settled along the maritime coast. The little kingdom of Bosphorus,
whose capital was situated on the Straits, through which the Maeotis
communicates itself to the Euxine, was composed of degenerate Greeks and
half-civilized barbarians. It subsisted, as an independent state, from
the time of the Peloponnesian war, [98] was at last swallowed up by the
ambition of Mithridates, [99] and, with the rest of his dominions, sunk
under the weight of the Roman arms. From the reign of Augustus, [100]
the kings of Bosphorus were the humble, but not useless, allies of the
empire. By presents, by arms, and by a slight fortification drawn across
the Isthmus, they effectually guarded against the roving plunderers of
Sarmatia, the access of a country, which, from its peculiar situation
and convenient harbors, commanded the Euxine Sea and Asia Minor. [101] As
long as the sceptre was possessed by a lineal succession of kings,
they acquitted themselves of their important charge with vigilance
and success. Domestic factions, and the fears, or private interest, of
obscure usurpers, who seized on the vacant throne, admitted the Goths
into the heart of Bosphorus. With the acquisition of a superfluous waste
of fertile soil, the conquerors obtained the command of a naval force,
sufficient to transport their armies to the coast of Asia. [102] These
ships used in the navigation of the Euxine were of a very singular
construction. They were slight flat-bottomed barks framed of timber
only, without the least mixture of iron, and occasionally covered with
a shelving roof, on the appearance of a tempest. [103] In these floating
houses, the Goths carelessly trusted themselves to the mercy of an
unknown sea, under the conduct of sailors pressed into the service,
and whose skill and fidelity were equally suspicious. But the hopes of
plunder had banished every idea of danger, and a natural fearlessness
of temper supplied in their minds the more rational confidence, which is
the just result of knowledge and experience. Warriors of such a daring
spirit must have often murmured against the cowardice of their guides,
who required the strongest assurances of a settled calm before they
would venture to embark; and would scarcely ever be tempted to lose
sight of the land. Such, at least, is the practice of the modern Turks;
[104] and they are probably not inferior, in the art of navigation, to
the ancient inhabitants of Bosphorus.

[Footnote 95: It is about half a league in breadth. Genealogical History
of the Tartars, p 598.]

[Footnote 96: M. de Peyssonel, who had been French Consul at Caffa, in
his Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, que ont habite les bords du
Danube]

[Footnote 97: Eeripides in Iphigenia in Taurid.]

[Footnote 98: Strabo, l. vii. p. 309. The first kings of Bosphorus were
the allies of Athens.]

[Footnote 99: Appian in Mithridat.]

[Footnote 100: It was reduced by the arms of Agrippa. Orosius, vi. 21.
Eu tropius, vii. 9. The Romans once advanced within three days' march of
the Tanais. Tacit. Annal. xii. 17.]

[Footnote 101: See the Toxaris of Lucian, if we credit the sincerity
and the virtues of the Scythian, who relates a great war of his nation
against the kings of Bosphorus.]

[Footnote 102: Zosimus, l. i. p. 28.]

[Footnote 103: Strabo, l. xi. Tacit. Hist. iii. 47. They were called
Camaroe.]

[Footnote 104: See a very natural picture of the Euxine navigation, in
the xvith letter of Tournefort.]

The fleet of the Goths, leaving the coast of Circassia on the left
hand, first appeared before Pityus, [105] the utmost limits of the Roman
provinces; a city provided with a convenient port, and fortified with
a strong wall. Here they met with a resistance more obstinate than they
had reason to expect from the feeble garrison of a distant fortress.
They were repulsed; and their disappointment seemed to diminish the
terror of the Gothic name. As long as Successianus, an officer of
superior rank and merit, defended that frontier, all their efforts
were ineffectual; but as soon as he was removed by Valerian to a more
honorable but less important station, they resumed the attack of Pityus;
and by the destruction of that city, obliterated the memory of their
former disgrace. [106]

[Footnote 105: Arrian places the frontier garrison at Dioscurias, or
Sebastopolis, forty-four miles to the east of Pityus. The garrison of
Phasis consisted in his time of only four hundred foot. See the Periplus
of the Euxine. * Note: Pityus is Pitchinda, according to D'Anville, ii.
115.--G. Rather Boukoun.--M. Dioscurias is Iskuriah.--G.]

[Footnote 106: Zosimus, l. i. p. 30.]

Circling round the eastern extremity of the Euxine Sea, the navigation
from Pityus to Trebizond is about three hundred miles. [107] The course
of the Goths carried them in sight of the country of Colchis, so famous
by the expedition of the Argonauts; and they even attempted, though
without success, to pillage a rich temple at the mouth of the River
Phasis. Trebizond, celebrated in the retreat of the ten thousand as an
ancient colony of Greeks, [108] derived its wealth and splendor from the
magnificence of the emperor Hadrian, who had constructed an artificial
port on a coast left destitute by nature of secure harbors. [109] The
city was large and populous; a double enclosure of walls seemed to defy
the fury of the Goths, and the usual garrison had been strengthened by
a reenforcement of ten thousand men. But there are not any advantages
capable of supplying the absence of discipline and vigilance. The
numerous garrison of Trebizond, dissolved in riot and luxury, disdained
to guard their impregnable fortifications. The Goths soon discovered
the supine negligence of the besieged, erected a lofty pile of fascines,
ascended the walls in the silence of the night, and entered the
defenceless city sword in hand. A general massacre of the people ensued,
whilst the affrighted soldiers escaped through the opposite gates of
the town. The most holy temples, and the most splendid edifices, were
involved in a common destruction. The booty that fell into the hands
of the Goths was immense: the wealth of the adjacent countries had been
deposited in Trebizond, as in a secure place of refuge. The number of
captives was incredible, as the victorious barbarians ranged without
opposition through the extensive province of Pontus. [110] The rich
spoils of Trebizond filled a great fleet of ships that had been found in
the port. The robust youth of the sea-coast were chained to the oar; and
the Goths, satisfied with the success of their first naval expedition,
returned in triumph to their new establishment in the kingdom of
Bosphorus. [111]

[Footnote 107: Arrian (in Periplo Maris Euxine, p. 130) calls the
distance 2610 stadia.]

[Footnote 108: Xenophon, Anabasis, l. iv. p. 348, edit. Hutchinson.
Note: Fallmerayer (Geschichte des Kaiserthums von Trapezunt, p. 6,
&c) assigns a very ancient date to the first (Pelasgic) foundation of
Trapezun (Trebizond)--M.]

[Footnote 109: Arrian, p. 129. The general observation is Tournefort's.]

[Footnote 110: See an epistle of Gregory Thaumaturgus, bishop of
Neo-Caeoarea, quoted by Mascou, v. 37.]

[Footnote 111: Zosimus, l. i. p. 32, 33.]

The second expedition of the Goths was undertaken with greater powers of
men and ships; but they steered a different course, and, disdaining the
exhausted provinces of Pontus, followed the western coast of the Euxine,
passed before the wide mouths of the Borysthenes, the Niester, and the
Danube, and increasing their fleet by the capture of a great number
of fishing barks, they approached the narrow outlet through which the
Euxine Sea pours its waters into the Mediterranean, and divides the
continents of Europe and Asia. The garrison of Chalcedon was encamped
near the temple of Jupiter Urius, on a promontory that commanded the
entrance of the Strait; and so inconsiderable were the dreaded invasions
of the barbarians that this body of troops surpassed in number the
Gothic army. But it was in numbers alone that they surpassed it. They
deserted with precipitation their advantageous post, and abandoned the
town of Chalcedon, most plentifully stored with arms and money, to the
discretion of the conquerors. Whilst they hesitated whether they
should prefer the sea or land Europe or Asia, for the scene of their
hostilities, a perfidious fugitive pointed out Nicomedia, [1111] once the
capital of the kings of Bithynia, as a rich and easy conquest. He guided
the march which was only sixty miles from the camp of Chalcedon, [112]
directed the resistless attack, and partook of the booty; for the Goths
had learned sufficient policy to reward the traitor whom they detested.
Nice, Prusa, Apamaea, Cius, [1121] cities that had sometimes rivalled, or
imitated, the splendor of Nicomedia, were involved in the same calamity,
which, in a few weeks, raged without control through the whole
province of Bithynia. Three hundred years of peace, enjoyed by the soft
inhabitants of Asia, had abolished the exercise of arms, and removed the
apprehension of danger. The ancient walls were suffered to moulder away,
and all the revenue of the most opulent cities was reserved for the
construction of baths, temples, and theatres. [113]

[Footnote 1111: It has preserved its name, joined to the preposition of place in that of
Nikmid. D'Anv. Geog. Anc. ii. 28.--G.]

[Footnote 112: Itiner. Hierosolym. p. 572. Wesseling.]

[Footnote 1121: Now Isnik, Bursa, Mondania Ghio or Kemlik D'Anv. ii.
23.--G.]

[Footnote 113: Zosimus, l.. p. 32, 33.]

When the city of Cyzicus withstood the utmost effort of Mithridates,
[114] it was distinguished by wise laws, a naval power of two hundred
galleys, and three arsenals, of arms, of military engines, and of corn.
[115] It was still the seat of wealth and luxury; but of its ancient
strength, nothing remained except the situation, in a little island of
the Propontis, connected with the continent of Asia only by two bridges.
From the recent sack of Prusa, the Goths advanced within eighteen miles.
[116] of the city, which they had devoted to destruction; but the ruin of
Cyzicus was delayed by a fortunate accident. The season was rainy,
and the Lake Apolloniates, the reservoir of all the springs of Mount
Olympus, rose to an uncommon height. The little river of Rhyndacus,
which issues from the lake, swelled into a broad and rapid stream, and
stopped the progress of the Goths. Their retreat to the maritime city of
Heraclea, where the fleet had probably been stationed, was attended by a
long train of wagons, laden with the spoils of Bithynia, and was marked
by the flames of Nico and Nicomedia, which they wantonly burnt. [117]
Some obscure hints are mentioned of a doubtful combat that secured their
retreat. [118] But even a complete victory would have been of little
moment, as the approach of the autumnal equinox summoned them to hasten
their return. To navigate the Euxine before the month of May, or
after that of September, is esteemed by the modern Turks the most
unquestionable instance of rashness and folly. [119]

[Footnote 114: He besieged the place with 400 galleys, 150,000 foot, and
a numerous cavalry. See Plutarch in Lucul. Appian in Mithridat Cicero
pro Lege Manilia, c. 8.]

[Footnote 115: Strabo, l. xii. p. 573.]

[Footnote 116: Pocock's Description of the East, l. ii. c. 23, 24.]

[Footnote 117: Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]

[Footnote 118: Syncellus tells an unintelligible story of Prince
Odenathus, who defeated the Goths, and who was killed by Prince
Odenathus.]

[Footnote 119: Voyages de Chardin, tom. i. p. 45. He sailed with the
Turks from Constantinople to Caffa.]

When we are informed that the third fleet, equipped by the Goths in the
ports of Bosphorus, consisted of five hundred sails of ships, [120]
our ready imagination instantly computes and multiplies the formidable
armament; but, as we are assured by the judicious Strabo, [121] that
the piratical vessels used by the barbarians of Pontus and the Lesser
Scythia, were not capable of containing more than twenty-five or thirty
men we may safely affirm, that fifteen thousand warriors, at the most,
embarked in this great expedition. Impatient of the limits of the
Euxine, they steered their destructive course from the Cimmerian to
the Thracian Bosphorus. When they had almost gained the middle of the
Straits, they were suddenly driven back to the entrance of them; till a
favorable wind, springing up the next day, carried them in a few hours
into the placid sea, or rather lake, of the Propontis. Their landing on
the little island of Cyzicus was attended with the ruin of that ancient
and noble city. From thence issuing again through the narrow passage
of the Hellespont, they pursued their winding navigation amidst the
numerous islands scattered over the Archipelago, or the Aegean Sea. The
assistance of captives and deserters must have been very necessary to
pilot their vessels, and to direct their various incursions, as well
on the coast of Greece as on that of Asia. At length the Gothic fleet
anchored in the port of Piraeus, five miles distant from Athens, [122]
which had attempted to make some preparations for a vigorous defence.
Cleodamus, one of the engineers employed by the emperor's orders to
fortify the maritime cities against the Goths, had already begun to
repair the ancient walls, fallen to decay since the time of Scylla. The
efforts of his skill were ineffectual, and the barbarians became masters
of the native seat of the muses and the arts. But while the conquerors
abandoned themselves to the license of plunder and intemperance, their
fleet, that lay with a slender guard in the harbor of Piraeus, was
unexpectedly attacked by the brave Dexippus, who, flying with the
engineer Cleodamus from the sack of Athens, collected a hasty band of
volunteers, peasants as well as soldiers, and in some measure avenged
the calamities of his country. [123]

[Footnote 120: Syncellus (p. 382) speaks of this expedition, as
undertaken by the Heruli.]

[Footnote 121: Strabo, l. xi. p. 495.]

[Footnote 122: Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 7.]

[Footnote 123: Hist. August. p. 181. Victor, c. 33. Orosius, vii. 42.
Zosimus, l. i. p. 35. Zonaras, l. xii. 635. Syncellus, p. 382. It is
not without some attention, that we can explain and conciliate their
imperfect hints. We can still discover some traces of the partiality of
Dexippus, in the relation of his own and his countrymen's exploits. *
Note: According to a new fragment of Dexippus, published by Mai, the 2000
men took up a strong position in a mountainous and woods district,
and kept up a harassing warfare. He expresses a hope of being speedily
joined by the Imperial fleet. Dexippus in rov. Byzantinorum Collect a
Niebuhr, p. 26, 8--M.]

But this exploit, whatever lustre it might shed on the declining age of
Athens, served rather to irritate than to subdue the undaunted spirit
of the northern invaders. A general conflagration blazed out at the same
time in every district of Greece. Thebes and Argos, Corinth and Sparta,
which had formerly waged such memorable wars against each other, were
now unable to bring an army into the field, or even to defend their
ruined fortifications. The rage of war, both by land and by sea, spread
from the eastern point of Sunium to the western coast of Epirus. The
Goths had already advanced within sight of Italy, when the approach of
such imminent danger awakened the indolent Gallienus from his dream of
pleasure. The emperor appeared in arms; and his presence seems to have
checked the ardor, and to have divided the strength, of the enemy.
Naulobatus, a chief of the Heruli, accepted an honorable capitulation,
entered with a large body of his countrymen into the service of Rome,
and was invested with the ornaments of the consular dignity, which
had never before been profaned by the hands of a barbarian. [124] Great
numbers of the Goths, disgusted with the perils and hardships of a
tedious voyage, broke into Maesia, with a design of forcing their way
over the Danube to their settlements in the Ukraine. The wild attempt
would have proved inevitable destruction, if the discord of the Roman
generals had not opened to the barbarians the means of an escape. [125]
The small remainder of this destroying host returned on board their
vessels; and measuring back their way through the Hellespont and the
Bosphorus, ravaged in their passage the shores of Troy, whose fame,
immortalized by Homer, will probably survive the memory of the Gothic
conquests. As soon as they found themselves in safety within the basin
of the Euxine, they landed at Anchialus in Thrace, near the foot of
Mount Haemus; and, after all their toils, indulged themselves in the use
of those pleasant and salutary hot baths. What remained of the voyage
was a short and easy navigation. [126] Such was the various fate of this
third and greatest of their naval enterprises. It may seem difficult
to conceive how the original body of fifteen thousand warriors could
sustain the losses and divisions of so bold an adventure. But as their
numbers were gradually wasted by the sword, by shipwrecks, and by the
influence of a warm climate, they were perpetually renewed by troops of
banditti and deserters, who flocked to the standard of plunder, and by
a crowd of fugitive slaves, often of German or Sarmatian extraction, who
eagerly seized the glorious opportunity of freedom and revenge. In these
expeditions, the Gothic nation claimed a superior share of honor
and danger; but the tribes that fought under the Gothic banners are
sometimes distinguished and sometimes confounded in the imperfect
histories of that age; and as the barbarian fleets seemed to issue from
the mouth of the Tanais, the vague but familiar appellation of Scythians
was frequently bestowed on the mixed multitude. [127]

[Footnote 124: Syncellus, p. 382. This body of Heruli was for a long
time faithful and famous.]

[Footnote 125: Claudius, who commanded on the Danube, thought with
propriety and acted with spirit. His colleague was jealous of his fame
Hist. August. p. 181.]

[Footnote 126: Jornandes, c. 20.]

[Footnote 127: Zosimus and the Greeks (as the author of the Philopatris)
give the name of Scythians to those whom Jornandes, and the Latin
writers, constantly represent as Goths.]




