## Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of Marcinus.--Part I.

     The Death Of Severus.--Tyranny Of Caracalla.--Usurpation
     Of Macrinus.--Follies Of Elagabalus.--Virtues Of Alexander
     Severus.--Licentiousness Of The Army.--General State Of
     The Roman Finances.

The ascent to greatness, however steep and dangerous, may entertain an
active spirit with the consciousness and exercise of its own powers: but
the possession of a throne could never yet afford a lasting satisfaction
to an ambitious mind. This melancholy truth was felt and acknowledged by
Severus. Fortune and merit had, from an humble station, elevated him
to the first place among mankind. "He had been all things," as he said
himself, "and all was of little value." [1] Distracted with the care,
not of acquiring, but of preserving an empire, oppressed with age and
infirmities, careless of fame, [2] and satiated with power, all his
prospects of life were closed. The desire of perpetuating the greatness
of his family was the only remaining wish of his ambition and paternal
tenderness.

[Footnote 1: Hist. August. p. 71. "Omnia fui, et nihil expedit."]

[Footnote 2: Dion Cassius, l. lxxvi. p. 1284.]

Like most of the Africans, Severus was passionately addicted to the vain
studies of magic and divination, deeply versed in the interpretation of
dreams and omens, and perfectly acquainted with the science of judicial
astrology; which, in almost every age except the present, has maintained
its dominion over the mind of man. He had lost his first wife, while
he was governor of the Lionnese Gaul. [3] In the choice of a second, he
sought only to connect himself with some favorite of fortune; and as
soon as he had discovered that the young lady of Emesa in Syria had a
royal nativity, he solicited and obtained her hand. [4] Julia Domna (for
that was her name) deserved all that the stars could promise her.

She possessed, even in advanced age, the attractions of beauty, [5]
and united to a lively imagination a firmness of mind, and strength of
judgment, seldom bestowed on her sex. Her amiable qualities never made
any deep impression on the dark and jealous temper of her husband;
but in her son's reign, she administered the principal affairs of
the empire, with a prudence that supported his authority, and with a
moderation that sometimes corrected his wild extravagancies. [6] Julia
applied herself to letters and philosophy, with some success, and with
the most splendid reputation. She was the patroness of every art, and
the friend of every man of genius. [7] The grateful flattery of the
learned has celebrated her virtues; but, if we may credit the scandal of
ancient history, chastity was very far from being the most conspicuous
virtue of the empress Julia. [8]

[Footnote 3: About the year 186. M. de Tillemont is miserably
embarrassed with a passage of Dion, in which the empress Faustina,
who died in the year 175, is introduced as having contributed to the
marriage of Severus and Julia, (l. lxxiv. p. 1243.) The learned compiler
forgot that Dion is relating not a real fact, but a dream of Severus;
and dreams are circumscribed to no limits of time or space. Did M. de
Tillemont imagine that marriages were consummated in the temple of Venus
at Rome? Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 389. Note 6.]

[Footnote 4: Hist. August. p. 65.]

[Footnote 5: Hist. August. p. 5.]

[Footnote 6: Dion Cassius, l. lxxvii. p. 1304, 1314.]

[Footnote 7: See a dissertation of Menage, at the end of his edition of
Diogenes Laertius, de Foeminis Philosophis.]

[Footnote 8: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1285. Aurelius Victor.]

Two sons, Caracalla [9] and Geta, were the fruit of this marriage, and
the destined heirs of the empire. The fond hopes of the father, and
of the Roman world, were soon disappointed by these vain youths, who
displayed the indolent security of hereditary princes; and a presumption
that fortune would supply the place of merit and application. Without
any emulation of virtue or talents, they discovered, almost from their
infancy, a fixed and implacable antipathy for each other.

[Footnote 9: Bassianus was his first name, as it had been that of his
maternal grandfather. During his reign, he assumed the appellation of
Antoninus, which is employed by lawyers and ancient historians. After
his death, the public indignation loaded him with the nicknames of
Tarantus and Caracalla. The first was borrowed from a celebrated
Gladiator, the second from a long Gallic gown which he distributed to
the people of Rome.]

Their aversion, confirmed by years, and fomented by the arts of their
interested favorites, broke out in childish, and gradually in more
serious competitions; and, at length, divided the theatre, the circus,
and the court, into two factions, actuated by the hopes and fears of
their respective leaders. The prudent emperor endeavored, by every
expedient of advice and authority, to allay this growing animosity. The
unhappy discord of his sons clouded all his prospects, and threatened to
overturn a throne raised with so much labor, cemented with so much
blood, and guarded with every defence of arms and treasure. With an
impartial hand he maintained between them an exact balance of favor,
conferred on both the rank of Augustus, with the revered name of
Antoninus; and for the first time the Roman world beheld three emperors.
[10] Yet even this equal conduct served only to inflame the contest,
whilst the fierce Caracalla asserted the right of primogeniture, and the
milder Geta courted the affections of the people and the soldiers. In
the anguish of a disappointed father, Severus foretold that the weaker
of his sons would fall a sacrifice to the stronger; who, in his turn,
would be ruined by his own vices. [11]

[Footnote 10: The elevation of Caracalla is fixed by the accurate M.
de Tillemont to the year 198; the association of Geta to the year 208.]

[Footnote 11: Herodian, l. iii. p. 130. The lives of Caracalla and Geta,
in the Augustan History.]

In these circumstances the intelligence of a war in Britain, and of an
invasion of the province by the barbarians of the North, was received
with pleasure by Severus. Though the vigilance of his lieutenants might
have been sufficient to repel the distant enemy, he resolved to embrace
the honorable pretext of withdrawing his sons from the luxury of Rome,
which enervated their minds and irritated their passions; and of inuring
their youth to the toils of war and government. Notwithstanding his
advanced age, (for he was above threescore,) and his gout, which obliged
him to be carried in a litter, he transported himself in person into
that remote island, attended by his two sons, his whole court, and
a formidable army. He immediately passed the walls of Hadrian and
Antoninus, and entered the enemy's country, with a design of completing
the long attempted conquest of Britain. He penetrated to the northern
extremity of the island, without meeting an enemy. But the concealed
ambuscades of the Caledonians, who hung unseen on the rear and flanks of
his army, the coldness of the climate and the severity of a winter march
across the hills and morasses of Scotland, are reported to have cost the
Romans above fifty thousand men. The Caledonians at length yielded to
the powerful and obstinate attack, sued for peace, and surrendered a
part of their arms, and a large tract of territory. But their apparent
submission lasted no longer than the present terror. As soon as the
Roman legions had retired, they resumed their hostile independence.
Their restless spirit provoked Severus to send a new army into
Caledonia, with the most bloody orders, not to subdue, but to extirpate
the natives. They were saved by the death of their haughty enemy. [12]

[Footnote 12: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1280, &c. Herodian, l. iii. p. 132,
&c.]

This Caledonian war, neither marked by decisive events, nor attended
with any important consequences, would ill deserve our attention; but it
is supposed, not without a considerable degree of probability, that the
invasion of Severus is connected with the most shining period of the
British history or fable. Fingal, whose fame, with that of his heroes
and bards, has been revived in our language by a recent publication, is
said to have commanded the Caledonians in that memorable juncture, to
have eluded the power of Severus, and to have obtained a signal victory
on the banks of the Carun, in which the son of the King of the World,
Caracul, fled from his arms along the fields of his pride. [13]
Something of a doubtful mist still hangs over these Highland traditions;
nor can it be entirely dispelled by the most ingenious researches of
modern criticism; [14] but if we could, with safety, indulge the
pleasing supposition, that Fingal lived, and that Ossian sung, the
striking contrast of the situation and manners of the contending nations
might amuse a philosophic mind.

The parallel would be little to the advantage of the more civilized
people, if we compared the unrelenting revenge of Severus with the
generous clemency of Fingal; the timid and brutal cruelty of Caracalla
with the bravery, the tenderness, the elegant genius of Ossian; the
mercenary chiefs, who, from motives of fear or interest, served under
the imperial standard, with the free-born warriors who started to arms
at the voice of the king of Morven; if, in a word, we contemplated the
untutored Caledonians, glowing with the warm virtues of nature, and the
degenerate Romans, polluted with the mean vices of wealth and slavery.

[Footnote 13: Ossian's Poems, vol. i. p. 175.]

[Footnote 14: That the Caracul of Ossian is the Caracalla of the Roman
History, is, perhaps, the only point of British antiquity in which Mr.
Macpherson and Mr. Whitaker are of the same opinion; and yet the opinion
is not without difficulty. In the Caledonian war, the son of Severus was
known only by the appellation of Antoninus, and it may seem strange that
the Highland bard should describe him by a nickname, invented four years
afterwards, scarcely used by the Romans till after the death of that
emperor, and seldom employed by the most ancient historians. See Dion,
l. lxxvii. p. 1317. Hist. August. p. 89 Aurel. Victor. Euseb. in Chron.
ad ann. 214. Note: The historical authority of Macpherson's Ossian has
not increased since Gibbon wrote. We may, indeed, consider it exploded.
Mr. Whitaker, in a letter to Gibbon (Misc. Works, vol. ii. p. 100,)
attempts, not very successfully, to weaken this objection of the
historian.--M.]

The declining health and last illness of Severus inflamed the wild
ambition and black passions of Caracalla's soul. Impatient of any delay
or division of empire, he attempted, more than once, to shorten the
small remainder of his father's days, and endeavored, but without
success, to excite a mutiny among the troops. [15] The old emperor had
often censured the misguided lenity of Marcus, who, by a single act of
justice, might have saved the Romans from the tyranny of his worthless
son. Placed in the same situation, he experienced how easily the rigor
of a judge dissolves away in the tenderness of a parent. He deliberated,
he threatened, but he could not punish; and this last and only instance
of mercy was more fatal to the empire than a long series of cruelty.
[16] The disorder of his mind irritated the pains of his body; he wished
impatiently for death, and hastened the instant of it by his impatience.
He expired at York in the sixty-fifth year of his life, and in the
eighteenth of a glorious and successful reign. In his last moments he
recommended concord to his sons, and his sons to the army. The salutary
advice never reached the heart, or even the understanding, of the
impetuous youths; but the more obedient troops, mindful of their oath of
allegiance, and of the authority of their deceased master, resisted the
solicitations of Caracalla, and proclaimed both brothers emperors of
Rome. The new princes soon left the Caledonians in peace, returned to
the capital, celebrated their father's funeral with divine honors, and
were cheerfully acknowledged as lawful sovereigns, by the senate, the
people, and the provinces. Some preeminence of rank seems to have been
allowed to the elder brother; but they both administered the empire with
equal and independent power. [17]

[Footnote 15: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1282. Hist. August. p. 71. Aurel.
Victor.]

[Footnote 16: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1283. Hist. August. p. 89]

[Footnote 17: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1284. Herodian, l. iii. p. 135.]

Such a divided form of government would have proved a source of discord
between the most affectionate brothers. It was impossible that it could
long subsist between two implacable enemies, who neither desired nor
could trust a reconciliation. It was visible that one only could reign,
and that the other must fall; and each of them, judging of his rival's
designs by his own, guarded his life with the most jealous vigilance
from the repeated attacks of poison or the sword. Their rapid journey
through Gaul and Italy, during which they never ate at the same table,
or slept in the same house, displayed to the provinces the odious
spectacle of fraternal discord. On their arrival at Rome, they
immediately divided the vast extent of the imperial palace. [18] No
communication was allowed between their apartments; the doors and
passages were diligently fortified, and guards posted and relieved with
the same strictness as in a besieged place. The emperors met only in
public, in the presence of their afflicted mother; and each surrounded
by a numerous train of armed followers. Even on these occasions of
ceremony, the dissimulation of courts could ill disguise the rancor of
their hearts. [19]

[Footnote 18: Mr. Hume is justly surprised at a passage of Herodian, (l.
iv. p. 139,) who, on this occasion, represents the Imperial palace as
equal in extent to the rest of Rome. The whole region of the Palatine
Mount, on which it was built, occupied, at most, a circumference of
eleven or twelve thousand feet, (see the Notitia and Victor, in
Nardini's Roma Antica.) But we should recollect that the opulent
senators had almost surrounded the city with their extensive gardens and
suburb palaces, the greatest part of which had been gradually
confiscated by the emperors. If Geta resided in the gardens that bore
his name on the Janiculum, and if Caracalla inhabited the gardens of
Maecenas on the Esquiline, the rival brothers were separated from each
other by the distance of several miles; and yet the intermediate space
was filled by the Imperial gardens of Sallust, of Lucullus, of Agrippa,
of Domitian, of Caius, &c., all skirting round the city, and all
connected with each other, and with the palace, by bridges thrown over
the Tiber and the streets. But this explanation of Herodian would
require, though it ill deserves, a particular dissertation, illustrated
by a map of ancient Rome. (Hume, Essay on Populousness of Ancient
Nations.--M.)]

[Footnote 19: Herodian, l. iv. p. 139]

This latent civil war already distracted the whole government, when
a scheme was suggested that seemed of mutual benefit to the hostile
brothers. It was proposed, that since it was impossible to reconcile
their minds, they should separate their interest, and divide the empire
between them. The conditions of the treaty were already drawn with some
accuracy. It was agreed that Caracalla, as the elder brother should
remain in possession of Europe and the western Africa; and that he
should relinquish the sovereignty of Asia and Egypt to Geta, who might
fix his residence at Alexandria or Antioch, cities little inferior to
Rome itself in wealth and greatness; that numerous armies should be
constantly encamped on either side of the Thracian Bosphorus, to guard
the frontiers of the rival monarchies; and that the senators of European
extraction should acknowledge the sovereign of Rome, whilst the natives
of Asia followed the emperor of the East. The tears of the empress Julia
interrupted the negotiation, the first idea of which had filled every
Roman breast with surprise and indignation. The mighty mass of conquest
was so intimately united by the hand of time and policy, that it
required the most forcible violence to rend it asunder. The Romans had
reason to dread, that the disjointed members would soon be reduced by
a civil war under the dominion of one master; but if the separation
was permanent, the division of the provinces must terminate in the
dissolution of an empire whose unity had hitherto remained inviolate.
[20]

[Footnote 20: Herodian, l. iv. p. 144.]

Had the treaty been carried into execution, the sovereign of Europe
might soon have been the conqueror of Asia; but Caracalla obtained
an easier, though a more guilty, victory. He artfully listened to his
mother's entreaties, and consented to meet his brother in her
apartment, on terms of peace and reconciliation. In the midst of their
conversation, some centurions, who had contrived to conceal themselves,
rushed with drawn swords upon the unfortunate Geta. His distracted
mother strove to protect him in her arms; but, in the unavailing
struggle, she was wounded in the hand, and covered with the blood of
her younger son, while she saw the elder animating and assisting [21] the
fury of the assassins. As soon as the deed was perpetrated, Caracalla,
with hasty steps, and horror in his countenance, ran towards the
Praetorian camp, as his only refuge, and threw himself on the ground
before the statues of the tutelar deities. [22] The soldiers attempted to
raise and comfort him. In broken and disordered words he informed them
of his imminent danger, and fortunate escape; insinuating that he had
prevented the designs of his enemy, and declared his resolution to live
and die with his faithful troops. Geta had been the favorite of the
soldiers; but complaint was useless, revenge was dangerous, and they
still reverenced the son of Severus. Their discontent died away in idle
murmurs, and Caracalla soon convinced them of the justice of his cause,
by distributing in one lavish donative the accumulated treasures of his
father's reign. [23] The real sentiments of the soldiers alone were
of importance to his power or safety. Their declaration in his favor
commanded the dutiful professions of the senate. The obsequious assembly
was always prepared to ratify the decision of fortune; [231] but as
Caracalla wished to assuage the first emotions of public indignation,
the name of Geta was mentioned with decency, and he received the funeral
honors of a Roman emperor. [24] Posterity, in pity to his misfortune,
has cast a veil over his vices. We consider that young prince as the
innocent victim of his brother's ambition, without recollecting that he
himself wanted power, rather than inclination, to consummate the same
attempts of revenge and murder. [241]

[Footnote 21: Caracalla consecrated, in the temple of Serapis, the
sword with which, as he boasted, he had slain his brother Geta. Dion, l.
lxxvii p. 1307.]

[Footnote 22: Herodian, l. iv. p. 147. In every Roman camp there was a
small chapel near the head-quarters, in which the statues of the tutelar
deities were preserved and adored; and we may remark that the eagles,
and other military ensigns, were in the first rank of these deities;
an excellent institution, which confirmed discipline by the sanction of
religion. See Lipsius de Militia Romana, iv. 5, v. 2.]

[Footnote 23: Herodian, l. iv. p. 148. Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1289.]

[Footnote 231: The account of this transaction, in a new passage of
Dion, varies in some degree from this statement. It adds that the
next morning, in the senate, Antoninus requested their indulgence, not
because he had killed his brother, but because he was hoarse, and could
not address them. Mai. Fragm. p. 228.--M.]

[Footnote 24: Geta was placed among the gods. Sit divus, dum non sit
vivus said his brother. Hist. August. p. 91. Some marks of Geta's
consecration are still found upon medals.]

[Footnote 241: The favorable judgment which history has given of Geta
is not founded solely on a feeling of pity; it is supported by the
testimony of contemporary historians: he was too fond of the pleasures
of the table, and showed great mistrust of his brother; but he was
humane, well instructed; he often endeavored to mitigate the rigorous
decrees of Severus and Caracalla. Herod iv. 3. Spartian in Geta.--W.]

The crime went not unpunished. Neither business, nor pleasure, nor
flattery, could defend Caracalla from the stings of a guilty conscience;
and he confessed, in the anguish of a tortured mind, that his disordered
fancy often beheld the angry forms of his father and his brother rising
into life, to threaten and upbraid him. [25] The consciousness of his
crime should have induced him to convince mankind, by the virtues of
his reign, that the bloody deed had been the involuntary effect of fatal
necessity. But the repentance of Caracalla only prompted him to remove
from the world whatever could remind him of his guilt, or recall the
memory of his murdered brother. On his return from the senate to the
palace, he found his mother in the company of several noble matrons,
weeping over the untimely fate of her younger son. The jealous emperor
threatened them with instant death; the sentence was executed against
Fadilla, the last remaining daughter of the emperor Marcus; [251] and even
the afflicted Julia was obliged to silence her lamentations, to
suppress her sighs, and to receive the assassin with smiles of joy and
approbation. It was computed that, under the vague appellation of the
friends of Geta, above twenty thousand persons of both sexes suffered
death. His guards and freedmen, the ministers of his serious business,
and the companions of his looser hours, those who by his interest had
been promoted to any commands in the army or provinces, with the long
connected chain of their dependants, were included in the proscription;
which endeavored to reach every one who had maintained the smallest
correspondence with Geta, who lamented his death, or who even mentioned
his name. [26] Helvius Pertinax, son to the prince of that name, lost
his life by an unseasonable witticism. [27] It was a sufficient crime
of Thrasea Priscus to be descended from a family in which the love
of liberty seemed an hereditary quality. [28] The particular causes of
calumny and suspicion were at length exhausted; and when a senator
was accused of being a secret enemy to the government, the emperor
was satisfied with the general proof that he was a man of property and
virtue. From this well-grounded principle he frequently drew the most
bloody inferences. [281]

[Footnote 25: Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307]

[Footnote 251: The most valuable paragraph of dion, which the industry
of M. Manas recovered, relates to this daughter of Marcus, executed by
Caracalla. Her name, as appears from Fronto, as well as from Dion,
was Cornificia. When commanded to choose the kind of death she was
to suffer, she burst into womanish tears; but remembering her father
Marcus, she thus spoke:--"O my hapless soul, (... animula,) now
imprisoned in the body, burst forth! be free! show them, however
reluctant to believe it, that thou art the daughter of Marcus." She then
laid aside all her ornaments, and preparing herself for death, ordered
her veins to be opened. Mai. Fragm. Vatican ii p. 220.--M.]

[Footnote 26: Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1290. Herodian, l. iv. p. 150. Dion
(p. 2298) says, that the comic poets no longer durst employ the name of
Geta in their plays, and that the estates of those who mentioned it in
their testaments were confiscated.]

[Footnote 27: Caracalla had assumed the names of several conquered
nations; Pertinax observed, that the name of Geticus (he had obtained
some advantage over the Goths, or Getae) would be a proper addition to
Parthieus, Alemannicus, &c. Hist. August. p. 89.]

[Footnote 28: Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1291. He was probably descended from
Helvidius Priscus, and Thrasea Paetus, those patriots, whose firm, but
useless and unseasonable, virtue has been immortalized by Tacitus. Note:
M. Guizot is indignant at this "cold" observation of Gibbon on the noble
character of Thrasea; but he admits that his virtue was useless to the
public, and unseasonable amidst the vices of his age.--M.]

[Footnote 281: Caracalla reproached all those who demanded no favors of
him. "It is clear that if you make me no requests, you do not trust me;
if you do not trust me, you suspect me; if you suspect me, you fear me;
if you fear me, you hate me." And forthwith he condemned them as
conspirators, a good specimen of the sorites in a tyrant's logic. See
Fragm. Vatican p.--M.]




