## Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.--Part IV.

I have expiated with pleasure on the first steps of the crusaders, as
they paint the manners and character of Europe: but I shall abridge the
tedious and uniform narrative of their blind achievements, which were
performed by strength and are described by ignorance. From their first
station in the neighborhood of Nicomedia, they advanced in successive
divisions; passed the contracted limit of the Greek empire; opened a
road through the hills, and commenced, by the siege of his capital,
their pious warfare against the Turkish sultan. His kingdom of Roum
extended from the Hellespont to the confines of Syria, and barred the
pilgrimage of Jerusalem, his name was Kilidge-Arslan, or Soliman,
[80] of the race of Seljuk, and son of the first conqueror; and in the
defence of a land which the Turks considered as their own, he deserved
the praise of his enemies, by whom alone he is known to posterity.
Yielding to the first impulse of the torrent, he deposited his family
and treasure in Nice; retired to the mountains with fifty thousand
horse; and twice descended to assault the camps or quarters of the
Christian besiegers, which formed an imperfect circle of above six
miles. The lofty and solid walls of Nice were covered by a deep ditch,
and flanked by three hundred and seventy towers; and on the verge of
Christendom, the Moslems were trained in arms, and inflamed by religion.
Before this city, the French princes occupied their stations, and
prosecuted their attacks without correspondence or subordination:
emulation prompted their valor; but their valor was sullied by cruelty,
and their emulation degenerated into envy and civil discord. In the
siege of Nice, the arts and engines of antiquity were employed by the
Latins; the mine and the battering-ram, the tortoise, and the belfrey or
movable turret, artificial fire, and the catapult and balist, the sling,
and the crossbow for the casting of stones and darts. [81] In the space
of seven weeks much labor and blood were expended, and some progress,
especially by Count Raymond, was made on the side of the besiegers. But
the Turks could protract their resistance and secure their escape, as
long as they were masters of the Lake [82] Ascanius, which stretches
several miles to the westward of the city. The means of conquest were
supplied by the prudence and industry of Alexius; a great number of
boats was transported on sledges from the sea to the lake; they were
filled with the most dexterous of his archers; the flight of the sultana
was intercepted; Nice was invested by land and water; and a Greek
emissary persuaded the inhabitants to accept his master's protection,
and to save themselves, by a timely surrender, from the rage of the
savages of Europe. In the moment of victory, or at least of hope, the
crusaders, thirsting for blood and plunder, were awed by the Imperial
banner that streamed from the citadel; [821] and Alexius guarded with
jealous vigilance this important conquest. The murmurs of the chiefs
were stifled by honor or interest; and after a halt of nine days, they
directed their march towards Phrygia under the guidance of a Greek
general, whom they suspected of a secret connivance with the sultan.
The consort and the principal servants of Soliman had been honorably
restored without ransom; and the emperor's generosity to the miscreants
[83] was interpreted as treason to the Christian cause.

[Footnote 80: His Mussulman appellation of Soliman is used by the
Latins, and his character is highly embellished by Tasso. His Turkish
name of Kilidge-Arslan (A. H. 485-500, A.D. 1192-1206. See De Guignes's
Tables, tom. i. p. 245) is employed by the Orientals, and with some
corruption by the Greeks; but little more than his name can be found in
the Mahometan writers, who are dry and sulky on the subject of the first
crusade, (De Guignes, tom. iii. p. ii. p. 10-30.) * Note: See note,
page 556. Soliman and Kilidge-Arslan were father and son--M.]

[Footnote 81: On the fortifications, engines, and sieges of the middle
ages, see Muratori, (Antiquitat. Italiae, tom. ii. dissert. xxvi. p.
452-524.) The belfredus, from whence our belfrey, was the movable tower
of the ancients, (Ducange, tom. i. p. 608.)]

[Footnote 82: I cannot forbear remarking the resemblance between the
siege and lake of Nice, with the operations of Hernan Cortez before
Mexico. See Dr. Robertson, History of America, l. v.]

[Footnote 821: See Anna Comnena.--M.]

[Footnote 83: Mecreant, a word invented by the French crusaders, and
confined in that language to its primitive sense. It should seem, that
the zeal of our ancestors boiled higher, and that they branded every
unbeliever as a rascal. A similar prejudice still lurks in the minds of
many who think themselves Christians.]

Soliman was rather provoked than dismayed by the loss of his capital:
he admonished his subjects and allies of this strange invasion of the
Western Barbarians; the Turkish emirs obeyed the call of loyalty or
religion; the Turkman hordes encamped round his standard; and his whole
force is loosely stated by the Christians at two hundred, or even three
hundred and sixty thousand horse. Yet he patiently waited till they had
left behind them the sea and the Greek frontier; and hovering on the
flanks, observed their careless and confident progress in two columns
beyond the view of each other. Some miles before they could reach
Dorylaeum in Phrygia, the left, and least numerous, division was
surprised, and attacked, and almost oppressed, by the Turkish cavalry.
[84] The heat of the weather, the clouds of arrows, and the barbarous
onset, overwhelmed the crusaders; they lost their order and confidence,
and the fainting fight was sustained by the personal valor, rather than
by the military conduct, of Bohemond, Tancred, and Robert of Normandy.
They were revived by the welcome banners of Duke Godfrey, who flew to
their succor, with the count of Vermandois, and sixty thousand horse;
and was followed by Raymond of Tholouse, the bishop of Puy, and the
remainder of the sacred army. Without a moment's pause, they formed
in new order, and advanced to a second battle. They were received with
equal resolution; and, in their common disdain for the unwarlike people
of Greece and Asia, it was confessed on both sides, that the Turks
and the Franks were the only nations entitled to the appellation of
soldiers. [85] Their encounter was varied, and balanced by the contrast
of arms and discipline; of the direct charge, and wheeling evolutions;
of the couched lance, and the brandished javelin; of a weighty
broadsword, and a crooked sabre; of cumbrous armor, and thin flowing
robes; and of the long Tartar bow, and the arbalist or crossbow, a
deadly weapon, yet unknown to the Orientals. [86] As long as the horses
were fresh, and the quivers full, Soliman maintained the advantage
of the day; and four thousand Christians were pierced by the Turkish
arrows. In the evening, swiftness yielded to strength: on either side,
the numbers were equal or at least as great as any ground could hold, or
any generals could manage; but in turning the hills, the last division
of Raymond and his provincials was led, perhaps without design on the
rear of an exhausted enemy; and the long contest was determined. Besides
a nameless and unaccounted multitude, three thousand Pagan knights were
slain in the battle and pursuit; the camp of Soliman was pillaged; and
in the variety of precious spoil, the curiosity of the Latins was amused
with foreign arms and apparel, and the new aspect of dromedaries and
camels. The importance of the victory was proved by the hasty retreat
of the sultan: reserving ten thousand guards of the relics of his army,
Soliman evacuated the kingdom of Roum, and hastened to implore the aid,
and kindle the resentment, of his Eastern brethren. In a march of five
hundred miles, the crusaders traversed the Lesser Asia, through a wasted
land and deserted towns, without finding either a friend or an enemy.
The geographer [87] may trace the position of Dorylaeum, Antioch of
Pisidia, Iconium, Archelais, and Germanicia, and may compare those
classic appellations with the modern names of Eskishehr the old city,
Akshehr the white city, Cogni, Erekli, and Marash. As the pilgrims
passed over a desert, where a draught of water is exchanged for silver,
they were tormented by intolerable thirst; and on the banks of the first
rivulet, their haste and intemperance were still more pernicious to
the disorderly throng. They climbed with toil and danger the steep and
slippery sides of Mount Taurus; many of the soldiers cast away their
arms to secure their footsteps; and had not terror preceded their van,
the long and trembling file might have been driven down the precipice by
a handful of resolute enemies. Two of their most respectable chiefs,
the duke of Lorraine and the count of Tholouse, were carried in litters:
Raymond was raised, as it is said by miracle, from a hopeless malady;
and Godfrey had been torn by a bear, as he pursued that rough and
perilous chase in the mountains of Pisidia.

[Footnote 84: Baronius has produced a very doubtful letter to his
brother Roger, (A.D. 1098, No. 15.) The enemies consisted of Medes,
Persians, Chaldeans: be it so. The first attack was cum nostro
incommodo; true and tender. But why Godfrey of Bouillon and Hugh
brothers! Tancred is styled filius; of whom? Certainly not of Roger, nor
of Bohemond.]

[Footnote 85: Verumtamen dicunt se esse de Francorum generatione; et
quia nullus homo naturaliter debet esse miles nisi Franci et Turci,
(Gesta Francorum, p. 7.) The same community of blood and valor is
attested by Archbishop Baldric, (p. 99.)]

[Footnote 86: Balista, Balestra, Arbalestre. See Muratori, Antiq. tom.
ii. p. 517-524. Ducange, Gloss. Latin. tom. i. p. 531, 532. In the
time of Anna Comnena, this weapon, which she describes under the name
of izangra, was unknown in the East, (l. x. p. 291.) By a humane
inconsistency, the pope strove to prohibit it in Christian wars.]

[Footnote 87: The curious reader may compare the classic learning of
Cellarius and the geographical science of D'Anville. William of Tyre is
the only historian of the crusades who has any knowledge of antiquity;
and M. Otter trod almost in the footsteps of the Franks from
Constantinople to Antioch, (Voyage en Turquie et en Perse, tom. i. p.
35-88.) * Note: The journey of Col. Macdonald Kinneir in Asia Minor
throws considerable light on the geography of this march of the
crusaders.--M.]

To improve the general consternation, the cousin of Bohemond and
the brother of Godfrey were detached from the main army with their
respective squadrons of five, and of seven, hundred knights. They
overran in a rapid career the hills and sea-coast of Cilicia, from Cogni
to the Syrian gates: the Norman standard was first planted on the walls
of Tarsus and Malmistra; but the proud injustice of Baldwin at length
provoked the patient and generous Italian; and they turned their
consecrated swords against each other in a private and profane quarrel.
Honor was the motive, and fame the reward, of Tancred; but fortune
smiled on the more selfish enterprise of his rival. [88] He was called
to the assistance of a Greek or Armenian tyrant, who had been suffered
under the Turkish yoke to reign over the Christians of Edessa. Baldwin
accepted the character of his son and champion: but no sooner was he
introduced into the city, than he inflamed the people to the massacre
of his father, occupied the throne and treasure, extended his conquests
over the hills of Armenia and the plain of Mesopotamia, and founded the
first principality of the Franks or Latins, which subsisted fifty-four
years beyond the Euphrates. [89]

[Footnote 88: This detached conquest of Edessa is best represented
by Fulcherius Carnotensis, or of Chartres, (in the collections of
Bongarsius Duchesne, and Martenne,) the valiant chaplain of Count
Baldwin (Esprit des Croisades, tom. i. p. 13, 14.) In the disputes
of that prince with Tancred, his partiality is encountered by the
partiality of Radulphus Cadomensis, the soldier and historian of the
gallant marquis.]

[Footnote 89: See de Guignes, Hist. des Huns, tom. i. p. 456.]

Before the Franks could enter Syria, the summer, and even the autumn,
were completely wasted: the siege of Antioch, or the separation and
repose of the army during the winter season, was strongly debated in
their council: the love of arms and the holy sepulchre urged them to
advance; and reason perhaps was on the side of resolution, since every
hour of delay abates the fame and force of the invader, and multiplies
the resources of defensive war. The capital of Syria was protected by
the River Orontes; and the iron bridge, [891] of nine arches, derives
its name from the massy gates of the two towers which are constructed at
either end. They were opened by the sword of the duke of Normandy: his
victory gave entrance to three hundred thousand crusaders, an account
which may allow some scope for losses and desertion, but which clearly
detects much exaggeration in the review of Nice. In the description of
Antioch, [90] it is not easy to define a middle term between her ancient
magnificence, under the successors of Alexander and Augustus, and the
modern aspect of Turkish desolation. The Tetrapolis, or four cities, if
they retained their name and position, must have left a large vacuity in
a circumference of twelve miles; and that measure, as well as the number
of four hundred towers, are not perfectly consistent with the five
gates, so often mentioned in the history of the siege. Yet Antioch must
have still flourished as a great and populous capital. At the head of
the Turkish emirs, Baghisian, a veteran chief, commanded in the place:
his garrison was composed of six or seven thousand horse, and fifteen
or twenty thousand foot: one hundred thousand Moslems are said to have
fallen by the sword; and their numbers were probably inferior to the
Greeks, Armenians, and Syrians, who had been no more than fourteen
years the slaves of the house of Seljuk. From the remains of a solid and
stately wall, it appears to have arisen to the height of threescore feet
in the valleys; and wherever less art and labor had been applied, the
ground was supposed to be defended by the river, the morass, and the
mountains. Notwithstanding these fortifications, the city had been
repeatedly taken by the Persians, the Arabs, the Greeks, and the Turks;
so large a circuit must have yielded many pervious points of attack; and
in a siege that was formed about the middle of October, the vigor of
the execution could alone justify the boldness of the attempt. Whatever
strength and valor could perform in the field was abundantly discharged
by the champions of the cross: in the frequent occasions of sallies,
of forage, of the attack and defence of convoys, they were often
victorious; and we can only complain, that their exploits are sometimes
enlarged beyond the scale of probability and truth. The sword of Godfrey
[91] divided a Turk from the shoulder to the haunch; and one half of the
infidel fell to the ground, while the other was transported by his horse
to the city gate. As Robert of Normandy rode against his antagonist, "I
devote thy head," he piously exclaimed, "to the daemons of hell;" and
that head was instantly cloven to the breast by the resistless stroke of
his descending falchion. But the reality or the report of such gigantic
prowess [92] must have taught the Moslems to keep within their walls:
and against those walls of earth or stone, the sword and the lance were
unavailing weapons. In the slow and successive labors of a siege, the
crusaders were supine and ignorant, without skill to contrive, or money
to purchase, or industry to use, the artificial engines and implements
of assault. In the conquest of Nice, they had been powerfully assisted
by the wealth and knowledge of the Greek emperor: his absence was poorly
supplied by some Genoese and Pisan vessels, that were attracted by
religion or trade to the coast of Syria: the stores were scanty, the
return precarious, and the communication difficult and dangerous.
Indolence or weakness had prevented the Franks from investing the entire
circuit; and the perpetual freedom of two gates relieved the wants and
recruited the garrison of the city. At the end of seven months, after
the ruin of their cavalry, and an enormous loss by famine, desertion
and fatigue, the progress of the crusaders was imperceptible, and their
success remote, if the Latin Ulysses, the artful and ambitious Bohemond,
had not employed the arms of cunning and deceit. The Christians of
Antioch were numerous and discontented: Phirouz, a Syrian renegado, had
acquired the favor of the emir and the command of three towers; and the
merit of his repentance disguised to the Latins, and perhaps to himself,
the foul design of perfidy and treason. A secret correspondence, for
their mutual interest, was soon established between Phirouz and the
prince of Tarento; and Bohemond declared in the council of the chiefs,
that he could deliver the city into their hands. [921] But he claimed
the sovereignty of Antioch as the reward of his service; and the
proposal which had been rejected by the envy, was at length extorted
from the distress, of his equals. The nocturnal surprise was executed
by the French and Norman princes, who ascended in person the
scaling-ladders that were thrown from the walls: their new proselyte,
after the murder of his too scrupulous brother, embraced and introduced
the servants of Christ; the army rushed through the gates; and the
Moslems soon found, that although mercy was hopeless, resistance was
impotent.

But the citadel still refused to surrender; and the victims themselves
were speedily encompassed and besieged by the innumerable forces of
Kerboga, prince of Mosul, who, with twenty-eight Turkish emirs, advanced
to the deliverance of Antioch. Five-and-twenty days the Christians spent
on the verge of destruction; and the proud lieutenant of the caliph and
the sultan left them only the choice of servitude or death. [93] In this
extremity they collected the relics of their strength, sallied from the
town, and in a single memorable day, annihilated or dispersed the host
of Turks and Arabians, which they might safely report to have consisted
of six hundred thousand men. [94] Their supernatural allies I shall
proceed to consider: the human causes of the victory of Antioch were the
fearless despair of the Franks; and the surprise, the discord, perhaps
the errors, of their unskilful and presumptuous adversaries. The battle
is described with as much disorder as it was fought; but we may observe
the tent of Kerboga, a movable and spacious palace, enriched with the
luxury of Asia, and capable of holding above two thousand persons; we
may distinguish his three thousand guards, who were cased, the horse as
well as the men, in complete steel.

[Footnote 891: This bridge was over the Ifrin, not the Orontes, at a
distance of three leagues from Antioch. See Wilken, vol. i. p. 172.--M.]

[Footnote 90: For Antioch, see Pocock, (Description of the East, vol.
ii. p. i. p. 188-193,) Otter, (Voyage en Turquie, &c., tom. i. p. 81,
&c.,) the Turkish geographer, (in Otter's notes,) the Index Geographicus
of Schultens, (ad calcem Bohadin. Vit. Saladin.,) and Abulfeda, (Tabula
Syriae, p. 115, 116, vers. Reiske.)]

[Footnote 91: Ensem elevat, eumque a sinistra parte scapularum, tanta
virtute intorsit, ut quod pectus medium disjunxit spinam et vitalia
interrupit; et sic lubricus ensis super crus dextrum integer exivit:
sicque caput integrum cum dextra parte corporis immersit gurgite,
partemque quae equo praesidebat remisit civitati, (Robert. Mon. p. 50.)
Cujus ense trajectus, Turcus duo factus est Turci: ut inferior alter in
urbem equitaret, alter arcitenens in flumine nataret, (Radulph. Cadom.
c. 53, p. 304.) Yet he justifies the deed by the stupendis viribus
of Godfrey; and William of Tyre covers it by obstupuit populus facti
novitate .... mirabilis, (l. v. c. 6, p. 701.) Yet it must not have
appeared incredible to the knights of that age.]

[Footnote 92: See the exploits of Robert, Raymond, and the modest
Tancred who imposed silence on his squire, (Randulph. Cadom. c. 53.)]

[Footnote 921: See the interesting extract from Kemaleddin's History of
Aleppo in Wilken, preface to vol. ii. p. 36. Phirouz, or Azzerrad, the
breastplate maker, had been pillaged and put to the torture by Bagi
Sejan, the prince of Antioch.--M.]

[Footnote 93: After mentioning the distress and humble petition of the
Franks, Abulpharagius adds the haughty reply of Codbuka, or Kerboga,
"Non evasuri estis nisi per gladium," (Dynast. p. 242.)]

[Footnote 94: In describing the host of Kerboga, most of the Latin
historians, the author of the Gesta, (p. 17,) Robert Monachus, (p. 56,)
Baldric, (p. 111,) Fulcherius Carnotensis, (p. 392,) Guibert, (p. 512,)
William of Tyre, (l. vi. c. 3, p. 714,) Bernard Thesaurarius, (c. 39,
p. 695,) are content with the vague expressions of infinita multitudo,
immensum agmen, innumerae copiae or gentes, which correspond with Anna
Comnena, (Alexias, l. xi. p. 318-320.) The numbers of the Turks are
fixed by Albert Aquensis at 200,000, (l. iv. c. 10, p. 242,) and by
Radulphus Cadomensis at 400,000 horse, (c. 72, p. 309.)]

In the eventful period of the siege and defence of Antioch, the
crusaders were alternately exalted by victory or sunk in despair; either
swelled with plenty or emaciated with hunger. A speculative reasoner
might suppose, that their faith had a strong and serious influence on
their practice; and that the soldiers of the cross, the deliverers of
the holy sepulchre, prepared themselves by a sober and virtuous life
for the daily contemplation of martyrdom. Experience blows away this
charitable illusion; and seldom does the history of profane war display
such scenes of intemperance and prostitution as were exhibited under
the walls of Antioch. The grove of Daphne no longer flourished; but the
Syrian air was still impregnated with the same vices; the Christians
were seduced by every temptation [95] that nature either prompts or
reprobates; the authority of the chiefs was despised; and sermons and
edicts were alike fruitless against those scandalous disorders, not less
pernicious to military discipline, than repugnant to evangelic purity.
In the first days of the siege and the possession of Antioch, the Franks
consumed with wanton and thoughtless prodigality the frugal subsistence
of weeks and months: the desolate country no longer yielded a supply;
and from that country they were at length excluded by the arms of the
besieging Turks. Disease, the faithful companion of want, was envenomed
by the rains of the winter, the summer heats, unwholesome food, and the
close imprisonment of multitudes. The pictures of famine and pestilence
are always the same, and always disgustful; and our imagination may
suggest the nature of their sufferings and their resources. The remains
of treasure or spoil were eagerly lavished in the purchase of the vilest
nourishment; and dreadful must have been the calamities of the poor,
since, after paying three marks of silver for a goat and fifteen for a
lean camel, [96] the count of Flanders was reduced to beg a dinner, and
Duke Godfrey to borrow a horse. Sixty thousand horse had been reviewed
in the camp: before the end of the siege they were diminished to two
thousand, and scarcely two hundred fit for service could be mustered on
the day of battle. Weakness of body and terror of mind extinguished
the ardent enthusiasm of the pilgrims; and every motive of honor and
religion was subdued by the desire of life. [97] Among the chiefs, three
heroes may be found without fear or reproach: Godfrey of Bouillon was
supported by his magnanimous piety; Bohemond by ambition and interest;
and Tancred declared, in the true spirit of chivalry, that as long as
he was at the head of forty knights, he would never relinquish the
enterprise of Palestine. But the count of Tholouse and Provence was
suspected of a voluntary indisposition; the duke of Normandy was
recalled from the sea-shore by the censures of the church: Hugh the
Great, though he led the vanguard of the battle, embraced an ambiguous
opportunity of returning to France and Stephen, count of Chartres,
basely deserted the standard which he bore, and the council in which
he presided. The soldiers were discouraged by the flight of William,
viscount of Melun, surnamed the Carpenter, from the weighty strokes of
his axe; and the saints were scandalized by the fall [971] of Peter the
Hermit, who, after arming Europe against Asia, attempted to escape from
the penance of a necessary fast. Of the multitude of recreant warriors,
the names (says an historian) are blotted from the book of life; and the
opprobrious epithet of the rope-dancers was applied to the deserters
who dropped in the night from the walls of Antioch. The emperor Alexius,
[98] who seemed to advance to the succor of the Latins, was dismayed by
the assurance of their hopeless condition. They expected their fate in
silent despair; oaths and punishments were tried without effect; and to
rouse the soldiers to the defence of the walls, it was found necessary
to set fire to their quarters.

[Footnote 95: See the tragic and scandalous fate of an archdeacon of
royal birth, who was slain by the Turks as he reposed in an orchard,
playing at dice with a Syrian concubine.]

[Footnote 96: The value of an ox rose from five solidi, (fifteen
shillings,) at Christmas to two marks, (four pounds,) and afterwards
much higher; a kid or lamb, from one shilling to eighteen of our present
money: in the second famine, a loaf of bread, or the head of an animal,
sold for a piece of gold. More examples might be produced; but it is the
ordinary, not the extraordinary, prices, that deserve the notice of the
philosopher.]

[Footnote 97: Alli multi, quorum nomina non tenemus; quia, deleta de
libro vitae, praesenti operi non sunt inserenda, (Will. Tyr. l. vi. c.
5, p. 715.) Guibert (p. 518, 523) attempts to excuse Hugh the Great, and
even Stephen of Chartres.]

[Footnote 971: Peter fell during the siege: he went afterwards on an
embassy to Kerboga Wilken. vol. i. p. 217.--M.]

[Footnote 98: See the progress of the crusade, the retreat of Alexius,
the victory of Antioch, and the conquest of Jerusalem, in the Alexiad,
l. xi. p. 317-327. Anna was so prone to exaggeration, that she
magnifies the exploits of the Latins.]

For their salvation and victory, they were indebted to the same
fanaticism which had led them to the brink of ruin. In such a cause, and
in such an army, visions, prophecies, and miracles, were frequent and
familiar. In the distress of Antioch, they were repeated with unusual
energy and success: St. Ambrose had assured a pious ecclesiastic, that
two years of trial must precede the season of deliverance and grace; the
deserters were stopped by the presence and reproaches of Christ himself;
the dead had promised to arise and combat with their brethren; the
Virgin had obtained the pardon of their sins; and their confidence was
revived by a visible sign, the seasonable and splendid discovery of
the Holy Lance. The policy of their chiefs has on this occasion been
admired, and might surely be excused; but a pious baud is seldom
produced by the cool conspiracy of many persons; and a voluntary
impostor might depend on the support of the wise and the credulity of
the people. Of the diocese of Marseilles, there was a priest of low
cunning and loose manners, and his name was Peter Bartholemy. He
presented himself at the door of the council-chamber, to disclose an
apparition of St. Andrew, which had been thrice reiterated in his sleep
with a dreadful menace, if he presumed to suppress the commands of
Heaven. "At Antioch," said the apostle, "in the church of my brother
St. Peter, near the high altar, is concealed the steel head of the lance
that pierced the side of our Redeemer. In three days that instrument
of eternal, and now of temporal, salvation, will be manifested to his
disciples. Search, and ye shall find: bear it aloft in battle; and that
mystic weapon shall penetrate the souls of the miscreants." The
pope's legate, the bishop of Puy, affected to listen with coldness and
distrust; but the revelation was eagerly accepted by Count Raymond, whom
his faithful subject, in the name of the apostle, had chosen for the
guardian of the holy lance. The experiment was resolved; and on the
third day after a due preparation of prayer and fasting, the priest
of Marseilles introduced twelve trusty spectators, among whom were the
count and his chaplain; and the church doors were barred against the
impetuous multitude. The ground was opened in the appointed place; but
the workmen, who relieved each other, dug to the depth of twelve feet
without discovering the object of their search. In the evening, when
Count Raymond had withdrawn to his post, and the weary assistants began
to murmur, Bartholemy, in his shirt, and without his shoes, boldly
descended into the pit; the darkness of the hour and of the place
enabled him to secrete and deposit the head of a Saracen lance; and the
first sound, the first gleam, of the steel was saluted with a devout
rapture. The holy lance was drawn from its recess, wrapped in a veil
of silk and gold, and exposed to the veneration of the crusaders; their
anxious suspense burst forth in a general shout of joy and hope, and
the desponding troops were again inflamed with the enthusiasm of valor.
Whatever had been the arts, and whatever might be the sentiments of the
chiefs, they skilfully improved this fortunate revolution by every aid
that discipline and devotion could afford. The soldiers were dismissed
to their quarters with an injunction to fortify their minds and bodies
for the approaching conflict, freely to bestow their last pittance on
themselves and their horses, and to expect with the dawn of day the
signal of victory. On the festival of St. Peter and St. Paul, the gates
of Antioch were thrown open: a martial psalm, "Let the Lord arise, and
let his enemies be scattered!" was chanted by a procession of priests
and monks; the battle array was marshalled in twelve divisions, in honor
of the twelve apostles; and the holy lance, in the absence of Raymond,
was intrusted to the hands of his chaplain. The influence of his relic
or trophy, was felt by the servants, and perhaps by the enemies, of
Christ; [99] and its potent energy was heightened by an accident, a
stratagem, or a rumor, of a miraculous complexion. Three knights, in
white garments and resplendent arms, either issued, or seemed to issue,
from the hills: the voice of Adhemar, the pope's legate, proclaimed them
as the martyrs St. George, St. Theodore, and St. Maurice: the tumult of
battle allowed no time for doubt or scrutiny; and the welcome apparition
dazzled the eyes or the imagination of a fanatic army. [991] In the
season of danger and triumph, the revelation of Bartholemy of Marseilles
was unanimously asserted; but as soon as the temporary service was
accomplished, the personal dignity and liberal arms which the count of
Tholouse derived from the custody of the holy lance, provoked the envy,
and awakened the reason, of his rivals. A Norman clerk presumed to sift,
with a philosophic spirit, the truth of the legend, the circumstances of
the discovery, and the character of the prophet; and the pious Bohemond
ascribed their deliverance to the merits and intercession of Christ
alone. For a while, the Provincials defended their national palladium
with clamors and arms and new visions condemned to death and hell the
profane sceptics who presumed to scrutinize the truth and merit of the
discovery. The prevalence of incredulity compelled the author to submit
his life and veracity to the judgment of God. A pile of dry fagots, four
feet high and fourteen long, was erected in the midst of the camp; the
flames burnt fiercely to the elevation of thirty cubits; and a narrow
path of twelve inches was left for the perilous trial. The unfortunate
priest of Marseilles traversed the fire with dexterity and speed; but
the thighs and belly were scorched by the intense heat; he expired the
next day; [992] and the logic of believing minds will pay some regard to
his dying protestations of innocence and truth. Some efforts were made
by the Provincials to substitute a cross, a ring, or a tabernacle,
in the place of the holy lance, which soon vanished in contempt and
oblivion. [100] Yet the revelation of Antioch is gravely asserted by
succeeding historians: and such is the progress of credulity, that
miracles most doubtful on the spot, and at the moment, will be received
with implicit faith at a convenient distance of time and space.

[Footnote 99: The Mahometan Aboulmahasen (apud De Guignes, tom. ii. p.
ii. p. 95) is more correct in his account of the holy lance than the
Christians, Anna Comnena and Abulpharagius: the Greek princess confounds
it with the nail of the cross, (l. xi. p. 326;) the Jacobite primate,
with St. Peter's staff, (p. 242.)]

[Footnote 991: The real cause of this victory appears to have been the
feud in Kerboga's army Wilken, vol. ii. p. 40.--M.]

[Footnote 992: The twelfth day after. He was much injured, and his
flesh torn off, from the ardor of pious congratulation with which he
was assailed by those who witnessed his escape, unhurt, as it was first
supposed. Wilken vol. i p. 263--M.]

[Footnote 100: The two antagonists who express the most intimate
knowledge and the strongest conviction of the miracle, and of the fraud,
are Raymond des Agiles, and Radulphus Cadomensis, the one attached
to the count of Tholouse, the other to the Norman prince. Fulcherius
Carnotensis presumes to say, Audite fraudem et non fraudem! and
afterwards, Invenit lanceam, fallaciter occultatam forsitan. The rest of
the herd are loud and strenuous.]

The prudence or fortune of the Franks had delayed their invasion till
the decline of the Turkish empire. [101] Under the manly government of
the three first sultans, the kingdoms of Asia were united in peace and
justice; and the innumerable armies which they led in person were equal
in courage, and superior in discipline, to the Barbarians of the West.
But at the time of the crusade, the inheritance of Malek Shaw was
disputed by his four sons; their private ambition was insensible of
the public danger; and, in the vicissitudes of their fortune, the
royal vassals were ignorant, or regardless, of the true object of their
allegiance. The twenty-eight emirs who marched with the standard or
Kerboga were his rivals or enemies: their hasty levies were drawn from
the towns and tents of Mesopotamia and Syria; and the Turkish veterans
were employed or consumed in the civil wars beyond the Tigris. The
caliph of Egypt embraced this opportunity of weakness and discord
to recover his ancient possessions; and his sultan Aphdal besieged
Jerusalem and Tyre, expelled the children of Ortok, and restored in
Palestine the civil and ecclesiastical authority of the Fatimites. [102]
They heard with astonishment of the vast armies of Christians that had
passed from Europe to Asia, and rejoiced in the sieges and battles
which broke the power of the Turks, the adversaries of their sect and
monarchy. But the same Christians were the enemies of the prophet; and
from the overthrow of Nice and Antioch, the motive of their enterprise,
which was gradually understood, would urge them forwards to the banks of
the Jordan, or perhaps of the Nile.

An intercourse of epistles and embassies, which rose and fell with the
events of war, was maintained between the throne of Cairo and the camp
of the Latins; and their adverse pride was the result of ignorance and
enthusiasm. The ministers of Egypt declared in a haughty, or insinuated
in a milder, tone, that their sovereign, the true and lawful commander
of the faithful, had rescued Jerusalem from the Turkish yoke; and that
the pilgrims, if they would divide their numbers, and lay aside their
arms, should find a safe and hospitable reception at the sepulchre
of Jesus. In the belief of their lost condition, the caliph Mostali
despised their arms and imprisoned their deputies: the conquest and
victory of Antioch prompted him to solicit those formidable champions
with gifts of horses and silk robes, of vases, and purses of gold and
silver; and in his estimate of their merit or power, the first place was
assigned to Bohemond, and the second to Godfrey. In either fortune, the
answer of the crusaders was firm and uniform: they disdained to inquire
into the private claims or possessions of the followers of Mahomet;
whatsoever was his name or nation, the usurper of Jerusalem was
their enemy; and instead of prescribing the mode and terms of their
pilgrimage, it was only by a timely surrender of the city and province,
their sacred right, that he could deserve their alliance, or deprecate
their impending and irresistible attack. [103]

[Footnote 101: See M. De Guignes, tom. ii. p. ii. p. 223, &c.; and the
articles of Barkidrok, Mohammed, Sangiar, in D'Herbelot.]

[Footnote 102: The emir, or sultan, Aphdal, recovered Jerusalem and
Tyre, A. H. 489, (Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexandrin. p. 478. De
Guignes, tom. i. p. 249, from Abulfeda and Ben Schounah.) Jerusalem
ante adventum vestrum recuperavimus, Turcos ejecimus, say the Fatimite
ambassadors]

[Footnote 103: See the transactions between the caliph of Egypt and the
crusaders in William of Tyre (l. iv. c. 24, l. vi. c. 19) and Albert
Aquensis, (l. iii. c. 59,) who are more sensible of their importance
than the contemporary writers.]

Yet this attack, when they were within the view and reach of their
glorious prize, was suspended above ten months after the defeat of
Kerboga. The zeal and courage of the crusaders were chilled in the
moment of victory; and instead of marching to improve the consternation,
they hastily dispersed to enjoy the luxury, of Syria. The causes of this
strange delay may be found in the want of strength and subordination. In
the painful and various service of Antioch, the cavalry was annihilated;
many thousands of every rank had been lost by famine, sickness, and
desertion: the same abuse of plenty had been productive of a third
famine; and the alternative of intemperance and distress had generated
a pestilence, which swept away above fifty thousand of the pilgrims. Few
were able to command, and none were willing to obey; the domestic feuds,
which had been stifled by common fear, were again renewed in acts, or at
least in sentiments, of hostility; the fortune of Baldwin and Bohemond
excited the envy of their companions; the bravest knights were enlisted
for the defence of their new principalities; and Count Raymond exhausted
his troops and treasures in an idle expedition into the heart of Syria.
[1031] The winter was consumed in discord and disorder; a sense of honor
and religion was rekindled in the spring; and the private soldiers, less
susceptible of ambition and jealousy, awakened with angry clamors the
indolence of their chiefs. In the month of May, the relics of this
mighty host proceeded from Antioch to Laodicea: about forty thousand
Latins, of whom no more than fifteen hundred horse, and twenty thousand
foot, were capable of immediate service. Their easy march was continued
between Mount Libanus and the sea-shore: their wants were liberally
supplied by the coasting traders of Genoa and Pisa; and they drew
large contributions from the emirs of Tripoli, Tyre, Sidon, Acre, and
Caesarea, who granted a free passage, and promised to follow the example
of Jerusalem. From Caesarea they advanced into the midland country;
their clerks recognized the sacred geography of Lydda, Ramla, Emmaus,
and Bethlem, [1032] and as soon as they descried the holy city, the
crusaders forgot their toils and claimed their reward. [104]

[Footnote 1031: This is not quite correct: he took Marra on his road.
His excursions were partly to obtain provisions for the army and fodder
for the horses Wilken, vol. i. p. 226.--M.]

[Footnote 1032: Scarcely of Bethlehem, to the south of Jerusalem.-- M.]

[Footnote 104: The greatest part of the march of the Franks is traced,
and most accurately traced, in Maundrell's Journey from Aleppo to
Jerusalem, (p. 11-67;) un des meilleurs morceaux, sans contredit qu'on
ait dans ce genre, (D'Anville, Memoire sur Jerusalem, p. 27.)]




