## Chapter V: Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus.--Part I.

     Public Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus By The
     Praetorian Guards--Clodius Albinus In Britain, Pescennius
     Niger In Syria, And Septimius Severus In Pannonia, Declare
     Against The Murderers Of Pertinax--Civil Wars And Victory Of
     Severus Over His Three Rivals--Relaxation Of Discipline--New
     Maxims Of Government.

The power of the sword is more sensibly felt in an extensive monarchy,
than in a small community. It has been calculated by the ablest
politicians, that no state, without being soon exhausted, can maintain
above the hundredth part of its members in arms and idleness. But
although this relative proportion may be uniform, the influence of the
army over the rest of the society will vary according to the degree of
its positive strength. The advantages of military science and discipline
cannot be exerted, unless a proper number of soldiers are united into
one body, and actuated by one soul. With a handful of men, such a union
would be ineffectual; with an unwieldy host, it would be impracticable;
and the powers of the machine would be alike destroyed by the extreme
minuteness or the excessive weight of its springs. To illustrate this
observation, we need only reflect, that there is no superiority of
natural strength, artificial weapons, or acquired skill, which could
enable one man to keep in constant subjection one hundred of his
fellow-creatures: the tyrant of a single town, or a small district,
would soon discover that a hundred armed followers were a weak defence
against ten thousand peasants or citizens; but a hundred thousand
well-disciplined soldiers will command, with despotic sway, ten millions
of subjects; and a body of ten or fifteen thousand guards will strike
terror into the most numerous populace that ever crowded the streets of
an immense capital. The Praetorian bands, whose licentious fury was the
first symptom and cause of the decline of the Roman empire, scarcely
amounted to the last-mentioned number [1] They derived their institution
from Augustus. That crafty tyrant, sensible that laws might color, but
that arms alone could maintain, his usurped dominion, had gradually
formed this powerful body of guards, in constant readiness to protect
his person, to awe the senate, and either to prevent or to crush the
first motions of rebellion. He distinguished these favored troops by
a double pay and superior privileges; but, as their formidable aspect
would at once have alarmed and irritated the Roman people, three cohorts
only were stationed in the capital, whilst the remainder was dispersed
in the adjacent towns of Italy. [2] But after fifty years of peace
and servitude, Tiberius ventured on a decisive measure, which forever
rivetted the fetters of his country. Under the fair pretences of
relieving Italy from the heavy burden of military quarters, and of
introducing a stricter discipline among the guards, he assembled them at
Rome, in a permanent camp, [3] which was fortified with skilful care, [4]
and placed on a commanding situation. [5]

[Footnote 1: They were originally nine or ten thousand men, (for Tacitus
and son are not agreed upon the subject,) divided into as many cohorts.
Vitellius increased them to sixteen thousand, and as far as we can learn
from inscriptions, they never afterwards sunk much below that number.
See Lipsius de magnitudine Romana, i. 4.]

[Footnote 2: Sueton. in August. c. 49.]

[Footnote 3: Tacit. Annal. iv. 2. Sueton. in Tiber. c. 37. Dion Cassius,
l. lvii. p. 867.]

[Footnote 4: In the civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian, the
Praetorian camp was attacked and defended with all the machines used in
the siege of the best fortified cities. Tacit. Hist. iii. 84.]

[Footnote 5: Close to the walls of the city, on the broad summit of the
Quirinal and Viminal hills. See Nardini Roma Antica, p. 174. Donatus de
Roma Antiqua, p. 46. * Note: Not on both these hills: neither Donatus
nor Nardini justify this position. (Whitaker's Review. p. 13.) At the
northern extremity of this hill (the Viminal) are some considerable
remains of a walled enclosure which bears all the appearance of a Roman
camp, and therefore is generally thought to correspond with the Castra
Praetoria. Cramer's Italy 390.--M.]

Such formidable servants are always necessary, but often
fatal to the throne of despotism. By thus introducing the Praetorian
guards as it were into the palace and the senate, the emperors taught
them to perceive their own strength, and the weakness of the civil
government; to view the vices of their masters with familiar contempt,
and to lay aside that reverential awe, which distance only, and mystery,
can preserve towards an imaginary power. In the luxurious idleness of
an opulent city, their pride was nourished by the sense of their
irresistible weight; nor was it possible to conceal from them, that
the person of the sovereign, the authority of the senate, the public
treasure, and the seat of empire, were all in their hands. To divert the
Praetorian bands from these dangerous reflections, the firmest and best
established princes were obliged to mix blandishments with commands,
rewards with punishments, to flatter their pride, indulge their
pleasures, connive at their irregularities, and to purchase their
precarious faith by a liberal donative; which, since the elevation of
Claudius, was enacted as a legal claim, on the accession of every new
emperor. [6]

[Footnote 6: Claudius, raised by the soldiers to the empire, was the
first who gave a donative. He gave quina dena, 120l. (Sueton. in Claud.
c. 10: ) when Marcus, with his colleague Lucius Versus, took quiet
possession of the throne, he gave vicena, 160l. to each of the guards.
Hist. August. p. 25, (Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1231.) We may form some idea
of the amount of these sums, by Hadrian's complaint that the promotion
of a Caesar had cost him ter millies, two millions and a half sterling.]

The advocate of the guards endeavored to justify by arguments the power
which they asserted by arms; and to maintain that, according to the
purest principles of the constitution, their consent was essentially
necessary in the appointment of an emperor. The election of consuls, of
generals, and of magistrates, however it had been recently usurped by
the senate, was the ancient and undoubted right of the Roman people. [7]
But where was the Roman people to be found? Not surely amongst the mixed
multitude of slaves and strangers that filled the streets of Rome; a
servile populace, as devoid of spirit as destitute of property. The
defenders of the state, selected from the flower of the Italian youth,
[8] and trained in the exercise of arms and virtue, were the genuine
representatives of the people, and the best entitled to elect the
military chief of the republic. These assertions, however defective in
reason, became unanswerable when the fierce Praetorians increased their
weight, by throwing, like the barbarian conqueror of Rome, their swords
into the scale. [9]

[Footnote 7: Cicero de Legibus, iii. 3. The first book of Livy, and the
second of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, show the authority of the people,
even in the election of the kings.]

[Footnote 8: They were originally recruited in Latium, Etruria, and the
old colonies, (Tacit. Annal. iv. 5.) The emperor Otho compliments
their vanity with the flattering titles of Italiae, Alumni, Romana were
juventus. Tacit. Hist. i. 84.]

[Footnote 9: In the siege of Rome by the Gauls. See Livy, v. 48.
Plutarch. in Camill. p. 143.]

The Praetorians had violated the sanctity of the throne by the atrocious
murder of Pertinax; they dishonored the majesty of it by their
subsequent conduct. The camp was without a leader, for even the praefect
Laetus, who had excited the tempest, prudently declined the public
indignation. Amidst the wild disorder, Sulpicianus, the emperor's
father-in-law, and governor of the city, who had been sent to the camp
on the first alarm of mutiny, was endeavoring to calm the fury of the
multitude, when he was silenced by the clamorous return of the
murderers, bearing on a lance the head of Pertinax. Though history has
accustomed us to observe every principle and every passion yielding to
the imperious dictates of ambition, it is scarcely credible that, in
these moments of horror, Sulpicianus should have aspired to ascend a
throne polluted with the recent blood of so near a relation and so
excellent a prince. He had already begun to use the only effectual
argument, and to treat for the Imperial dignity; but the more prudent of
the Praetorians, apprehensive that, in this private contract, they
should not obtain a just price for so valuable a commodity, ran out upon
the ramparts; and, with a loud voice, proclaimed that the Roman world
was to be disposed of to the best bidder by public auction. [10]

[Footnote 10: Dion, L. lxxiii. p. 1234. Herodian, l. ii. p. 63. Hist.
August p. 60. Though the three historians agree that it was in fact an
auction, Herodian alone affirms that it was proclaimed as such by the
soldiers.]

This infamous offer, the most insolent excess of military license,
diffused a universal grief, shame, and indignation throughout the city.
It reached at length the ears of Didius Julianus, a wealthy senator,
who, regardless of the public calamities, was indulging himself in the
luxury of the table. [11] His wife and his daughter, his freedmen and
his parasites, easily convinced him that he deserved the throne, and
earnestly conjured him to embrace so fortunate an opportunity. The vain
old man hastened to the Praetorian camp, where Sulpicianus was still in
treaty with the guards, and began to bid against him from the foot
of the rampart. The unworthy negotiation was transacted by faithful
emissaries, who passed alternately from one candidate to the other, and
acquainted each of them with the offers of his rival. Sulpicianus had
already promised a donative of five thousand drachms (above one hundred
and sixty pounds) to each soldier; when Julian, eager for the prize,
rose at once to the sum of six thousand two hundred and fifty drachms,
or upwards of two hundred pounds sterling. The gates of the camp were
instantly thrown open to the purchaser; he was declared emperor, and
received an oath of allegiance from the soldiers, who retained humanity
enough to stipulate that he should pardon and forget the competition of
Sulpicianus. [111]

[Footnote 11: Spartianus softens the most odious parts of the character
and elevation of Julian.]

[Footnote 111: One of the principal causes of the preference of Julianus
by the soldiers, was the dexterty dexterity with which he reminded them
that Sulpicianus would not fail to revenge on them the death of his
son-in-law. (See Dion, p. 1234, 1234. c. 11. Herod. ii. 6.)--W.]

It was now incumbent on the Praetorians to fulfil the conditions of the
sale. They placed their new sovereign, whom they served and despised,
in the centre of their ranks, surrounded him on every side with their
shields, and conducted him in close order of battle through the deserted
streets of the city. The senate was commanded to assemble; and those who
had been the distinguished friends of Pertinax, or the personal enemies
of Julian, found it necessary to affect a more than common share of
satisfaction at this happy revolution. [12] After Julian had filled the
senate house with armed soldiers, he expatiated on the freedom of
his election, his own eminent virtues, and his full assurance of the
affections of the senate. The obsequious assembly congratulated their
own and the public felicity; engaged their allegiance, and conferred on
him all the several branches of the Imperial power. [13] From the
senate Julian was conducted, by the same military procession, to take
possession of the palace. The first objects that struck his eyes, were
the abandoned trunk of Pertinax, and the frugal entertainment prepared
for his supper. The one he viewed with indifference, the other with
contempt. A magnificent feast was prepared by his order, and he amused
himself, till a very late hour, with dice, and the performances of
Pylades, a celebrated dancer. Yet it was observed, that after the
crowd of flatterers dispersed, and left him to darkness, solitude,
and terrible reflection, he passed a sleepless night; revolving most
probably in his mind his own rash folly, the fate of his virtuous
predecessor, and the doubtful and dangerous tenure of an empire which
had not been acquired by merit, but purchased by money. [14]

[Footnote 12: Dion Cassius, at that time praetor, had been a personal
enemy to Julian, i. lxxiii. p. 1235.]

[Footnote 13: Hist. August. p. 61. We learn from thence one curious
circumstance, that the new emperor, whatever had been his birth, was
immediately aggregated to the number of patrician families. Note: A new
fragment of Dion shows some shrewdness in the character of Julian. When
the senate voted him a golden statue, he preferred one of brass, as more
lasting. He "had always observed," he said, "that the statues of former
emperors were soon destroyed. Those of brass alone remained." The
indignant historian adds that he was wrong. The virtue of sovereigns
alone preserves their images: the brazen statue of Julian was broken to
pieces at his death. Mai. Fragm. Vatican. p. 226.--M.]

[Footnote 14: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1235. Hist. August. p. 61. I have
endeavored to blend into one consistent story the seeming contradictions
of the two writers. * Note: The contradiction as M. Guizot observed, is
irreconcilable. He quotes both passages: in one Julianus is represented
as a miser, in the other as a voluptuary. In the one he refuses to eat
till the body of Pertinax has been buried; in the other he gluts himself
with every luxury almost in the sight of his headless remains.--M.]

He had reason to tremble. On the throne of the world he found himself
without a friend, and even without an adherent. The guards themselves
were ashamed of the prince whom their avarice had persuaded them to
accept; nor was there a citizen who did not consider his elevation
with horror, as the last insult on the Roman name. The nobility, whose
conspicuous station, and ample possessions, exacted the strictest
caution, dissembled their sentiments, and met the affected civility of
the emperor with smiles of complacency and professions of duty. But the
people, secure in their numbers and obscurity, gave a free vent to their
passions. The streets and public places of Rome resounded with clamors
and imprecations. The enraged multitude affronted the person of Julian,
rejected his liberality, and, conscious of the impotence of their own
resentment, they called aloud on the legions of the frontiers to assert
the violated majesty of the Roman empire. The public discontent was soon
diffused from the centre to the frontiers of the empire. The armies of
Britain, of Syria, and of Illyricum, lamented the death of Pertinax,
in whose company, or under whose command, they had so often fought and
conquered. They received with surprise, with indignation, and perhaps
with envy, the extraordinary intelligence, that the Praetorians had
disposed of the empire by public auction; and they sternly refused to
ratify the ignominious bargain. Their immediate and unanimous revolt was
fatal to Julian, but it was fatal at the same time to the public peace,
as the generals of the respective armies, Clodius Albinus, Pescennius
Niger, and Septimius Severus, were still more anxious to succeed than to
revenge the murdered Pertinax. Their forces were exactly balanced. Each
of them was at the head of three legions, [15] with a numerous train of
auxiliaries; and however different in their characters, they were all
soldiers of experience and capacity.

[Footnote 15: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1235.]

Clodius Albinus, governor of Britain, surpassed both his competitors in
the nobility of his extraction, which he derived from some of the most
illustrious names of the old republic. [16] But the branch from which he
claimed his descent was sunk into mean circumstances, and transplanted
into a remote province. It is difficult to form a just idea of his true
character. Under the philosophic cloak of austerity, he stands accused
of concealing most of the vices which degrade human nature. [17] But his
accusers are those venal writers who adored the fortune of Severus,
and trampled on the ashes of an unsuccessful rival. Virtue, or the
appearances of virtue, recommended Albinus to the confidence and good
opinion of Marcus; and his preserving with the son the same interest
which he had acquired with the father, is a proof at least that he was
possessed of a very flexible disposition. The favor of a tyrant does
not always suppose a want of merit in the object of it; he may, without
intending it, reward a man of worth and ability, or he may find such a
man useful to his own service. It does not appear that Albinus served
the son of Marcus, either as the minister of his cruelties, or even as
the associate of his pleasures. He was employed in a distant honorable
command, when he received a confidential letter from the emperor,
acquainting him of the treasonable designs of some discontented
generals, and authorizing him to declare himself the guardian and
successor of the throne, by assuming the title and ensigns of Caesar.
[18] The governor of Britain wisely declined the dangerous honor,
which would have marked him for the jealousy, or involved him in the
approaching ruin, of Commodus. He courted power by nobler, or, at
least, by more specious arts. On a premature report of the death of
the emperor, he assembled his troops; and, in an eloquent discourse,
deplored the inevitable mischiefs of despotism, described the happiness
and glory which their ancestors had enjoyed under the consular
government, and declared his firm resolution to reinstate the senate and
people in their legal authority. This popular harangue was answered by
the loud acclamations of the British legions, and received at Rome with
a secret murmur of applause. Safe in the possession of his little world,
and in the command of an army less distinguished indeed for discipline
than for numbers and valor, [19] Albinus braved the menaces of Commodus,
maintained towards Pertinax a stately ambiguous reserve, and instantly
declared against the usurpation of Julian. The convulsions of the
capital added new weight to his sentiments, or rather to his professions
of patriotism. A regard to decency induced him to decline the lofty
titles of Augustus and Emperor; and he imitated perhaps the example of
Galba, who, on a similar occasion, had styled himself the Lieutenant of
the senate and people. [20]

[Footnote 16: The Posthumian and the Ce'onian; the former of whom was
raised to the consulship in the fifth year after its institution.]

[Footnote 17: Spartianus, in his undigested collections, mixes up all
the virtues and all the vices that enter into the human composition, and
bestows them on the same object. Such, indeed are many of the characters
in the Augustan History.]

[Footnote 18: Hist. August. p. 80, 84.]

[Footnote 19: Pertinax, who governed Britain a few years before, had
been left for dead, in a mutiny of the soldiers. Hist. August. p 54.
Yet they loved and regretted him; admirantibus eam virtutem cui
irascebantur.]

[Footnote 20: Sueton. in Galb. c. 10.]

Personal merit alone had raised Pescennius Niger, from an obscure birth
and station, to the government of Syria; a lucrative and important
command, which in times of civil confusion gave him a near prospect of
the throne. Yet his parts seem to have been better suited to the second
than to the first rank; he was an unequal rival, though he might have
approved himself an excellent lieutenant, to Severus, who afterwards
displayed the greatness of his mind by adopting several useful
institutions from a vanquished enemy. [21] In his government Niger
acquired the esteem of the soldiers and the love of the provincials. His
rigid discipline fortified the valor and confirmed the obedience of the
former, whilst the voluptuous Syrians were less delighted with the mild
firmness of his administration, than with the affability of his manners,
and the apparent pleasure with which he attended their frequent and
pompous festivals. [22] As soon as the intelligence of the atrocious
murder of Pertinax had reached Antioch, the wishes of Asia invited Niger
to assume the Imperial purple and revenge his death. The legions of the
eastern frontier embraced his cause; the opulent but unarmed provinces,
from the frontiers of Aethiopia [23] to the Hadriatic, cheerfully
submitted to his power; and the kings beyond the Tigris and the
Euphrates congratulated his election, and offered him their homage and
services. The mind of Niger was not capable of receiving this sudden
tide of fortune: he flattered himself that his accession would be
undisturbed by competition and unstained by civil blood; and whilst he
enjoyed the vain pomp of triumph, he neglected to secure the means of
victory. Instead of entering into an effectual negotiation with the
powerful armies of the West, whose resolution might decide, or at least
must balance, the mighty contest; instead of advancing without delay
towards Rome and Italy, where his presence was impatiently expected, [24]
Niger trifled away in the luxury of Antioch those irretrievable moments
which were diligently improved by the decisive activity of Severus. [25]
[Footnote 21: Hist. August. p. 76.]

[Footnote 22: Herod. l. ii. p. 68. The Chronicle of John Malala, of
Antioch, shows the zealous attachment of his countrymen to these
festivals, which at once gratified their superstition, and their love of
pleasure.]

[Footnote 23: A king of Thebes, in Egypt, is mentioned, in the Augustan
History, as an ally, and, indeed, as a personal friend of Niger. If
Spartianus is not, as I strongly suspect, mistaken, he has brought to
light a dynasty of tributary princes totally unknown to history.]

[Footnote 24: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1238. Herod. l. ii. p. 67. A verse in
every one's mouth at that time, seems to express the general opinion of
the three rivals; Optimus est Niger, [Fuscus, which preserves the
quantity.--M.] bonus After, pessimus Albus. Hist. August. p. 75.]

[Footnote 25: Herodian, l. ii. p. 71.]

The country of Pannonia and Dalmatia, which occupied the space between
the Danube and the Hadriatic, was one of the last and most difficult
conquests of the Romans. In the defence of national freedom, two hundred
thousand of these barbarians had once appeared in the field, alarmed
the declining age of Augustus, and exercised the vigilant prudence
of Tiberius at the head of the collected force of the empire. [26] The
Pannonians yielded at length to the arms and institutions of Rome. Their
recent subjection, however, the neighborhood, and even the mixture, of
the unconquered tribes, and perhaps the climate, adapted, as it has
been observed, to the production of great bodies and slow minds, [27]
all contributed to preserve some remains of their original ferocity, and
under the tame and uniform countenance of Roman provincials, the hardy
features of the natives were still to be discerned. Their warlike youth
afforded an inexhaustible supply of recruits to the legions stationed on
the banks of the Danube, and which, from a perpetual warfare against the
Germans and Sarmazans, were deservedly esteemed the best troops in the
service.

[Footnote 26: See an account of that memorable war in Velleius
Paterculus, is 110, &c., who served in the army of Tiberius.]

[Footnote 27: Such is the reflection of Herodian, l. ii. p. 74. Will the
modern Austrians allow the influence?]

The Pannonian army was at this time commanded by Septimius Severus,
a native of Africa, who, in the gradual ascent of private honors, had
concealed his daring ambition, which was never diverted from its steady
course by the allurements of pleasure, the apprehension of danger,
or the feelings of humanity. [28] On the first news of the murder of
Pertinax, he assembled his troops, painted in the most lively colors
the crime, the insolence, and the weakness of the Praetorian guards,
and animated the legions to arms and to revenge. He concluded (and the
peroration was thought extremely eloquent) with promising every soldier
about four hundred pounds; an honorable donative, double in value to
the infamous bribe with which Julian had purchased the empire. [29] The
acclamations of the army immediately saluted Severus with the names of
Augustus, Pertinax, and Emperor; and he thus attained the lofty station
to which he was invited, by conscious merit and a long train of dreams
and omens, the fruitful offsprings either of his superstition or policy.
[30]

[Footnote 28: In the letter to Albinus, already mentioned, Commodus
accuses Severus, as one of the ambitious generals who censured his
conduct, and wished to occupy his place. Hist. August. p. 80.]

[Footnote 29: Pannonia was too poor to supply such a sum. It was
probably promised in the camp, and paid at Rome, after the victory. In
fixing the sum, I have adopted the conjecture of Casaubon. See Hist.
August. p. 66. Comment. p. 115.]

[Footnote 30: Herodian, l. ii. p. 78. Severus was declared emperor on
the banks of the Danube, either at Carnuntum, according to Spartianus,
(Hist. August. p. 65,) or else at Sabaria, according to Victor. Mr.
Hume, in supposing that the birth and dignity of Severus were too
much inferior to the Imperial crown, and that he marched into Italy
as general only, has not considered this transaction with his usual
accuracy, (Essay on the original contract.) * Note: Carnuntum, opposite
to the mouth of the Morava: its position is doubtful, either Petronel or
Haimburg. A little intermediate village seems to indicate by its name
(Altenburg) the site of an old town. D'Anville Geogr. Anc. Sabaria, now
Sarvar.--G. Compare note 37.--M.]

The new candidate for empire saw and improved the peculiar advantage of
his situation. His province extended to the Julian Alps, which gave an
easy access into Italy; and he remembered the saying of Augustus, That
a Pannonian army might in ten days appear in sight of Rome. [31] By
a celerity proportioned to the greatness of the occasion, he might
reasonably hope to revenge Pertinax, punish Julian, and receive the
homage of the senate and people, as their lawful emperor, before his
competitors, separated from Italy by an immense tract of sea and land,
were apprised of his success, or even of his election. During the whole
expedition, he scarcely allowed himself any moments for sleep or food;
marching on foot, and in complete armor, at the head of his columns,
he insinuated himself into the confidence and affection of his troops,
pressed their diligence, revived their spirits, animated their hopes,
and was well satisfied to share the hardships of the meanest soldier,
whilst he kept in view the infinite superiority of his reward.

[Footnote 31: Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 3. We must reckon the march
from the nearest verge of Pannonia, and extend the sight of the city as
far as two hundred miles.]

The wretched Julian had expected, and thought himself prepared, to
dispute the empire with the governor of Syria; but in the invincible and
rapid approach of the Pannonian legions, he saw his inevitable ruin. The
hasty arrival of every messenger increased his just apprehensions. He
was successively informed, that Severus had passed the Alps; that the
Italian cities, unwilling or unable to oppose his progress, had received
him with the warmest professions of joy and duty; that the important
place of Ravenna had surrendered without resistance, and that the
Hadriatic fleet was in the hands of the conqueror. The enemy was now
within two hundred and fifty miles of Rome; and every moment diminished
the narrow span of life and empire allotted to Julian.

He attempted, however, to prevent, or at least to protract, his ruin.
He implored the venal faith of the Praetorians, filled the city with
unavailing preparations for war, drew lines round the suburbs, and
even strengthened the fortifications of the palace; as if those last
intrenchments could be defended, without hope of relief, against a
victorious invader. Fear and shame prevented the guards from deserting
his standard; but they trembled at the name of the Pannonian legions,
commanded by an experienced general, and accustomed to vanquish the
barbarians on the frozen Danube. [32] They quitted, with a sigh, the
pleasures of the baths and theatres, to put on arms, whose use they had
almost forgotten, and beneath the weight of which they were oppressed.
The unpractised elephants, whose uncouth appearance, it was hoped, would
strike terror into the army of the north, threw their unskilful riders;
and the awkward evolutions of the marines, drawn from the fleet of
Misenum, were an object of ridicule to the populace; whilst the senate
enjoyed, with secret pleasure, the distress and weakness of the usurper.
[33]

[Footnote 32: This is not a puerile figure of rhetoric, but an allusion
to a real fact recorded by Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1181. It probably happened
more than once.]

[Footnote 33: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1233. Herodian, l. ii. p. 81. There
is no surer proof of the military skill of the Romans, than their first
surmounting the idle terror, and afterwards disdaining the dangerous
use, of elephants in war. Note: These elephants were kept for
processions, perhaps for the games. Se Herod. in loc.--M.]

Every motion of Julian betrayed his trembling perplexity. He insisted
that Severus should be declared a public enemy by the senate. He
entreated that the Pannonian general might be associated to the empire.
He sent public ambassadors of consular rank to negotiate with his rival;
he despatched private assassins to take away his life. He designed that
the Vestal virgins, and all the colleges of priests, in their sacerdotal
habits, and bearing before them the sacred pledges of the Roman
religion, should advance in solemn procession to meet the Pannonian
legions; and, at the same time, he vainly tried to interrogate, or to
appease, the fates, by magic ceremonies and unlawful sacrifices. [34]

[Footnote 34: Hist. August. p. 62, 63. * Note: Quae ad speculum dicunt
fieri in quo pueri praeligatis oculis, incantate..., respicere dicuntur.
* * * Tuncque puer vidisse dicitur et adventun Severi et Juliani
decessionem. This seems to have been a practice somewhat similar to that
of which our recent Egyptian travellers relate such extraordinary
circumstances. See also Apulius, Orat. de Magia.--M.]




