## Chapter V: Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus.--Part II.

Severus, who dreaded neither his arms nor his enchantments, guarded
himself from the only danger of secret conspiracy, by the faithful
attendance of six hundred chosen men, who never quitted his person or
their cuirasses, either by night or by day, during the whole march.
Advancing with a steady and rapid course, he passed, without difficulty,
the defiles of the Apennine, received into his party the troops and
ambassadors sent to retard his progress, and made a short halt at
Interamnia, about seventy miles from Rome. His victory was already
secure, but the despair of the Praetorians might have rendered it
bloody; and Severus had the laudable ambition of ascending the throne
without drawing the sword. [35] His emissaries, dispersed in the capital,
assured the guards, that provided they would abandon their worthless
prince, and the perpetrators of the murder of Pertinax, to the justice
of the conqueror, he would no longer consider that melancholy event as
the act of the whole body. The faithless Praetorians, whose resistance
was supported only by sullen obstinacy, gladly complied with the easy
conditions, seized the greatest part of the assassins, and signified
to the senate, that they no longer defended the cause of Julian. That
assembly, convoked by the consul, unanimously acknowledged Severus as
lawful emperor, decreed divine honors to Pertinax, and pronounced a
sentence of deposition and death against his unfortunate successor.
Julian was conducted into a private apartment of the baths of the
palace, and beheaded as a common criminal, after having purchased, with
an immense treasure, an anxious and precarious reign of only sixty-six
days. [36] The almost incredible expedition of Severus, who, in so short
a space of time, conducted a numerous army from the banks of the Danube
to those of the Tyber, proves at once the plenty of provisions produced
by agriculture and commerce, the goodness of the roads, the discipline
of the legions, and the indolent, subdued temper of the provinces. [37]


[Footnote 35: Victor and Eutropius, viii. 17, mention a combat near the
Milvian bridge, the Ponte Molle, unknown to the better and more ancient
writers.]

[Footnote 36: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1240. Herodian, l. ii. p. 83. Hist.
August. p. 63.]

[Footnote 37: From these sixty-six days, we must first deduct sixteen,
as Pertinax was murdered on the 28th of March, and Severus most probably
elected on the 13th of April, (see Hist. August. p. 65, and Tillemont,
Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 393, note 7.) We cannot allow less
than ten days after his election, to put a numerous army in motion.
Forty days remain for this rapid march; and as we may compute about
eight hundred miles from Rome to the neighborhood of Vienna, the army of
Severus marched twenty miles every day, without halt or intermission.]

The first cares of Severus were bestowed on two measures the one
dictated by policy, the other by decency; the revenge, and the honors,
due to the memory of Pertinax. Before the new emperor entered Rome, he
issued his commands to the Praetorian guards, directing them to wait his
arrival on a large plain near the city, without arms, but in the habits
of ceremony, in which they were accustomed to attend their sovereign. He
was obeyed by those haughty troops, whose contrition was the effect of
their just terrors. A chosen part of the Illyrian army encompassed them
with levelled spears. Incapable of flight or resistance, they expected
their fate in silent consternation. Severus mounted the tribunal,
sternly reproached them with perfidy and cowardice, dismissed them with
ignominy from the trust which they had betrayed, despoiled them of their
splendid ornaments, and banished them, on pain of death, to the distance
of a hundred miles from the capital. During the transaction, another
detachment had been sent to seize their arms, occupy their camp, and
prevent the hasty consequences of their despair. [38]

[Footnote 38: Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1241. Herodian, l. ii. p. 84.] The
funeral and consecration of Pertinax was next solemnized with every
circumstance of sad magnificence. [39] The senate, with a melancholy
pleasure, performed the last rites to that excellent prince, whom they
had loved, and still regretted. The concern of his successor was
probably less sincere; he esteemed the virtues of Pertinax, but those
virtues would forever have confined his ambition to a private station.
Severus pronounced his funeral oration with studied eloquence, inward
satisfaction, and well-acted sorrow; and by this pious regard to his
memory, convinced the credulous multitude, that he alone was worthy to
supply his place. Sensible, however, that arms, not ceremonies, must
assert his claim to the empire, he left Rome at the end of thirty days,
and without suffering himself to be elated by this easy victory,
prepared to encounter his more formidable rivals.

[Footnote 39: Dion, (l. lxxiv. p. 1244,) who assisted at the ceremony as
a senator, gives a most pompous description of it.]

The uncommon abilities and fortune of Severus have induced an elegant
historian to compare him with the first and greatest of the Caesars.
[40] The parallel is, at least, imperfect. Where shall we find, in the
character of Severus, the commanding superiority of soul, the generous
clemency, and the various genius, which could reconcile and unite the
love of pleasure, the thirst of knowledge, and the fire of ambition?
[41] In one instance only, they may be compared, with some degree of
propriety, in the celerity of their motions, and their civil victories.
In less than four years, [42] Severus subdued the riches of the East, and
the valor of the West. He vanquished two competitors of reputation
and ability, and defeated numerous armies, provided with weapons and
discipline equal to his own. In that age, the art of fortification,
and the principles of tactics, were well understood by all the Roman
generals; and the constant superiority of Severus was that of an artist,
who uses the same instruments with more skill and industry than his
rivals. I shall not, however, enter into a minute narrative of these
military operations; but as the two civil wars against Niger and against
Albinus were almost the same in their conduct, event, and consequences,
I shall collect into one point of view the most striking circumstances,
tending to develop the character of the conqueror and the state of the
empire.

[Footnote 40: Herodian, l. iii. p. 112]

[Footnote 41: Though it is not, most assuredly, the intention of Lucan
to exalt the character of Caesar, yet the idea he gives of that hero,
in the tenth book of the Pharsalia, where he describes him, at the same
time, making love to Cleopatra, sustaining a siege against the power of
Egypt, and conversing with the sages of the country, is, in reality, the
noblest panegyric. * Note: Lord Byron wrote, no doubt, from a
reminiscence of that passage--"It is possible to be a very great man,
and to be still very inferior to Julius Caesar, the most complete
character, so Lord Bacon thought, of all antiquity. Nature seems
incapable of such extraordinary combinations as composed his versatile
capacity, which was the wonder even of the Romans themselves. The first
general; the only triumphant politician; inferior to none in point of
eloquence; comparable to any in the attainments of wisdom, in an age
made up of the greatest commanders, statesmen, orators, and
philosophers, that ever appeared in the world; an author who composed a
perfect specimen of military annals in his travelling carriage; at one
time in a controversy with Cato, at another writing a treatise on
punuing, and collecting a set of good sayings; fighting and making love
at the same moment, and willing to abandon both his empire and his
mistress for a sight of the fountains of the Nile. Such did Julius
Caesar appear to his contemporaries, and to those of the subsequent ages
who were the most inclined to deplore and execrate his fatal genius."
Note 47 to Canto iv. of Childe Harold.--M.]

[Footnote 42: Reckoning from his election, April 13, 193, to the death
of Albinus, February 19, 197. See Tillemont's Chronology.]

Falsehood and insincerity, unsuitable as they seem to the dignity of
public transactions, offend us with a less degrading idea of meanness,
than when they are found in the intercourse of private life. In the
latter, they discover a want of courage; in the other, only a defect of
power: and, as it is impossible for the most able statesmen to subdue
millions of followers and enemies by their own personal strength, the
world, under the name of policy, seems to have granted them a very
liberal indulgence of craft and dissimulation. Yet the arts of Severus
cannot be justified by the most ample privileges of state reason. He
promised only to betray, he flattered only to ruin; and however he
might occasionally bind himself by oaths and treaties, his conscience,
obsequious to his interest, always released him from the inconvenient
obligation. [43]

[Footnote 43: Herodian, l. ii. p. 85.]

If his two competitors, reconciled by their common danger, had advanced
upon him without delay, perhaps Severus would have sunk under their
united effort. Had they even attacked him, at the same time, with
separate views and separate armies, the contest might have been long and
doubtful. But they fell, singly and successively, an easy prey to the
arts as well as arms of their subtle enemy, lulled into security by the
moderation of his professions, and overwhelmed by the rapidity of his
action. He first marched against Niger, whose reputation and power he
the most dreaded: but he declined any hostile declarations, suppressed
the name of his antagonist, and only signified to the senate and people
his intention of regulating the eastern provinces. In private, he spoke
of Niger, his old friend and intended successor, [44] with the most
affectionate regard, and highly applauded his generous design of
revenging the murder of Pertinax. To punish the vile usurper of the
throne, was the duty of every Roman general. To persevere in arms, and
to resist a lawful emperor, acknowledged by the senate, would alone
render him criminal. [45] The sons of Niger had fallen into his hands
among the children of the provincial governors, detained at Rome as
pledges for the loyalty of their parents. [46] As long as the power of
Niger inspired terror, or even respect, they were educated with the most
tender care, with the children of Severus himself; but they were
soon involved in their father's ruin, and removed first by exile, and
afterwards by death, from the eye of public compassion. [47]

[Footnote 44: Whilst Severus was very dangerously ill, it was
industriously given out, that he intended to appoint Niger and Albinus
his successors. As he could not be sincere with respect to both, he
might not be so with regard to either. Yet Severus carried his hypocrisy
so far, as to profess that intention in the memoirs of his own life.]

[Footnote 45: Hist. August. p. 65.]

[Footnote 46: This practice, invented by Commodus, proved very useful
to Severus. He found at Rome the children of many of the principal
adherents of his rivals; and he employed them more than once to
intimidate, or seduce, the parents.]

[Footnote 47: Herodian, l. iii. p. 95. Hist. August. p. 67, 68.]

Whilst Severus was engaged in his eastern war, he had reason to
apprehend that the governor of Britain might pass the sea and the
Alps, occupy the vacant seat of empire, and oppose his return with
the authority of the senate and the forces of the West. The ambiguous
conduct of Albinus, in not assuming the Imperial title, left room for
negotiation. Forgetting, at once, his professions of patriotism, and the
jealousy of sovereign power, he accepted the precarious rank of Caesar,
as a reward for his fatal neutrality. Till the first contest was
decided, Severus treated the man, whom he had doomed to destruction,
with every mark of esteem and regard. Even in the letter, in which he
announced his victory over Niger, he styles Albinus the brother of his
soul and empire, sends him the affectionate salutations of his wife
Julia, and his young family, and entreats him to preserve the armies and
the republic faithful to their common interest. The messengers charged
with this letter were instructed to accost the Caesar with respect, to
desire a private audience, and to plunge their daggers into his heart.
[48] The conspiracy was discovered, and the too credulous Albinus,
at length, passed over to the continent, and prepared for an unequal
contest with his rival, who rushed upon him at the head of a veteran and
victorious army.

[Footnote 48: Hist. August. p. 84. Spartianus has inserted this curious
letter at full length.]

The military labors of Severus seem inadequate to the importance of his
conquests. Two engagements, [481] the one near the Hellespont, the other
in the narrow defiles of Cilicia, decided the fate of his Syrian
competitor; and the troops of Europe asserted their usual ascendant
over the effeminate natives of Asia. [49] The battle of Lyons, where one
hundred and fifty thousand Romans [50] were engaged, was equally fatal to
Albinus. The valor of the British army maintained, indeed, a sharp and
doubtful contest, with the hardy discipline of the Illyrian legions. The
fame and person of Severus appeared, during a few moments, irrecoverably
lost, till that warlike prince rallied his fainting troops, and led them
on to a decisive victory. [51] The war was finished by that memorable
day. [511]

[Footnote 481: There were three actions; one near Cyzicus, on the
Hellespont, one near Nice, in Bithynia, the third near the Issus, in
Cilicia, where Alexander conquered Darius. (Dion, lxiv. c. 6.
Herodian, iii. 2, 4.)--W Herodian represents the second battle as of
less importance than Dion--M.]

[Footnote 49: Consult the third book of Herodian, and the seventy-fourth
book of Dion Cassius.]

[Footnote 50: Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1260.]

[Footnote 51: Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1261. Herodian, l. iii. p. 110. Hist.
August. p. 68. The battle was fought in the plain of Trevoux, three
or four leagues from Lyons. See Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 406, note 18.]

[Footnote 511: According to Herodian, it was his lieutenant Laetus who
led back the troops to the battle, and gained the day, which Severus
had almost lost. Dion also attributes to Laetus a great share in the
victory. Severus afterwards put him to death, either from fear or
jealousy.--W. and G. Wenck and M. Guizot have not given the real
statement of Herodian or of Dion. According to the former, Laetus
appeared with his own army entire, which he was suspected of having
designedly kept disengaged when the battle was still doudtful, or rather
after the rout of severus. Dion says that he did not move till Severus
had won the victory.--M.]

The civil wars of modern Europe have been distinguished, not only by
the fierce animosity, but likewise by the obstinate perseverance, of
the contending factions. They have generally been justified by some
principle, or, at least, colored by some pretext, of religion, freedom,
or loyalty. The leaders were nobles of independent property and
hereditary influence. The troops fought like men interested in the
decision of the quarrel; and as military spirit and party zeal were
strongly diffused throughout the whole community, a vanquished chief was
immediately supplied with new adherents, eager to shed their blood in
the same cause. But the Romans, after the fall of the republic,
combated only for the choice of masters. Under the standard of a popular
candidate for empire, a few enlisted from affection, some from fear,
many from interest, none from principle. The legions, uninflamed by
party zeal, were allured into civil war by liberal donatives, and
still more liberal promises. A defeat, by disabling the chief from the
performance of his engagements, dissolved the mercenary allegiance of
his followers, and left them to consult their own safety by a timely
desertion of an unsuccessful cause. It was of little moment to the
provinces, under whose name they were oppressed or governed; they were
driven by the impulsion of the present power, and as soon as that power
yielded to a superior force, they hastened to implore the clemency of
the conqueror, who, as he had an immense debt to discharge, was obliged
to sacrifice the most guilty countries to the avarice of his soldiers.
In the vast extent of the Roman empire, there were few fortified cities
capable of protecting a routed army; nor was there any person, or
family, or order of men, whose natural interest, unsupported by the
powers of government, was capable of restoring the cause of a sinking
party. [52]

[Footnote 52: Montesquieu, Considerations sur la Grandeur et la
Decadence des Romains, c. xiii.]

Yet, in the contest between Niger and Severus, a single city deserves an
honorable exception. As Byzantium was one of the greatest passages from
Europe into Asia, it had been provided with a strong garrison, and
a fleet of five hundred vessels was anchored in the harbor. [53] The
impetuosity of Severus disappointed this prudent scheme of defence; he
left to his generals the siege of Byzantium, forced the less guarded
passage of the Hellespont, and, impatient of a meaner enemy, pressed
forward to encounter his rival. Byzantium, attacked by a numerous and
increasing army, and afterwards by the whole naval power of the empire,
sustained a siege of three years, and remained faithful to the name and
memory of Niger. The citizens and soldiers (we know not from what cause)
were animated with equal fury; several of the principal officers
of Niger, who despaired of, or who disdained, a pardon, had thrown
themselves into this last refuge: the fortifications were esteemed
impregnable, and, in the defence of the place, a celebrated engineer
displayed all the mechanic powers known to the ancients. [54] Byzantium,
at length, surrendered to famine. The magistrates and soldiers were put
to the sword, the walls demolished, the privileges suppressed, and the
destined capital of the East subsisted only as an open village, subject
to the insulting jurisdiction of Perinthus. The historian Dion, who had
admired the flourishing, and lamented the desolate, state of Byzantium,
accused the revenge of Severus, for depriving the Roman people of the
strongest bulwark against the barbarians of Pontus and Asia [55] The
truth of this observation was but too well justified in the succeeding
age, when the Gothic fleets covered the Euxine, and passed through the
undefined Bosphorus into the centre of the Mediterranean.

[Footnote 53: Most of these, as may be supposed, were small open
vessels; some, however, were galleys of two, and a few of three ranks
of oars.]

[Footnote 54: The engineer's name was Priscus. His skill saved
his life, and he was taken into the service of the conqueror. For the
particular facts of the siege, consult Dion Cassius (l. lxxv. p. 1251)
and Herodian, (l. iii. p. 95;) for the theory of it, the fanciful
chevalier de Folard may be looked into. See Polybe, tom. i. p. 76.]

[Footnote 55: Notwithstanding the authority of Spartianus, and
some modern Greeks, we may be assured, from Dion and Herodian, that
Byzantium, many years after the death of Severus, lay in ruins. There is
no contradiction between the relation of Dion and that of Spartianus and
the modern Greeks. Dion does not say that Severus destroyed Byzantium,
but that he deprived it of its franchises and privileges, stripped the
inhabitants of their property, razed the fortifications, and subjected
the city to the jurisdiction of Perinthus. Therefore, when Spartian,
Suidas, Cedrenus, say that Severus and his son Antoninus restored to
Byzantium its rights and franchises, ordered temples to be built, &c.,
this is easily reconciled with the relation of Dion. Perhaps the latter
mentioned it in some of the fragments of his history which have been
lost. As to Herodian, his expressions are evidently exaggerated, and he
has been guilty of so many inaccuracies in the history of Severus, that
we have a right to suppose one in this passage.--G. from W Wenck and M.
Guizot have omitted to cite Zosimus, who mentions a particular portico
built by Severus, and called, apparently, by his name. Zosim. Hist. ii.
c. xxx. p. 151, 153, edit Heyne.--M.]

Both Niger and Albinus were discovered and put to death
in their flight from the field of battle. Their fate excited neither
surprise nor compassion. They had staked their lives against the chance
of empire, and suffered what they would have inflicted; nor did Severus
claim the arrogant superiority of suffering his rivals to live in a
private station. But his unforgiving temper, stimulated by avarice,
indulged a spirit of revenge, where there was no room for apprehension.
The most considerable of the provincials, who, without any dislike to
the fortunate candidate, had obeyed the governor under whose authority
they were accidentally placed, were punished by death, exile, and
especially by the confiscation of their estates. Many cities of the
East were stripped of their ancient honors, and obliged to pay, into the
treasury of Severus, four times the amount of the sums contributed by
them for the service of Niger. [56]

[Footnote 56: Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1250.]

Till the final decision of the war, the cruelty of Severus was, in some
measure, restrained by the uncertainty of the event, and his pretended
reverence for the senate. The head of Albinus, accompanied with a
menacing letter, announced to the Romans that he was resolved to spare
none of the adherents of his unfortunate competitors. He was irritated
by the just auspicion that he had never possessed the affections of the
senate, and he concealed his old malevolence under the recent discovery
of some treasonable correspondences. Thirty-five senators, however,
accused of having favored the party of Albinus, he freely pardoned, and,
by his subsequent behavior, endeavored to convince them, that he had
forgotten, as well as forgiven, their supposed offences. But, at the
same time, he condemned forty-one [57] other senators, whose names
history has recorded; their wives, children, and clients attended them
in death, [571] and the noblest provincials of Spain and Gaul were involved
in the same ruin. [572] Such rigid justice--for so he termed it--was, in
the opinion of Severus, the only conduct capable of insuring peace to
the people or stability to the prince; and he condescended slightly to
lament, that to be mild, it was necessary that he should first be cruel.
[58]

[Footnote 57: Dion, (l. lxxv. p. 1264;) only twenty-nine senators
are mentioned by him, but forty-one are named in the Augustan History,
p. 69, among whom were six of the name of Pescennius. Herodian (l. iii.
p. 115) speaks in general of the cruelties of Severus.]

[Footnote 571: Wenck denies that there is any authority for this massacre
of the wives of the senators. He adds, that only the children and
relatives of Niger and Albinus were put to death. This is true of the
family of Albinus, whose bodies were thrown into the Rhone; those of
Niger, according to Lampridius, were sent into exile, but afterwards put
to death. Among the partisans of Albinus who were put to death were many
women of rank, multae foeminae illustres. Lamprid. in Sever.--M.]

[Footnote 572: A new fragment of Dion describes the state of Rome during
this contest. All pretended to be on the side of Severus; but their
secret sentiments were often betrayed by a change of countenance on the
arrival of some sudden report. Some were detected by overacting their
loyalty, Mai. Fragm. Vatican. p. 227 Severus told the senate he would
rather have their hearts than their votes.--Ibid.--M.]

[Footnote 58: Aurelius Victor.]

The true interest of an absolute monarch generally coincides with that
of his people. Their numbers, their wealth, their order, and their
security, are the best and only foundations of his real greatness; and
were he totally devoid of virtue, prudence might supply its place, and
would dictate the same rule of conduct. Severus considered the Roman
empire as his property, and had no sooner secured the possession, than
he bestowed his care on the cultivation and improvement of so valuable
an acquisition. Salutary laws, executed with inflexible firmness, soon
corrected most of the abuses with which, since the death of Marcus,
every part of the government had been infected. In the administration of
justice, the judgments of the emperor were characterized by attention,
discernment, and impartiality; and whenever he deviated from the strict
line of equity, it was generally in favor of the poor and oppressed;
not so much indeed from any sense of humanity, as from the natural
propensity of a despot to humble the pride of greatness, and to sink
all his subjects to the same common level of absolute dependence.
His expensive taste for building, magnificent shows, and above all
a constant and liberal distribution of corn and provisions, were the
surest means of captivating the affection of the Roman people. [59] The
misfortunes of civil discord were obliterated. The calm of peace and
prosperity was once more experienced in the provinces; and many cities,
restored by the munificence of Severus, assumed the title of his
colonies, and attested by public monuments their gratitude and
felicity. [60] The fame of the Roman arms was revived by that warlike and
successful emperor, [61] and he boasted, with a just pride, that, having
received the empire oppressed with foreign and domestic wars, he left it
established in profound, universal, and honorable peace. [62]

[Footnote 59: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1272. Hist. August. p. 67. Severus
celebrated the secular games with extraordinary magnificence, and he
left in the public granaries a provision of corn for seven years, at the
rate of 75,000 modii, or about 2500 quarters per day. I am persuaded
that the granaries of Severus were supplied for a long term, but I am
not less persuaded, that policy on one hand, and admiration on the
other, magnified the hoard far beyond its true contents.]

[Footnote 60: See Spanheim's treatise of ancient medals, the
inscriptions, and our learned travellers Spon and Wheeler, Shaw, Pocock,
&c, who, in Africa, Greece, and Asia, have found more monuments of
Severus than of any other Roman emperor whatsoever.]

[Footnote 61: He carried his victorious arms to Seleucia and Ctesiphon,
the capitals of the Parthian monarchy. I shall have occasion to mention
this war in its proper place.]

[Footnote 62: Etiam in Britannis, was his own just and emphatic
expression Hist. August. 73.]

Although the wounds of civil war appeared completely healed, its mortal
poison still lurked in the vitals of the constitution.

Severus possessed a considerable share of vigor and ability; but the
daring soul of the first Caesar, or the deep policy of Augustus, were
scarcely equal to the task of curbing the insolence of the victorious
legions. By gratitude, by misguided policy, by seeming necessity,
Severus was reduced to relax the nerves of discipline. [63] The vanity
of his soldiers was flattered with the honor of wearing gold rings their
ease was indulged in the permission of living with their wives in the
idleness of quarters. He increased their pay beyond the example
of former times, and taught them to expect, and soon to claim,
extraordinary donatives on every public occasion of danger or festivity.
Elated by success, enervated by luxury, and raised above the level of
subjects by their dangerous privileges, [64] they soon became incapable
of military fatigue, oppressive to the country, and impatient of a just
subordination. Their officers asserted the superiority of rank by a more
profuse and elegant luxury. There is still extant a letter of Severus,
lamenting the licentious stage of the army, [641] and exhorting one of
his generals to begin the necessary reformation from the tribunes
themselves; since, as he justly observes, the officer who has forfeited
the esteem, will never command the obedience, of his soldiers. [65] Had
the emperor pursued the train of reflection, he would have discovered,
that the primary cause of this general corruption might be ascribed, not
indeed to the example, but to the pernicious indulgence, however, of
the commander-in-chief.

[Footnote 63: Herodian, l. iii. p. 115. Hist. August. p. 68.]

[Footnote 64: Upon the insolence and privileges of the soldier, the 16th
satire, falsely ascribed to Juvenal, may be consulted; the style and
circumstances of it would induce me to believe, that it was composed
under the reign of Severus, or that of his son.]

[Footnote 641: Not of the army, but of the troops in Gaul. The contents
of this letter seem to prove that Severus was really anxious to restore
discipline Herodian is the only historian who accuses him of being the
first cause of its relaxation.--G. from W Spartian mentions his increase
of the pays.--M.]

[Footnote 65: Hist. August. p. 73.]

The Praetorians, who murdered their emperor and sold the empire, had
received the just punishment of their treason; but the necessary, though
dangerous, institution of guards was soon restored on a new model by
Severus, and increased to four times the ancient number. [66] Formerly
these troops had been recruited in Italy; and as the adjacent provinces
gradually imbibed the softer manners of Rome, the levies were extended
to Macedonia, Noricum, and Spain. In the room of these elegant troops,
better adapted to the pomp of courts than to the uses of war, it was
established by Severus, that from all the legions of the frontiers, the
soldiers most distinguished for strength, valor, and fidelity, should be
occasionally draughted; and promoted, as an honor and reward, into the
more eligible service of the guards. [67] By this new institution, the
Italian youth were diverted from the exercise of arms, and the capital
was terrified by the strange aspect and manners of a multitude of
barbarians. But Severus flattered himself, that the legions would
consider these chosen Praetorians as the representatives of the whole
military order; and that the present aid of fifty thousand men, superior
in arms and appointments to any force that could be brought into the
field against them, would forever crush the hopes of rebellion, and
secure the empire to himself and his posterity.

[Footnote 66: Herodian, l. iii. p. 131.]

[Footnote 67: Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1243.]

The command of these favored and formidable troops soon became the
first office of the empire. As the government degenerated into military
despotism, the Praetorian Praefect, who in his origin had been a simple
captain of the guards, [671] was placed not only at the head of the
army, but of the finances, and even of the law. In every department of
administration, he represented the person, and exercised the authority,
of the emperor. The first praefect who enjoyed and abused this immense
power was Plautianus, the favorite minister of Severus. His reign lasted
above ten years, till the marriage of his daughter with the eldest son
of the emperor, which seemed to assure his fortune, proved the occasion
of his ruin. [68] The animosities of the palace, by irritating the
ambition and alarming the fears of Plautianus, [681] threatened to produce
a revolution, and obliged the emperor, who still loved him, to consent
with reluctance to his death. [69] After the fall of Plautianus, an
eminent lawyer, the celebrated Papinian, was appointed to execute the
motley office of Praetorian Praefect.

[Footnote 671: The Praetorian Praefect had never been a simple captain of
the guards; from the first creation of this office, under Augustus,
it possessed great power. That emperor, therefore, decreed that there
should be always two Praetorian Praefects, who could only be taken from
the equestrian order Tiberius first departed from the former clause of
this edict; Alexander Severus violated the second by naming senators
praefects. It appears that it was under Commodus that the Praetorian
Praefects obtained the province of civil jurisdiction. It extended only
to Italy, with the exception of Rome and its district, which was
governed by the Praefectus urbi. As to the control of the finances, and
the levying of taxes, it was not intrusted to them till after the great
change that Constantine I. made in the organization of the empire at
least, I know no passage which assigns it to them before that time; and
Drakenborch, who has treated this question in his Dissertation de
official praefectorum praetorio, vi., does not quote one.--W.]

[Footnote 68: One of his most daring and wanton acts of power, was the
castration of a hundred free Romans, some of them married men, and even
fathers of families; merely that his daughter, on her marriage with the
young emperor, might be attended by a train of eunuchs worthy of an
eastern queen. Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1271.]

[Footnote 681: Plautianus was compatriot, relative, and the old friend,
of Severus; he had so completely shut up all access to the emperor, that
the latter was ignorant how far he abused his powers: at length,
being informed of it, he began to limit his authority. The marriage of
Plautilla with Caracalla was unfortunate; and the prince who had been
forced to consent to it, menaced the father and the daughter with death
when he should come to the throne. It was feared, after that, that
Plautianus would avail himself of the power which he still possessed,
against the Imperial family; and Severus caused him to be assassinated
in his presence, upon the pretext of a conspiracy, which Dion considers
fictitious.--W. This note is not, perhaps, very necessary and does not
contain the whole facts. Dion considers the conspiracy the invention of
Caracalla, by whose command, almost by whose hand, Plautianus was slain
in the presence of Severus.--M.]

[Footnote 69: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1274.
Herodian, l. iii. p. 122, 129. The grammarian of Alexander seems, as is
not unusual, much better acquainted with this mysterious transaction,
and more assured of the guilt of Plautianus than the Roman senator
ventures to be.]

Till the reign of Severus, the virtue and even the good sense of the
emperors had been distinguished by their zeal or affected reverence for
the senate, and by a tender regard to the nice frame of civil policy
instituted by Augustus. But the youth of Severus had been trained in the
implicit obedience of camps, and his riper years spent in the despotism
of military command. His haughty and inflexible spirit could not
discover, or would not acknowledge, the advantage of preserving an
intermediate power, however imaginary, between the emperor and the army.
He disdained to profess himself the servant of an assembly that detested
his person and trembled at his frown; he issued his commands, where his
requests would have proved as effectual; assumed the conduct and style
of a sovereign and a conqueror, and exercised, without disguise, the
whole legislative, as well as the executive power.

The victory over the senate was easy and inglorious. Every eye and every
passion were directed to the supreme magistrate, who possessed the arms
and treasure of the state; whilst the senate, neither elected by the
people, nor guarded by military force, nor animated by public spirit,
rested its declining authority on the frail and crumbling basis of
ancient opinion. The fine theory of a republic insensibly vanished, and
made way for the more natural and substantial feelings of monarchy. As
the freedom and honors of Rome were successively communicated to the
provinces, in which the old government had been either unknown, or
was remembered with abhorrence, the tradition of republican maxims was
gradually obliterated. The Greek historians of the age of the Antonines
[70] observe, with a malicious pleasure, that although the sovereign of
Rome, in compliance with an obsolete prejudice, abstained from the name
of king, he possessed the full measure of regal power. In the reign of
Severus, the senate was filled with polished and eloquent slaves from
the eastern provinces, who justified personal flattery by speculative
principles of servitude. These new advocates of prerogative were heard
with pleasure by the court, and with patience by the people, when
they inculcated the duty of passive obedience, and descanted on the
inevitable mischiefs of freedom. The lawyers and historians concurred
in teaching, that the Imperial authority was held, not by the delegated
commission, but by the irrevocable resignation of the senate; that the
emperor was freed from the restraint of civil laws, could command by his
arbitrary will the lives and fortunes of his subjects, and might dispose
of the empire as of his private patrimony. [71] The most eminent of the
civil lawyers, and particularly Papinian, Paulus, and Ulpian, flourished
under the house of Severus; and the Roman jurisprudence, having closely
united itself with the system of monarchy, was supposed to have attained
its full majority and perfection.

[Footnote 70: Appian in Prooem.]

[Footnote 71: Dion Cassius seems to have written with no other view than
to form these opinions into an historical system. The Pandea's will
how how assiduously the lawyers, on their side, laboree in the cause of
prerogative.]

The contemporaries of Severus in the enjoyment of the peace and glory
of his reign, forgave the cruelties by which it had been introduced.
Posterity, who experienced the fatal effects of his maxims and example,
justly considered him as the principal author of the decline of the
Roman empire.




