## Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.--Part VII

I. The community of goods, which had so agreeably amused the imagination
of Plato, [128] and which subsisted in some degree among the austere sect
of the Essenians, [129] was adopted for a short time in the primitive
church. The fervor of the first proselytes prompted them to sell those
worldly possessions, which they despised, to lay the price of them at
the feet of the apostles, and to content themselves with receiving an
equal share out of the general distribution. [130] The progress of the
Christian religion relaxed, and gradually abolished, this generous
institution, which, in hands less pure than those of the apostles, would
too soon have been corrupted and abused by the returning selfishness
of human nature; and the converts who embraced the new religion were
permitted to retain the possession of their patrimony, to receive
legacies and inheritances, and to increase their separate property
by all the lawful means of trade and industry. Instead of an absolute
sacrifice, a moderate proportion was accepted by the ministers of the
gospel; and in their weekly or monthly assemblies, every believer,
according to the exigency of the occasion, and the measure of his wealth
and piety, presented his voluntary offering for the use of the common
fund. [131] Nothing, however inconsiderable, was refused; but it was
diligently inculcated; that, in the article of Tithes, the Mosaic law
was still of divine obligation; and that since the Jews, under a less
perfect discipline, had been commanded to pay a tenth part of all that
they possessed, it would become the disciples of Christ to distinguish
themselves by a superior degree of liberality, [132] and to acquire
some merit by resigning a superfluous treasure, which must so soon be
annihilated with the world itself. [133] It is almost unnecessary to
observe, that the revenue of each particular church, which was of so
uncertain and fluctuating a nature, must have varied with the poverty
or the opulence of the faithful, as they were dispersed in obscure
villages, or collected in the great cities of the empire. In the time
of the emperor Decius, it was the opinion of the magistrates, that the
Christians of Rome were possessed of very considerable wealth; that
vessels of gold and silver were used in their religious worship, and
that many among their proselytes had sold their lands and houses to
increase the public riches of the sect, at the expense, indeed, of
their unfortunate children, who found themselves beggars, because their
parents had been saints. [134] We should listen with distrust to the
suspicions of strangers and enemies: on this occasion, however, they
receive a very specious and probable color from the two following
circumstances, the only ones that have reached our knowledge, which
define any precise sums, or convey any distinct idea. Almost at the same
period, the bishop of Carthage, from a society less opulent than that of
Rome, collected a hundred thousand sesterces, (above eight hundred
and fifty pounds sterling,) on a sudden call of charity to redeem
the brethren of Numidia, who had been carried away captives by the
barbarians of the desert. [135] About a hundred years before the reign of
Decius, the Roman church had received, in a single donation, the sum of
two hundred thousand sesterces from a stranger of Pontus, who proposed
to fix his residence in the capital. [136] These oblations, for the
most part, were made in money; nor was the society of Christians either
desirous or capable of acquiring, to any considerable degree, the
encumbrance of landed property. It had been provided by several laws,
which were enacted with the same design as our statutes of mortmain,
that no real estates should be given or bequeathed to any corporate
body, without either a special privilege or a particular dispensation
from the emperor or from the senate; [137] who were seldom disposed to
grant them in favor of a sect, at first the object of their contempt,
and at last of their fears and jealousy. A transaction, however, is
related under the reign of Alexander Severus, which discovers that the
restraint was sometimes eluded or suspended, and that the Christians
were permitted to claim and to possess lands within the limits of Rome
itself. [138] The progress of Christianity, and the civil confusion of
the empire, contributed to relax the severity of the laws; and before
the close of the third century many considerable estates were bestowed
on the opulent churches of Rome, Milan, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria,
and the other great cities of Italy and the provinces.

[Footnote 128: The community instituted by Plato is more perfect than
that which Sir Thomas More had imagined for his Utopia. The community
of women, and that of temporal goods, may be considered as inseparable
parts of the same system.]

[Footnote 129: Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii. 2. Philo, de Vit.
Contemplativ.]

[Footnote 130: See the Acts of the Apostles, c. 2, 4, 5, with Grotius's
Commentary. Mosheim, in a particular dissertation, attacks the common
opinion with very inconclusive arguments. * Note: This is not the
general judgment on Mosheim's learned dissertation. There is no trace in
the latter part of the New Testament of this community of goods, and
many distinct proofs of the contrary. All exhortations to almsgiving
would have been unmeaning if property had been in common--M.]

[Footnote 131: Justin Martyr, Apolog. Major, c. 89. Tertullian, Apolog.
c. 39.]

[Footnote 132: Irenaeus ad Haeres. l. iv. c. 27, 34. Origen in Num. Hom.
ii Cyprian de Unitat. Eccles. Constitut. Apostol. l. ii. c. 34, 35,
with the notes of Cotelerius. The Constitutions introduce this divine
precept, by declaring that priests are as much above kings as the soul
is above the body. Among the tithable articles, they enumerate corn,
wine, oil, and wool. On this interesting subject, consult Prideaux's
History of Tithes, and Fra Paolo delle Materie Beneficiarie; two writers
of a very different character.]

[Footnote 133: The same opinion which prevailed about the year one
thousand, was productive of the same effects. Most of the Donations
express their motive, "appropinquante mundi fine." See Mosheim's General
History of the Church, vol. i. p. 457.]

[Footnote 134: Tum summa cura est fratribus (Ut sermo testatur loquax.)
Offerre, fundis venditis Sestertiorum millia. Addicta avorum praedia
Foedis sub auctionibus, Successor exheres gemit Sanctis egens
Parentibus. Haec occuluntur abditis Ecclesiarum in angulis. Et summa
pietas creditur Nudare dulces liberos.----Prudent. Hymn 2.
The subsequent conduct of the deacon Laurence only proves how proper a
use was made of the wealth of the Roman church; it was undoubtedly
very considerable; but Fra Paolo (c. 3) appears to exaggerate, when he
supposes that the successors of Commodus were urged to persecute the
Christians by their own avarice, or that of their Praetorian praefects.]

[Footnote 135: Cyprian, Epistol. 62.]

[Footnote 136: Tertullian de Praescriptione, c. 30.]

[Footnote 137: Diocletian gave a rescript, which is only a declaration
of the old law; "Collegium, si nullo speciali privilegio subnixum sit,
haereditatem capere non posse, dubium non est." Fra Paolo (c. 4) thinks
that these regulations had been much neglected since the reign of
Valerian.]

[Footnote 138: Hist. August. p. 131. The ground had been public; and was
row disputed between the society of Christians and that of butchers.
Note *: Carponarii, rather victuallers.--M.]

The bishop was the natural steward of the church; the public stock was
intrusted to his care without account or control; the presbyters were
confined to their spiritual functions, and the more dependent order of
the deacons was solely employed in the management and distribution of
the ecclesiastical revenue. [139] If we may give credit to the vehement
declamations of Cyprian, there were too many among his African brethren,
who, in the execution of their charge, violated every precept, not only
of evangelical perfection, but even of moral virtue. By some of these
unfaithful stewards the riches of the church were lavished in sensual
pleasures; by others they were perverted to the purposes of private
gain, of fraudulent purchases, and of rapacious usury. [140] But as
long as the contributions of the Christian people were free and
unconstrained, the abuse of their confidence could not be very frequent,
and the general uses to which their liberality was applied reflected
honor on the religious society. A decent portion was reserved for the
maintenance of the bishop and his clergy; a sufficient sum was allotted
for the expenses of the public worship, of which the feasts of love, the
agapoe, as they were called, constituted a very pleasing part. The
whole remainder was the sacred patrimony of the poor. According to
the discretion of the bishop, it was distributed to support widows and
orphans, the lame, the sick, and the aged of the community; to comfort
strangers and pilgrims, and to alleviate the misfortunes of prisoners
and captives, more especially when their sufferings had been occasioned
by their firm attachment to the cause of religion. [141] A generous
intercourse of charity united the most distant provinces, and the
smaller congregations were cheerfully assisted by the alms of their more
opulent brethren. [142] Such an institution, which paid less regard to
the merit than to the distress of the object, very materially conduced
to the progress of Christianity. The Pagans, who were actuated by a
sense of humanity, while they derided the doctrines, acknowledged the
benevolence, of the new sect. [143] The prospect of immediate relief and
of future protection allured into its hospitable bosom many of those
unhappy persons whom the neglect of the world would have abandoned to
the miseries of want, of sickness, and of old age. There is some reason
likewise to believe that great numbers of infants, who, according to the
inhuman practice of the times, had been exposed by their parents, were
frequently rescued from death, baptized, educated, and maintained by the
piety of the Christians, and at the expense of the public treasure. [144]

[Footnote 139: Constitut. Apostol. ii. 35.]

[Footnote 140: Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 89. Epistol. 65. The charge is
confirmed by the 19th and 20th canon of the council of Illiberis.]

[Footnote 141: See the apologies of Justin, Tertullian, &c.]

[Footnote 142: The wealth and liberality of the Romans to their most distant
brethren is gratefully celebrated by Dionysius of Corinth, ap. Euseb. l.
iv. c. 23.]

[Footnote 143: See Lucian iu Peregrin. Julian (Epist. 49) seems
mortified that the Christian charity maintains not only their own, but
likewise the heathen poor.]

[Footnote 144: Such, at least, has been the laudable conduct of more
modern missionaries, under the same circumstances. Above three thousand
new-born infants are annually exposed in the streets of Pekin. See Le
Comte, Memoires sur la Chine, and the Recherches sur les Chinois et
les Egyptians, tom. i. p. 61.]


II. It is the undoubted right of every society to exclude from its
communion and benefits such among its members as reject or violate those
regulations which have been established by general consent. In the
exercise of this power, the censures of the Christian church were
chiefly directed against scandalous sinners, and particularly those who
were guilty of murder, of fraud, or of incontinence; against the authors
or the followers of any heretical opinions which had been condemned by
the judgment of the episcopal order; and against those unhappy persons,
who, whether from choice or compulsion, had polluted themselves after
their baptism by any act of idolatrous worship. The consequences of
excommunication were of a temporal as well as a spiritual nature. The
Christian against whom it was pronounced, was deprived of any part in
the oblations of the faithful. The ties both of religious and of private
friendship were dissolved: he found himself a profane object of
abhorrence to the persons whom he the most esteemed, or by whom he had
been the most tenderly beloved; and as far as an expulsion from a
respectable society could imprint on his character a mark of disgrace,
he was shunned or suspected by the generality of mankind. The situation
of these unfortunate exiles was in itself very painful and melancholy;
but, as it usually happens, their apprehensions far exceeded their
sufferings. The benefits of the Christian communion were those of
eternal life; nor could they erase from their minds the awful opinion,
that to those ecclesiastical governors by whom they were condemned, the
Deity had committed the keys of Hell and of Paradise. The heretics,
indeed, who might be supported by the consciousness of their intentions,
and by the flattering hope that they alone had discovered the true path
of salvation, endeavored to regain, in their separate assemblies, those
comforts, temporal as well as spiritual, which they no longer derived
from the great society of Christians. But almost all those who had
reluctantly yielded to the power of vice or idolatry were sensible of
their fallen condition, and anxiously desirous of being restored to the
benefits of the Christian communion.

With regard to the treatment of these penitents, two opposite opinions,
the one of justice, the other of mercy, divided the primitive church.
The more rigid and inflexible casuists refused them forever, and without
exception, the meanest place in the holy community, which they had
disgraced or deserted; and leaving them to the remorse of a guilty
conscience, indulged them only with a faint ray of hope that the
contrition of their life and death might possibly be accepted by the
Supreme Being. [145] A milder sentiment was embraced in practice as
well as in theory, by the purest and most respectable of the Christian
churches. [146] The gates of reconciliation and of heaven were seldom
shut against the returning penitent; but a severe and solemn form of
discipline was instituted, which, while it served to expiate his crime,
might powerfully deter the spectators from the imitation of his example.
Humbled by a public confession, emaciated by fasting and clothed in
sackcloth, the penitent lay prostrate at the door of the assembly,
imploring with tears the pardon of his offences, and soliciting the
prayers of the faithful. [147] If the fault was of a very heinous nature,
whole years of penance were esteemed an inadequate satisfaction to the
divine justice; and it was always by slow and painful gradations that
the sinner, the heretic, or the apostate, was readmitted into the bosom
of the church. A sentence of perpetual excommunication was, however,
reserved for some crimes of an extraordinary magnitude, and particularly
for the inexcusable relapses of those penitents who had already
experienced and abused the clemency of their ecclesiastical superiors.
According to the circumstances or the number of the guilty, the exercise
of the Christian discipline was varied by the discretion of the bishops.
The councils of Ancyra and Illiberis were held about the same time, the
one in Galatia, the other in Spain; but their respective canons, which
are still extant, seem to breathe a very different spirit. The Galatian,
who after his baptism had repeatedly sacrificed to idols, might obtain
his pardon by a penance of seven years; and if he had seduced others to
imitate his example, only three years more were added to the term of his
exile. But the unhappy Spaniard, who had committed the same offence, was
deprived of the hope of reconciliation, even in the article of death;
and his idolatry was placed at the head of a list of seventeen other
crimes, against which a sentence no less terrible was pronounced. Among
these we may distinguish the inexpiable guilt of calumniating a bishop,
a presbyter, or even a deacon. [148]

[Footnote 145: The Montanists and the Novatians, who adhered to this
opinion with the greatest rigor and obstinacy, found themselves at last
in the number of excommunicated heretics. See the learned and copious
Mosheim, Secul. ii. and iii.]

[Footnote 146: Dionysius ap. Euseb. iv. 23. Cyprian, de Lapsis.]

[Footnote 147: Cave's Primitive Christianity, part iii. c. 5. The
admirers of antiquity regret the loss of this public penance.]

[Footnote 148: See in Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. ii.
p. 304--313, a short but rational exposition of the canons of those
councils, which were assembled in the first moments of tranquillity,
after the persecution of Diocletian. This persecution had been much less
severely felt in Spain than in Galatia; a difference which may, in some
measure account for the contrast of their regulations.]

The well-tempered mixture of liberality and rigor, the judicious
dispensation of rewards and punishments, according to the maxims of
policy as well as justice, constituted the human strength of the church.
The Bishops, whose paternal care extended itself to the government of
both worlds, were sensible of the importance of these prerogatives; and
covering their ambition with the fair pretence of the love of order,
they were jealous of any rival in the exercise of a discipline so
necessary to prevent the desertion of those troops which had enlisted
themselves under the banner of the cross, and whose numbers every day
became more considerable. From the imperious declamations of Cyprian,
we should naturally conclude that the doctrines of excommunication and
penance formed the most essential part of religion; and that it was much
less dangerous for the disciples of Christ to neglect the observance of
the moral duties, than to despise the censures and authority of their
bishops. Sometimes we might imagine that we were listening to the voice
of Moses, when he commanded the earth to open, and to swallow up, in
consuming flames, the rebellious race which refused obedience to the
priesthood of Aaron; and we should sometimes suppose that we hear a
Roman consul asserting the majesty of the republic, and declaring his
inflexible resolution to enforce the rigor of the laws. "If such
irregularities are suffered with impunity," (it is thus that the bishop
of Carthage chides the lenity of his colleague,) "if such irregularities
are suffered, there is an end of Episcopal Vigor; [149] an end of the
sublime and divine power of governing the Church, an end of Christianity
itself." Cyprian had renounced those temporal honors, which it is
probable he would never have obtained; but the acquisition of
such absolute command over the consciences and understanding of a
congregation, however obscure or despised by the world, is more truly
grateful to the pride of the human heart, than the possession of the
most despotic power, imposed by arms and conquest on a reluctant people.
[Footnote 1491]: Gibbon has been accused of injustice to the character of
Cyprian, as exalting the "censures and authority of the church above the
observance of the moral duties." Felicissimus had been condemned by a
synod of bishops, (non tantum mea, sed plurimorum coepiscorum, sententia
condemnatum,) on the charge not only of schism, but of embezzlement of
public money, the debauching of virgins, and frequent acts of adultery.
His violent menaces had extorted his readmission into the church,
against which Cyprian protests with much vehemence: ne pecuniae
commissae sibi fraudator, ne stuprator virginum, ne matrimoniorum
multorum depopulator et corruptor, ultra adhuc sponsam Christi
incorruptam praesentiae suae dedecore, et impudica atque incesta
contagione, violaret. See Chelsum's Remarks, p. 134. If these
charges against Felicissimus were true, they were something more than
"irregularities," A Roman censor would have been a fairer subject of
comparison than a consul. On the other hand, it must be admitted that
the charge of adultery deepens very rapidly as the controversy becomes
more violent. It is first represented as a single act, recently
detected, and which men of character were prepared to substantiate:
adulterii etiam crimen accedit. quod patres nostri graves viri
deprehendisse se nuntiaverunt, et probaturos se asseverarunt. Epist.
xxxviii. The heretic has now darkened into a man of notorious and
general profligacy. Nor can it be denied that of the whole long epistle,
very far the larger and the more passionate part dwells on the breach
of ecclesiastical unity rather than on the violation of Christian
holiness.--M.]

[Footnote 149: Cyprian Epist. 69.]

[Footnote 1491: This supposition appears unfounded: the birth and the
talents of Cyprian might make us presume the contrary. Thascius
Caecilius Cyprianus, Carthaginensis, artis oratoriae professione clarus,
magnam sibi gloriam, opes, honores acquisivit, epularibus caenis et
largis dapibus assuetus, pretiosa veste conspicuus, auro atque purpura
fulgens, fascibus oblectatus et honoribus, stipatus clientium cuneis,
frequentiore comitatu officii agminis honestatus, ut ipse de se loquitur
in Epistola ad Donatum. See De Cave, Hist. Liter. b. i. p. 87.--G.
Cave has rather embellished Cyprian's language.--M.]

In the course of this important, though perhaps tedious inquiry, I have
attempted to display the secondary causes which so efficaciously
assisted the truth of the Christian religion. If among these causes we
have discovered any artificial ornaments, any accidental circumstances,
or any mixture of error and passion, it cannot appear surprising that
mankind should be the most sensibly affected by such motives as were
suited to their imperfect nature. It was by the aid of these causes,
exclusive zeal, the immediate expectation of another world, the claim of
miracles, the practice of rigid virtue, and the constitution of the
primitive church, that Christianity spread itself with so much success
in the Roman empire. To the first of these the Christians were indebted
for their invincible valor, which disdained to capitulate with the enemy
whom they were resolved to vanquish. The three succeeding causes
supplied their valor with the most formidable arms. The last of these
causes united their courage, directed their arms, and gave their efforts
that irresistible weight, which even a small band of well-trained and
intrepid volunteers has so often possessed over an undisciplined
multitude, ignorant of the subject, and careless of the event of the
war. In the various religions of Polytheism, some wandering fanatics of
Egypt and Syria, who addressed themselves to the credulous superstition
of the populace, were perhaps the only order of priests [150] that
derived their whole support and credit from their sacerdotal profession,
and were very deeply affected by a personal concern for the safety or
prosperity of their tutelar deities. The ministers of Polytheism, both
in Rome and in the provinces, were, for the most part, men of a noble
birth, and of an affluent fortune, who received, as an honorable
distinction, the care of a celebrated temple, or of a public sacrifice,
exhibited, very frequently at their own expense, the sacred games, [151]
and with cold indifference performed the ancient rites, according to the
laws and fashion of their country. As they were engaged in the ordinary
occupations of life, their zeal and devotion were seldom animated by a
sense of interest, or by the habits of an ecclesiastical character.
Confined to their respective temples and cities, they remained without
any connection of discipline or government; and whilst they acknowledged
the supreme jurisdiction of the senate, of the college of pontiffs, and
of the emperor, those civil magistrates contented themselves with the
easy task of maintaining in peace and dignity the general worship of
mankind. We have already seen how various, how loose, and how uncertain
were the religious sentiments of Polytheists. They were abandoned,
almost without control, to the natural workings of a superstitious
fancy. The accidental circumstances of their life and situation
determined the object as well as the degree of their devotion; and as
long as their adoration was successively prostituted to a thousand
deities, it was scarcely possible that their hearts could be susceptible
of a very sincere or lively passion for any of them.

[Footnote 150: The arts, the manners, and the vices of the priests of
the Syrian goddess are very humorously described by Apuleius, in the
eighth book of his Metamorphosis.]

[Footnote 151: The office of Asiarch was of this nature, and it is
frequently mentioned in Aristides, the Inscriptions, &c. It was annual
and elective. None but the vainest citizens could desire the honor;
none but the most wealthy could support the expense. See, in the Patres
Apostol. tom. ii. p. 200, with how much indifference Philip the Asiarch
conducted himself in the martyrdom of Polycarp. There were likewise
Bithyniarchs, Lyciarchs, &c.]

When Christianity appeared in the world, even these faint and imperfect
impressions had lost much of their original power. Human reason, which
by its unassisted strength is incapable of perceiving the mysteries of
faith, had already obtained an easy triumph over the folly of Paganism;
and when Tertullian or Lactantius employ their labors in exposing its
falsehood and extravagance, they are obliged to transcribe the eloquence
of Cicero or the wit of Lucian. The contagion of these sceptical
writings had been diffused far beyond the number of their readers. The
fashion of incredulity was communicated from the philosopher to the man
of pleasure or business, from the noble to the plebeian, and from the
master to the menial slave who waited at his table, and who eagerly
listened to the freedom of his conversation. On public occasions the
philosophic part of mankind affected to treat with respect and decency
the religious institutions of their country; but their secret contempt
penetrated through the thin and awkward disguise; and even the people,
when they discovered that their deities were rejected and derided by
those whose rank or understanding they were accustomed to reverence,
were filled with doubts and apprehensions concerning the truth of those
doctrines, to which they had yielded the most implicit belief. The
decline of ancient prejudice exposed a very numerous portion of human
kind to the danger of a painful and comfortless situation. A state of
scepticism and suspense may amuse a few inquisitive minds. But the
practice of superstition is so congenial to the multitude, that if they
are forcibly awakened, they still regret the loss of their pleasing
vision. Their love of the marvellous and supernatural, their curiosity
with regard to future events, and their strong propensity to extend
their hopes and fears beyond the limits of the visible world, were the
principal causes which favored the establishment of Polytheism. So
urgent on the vulgar is the necessity of believing, that the fall of any
system of mythology will most probably be succeeded by the introduction
of some other mode of superstition. Some deities of a more recent and
fashionable cast might soon have occupied the deserted temples of
Jupiter and Apollo, if, in the decisive moment, the wisdom of Providence
had not interposed a genuine revelation, fitted to inspire the most
rational esteem and conviction, whilst, at the same time, it was adorned
with all that could attract the curiosity, the wonder, and the
veneration of the people. In their actual disposition, as many were
almost disengaged from their artificial prejudices, but equally
susceptible and desirous of a devout attachment; an object much less
deserving would have been sufficient to fill the vacant place in their
hearts, and to gratify the uncertain eagerness of their passions. Those
who are inclined to pursue this reflection, instead of viewing with
astonishment the rapid progress of Christianity, will perhaps be
surprised that its success was not still more rapid and still more
universal. It has been observed, with truth as well as propriety, that
the conquests of Rome prepared and facilitated those of Christianity. In
the second chapter of this work we have attempted to explain in what
manner the most civilized provinces of Europe, Asia, and Africa were
united under the dominion of one sovereign, and gradually connected by
the most intimate ties of laws, of manners, and of language. The Jews of
Palestine, who had fondly expected a temporal deliverer, gave so cold a
reception to the miracles of the divine prophet, that it was found
unnecessary to publish, or at least to preserve, any Hebrew gospel.
[152] The authentic histories of the actions of Christ were composed in
the Greek language, at a considerable distance from Jerusalem, and after
the Gentile converts were grown extremely numerous. [153] As soon as
those histories were translated into the Latin tongue, they were
perfectly intelligible to all the subjects of Rome, excepting only to
the peasants of Syria and Egypt, for whose benefit particular versions
were afterwards made. The public highways, which had been constructed
for the use of the legions, opened an easy passage for the Christian
missionaries from Damascus to Corinth, and from Italy to the extremity
of Spain or Britain; nor did those spiritual conquerors encounter any of
the obstacles which usually retard or prevent the introduction of a
foreign religion into a distant country. There is the strongest reason
to believe, that before the reigns of Diocletian and Constantine, the
faith of Christ had been preached in every province, and in all the
great cities of the empire; but the foundation of the several
congregations, the numbers of the faithful who composed them, and their
proportion to the unbelieving multitude, are now buried in obscurity, or
disguised by fiction and declamation. Such imperfect circumstances,
however, as have reached our knowledge concerning the increase of the
Christian name in Asia and Greece, in Egypt, in Italy, and in the West,
we shall now proceed to relate, without neglecting the real or imaginary
acquisitions which lay beyond the frontiers of the Roman empire.

[Footnote 152: The modern critics are not disposed to believe what the
fathers almost unanimously assert, that St. Matthew composed a Hebrew
gospel, of which only the Greek translation is extant. It seems,
however, dangerous to reject their testimony. * Note: Strong reasons
appear to confirm this testimony. Papias, contemporary of the Apostle
St. John, says positively that Matthew had written the discourses of
Jesus Christ in Hebrew, and that each interpreted them as he could. This
Hebrew was the Syro-Chaldaic dialect, then in use at Jerusalem: Origen,
Irenaeus, Eusebius, Jerome, Epiphanius, confirm this statement. Jesus
Christ preached himself in Syro-Chaldaic, as is proved by many words
which he used, and which the Evangelists have taken the pains to
translate. St. Paul, addressing the Jews, used the same language: Acts
xxi. 40, xxii. 2, xxvi. 14. The opinions of some critics prove nothing
against such undeniable testimonies. Moreover, their principal objection
is, that St. Matthew quotes the Old Testament according to the Greek
version of the LXX., which is inaccurate; for of ten quotations, found
in his Gospel, seven are evidently taken from the Hebrew text; the threo
others offer little that differ: moreover, the latter are not literal
quotations. St. Jerome says positively, that, according to a copy which
he had seen in the library of Caesarea, the quotations were made in
Hebrew (in Catal.) More modern critics, among others Michaelis, do not
entertain a doubt on the subject. The Greek version appears to have been
made in the time of the apostles, as St. Jerome and St. Augustus affirm,
perhaps by one of them.--G. ----Among modern critics, Dr. Hug has
asserted the Greek original of St. Matthew, but the general opinion of
the most learned biblical writer, supports the view of M. Guizot.--M.]

[Footnote 153: Under the reigns of Nero and Domitian, and in the cities
of Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, and Ephesus. See Mill. Prolegomena ad Nov.
Testament, and Dr. Lardner's fair and extensive collection, vol.
xv. Note: This question has, it is well known, been most elaborately
discussed since the time of Gibbon. The Preface to the Translation of
Schleier Macher's Version of St. Luke contains a very able summary of
the various theories.--M.]




