## Chapter XXIII: Reign Of Julian.--Part I.

The Religion Of Julian.--Universal Toleration.--He Attempts To Restore
And Reform The Pagan Worship--To Rebuild The Temple Of Jerusalem--His
Artful Persecution Of The Christians.--Mutual Zeal And Injustice. The
character of Apostate has injured the reputation of Julian; and the
enthusiasm which clouded his virtues has exaggerated the real and
apparent magnitude of his faults. Our partial ignorance may represent
him as a philosophic monarch, who studied to protect, with an equal
hand, the religious factions of the empire; and to allay the theological
fever which had inflamed the minds of the people, from the edicts of
Diocletian to the exile of Athanasius. A more accurate view of the
character and conduct of Julian will remove this favorable prepossession
for a prince who did not escape the general contagion of the times. We
enjoy the singular advantage of comparing the pictures which have been
delineated by his fondest admirers and his implacable enemies. The
actions of Julian are faithfully related by a judicious and candid
historian, the impartial spectator of his life and death. The unanimous
evidence of his contemporaries is confirmed by the public and private
declarations of the emperor himself; and his various writings express
the uniform tenor of his religious sentiments, which policy would have
prompted him to dissemble rather than to affect. A devout and sincere
attachment for the gods of Athens and Rome constituted the ruling
passion of Julian; [1] the powers of an enlightened understanding were
betrayed and corrupted by the influence of superstitious prejudice; and
the phantoms which existed only in the mind of the emperor had a real
and pernicious effect on the government of the empire. The vehement zeal
of the Christians, who despised the worship, and overturned the
altars of those fabulous deities, engaged their votary in a state of
irreconcilable hostility with a very numerous party of his subjects;
and he was sometimes tempted by the desire of victory, or the shame of
a repulse, to violate the laws of prudence, and even of justice. The
triumph of the party, which he deserted and opposed, has fixed a stain
of infamy on the name of Julian; and the unsuccessful apostate has been
overwhelmed with a torrent of pious invectives, of which the signal
was given by the sonorous trumpet [2] of Gregory Nazianzen. [3] The
interesting nature of the events which were crowded into the short reign
of this active emperor, deserve a just and circumstantial narrative.
His motives, his counsels, and his actions, as far as they are connected
with the history of religion, will be the subject of the present
chapter.

[Footnote 1: I shall transcribe some of his own expressions from a short
religious discourse which the Imperial pontiff composed to censure the
bold impiety of a Cynic. Orat. vii. p. 212. The variety and copiousness
of the Greek tongue seem inadequate to the fervor of his devotion.]

[Footnote 2: The orator, with some eloquence, much enthusiasm, and more
vanity, addresses his discourse to heaven and earth, to men and angels,
to the living and the dead; and above all, to the great Constantius, an
odd Pagan expression. He concludes with a bold assurance, that he has
erected a monument not less durable, and much more portable, than the
columns of Hercules. See Greg. Nazianzen, Orat. iii. p. 50, iv. p. 134.]

[Footnote 3: See this long invective, which has been injudiciously
divided into two orations in Gregory's works, tom. i. p. 49-134, Paris,
1630. It was published by Gregory and his friend Basil, (iv. p. 133,)
about six months after the death of Julian, when his remains had been
carried to Tarsus, (iv. p. 120;) but while Jovian was still on the
throne, (iii. p. 54, iv. p. 117) I have derived much assistance from a
French version and remarks, printed at Lyons, 1735.]

The cause of his strange and fatal apostasy may be derived from the
early period of his life, when he was left an orphan in the hands of
the murderers of his family. The names of Christ and of Constantius,
the ideas of slavery and of religion, were soon associated in a youthful
imagination, which was susceptible of the most lively impressions. The
care of his infancy was intrusted to Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia,
[4] who was related to him on the side of his mother; and till Julian
reached the twentieth year of his age, he received from his Christian
preceptors the education, not of a hero, but of a saint. The emperor,
less jealous of a heavenly than of an earthly crown, contented himself
with the imperfect character of a catechumen, while he bestowed the
advantages of baptism [5] on the nephews of Constantine. [6] They were
even admitted to the inferior offices of the ecclesiastical order; and
Julian publicly read the Holy Scriptures in the church of Nicomedia.
The study of religion, which they assiduously cultivated, appeared to
produce the fairest fruits of faith and devotion. [7] They prayed, they
fasted, they distributed alms to the poor, gifts to the clergy, and
oblations to the tombs of the martyrs; and the splendid monument of
St. Mamas, at Caesarea, was erected, or at least was undertaken, by the
joint labor of Gallus and Julian. [8] They respectfully conversed with
the bishops, who were eminent for superior sanctity, and solicited the
benediction of the monks and hermits, who had introduced into Cappadocia
the voluntary hardships of the ascetic life. [9] As the two princes
advanced towards the years of manhood, they discovered, in their
religious sentiments, the difference of their characters. The dull and
obstinate understanding of Gallus embraced, with implicit zeal, the
doctrines of Christianity; which never influenced his conduct, or
moderated his passions. The mild disposition of the younger brother was
less repugnant to the precepts of the gospel; and his active curiosity
might have been gratified by a theological system, which explains the
mysterious essence of the Deity, and opens the boundless prospect
of invisible and future worlds. But the independent spirit of Julian
refused to yield the passive and unresisting obedience which was
required, in the name of religion, by the haughty ministers of the
church. Their speculative opinions were imposed as positive laws, and
guarded by the terrors of eternal punishments; but while they prescribed
the rigid formulary of the thoughts, the words, and the actions of the
young prince; whilst they silenced his objections, and severely checked
the freedom of his inquiries, they secretly provoked his impatient
genius to disclaim the authority of his ecclesiastical guides. He
was educated in the Lesser Asia, amidst the scandals of the Arian
controversy. [10] The fierce contests of the Eastern bishops, the
incessant alterations of their creeds, and the profane motives which
appeared to actuate their conduct, insensibly strengthened the prejudice
of Julian, that they neither understood nor believed the religion for
which they so fiercely contended. Instead of listening to the proofs of
Christianity with that favorable attention which adds weight to the
most respectable evidence, he heard with suspicion, and disputed with
obstinacy and acuteness, the doctrines for which he already entertained
an invincible aversion. Whenever the young princes were directed to
compose declamations on the subject of the prevailing controversies,
Julian always declared himself the advocate of Paganism; under the
specious excuse that, in the defence of the weaker cause, his learning
and ingenuity might be more advantageously exercised and displayed.

[Footnote 4: Nicomediae ab Eusebio educatus Episcopo, quem genere
longius contingebat, (Ammian. xxii. 9.) Julian never expresses any
gratitude towards that Arian prelate; but he celebrates his preceptor,
the eunuch Mardonius, and describes his mode of education, which
inspired his pupil with a passionate admiration for the genius, and
perhaps the religion of Homer. Misopogon, p. 351, 352.]

[Footnote 5: Greg. Naz. iii. p. 70. He labored to effect that holy mark
in the blood, perhaps of a Taurobolium. Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 361,
No. 3, 4.]

[Footnote 6: Julian himself (Epist. li. p. 454) assures the Alexandrians
that he had been a Christian (he must mean a sincere one) till the
twentieth year of his age.]

[Footnote 7: See his Christian, and even ecclesiastical education, in
Gregory, (iii. p. 58,) Socrates, (l. iii. c. 1,) and Sozomen, (l. v. c.
2.) He escaped very narrowly from being a bishop, and perhaps a saint.]

[Footnote 8: The share of the work which had been allotted to Gallus,
was prosecuted with vigor and success; but the earth obstinately
rejected and subverted the structures which were imposed by the
sacrilegious hand of Julian. Greg. iii. p. 59, 60, 61. Such a partial
earthquake, attested by many living spectators, would form one of the
clearest miracles in ecclesiastical story.]

[Footnote 9: The philosopher (Fragment, p. 288,) ridicules the iron
chains, &c, of these solitary fanatics, (see Tillemont, Mem. Eccles.
tom. ix. p. 661, 632,) who had forgot that man is by nature a gentle and
social animal. The Pagan supposes, that because they had renounced the
gods, they were possessed and tormented by evil daemons.]

[Footnote 10: See Julian apud Cyril, l. vi. p. 206, l. viii. p. 253,
262. "You persecute," says he, "those heretics who do not mourn the
dead man precisely in the way which you approve." He shows himself a
tolerable theologian; but he maintains that the Christian Trinity is not
derived from the doctrine of Paul, of Jesus, or of Moses.]

As soon as Gallus was invested with the honors of the purple, Julian was
permitted to breathe the air of freedom, of literature, and of Paganism.
[11] The crowd of sophists, who were attracted by the taste and
liberality of their royal pupil, had formed a strict alliance between
the learning and the religion of Greece; and the poems of Homer, instead
of being admired as the original productions of human genius, were
seriously ascribed to the heavenly inspiration of Apollo and the muses.
The deities of Olympus, as they are painted by the immortal bard,
imprint themselves on the minds which are the least addicted to
superstitious credulity. Our familiar knowledge of their names and
characters, their forms and attributes, seems to bestow on those airy
beings a real and substantial existence; and the pleasing enchantment
produces an imperfect and momentary assent of the imagination to those
fables, which are the most repugnant to our reason and experience. In
the age of Julian, every circumstance contributed to prolong and fortify
the illusion; the magnificent temples of Greece and Asia; the works of
those artists who had expressed, in painting or in sculpture, the divine
conceptions of the poet; the pomp of festivals and sacrifices; the
successful arts of divination; the popular traditions of oracles and
prodigies; and the ancient practice of two thousand years. The weakness
of polytheism was, in some measure, excused by the moderation of its
claims; and the devotion of the Pagans was not incompatible with the
most licentious scepticism. [12] Instead of an indivisible and regular
system, which occupies the whole extent of the believing mind, the
mythology of the Greeks was composed of a thousand loose and flexible
parts, and the servant of the gods was at liberty to define the degree
and measure of his religious faith. The creed which Julian adopted
for his own use was of the largest dimensions; and, by strange
contradiction, he disdained the salutary yoke of the gospel, whilst he
made a voluntary offering of his reason on the altars of Jupiter and
Apollo. One of the orations of Julian is consecrated to the honor of
Cybele, the mother of the gods, who required from her effeminate priests
the bloody sacrifice, so rashly performed by the madness of the Phrygian
boy. The pious emperor condescends to relate, without a blush, and
without a smile, the voyage of the goddess from the shores of Pergamus
to the mouth of the Tyber, and the stupendous miracle, which convinced
the senate and people of Rome that the lump of clay, which their
ambassadors had transported over the seas, was endowed with life, and
sentiment, and divine power. [13] For the truth of this prodigy he
appeals to the public monuments of the city; and censures, with some
acrimony, the sickly and affected taste of those men, who impertinently
derided the sacred traditions of their ancestors. [14]

[Footnote 11: Libanius, Orat. Parentalis, c. 9, 10, p. 232, &c. Greg.
Nazianzen. Orat. iii. p 61. Eunap. Vit. Sophist. in Maximo, p. 68, 69,
70, edit Commelin.]

[Footnote 12: A modern philosopher has ingeniously compared the
different operation of theism and polytheism, with regard to the doubt
or conviction which they produce in the human mind. See Hume's Essays
vol. ii. p. 444- 457, in 8vo. edit. 1777.]

[Footnote 13: The Idaean mother landed in Italy about the end of the
second Punic war. The miracle of Claudia, either virgin or matron, who
cleared her fame by disgracing the graver modesty of the Roman Indies,
is attested by a cloud of witnesses. Their evidence is collected by
Drakenborch, (ad Silium Italicum, xvii. 33;) but we may observe that
Livy (xxix. 14) slides over the transaction with discreet ambiguity.]

[Footnote 14: I cannot refrain from transcribing the emphatical words of
Julian: Orat. v. p. 161. Julian likewise declares his firm belief in
the ancilia, the holy shields, which dropped from heaven on the Quirinal
hill; and pities the strange blindness of the Christians, who preferred
the cross to these celestial trophies. Apud Cyril. l. vi. p. 194.]

But the devout philosopher, who sincerely embraced, and warmly
encouraged, the superstition of the people, reserved for himself the
privilege of a liberal interpretation; and silently withdrew from the
foot of the altars into the sanctuary of the temple. The extravagance of
the Grecian mythology proclaimed, with a clear and audible voice, that
the pious inquirer, instead of being scandalized or satisfied with the
literal sense, should diligently explore the occult wisdom, which had
been disguised, by the prudence of antiquity, under the mask of folly
and of fable. [15] The philosophers of the Platonic school, [16]
Plotinus, Porphyry, and the divine Iamblichus, were admired as the most
skilful masters of this allegorical science, which labored to soften
and harmonize the deformed features of Paganism. Julian himself, who was
directed in the mysterious pursuit by Aedesius, the venerable successor
of Iamblichus, aspired to the possession of a treasure, which he
esteemed, if we may credit his solemn asseverations, far above the
empire of the world. [17] It was indeed a treasure, which derived its
value only from opinion; and every artist who flattered himself that he
had extracted the precious ore from the surrounding dross, claimed an
equal right of stamping the name and figure the most agreeable to his
peculiar fancy. The fable of Atys and Cybele had been already explained
by Porphyry; but his labors served only to animate the pious industry of
Julian, who invented and published his own allegory of that ancient and
mystic tale. This freedom of interpretation, which might gratify the
pride of the Platonists, exposed the vanity of their art. Without a
tedious detail, the modern reader could not form a just idea of the
strange allusions, the forced etymologies, the solemn trifling, and
the impenetrable obscurity of these sages, who professed to reveal
the system of the universe. As the traditions of Pagan mythology were
variously related, the sacred interpreters were at liberty to select
the most convenient circumstances; and as they translated an arbitrary
cipher, they could extract from any fable any sense which was adapted to
their favorite system of religion and philosophy. The lascivious form of
a naked Venus was tortured into the discovery of some moral precept, or
some physical truth; and the castration of Atys explained the revolution
of the sun between the tropics, or the separation of the human soul from
vice and error. [18]

[Footnote 15: See the principles of allegory, in Julian, (Orat. vii.
p. 216, 222.) His reasoning is less absurd than that of some modern
theologians, who assert that an extravagant or contradictory doctrine
must be divine; since no man alive could have thought of inventing it.]

[Footnote 16: Eunapius has made these sophists the subject of a partial
and fanatical history; and the learned Brucker (Hist. Philosoph. tom.
ii. p. 217-303) has employed much labor to illustrate their obscure
lives and incomprehensible doctrines.]

[Footnote 17: Julian, Orat. vii p 222. He swears with the most fervent
and enthusiastic devotion; and trembles, lest he should betray too much
of these holy mysteries, which the profane might deride with an impious
Sardonic laugh.]

[Footnote 18: See the fifth oration of Julian. But all the allegories
which ever issued from the Platonic school are not worth the short poem
of Catullus on the same extraordinary subject. The transition of Atys,
from the wildest enthusiasm to sober, pathetic complaint, for his
irretrievable loss, must inspire a man with pity, a eunuch with
despair.]

The theological system of Julian appears to have contained the sublime
and important principles of natural religion. But as the faith, which is
not founded on revelation, must remain destitute of any firm assurance,
the disciple of Plato imprudently relapsed into the habits of vulgar
superstition; and the popular and philosophic notion of the Deity seems
to have been confounded in the practice, the writings, and even in
the mind of Julian. [19] The pious emperor acknowledged and adored the
Eternal Cause of the universe, to whom he ascribed all the perfections
of an infinite nature, invisible to the eyes and inaccessible to the
understanding, of feeble mortals. The Supreme God had created, or
rather, in the Platonic language, had generated, the gradual succession
of dependent spirits, of gods, of daemons, of heroes, and of men; and
every being which derived its existence immediately from the First
Cause, received the inherent gift of immortality. That so precious
an advantage might be lavished upon unworthy objects, the Creator had
intrusted to the skill and power of the inferior gods the office of
forming the human body, and of arranging the beautiful harmony of the
animal, the vegetable, and the mineral kingdoms. To the conduct of these
divine ministers he delegated the temporal government of this lower
world; but their imperfect administration is not exempt from discord
or error. The earth and its inhabitants are divided among them, and the
characters of Mars or Minerva, of Mercury or Venus, may be distinctly
traced in the laws and manners of their peculiar votaries. As long as
our immortal souls are confined in a mortal prison, it is our interest,
as well as our duty, to solicit the favor, and to deprecate the wrath,
of the powers of heaven; whose pride is gratified by the devotion
of mankind; and whose grosser parts may be supposed to derive some
nourishment from the fumes of sacrifice. [20] The inferior gods might
sometimes condescend to animate the statues, and to inhabit the temples,
which were dedicated to their honor. They might occasionally visit the
earth, but the heavens were the proper throne and symbol of their glory.
The invariable order of the sun, moon, and stars, was hastily admitted
by Julian, as a proof of their eternal duration; and their eternity was
a sufficient evidence that they were the workmanship, not of an inferior
deity, but of the Omnipotent King. In the system of Platonists, the
visible was a type of the invisible world. The celestial bodies, as they
were informed by a divine spirit, might be considered as the objects
the most worthy of religious worship. The Sun, whose genial influence
pervades and sustains the universe, justly claimed the adoration of
mankind, as the bright representative of the Logos, the lively, the
rational, the beneficent image of the intellectual Father. [21]

[Footnote 19: The true religion of Julian may be deduced from the
Caesars, p. 308, with Spanheim's notes and illustrations, from
the fragments in Cyril, l. ii. p. 57, 58, and especially from the
theological oration in Solem Regem, p. 130-158, addressed in the
confidence of friendship, to the praefect Sallust.]

[Footnote 20: Julian adopts this gross conception by ascribing to his
favorite Marcus Antoninus, (Caesares, p. 333.) The Stoics and Platonists
hesitated between the analogy of bodies and the purity of spirits; yet
the gravest philosophers inclined to the whimsical fancy of Aristophanes
and Lucian, that an unbelieving age might starve the immortal gods. See
Observations de Spanheim, p. 284, 444, &c.]

[Footnote 21: Julian. Epist. li. In another place, (apud Cyril. l. ii.
p. 69,) he calls the Sun God, and the throne of God. Julian believed
the Platonician Trinity; and only blames the Christians for preferring a
mortal to an immortal Logos.]

In every age, the absence of genuine inspiration is supplied by the
strong illusions of enthusiasm, and the mimic arts of imposture. If,
in the time of Julian, these arts had been practised only by the pagan
priests, for the support of an expiring cause, some indulgence might
perhaps be allowed to the interest and habits of the sacerdotal
character. But it may appear a subject of surprise and scandal, that
the philosophers themselves should have contributed to abuse the
superstitious credulity of mankind, [22] and that the Grecian mysteries
should have been supported by the magic or theurgy of the modern
Platonists. They arrogantly pretended to control the order of nature, to
explore the secrets of futurity, to command the service of the inferior
daemons, to enjoy the view and conversation of the superior gods, and by
disengaging the soul from her material bands, to reunite that immortal
particle with the Infinite and Divine Spirit.

[Footnote 22: The sophists of Eunapias perform as many miracles as the
saints of the desert; and the only circumstance in their favor is, that
they are of a less gloomy complexion. Instead of devils with horns and
tails, Iamblichus evoked the genii of love, Eros and Anteros, from two
adjacent fountains. Two beautiful boys issued from the water, fondly
embraced him as their father, and retired at his command, p. 26, 27.]

The devout and fearless curiosity of Julian tempted the philosophers
with the hopes of an easy conquest; which, from the situation of their
young proselyte, might be productive of the most important consequences.
[23] Julian imbibed the first rudiments of the Platonic doctrines from
the mouth of Aedesius, who had fixed at Pergamus his wandering and
persecuted school. But as the declining strength of that venerable sage
was unequal to the ardor, the diligence, the rapid conception of his
pupil, two of his most learned disciples, Chrysanthes and Eusebius,
supplied, at his own desire, the place of their aged master. These
philosophers seem to have prepared and distributed their respective
parts; and they artfully contrived, by dark hints and affected disputes,
to excite the impatient hopes of the aspirant, till they delivered him
into the hands of their associate, Maximus, the boldest and most skilful
master of the Theurgic science. By his hands, Julian was secretly
initiated at Ephesus, in the twentieth year of his age. His residence at
Athens confirmed this unnatural alliance of philosophy and superstition.

He obtained the privilege of a solemn initiation into the mysteries of
Eleusis, which, amidst the general decay of the Grecian worship, still
retained some vestiges of their primaeval sanctity; and such was the
zeal of Julian, that he afterwards invited the Eleusinian pontiff to the
court of Gaul, for the sole purpose of consummating, by mystic rites and
sacrifices, the great work of his sanctification. As these ceremonies
were performed in the depth of caverns, and in the silence of the night,
and as the inviolable secret of the mysteries was preserved by the
discretion of the initiated, I shall not presume to describe the horrid
sounds, and fiery apparitions, which were presented to the senses, or
the imagination, of the credulous aspirant, [24] till the visions of
comfort and knowledge broke upon him in a blaze of celestial light. [25]
In the caverns of Ephesus and Eleusis, the mind of Julian was penetrated
with sincere, deep, and unalterable enthusiasm; though he might
sometimes exhibit the vicissitudes of pious fraud and hypocrisy, which
may be observed, or at least suspected, in the characters of the most
conscientious fanatics. From that moment he consecrated his life to the
service of the gods; and while the occupations of war, of government,
and of study, seemed to claim the whole measure of his time, a stated
portion of the hours of the night was invariably reserved for the
exercise of private devotion. The temperance which adorned the severe
manners of the soldier and the philosopher was connected with some
strict and frivolous rules of religious abstinence; and it was in honor
of Pan or Mercury, of Hecate or Isis, that Julian, on particular days,
denied himself the use of some particular food, which might have been
offensive to his tutelar deities. By these voluntary fasts, he prepared
his senses and his understanding for the frequent and familiar visits
with which he was honored by the celestial powers. Notwithstanding the
modest silence of Julian himself, we may learn from his faithful friend,
the orator Libanius, that he lived in a perpetual intercourse with
the gods and goddesses; that they descended upon earth to enjoy the
conversation of their favorite hero; that they gently interrupted his
slumbers by touching his hand or his hair; that they warned him of every
impending danger, and conducted him, by their infallible wisdom, in
every action of his life; and that he had acquired such an intimate
knowledge of his heavenly guests, as readily to distinguish the voice of
Jupiter from that of Minerva, and the form of Apollo from the figure of
Hercules. [26] These sleeping or waking visions, the ordinary effects of
abstinence and fanaticism, would almost degrade the emperor to the level
of an Egyptian monk. But the useless lives of Antony or Pachomius were
consumed in these vain occupations. Julian could break from the dream
of superstition to arm himself for battle; and after vanquishing in the
field the enemies of Rome, he calmly retired into his tent, to dictate
the wise and salutary laws of an empire, or to indulge his genius in the
elegant pursuits of literature and philosophy.

[Footnote 23: The dexterous management of these sophists, who played
their credulous pupil into each other's hands, is fairly told by
Eunapius (p. 69- 79) with unsuspecting simplicity. The Abbe de la
Bleterie understands, and neatly describes, the whole comedy, (Vie de
Julian, p. 61-67.)]

[Footnote 24: When Julian, in a momentary panic, made the sign of the
cross the daemons instantly disappeared, (Greg. Naz. Orat. iii. p. 71.)
Gregory supposes that they were frightened, but the priests declared
that they were indignant. The reader, according to the measure of his
faith, will determine this profound question.]

[Footnote 25: A dark and distant view of the terrors and joys of
initiation is shown by Dion Chrysostom, Themistius, Proclus, and
Stobaeus. The learned author of the Divine Legation has exhibited their
words, (vol. i. p. 239, 247, 248, 280, edit. 1765,) which he dexterously
or forcibly applies to his own hypothesis.]

[Footnote 26: Julian's modesty confined him to obscure and occasional
hints: but Libanius expiates with pleasure on the facts and visions of
the religious hero. (Legat. ad Julian. p. 157, and Orat. Parental. c.
lxxxiii. p. 309, 310.)]

The important secret of the apostasy of Julian was intrusted to the
fidelity of the initiated, with whom he was united by the sacred ties
of friendship and religion. [27] The pleasing rumor was cautiously
circulated among the adherents of the ancient worship; and his
future greatness became the object of the hopes, the prayers, and the
predictions of the Pagans, in every province of the empire. From the
zeal and virtues of their royal proselyte, they fondly expected the cure
of every evil, and the restoration of every blessing; and instead of
disapproving of the ardor of their pious wishes, Julian ingenuously
confessed, that he was ambitious to attain a situation in which he might
be useful to his country and to his religion. But this religion was
viewed with a hostile eye by the successor of Constantine, whose
capricious passions altercately saved and threatened the life of Julian.
The arts of magic and divination were strictly prohibited under a
despotic government, which condescended to fear them; and if the Pagans
were reluctantly indulged in the exercise of their superstition, the
rank of Julian would have excepted him from the general toleration. The
apostate soon became the presumptive heir of the monarchy, and his death
could alone have appeased the just apprehensions of the Christians. [28]
But the young prince, who aspired to the glory of a hero rather than of
a martyr, consulted his safety by dissembling his religion; and the easy
temper of polytheism permitted him to join in the public worship of a
sect which he inwardly despised. Libanius has considered the hypocrisy
of his friend as a subject, not of censure, but of praise. "As the
statues of the gods," says that orator, "which have been defiled with
filth, are again placed in a magnificent temple, so the beauty of truth
was seated in the mind of Julian, after it had been purified from the
errors and follies of his education. His sentiments were changed; but as
it would have been dangerous to have avowed his sentiments, his conduct
still continued the same. Very different from the ass in Aesop, who
disguised himself with a lion's hide, our lion was obliged to conceal
himself under the skin of an ass; and, while he embraced the dictates
of reason, to obey the laws of prudence and necessity." [29] The
dissimulation of Julian lasted about ten years, from his secret
initiation at Ephesus to the beginning of the civil war; when he
declared himself at once the implacable enemy of Christ and of
Constantius. This state of constraint might contribute to strengthen his
devotion; and as soon as he had satisfied the obligation of assisting,
on solemn festivals, at the assemblies of the Christians, Julian
returned, with the impatience of a lover, to burn his free and voluntary
incense on the domestic chapels of Jupiter and Mercury. But as every act
of dissimulation must be painful to an ingenuous spirit, the profession
of Christianity increased the aversion of Julian for a religion which
oppressed the freedom of his mind, and compelled him to hold a conduct
repugnant to the noblest attributes of human nature, sincerity and
courage.

[Footnote 27: Libanius, Orat. Parent. c. x. p. 233, 234. Gallus had some
reason to suspect the secret apostasy of his brother; and in a letter,
which may be received as genuine, he exhorts Julian to adhere to the
religion of their ancestors; an argument which, as it should seem, was
not yet perfectly ripe. See Julian, Op. p. 454, and Hist. de Jovien tom
ii. p. 141.]

[Footnote 28: Gregory, (iii. p. 50,) with inhuman zeal, censures
Constantius for paring the infant apostate. His French translator (p.
265) cautiously observes, that such expressions must not be prises a la
lettre.]

[Footnote 29: Libanius, Orat. Parental. c ix. p. 233.]




