## Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines. Part IV.

All these cities were connected with each other, and with the capital,
by the public highways, which, issuing from the Forum of Rome, traversed
Italy, pervaded the provinces, and were terminated only by the frontiers
of the empire. If we carefully trace the distance from the wall of
Antoninus to Rome, and from thence to Jerusalem, it will be found that
the great chain of communication, from the north-west to the south-east
point of the empire, was drawn out to the length of four thousand and
eighty Roman miles. [85] The public roads were accurately divided by
mile-stones, and ran in a direct line from one city to another, with
very little respect for the obstacles either of nature or private
property. Mountains were perforated, and bold arches thrown over the
broadest and most rapid streams. [86] The middle part of the road was
raised into a terrace which commanded the adjacent country, consisted
of several strata of sand, gravel, and cement, and was paved with large
stones, or, in some places near the capital, with granite. [87] Such was
the solid construction of the Roman highways, whose firmness has not
entirely yielded to the effort of fifteen centuries. They united
the subjects of the most distant provinces by an easy and familiar
intercourse; but their primary object had been to facilitate the marches
of the legions; nor was any country considered as completely subdued,
till it had been rendered, in all its parts, pervious to the arms and
authority of the conqueror. The advantage of receiving the earliest
intelligence, and of conveying their orders with celerity, induced the
emperors to establish, throughout their extensive dominions, the
regular institution of posts. [88] Houses were every where erected at the
distance only of five or six miles; each of them was constantly provided
with forty horses, and by the help of these relays, it was easy to
travel a hundred miles in a day along the Roman roads. [89] [891] The use
of posts was allowed to those who claimed it by an Imperial mandate;
but though originally intended for the public service, it was sometimes
indulged to the business or conveniency of private citizens. [90] Nor was
the communication of the Roman empire less free and open by sea than it
was by land. The provinces surrounded and enclosed the Mediterranean:
and Italy, in the shape of an immense promontory, advanced into the
midst of that great lake. The coasts of Italy are, in general, destitute
of safe harbors; but human industry had corrected the deficiencies of
nature; and the artificial port of Ostia, in particular, situate at the
mouth of the Tyber, and formed by the emperor Claudius, was a useful
monument of Roman greatness. [91] From this port, which was only sixteen
miles from the capital, a favorable breeze frequently carried vessels in
seven days to the columns of Hercules, and in nine or ten, to Alexandria
in Egypt. [92]

[See Remains Of Claudian Aquaduct]

[Footnote 85: The following Itinerary may serve to convey some idea of
the direction of the road, and of the distance between the principal
towns. I. From the wall of Antoninus to York, 222 Roman miles. II.
London, 227. III. Rhutupiae or Sandwich, 67. IV. The navigation to
Boulogne, 45. V. Rheims, 174. VI. Lyons, 330. VII. Milan, 324. VIII.
Rome, 426. IX. Brundusium, 360. X. The navigation to Dyrrachium, 40. XI.
Byzantium, 711. XII. Ancyra, 283. XIII. Tarsus, 301. XIV. Antioch, 141.
XV. Tyre, 252. XVI. Jerusalem, 168. In all 4080 Roman, or 3740 English
miles. See the Itineraries published by Wesseling, his annotations; Gale
and Stukeley for Britain, and M. d'Anville for Gaul and Italy.]

[Footnote 86: Montfaucon, l'Antiquite Expliquee, (tom. 4, p. 2, l. i.
c. 5,) has described the bridges of Narni, Alcantara, Nismes, &c.]

[Footnote 87: Bergier, Histoire des grands Chemins de l'Empire Romain,
l. ii. c. l. l--28.]

[Footnote 88: Procopius in Hist. Arcana, c. 30. Bergier, Hist. des
grands Chemins, l. iv. Codex Theodosian. l. viii. tit. v. vol. ii. p.
506--563 with Godefroy's learned commentary.]

[Footnote 89: In the time of Theodosius, Caesarius, a magistrate of high
rank, went post from Antioch to Constantinople. He began his journey at
night, was in Cappadocia (165 miles from Antioch) the ensuing evening,
and arrived at Constantinople the sixth day about noon. The whole
distance was 725 Roman, or 665 English miles. See Libanius, Orat. xxii.,
and the Itineria, p. 572--581. Note: A courier is mentioned in Walpole's
Travels, ii. 335, who was to travel from Aleppo to Constantinople, more
than 700 miles, in eight days, an unusually short journey.--M.]

[Footnote 891: Posts for the conveyance of intelligence were established
by Augustus. Suet. Aug. 49. The couriers travelled with amazing speed.
Blair on Roman Slavery, note, p. 261. It is probable that the posts,
from the time of Augustus, were confined to the public service, and
supplied by impressment Nerva, as it appears from a coin of his reign,
made an important change; "he established posts upon all the public
roads of Italy, and made the service chargeable upon his own exchequer.
Hadrian, perceiving the advantage of this improvement, extended it
to all the provinces of the empire." Cardwell on Coins, p. 220.--M.]

[Footnote 90: Pliny, though a favorite and a minister, made an apology
for granting post-horses to his wife on the most urgent business. Epist.
x. 121, 122.]

[Footnote 91: Bergier, Hist. des grands Chemins, l. iv. c. 49.]

[Footnote 92: Plin. Hist. Natur. xix. i. [In Prooem.] * Note: Pliny says
Puteoli, which seems to have been the usual landing place from the East.
See the voyages of St. Paul, Acts xxviii. 13, and of Josephus, Vita, c.
3--M.]

Whatever evils either reason or declamation have imputed to extensive
empire, the power of Rome was attended with some beneficial consequences
to mankind; and the same freedom of intercourse which extended the
vices, diffused likewise the improvements, of social life. In the more
remote ages of antiquity, the world was unequally divided. The East was
in the immemorial possession of arts and luxury; whilst the West
was inhabited by rude and warlike barbarians, who either disdained
agriculture, or to whom it was totally unknown. Under the protection of
an established government, the productions of happier climates, and the
industry of more civilized nations, were gradually introduced into the
western countries of Europe; and the natives were encouraged, by an open
and profitable commerce, to multiply the former, as well as to improve
the latter. It would be almost impossible to enumerate all the articles,
either of the animal or the vegetable reign, which were successively
imported into Europe from Asia and Egypt: [93] but it will not be
unworthy of the dignity, and much less of the utility, of an historical
work, slightly to touch on a few of the principal heads. 1. Almost
all the flowers, the herbs, and the fruits, that grow in our European
gardens, are of foreign extraction, which, in many cases, is betrayed
even by their names: the apple was a native of Italy, and when the
Romans had tasted the richer flavor of the apricot, the peach, the
pomegranate, the citron, and the orange, they contented themselves
with applying to all these new fruits the common denomination of apple,
discriminating them from each other by the additional epithet of their
country. 2. In the time of Homer, the vine grew wild in the island of
Sicily, and most probably in the adjacent continent; but it was not
improved by the skill, nor did it afford a liquor grateful to the taste,
of the savage inhabitants. [94] A thousand years afterwards, Italy could
boast, that of the fourscore most generous and celebrated wines, more
than two thirds were produced from her soil. [95] The blessing was soon
communicated to the Narbonnese province of Gaul; but so intense was the
cold to the north of the Cevennes, that, in the time of Strabo, it was
thought impossible to ripen the grapes in those parts of Gaul. [96] This
difficulty, however, was gradually vanquished; and there is some reason
to believe, that the vineyards of Burgundy are as old as the age of the
Antonines. [97] 3. The olive, in the western world, followed the progress
of peace, of which it was considered as the symbol. Two centuries after
the foundation of Rome, both Italy and Africa were strangers to that
useful plant: it was naturalized in those countries; and at length
carried into the heart of Spain and Gaul. The timid errors of the
ancients, that it required a certain degree of heat, and could only
flourish in the neighborhood of the sea, were insensibly exploded by
industry and experience. [98] 4. The cultivation of flax was transported
from Egypt to Gaul, and enriched the whole country, however it might
impoverish the particular lands on which it was sown. [99] 5. The use of
artificial grasses became familiar to the farmers both of Italy and the
provinces, particularly the Lucerne, which derived its name and origin
from Media. [100] The assured supply of wholesome and plentiful food for
the cattle during winter, multiplied the number of the docks and herds,
which in their turn contributed to the fertility of the soil. To all
these improvements may be added an assiduous attention to mines and
fisheries, which, by employing a multitude of laborious hands, serve to
increase the pleasures of the rich and the subsistence of the poor.
The elegant treatise of Columella describes the advanced state of the
Spanish husbandry under the reign of Tiberius; and it may be observed,
that those famines, which so frequently afflicted the infant republic,
were seldom or never experienced by the extensive empire of Rome. The
accidental scarcity, in any single province, was immediately relieved by
the plenty of its more fortunate neighbors.

[Footnote 93: It is not improbable that the Greeks and Phoenicians
introduced some new arts and productions into the neighborhood of
Marseilles and Gades.]

[Footnote 94: See Homer, Odyss. l. ix. v. 358.]

[Footnote 95: Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xiv.]

[Footnote 96: Strab. Geograph. l. iv. p. 269. The intense cold of a
Gallic winter was almost proverbial among the ancients. * Note: Strabo
only says that the grape does not ripen. Attempts had been made in the
time of Augustus to naturalize the vine in the north of Gaul; but the
cold was too great. Diod. Sic. edit. Rhodom. p. 304.--W. Diodorus (lib.
v. 26) gives a curious picture of the Italian traders bartering, with
the savages of Gaul, a cask of wine for a slave.--M. --It appears from
the newly discovered treatise of Cicero de Republica, that there was a
law of the republic prohibiting the culture of the vine and olive beyond
the Alps, in order to keep up the value of those in Italy. Nos
justissimi homines, qui transalpinas gentes oleam et vitem serere non
sinimus, quo pluris sint nostra oliveta nostraeque vineae. Lib. iii. 9.
The restrictive law of Domitian was veiled under the decent pretext of
encouraging the cultivation of grain. Suet. Dom. vii. It was repealed by
Probus Vopis Strobus, 18.--M.]

[Footnote 97: In the beginning of the fourth century, the orator
Eumenius (Panegyr. Veter. viii. 6, edit. Delphin.) speaks of the vines
in the territory of Autun, which were decayed through age, and the
first plantation of which was totally unknown. The Pagus Arebrignus is
supposed by M. d'Anville to be the district of Beaune, celebrated, even
at present for one of the first growths of Burgundy. * Note: This is
proved by a passage of Pliny the Elder, where he speaks of a certain
kind of grape (vitis picata. vinum picatum) which grows naturally to the
district of Vienne, and had recently been transplanted into the country
of the Arverni, (Auvergne,) of the Helvii, (the Vivarias.) and the
Burgundy and Franche Compte. Pliny wrote A.D. 77. Hist. Nat. xiv. 1.--
W.]

[Footnote 98: Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xv.]

[Footnote 99: Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xix.]

[Footnote 100: See the agreeable Essays on Agriculture by Mr. Harte, in
which he has collected all that the ancients and moderns have said
of Lucerne.]

Agriculture is the foundation of manufactures; since the productions of
nature are the materials of art. Under the Roman empire, the labor of an
industrious and ingenious people was variously, but incessantly,
employed in the service of the rich. In their dress, their table, their
houses, and their furniture, the favorites of fortune united every
refinement of conveniency, of elegance, and of splendor, whatever could
soothe their pride or gratify their sensuality. Such refinements, under
the odious name of luxury, have been severely arraigned by the moralists
of every age; and it might perhaps be more conducive to the virtue, as
well as happiness, of mankind, if all possessed the necessaries, and
none the superfluities, of life. But in the present imperfect condition
of society, luxury, though it may proceed from vice or folly, seems to
be the only means that can correct the unequal distribution of property.
The diligent mechanic, and the skilful artist, who have obtained no
share in the division of the earth, receive a voluntary tax from the
possessors of land; and the latter are prompted, by a sense of interest,
to improve those estates, with whose produce they may purchase
additional pleasures. This operation, the particular effects of which
are felt in every society, acted with much more diffusive energy in the
Roman world. The provinces would soon have been exhausted of their
wealth, if the manufactures and commerce of luxury had not insensibly
restored to the industrious subjects the sums which were exacted from
them by the arms and authority of Rome. As long as the circulation was
confined within the bounds of the empire, it impressed the political
machine with a new degree of activity, and its consequences, sometimes
beneficial, could never become pernicious.

But it is no easy task to confine luxury within the limits of an empire.
The most remote countries of the ancient world were ransacked to supply
the pomp and delicacy of Rome. The forests of Scythia afforded some
valuable furs. Amber was brought over land from the shores of the Baltic
to the Danube; and the barbarians were astonished at the price which
they received in exchange for so useless a commodity. [101] There was a
considerable demand for Babylonian carpets, and other manufactures of
the East; but the most important and unpopular branch of foreign trade
was carried on with Arabia and India. Every year, about the time of the
summer solstice, a fleet of a hundred and twenty vessels sailed
from Myos-hormos, a port of Egypt, on the Red Sea. By the periodical
assistance of the monsoons, they traversed the ocean in about forty
days. The coast of Malabar, or the island of Ceylon, [102] was the usual
term of their navigation, and it was in those markets that the merchants
from the more remote countries of Asia expected their arrival. The
return of the fleet of Egypt was fixed to the months of December or
January; and as soon as their rich cargo had been transported on the
backs of camels, from the Red Sea to the Nile, and had descended that
river as far as Alexandria, it was poured, without delay, into the
capital of the empire. [103] The objects of oriental traffic were
splendid and trifling; silk, a pound of which was esteemed not inferior
in value to a pound of gold; [104] precious stones, among which the
pearl claimed the first rank after the diamond; [105] and a variety
of aromatics, that were consumed in religious worship and the pomp of
funerals. The labor and risk of the voyage was rewarded with almost
incredible profit; but the profit was made upon Roman subjects, and
a few individuals were enriched at the expense of the public. As the
natives of Arabia and India were contented with the productions and
manufactures of their own country, silver, on the side of the Romans,
was the principal, if not the only [1051] instrument of commerce. It was a
complaint worthy of the gravity of the senate, that, in the purchase of
female ornaments, the wealth of the state was irrecoverably given away
to foreign and hostile nations. [106] The annual loss is computed, by
a writer of an inquisitive but censorious temper, at upwards of eight
hundred thousand pounds sterling. [107] Such was the style of discontent,
brooding over the dark prospect of approaching poverty. And yet, if we
compare the proportion between gold and silver, as it stood in the time
of Pliny, and as it was fixed in the reign of Constantine, we shall
discover within that period a very considerable increase. [108] There is
not the least reason to suppose that gold was become more scarce; it is
therefore evident that silver was grown more common; that whatever might
be the amount of the Indian and Arabian exports, they were far from
exhausting the wealth of the Roman world; and that the produce of the
mines abundantly supplied the demands of commerce.

[Footnote 101: Tacit. Germania, c. 45. Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 13. The
latter observed, with some humor, that even fashion had not yet found
out the use of amber. Nero sent a Roman knight to purchase great
quantities on the spot where it was produced, the coast of modern
Prussia.]

[Footnote 102: Called Taprobana by the Romans, and Serindib by the
Arabs. It was discovered under the reign of Claudius, and gradually
became the principal mart of the East.]

[Footnote 103: Plin. Hist. Natur. l. vi. Strabo, l. xvii.]

[Footnote 104: Hist. August. p. 224. A silk garment was considered as an
ornament to a woman, but as a disgrace to a man.]

[Footnote 105: The two great pearl fisheries were the same as at
present, Ormuz and Cape Comorin. As well as we can compare ancient
with modern geography, Rome was supplied with diamonds from the mine
of Jumelpur, in Bengal, which is described in the Voyages de Tavernier,
tom. ii. p. 281.]

[Footnote 1051: Certainly not the only one. The Indians were not so
contented with regard to foreign productions. Arrian has a long list of
European wares, which they received in exchange for their own; Italian
and other wines, brass, tin, lead, coral, chrysolith, storax, glass,
dresses of one or many colors, zones, &c. See Periplus Maris Erythraei
in Hudson, Geogr. Min. i. p. 27.--W. The German translator observes that
Gibbon has confined the use of aromatics to religious worship and
funerals. His error seems the omission of other spices, of which the
Romans must have consumed great quantities in their cookery. Wenck,
however, admits that silver was the chief article of exchange.--M.
In 1787, a peasant (near Nellore in the Carnatic) struck, in digging,
on the remains of a Hindu temple; he found, also, a pot which contained
Roman coins and medals of the second century, mostly Trajans, Adrians,
and Faustinas, all of gold, many of them fresh and beautiful, others
defaced or perforated, as if they had been worn as ornaments. (Asiatic
Researches, ii. 19.)--M.]

[Footnote 106: Tacit. Annal. iii. 53. In a speech of Tiberius.]

[Footnote 107: Plin. Hist. Natur. xii. 18. In another place he computes
half that sum; Quingenties H. S. for India exclusive of Arabia.]

[Footnote 108: The proportion, which was 1 to 10, and 12 1/2, rose to
14 2/5, the legal regulation of Constantine. See Arbuthnot's Tables of
ancient Coins, c. 5.]

Notwithstanding the propensity of mankind to exalt the past, and to
depreciate the present, the tranquil and prosperous state of the empire
was warmly felt, and honestly confessed, by the provincials as well
as Romans. "They acknowledged that the true principles of social life,
laws, agriculture, and science, which had been first invented by the
wisdom of Athens, were now firmly established by the power of Rome,
under whose auspicious influence the fiercest barbarians were united
by an equal government and common language. They affirm, that with the
improvement of arts, the human species were visibly multiplied. They
celebrate the increasing splendor of the cities, the beautiful face of
the country, cultivated and adorned like an immense garden; and the long
festival of peace which was enjoyed by so many nations, forgetful of
the ancient animosities, and delivered from the apprehension of future
danger." [109] Whatever suspicions may be suggested by the air of
rhetoric and declamation, which seems to prevail in these passages, the
substance of them is perfectly agreeable to historic truth.

[Footnote 109: Among many other passages, see Pliny, (Hist. Natur. iii.
5.) Aristides, (de Urbe Roma,) and Tertullian, (de Anima, c. 30.)]

It was scarcely possible that the eyes of contemporaries should discover
in the public felicity the latent causes of decay and corruption. This
long peace, and the uniform government of the Romans, introduced a slow
and secret poison into the vitals of the empire. The minds of men were
gradually reduced to the same level, the fire of genius was
extinguished, and even the military spirit evaporated. The natives of
Europe were brave and robust. Spain, Gaul, Britain, and Illyricum
supplied the legions with excellent soldiers, and constituted the real
strength of the monarchy. Their personal valor remained, but they no
longer possessed that public courage which is nourished by the love of
independence, the sense of national honor, the presence of danger, and
the habit of command. They received laws and governors from the will of
their sovereign, and trusted for their defence to a mercenary army. The
posterity of their boldest leaders was contented with the rank of
citizens and subjects. The most aspiring spirits resorted to the court
or standard of the emperors; and the deserted provinces, deprived of
political strength or union, insensibly sunk into the languid
indifference of private life.

The love of letters, almost inseparable from peace and refinement, was
fashionable among the subjects of Hadrian and the Antonines, who were
themselves men of learning and curiosity. It was diffused over the whole
extent of their empire; the most northern tribes of Britons had acquired
a taste for rhetoric; Homer as well as Virgil were transcribed and
studied on the banks of the Rhine and Danube; and the most liberal
rewards sought out the faintest glimmerings of literary merit. [110] The
sciences of physic and astronomy were successfully cultivated by the
Greeks; the observations of Ptolemy and the writings of Galen are
studied by those who have improved their discoveries and corrected their
errors; but if we except the inimitable Lucian, this age of indolence
passed away without having produced a single writer of original genius,
or who excelled in the arts of elegant composition. The authority of
Plato and Aristotle, of Zeno and Epicurus, still reigned in the schools;
and their systems, transmitted with blind deference from one generation
of disciples to another, precluded every generous attempt to exercise
the powers, or enlarge the limits, of the human mind. The beauties
of the poets and orators, instead of kindling a fire like their own,
inspired only cold and servile imitations: or if any ventured to deviate
from those models, they deviated at the same time from good sense
and propriety. On the revival of letters, the youthful vigor of the
imagination, after a long repose, national emulation, a new religion,
new languages, and a new world, called forth the genius of Europe.
But the provincials of Rome, trained by a uniform artificial foreign
education, were engaged in a very unequal competition with those bold
ancients, who, by expressing their genuine feelings in their native
tongue, had already occupied every place of honor. The name of Poet was
almost forgotten; that of Orator was usurped by the sophists. A cloud of
critics, of compilers, of commentators, darkened the face of learning,
and the decline of genius was soon followed by the corruption of
taste.[1101]

[Footnote 110: Herodes Atticus gave the sophist Polemo above eight
thousand pounds for three declamations. See Philostrat. l. i. p. 538.
The Antonines founded a school at Athens, in which professors of
grammar, rhetoric, politics, and the four great sects of philosophy were
maintained at the public expense for the instruction of youth. The
salary of a philosopher was ten thousand drachmae, between three and
four hundred pounds a year. Similar establishments were formed in the
other great cities of the empire. See Lucian in Eunuch. tom. ii. p. 352,
edit. Reitz. Philostrat. l. ii. p. 566. Hist. August. p. 21. Dion
Cassius, l. lxxi. p. 1195. Juvenal himself, in a morose satire, which in
every line betrays his own disappointment and envy, is obliged, however,
to say,--"--O Juvenes, circumspicit et stimulat vos. Materiamque sibi
Ducis indulgentia quaerit."--Satir. vii. 20. Note: Vespasian first gave
a salary to professors: he assigned to each professor of rhetoric, Greek
and Roman, centena sestertia. (Sueton. in Vesp. 18). Hadrian and the
Antonines, though still liberal, were less profuse.--G. from W.
Suetonius wrote annua centena L. 807, 5, 10.--M.]

[Footnote 1101: This judgment is rather severe: besides the physicians,
astronomers, and grammarians, among whom there were some very
distinguished men, there were still, under Hadrian, Suetonius, Florus,
Plutarch; under the Antonines, Arrian, Pausanias, Appian, Marcus
Aurelius himself, Sextus Empiricus, &c. Jurisprudence gained much by the
labors of Salvius Julianus, Julius Celsus, Sex. Pomponius, Caius, and
others.--G. from W. Yet where, among these, is the writer of original
genius, unless, perhaps Plutarch? or even of a style really elegant?--
M.]

The sublime Longinus, who, in somewhat a later period, and in the court
of a Syrian queen, preserved the spirit of ancient Athens, observes
and laments this degeneracy of his contemporaries, which debased their
sentiments, enervated their courage, and depressed their talents. "In
the same manner," says he, "as some children always remain pygmies,
whose infant limbs have been too closely confined, thus our tender
minds, fettered by the prejudices and habits of a just servitude,
are unable to expand themselves, or to attain that well-proportioned
greatness which we admire in the ancients; who, living under a popular
government, wrote with the same freedom as they acted." [111] This
diminutive stature of mankind, if we pursue the metaphor, was daily
sinking below the old standard, and the Roman world was indeed peopled
by a race of pygmies; when the fierce giants of the north broke in,
and mended the puny breed. They restored a manly spirit of freedom; and
after the revolution of ten centuries, freedom became the happy parent
of taste and science.

[Footnote 111: Longin. de Sublim. c. 44, p. 229, edit. Toll. Here, too,
we may say of Longinus, "his own example strengthens all his laws."
Instead of proposing his sentiments with a manly boldness, he insinuates
them with the most guarded caution; puts them into the mouth of a
friend, and as far as we can collect from a corrupted text, makes a show
of refuting them himself.]





