## Chapter VIII: State Of Persia And Restoration Of The Monarchy.--Part I.

     Of The State Of Persia After The Restoration Of The Monarchy
     By Artaxerxes.

Whenever Tacitus indulges himself in those beautiful episodes, in which
he relates some domestic transaction of the Germans or of the Parthians,
his principal object is to relieve the attention of the reader from a
uniform scene of vice and misery. From the reign of Augustus to the time
of Alexander Severus, the enemies of Rome were in her bosom--the tyrants
and the soldiers; and her prosperity had a very distant and feeble
interest in the revolutions that might happen beyond the Rhine and the
Euphrates. But when the military order had levelled, in wild anarchy,
the power of the prince, the laws of the senate, and even the discipline
of the camp, the barbarians of the North and of the East, who had long
hovered on the frontier, boldly attacked the provinces of a declining
monarchy. Their vexatious inroads were changed into formidable
irruptions, and, after a long vicissitude of mutual calamities,
many tribes of the victorious invaders established themselves in the
provinces of the Roman Empire. To obtain a clearer knowledge of
these great events, we shall endeavor to form a previous idea of the
character, forces, and designs of those nations who avenged the cause of
Hannibal and Mithridates.

In the more early ages of the world, whilst the forest that covered
Europe afforded a retreat to a few wandering savages, the inhabitants
of Asia were already collected into populous cities, and reduced under
extensive empires, the seat of the arts, of luxury, and of despotism.
The Assyrians reigned over the East, [1] till the sceptre of Ninus and
Semiramis dropped from the hands of their enervated successors. The
Medes and the Babylonians divided their power, and were themselves
swallowed up in the monarchy of the Persians, whose arms could not be
confined within the narrow limits of Asia. Followed, as it is said, by
two millions of men, Xerxes, the descendant of Cyrus, invaded Greece.

Thirty thousand soldiers, under the command of Alexander, the son of
Philip, who was intrusted by the Greeks with their glory and revenge,
were sufficient to subdue Persia. The princes of the house of Seleucus
usurped and lost the Macedonian command over the East. About the same
time, that, by an ignominious treaty, they resigned to the Romans the
country on this side Mount Tarus, they were driven by the Parthians,
[1001] an obscure horde of Scythian origin, from all the provinces of Upper
Asia. The formidable power of the Parthians, which spread from India
to the frontiers of Syria, was in its turn subverted by Ardshir, or
Artaxerxes; the founder of a new dynasty, which, under the name of
Sassanides, governed Persia till the invasion of the Arabs. This great
revolution, whose fatal influence was soon experienced by the Romans,
happened in the fourth year of Alexander Severus, two hundred and
twenty-six years after the Christian era. [2] [201]

[Footnote 1: An ancient chronologist, quoted by Valleius Paterculus, (l.
i. c. 6,) observes, that the Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, and the
Macedonians, reigned over Asia one thousand nine hundred and ninety-five
years, from the accession of Ninus to the defeat of Antiochus by the
Romans. As the latter of these great events happened 289 years before
Christ, the former may be placed 2184 years before the same aera. The
Astronomical Observations, found at Babylon, by Alexander, went fifty
years higher.]

[Footnote 1001: The Parthians were a tribe of the Indo-Germanic branch
which dwelt on the south-east of the Caspian, and belonged to the same
race as the Getae, the Massagetae, and other nations, confounded by the
ancients under the vague denomination of Scythians. Klaproth, Tableaux
Hist. d l'Asie, p. 40. Strabo (p. 747) calls the Parthians Carduchi,
i.e., the inhabitants of Curdistan.--M.]

[Footnote 2: In the five hundred and thirty-eighth year of the aera
of Seleucus. See Agathias, l. ii. p. 63. This great event (such is the
carelessness of the Orientals) is placed by Eutychius as high as the
tenth year of Commodus, and by Moses of Chorene as low as the reign
of Philip. Ammianus Marcellinus has so servilely copied (xxiii. 6) his
ancient materials, which are indeed very good, that he describes the
family of the Arsacides as still seated on the Persian throne in the
middle of the fourth century.]

[Footnote 201: The Persian History, if the poetry of the Shah Nameh, the
Book of Kings, may deserve that name mentions four dynasties from the
earliest ages to the invasion of the Saracens. The Shah Nameh was
composed with the view of perpetuating the remains of the original
Persian records or traditions which had survived the Saracenic invasion.
The task was undertaken by the poet Dukiki, and afterwards, under the
patronage of Mahmood of Ghazni, completed by Ferdusi. The first of these
dynasties is that of Kaiomors, as Sir W. Jones observes, the dark and
fabulous period; the second, that of the Kaianian, the heroic and
poetical, in which the earned have discovered some curious, and imagined
some fanciful, analogies with the Jewish, the Greek, and the Roman
accounts of the eastern world. See, on the Shah Nameh, Translation by
Goerres, with Von Hammer's Review, Vienna Jahrbuch von Lit. 17, 75, 77.
Malcolm's Persia, 8vo. ed. i. 503. Macan's Preface to his Critical
Edition of the Shah Nameh. On the early Persian History, a very sensible
abstract of various opinions in Malcolm's Hist. of Persian.--M.]

Artaxerxes had served with great reputation in the armies of Artaban,
the last king of the Parthians, and it appears that he was driven into
exile and rebellion by royal ingratitude, the customary reward for
superior merit. His birth was obscure, and the obscurity equally
gave room to the aspersions of his enemies, and the flattery of his
adherents. If we credit the scandal of the former, Artaxerxes sprang
from the illegitimate commerce of a tanner's wife with a common soldier.
[3] The latter represent him as descended from a branch of the ancient
kings of Persian, though time and misfortune had gradually reduced his
ancestors to the humble station of private citizens. [4] As the
lineal heir of the monarchy, he asserted his right to the throne, and
challenged the noble task of delivering the Persians from the oppression
under which they groaned above five centuries since the death of Darius.
The Parthians were defeated in three great battles. [401] In the last of
these their king Artaban was slain, and the spirit of the nation was
forever broken. [5] The authority of Artaxerxes was solemnly acknowledged
in a great assembly held at Balch in Khorasan. [501] Two younger branches
of the royal house of Arsaces were confounded among the prostrate
satraps. A third, more mindful of ancient grandeur than of present
necessity, attempted to retire, with a numerous train of vessels,
towards their kinsman, the king of Armenia; but this little army
of deserters was intercepted, and cut off, by the vigilance of the
conqueror, [6] who boldly assumed the double diadem, and the title of
King of Kings, which had been enjoyed by his predecessor. But these
pompous titles, instead of gratifying the vanity of the Persian, served
only to admonish him of his duty, and to inflame in his soul and should
the ambition of restoring in their full splendor, the religion and
empire of Cyrus.

[Footnote 3: The tanner's name was Babec; the soldier's, Sassan: from
the former Artaxerxes obtained the surname of Babegan, from the latter
all his descendants have been styled Sassanides.]

[Footnote 4: D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, Ardshir.]

[Footnote 401: In the plain of Hoormuz, the son of Babek was hailed in
the field with the proud title of Shahan Shah, king of kings--a name
ever since assumed by the sovereigns of Persia. Malcolm, i. 71.--M.]

[Footnote 5: Dion Cassius, l. lxxx. Herodian, l. vi. p. 207.
Abulpharagins Dynast. p. 80.]

[Footnote 501: See the Persian account of the rise of Ardeschir Babegan
in Malcolm l 69.--M.]

[Footnote 6: See Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 65--71.]


I. During the long servitude of Persia under the Macedonian and the
Parthian yoke, the nations of Europe and Asia had mutually adopted and
corrupted each other's superstitions. The Arsacides, indeed, practised
the worship of the Magi; but they disgraced and polluted it with a
various mixture of foreign idolatry. [601] The memory of Zoroaster, the
ancient prophet and philosopher of the Persians, [7] was still revered
in the East; but the obsolete and mysterious language, in which the
Zendavesta was composed, [8] opened a field of dispute to seventy sects,
who variously explained the fundamental doctrines of their religion, and
were all indifferently devided by a crowd of infidels, who rejected the
divine mission and miracles of the prophet. To suppress the idolaters,
reunite the schismatics, and confute the unbelievers, by the infallible
decision of a general council, the pious Artaxerxes summoned the Magi
from all parts of his dominions. These priests, who had so long sighed
in contempt and obscurity obeyed the welcome summons; and, on the
appointed day, appeared, to the number of about eighty thousand. But as
the debates of so tumultuous an assembly could not have been directed by
the authority of reason, or influenced by the art of policy, the Persian
synod was reduced, by successive operations, to forty thousand, to four
thousand, to four hundred, to forty, and at last to seven Magi, the
most respected for their learning and piety. One of these, Erdaviraph,
a young but holy prelate, received from the hands of his brethren three
cups of soporiferous wine. He drank them off, and instantly fell into a
long and profound sleep. As soon as he waked, he related to the king
and to the believing multitude, his journey to heaven, and his
intimate conferences with the Deity. Every doubt was silenced by this
supernatural evidence; and the articles of the faith of Zoroaster were
fixed with equal authority and precision. [9] A short delineation of
that celebrated system will be found useful, not only to display the
character of the Persian nation, but to illustrate many of their most
important transactions, both in peace and war, with the Roman empire.
[10]

[Footnote 601: Silvestre de Sacy (Antiquites de la Perse) had proved
the neglect of the Zoroastrian religion under the Parthian kings.--M.]

[Footnote 7: Hyde and Prideaux, working up the Persian legends and their
own conjectures into a very agreeable story, represent Zoroaster as a
contemporary of Darius Hystaspes. But it is sufficient to observe, that
the Greek writers, who lived almost in the age of Darius, agree in
placing the aera of Zoroaster many hundred, or even thousand, years
before their own time. The judicious criticisms of Mr. Moyle perceived,
and maintained against his uncle, Dr. Prideaux, the antiquity of the
Persian prophet. See his work, vol. ii. * Note: There are three leading
theories concerning the age of Zoroaster: 1. That which assigns him to
an age of great and almost indefinite antiquity--it is that of Moyle,
adopted by Gibbon, Volney, Recherches sur l'Histoire, ii. 2. Rhode,
also, (die Heilige Sage, &c.,) in a very ingenious and ably-developed
theory, throws the Bactrian prophet far back into antiquity 2. Foucher,
(Mem. de l'Acad. xxvii. 253,) Tychsen, (in Com. Soc. Gott. ii. 112),
Heeren, (ldeen. i. 459,) and recently Holty, identify the Gushtasp of
the Persian mythological history with Cyaxares the First, the king of
the Medes, and consider the religion to be Median in its origin. M.
Guizot considers this opinion most probable, note in loc. 3. Hyde,
Prideaux, Anquetil du Perron, Kleuker, Herder, Goerres,
(Mythen-Geschichte,) Von Hammer. (Wien. Jahrbuch, vol. ix.,) Malcolm,
(i. 528,) De Guigniaut, (Relig. de l'Antiq. 2d part, vol. iii.,)
Klaproth, (Tableaux de l'Asie, p. 21,) make Gushtasp Darius Hystaspes,
and Zoroaster his contemporary. The silence of Herodotus appears the
great objection to this theory. Some writers, as M. Foucher (resting, as
M. Guizot observes, on the doubtful authority of Pliny,) make more than
one Zoroaster, and so attempt to reconcile the conflicting theories.--
M.]

[Footnote 8: That ancient idiom was called the Zend. The language of the
commentary, the Pehlvi, though much more modern, has ceased many ages
ago to be a living tongue. This fact alone (if it is allowed as
authentic) sufficiently warrants the antiquity of those writings which M
d'Anquetil has brought into Europe, and translated into French. * Note:
Zend signifies life, living. The word means, either the collection of
the canonical books of the followers of Zoroaster, or the language
itself in which they are written. They are the books that contain the
word of life whether the language was originally called Zend, or whether
it was so called from the contents of the books. Avesta means word,
oracle, revelation: this term is not the title of a particular work, but
of the collection of the books of Zoroaster, as the revelation of
Ormuzd. This collection is sometimes called Zendavesta, sometimes
briefly Zend. The Zend was the ancient language of Media, as is proved
by its affinity with the dialects of Armenia and Georgia; it was already
a dead language under the Arsacides in the country which was the scene
of the events recorded in the Zendavesta. Some critics, among others
Richardson and Sir W. Jones, have called in question the antiquity of
these books. The former pretended that Zend had never been a written or
spoken language, but had been invented in the later times by the Magi,
for the purposes of their art; but Kleuker, in the dissertations which
he added to those of Anquetil and the Abbe Foucher, has proved that the
Zend was a living and spoken language.--G. Sir W. Jones appears to have
abandoned his doubts, on discovering the affinity between the Zend and
the Sanskrit. Since the time of Kleuker, this question has been
investigated by many learned scholars. Sir W. Jones, Leyden, (Asiat.
Research. x. 283,) and Mr. Erskine, (Bombay Trans. ii. 299,) consider it
a derivative from the Sanskrit. The antiquity of the Zendavesta has
likewise been asserted by Rask, the great Danish linguist, who,
according to Malcolm, brought back from the East fresh transcripts and
additions to those published by Anquetil. According to Rask, the Zend
and Sanskrit are sister dialects; the one the parent of the Persian, the
other of the Indian family of languages.--G. and M.----But the subject
is more satisfactorily illustrated in Bopp's comparative Grammar of the
Sanscrit, Zend, Greek, Latin, Lithuanian, Gothic, and German languages.
Berlin. 1833-5. According to Bopp, the Zend is, in some respects, of a
more remarkable structure than the Sanskrit. Parts of the Zendavesta
have been published in the original, by M. Bournouf, at Paris, and M.
Ol. shausen, in Hamburg.--M.----The Pehlvi was the language of the
countries bordering on Assyria, and probably of Assyria itself. Pehlvi
signifies valor, heroism; the Pehlvi, therefore, was the language of the
ancient heroes and kings of Persia, the valiant. (Mr. Erskine prefers
the derivation from Pehla, a border.--M.) It contains a number of
Aramaic roots. Anquetil considered it formed from the Zend. Kleuker does
not adopt this opinion. The Pehlvi, he says, is much more flowing, and
less overcharged with vowels, than the Zend. The books of Zoroaster,
first written in Zend, were afterwards translated into Pehlvi and Parsi.
The Pehlvi had fallen into disuse under the dynasty of the Sassanides,
but the learned still wrote it. The Parsi, the dialect of Pars or
Farristan, was then prevailing dialect. Kleuker, Anhang zum Zend Avesta,
2, ii. part i. p. 158, part ii. 31.--G.----Mr. Erskine (Bombay
Transactions) considers the existing Zendavesta to have been compiled in
the time of Ardeschir Babegan.--M.]

[Footnote 9: Hyde de Religione veterum Pers. c. 21.]

[Footnote 10: I have principally drawn this account from the Zendavesta
of M. d'Anquetil, and the Sadder, subjoined to Dr. Hyde's treatise. It
must, however, be confessed, that the studied obscurity of a prophet,
the figurative style of the East, and the deceitful medium of a French
or Latin version may have betrayed us into error and heresy, in this
abridgment of Persian theology. * Note: It is to be regretted that
Gibbon followed the post-Mahometan Sadder of Hyde.--M.]

The great and fundamental article of the system, was the celebrated
doctrine of the two principles; a bold and injudicious attempt of
Eastern philosophy to reconcile the existence of moral and physical evil
with the attributes of a beneficent Creator and Governor of the world.
The first and original Being, in whom, or by whom, the universe exists,
is denominated in the writings of Zoroaster, Time without bounds; [1001]
but it must be confessed, that this infinite substance seems rather a
metaphysical, abstraction of the mind, than a real object endowed with
self-consciousness, or possessed of moral perfections. From either the
blind or the intelligent operation of this infinite Time, which bears
but too near an affinity with the chaos of the Greeks, the two secondary
but active principles of the universe, were from all eternity produced,
Ormusd and Ahriman, each of them possessed of the powers of creation,
but each disposed, by his invariable nature, to exercise them with
different designs. [1002] The principle of good is eternally aborbed in
light; the principle of evil eternally buried in darkness. The wise
benevolence of Ormusd formed man capable of virtue, and abundantly
provided his fair habitation with the materials of happiness. By
his vigilant providence, the motion of the planets, the order of the
seasons, and the temperate mixture of the elements, are preserved. But
the malice of Ahriman has long since pierced Ormusd's egg; or, in other
words, has violated the harmony of his works. Since that fatal eruption,
the most minute articles of good and evil are intimately intermingled
and agitated together; the rankest poisons spring up amidst the most
salutary plants; deluges, earthquakes, and conflagrations attest the
conflict of Nature, and the little world of man is perpetually shaken by
vice and misfortune. Whilst the rest of human kind are led away captives
in the chains of their infernal enemy, the faithful Persian alone
reserves his religious adoration for his friend and protector Ormusd,
and fights under his banner of light, in the full confidence that he
shall, in the last day, share the glory of his triumph. At that decisive
period, the enlightened wisdom of goodness will render the power of
Ormusd superior to the furious malice of his rival. Ahriman and his
followers, disarmed and subdued, will sink into their native darkness;
and virtue will maintain the eternal peace and harmony of the universe.
[11] [1101]

[Footnote 1001: Zeruane Akerene, so translated by Anquetil and Kleuker.
There is a dissertation of Foucher on this subject, Mem. de l'Acad. des
Inscr. t. xxix. According to Bohlen (das alte Indien) it is the Sanskrit
Sarvan Akaranam, the Uncreated Whole; or, according to Fred. Schlegel,
Sarvan Akharyam the Uncreate Indivisible.--M.]

[Footnote 1002: This is an error. Ahriman was not forced by his invariable
nature to do evil; the Zendavesta expressly recognizes (see the
Izeschne) that he was born good, that in his origin he was light; envy
rendered him evil; he became jealous of the power and attributes
of Ormuzd; then light was changed into darkness, and Ahriman was
precipitated into the abyss. See the Abridgment of the Doctrine of the
Ancient Persians, by Anquetil, c. ii Section 2.--G.]

[Footnote 11: The modern Parsees (and in some degree the Sadder) exalt
Ormusd into the first and omnipotent cause, whilst they degrade Ahriman
into an inferior but rebellious spirit. Their desire of pleasing the
Mahometans may have contributed to refine their theological systems.]

[Footnote 1101: According to the Zendavesta, Ahriman will not be
annihilated or precipitated forever into darkness: at the resurrection
of the dead he will be entirely defeated by Ormuzd, his power will be
destroyed, his kingdom overthrown to its foundations, he will himself be
purified in torrents of melting metal; he will change his heart and his
will, become holy, heavenly establish in his dominions the law and word
of Ormuzd, unite himself with him in everlasting friendship, and
both will sing hymns in honor of the Great Eternal. See Anquetil's
Abridgment. Kleuker, Anhang part iii. p 85, 36; and the Izeschne, one of
the books of the Zendavesta. According to the Sadder Bun-Dehesch, a more
modern work, Ahriman is to be annihilated: but this is contrary to the
text itself of the Zendavesta, and to the idea its author gives of the
kingdom of Eternity, after the twelve thousand years assigned to the
contest between Good and Evil.--G.]




