## Chapter XXXIV: Attila.--Part III.

I must acknowledge myself unable to form any satisfactory theory as
to the connection of these poems with the history of the time, or the
period, from which they may date their origin; notwithstanding the
laborious investigations and critical sagacity of the Schlegels, the
Grimms, of P. E. Muller and Lachman, and a whole host of German critics
and antiquaries; not to omit our own countryman, Mr. Herbert, whose
theory concerning Attila is certainly neither deficient in boldness nor
originality. I conceive the only way to obtain any thing like a clear
conception on this point would be what Lachman has begun, (see above,)
patiently to collect and compare the various forms which the traditions
have assumed, without any preconceived, either mythical or poetical,
theory, and, if possible, to discover the original basis of the whole
rich and fantastic legend. One point, which to me is strongly in favor
of the antiquity of this poetic cycle, is, that the manners are so
clearly anterior to chivalry, and to the influence exercised on the
poetic literature of Europe by the chivalrous poems and romances. I
think I find some traces of that influence in the Latin poem, though
strained through the imagination of a monk. The English reader will find
an amusing account of the German Nibelungen and Heldenbuch, and of
some of the Scandinavian Sagas, in the volume of Northern Antiquities
published by Weber, the friend of Sir Walter Scott. Scott himself
contributed a considerable, no doubt far the most valuable, part to the
work. [46] [4611] [47]

See also the various German editions of the Nibelungen, to which
Lachman, with true German perseverance, has compiled a thick volume of
various readings; the Heldenbuch, the old Danish poems by Grimm, the
Eddas, &c. Herbert's Attila, p. 510, et seq.--M.]

[Footnote 46: If we may believe Plutarch, (in Demetrio, tom. v. p. 24,)
it was the custom of the Scythians, when they indulged in the pleasures
of the table, to awaken their languid courage by the martial harmony of
twanging their bow-strings.]

[Footnote 4611: The Scythian was an idiot or lunatic; the Moor a regular
buffcon--M.]

[Footnote 47: The curious narrative of this embassy, which required few
observations, and was not susceptible of any collateral evidence, may be
found in Priscus, p. 49-70. But I have not confined myself to the same
order; and I had previously extracted the historical circumstances,
which were less intimately connected with the journey, and business, of
the Roman ambassadors.]

But the Roman ambassador was ignorant of the treacherous design, which
had been concealed under the mask of the public faith. The surprise
and satisfaction of Edecon, when he contemplated the splendor of
Constantinople, had encouraged the interpreter Vigilius to procure for
him a secret interview with the eunuch Chrysaphius, [48] who governed
the emperor and the empire. After some previous conversation, and a
mutual oath of secrecy, the eunuch, who had not, from his own feelings
or experience, imbibed any exalted notions of ministerial virtue,
ventured to propose the death of Attila, as an important service, by
which Edecon might deserve a liberal share of the wealth and luxury
which he admired. The ambassador of the Huns listened to the tempting
offer; and professed, with apparent zeal, his ability, as well as
readiness, to execute the bloody deed; the design was communicated to
the master of the offices, and the devout Theodosius consented to the
assassination of his invincible enemy. But this perfidious conspiracy
was defeated by the dissimulation, or the repentance, of Edecon; and
though he might exaggerate his inward abhorrence for the treason, which
he seemed to approve, he dexterously assumed the merit of an early and
voluntary confession. If we now review the embassy of Maximin, and the
behavior of Attila, we must applaud the Barbarian, who respected the
laws of hospitality, and generously entertained and dismissed the
minister of a prince who had conspired against his life. But the
rashness of Vigilius will appear still more extraordinary, since
he returned, conscious of his guilt and danger, to the royal camp,
accompanied by his son, and carrying with him a weighty purse of gold,
which the favorite eunuch had furnished, to satisfy the demands of
Edecon, and to corrupt the fidelity of the guards. The interpreter was
instantly seized, and dragged before the tribunal of Attila, where
he asserted his innocence with specious firmness, till the threat
of inflicting instant death on his son extorted from him a sincere
discovery of the criminal transaction. Under the name of ransom, or
confiscation, the rapacious king of the Huns accepted two hundred pounds
of gold for the life of a traitor, whom he disdained to punish. He
pointed his just indignation against a nobler object. His ambassadors,
Eslaw and Orestes, were immediately despatched to Constantinople, with a
peremptory instruction, which it was much safer for them to execute than
to disobey. They boldly entered the Imperial presence, with the fatal
purse hanging down from the neck of Orestes; who interrogated the eunuch
Chrysaphius, as he stood beside the throne, whether he recognized the
evidence of his guilt. But the office of reproof was reserved for the
superior dignity of his colleague Eslaw, who gravely addressed the
emperor of the East in the following words: "Theodosius is the son of an
illustrious and respectable parent: Attila likewise is descended from a
noble race; and he has supported, by his actions, the dignity which
he inherited from his father Mundzuk. But Theodosius has forfeited his
paternal honors, and, by consenting to pay tribute has degraded himself
to the condition of a slave. It is therefore just, that he should
reverence the man whom fortune and merit have placed above him; instead
of attempting, like a wicked slave, clandestinely to conspire against
his master." The son of Arcadius, who was accustomed only to the voice
of flattery, heard with astonishment the severe language of truth: he
blushed and trembled; nor did he presume directly to refuse the head of
Chrysaphius, which Eslaw and Orestes were instructed to demand. A solemn
embassy, armed with full powers and magnificent gifts, was hastily sent
to deprecate the wrath of Attila; and his pride was gratified by the
choice of Nomius and Anatolius, two ministers of consular or
patrician rank, of whom the one was great treasurer, and the other was
master-general of the armies of the East. He condescended to meet these
ambassadors on the banks of the River Drenco; and though he at first
affected a stern and haughty demeanor, his anger was insensibly
mollified by their eloquence and liberality. He condescended to pardon
the emperor, the eunuch, and the interpreter; bound himself by an oath
to observe the conditions of peace; released a great number of captives;
abandoned the fugitives and deserters to their fate; and resigned
a large territory, to the south of the Danube, which he had already
exhausted of its wealth and inhabitants. But this treaty was purchased
at an expense which might have supported a vigorous and successful war;
and the subjects of Theodosius were compelled to redeem the safety of a
worthless favorite by oppressive taxes, which they would more cheerfully
have paid for his destruction. [49]

[Footnote 48: M. de Tillemont has very properly given the succession of
chamberlains, who reigned in the name of Theodosius. Chrysaphius was the
last, and, according to the unanimous evidence of history, the worst
of these favorites, (see Hist. des Empereurs, tom. vi. p. 117-119.
Mem. Eccles. tom. xv. p. 438.) His partiality for his godfather the
heresiarch Eutyches, engaged him to persecute the orthodox party]

[Footnote 49: This secret conspiracy and its important consequences, may
be traced in the fragments of Priscus, p. 37, 38, 39, 54, 70, 71, 72.
The chronology of that historian is not fixed by any precise date; but
the series of negotiations between Attila and the Eastern empire must be
included within the three or four years which are terminated, A.D. 450.
by the death of Theodosius.]

The emperor Theodosius did not long survive the most humiliating
circumstance of an inglorious life. As he was riding, or hunting, in the
neighborhood of Constantinople, he was thrown from his horse into the
River Lycus: the spine of the back was injured by the fall; and he
expired some days afterwards, in the fiftieth year of his age, and the
forty-third of his reign. [50] His sister Pulcheria, whose authority
had been controlled both in civil and ecclesiastical affairs by the
pernicious influence of the eunuchs, was unanimously proclaimed Empress
of the East; and the Romans, for the first time, submitted to a female
reign. No sooner had Pulcheria ascended the throne, than she indulged
her own and the public resentment, by an act of popular justice. Without
any legal trial, the eunuch Chrysaphius was executed before the gates
of the city; and the immense riches which had been accumulated by the
rapacious favorite, served only to hasten and to justify his punishment.
[51] Amidst the general acclamations of the clergy and people, the
empress did not forget the prejudice and disadvantage to which her sex
was exposed; and she wisely resolved to prevent their murmurs by the
choice of a colleague, who would always respect the superior rank and
virgin chastity of his wife. She gave her hand to Marcian, a senator,
about sixty years of age; and the nominal husband of Pulcheria was
solemnly invested with the Imperial purple. The zeal which he displayed
for the orthodox creed, as it was established by the council of
Chalcedon, would alone have inspired the grateful eloquence of the
Catholics. But the behavior of Marcian in a private life, and afterwards
on the throne, may support a more rational belief, that he was qualified
to restore and invigorate an empire, which had been almost dissolved
by the successive weakness of two hereditary monarchs. He was born in
Thrace, and educated to the profession of arms; but Marcian's youth
had been severely exercised by poverty and misfortune, since his only
resource, when he first arrived at Constantinople, consisted in two
hundred pieces of gold, which he had borrowed of a friend. He passed
nineteen years in the domestic and military service of Aspar, and his
son Ardaburius; followed those powerful generals to the Persian and
African wars; and obtained, by their influence, the honorable rank of
tribune and senator. His mild disposition, and useful talents, without
alarming the jealousy, recommended Marcian to the esteem and favor of
his patrons; he had seen, perhaps he had felt, the abuses of a venal and
oppressive administration; and his own example gave weight and energy to
the laws, which he promulgated for the reformation of manners. [52]

[Footnote 50: Theodorus the Reader, (see Vales. Hist. Eccles. tom. iii.
p. 563,) and the Paschal Chronicle, mention the fall, without specifying
the injury: but the consequence was so likely to happen, and so unlikely
to be invented, that we may safely give credit to Nicephorus Callistus,
a Greek of the fourteenth century.]

[Footnote 51: Pulcheriae nutu (says Count Marcellinus) sua cum avaritia
interemptus est. She abandoned the eunuch to the pious revenge of a
son, whose father had suffered at his instigation. Note: Might not the
execution of Chrysaphius have been a sacrifice to avert the anger of
Attila, whose assassination the eunuch had attempted to contrive?--M.]

[Footnote 52: de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 4. Evagrius, l. ii. c. 1.
Theophanes, p. 90, 91. Novell. ad Calcem. Cod. Theod. tom. vi. p. 30.
The praises which St. Leo and the Catholics have bestowed on Marcian,
are diligently transcribed by Baronius, as an encouragement for future
princes.]




