## Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.--Part I.

     Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.--Birth,
     Character, And Doctrine Of Mahomet.--He Preaches At Mecca.--
     Flies To Medina.--Propagates His Religion By The Sword.--
     Voluntary Or Reluctant Submission Of The Arabs.--His Death
     And Successors.--The Claims And Fortunes Of Ali And His
     Descendants.

After pursuing above six hundred years the fleeting Caesars of
Constantinople and Germany, I now descend, in the reign of Heraclius, on
the eastern borders of the Greek monarchy. While the state was exhausted
by the Persian war, and the church was distracted by the Nestorian and
Monophysite sects, Mahomet, with the sword in one hand and the Koran in
the other, erected his throne on the ruins of Christianity and of Rome.
The genius of the Arabian prophet, the manners of his nation, and the
spirit of his religion, involve the causes of the decline and fall of
the Eastern empire; and our eyes are curiously intent on one of the most
memorable revolutions, which have impressed a new and lasting character
on the nations of the globe. [1]

[Footnote 1: As in this and the following chapter I shall display much
Arabic learning, I must profess my total ignorance of the Oriental
tongues, and my gratitude to the learned interpreters, who have
transfused their science into the Latin, French, and English languages.
Their collections, versions, and histories, I shall occasionally
notice.]

In the vacant space between Persia, Syria, Egypt, and Aethiopia, the
Arabian peninsula [2] may be conceived as a triangle of spacious but
irregular dimensions. From the northern point of Beles [3] on the
Euphrates, a line of fifteen hundred miles is terminated by the Straits
of Bebelmandel and the land of frankincense. About half this length may
be allowed for the middle breadth, from east to west, from Bassora
to Suez, from the Persian Gulf to the Red Sea. [4] The sides of the
triangle are gradually enlarged, and the southern basis presents a
front of a thousand miles to the Indian Ocean. The entire surface of the
peninsula exceeds in a fourfold proportion that of Germany or France;
but the far greater part has been justly stigmatized with the epithets
of the stony and the sandy. Even the wilds of Tartary are decked, by the
hand of nature, with lofty trees and luxuriant herbage; and the lonesome
traveller derives a sort of comfort and society from the presence of
vegetable life. But in the dreary waste of Arabia, a boundless level of
sand is intersected by sharp and naked mountains; and the face of the
desert, without shade or shelter, is scorched by the direct and intense
rays of a tropical sun. Instead of refreshing breezes, the winds,
particularly from the south-west, diffuse a noxious and even deadly
vapor; the hillocks of sand which they alternately raise and scatter,
are compared to the billows of the ocean, and whole caravans, whole
armies, have been lost and buried in the whirlwind. The common benefits
of water are an object of desire and contest; and such is the scarcity
of wood, that some art is requisite to preserve and propagate the
element of fire. Arabia is destitute of navigable rivers, which
fertilize the soil, and convey its produce to the adjacent regions: the
torrents that fall from the hills are imbibed by the thirsty earth: the
rare and hardy plants, the tamarind or the acacia, that strike their
roots into the clefts of the rocks, are nourished by the dews of the
night: a scanty supply of rain is collected in cisterns and aqueducts:
the wells and springs are the secret treasure of the desert; and the
pilgrim of Mecca, [5] after many a dry and sultry march, is disgusted by
the taste of the waters which have rolled over a bed of sulphur or salt.
Such is the general and genuine picture of the climate of Arabia.
The experience of evil enhances the value of any local or partial
enjoyments. A shady grove, a green pasture, a stream of fresh water, are
sufficient to attract a colony of sedentary Arabs to the fortunate spots
which can afford food and refreshment to themselves and their cattle,
and which encourage their industry in the cultivation of the palmtree
and the vine. The high lands that border on the Indian Ocean are
distinguished by their superior plenty of wood and water; the air is
more temperate, the fruits are more delicious, the animals and the human
race more numerous: the fertility of the soil invites and rewards the
toil of the husbandman; and the peculiar gifts of frankincense [6] and
coffee have attracted in different ages the merchants of the world. If
it be compared with the rest of the peninsula, this sequestered region
may truly deserve the appellation of the happy; and the splendid
coloring of fancy and fiction has been suggested by contrast, and
countenanced by distance. It was for this earthly paradise that Nature
had reserved her choicest favors and her most curious workmanship: the
incompatible blessings of luxury and innocence were ascribed to the
natives: the soil was impregnated with gold [7] and gems, and both the
land and sea were taught to exhale the odors of aromatic sweets. This
division of the sandy, the stony, and the happy, so familiar to the
Greeks and Latins, is unknown to the Arabians themselves; and it is
singular enough, that a country, whose language and inhabitants have
ever been the same, should scarcely retain a vestige of its ancient
geography. The maritime districts of Bahrein and Oman are opposite to
the realm of Persia. The kingdom of Yemen displays the limits, or at
least the situation, of Arabia Felix: the name of Neged is extended over
the inland space; and the birth of Mahomet has illustrated the province
of Hejaz along the coast of the Red Sea. [8]

[Footnote 2: The geographers of Arabia may be divided into three
classes: 1. The Greeks and Latins, whose progressive knowledge may be
traced in Agatharcides, (de Mari Rubro, in Hudson, Geograph. Minor. tom.
i.,) Diodorus Siculus, (tom. i. l. ii. p. 159-167, l. iii. p. 211-216,
edit. Wesseling,) Strabo, (l. xvi. p. 1112-1114, from Eratosthenes, p.
1122-1132, from Artemidorus,) Dionysius, (Periegesis, 927-969,) Pliny,
(Hist. Natur. v. 12, vi. 32,) and Ptolemy, (Descript. et Tabulae Urbium,
in Hudson, tom. iii.) 2. The Arabic writers, who have treated the
subject with the zeal of patriotism or devotion: the extracts of Pocock
(Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 125-128) from the Geography of the Sherif
al Edrissi, render us still more dissatisfied with the version or
abridgment (p. 24-27, 44-56, 108, &c., 119, &c.) which the Maronites
have published under the absurd title of Geographia Nubiensis, (Paris,
1619;) but the Latin and French translators, Greaves (in Hudson, tom.
iii.) and Galland, (Voyage de la Palestine par La Roque, p. 265-346,)
have opened to us the Arabia of Abulfeda, the most copious and correct
account of the peninsula, which may be enriched, however, from the
Bibliotheque Orientale of D'Herbelot, p. 120, et alibi passim. 3.
The European travellers; among whom Shaw (p. 438-455) and Niebuhr
(Description, 1773; Voyages, tom. i. 1776) deserve an honorable
distinction: Busching (Geographie par Berenger, tom. viii. p. 416-510)
has compiled with judgment, and D'Anville's Maps (Orbis Veteribus
Notus, and 1re Partie de l'Asie) should lie before the reader, with his
Geographie Ancienne, tom. ii. p. 208-231. * Note: Of modern travellers
may be mentioned the adventurer who called himself Ali Bey; but above
all, the intelligent, the enterprising the accurate Burckhardt.--M.]

[Footnote 3: Abulfed. Descript. Arabiae, p. 1. D'Anville, l'Euphrate et
le Tigre, p. 19, 20. It was in this place, the paradise or garden of
a satrap, that Xenophon and the Greeks first passed the Euphrates,
(Anabasis, l. i. c. 10, p. 29, edit. Wells.)]

[Footnote 4: Reland has proved, with much superfluous learning,

1. That our Red Sea (the Arabian Gulf) is no more than a part of the
Mare Rubrum, which was extended to the indefinite space of the Indian
Ocean.

2. That the synonymous words, allude to the color of the blacks or
negroes, (Dissert Miscell. tom. i. p. 59-117.)]

[Footnote 5: In the thirty days, or stations, between Cairo and Mecca,
there are fifteen destitute of good water. See the route of the Hadjees,
in Shaw's Travels, p. 477.]

[Footnote 6: The aromatics, especially the thus, or frankincense, of
Arabia, occupy the xiith book of Pliny. Our great poet (Paradise Lost,
l. iv.) introduces, in a simile, the spicy odors that are blown by the
north-east wind from the Sabaean coast:----Many a league, Pleased with
the grateful scent, old Ocean smiles. (Plin. Hist. Natur. xii. 42.)]

[Footnote 7: Agatharcides affirms, that lumps of pure gold were found,
from the size of an olive to that of a nut; that iron was twice, and
silver ten times, the value of gold, (de Mari Rubro, p. 60.) These real
or imaginary treasures are vanished; and no gold mines are at present
known in Arabia, (Niebuhr, Description, p. 124.) * Note: A brilliant
passage in the geographical poem of Dionysius Periegetes embodies the
notions of the ancients on the wealth and fertility of Yemen. Greek
mythology, and the traditions of the "gorgeous east," of India as well
as Arabia, are mingled together in indiscriminate splendor. Compare on
the southern coast of Arabia, the recent travels of Lieut. Wellsted--M.]

[Footnote 8: Consult, peruse, and study the Specimen Hostoriae Arabum of
Pocock, (Oxon. 1650, in 4to.) The thirty pages of text and version are
extracted from the Dynasties of Gregory Abulpharagius, which Pocock
afterwards translated, (Oxon. 1663, in 4to.;) the three hundred and
fifty-eight notes form a classic and original work on the Arabian
antiquities.]

The measure of population is regulated by the means of subsistence;
and the inhabitants of this vast peninsula might be outnumbered by the
subjects of a fertile and industrious province. Along the shores of the
Persian Gulf, of the ocean, and even of the Red Sea, the Icthyophagi,
[9] or fish eaters, continued to wander in quest of their precarious
food. In this primitive and abject state, which ill deserves the name of
society, the human brute, without arts or laws, almost without sense or
language, is poorly distinguished from the rest of the animal creation.
Generations and ages might roll away in silent oblivion, and the
helpless savage was restrained from multiplying his race by the wants
and pursuits which confined his existence to the narrow margin of the
seacoast. But in an early period of antiquity the great body of the
Arabs had emerged from this scene of misery; and as the naked wilderness
could not maintain a people of hunters, they rose at once to the more
secure and plentiful condition of the pastoral life. The same life
is uniformly pursued by the roving tribes of the desert; and in the
portrait of the modern Bedoweens, we may trace the features of their
ancestors, [10] who, in the age of Moses or Mahomet, dwelt under similar
tents, and conducted their horses, and camels, and sheep, to the same
springs and the same pastures. Our toil is lessened, and our wealth
is increased, by our dominion over the useful animals; and the Arabian
shepherd had acquired the absolute possession of a faithful friend and
a laborious slave. [11] Arabia, in the opinion of the naturalist, is the
genuine and original country of the horse; the climate most propitious,
not indeed to the size, but to the spirit and swiftness, of that
generous animal. The merit of the Barb, the Spanish, and the English
breed, is derived from a mixture of Arabian blood: [12] the Bedoweens
preserve, with superstitious care, the honors and the memory of the
purest race: the males are sold at a high price, but the females are
seldom alienated; and the birth of a noble foal was esteemed among the
tribes, as a subject of joy and mutual congratulation. These horses are
educated in the tents, among the children of the Arabs, with a
tender familiarity, which trains them in the habits of gentleness
and attachment. They are accustomed only to walk and to gallop: their
sensations are not blunted by the incessant abuse of the spur and the
whip: their powers are reserved for the moments of flight and pursuit:
but no sooner do they feel the touch of the hand or the stirrup, than
they dart away with the swiftness of the wind; and if their friend
be dismounted in the rapid career, they instantly stop till he has
recovered his seat. In the sands of Africa and Arabia, the camel is a
sacred and precious gift. That strong and patient beast of burden can
perform, without eating or drinking, a journey of several days; and a
reservoir of fresh water is preserved in a large bag, a fifth stomach
of the animal, whose body is imprinted with the marks of servitude: the
larger breed is capable of transporting a weight of a thousand pounds;
and the dromedary, of a lighter and more active frame, outstrips the
fleetest courser in the race. Alive or dead, almost every part of the
camel is serviceable to man: her milk is plentiful and nutritious: the
young and tender flesh has the taste of veal: [13] a valuable salt is
extracted from the urine: the dung supplies the deficiency of fuel;
and the long hair, which falls each year and is renewed, is coarsely
manufactured into the garments, the furniture, and the tents of the
Bedoweens. In the rainy seasons, they consume the rare and insufficient
herbage of the desert: during the heats of summer and the scarcity of
winter, they remove their encampments to the sea-coast, the hills of
Yemen, or the neighborhood of the Euphrates, and have often extorted the
dangerous license of visiting the banks of the Nile, and the villages
of Syria and Palestine. The life of a wandering Arab is a life of
danger and distress; and though sometimes, by rapine or exchange, he may
appropriate the fruits of industry, a private citizen in Europe is in
the possession of more solid and pleasing luxury than the proudest emir,
who marches in the field at the head of ten thousand horse.

[Footnote 9: Arrian remarks the Icthyophagi of the coast of Hejez,
(Periplus Maris Erythraei, p. 12,) and beyond Aden, (p. 15.) It seems
probable that the shores of the Red Sea (in the largest sense) were
occupied by these savages in the time, perhaps, of Cyrus; but I can
hardly believe that any cannibals were left among the savages in the
reign of Justinian. (Procop. de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 19.)]

[Footnote 10: See the Specimen Historiae Arabum of Pocock, p. 2, 5, 86,
&c. The journey of M. d'Arvieux, in 1664, to the camp of the emir of
Mount Carmel, (Voyage de la Palestine, Amsterdam, 1718,) exhibits a
pleasing and original picture of the life of the Bedoweens, which may
be illustrated from Niebuhr (Description de l'Arabie, p. 327-344) and
Volney, (tom. i. p. 343-385,) the last and most judicious of our Syrian
travellers.]

[Footnote 11: Read (it is no unpleasing task) the incomparable articles
of the Horse and the Camel, in the Natural History of M. de Buffon.]

[Footnote 12: For the Arabian horses, see D'Arvieux (p. 159-173) and
Niebuhr, (p. 142-144.) At the end of the xiiith century, the horses of
Neged were esteemed sure-footed, those of Yemen strong and serviceable,
those of Hejaz most noble. The horses of Europe, the tenth and last
class, were generally despised as having too much body and too little
spirit, (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient. p. 339: ) their strength was
requisite to bear the weight of the knight and his armor]

[Footnote 13: Qui carnibus camelorum vesci solent odii tenaces sunt, was
the opinion of an Arabian physician, (Pocock, Specimen, p. 88.) Mahomet
himself, who was fond of milk, prefers the cow, and does not even
mention the camel; but the diet of Mecca and Medina was already more
luxurious, (Gagnier Vie de Mahomet, tom. iii. p. 404.)]

Yet an essential difference may be found between the hordes of Scythia
and the Arabian tribes; since many of the latter were collected into
towns, and employed in the labors of trade and agriculture. A part of
their time and industry was still devoted to the management of their
cattle: they mingled, in peace and war, with their brethren of the
desert; and the Bedoweens derived from their useful intercourse some
supply of their wants, and some rudiments of art and knowledge. Among
the forty-two cities of Arabia, [14] enumerated by Abulfeda, the most
ancient and populous were situate in the happy Yemen: the towers of
Saana, [15] and the marvellous reservoir of Merab, [16] were constructed
by the kings of the Homerites; but their profane lustre was eclipsed by
the prophetic glories of Medina [17] and Mecca, [18] near the Red Sea,
and at the distance from each other of two hundred and seventy miles.
The last of these holy places was known to the Greeks under the name
of Macoraba; and the termination of the word is expressive of its
greatness, which has not, indeed, in the most flourishing period,
exceeded the size and populousness of Marseilles. Some latent motive,
perhaps of superstition, must have impelled the founders, in the choice
of a most unpromising situation. They erected their habitations of mud
or stone, in a plain about two miles long and one mile broad, at the
foot of three barren mountains: the soil is a rock; the water even of
the holy well of Zemzem is bitter or brackish; the pastures are remote
from the city; and grapes are transported above seventy miles from the
gardens of Tayef. The fame and spirit of the Koreishites, who reigned in
Mecca, were conspicuous among the Arabian tribes; but their ungrateful
soil refused the labors of agriculture, and their position was favorable
to the enterprises of trade. By the seaport of Gedda, at the distance
only of forty miles, they maintained an easy correspondence with
Abyssinia; and that Christian kingdom afforded the first refuge to the
disciples of Mahomet. The treasures of Africa were conveyed over the
Peninsula to Gerrha or Katif, in the province of Bahrein, a city built,
as it is said, of rock-salt, by the Chaldaean exiles; [19] and from
thence with the native pearls of the Persian Gulf, they were floated on
rafts to the mouth of the Euphrates. Mecca is placed almost at an equal
distance, a month's journey, between Yemen on the right, and Syria on
the left hand. The former was the winter, the latter the summer, station
of her caravans; and their seasonable arrival relieved the ships of
India from the tedious and troublesome navigation of the Red Sea. In the
markets of Saana and Merab, in the harbors of Oman and Aden, the camels
of the Koreishites were laden with a precious cargo of aromatics; a
supply of corn and manufactures was purchased in the fairs of Bostra
and Damascus; the lucrative exchange diffused plenty and riches in the
streets of Mecca; and the noblest of her sons united the love of arms
with the profession of merchandise. [20]

[Footnote 14: Yet Marcian of Heraclea (in Periplo, p. 16, in tom. i.
Hudson, Minor. Geograph.) reckons one hundred and sixty-four towns in
Arabia Felix. The size of the towns might be small--the faith of the
writer might be large.]

[Footnote 15: It is compared by Abulfeda (in Hudson, tom. ii. p. 54) to
Damascus, and is still the residence of the Iman of Yemen, (Voyages
de Niebuhr, tom. i. p. 331-342.) Saana is twenty-four parasangs from
Dafar, (Abulfeda, p. 51,) and sixty-eight from Aden, (p. 53.)]

[Footnote 16: Pocock, Specimen, p. 57. Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 52.
Meriaba, or Merab, six miles in circumference, was destroyed by the
legions of Augustus, (Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 32,) and had not revived in
the xivth century, (Abulfed. Descript. Arab. p. 58.) * Note: See note
2 to chap. i. The destruction of Meriaba by the Romans is doubtful. The
town never recovered the inundation which took place from the bursting
of a large reservoir of water--an event of great importance in
the Arabian annals, and discussed at considerable length by modern
Orientalists.--M.]

[Footnote 17: The name of city, Medina, was appropriated, to Yatreb.
(the Iatrippa of the Greeks,) the seat of the prophet. The distances
from Medina are reckoned by Abulfeda in stations, or days' journey of a
caravan, (p. 15: ) to Bahrein, xv.; to Bassora, xviii.; to Cufah, xx.;
to Damascus or Palestine, xx.; to Cairo, xxv.; to Mecca. x.; from Mecca
to Saana, (p. 52,) or Aden, xxx.; to Cairo, xxxi. days, or 412 hours,
(Shaw's Travels, p. 477;) which, according to the estimate of D'Anville,
(Mesures Itineraires, p. 99,) allows about twenty-five English miles
for a day's journey. From the land of frankincense (Hadramaut, in Yemen,
between Aden and Cape Fartasch) to Gaza in Syria, Pliny (Hist. Nat. xii.
32) computes lxv. mansions of camels. These measures may assist fancy
and elucidate facts.]

[Footnote 18: Our notions of Mecca must be drawn from the Arabians,
(D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 368-371. Pocock, Specimen, p.
125-128. Abulfeda, p. 11-40.) As no unbeliever is permitted to enter
the city, our travellers are silent; and the short hints of Thevenot
(Voyages du Levant, part i. p. 490) are taken from the suspicious mouth
of an African renegado. Some Persians counted 6000 houses, (Chardin.
tom. iv. p. 167.) * Note: Even in the time of Gibbon, Mecca had not been
so inaccessible to Europeans. It had been visited by Ludovico Barthema,
and by one Joseph Pitts, of Exeter, who was taken prisoner by the Moors,
and forcibly converted to Mahometanism. His volume is a curious, though
plain, account of his sufferings and travels. Since that time Mecca has
been entered, and the ceremonies witnessed, by Dr. Seetzen, whose papers
were unfortunately lost; by the Spaniard, who called himself Ali Bey;
and, lastly, by Burckhardt, whose description leaves nothing wanting to
satisfy the curiosity.--M.]

[Footnote 19: Strabo, l. xvi. p. 1110. See one of these salt houses near
Bassora, in D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient. p. 6.]

[Footnote 20: Mirum dictu ex innumeris populis pars aequa in commerciis
aut in latrociniis degit, (Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 32.) See Sale's Koran,
Sura. cvi. p. 503. Pocock, Specimen, p. 2. D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient.
p. 361. Prideaux's Life of Mahomet, p. 5. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, tom.
i. p. 72, 120, 126, &c.]

The perpetual independence of the Arabs has been the theme of praise
among strangers and natives; and the arts of controversy transform this
singular event into a prophecy and a miracle, in favor of the posterity
of Ismael. [21] Some exceptions, that can neither be dismissed
nor eluded, render this mode of reasoning as indiscreet as it is
superfluous; the kingdom of Yemen has been successively subdued by the
Abyssinians, the Persians, the sultans of Egypt, [22] and the Turks;
[23] the holy cities of Mecca and Medina have repeatedly bowed under
a Scythian tyrant; and the Roman province of Arabia [24] embraced the
peculiar wilderness in which Ismael and his sons must have pitched their
tents in the face of their brethren. Yet these exceptions are temporary
or local; the body of the nation has escaped the yoke of the most
powerful monarchies: the arms of Sesostris and Cyrus, of Pompey
and Trajan, could never achieve the conquest of Arabia; the present
sovereign of the Turks [25] may exercise a shadow of jurisdiction, but
his pride is reduced to solicit the friendship of a people, whom it is
dangerous to provoke, and fruitless to attack. The obvious causes of
their freedom are inscribed on the character and country of the Arabs.
Many ages before Mahomet, [26] their intrepid valor had been severely
felt by their neighbors in offensive and defensive war. The patient
and active virtues of a soldier are insensibly nursed in the habits
and discipline of a pastoral life. The care of the sheep and camels is
abandoned to the women of the tribe; but the martial youth, under the
banner of the emir, is ever on horseback, and in the field, to practise
the exercise of the bow, the javelin, and the cimeter. The long memory
of their independence is the firmest pledge of its perpetuity and
succeeding generations are animated to prove their descent, and to
maintain their inheritance. Their domestic feuds are suspended on the
approach of a common enemy; and in their last hostilities against the
Turks, the caravan of Mecca was attacked and pillaged by fourscore
thousand of the confederates. When they advance to battle, the hope of
victory is in the front; in the rear, the assurance of a retreat. Their
horses and camels, who, in eight or ten days, can perform a march of
four or five hundred miles, disappear before the conqueror; the secret
waters of the desert elude his search, and his victorious troops
are consumed with thirst, hunger, and fatigue, in the pursuit of an
invisible foe, who scorns his efforts, and safely reposes in the heart
of the burning solitude. The arms and deserts of the Bedoweens are not
only the safeguards of their own freedom, but the barriers also of the
happy Arabia, whose inhabitants, remote from war, are enervated by the
luxury of the soil and climate. The legions of Augustus melted away in
disease and lassitude; [27] and it is only by a naval power that the
reduction of Yemen has been successfully attempted. When Mahomet erected
his holy standard, [28] that kingdom was a province of the Persian
empire; yet seven princes of the Homerites still reigned in the
mountains; and the vicegerent of Chosroes was tempted to forget his
distant country and his unfortunate master. The historians of the age of
Justinian represent the state of the independent Arabs, who were divided
by interest or affection in the long quarrel of the East: the tribe of
Gassan was allowed to encamp on the Syrian territory: the princes of
Hira were permitted to form a city about forty miles to the southward
of the ruins of Babylon. Their service in the field was speedy and
vigorous; but their friendship was venal, their faith inconstant, their
enmity capricious: it was an easier task to excite than to disarm these
roving barbarians; and, in the familiar intercourse of war, they learned
to see, and to despise, the splendid weakness both of Rome and of
Persia. From Mecca to the Euphrates, the Arabian tribes [29] were
confounded by the Greeks and Latins, under the general appellation of
Saracens, [30] a name which every Christian mouth has been taught to
pronounce with terror and abhorrence.

[Footnote 21: A nameless doctor (Universal Hist. vol. xx. octavo
edition) has formally demonstrated the truth of Christianity by the
independence of the Arabs. A critic, besides the exceptions of fact,
might dispute the meaning of the text (Gen. xvi. 12,) the extent of the
application, and the foundation of the pedigree. * Note: See note 3 to
chap. xlvi. The atter point is probably the least contestable of the
three.--M.]

[Footnote 22: It was subdued, A.D. 1173, by a brother of the great
Saladin, who founded a dynasty of Curds or Ayoubites, (Guignes, Hist.
des Huns, tom. i. p. 425. D'Herbelot, p. 477.)]

[Footnote 23: By the lieutenant of Soliman I. (A.D. 1538) and Selim
II., (1568.) See Cantemir's Hist. of the Othman Empire, p. 201, 221. The
pacha, who resided at Saana, commanded twenty-one beys; but no revenue
was ever remitted to the Porte, (Marsigli, Stato Militare dell' Imperio
Ottomanno, p. 124,) and the Turks were expelled about the year 1630,
(Niebuhr, p. 167, 168.)]

[Footnote 24: Of the Roman province, under the name of Arabia and the
third Palestine, the principal cities were Bostra and Petra, which
dated their aera from the year 105, when they were subdued by Palma, a
lieutenant of Trajan, (Dion. Cassius, l. lxviii.) Petra was the capital
of the Nabathaeans; whose name is derived from the eldest of the sons
of Ismael, (Gen. xxv. 12, &c., with the Commentaries of Jerom, Le Clerc,
and Calmet.) Justinian relinquished a palm country of ten days' journey
to the south of Aelah, (Procop. de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 19,) and the
Romans maintained a centurion and a custom-house, (Arrian in Periplo
Maris Erythraei, p. 11, in Hudson, tom. i.,) at a place (Pagus Albus,
Hawara) in the territory of Medina, (D'Anville, Memoire sur l'Egypte, p.
243.) These real possessions, and some naval inroads of Trajan, (Peripl.
p. 14, 15,) are magnified by history and medals into the Roman conquest
of Arabia. * Note: On the ruins of Petra, see the travels of Messrs.
Irby and Mangles, and of Leon de Laborde.--M.]

[Footnote 25: Niebuhr (Description de l'Arabie, p. 302, 303, 329-331)
affords the most recent and authentic intelligence of the Turkish empire
in Arabia. * Note: Niebuhr's, notwithstanding the multitude of later
travellers, maintains its ground, as the classical work on Arabia.--M.]

[Footnote 26: Diodorus Siculus (tom. ii. l. xix. p. 390-393, edit.
Wesseling) has clearly exposed the freedom of the Nabathaean Arabs, who
resisted the arms of Antigonus and his son.]

[Footnote 27: Strabo, l. xvi. p. 1127-1129. Plin. Hist. Natur. vi. 32.
Aelius Gallus landed near Medina, and marched near a thousand miles into
the part of Yemen between Mareb and the Ocean. The non ante devictis
Sabeae regibus, (Od. i. 29,) and the intacti Arabum thesanri (Od. iii.
24) of Horace, attest the virgin purity of Arabia.]

[Footnote 28: See the imperfect history of Yemen in Pocock, Specimen, p.
55-66, of Hira, p. 66-74, of Gassan, p. 75-78, as far as it could be
known or preserved in the time of ignorance. * Note: Compare the
Hist. Yemanae, published by Johannsen at Bonn 1880 particularly the
translator's preface.--M.]

[Footnote 29: They are described by Menander, (Excerpt. Legation p.
149,) Procopius, (de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 17, 19, l. ii. c. 10,) and,
in the most lively colors, by Ammianus Marcellinus, (l. xiv. c. 4,) who
had spoken of them as early as the reign of Marcus.]

[Footnote 30: The name which, used by Ptolemy and Pliny in a more
confined, by Ammianus and Procopius in a larger, sense, has been
derived, ridiculously, from Sarah, the wife of Abraham, obscurely from
the village of Saraka, (Stephan. de Urbibus,) more plausibly from the
Arabic words, which signify a thievish character, or Oriental situation,
(Hottinger, Hist. Oriental. l. i. c. i. p. 7, 8. Pocock, Specimen, p.
33, 35. Asseman. Bibliot. Orient. tom. iv. p. 567.) Yet the last and
most popular of these etymologies is refuted by Ptolemy, (Arabia, p. 2,
18, in Hudson, tom. iv.,) who expressly remarks the western and southern
position of the Saracens, then an obscure tribe on the borders of Egypt.
The appellation cannot therefore allude to any national character; and,
since it was imposed by strangers, it must be found, not in the Arabic,
but in a foreign language. * Note: Dr. Clarke, (Travels, vol. ii. p.
491,) after expressing contemptuous pity for Gibbon's ignorance, derives
the word from Zara, Zaara, Sara, the Desert, whence Saraceni, the
children of the Desert. De Marles adopts the derivation from Sarrik, a
robber, (Hist. des Arabes, vol. i. p. 36, S.L. Martin from Scharkioun,
or Sharkun, Eastern, vol. xi. p. 55.)--M.]




