## Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.--Part II.

Pestilence and famine contributed to fill up the measure of the
calamities of Rome. [25] The first could be only imputed to the just
indignation of the gods; but a monopoly of corn, supported by the riches
and power of the minister, was considered as the immediate cause of
the second. The popular discontent, after it had long circulated in
whispers, broke out in the assembled circus. The people quitted their
favorite amusements for the more delicious pleasure of revenge,
rushed in crowds towards a palace in the suburbs, one of the emperor's
retirements, and demanded, with angry clamors, the head of the public
enemy. Cleander, who commanded the Praetorian guards, [26] ordered a body
of cavalry to sally forth, and disperse the seditious multitude. The
multitude fled with precipitation towards the city; several were slain,
and many more were trampled to death; but when the cavalry entered the
streets, their pursuit was checked by a shower of stones and darts from
the roofs and windows of the houses. The foot guards, [27] who had
been long jealous of the prerogatives and insolence of the Praetorian
cavalry, embraced the party of the people. The tumult became a regular
engagement, and threatened a general massacre. The Praetorians, at
length, gave way, oppressed with numbers; and the tide of popular fury
returned with redoubled violence against the gates of the palace, where
Commodus lay, dissolved in luxury, and alone unconscious of the civil
war. It was death to approach his person with the unwelcome news. He
would have perished in this supine security, had not two women, his
eldest sister Fadilla, and Marcia, the most favored of his concubines,
ventured to break into his presence. Bathed in tears, and with
dishevelled hair, they threw themselves at his feet; and with all the
pressing eloquence of fear, discovered to the affrighted emperor the
crimes of the minister, the rage of the people, and the impending
ruin, which, in a few minutes, would burst over his palace and person.
Commodus started from his dream of pleasure, and commanded that the head
of Cleander should be thrown out to the people. The desired spectacle
instantly appeased the tumult; and the son of Marcus might even yet have
regained the affection and confidence of his subjects. [28]

[Footnote 25: Herodian, l. i. p. 28. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1215. The
latter says that two thousand persons died every day at Rome, during a
considerable length of time.]

[Footnote 26: Tuneque primum tres praefecti praetorio fuere: inter quos
libertinus. From some remains of modesty, Cleander declined the title,
whilst he assumed the powers, of Praetorian praefect. As the other
freedmen were styled, from their several departments, a rationibus,
ab epistolis, Cleander called himself a pugione, as intrusted with the
defence of his master's person. Salmasius and Casaubon seem to have
talked very idly upon this passage. * Note: M. Guizot denies that
Lampridius means Cleander as praefect a pugione. The Libertinus seems to
me to mean him.--M.]

[Footnote 27: Herodian, l. i. p. 31. It is doubtful whether he means
the Praetorian infantry, or the cohortes urbanae, a body of six thousand
men, but whose rank and discipline were not equal to their numbers.
Neither Tillemont nor Wotton choose to decide this question.]

[Footnote 28: Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1215. Herodian, l. i. p. 32.
Hist. August. p. 48.]

But every sentiment of virtue and humanity was extinct in the mind of
Commodus. Whilst he thus abandoned the reins of empire to these unworthy
favorites, he valued nothing in sovereign power, except the unbounded
license of indulging his sensual appetites. His hours were spent in a
seraglio of three hundred beautiful women, and as many boys, of every
rank, and of every province; and, wherever the arts of seduction proved
ineffectual, the brutal lover had recourse to violence. The
ancient historians [29] have expatiated on these abandoned scenes of
prostitution, which scorned every restraint of nature or modesty; but it
would not be easy to translate their too faithful descriptions into the
decency of modern language. The intervals of lust were filled up with
the basest amusements. The influence of a polite age, and the labor of
an attentive education, had never been able to infuse into his rude and
brutish mind the least tincture of learning; and he was the first of
the Roman emperors totally devoid of taste for the pleasures of the
understanding. Nero himself excelled, or affected to excel, in the
elegant arts of music and poetry: nor should we despise his pursuits,
had he not converted the pleasing relaxation of a leisure hour into
the serious business and ambition of his life. But Commodus, from his
earliest infancy, discovered an aversion to whatever was rational or
liberal, and a fond attachment to the amusements of the populace; the
sports of the circus and amphitheatre, the combats of gladiators, and
the hunting of wild beasts. The masters in every branch of learning,
whom Marcus provided for his son, were heard with inattention and
disgust; whilst the Moors and Parthians, who taught him to dart the
javelin and to shoot with the bow, found a disciple who delighted in his
application, and soon equalled the most skilful of his instructors in
the steadiness of the eye and the dexterity of the hand.

[Footnote 29: Sororibus suis constupratis. Ipsas concubinas suas sub
oculis...stuprari jubebat. Nec irruentium in se juvenum carebat infamia,
omni parte corporis atque ore in sexum utrumque pollutus. Hist. Aug. p.
47.]

The servile crowd, whose fortune depended on their master's vices,
applauded these ignoble pursuits. The perfidious voice of flattery
reminded him, that by exploits of the same nature, by the defeat of the
Nemaean lion, and the slaughter of the wild boar of Erymanthus, the
Grecian Hercules had acquired a place among the gods, and an immortal
memory among men. They only forgot to observe, that, in the first ages
of society, when the fiercer animals often dispute with man the
possession of an unsettled country, a successful war against those
savages is one of the most innocent and beneficial labors of heroism. In
the civilized state of the Roman empire, the wild beasts had long since
retired from the face of man, and the neighborhood of populous cities.
To surprise them in their solitary haunts, and to transport them to
Rome, that they might be slain in pomp by the hand of an emperor, was an
enterprise equally ridiculous for the prince and oppressive for the
people. [30] Ignorant of these distinctions, Commodus eagerly embraced
the glorious resemblance, and styled himself (as we still read on his
medals [31] the Roman Hercules. [311] The club and the lion's hide were
placed by the side of the throne, amongst the ensigns of sovereignty;
and statues were erected, in which Commodus was represented in the
character, and with the attributes, of the god, whose valor and
dexterity he endeavored to emulate in the daily course of his ferocious
amusements. [32]

[Footnote 30: The African lions, when pressed by hunger, infested the open
villages and cultivated country; and they infested them with impunity.
The royal beast was reserved for the pleasures of the emperor and the
capital; and the unfortunate peasant who killed one of them though
in his own defence, incurred a very heavy penalty. This extraordinary
game-law was mitigated by Honorius, and finally repealed by Justinian.
Codex Theodos. tom. v. p. 92, et Comment Gothofred.]

[Footnote 31: Spanheim de Numismat. Dissertat. xii. tom. ii. p. 493.]

[Footnote 311: Commodus placed his own head on the colossal statue of
Hercules with the inscription, Lucius Commodus Hercules. The wits of
Rome, according to a new fragment of Dion, published an epigram, of
which, like many other ancient jests, the point is not very clear.
It seems to be a protest of the god against being confounded with the
emperor. Mai Fragm. Vatican. ii. 225.--M.]

[Footnote 32: Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1216. Hist. August. p. 49.]

Elated with these praises, which gradually extinguished the innate sense
of shame, Commodus resolved to exhibit before the eyes of the Roman
people those exercises, which till then he had decently confined within
the walls of his palace, and to the presence of a few favorites. On the
appointed day, the various motives of flattery, fear, and curiosity,
attracted to the amphitheatre an innumerable multitude of spectators;
and some degree of applause was deservedly bestowed on the uncommon
skill of the Imperial performer. Whether he aimed at the head or heart
of the animal, the wound was alike certain and mortal. With arrows whose
point was shaped into the form of crescent, Commodus often intercepted
the rapid career, and cut asunder the long, bony neck of the ostrich.
[33] A panther was let loose; and the archer waited till he had leaped
upon a trembling malefactor. In the same instant the shaft flew, the
beast dropped dead, and the man remained unhurt. The dens of the
amphitheatre disgorged at once a hundred lions: a hundred darts from the
unerring hand of Commodus laid them dead as they run raging round the
Arena. Neither the huge bulk of the elephant, nor the scaly hide of the
rhinoceros, could defend them from his stroke. Aethiopia and India
yielded their most extraordinary productions; and several animals were
slain in the amphitheatre, which had been seen only in the
representations of art, or perhaps of fancy. [34] In all these
exhibitions, the securest precautions were used to protect the person of
the Roman Hercules from the desperate spring of any savage, who might
possibly disregard the dignity of the emperor and the sanctity of the
god. [35]

[Footnote 33: The ostrich's neck is three feet long, and composed of
seventeen vertebrae. See Buffon, Hist. Naturelle.]

[Footnote 34: Commodus killed a camelopardalis or Giraffe, (Dion, l.
lxxii. p. 1211,) the tallest, the most gentle, and the most useless
of the large quadrupeds. This singular animal, a native only of the
interior parts of Africa, has not been seen in Europe since the revival
of letters; and though M. de Buffon (Hist. Naturelle, tom. xiii.) has
endeavored to describe, he has not ventured to delineate, the Giraffe. *
Note: The naturalists of our days have been more fortunate. London
probably now contains more specimens of this animal than have been seen
in Europe since the fall of the Roman empire, unless in the pleasure
gardens of the emperor Frederic II., in Sicily, which possessed several.
Frederic's collections of wild beasts were exhibited, for the popular
amusement, in many parts of Italy. Raumer, Geschichte der Hohenstaufen,
v. iii. p. 571. Gibbon, moreover, is mistaken; as a giraffe was
presented to Lorenzo de Medici, either by the sultan of Egypt or the
king of Tunis. Contemporary authorities are quoted in the old work,
Gesner de Quadrupedibum p. 162.--M.]

[Footnote 35: Herodian, l. i. p. 37. Hist. August. p. 50.]

But the meanest of the populace were affected with shame and indignation
when they beheld their sovereign enter the lists as a gladiator, and
glory in a profession which the laws and manners of the Romans had
branded with the justest note of infamy. [36] He chose the habit and
arms of the Secutor, whose combat with the Retiarius formed one of the
most lively scenes in the bloody sports of the amphitheatre. The Secutor
was armed with a helmet, sword, and buckler; his naked antagonist had
only a large net and a trident; with the one he endeavored to entangle,
with the other to despatch his enemy. If he missed the first throw, he
was obliged to fly from the pursuit of the Secutor, till he had prepared
his net for a second cast. [37] The emperor fought in this character
seven hundred and thirty-five several times. These glorious achievements
were carefully recorded in the public acts of the empire; and that he
might omit no circumstance of infamy, he received from the common fund
of gladiators a stipend so exorbitant that it became a new and most
ignominious tax upon the Roman people. [38] It may be easily supposed,
that in these engagements the master of the world was always successful;
in the amphitheatre, his victories were not often sanguinary; but when
he exercised his skill in the school of gladiators, or his own palace,
his wretched antagonists were frequently honored with a mortal wound
from the hand of Commodus, and obliged to seal their flattery with their
blood. [39] He now disdained the appellation of Hercules. The name of
Paulus, a celebrated Secutor, was the only one which delighted his ear.
It was inscribed on his colossal statues, and repeated in the redoubled
acclamations [40] of the mournful and applauding senate. [41] Claudius
Pompeianus, the virtuous husband of Lucilla, was the only senator who
asserted the honor of his rank. As a father, he permitted his sons to
consult their safety by attending the amphitheatre. As a Roman, he
declared, that his own life was in the emperor's hands, but that he
would never behold the son of Marcus prostituting his person and
dignity. Notwithstanding his manly resolution Pompeianus escaped the
resentment of the tyrant, and, with his honor, had the good fortune to
preserve his life. [42]

[Footnote 36: The virtuous and even the wise princes forbade the
senators and knights to embrace this scandalous profession, under pain
of infamy, or, what was more dreaded by those profligate wretches, of
exile. The tyrants allured them to dishonor by threats and rewards.
Nero once produced in the arena forty senators and sixty knights. See
Lipsius, Saturnalia, l. ii. c. 2. He has happily corrected a passage
of Suetonius in Nerone, c. 12.]

[Footnote 37: Lipsius, l. ii. c. 7, 8. Juvenal, in the eighth satire,
gives a picturesque description of this combat.]

[Footnote 38: Hist. August. p. 50. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1220. He received,
for each time, decies, about 8000l. sterling.]

[Footnote 39: Victor tells us, that Commodus only allowed his
antagonists a...weapon, dreading most probably the consequences of their
despair.]

[Footnote 40: They were obliged to repeat, six hundred and twenty-six
times, Paolus first of the Secutors, &c.]

[Footnote 41: Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1221. He speaks of his own baseness and
danger.]

[Footnote 42: He mixed, however, some prudence with his courage, and
passed the greatest part of his time in a country retirement; alleging
his advanced age, and the weakness of his eyes. "I never saw him in the
senate," says Dion, "except during the short reign of Pertinax." All his
infirmities had suddenly left him, and they returned as suddenly upon
the murder of that excellent prince. Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1227.]

Commodus had now attained the summit of vice and infamy. Amidst the
acclamations of a flattering court, he was unable to disguise from
himself, that he had deserved the contempt and hatred of every man of
sense and virtue in his empire. His ferocious spirit was irritated by
the consciousness of that hatred, by the envy of every kind of merit, by
the just apprehension of danger, and by the habit of slaughter, which he
contracted in his daily amusements. History has preserved a long list of
consular senators sacrificed to his wanton suspicion, which sought out,
with peculiar anxiety, those unfortunate persons connected, however
remotely, with the family of the Antonines, without sparing even the
ministers of his crimes or pleasures. [43] His cruelty proved at last
fatal to himself. He had shed with impunity the noblest blood of Rome:
he perished as soon as he was dreaded by his own domestics. Marcia,
his favorite concubine, Eclectus, his chamberlain, and Laetus, his
Praetorian praefect, alarmed by the fate of their companions and
predecessors, resolved to prevent the destruction which every hour hung
over their heads, either from the mad caprice of the tyrant, [431] or
the sudden indignation of the people. Marcia seized the occasion of
presenting a draught of wine to her lover, after he had fatigued himself
with hunting some wild beasts. Commodus retired to sleep; but whilst he
was laboring with the effects of poison and drunkenness, a robust youth,
by profession a wrestler, entered his chamber, and strangled him without
resistance. The body was secretly conveyed out of the palace, before the
least suspicion was entertained in the city, or even in the court, of
the emperor's death. Such was the fate of the son of Marcus, and so
easy was it to destroy a hated tyrant, who, by the artificial powers of
government, had oppressed, during thirteen years, so many millions of
subjects, each of whom was equal to their master in personal strength
and personal abilities. [44]

[Footnote 43: The prefects were changed almost hourly or daily; and the
caprice of Commodus was often fatal to his most favored chamberlains.
Hist. August. p. 46, 51.]

[Footnote 431: Commodus had already resolved to massacre them the
following night they determined o anticipate his design. Herod. i.
17.--W.]

[Footnote 44: Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1222. Herodian, l. i. p. 43. Hist.
August. p. 52.]

The measures of the conspirators were conducted with the deliberate
coolness and celerity which the greatness of the occasion required.
They resolved instantly to fill the vacant throne with an emperor whose
character would justify and maintain the action that had been committed.
They fixed on Pertinax, praefect of the city, an ancient senator of
consular rank, whose conspicuous merit had broke through the obscurity
of his birth, and raised him to the first honors of the state. He had
successively governed most of the provinces of the empire; and in all
his great employments, military as well as civil, he had uniformly
distinguished himself by the firmness, the prudence, and the integrity
of his conduct. [45] He now remained almost alone of the friends and
ministers of Marcus; and when, at a late hour of the night, he was
awakened with the news, that the chamberlain and the praefect were at
his door, he received them with intrepid resignation, and desired they
would execute their master's orders. Instead of death, they offered him
the throne of the Roman world. During some moments he distrusted their
intentions and assurances. Convinced at length of the death of Commodus,
he accepted the purple with a sincere reluctance, the natural effect of
his knowledge both of the duties and of the dangers of the supreme rank.
[46]

[Footnote 45: Pertinax was a native of Alba Pompeia, in Piedmont,
and son of a timber merchant. The order of his employments (it is marked
by Capitolinus) well deserves to be set down, as expressive of the form
of government and manners of the age. 1. He was a centurion. 2. Praefect
of a cohort in Syria, in the Parthian war, and in Britain. 3. He
obtained an Ala, or squadron of horse, in Maesia. 4. He was commissary
of provisions on the Aemilian way. 5. He commanded the fleet upon the
Rhine. 6. He was procurator of Dacia, with a salary of about 1600l. a
year. 7. He commanded the veterans of a legion. 8. He obtained the rank
of senator. 9. Of praetor. 10. With the command of the first legion
in Rhaetia and Noricum. 11. He was consul about the year 175. 12. He
attended Marcus into the East. 13. He commanded an army on the Danube.
14. He was consular legate of Maesia. 15. Of Dacia. 16. Of Syria. 17.
Of Britain. 18. He had the care of the public provisions at Rome. 19.
He was proconsul of Africa. 20. Praefect of the city. Herodian (l. i.
p. 48) does justice to his disinterested spirit; but Capitolinus, who
collected every popular rumor, charges him with a great fortune acquired
by bribery and corruption.]

[Footnote 46: Julian, in the Caesars, taxes him with being accessory to
the death of Commodus.]

Laetus conducted without delay his new emperor to the camp of the
Praetorians, diffusing at the same time through the city a seasonable
report that Commodus died suddenly of an apoplexy; and that the virtuous
Pertinax had already succeeded to the throne. The guards were rather
surprised than pleased with the suspicious death of a prince, whose
indulgence and liberality they alone had experienced; but the emergency
of the occasion, the authority of their praefect, the reputation of
Pertinax, and the clamors of the people, obliged them to stifle their
secret discontents, to accept the donative promised by the new emperor,
to swear allegiance to him, and with joyful acclamations and laurels
in their hands to conduct him to the senate house, that the military
consent might be ratified by the civil authority. This important night
was now far spent; with the dawn of day, and the commencement of the new
year, the senators expected a summons to attend an ignominious ceremony.
[461] In spite of all remonstrances, even of those of his creatures who
yet preserved any regard for prudence or decency, Commodus had resolved
to pass the night in the gladiators' school, and from thence to take
possession of the consulship, in the habit and with the attendance of
that infamous crew. On a sudden, before the break of day, the senate was
called together in the temple of Concord, to meet the guards, and to
ratify the election of a new emperor. For a few minutes they sat in
silent suspense, doubtful of their unexpected deliverance, and
suspicious of the cruel artifices of Commodus: but when at length they
were assured that the tyrant was no more, they resigned themselves to
all the transports of joy and indignation. Pertinax, who modestly
represented the meanness of his extraction, and pointed out several
noble senators more deserving than himself of the empire, was
constrained by their dutiful violence to ascend the throne, and received
all the titles of Imperial power, confirmed by the most sincere vows of
fidelity. The memory of Commodus was branded with eternal infamy. The
names of tyrant, of gladiator, of public enemy resounded in every corner
of the house. They decreed in tumultuous votes, [462] that his honors
should be reversed, his titles erased from the public monuments, his
statues thrown down, his body dragged with a hook into the stripping
room of the gladiators, to satiate the public fury; and they expressed
some indignation against those officious servants who had already
presumed to screen his remains from the justice of the senate. But
Pertinax could not refuse those last rites to the memory of Marcus, and
the tears of his first protector Claudius Pompeianus, who lamented the
cruel fate of his brother-in-law, and lamented still more that he had
deserved it. [47]

[Footnote 461: The senate always assembled at the beginning of the year,
on the night of the 1st January, (see Savaron on Sid. Apoll. viii. 6,)
and this happened the present year, as usual, without any particular
order.--G from W.]

[Footnote 462: What Gibbon improperly calls, both here and in the note,
tumultuous decrees, were no more than the applauses and acclamations
which recur so often in the history of the emperors. The custom passed
from the theatre to the forum, from the forum to the senate. Applauses
on the adoption of the Imperial decrees were first introduced under
Trajan. (Plin. jun. Panegyr. 75.) One senator read the form of the
decree, and all the rest answered by acclamations, accompanied with a
kind of chant or rhythm. These were some of the acclamations addressed
to Pertinax, and against the memory of Commodus. Hosti patriae honores
detrahantur. Parricidae honores detrahantur. Ut salvi simus, Jupiter,
optime, maxime, serva nobis Pertinacem. This custom prevailed not only
in the councils of state, but in all the meetings of the senate. However
inconsistent it may appear with the solemnity of a religious assembly,
the early Christians adopted and introduced it into their synods,
notwithstanding the opposition of some of the Fathers, particularly of
St. Chrysostom. See the Coll. of Franc. Bern. Ferrarius de veterum
acclamatione in Graevii Thesaur. Antiq. Rom. i. 6.--W. This note is
rather hypercritical, as regards Gibbon, but appears to be worthy of
preservation.--M.]

[Footnote 47: Capitolinus gives us the particulars of these tumultuary
votes, which were moved by one senator, and repeated, or rather chanted
by the whole body. Hist. August. p. 52.]

These effusions of impotent rage against a dead emperor, whom the senate
had flattered when alive with the most abject servility, betrayed a just
but ungenerous spirit of revenge.

The legality of these decrees was, however, supported by the principles
of the Imperial constitution. To censure, to depose, or to punish
with death, the first magistrate of the republic, who had abused his
delegated trust, was the ancient and undoubted prerogative of the Roman
senate; [48] but the feeble assembly was obliged to content itself with
inflicting on a fallen tyrant that public justice, from which, during
his life and reign, he had been shielded by the strong arm of military
despotism. [481]

[Footnote 48: The senate condemned Nero to be put to death more majorum.
Sueton. c. 49.]

[Footnote 481: No particular law assigned this right to the senate: it was
deduced from the ancient principles of the republic. Gibbon appears to
infer, from the passage of Suetonius, that the senate, according to its
ancient right, punished Nero with death. The words, however, more
majerum refer not to the decree of the senate, but to the kind of death,
which was taken from an old law of Romulus. (See Victor. Epit. Ed.
Artzen p. 484, n. 7.)--W.]

Pertinax found a nobler way of condemning his predecessor's memory; by
the contrast of his own virtues with the vices of Commodus. On the day
of his accession, he resigned over to his wife and son his whole private
fortune; that they might have no pretence to solicit favors at the
expense of the state. He refused to flatter the vanity of the former
with the title of Augusta; or to corrupt the inexperienced youth of
the latter by the rank of Caesar. Accurately distinguishing between the
duties of a parent and those of a sovereign, he educated his son with a
severe simplicity, which, while it gave him no assured prospect of the
throne, might in time have rendered him worthy of it. In public, the
behavior of Pertinax was grave and affable. He lived with the virtuous
part of the senate, (and, in a private station, he had been acquainted
with the true character of each individual,) without either pride or
jealousy; considered them as friends and companions, with whom he had
shared the danger of the tyranny, and with whom he wished to enjoy
the security of the present time. He very frequently invited them to
familiar entertainments, the frugality of which was ridiculed by those
who remembered and regretted the luxurious prodigality of Commodus. [49]

[Footnote 49: Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1223) speaks of these entertainments,
as a senator who had supped with the emperor; Capitolinus, (Hist.
August. p. 58,) like a slave, who had received his intelligence from one
the scullions.]

To heal, as far as it was possible, the wounds inflicted
by the hand of tyranny, was the pleasing, but melancholy, task of
Pertinax. The innocent victims, who yet survived, were recalled from
exile, released from prison, and restored to the full possession of
their honors and fortunes. The unburied bodies of murdered senators (for
the cruelty of Commodus endeavored to extend itself beyond death)
were deposited in the sepulchres of their ancestors; their memory
was justified and every consolation was bestowed on their ruined and
afflicted families. Among these consolations, one of the most grateful
was the punishment of the Delators; the common enemies of their master,
of virtue, and of their country. Yet even in the inquisition of these
legal assassins, Pertinax proceeded with a steady temper, which gave
every thing to justice, and nothing to popular prejudice and resentment.
The finances of the state demanded the most vigilant care of the
emperor. Though every measure of injustice and extortion had been
adopted, which could collect the property of the subject into the
coffers of the prince, the rapaciousness of Commodus had been so very
inadequate to his extravagance, that, upon his death, no more than eight
thousand pounds were found in the exhausted treasury, [50] to defray the
current expenses of government, and to discharge the pressing demand of
a liberal donative, which the new emperor had been obliged to promise
to the Praetorian guards. Yet under these distressed circumstances,
Pertinax had the generous firmness to remit all the oppressive taxes
invented by Commodus, and to cancel all the unjust claims of the
treasury; declaring, in a decree of the senate, "that he was better
satisfied to administer a poor republic with innocence, than to acquire
riches by the ways of tyranny and dishonor. Economy and industry he
considered as the pure and genuine sources of wealth; and from them he
soon derived a copious supply for the public necessities. The expense of
the household was immediately reduced to one half. All the instruments
of luxury Pertinax exposed to public auction, [51] gold and silver plate,
chariots of a singular construction, a superfluous wardrobe of silk
and embroidery, and a great number of beautiful slaves of both sexes;
excepting only, with attentive humanity, those who were born in a
state of freedom, and had been ravished from the arms of their weeping
parents. At the same time that he obliged the worthless favorites of
the tyrant to resign a part of their ill-gotten wealth, he satisfied
the just creditors of the state, and unexpectedly discharged the long
arrears of honest services. He removed the oppressive restrictions which
had been laid upon commerce, and granted all the uncultivated lands
in Italy and the provinces to those who would improve them; with an
exemption from tribute during the term of ten years. [52]

[Footnote 50: Decies. The blameless economy of Pius left his successors
a treasure of vicies septies millies, above two and twenty millions
sterling. Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1231.]

[Footnote 51: Besides the design of converting these useless ornaments
into money, Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1229) assigns two secret motives of
Pertinax. He wished to expose the vices of Commodus, and to discover by
the purchasers those who most resembled him.]

[Footnote 52: Though Capitolinus has picked up many idle tales of the
private life of Pertinax, he joins with Dion and Herodian in admiring
his public conduct.]

Such a uniform conduct had already secured to Pertinax the noblest
reward of a sovereign, the love and esteem of his people.

Those who remembered the virtues of Marcus were happy to contemplate in
their new emperor the features of that bright original; and flattered
themselves, that they should long enjoy the benign influence of his
administration. A hasty zeal to reform the corrupted state, accompanied
with less prudence than might have been expected from the years and
experience of Pertinax, proved fatal to himself and to his country.
His honest indiscretion united against him the servile crowd, who found
their private benefit in the public disorders, and who preferred the
favor of a tyrant to the inexorable equality of the laws. [53]

[Footnote 53: Leges, rem surdam, inexorabilem esse. T. Liv. ii. 3.]

Amidst the general joy, the sullen and angry countenance of the
Praetorian guards betrayed their inward dissatisfaction. They had
reluctantly submitted to Pertinax; they dreaded the strictness of
the ancient discipline, which he was preparing to restore; and they
regretted the license of the former reign. Their discontents were
secretly fomented by Laetus, their praefect, who found, when it was
too late, that his new emperor would reward a servant, but would not be
ruled by a favorite. On the third day of his reign, the soldiers seized
on a noble senator, with a design to carry him to the camp, and to
invest him with the Imperial purple. Instead of being dazzled by the
dangerous honor, the affrighted victim escaped from their violence, and
took refuge at the feet of Pertinax. A short time afterwards, Sosius
Falco, one of the consuls of the year, a rash youth, [54] but of an
ancient and opulent family, listened to the voice of ambition; and a
conspiracy was formed during a short absence of Pertinax, which was
crushed by his sudden return to Rome, and his resolute behavior. Falco
was on the point of being justly condemned to death as a public enemy
had he not been saved by the earnest and sincere entreaties of the
injured emperor, who conjured the senate, that the purity of his reign
might not be stained by the blood even of a guilty senator.

[Footnote 54: If we credit Capitolinus, (which is rather difficult,)
Falco behaved with the most petulant indecency to Pertinax, on the day
of his accession. The wise emperor only admonished him of his youth and
in experience. Hist. August. p. 55.]

These disappointments served only to irritate the rage of the Praetorian
guards. On the twenty-eighth of March, eighty-six days only after the
death of Commodus, a general sedition broke out in the camp, which the
officers wanted either power or inclination to suppress. Two or three
hundred of the most desperate soldiers marched at noonday, with arms in
their hands and fury in their looks, towards the Imperial palace.
The gates were thrown open by their companions upon guard, and by the
domestics of the old court, who had already formed a secret conspiracy
against the life of the too virtuous emperor. On the news of their
approach, Pertinax, disdaining either flight or concealment, advanced to
meet his assassins; and recalled to their minds his own innocence,
and the sanctity of their recent oath. For a few moments they stood
in silent suspense, ashamed of their atrocious design, and awed by
the venerable aspect and majestic firmness of their sovereign, till at
length, the despair of pardon reviving their fury, a barbarian of the
country of Tongress [55] levelled the first blow against Pertinax, who
was instantly despatched with a multitude of wounds. His head, separated
from his body, and placed on a lance, was carried in triumph to the
Praetorian camp, in the sight of a mournful and indignant people, who
lamented the unworthy fate of that excellent prince, and the transient
blessings of a reign, the memory of which could serve only to aggravate
their approaching misfortunes. [56]

[Footnote 55: The modern bishopric of Liege. This soldier probably
belonged to the Batavian horse-guards, who were mostly raised in the
duchy of Gueldres and the neighborhood, and were distinguished by their
valor, and by the boldness with which they swam their horses across the
broadest and most rapid rivers. Tacit. Hist. iv. 12 Dion, l. lv p. 797
Lipsius de magnitudine Romana, l. i. c. 4.]

[Footnote 56: Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1232. Herodian, l. ii. p. 60. Hist.
August. p. 58. Victor in Epitom. et in Caesarib. Eutropius, viii. 16.]




