## Chapter XII: Reigns Of Tacitus, Probus, Carus And His Sons.--Part II.

The strength of Aurelian had crushed on every side the enemies of Rome.
After his death they seemed to revive with an increase of fury and of
numbers. They were again vanquished by the active vigor of Probus, who,
in a short reign of about six years, [29] equalled the fame of ancient
heroes, and restored peace and order to every province of the Roman
world. The dangerous frontier of Rhaetia he so firmly secured, that he
left it without the suspicion of an enemy. He broke the wandering power
of the Sarmatian tribes, and by the terror of his arms compelled those
barbarians to relinquish their spoil. The Gothic nation courted the
alliance of so warlike an emperor. [30] He attacked the Isaurians in
their mountains, besieged and took several of their strongest castles,
[31] and flattered himself that he had forever suppressed a domestic
foe, whose independence so deeply wounded the majesty of the empire. The
troubles excited by the usurper Firmus in the Upper Egypt had never been
perfectly appeased, and the cities of Ptolemais and Coptos, fortified by
the alliance of the Blemmyes, still maintained an obscure rebellion. The
chastisement of those cities, and of their auxiliaries the savages of
the South, is said to have alarmed the court of Persia, [32] and the
Great King sued in vain for the friendship of Probus. Most of the
exploits which distinguished his reign were achieved by the personal
valor and conduct of the emperor, insomuch that the writer of his life
expresses some amazement how, in so short a time, a single man could be
present in so many distant wars. The remaining actions he intrusted
to the care of his lieutenants, the judicious choice of whom forms
no inconsiderable part of his glory. Carus, Diocletian, Maximian,
Constantius, Galerius, Asclepiodatus, Annibalianus, and a crowd of other
chiefs, who afterwards ascended or supported the throne, were trained to
arms in the severe school of Aurelian and Probus. [33]

[Footnote 29: The date and duration of the reign of Probus are very
correctly ascertained by Cardinal Noris in his learned work, De Epochis
Syro-Macedonum, p. 96--105. A passage of Eusebius connects the second
year of Probus with the aeras of several of the Syrian cities.]

[Footnote 30: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 239.]

[Footnote 31: Zosimus (l. i. p. 62--65) tells us a very long and
trifling story of Lycius, the Isaurian robber.]

[Footnote 32: Zosim. l. i. p. 65. Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 239,
240. But it seems incredible that the defeat of the savages of Aethiopia
could affect the Persian monarch.]

[Footnote 33: Besides these well-known chiefs, several others are named
by Vopiscus, (Hist. August. p. 241,) whose actions have not reached
knowledge.]

But the most important service which Probus rendered to the republic was
the deliverance of Gaul, and the recovery of seventy flourishing cities
oppressed by the barbarians of Germany, who, since the death of
Aurelian, had ravaged that great province with impunity. [34] Among the
various multitude of those fierce invaders we may distinguish, with some
degree of clearness, three great armies, or rather nations, successively
vanquished by the valor of Probus. He drove back the Franks into their
morasses; a descriptive circumstance from whence we may infer, that the
confederacy known by the manly appellation of Free, already occupied the
flat maritime country, intersected and almost overflown by the
stagnating waters of the Rhine, and that several tribes of the Frisians
and Batavians had acceded to their alliance. He vanquished the
Burgundians, a considerable people of the Vandalic race. [341] They had
wandered in quest of booty from the banks of the Oder to those of the
Seine. They esteemed themselves sufficiently fortunate to purchase, by
the restitution of all their booty, the permission of an undisturbed
retreat. They attempted to elude that article of the treaty. Their
punishment was immediate and terrible. [35] But of all the invaders of
Gaul, the most formidable were the Lygians, a distant people, who
reigned over a wide domain on the frontiers of Poland and Silesia. [36]
In the Lygian nation, the Arii held the first rank by their numbers and
fierceness. "The Arii" (it is thus that they are described by the energy
of Tacitus) "study to improve by art and circumstances the innate
terrors of their barbarism. Their shields are black, their bodies are
painted black. They choose for the combat the darkest hour of the night.
Their host advances, covered as it were with a funeral shade; [37] nor do
they often find an enemy capable of sustaining so strange and infernal
an aspect. Of all our senses, the eyes are the first vanquished
in battle." [38] Yet the arms and discipline of the Romans easily
discomfited these horrid phantoms. The Lygii were defeated in a general
engagement, and Semno, the most renowned of their chiefs, fell alive
into the hands of Probus. That prudent emperor, unwilling to reduce a
brave people to despair, granted them an honorable capitulation, and
permitted them to return in safety to their native country. But the
losses which they suffered in the march, the battle, and the retreat,
broke the power of the nation: nor is the Lygian name ever repeated in
the history either of Germany or of the empire. The deliverance of
Gaul is reported to have cost the lives of four hundred thousand of the
invaders; a work of labor to the Romans, and of expense to the emperor,
who gave a piece of gold for the head of every barbarian. [39] But as
the fame of warriors is built on the destruction of human kind, we may
naturally suspect, that the sanguinary account was multiplied by
the avarice of the soldiers, and accepted without any very severe
examination by the liberal vanity of Probus.

[Footnote 34: See the Caesars of Julian, and Hist. August. p. 238, 240,
241.]

[Footnote 341: It was only under the emperors Diocletian and Maximian,
that the Burgundians, in concert with the Alemanni, invaded the interior
of Gaul; under the reign of Probus, they did no more than pass the river
which separated them from the Roman Empire: they were repelled. Gatterer
presumes that this river was the Danube; a passage in Zosimus appears to
me rather to indicate the Rhine. Zos. l. i. p. 37, edit H. Etienne,
1581.--G. On the origin of the Burgundians may be consulted Malte Brun,
Geogr vi. p. 396, (edit. 1831,) who observes that all the remains of the
Burgundian language indicate that they spoke a Gothic dialect.--M.]

[Footnote 35: Zosimus, l. i. p. 62. Hist. August. p. 240. But the latter
supposes the punishment inflicted with the consent of their kings: if
so, it was partial, like the offence.]

[Footnote 36: See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, l. iii. Ptolemy places in
their country the city of Calisia, probably Calish in Silesia. *
Note: Luden (vol ii. 501) supposes that these have been erroneously
identified with the Lygii of Tacitus. Perhaps one fertile source
of mistakes has been, that the Romans have turned appellations into
national names. Malte Brun observes of the Lygii, "that their name
appears Sclavonian, and signifies 'inhabitants of plains;' they are
probably the Lieches of the middle ages, and the ancestors of the Poles.
We find among the Arii the worship of the two twin gods known in the
Sclavian mythology." Malte Brun, vol. i. p. 278, (edit. 1831.)--M.
But compare Schafarik, Slawische Alterthumer, 1, p. 406. They were of
German or Keltish descent, occupying the Wendish (or Slavian) district,
Luhy.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 37: Feralis umbra, is the expression of Tacitus: it is surely
a very bold one.]

[Footnote 38: Tacit. Germania, (c. 43.)]

[Footnote 39: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 238]

Since the expedition of Maximin, the Roman generals had confined
their ambition to a defensive war against the nations of Germany, who
perpetually pressed on the frontiers of the empire. The more daring
Probus pursued his Gallic victories, passed the Rhine, and displayed his
invincible eagles on the banks of the Elbe and the Necker. He was fully
convinced that nothing could reconcile the minds of the barbarians to
peace, unless they experienced, in their own country, the calamities of
war. Germany, exhausted by the ill success of the last emigration,
was astonished by his presence. Nine of the most considerable princes
repaired to his camp, and fell prostrate at his feet. Such a treaty was
humbly received by the Germans, as it pleased the conqueror to dictate.
He exacted a strict restitution of the effects and captives which they
had carried away from the provinces; and obliged their own magistrates
to punish the more obstinate robbers who presumed to detain any part of
the spoil. A considerable tribute of corn, cattle, and horses, the only
wealth of barbarians, was reserved for the use of the garrisons which
Probus established on the limits of their territory. He even entertained
some thoughts of compelling the Germans to relinquish the exercise of
arms, and to trust their differences to the justice, their safety to
the power, of Rome. To accomplish these salutary ends, the constant
residence of an Imperial governor, supported by a numerous army, was
indispensably requisite. Probus therefore judged it more expedient to
defer the execution of so great a design; which was indeed rather of
specious than solid utility. [40] Had Germany been reduced into the state
of a province, the Romans, with immense labor and expense, would have
acquired only a more extensive boundary to defend against the fiercer
and more active barbarians of Scythia.

[Footnote 40: Hist. August. 238, 239. Vopiscus quotes a letter from
the emperor to the senate, in which he mentions his design of reducing
Germany into a province.]

Instead of reducing the warlike natives of Germany to the condition of
subjects, Probus contented himself with the humble expedient of raising
a bulwark against their inroads. The country which now forms the circle
of Swabia had been left desert in the age of Augustus by the emigration
of its ancient inhabitants. [41] The fertility of the soil soon attracted
a new colony from the adjacent provinces of Gaul. Crowds of adventurers,
of a roving temper and of desperate fortunes, occupied the doubtful
possession, and acknowledged, by the payment of tithes the majesty
of the empire. [42] To protect these new subjects, a line of frontier
garrisons was gradually extended from the Rhine to the Danube. About the
reign of Hadrian, when that mode of defence began to be practised, these
garrisons were connected and covered by a strong intrenchment of trees
and palisades. In the place of so rude a bulwark, the emperor Probus
constructed a stone wall of a considerable height, and strengthened it
by towers at convenient distances. From the neighborhood of Newstadt and
Ratisbon on the Danube, it stretched across hills, valleys, rivers, and
morasses, as far as Wimpfen on the Necker, and at length terminated
on the banks of the Rhine, after a winding course of near two hundred
miles. [43] This important barrier, uniting the two mighty streams that
protected the provinces of Europe, seemed to fill up the vacant space
through which the barbarians, and particularly the Alemanni, could
penetrate with the greatest facility into the heart of the empire. But
the experience of the world, from China to Britain, has exposed the
vain attempt of fortifying any extensive tract of country. [44] An active
enemy, who can select and vary his points of attack, must, in the end,
discover some feeble spot, on some unguarded moment. The strength, as
well as the attention, of the defenders is divided; and such are the
blind effects of terror on the firmest troops, that a line broken in a
single place is almost instantly deserted. The fate of the wall which
Probus erected may confirm the general observation. Within a few years
after his death, it was overthrown by the Alemanni. Its scattered ruins,
universally ascribed to the power of the Daemon, now serve only to
excite the wonder of the Swabian peasant.

[Footnote 41: Strabo, l. vii. According to Valleius Paterculus, (ii.
108,) Maroboduus led his Marcomanni into Bohemia; Cluverius (German.
Antiq. iii. 8) proves that it was from Swabia.]

[Footnote 42: These settlers, from the payment of tithes, were
denominated Decunates. Tacit. Germania, c. 29]

[Footnote 43: See notes de l'Abbe de la Bleterie a la Germanie de
Tacite, p. 183. His account of the wall is chiefly borrowed (as he says
himself) from the Alsatia Illustrata of Schoepflin.]

[Footnote 44: See Recherches sur les Chinois et les Egyptiens, tom. ii.
p. 81--102. The anonymous author is well acquainted with the globe in
general, and with Germany in particular: with regard to the latter,
he quotes a work of M. Hanselman; but he seems to confound the wall of
Probus, designed against the Alemanni, with the fortification of the
Mattiaci, constructed in the neighborhood of Frankfort against the
Catti. * Note: De Pauw is well known to have been the author of this
work, as of the Recherches sur les Americains before quoted. The
judgment of M. Remusat on this writer is in a very different, I fear a
juster tone. Quand au lieu de rechercher, d'examiner, d'etudier, on se
borne, comme cet ecrivain, a juger a prononcer, a decider, sans
connoitre ni l'histoire. ni les langues, sans recourir aux sources, sans
meme se douter de leur existence, on peut en imposer pendant quelque
temps a des lecteurs prevenus ou peu instruits; mais le mepris qui ne
manque guere de succeder a cet engouement fait bientot justice de ces
assertions hazardees, et elles retombent dans l'oubli d'autant plus
promptement, qu'elles ont ete posees avec plus de confiance. Sur les l
angues Tartares, p. 231.--M.]

Among the useful conditions of peace imposed by Probus on the vanquished
nations of Germany, was the obligation of supplying the Roman army with
sixteen thousand recruits, the bravest and most robust of their youth.
The emperor dispersed them through all the provinces, and distributed
this dangerous reenforcement, in small bands of fifty or sixty each,
among the national troops; judiciously observing, that the aid which the
republic derived from the barbarians should be felt but not seen. [45]
Their aid was now become necessary. The feeble elegance of Italy and the
internal provinces could no longer support the weight of arms. The hardy
frontiers of the Rhine and Danube still produced minds and bodies equal
to the labors of the camp; but a perpetual series of wars had gradually
diminished their numbers. The infrequency of marriage, and the ruin
of agriculture, affected the principles of population, and not only
destroyed the strength of the present, but intercepted the hope
of future, generations. The wisdom of Probus embraced a great and
beneficial plan of replenishing the exhausted frontiers, by new colonies
of captive or fugitive barbarians, on whom he bestowed lands, cattle,
instruments of husbandry, and every encouragement that might engage
them to educate a race of soldiers for the service of the republic. Into
Britain, and most probably into Cambridgeshire, [46] he transported a
considerable body of Vandals. The impossibility of an escape reconciled
them to their situation, and in the subsequent troubles of that island,
they approved themselves the most faithful servants of the state. [47]
Great numbers of Franks and Gepidae were settled on the banks of the
Danube and the Rhine. A hundred thousand Bastarnae, expelled from their
own country, cheerfully accepted an establishment in Thrace, and soon
imbibed the manners and sentiments of Roman subjects. [48] But the
expectations of Probus were too often disappointed. The impatience
and idleness of the barbarians could ill brook the slow labors of
agriculture. Their unconquerable love of freedom, rising against
despotism, provoked them into hasty rebellions, alike fatal to
themselves and to the provinces; [49] nor could these artificial
supplies, however repeated by succeeding emperors, restore the important
limit of Gaul and Illyricum to its ancient and native vigor.

[Footnote 45: He distributed about fifty or sixty barbarians to a
Numerus, as it was then called, a corps with whose established number we
are not exactly acquainted.]

[Footnote 46: Camden's Britannia, Introduction, p. 136; but he speaks
from a very doubtful conjecture.]

[Footnote 47: Zosimus, l. i. p. 62. According to Vopiscus, another body
of Vandals was less faithful.]

[Footnote 48: Hist. August. p. 240. They were probably expelled by the
Goths. Zosim. l. i. p. 66.]

[Footnote 49: Hist. August. p. 240.]

Of all the barbarians who abandoned their new settlements, and disturbed
the public tranquillity, a very small number returned to their own
country. For a short season they might wander in arms through the
empire; but in the end they were surely destroyed by the power of
a warlike emperor. The successful rashness of a party of Franks was
attended, however, with such memorable consequences, that it ought not
to be passed unnoticed. They had been established by Probus, on the
sea-coast of Pontus, with a view of strengthening the frontier against
the inroads of the Alani. A fleet stationed in one of the harbors of
the Euxine fell into the hands of the Franks; and they resolved, through
unknown seas, to explore their way from the mouth of the Phasis to
that of the Rhine. They easily escaped through the Bosphorus and
the Hellespont, and cruising along the Mediterranean, indulged
their appetite for revenge and plunder by frequent descents on the
unsuspecting shores of Asia, Greece, and Africa. The opulent city of
Syracuse, in whose port the natives of Athens and Carthage had formerly
been sunk, was sacked by a handful of barbarians, who massacred the
greatest part of the trembling inhabitants. From the Island of Sicily,
the Franks proceeded to the columns of Hercules, trusted themselves to
the ocean, coasted round Spain and Gaul, and steering their triumphant
course through the British Channel, at length finished their surprising
voyage, by landing in safety on the Batavian or Frisian shores. [50] The
example of their success, instructing their countrymen to conceive the
advantages and to despise the dangers of the sea, pointed out to their
enterprising spirit a new road to wealth and glory.

[Footnote 50: Panegyr. Vet. v. 18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 66.]

Notwithstanding the vigilance and activity of Probus, it was almost
impossible that he could at once contain in obedience every part of his
wide-extended dominions. The barbarians, who broke their chains, had
seized the favorable opportunity of a domestic war. When the emperor
marched to the relief of Gaul, he devolved the command of the East on
Saturninus. That general, a man of merit and experience, was driven into
rebellion by the absence of his sovereign, the levity of the Alexandrian
people, the pressing instances of his friends, and his own fears; but
from the moment of his elevation, he never entertained a hope of empire,
or even of life. "Alas!" he said, "the republic has lost a useful
servant, and the rashness of an hour has destroyed the services of many
years. You know not," continued he, "the misery of sovereign power; a
sword is perpetually suspended over our head. We dread our very guards,
we distrust our companions. The choice of action or of repose is no
longer in our disposition, nor is there any age, or character, or
conduct, that can protect us from the censure of envy. In thus exalting
me to the throne, you have doomed me to a life of cares, and to an
untimely fate. The only consolation which remains is, the assurance that
I shall not fall alone." [51] But as the former part of his prediction
was verified by the victory, so the latter was disappointed by the
clemency of Probus. That amiable prince attempted even to save the
unhappy Saturninus from the fury of the soldiers. He had more than once
solicited the usurper himself to place some confidence in the mercy of a
sovereign who so highly esteemed his character, that he had punished, as
a malicious informer, the first who related the improbable news of his
disaffection. [52] Saturninus might, perhaps, have embraced the generous
offer, had he not been restrained by the obstinate distrust of his
adherents. Their guilt was deeper, and their hopes more sanguine, than
those of their experienced leader.

[Footnote 51: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 245, 246. The unfortunate
orator had studied rhetoric at Carthage; and was therefore more probably
a Moor (Zosim. l. i. p. 60) than a Gaul, as Vopiscus calls him.]

[Footnote 52: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 638.]

The revolt of Saturninus was scarcely extinguished in the East, before
new troubles were excited in the West, by the rebellion of Bonosus and
Proculus, in Gaul. The most distinguished merit of those two officers
was their respective prowess, of the one in the combats of Bacchus, of
the other in those of Venus, [53] yet neither of them was destitute
of courage and capacity, and both sustained, with honor, the august
character which the fear of punishment had engaged them to assume, till
they sunk at length beneath the superior genius of Probus. He used the
victory with his accustomed moderation, and spared the fortune, as well
as the lives of their innocent families. [54]

[Footnote 53: A very surprising instance is recorded of the prowess of
Procufus. He had taken one hundred Sarmatian virgins. The rest of the
story he must relate in his own language: "Ex his una necte decem inivi;
omnes tamen, quod in me erat, mulieres intra dies quindecim reddidi."
Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 246.]

[Footnote 54: Proculus, who was a native of Albengue, on the Genoese
coast armed two thousand of his own slaves. His riches were great, but
they were acquired by robbery. It was afterwards a saying of his family,
sibi non placere esse vel principes vel latrones. Vopiscus in Hist.
August. p. 247.]

The arms of Probus had now suppressed all the foreign and domestic
enemies of the state. His mild but steady administration confirmed the
reestablishment of the public tranquillity; nor was there left in the
provinces a hostile barbarian, a tyrant, or even a robber, to revive the
memory of past disorders. It was time that the emperor should revisit
Rome, and celebrate his own glory and the general happiness. The triumph
due to the valor of Probus was conducted with a magnificence suitable to
his fortune, and the people who had so lately admired the trophies of
Aurelian, gazed with equal pleasure on those of his heroic successor.
[55] We cannot, on this occasion, forget the desperate courage of about
fourscore gladiators, reserved, with near six hundred others, for the
inhuman sports of the amphitheatre. Disdaining to shed their blood for
the amusement of the populace, they killed their keepers, broke from the
place of their confinement, and filled the streets of Rome with blood
and confusion. After an obstinate resistance, they were overpowered and
cut in pieces by the regular forces; but they obtained at least an
honorable death, and the satisfaction of a just revenge. [56]

[Footnote 55: Hist. August. p. 240.]

[Footnote 56: Zosim. l. i. p. 66.]

The military discipline which reigned in the camps of Probus was less
cruel than that of Aurelian, but it was equally rigid and exact. The
latter had punished the irregularities of the soldiers with unrelenting
severity, the former prevented them by employing the legions in constant
and useful labors. When Probus commanded in Egypt, he executed many
considerable works for the splendor and benefit of that rich country.
The navigation of the Nile, so important to Rome itself, was improved;
and temples, buildings, porticos, and palaces were constructed by the
hands of the soldiers, who acted by turns as architects, as engineers,
and as husbandmen. [57] It was reported of Hannibal, that in order to
preserve his troops from the dangerous temptations of idleness, he had
obliged them to form large plantations of olive-trees along the coast
of Africa. [58] From a similar principle, Probus exercised his legions
in covering with rich vineyards the hills of Gaul and Pannonia, and two
considerable spots are described, which were entirely dug and planted
by military labor. [59] One of these, known under the name of Mount Almo,
was situated near Sirmium, the country where Probus was born, for which
he ever retained a partial affection, and whose gratitude he endeavored
to secure, by converting into tillage a large and unhealthy tract
of marshy ground. An army thus employed constituted perhaps the most
useful, as well as the bravest, portion of Roman subjects.

[Footnote 57: Hist. August. p. 236.]

[Footnote 58: Aurel. Victor. in Prob. But the policy of Hannibal,
unnoticed by any more ancient writer, is irreconcilable with the history
of his life. He left Africa when he was nine years old, returned to it
when he was forty-five, and immediately lost his army in the decisive
battle of Zama. Livilus, xxx. 37.]

[Footnote 59: Hist. August. p. 240. Eutrop. ix. 17. Aurel. Victor. in
Prob. Victor Junior. He revoked the prohibition of Domitian, and granted
a general permission of planting vines to the Gauls, the Britons, and
the Pannonians.]

But in the prosecution of a favorite scheme, the best of men, satisfied
with the rectitude of their intentions, are subject to forget the bounds
of moderation; nor did Probus himself sufficiently consult the patience
and disposition of his fierce legionaries. [60] The dangers of the
military profession seem only to be compensated by a life of pleasure
and idleness; but if the duties of the soldier are incessantly
aggravated by the labors of the peasant, he will at last sink under the
intolerable burden, or shake it off with indignation. The imprudence of
Probus is said to have inflamed the discontent of his troops. More
attentive to the interests of mankind than to those of the army, he
expressed the vain hope, that, by the establishment of universal peace,
he should soon abolish the necessity of a standing and mercenary force.
[61] The unguarded expression proved fatal to him. In one of the hottest
days of summer, as he severely urged the unwholesome labor of draining
the marshes of Sirmium, the soldiers, impatient of fatigue, on a sudden
threw down their tools, grasped their arms, and broke out into a furious
mutiny. The emperor, conscious of his danger, took refuge in a lofty
tower, constructed for the purpose of surveying the progress of the
work. [62] The tower was instantly forced, and a thousand swords were
plunged at once into the bosom of the unfortunate Probus. The rage of
the troops subsided as soon as it had been gratified. They then lamented
their fatal rashness, forgot the severity of the emperor, whom they had
massacred, and hastened to perpetuate, by an honorable monument, the
memory of his virtues and victories. [63]

[Footnote 60: Julian bestows a severe, and indeed excessive, censure
on the rigor of Probus, who, as he thinks, almost deserved his fate.]

[Footnote 61: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 241. He lavishes on this idle
hope a large stock of very foolish eloquence.]

[Footnote 62: Turris ferrata. It seems to have been a movable tower, and
cased with iron.]

[Footnote 63: Probus, et vere probus situs est; Victor omnium gentium
Barbararum; victor etiam tyrannorum.]

When the legions had indulged their grief and repentance for the death
of Probus, their unanimous consent declared Carus, his Praetorian
praefect, the most deserving of the Imperial throne. Every circumstance
that relates to this prince appears of a mixed and doubtful nature.
He gloried in the title of Roman Citizen; and affected to compare the
purity of his blood with the foreign and even barbarous origin of the
preceding emperors; yet the most inquisitive of his contemporaries, very
far from admitting his claim, have variously deduced his own birth,
or that of his parents, from Illyricum, from Gaul, or from Africa. [64]
Though a soldier, he had received a learned education; though a senator,
he was invested with the first dignity of the army; and in an age when
the civil and military professions began to be irrecoverably
separated from each other, they were united in the person of Carus.
Notwithstanding the severe justice which he exercised against the
assassins of Probus, to whose favor and esteem he was highly indebted,
he could not escape the suspicion of being accessory to a deed from
whence he derived the principal advantage. He enjoyed, at least, before
his elevation, an acknowledged character of virtue and abilities;
[65] but his austere temper insensibly degenerated into moroseness and
cruelty; and the imperfect writers of his life almost hesitate whether
they shall not rank him in the number of Roman tyrants. [66] When Carus
assumed the purple, he was about sixty years of age, and his two sons,
Carinus and Numerian had already attained the season of manhood. [67]

[Footnote 64: Yet all this may be conciliated. He was born at Narbonne
in Illyricum, confounded by Eutropius with the more famous city of that
name in Gaul. His father might be an African, and his mother a
noble Roman. Carus himself was educated in the capital. See Scaliger
Animadversion. ad Euseb. Chron. p. 241.]

[Footnote 65: Probus had requested of the senate an equestrian statue
and a marble palace, at the public expense, as a just recompense of the
singular merit of Carus. Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 249.]

[Footnote 66: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 242, 249. Julian excludes
the emperor Carus and both his sons from the banquet of the Caesars.]

[Footnote 67: John Malala, tom. i. p. 401. But the authority of that
ignorant Greek is very slight. He ridiculously derives from Carus the
city of Carrhae, and the province of Caria, the latter of which is
mentioned by Homer.]

The authority of the senate expired with Probus; nor was the repentance
of the soldiers displayed by the same dutiful regard for the civil
power, which they had testified after the unfortunate death of Aurelian.
The election of Carus was decided without expecting the approbation of
the senate, and the new emperor contented himself with announcing, in a
cold and stately epistle, that he had ascended the vacant throne. [68] A
behavior so very opposite to that of his amiable predecessor afforded
no favorable presage of the new reign: and the Romans, deprived of power
and freedom, asserted their privilege of licentious murmurs. [69] The
voice of congratulation and flattery was not, however, silent; and we
may still peruse, with pleasure and contempt, an eclogue, which was
composed on the accession of the emperor Carus. Two shepherds, avoiding
the noontide heat, retire into the cave of Faunus. On a spreading beech
they discover some recent characters. The rural deity had described, in
prophetic verses, the felicity promised to the empire under the reign
of so great a prince. Faunus hails the approach of that hero, who,
receiving on his shoulders the sinking weight of the Roman world, shall
extinguish war and faction, and once again restore the innocence and
security of the golden age. [70]

[Footnote 68: Hist. August. p. 249. Carus congratulated the senate, that
one of their own order was made emperor.]

[Footnote 69: Hist. August. p. 242.]

[Footnote 70: See the first eclogue of Calphurnius. The design of it
is preferes by Fontenelle to that of Virgil's Pollio. See tom. iii. p.
148.]

It is more than probable, that these elegant trifles never reached
the ears of a veteran general, who, with the consent of the legions,
was preparing to execute the long-suspended design of the Persian war.
Before his departure for this distant expedition, Carus conferred on his
two sons, Carinus and Numerian, the title of Caesar, and investing the
former with almost an equal share of the Imperial power, directed the
young prince, first to suppress some troubles which had arisen in Gaul,
and afterwards to fix the seat of his residence at Rome, and to assume
the government of the Western provinces. [71] The safety of Illyricum was
confirmed by a memorable defeat of the Sarmatians; sixteen thousand
of those barbarians remained on the field of battle, and the number of
captives amounted to twenty thousand. The old emperor, animated with the
fame and prospect of victory, pursued his march, in the midst of winter,
through the countries of Thrace and Asia Minor, and at length, with his
younger son, Numerian, arrived on the confines of the Persian monarchy.
There, encamping on the summit of a lofty mountain, he pointed out to
his troops the opulence and luxury of the enemy whom they were about to
invade.

[Footnote 71: Hist. August. p. 353. Eutropius, ix. 18. Pagi. Annal.]

The successor of Artaxerxes, [711] Varanes, or Bahram, though he had subdued
the Segestans, one of the most warlike nations of Upper Asia, [72] was
alarmed at the approach of the Romans, and endeavored to retard their
progress by a negotiation of peace. [721]

His ambassadors entered the camp about sunset, at the time when the
troops were satisfying their hunger with a frugal repast. The Persians
expressed their desire of being introduced to the presence of the Roman
emperor. They were at length conducted to a soldier, who was seated
on the grass. A piece of stale bacon and a few hard peas composed his
supper. A coarse woollen garment of purple was the only circumstance
that announced his dignity. The conference was conducted with the same
disregard of courtly elegance. Carus, taking off a cap which he wore to
conceal his baldness, assured the ambassadors, that, unless their master
acknowledged the superiority of Rome, he would speedily render Persia
as naked of trees as his own head was destitute of hair. [73]
Notwithstanding some traces of art and preparation, we may discover in
this scene the manners of Carus, and the severe simplicity which the
martial princes, who succeeded Gallienus, had already restored in the
Roman camps. The ministers of the Great King trembled and retired.

[Footnote 711: Three monarchs had intervened, Sapor, (Shahpour,)
Hormisdas, (Hormooz,) Varanes; Baharam the First.--M.]

[Footnote 72: Agathias, l. iv. p. 135. We find one of his sayings in
the Bibliotheque Orientale of M. d'Herbelot. "The definition of humanity
includes all other virtues."]

[Footnote 721: The manner in which his life was saved by the Chief Pontiff
from a conspiracy of his nobles, is as remarkable as his saying. "By the
advice (of the Pontiff) all the nobles absented themselves from court.
The king wandered through his palace alone. He saw no one; all was
silence around. He became alarmed and distressed. At last the Chief
Pontiff appeared, and bowed his head in apparent misery, but spoke not a
word. The king entreated him to declare what had happened. The virtuous
man boldly related all that had passed, and conjured Bahram, in the name
of his glorious ancestors, to change his conduct and save himself from
destruction. The king was much moved, professed himself most penitent,
and said he was resolved his future life should prove his sincerity.
The overjoyed High Priest, delighted at this success, made a signal, at
which all the nobles and attendants were in an instant, as if by magic,
in their usual places. The monarch now perceived that only one opinion
prevailed on his past conduct. He repeated therefore to his nobles all
he had said to the Chief Pontiff, and his future reign was unstained by
cruelty or oppression." Malcolm's Persia,--M.]

[Footnote 73: Synesius tells this story of Carinus; and it is much more
natural to understand it of Carus, than (as Petavius and Tillemont
choose to do) of Probus.]

The threats of Carus were not without effect. He ravaged Mesopotamia,
cut in pieces whatever opposed his passage, made himself master of
the great cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon, (which seemed to have
surrendered without resistance,) and carried his victorious arms beyond
the Tigris. [74] He had seized the favorable moment for an invasion. The
Persian councils were distracted by domestic factions, and the greater
part of their forces were detained on the frontiers of India. Rome and
the East received with transports the news of such important advantages.
Flattery and hope painted, in the most lively colors, the fall of
Persia, the conquest of Arabia, the submission of Egypt, and a lasting
deliverance from the inroads of the Scythian nations. [75] But the reign
of Carus was destined to expose the vanity of predictions. They were
scarcely uttered before they were contradicted by his death; an event
attended with such ambiguous circumstances, that it may be related in a
letter from his own secretary to the praefect of the city. "Carus," says
he, "our dearest emperor, was confined by sickness to his bed, when a
furious tempest arose in the camp. The darkness which overspread the sky
was so thick, that we could no longer distinguish each other; and the
incessant flashes of lightning took from us the knowledge of all that
passed in the general confusion. Immediately after the most violent clap
of thunder, we heard a sudden cry that the emperor was dead; and it soon
appeared, that his chamberlains, in a rage of grief, had set fire to the
royal pavilion; a circumstance which gave rise to the report that Carus
was killed by lightning. But, as far as we have been able to investigate
the truth, his death was the natural effect of his disorder." [76]

[Footnote 74: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 250. Eutropius, ix. 18. The
two Victors.]

[Footnote 75: To the Persian victory of Carus I refer the dialogue of
the Philopatris, which has so long been an object of dispute among
the learned. But to explain and justify my opinion, would require a
dissertation. Note: Niebuhr, in the new edition of the Byzantine
Historians, (vol. x.) has boldly assigned the Philopatris to the tenth
century, and to the reign of Nicephorus Phocas. An opinion so decisively
pronounced by Niebuhr and favorably received by Hase, the learned editor
of Leo Diaconus, commands respectful consideration. But the whole tone
of the work appears to me altogether inconsistent with any period in
which philosophy did not stand, as it were, on some ground of equality
with Christianity. The doctrine of the Trinity is sarcastically
introduced rather as the strange doctrine of a new religion, than
the established tenet of a faith universally prevalent. The argument,
adopted from Solanus, concerning the formula of the procession of the
Holy Ghost, is utterly worthless, as it is a mere quotation in the words
of the Gospel of St. John, xv. 26. The only argument of any value is the
historic one, from the allusion to the recent violation of many virgins
in the Island of Crete. But neither is the language of Niebuhr quite
accurate, nor his reference to the Acroases of Theodosius satisfactory.
When, then, could this occurrence take place? Why not in the devastation
of the island by the Gothic pirates, during the reign of Claudius. Hist.
Aug. in Claud. p. 814. edit. Var. Lugd. Bat 1661.--M.]

[Footnote 76: Hist. August. p. 250. Yet Eutropius, Festus, Rufus, the
two Victors, Jerome, Sidonius Apollinaris, Syncellus, and Zonaras, all
ascribe the death of Carus to lightning.]




