## Chapter XXXVI: Total Extinction Of The Western Empire.--Part III.

Without the help of a personal interview, Genseric was sufficiently
acquainted with the genius and designs of his adversary. He practiced
his customary arts of fraud and delay, but he practiced them without
success. His applications for peace became each hour more submissive,
and perhaps more sincere; but the inflexible Majorian had adopted the
ancient maxim, that Rome could not be safe, as long as Carthage existed
in a hostile state. The king of the Vandals distrusted the valor of his
native subjects, who were enervated by the luxury of the South; [51] he
suspected the fidelity of the vanquished people, who abhorred him as an
Arian tyrant; and the desperate measure, which he executed, of reducing
Mauritania into a desert, [52] could not defeat the operations of the
Roman emperor, who was at liberty to land his troops on any part of the
African coast. But Genseric was saved from impending and inevitable ruin
by the treachery of some powerful subjects, envious, or apprehensive,
of their master's success. Guided by their secret intelligence, he
surprised the unguarded fleet in the Bay of Carthagena: many of the
ships were sunk, or taken, or burnt; and the preparations of three years
were destroyed in a single day. [53] After this event, the behavior of
the two antagonists showed them superior to their fortune. The Vandal,
instead of being elated by this accidental victory, immediately renewed
his solicitations for peace. The emperor of the West, who was capable
of forming great designs, and of supporting heavy disappointments,
consented to a treaty, or rather to a suspension of arms; in the full
assurance that, before he could restore his navy, he should be supplied
with provocations to justify a second war. Majorian returned to Italy,
to prosecute his labors for the public happiness; and, as he was
conscious of his own integrity, he might long remain ignorant of the
dark conspiracy which threatened his throne and his life. The recent
misfortune of Carthagena sullied the glory which had dazzled the eyes of
the multitude; almost every description of civil and military officers
were exasperated against the Reformer, since they all derived some
advantage from the abuses which he endeavored to suppress; and the
patrician Ricimer impelled the inconstant passions of the Barbarians
against a prince whom he esteemed and hated. The virtues of Majorian
could not protect him from the impetuous sedition, which broke out in
the camp near Tortona, at the foot of the Alps. He was compelled to
abdicate the Imperial purple: five days after his abdication, it was
reported that he died of a dysentery; [54] and the humble tomb, which
covered his remains, was consecrated by the respect and gratitude of
succeeding generations. [55] The private character of Majorian inspired
love and respect. Malicious calumny and satire excited his indignation,
or, if he himself were the object, his contempt; but he protected the
freedom of wit, and, in the hours which the emperor gave to the familiar
society of his friends, he could indulge his taste for pleasantry,
without degrading the majesty of his rank. [56]

[Footnote 51:

     Spoliisque potitus
     Immensis, robux luxu jam perdidit omne,
     Quo valuit dum pauper erat.
     --Panegyr. Majorian, 330.

He afterwards applies to Genseric, unjustly, as it should seem, the
vices of his subjects.]

[Footnote 52: He burnt the villages, and poisoned the springs, (Priscus,
p. 42.) Dubos (Hist. Critique, tom. i. p. 475) observes, that the
magazines which the Moors buried in the earth might escape his
destructive search. Two or three hundred pits are sometimes dug in the
same place; and each pit contains at least four hundred bushels of corn
Shaw's Travels, p. 139.]

[Footnote 53: Idatius, who was safe in Gallicia from the power of
Recimer boldly and honestly declares, Vandali per proditeres admoniti,
&c: i. e. dissembles, however, the name of the traitor.]

[Footnote 54: Procop. de Bell. Vandal. l. i. i. c. 8, p. 194. The
testimony of Idatius is fair and impartial: "Majorianum de Galliis Romam
redeuntem, et Romano imperio vel nomini res necessarias ordinantem;
Richimer livore percitus, et invidorum consilio fultus, fraude
interficit circumventum." Some read Suevorum, and I am unwilling to
efface either of the words, as they express the different accomplices
who united in the conspiracy against Majorian.]

[Footnote 55: See the Epigrams of Ennodius, No. cxxxv. inter Sirmond.
Opera, tom. i. p. 1903. It is flat and obscure; but Ennodius was made
bishop of Pavia fifty years after the death of Majorian, and his praise
deserves credit and regard.]

[Footnote 56: Sidonius gives a tedious account (l. i. epist. xi. p.
25-31) of a supper at Arles, to which he was invited by Majorian, a
short time before his death. He had no intention of praising a deceased
emperor: but a casual disinterested remark, "Subrisit Augustus; ut erat,
auctoritate servata, cum se communioni dedisset, joci plenus," outweighs
the six hundred lines of his venal panegyric.]

It was not, perhaps, without some regret, that Ricimer sacrificed his
friend to the interest of his ambition: but he resolved, in a second
choice, to avoid the imprudent preference of superior virtue and merit.
At his command, the obsequious senate of Rome bestowed the Imperial
title on Libius Severus, who ascended the throne of the West without
emerging from the obscurity of a private condition. History has scarcely
deigned to notice his birth, his elevation, his character, or his death.
Severus expired, as soon as his life became inconvenient to his patron;
[57] and it would be useless to discriminate his nominal reign in the
vacant interval of six years, between the death of Majorian and the
elevation of Anthemius. During that period, the government was in the
hands of Ricimer alone; and, although the modest Barbarian disclaimed
the name of king, he accumulated treasures, formed a separate army,
negotiated private alliances, and ruled Italy with the same independent
and despotic authority, which was afterwards exercised by Odoacer and
Theodoric. But his dominions were bounded by the Alps; and two Roman
generals, Marcellinus and Aegidius, maintained their allegiance to the
republic, by rejecting, with disdain, the phantom which he styled an
emperor. Marcellinus still adhered to the old religion; and the devout
Pagans, who secretly disobeyed the laws of the church and state,
applauded his profound skill in the science of divination. But he
possessed the more valuable qualifications of learning, virtue, and
courage; [58] the study of the Latin literature had improved his
taste; and his military talents had recommended him to the esteem and
confidence of the great Aetius, in whose ruin he was involved. By a
timely flight, Marcellinus escaped the rage of Valentinian, and boldly
asserted his liberty amidst the convulsions of the Western empire. His
voluntary, or reluctant, submission to the authority of Majorian,
was rewarded by the government of Sicily, and the command of an army,
stationed in that island to oppose, or to attack, the Vandals; but his
Barbarian mercenaries, after the emperor's death, were tempted to revolt
by the artful liberality of Ricimer. At the head of a band of faithful
followers, the intrepid Marcellinus occupied the province of Dalmatia,
assumed the title of patrician of the West, secured the love of his
subjects by a mild and equitable reign, built a fleet which claimed the
dominion of the Adriatic, and alternately alarmed the coasts of Italy
and of Africa. [59] Aegidius, the master-general of Gaul, who equalled,
or at least who imitated, the heroes of ancient Rome, [60] proclaimed
his immortal resentment against the assassins of his beloved master. A
brave and numerous army was attached to his standard: and, though he was
prevented by the arts of Ricimer, and the arms of the Visigoths, from
marching to the gates of Rome, he maintained his independent sovereignty
beyond the Alps, and rendered the name of Aegidius, respectable both
in peace and war. The Franks, who had punished with exile the youthful
follies of Childeric, elected the Roman general for their king: his
vanity, rather than his ambition, was gratified by that singular honor;
and when the nation, at the end of four years, repented of the
injury which they had offered to the Merovingian family, he patiently
acquiesced in the restoration of the lawful prince. The authority of
Aegidius ended only with his life, and the suspicions of poison and
secret violence, which derived some countenance from the character of
Ricimer, were eagerly entertained by the passionate credulity of the
Gauls. [61]

[Footnote 57: Sidonius (Panegyr. Anthem. 317) dismisses him to
heaven:--Auxerat Augustus naturae lege Severus--Divorum numerum. And an
old list of the emperors, composed about the time of Justinian, praises
his piety, and fixes his residence at Rome, (Sirmond. Not. ad Sidon. p.
111, 112.)]

[Footnote 58: Tillemont, who is always scandalized by the virtues of
infidels, attributes this advantageous portrait of Marcellinus (which
Suidas has preserved) to the partial zeal of some Pagan historian,
(Hist. des Empereurs. tom. vi. p. 330.)]

[Footnote 59: Procopius de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 6, p. 191. In various
circumstances of the life of Marcellinus, it is not easy to reconcile
the Greek historian with the Latin Chronicles of the times.]

[Footnote 60: I must apply to Aegidius the praises which Sidonius
(Panegyr Majorian, 553) bestows on a nameless master-general, who
commanded the rear-guard of Majorian. Idatius, from public report,
commends his Christian piety; and Priscus mentions (p. 42) his military
virtues.]

[Footnote 61: Greg. Turon. l. ii. c. 12, in tom. ii. p. 168. The Pere
Daniel, whose ideas were superficial and modern, has started some
objections against the story of Childeric, (Hist. de France, tom.
i. Preface Historique, p. lxxvii., &c.:) but they have been fairly
satisfied by Dubos, (Hist. Critique, tom. i. p. 460-510,) and by two
authors who disputed the prize of the Academy of Soissons, (p. 131-177,
310-339.) With regard to the term of Childeric's exile, it is necessary
either to prolong the life of Aegidius beyond the date assigned by
the Chronicle of Idatius or to correct the text of Gregory, by reading
quarto anno, instead of octavo.]

The kingdom of Italy, a name to which the Western empire was gradually
reduced, was afflicted, under the reign of Ricimer, by the incessant
depredations of the Vandal pirates. [62] In the spring of each year,
they equipped a formidable navy in the port of Carthage; and Genseric
himself, though in a very advanced age, still commanded in person the
most important expeditions. His designs were concealed with impenetrable
secrecy, till the moment that he hoisted sail. When he was asked, by
his pilot, what course he should steer, "Leave the determination to
the winds, (replied the Barbarian, with pious arrogance;) they will
transport us to the guilty coast, whose inhabitants have provoked the
divine justice;" but if Genseric himself deigned to issue more precise
orders, he judged the most wealthy to be the most criminal. The Vandals
repeatedly visited the coasts of Spain, Liguria, Tuscany, Campania,
Lucania, Bruttium, Apulia, Calabria, Venetia, Dalmatia, Epirus, Greece,
and Sicily: they were tempted to subdue the Island of Sardinia, so
advantageously placed in the centre of the Mediterranean; and their arms
spread desolation, or terror, from the columns of Hercules to the mouth
of the Nile. As they were more ambitious of spoil than of glory, they
seldom attacked any fortified cities, or engaged any regular troops in
the open field. But the celerity of their motions enabled them, almost
at the same time, to threaten and to attack the most distant objects,
which attracted their desires; and as they always embarked a sufficient
number of horses, they had no sooner landed, than they swept the
dismayed country with a body of light cavalry. Yet, notwithstanding the
example of their king, the native Vandals and Alani insensibly declined
this toilsome and perilous warfare; the hardy generation of the first
conquerors was almost extinguished, and their sons, who were born in
Africa, enjoyed the delicious baths and gardens which had been acquired
by the valor of their fathers. Their place was readily supplied by a
various multitude of Moors and Romans, of captives and outlaws; and
those desperate wretches, who had already violated the laws of their
country, were the most eager to promote the atrocious acts which
disgrace the victories of Genseric. In the treatment of his unhappy
prisoners, he sometimes consulted his avarice, and sometimes indulged
his cruelty; and the massacre of five hundred noble citizens of Zant
or Zacynthus, whose mangled bodies he cast into the Ionian Sea, was
imputed, by the public indignation, to his latest posterity.

[Footnote 62: The naval war of Genseric is described by Priscus,
(Excerpta Legation. p. 42,) Procopius, (de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 5, p.
189, 190, and c. 22, p. 228,) Victor Vitensis, (de Persecut. Vandal. l.
i. c. 17, and Ruinart, p. 467-481,) and in three panegyrics of Sidonius,
whose chronological order is absurdly transposed in the editions both
of Savaron and Sirmond. (Avit. Carm. vii. 441-451. Majorian. Carm. v.
327-350, 385-440. Anthem. Carm. ii. 348-386) In one passage the poet
seems inspired by his subject, and expresses a strong idea by a lively
image:--

     Hinc Vandalus hostis
     Urget; et in nostrum numerosa classe quotannis
     Militat excidium; conversoque ordine Fati
     Torrida Caucaseos infert mihi Byrsa furoree]

Such crimes could not be excused by any provocations; but the war,
which the king of the Vandals prosecuted against the Roman empire was
justified by a specious and reasonable motive. The widow of Valentinian,
Eudoxia, whom he had led captive from Rome to Carthage, was the sole
heiress of the Theodosian house; her elder daughter, Eudocia, became
the reluctant wife of Hunneric, his eldest son; and the stern father,
asserting a legal claim, which could not easily be refuted or satisfied,
demanded a just proportion of the Imperial patrimony. An adequate, or at
least a valuable, compensation, was offered by the Eastern emperor, to
purchase a necessary peace. Eudoxia and her younger daughter, Placidia,
were honorably restored, and the fury of the Vandals was confined to the
limits of the Western empire. The Italians, destitute of a naval force,
which alone was capable of protecting their coasts, implored the aid of
the more fortunate nations of the East; who had formerly acknowledged,
in peace and war, the supremacy of Rome. But the perpetual divisions of
the two empires had alienated their interest and their inclinations; the
faith of a recent treaty was alleged; and the Western Romans, instead
of arms and ships, could only obtain the assistance of a cold and
ineffectual mediation. The haughty Ricimer, who had long struggled with
the difficulties of his situation, was at length reduced to address the
throne of Constantinople, in the humble language of a subject; and Italy
submitted, as the price and security to accept a master from the choice
of the emperor of the East. [63] It is not the purpose of the present
chapter, or even of the present volume, to continue the distinct series
of the Byzantine history; but a concise view of the reign and character
of the emperor Leo, may explain the last efforts that were attempted to
save the falling empire of the West. [64]

[Footnote 63: The poet himself is compelled to acknowledge the distress
of Ricimer:--

     Praeterea invictus Ricimer, quem publica fata
     Respiciunt, proprio solas vix Marte repellit
     Piratam per rura vagum.

Italy addresses her complaint to the Tyber, and Rome, at the
solicitation of the river god, transports herself to Constantinople,
renounces her ancient claims, and implores the friendship of Aurora,
the goddess of the East. This fabulous machinery, which the genius of
Claudian had used and abused, is the constant and miserable resource of
the muse of Sidonius.]

[Footnote 64: The original authors of the reigns of Marcian, Leo, and
Zeno, are reduced to some imperfect fragments, whose deficiencies must
be supplied from the more recent compilations of Theophanes, Zonaras,
and Cedrenus.]

Since the death of the younger Theodosius, the domestic
repose of Constantinople had never been interrupted by war or faction.
Pulcheria had bestowed her hand, and the sceptre of the East, on the
modest virtue of Marcian: he gratefully reverenced her august rank and
virgin chastity; and, after her death, he gave his people the example of
the religious worship that was due to the memory of the Imperial saint.
[65] Attentive to the prosperity of his own dominions, Marcian seemed
to behold, with indifference, the misfortunes of Rome; and the obstinate
refusal of a brave and active prince, to draw his sword against the
Vandals, was ascribed to a secret promise, which had formerly been
exacted from him when he was a captive in the power of Genseric. [66]
The death of Marcian, after a reign of seven years, would have exposed
the East to the danger of a popular election; if the superior weight of
a single family had not been able to incline the balance in favor of the
candidate whose interest they supported. The patrician Aspar might
have placed the diadem on his own head, if he would have subscribed the
Nicene creed. [67] During three generations, the armies of the East
were successively commanded by his father, by himself, and by his son
Ardaburius; his Barbarian guards formed a military force that overawed
the palace and the capital; and the liberal distribution of his immense
treasures rendered Aspar as popular as he was powerful. He recommended
the obscure name of Leo of Thrace, a military tribune, and the principal
steward of his household. His nomination was unanimously ratified by the
senate; and the servant of Aspar received the Imperial crown from the
hands of the patriarch or bishop, who was permitted to express, by this
unusual ceremony, the suffrage of the Deity. [68] This emperor, the
first of the name of Leo, has been distinguished by the title of the
Great; from a succession of princes, who gradually fixed in the opinion
of the Greeks a very humble standard of heroic, or at least of royal,
perfection. Yet the temperate firmness with which Leo resisted the
oppression of his benefactor, showed that he was conscious of his duty
and of his prerogative. Aspar was astonished to find that his influence
could no longer appoint a praefect of Constantinople: he presumed to
reproach his sovereign with a breach of promise, and insolently shaking
his purple, "It is not proper, (said he,) that the man who is invested
with this garment, should be guilty of lying." "Nor is it proper,
(replied Leo,) that a prince should be compelled to resign his own
judgment, and the public interest, to the will of a subject."[69] After
this extraordinary scene, it was impossible that the reconciliation of
the emperor and the patrician could be sincere; or, at least, that it
could be solid and permanent. An army of Isaurians [70] was secretly
levied, and introduced into Constantinople; and while Leo undermined the
authority, and prepared the disgrace, of the family of Aspar, his
mild and cautious behavior restrained them from any rash and desperate
attempts, which might have been fatal to themselves, or their enemies.
The measures of peace and war were affected by this internal revolution.
As long as Aspar degraded the majesty of the throne, the secret
correspondence of religion and interest engaged him to favor the cause
of Genseric. When Leo had delivered himself from that ignominious
servitude, he listened to the complaints of the Italians; resolved to
extirpate the tyranny of the Vandals; and declared his alliance with
his colleague, Anthemius, whom he solemnly invested with the diadem and
purple of the West.

[Footnote 65: St. Pulcheria died A.D. 453, four years before her nominal
husband; and her festival is celebrated on the 10th of September by
the modern Greeks: she bequeathed an immense patrimony to pious, or, at
least, to ecclesiastical, uses. See Tillemont, Memoires Eccles. tom. xv
p. 181-184.]

[Footnote 66: See Procopius, de Bell. Vandal. l. i. c. 4, p. 185.]

[Footnote 67: From this disability of Aspar to ascend the throne, it may
be inferred that the stain of Heresy was perpetual and indelible, while
that of Barbarism disappeared in the second generation.]

[Footnote 68: Theophanes, p. 95. This appears to be the first origin
of a ceremony, which all the Christian princes of the world have since
adopted and from which the clergy have deduced the most formidable
consequences.]

[Footnote 69: Cedrenus, (p. 345, 346,) who was conversant with the
writers of better days, has preserved the remarkable words of Aspar.]

[Footnote 70: The power of the Isaurians agitated the Eastern empire in
the two succeeding reigns of Zeno and Anastasius; but it ended in
the destruction of those Barbarians, who maintained their fierce
independences about two hundred and thirty years.]

The virtues of Anthemius have perhaps been magnified, since the Imperial
descent, which he could only deduce from the usurper Procopius, has been
swelled into a line of emperors. [71] But the merit of his immediate
parents, their honors, and their riches, rendered Anthemius one of the
most illustrious subjects of the East. His father, Procopius, obtained,
after his Persian embassy, the rank of general and patrician; and
the name of Anthemius was derived from his maternal grandfather, the
celebrated praefect, who protected, with so much ability and success,
the infant reign of Theodosius. The grandson of the praefect was raised
above the condition of a private subject, by his marriage with Euphemia,
the daughter of the emperor Marcian. This splendid alliance, which might
supersede the necessity of merit, hastened the promotion of Anthemius to
the successive dignities of count, of master-general, of consul, and
of patrician; and his merit or fortune claimed the honors of a victory,
which was obtained on the banks of the Danube, over the Huns. Without
indulging an extravagant ambition, the son-in-law of Marcian might hope
to be his successor; but Anthemius supported the disappointment with
courage and patience; and his subsequent elevation was universally
approved by the public, who esteemed him worthy to reign, till
he ascended the throne. [72] The emperor of the West marched from
Constantinople, attended by several counts of high distinction, and a
body of guards almost equal to the strength and numbers of a regular
army: he entered Rome in triumph, and the choice of Leo was confirmed
by the senate, the people, and the Barbarian confederates of Italy. [73]
The solemn inauguration of Anthemius was followed by the nuptials of
his daughter and the patrician Ricimer; a fortunate event, which was
considered as the firmest security of the union and happiness of the
state. The wealth of two empires was ostentatiously displayed; and many
senators completed their ruin, by an expensive effort to disguise their
poverty. All serious business was suspended during this festival; the
courts of justice were shut; the streets of Rome, the theatres, the
places of public and private resort, resounded with hymeneal songs and
dances: and the royal bride, clothed in silken robes, with a crown on
her head, was conducted to the palace of Ricimer, who had changed
his military dress for the habit of a consul and a senator. On this
memorable occasion, Sidonius, whose early ambition had been so fatally
blasted, appeared as the orator of Auvergne, among the provincial
deputies who addressed the throne with congratulations or complaints.
[74] The calends of January were now approaching, and the venal poet,
who had loved Avitus, and esteemed Majorian, was persuaded by his
friends to celebrate, in heroic verse, the merit, the felicity, the
second consulship, and the future triumphs, of the emperor Anthemius.
Sidonius pronounced, with assurance and success, a panegyric which is
still extant; and whatever might be the imperfections, either of the
subject or of the composition, the welcome flatterer was immediately
rewarded with the praefecture of Rome; a dignity which placed him among
the illustrious personages of the empire, till he wisely preferred the
more respectable character of a bishop and a saint. [75]

[Footnote 71:

     Tali tu civis ab urbe
     Procopio genitore micas; cui prisca propago
     Augustis venit a proavis.

The poet (Sidon. Panegyr. Anthem. 67-306) then proceeds to relate the
private life and fortunes of the future emperor, with which he must have
been imperfectly acquainted.]

[Footnote 72: Sidonius discovers, with tolerable ingenuity, that this
disappointment added new lustre to the virtues of Anthemius, (210, &c.,)
who declined one sceptre, and reluctantly accepted another, (22, &c.)]

[Footnote 73: The poet again celebrates the unanimity of all orders of
the state, (15-22;) and the Chronicle of Idatius mentions the forces
which attended his march.]

[Footnote 74: Interveni autem nuptiis Patricii Ricimeris, cui filia
perennis Augusti in spem publicae securitatis copulabator. The journey
of Sidonius from Lyons, and the festival of Rome, are described with
some spirit. L. i. epist. 5, p. 9-13, epist. 9, p. 21.]

[Footnote 75: Sidonius (l. i. epist. 9, p. 23, 24) very fairly states
his motive, his labor, and his reward. "Hic ipse Panegyricus, si non
judicium, certa eventum, boni operis, accepit." He was made bishop of
Clermont, A.D. 471. Tillemont, Mem. Eccles. tom. xvi. p. 750.]

The Greeks ambitiously commend the piety and catholic faith of the
emperor whom they gave to the West; nor do they forget to observe, that
when he left Constantinople, he converted his palace into the pious
foundation of a public bath, a church, and a hospital for old men. [76]
Yet some suspicious appearances are found to sully the theological fame
of Anthemius. From the conversation of Philotheus, a Macedonian sectary,
he had imbibed the spirit of religious toleration; and the Heretics
of Rome would have assembled with impunity, if the bold and vehement
censure which Pope Hilary pronounced in the church of St. Peter, had not
obliged him to abjure the unpopular indulgence. [77] Even the Pagans,
a feeble and obscure remnant, conceived some vain hopes, from the
indifference, or partiality, of Anthemius; and his singular friendship
for the philosopher Severus, whom he promoted to the consulship, was
ascribed to a secret project, of reviving the ancient worship of the
gods. [78] These idols were crumbled into dust: and the mythology which
had once been the creed of nations, was so universally disbelieved, that
it might be employed without scandal, or at least without suspicion,
by Christian poets. [79] Yet the vestiges of superstition were not
absolutely obliterated, and the festival of the Lupercalia, whose origin
had preceded the foundation of Rome, was still celebrated under the
reign of Anthemius. The savage and simple rites were expressive of an
early state of society before the invention of arts and agriculture. The
rustic deities who presided over the toils and pleasures of the pastoral
life, Pan, Faunus, and their train of satyrs, were such as the fancy of
shepherds might create, sportive, petulant, and lascivious; whose power
was limited, and whose malice was inoffensive. A goat was the offering
the best adapted to their character and attributes; the flesh of the
victim was roasted on willow spits; and the riotous youths, who crowded
to the feast, ran naked about the fields, with leather thongs in their
hands, communicating, as it was supposed, the blessing of fecundity to
the women whom they touched. [80] The altar of Pan was erected, perhaps
by Evander the Arcadian, in a dark recess in the side of the Palantine
hill, watered by a perpetual fountain, and shaded by a hanging grove.
A tradition, that, in the same place, Romulus and Remus were suckled by
the wolf, rendered it still more sacred and venerable in the eyes of
the Romans; and this sylvan spot was gradually surrounded by the stately
edifices of the Forum. [81] After the conversion of the Imperial city,
the Christians still continued, in the month of February, the annual
celebration of the Lupercalia; to which they ascribed a secret and
mysterious influence on the genial powers of the animal and vegetable
world.

The bishops of Rome were solicitous to abolish a profane custom,
so repugnant to the spirit of Christianity; but their zeal was not
supported by the authority of the civil magistrate: the inveterate abuse
subsisted till the end of the fifth century, and Pope Gelasius, who
purified the capital from the last stain of idolatry, appeased by a
formal apology, the murmurs of the senate and people. [82]

[Footnote 76: The palace of Anthemius stood on the banks of the
Propontis. In the ninth century, Alexius, the son-in-law of the emperor
Theophilus, obtained permission to purchase the ground; and ended his
days in a monastery which he founded on that delightful spot. Ducange
Constantinopolis Christiana, p. 117, 152.]

[Footnote 77: Papa Hilarius... apud beatum Petrum Apostolum, palam ne
id fieret, clara voce constrinxit, in tantum ut non ea facienda cum
interpositione juramenti idem promitteret Imperator. Gelasius Epistol ad
Andronicum, apud Baron. A.D. 467, No. 3. The cardinal observes, with
some complacency, that it was much easier to plant heresies at
Constantinople, than at Rome.]

[Footnote 78: Damascius, in the life of the philosopher Isidore, apud
Photium, p. 1049. Damascius, who lived under Justinian, composed another
work, consisting of 570 praeternatural stories of souls, daemons,
apparitions, the dotage of Platonic Paganism.]

[Footnote 79: In the poetical works of Sidonius, which he afterwards
condemned, (l. ix. epist. 16, p. 285,) the fabulous deities are the
principal actors. If Jerom was scourged by the angels for only reading
Virgil, the bishop of Clermont, for such a vile imitation, deserved an
additional whipping from the Muses.]

[Footnote 80: Ovid (Fast. l. ii. 267-452) has given an amusing
description of the follies of antiquity, which still inspired so much
respect, that a grave magistrate, running naked through the streets, was
not an object of astonishment or laughter.]

[Footnote 81: See Dionys. Halicarn. l. i. p. 25, 65, edit. Hudson. The
Roman antiquaries Donatus (l. ii. c. 18, p. 173, 174) and Nardini (p.
386, 387) have labored to ascertain the true situation of the Lupercal.]

[Footnote 82: Baronius published, from the MSS. of the Vatican, this
epistle of Pope Gelasius, (A.D. 496, No. 28-45,) which is entitled
Adversus Andromachum Senatorem, caeterosque Romanos, qui Lupercalia
secundum morem pristinum colenda constituebant. Gelasius always supposes
that his adversaries are nominal Christians, and, that he may not yield
to them in absurd prejudice, he imputes to this harmless festival all
the calamities of the age.]




