## Chapter XII: Reigns Of Tacitus, Probus, Carus And His Sons.--Part I.

     Conduct Of The Army And Senate After The Death Of Aurelian.
     --Reigns Of Tacitus, Probus, Carus, And His Sons.

Such was the unhappy condition of the Roman emperors, that, whatever
might be their conduct, their fate was commonly the same. A life of
pleasure or virtue, of severity or mildness, of indolence or glory,
alike led to an untimely grave; and almost every reign is closed by the
same disgusting repetition of treason and murder. The death of Aurelian,
however, is remarkable by its extraordinary consequences. The legions
admired, lamented, and revenged their victorious chief. The artifice of
his perfidious secretary was discovered and punished.

The deluded conspirators attended the funeral of their injured
sovereign, with sincere or well-feigned contrition, and submitted to the
unanimous resolution of the military order, which was signified by the
following epistle: "The brave and fortunate armies to the senate and
people of Rome.--The crime of one man, and the error of many, have
deprived us of the late emperor Aurelian. May it please you, venerable
lords and fathers! to place him in the number of the gods, and to
appoint a successor whom your judgment shall declare worthy of
the Imperial purple! None of those whose guilt or misfortune have
contributed to our loss, shall ever reign over us." [1] The Roman
senators heard, without surprise, that another emperor had been
assassinated in his camp; they secretly rejoiced in the fall of
Aurelian; and, besides the recent notoriety of the facts, constantly
draws his materials from the Journals of the Senate, and the but the
modest and dutiful address of the legions, when it was communicated in
full assembly by the consul, diffused the most pleasing astonishment.
Such honors as fear and perhaps esteem could extort, they liberally
poured forth on the memory of their deceased sovereign. Such
acknowledgments as gratitude could inspire, they returned to the
faithful armies of the republic, who entertained so just a sense of
the legal authority of the senate in the choice of an emperor. Yet,
notwithstanding this flattering appeal, the most prudent of the assembly
declined exposing their safety and dignity to the caprice of an armed
multitude. The strength of the legions was, indeed, a pledge of their
sincerity, since those who may command are seldom reduced to the
necessity of dissembling; but could it naturally be expected, that a
hasty repentance would correct the inveterate habits of fourscore years?
Should the soldiers relapse into their accustomed seditions, their
insolence might disgrace the majesty of the senate, and prove fatal to
the object of its choice. Motives like these dictated a decree, by
which the election of a new emperor was referred to the suffrage of the
military order.

[Footnote 1: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 222. Aurelius Victor mentions
a formal deputation from the troops to the senate.]

The contention that ensued is one of the best attested, but most
improbable events in the history of mankind. [2] The troops, as if
satiated with the exercise of power, again conjured the senate to invest
one of its own body with the Imperial purple. The senate still persisted
in its refusal; the army in its request. The reciprocal offer was
pressed and rejected at least three times, and, whilst the obstinate
modesty of either party was resolved to receive a master from the hands
of the other, eight months insensibly elapsed; an amazing period of
tranquil anarchy, during which the Roman world remained without a
sovereign, without a usurper, and without a sedition. [201] The generals
and magistrates appointed by Aurelian continued to execute their
ordinary functions; and it is observed, that a proconsul of Asia was the
only considerable person removed from his office in the whole course of
the interregnum.

[Footnote 2: Vopiscus, our principal authority, wrote at Rome, sixteen
years only after the death of Aurelian; and, besides the recent
notoriety of the facts, constantly draws his materials from the Journals
of the Senate, and the original papers of the Ulpian library. Zosimus
and Zonaras appear as ignorant of this transaction as they were in
general of the Roman constitution.]

[Footnote 201: The interregnum could not be more than seven months;
Aurelian was assassinated in the middle of March, the year of Rome 1028.
Tacitus was elected the 25th September in the same year.--G.]

An event somewhat similar, but much less authentic, is supposed to have
happened after the death of Romulus, who, in his life and character,
bore some affinity with Aurelian. The throne was vacant during twelve
months, till the election of a Sabine philosopher, and the public peace
was guarded in the same manner, by the union of the several orders of
the state. But, in the time of Numa and Romulus, the arms of the people
were controlled by the authority of the Patricians; and the balance of
freedom was easily preserved in a small and virtuous community. [3] The
decline of the Roman state, far different from its infancy, was attended
with every circumstance that could banish from an interregnum the
prospect of obedience and harmony: an immense and tumultuous capital,
a wide extent of empire, the servile equality of despotism, an army
of four hundred thousand mercenaries, and the experience of frequent
revolutions. Yet, notwithstanding all these temptations, the discipline
and memory of Aurelian still restrained the seditious temper of the
troops, as well as the fatal ambition of their leaders. The flower of
the legions maintained their stations on the banks of the Bosphorus, and
the Imperial standard awed the less powerful camps of Rome and of the
provinces. A generous though transient enthusiasm seemed to animate the
military order; and we may hope that a few real patriots cultivated the
returning friendship of the army and the senate, as the only expedient
capable of restoring the republic to its ancient beauty and vigor.

[Footnote 3: Liv. i. 17 Dionys. Halicarn. l. ii. p. 115. Plutarch
in Numa, p. 60. The first of these writers relates the story like an
orator, the second like a lawyer, and the third like a moralist, and
none of them probably without some intermixture of fable.]

On the twenty-fifth of September, near eight months after the murder of
Aurelian, the consul convoked an assembly of the senate, and reported
the doubtful and dangerous situation of the empire. He slightly
insinuated, that the precarious loyalty of the soldiers depended on the
chance of every hour, and of every accident; but he represented, with
the most convincing eloquence, the various dangers that might attend any
further delay in the choice of an emperor. Intelligence, he said, was
already received, that the Germans had passed the Rhine, and occupied
some of the strongest and most opulent cities of Gaul. The ambition of
the Persian king kept the East in perpetual alarms; Egypt, Africa, and
Illyricum, were exposed to foreign and domestic arms, and the levity of
Syria would prefer even a female sceptre to the sanctity of the Roman
laws. The consul, then addressing himself to Tacitus, the first of the
senators, [4] required his opinion on the important subject of a proper
candidate for the vacant throne.

[Footnote 4: Vopiscus (in Hist. August p. 227) calls him "primae
sententia consularis;" and soon afterwards Princeps senatus. It is
natural to suppose, that the monarchs of Rome, disdaining that humble
title, resigned it to the most ancient of the senators.]

If we can prefer personal merit to accidental greatness, we shall esteem
the birth of Tacitus more truly noble than that of kings. He claimed his
descent from the philosophic historian, whose writings will instruct
the last generations of mankind. [5] The senator Tacitus was then
seventy-five years of age. [6] The long period of his innocent life was
adorned with wealth and honors. He had twice been invested with the
consular dignity, [7] and enjoyed with elegance and sobriety his ample
patrimony of between two and three millions sterling. [8] The experience
of so many princes, whom he had esteemed or endured, from the vain
follies of Elagabalus to the useful rigor of Aurelian, taught him to
form a just estimate of the duties, the dangers, and the temptations
of their sublime station. From the assiduous study of his immortal
ancestor, he derived the knowledge of the Roman constitution, and of
human nature. [9] The voice of the people had already named Tacitus as
the citizen the most worthy of empire. The ungrateful rumor reached his
ears, and induced him to seek the retirement of one of his villas in
Campania. He had passed two months in the delightful privacy of Baiae,
when he reluctantly obeyed the summons of the consul to resume his
honorable place in the senate, and to assist the republic with his
counsels on this important occasion.

[Footnote 5: The only objection to this genealogy is, that the historian
was named Cornelius, the emperor, Claudius. But under the lower empire,
surnames were extremely various and uncertain.]

[Footnote 6: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 637. The Alexandrian Chronicle, by an
obvious mistake, transfers that age to Aurelian.]

[Footnote 7: In the year 273, he was ordinary consul. But he must have
been Suffectus many years before, and most probably under Valerian.]

[Footnote 8: Bis millies octingenties. Vopiscus in Hist. August p. 229.
This sum, according to the old standard, was equivalent to eight hundred
and forty thousand Roman pounds of silver, each of the value of three
pounds sterling. But in the age of Tacitus, the coin had lost much of
its weight and purity.]

[Footnote 9: After his accession, he gave orders that ten copies of
the historian should be annually transcribed and placed in the public
libraries. The Roman libraries have long since perished, and the most
valuable part of Tacitus was preserved in a single Ms., and discovered
in a monastery of Westphalia. See Bayle, Dictionnaire, Art. Tacite, and
Lipsius ad Annal. ii. 9.]

He arose to speak, when from every quarter of the house, he was saluted
with the names of Augustus and emperor. "Tacitus Augustus, the gods
preserve thee! we choose thee for our sovereign; to thy care we intrust
the republic and the world. Accept the empire from the authority of the
senate. It is due to thy rank, to thy conduct, to thy manners." As soon
as the tumult of acclamations subsided, Tacitus attempted to decline the
dangerous honor, and to express his wonder, that they should elect his
age and infirmities to succeed the martial vigor of Aurelian. "Are these
limbs, conscript fathers! fitted to sustain the weight of armor, or to
practise the exercises of the camp? The variety of climates, and the
hardships of a military life, would soon oppress a feeble constitution,
which subsists only by the most tender management. My exhausted strength
scarcely enables me to discharge the duty of a senator; how insufficient
would it prove to the arduous labors of war and government! Can you
hope, that the legions will respect a weak old man, whose days have been
spent in the shade of peace and retirement? Can you desire that I should
ever find reason to regret the favorable opinion of the senate?" [10]

[Footnote 10: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 227.]

The reluctance of Tacitus (and it might possibly be sincere) was
encountered by the affectionate obstinacy of the senate. Five hundred
voices repeated at once, in eloquent confusion, that the greatest of the
Roman princes, Numa, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines, had ascended
the throne in a very advanced season of life; that the mind, not the
body, a sovereign, not a soldier, was the object of their choice; and
that they expected from him no more than to guide by his wisdom the
valor of the legions. These pressing though tumultuary instances were
seconded by a more regular oration of Metius Falconius, the next on the
consular bench to Tacitus himself. He reminded the assembly of the
evils which Rome had endured from the vices of headstrong and capricious
youths, congratulated them on the election of a virtuous and experienced
senator, and, with a manly, though perhaps a selfish, freedom, exhorted
Tacitus to remember the reasons of his elevation, and to seek a
successor, not in his own family, but in the republic. The speech of
Falconius was enforced by a general acclamation. The emperor elect
submitted to the authority of his country, and received the voluntary
homage of his equals. The judgment of the senate was confirmed by the
consent of the Roman people, and of the Praetorian guards. [11]

[Footnote 11: Hist. August. p. 228. Tacitus addressed the Praetorians
by the appellation of sanctissimi milites, and the people by that of
sacratissim. Quirites.]

The administration of Tacitus was not unworthy of his life and
principles. A grateful servant of the senate, he considered that
national council as the author, and himself as the subject, of the laws.
[12] He studied to heal the wounds which Imperial pride, civil discord,
and military violence, had inflicted on the constitution, and to
restore, at least, the image of the ancient republic, as it had been
preserved by the policy of Augustus, and the virtues of Trajan and
the Antonines. It may not be useless to recapitulate some of the most
important prerogatives which the senate appeared to have regained by the
election of Tacitus. [13] 1. To invest one of their body, under the title
of emperor, with the general command of the armies, and the government
of the frontier provinces. 2. To determine the list, or, as it was then
styled, the College of Consuls. They were twelve in number, who, in
successive pairs, each, during the space of two months, filled the year,
and represented the dignity of that ancient office. The authority of
the senate, in the nomination of the consuls, was exercised with such
independent freedom, that no regard was paid to an irregular request of
the emperor in favor of his brother Florianus. "The senate," exclaimed
Tacitus, with the honest transport of a patriot, "understand the
character of a prince whom they have chosen." 3. To appoint the
proconsuls and presidents of the provinces, and to confer on all the
magistrates their civil jurisdiction. 4. To receive appeals through the
intermediate office of the praefect of the city from all the tribunals
of the empire. 5. To give force and validity, by their decrees, to such
as they should approve of the emperor's edicts. 6. To these several
branches of authority we may add some inspection over the finances,
since, even in the stern reign of Aurelian, it was in their power to
divert a part of the revenue from the public service. [14]

[Footnote 12: In his manumissions he never exceeded the number of
a hundred, as limited by the Caninian law, which was enacted under
Augustus, and at length repealed by Justinian. See Casaubon ad locum
Vopisci.]

[Footnote 13: See the lives of Tacitus, Florianus, and Probus,
in the Augustan History; we may be well assured, that whatever the
soldier gave the senator had already given.]

[Footnote 14: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 216. The passage is perfectly
clear, both Casaubon and Salmasius wish to correct it.]

Circular epistles were sent, without delay, to all the principal cities
of the empire, Treves, Milan, Aquileia, Thessalo nica, Corinth, Athens,
Antioch, Alexandria, and Carthage, to claim their obedience, and to
inform them of the happy revolution, which had restored the Roman senate
to its ancient dignity. Two of these epistles are still extant.
We likewise possess two very singular fragments of the private
correspondence of the senators on this occasion. They discover the most
excessive joy, and the most unbounded hopes. "Cast away your indolence,"
it is thus that one of the senators addresses his friend, "emerge from
your retirements of Baiae and Puteoli. Give yourself to the city, to the
senate. Rome flourishes, the whole republic flourishes. Thanks to the
Roman army, to an army truly Roman; at length we have recovered our
just authority, the end of all our desires. We hear appeals, we appoint
proconsuls, we create emperors; perhaps too we may restrain them--to the
wise a word is sufficient." [15] These lofty expectations were, however,
soon disappointed; nor, indeed, was it possible that the armies and the
provinces should long obey the luxurious and unwarlike nobles of Rome.
On the slightest touch, the unsupported fabric of their pride and power
fell to the ground. The expiring senate displayed a sudden lustre,
blazed for a moment and was extinguished forever.

[Footnote 15: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 230, 232, 233. The senators
celebrated the happy restoration with hecatombs and public rejoicings.]

All that had yet passed at Rome was no more than a theatrical
representation, unless it was ratified by the more substantial power of
the legions. Leaving the senators to enjoy their dream of freedom and
ambition, Tacitus proceeded to the Thracian camp, and was there, by the
Praetorian praefect, presented to the assembled troops, as the prince
whom they themselves had demanded, and whom the senate had bestowed. As
soon as the praefect was silent, the emperor addressed himself to the
soldiers with eloquence and propriety. He gratified their avarice by a
liberal distribution of treasure, under the names of pay and donative.
He engaged their esteem by a spirited declaration, that although his age
might disable him from the performance of military exploits, his
counsels should never be unworthy of a Roman general, the successor of
the brave Aurelian. [16]

[Footnote 16: Hist. August. p. 228.]

Whilst the deceased emperor was making preparations for a second
expedition into the East, he had negotiated with the Alani, [161] a
Scythian people, who pitched their tents in the neighborhood of the
Lake Moeotis. Those barbarians, allured by presents and subsidies, had
promised to invade Persia with a numerous body of light cavalry. They
were faithful to their engagements; but when they arrived on the Roman
frontier, Aurelian was already dead, the design of the Persian war
was at least suspended, and the generals, who, during the interregnum,
exercised a doubtful authority, were unprepared either to receive or
to oppose them. Provoked by such treatment, which they considered as
trifling and perfidious, the Alani had recourse to their own valor for
their payment and revenge; and as they moved with the usual swiftness of
Tartars, they had soon spread themselves over the provinces of Pontus,
Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Galatia. The legions, who from the opposite
shores of the Bosphorus could almost distinguish the flames of the
cities and villages, impatiently urged their general to lead them
against the invaders. The conduct of Tacitus was suitable to his age and
station. He convinced the barbarians of the faith, as well as the power,
of the empire. Great numbers of the Alani, appeased by the punctual
discharge of the engagements which Aurelian had contracted with them,
relinquished their booty and captives, and quietly retreated to their
own deserts, beyond the Phasis. Against the remainder, who refused
peace, the Roman emperor waged, in person, a successful war. Seconded by
an army of brave and experienced veterans, in a few weeks he delivered
the provinces of Asia from the terror of the Scythian invasion. [17]

[Footnote 161: On the Alani, see ch. xxvi. note 55.--M.]

[Footnote 17: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 230. Zosimus, l. i. p. 57.
Zonaras, l. xii. p. 637. Two passages in the life of Probus (p. 236,
238) convince me, that these Scythian invaders of Pontus were Alani. If
we may believe Zosimus, (l. i. p. 58,) Florianus pursued them as far
as the Cimmerian Bosphorus. But he had scarcely time for so long and
difficult an expedition.]

But the glory and life of Tacitus were of short duration. Transported,
in the depth of winter, from the soft retirement of Campania to the
foot of Mount Caucasus, he sunk under the unaccustomed hardships of a
military life. The fatigues of the body were aggravated by the cares of
the mind. For a while, the angry and selfish passions of the soldiers
had been suspended by the enthusiasm of public virtue. They soon broke
out with redoubled violence, and raged in the camp, and even in the
tent of the aged emperor. His mild and amiable character served only to
inspire contempt, and he was incessantly tormented with factions which
he could not assuage, and by demands which it was impossible to satisfy.
Whatever flattering expectations he had conceived of reconciling the
public disorders, Tacitus soon was convinced that the licentiousness of
the army disdained the feeble restraint of laws, and his last hour was
hastened by anguish and disappointment. It may be doubtful whether the
soldiers imbrued their hands in the blood of this innocent prince.
[18] It is certain that their insolences was the cause of his death. He
expired at Tyana in Cappadocia, after a reign of only six months and
about twenty days. [19]

[Footnote 18: Eutropius and Aurelius Victor only say that he died;
Victor Junior adds, that it was of a fever. Zosimus and Zonaras affirm,
that he was killed by the soldiers. Vopiscus mentions both accounts,
and seems to hesitate. Yet surely these jarring opinions are easily
reconciled.]

[Footnote 19: According to the two Victors, he reigned exactly two
hundred days.]

The eyes of Tacitus were scarcely closed, before his brother Florianus
showed himself unworthy to reign, by the hasty usurpation of the purple,
without expecting the approbation of the senate. The reverence for the
Roman constitution, which yet influenced the camp and the provinces, was
sufficiently strong to dispose them to censure, but not to provoke them
to oppose, the precipitate ambition of Florianus. The discontent would
have evaporated in idle murmurs, had not the general of the East, the
heroic Probus, boldly declared himself the avenger of the senate.

The contest, however, was still unequal; nor could the most able leader,
at the head of the effeminate troops of Egypt and Syria, encounter, with
any hopes of victory, the legions of Europe, whose irresistible strength
appeared to support the brother of Tacitus. But the fortune and activity
of Probus triumphed over every obstacle. The hardy veterans of his
rival, accustomed to cold climates, sickened and consumed away in the
sultry heats of Cilicia, where the summer proved remarkably unwholesome.
Their numbers were diminished by frequent desertion; the passes of
the mountains were feebly defended; Tarsus opened its gates; and the
soldiers of Florianus, when they had permitted him to enjoy the Imperial
title about three months, delivered the empire from civil war by the
easy sacrifice of a prince whom they despised. [20]

[Footnote 20: Hist. August, p. 231. Zosimus, l. i. p. 58, 59. Zonaras,
l. xii. p. 637. Aurelius Victor says, that Probus assumed the empire in
Illyricum; an opinion which (though adopted by a very learned man) would
throw that period of history into inextricable confusion.]

The perpetual revolutions of the throne had so perfectly erased every
notion of hereditary title, that the family of an unfortunate emperor
was incapable of exciting the jealousy of his successors. The children
of Tacitus and Florianus were permitted to descend into a private
station, and to mingle with the general mass of the people. Their
poverty indeed became an additional safeguard to their innocence. When
Tacitus was elected by the senate, he resigned his ample patrimony to
the public service; [21] an act of generosity specious in appearance,
but which evidently disclosed his intention of transmitting the empire
to his descendants. The only consolation of their fallen state was the
remembrance of transient greatness, and a distant hope, the child of a
flattering prophecy, that at the end of a thousand years, a monarch of
the race of Tacitus should arise, the protector of the senate, the
restorer of Rome, and the conqueror of the whole earth. [22]

[Footnote 21: Hist. August. p. 229]

[Footnote 22: He was to send judges to the Parthians, Persians, and
Sarmatians, a president to Taprobani, and a proconsul to the Roman
island, (supposed by Casaubon and Salmasius to mean Britain.) Such a
history as mine (says Vopiscus with proper modesty) will not subsist a
thousand years, to expose or justify the prediction.]

The peasants of Illyricum, who had already given Claudius and Aurelian
to the sinking empire, had an equal right to glory in the elevation of
Probus. [23] Above twenty years before, the emperor Valerian, with his
usual penetration, had discovered the rising merit of the young soldier,
on whom he conferred the rank of tribune, long before the age prescribed
by the military regulations. The tribune soon justified his choice, by a
victory over a great body of Sarmatians, in which he saved the life of
a near relation of Valerian; and deserved to receive from the emperor's
hand the collars, bracelets, spears, and banners, the mural and the
civic crown, and all the honorable rewards reserved by ancient Rome
for successful valor. The third, and afterwards the tenth, legion were
intrusted to the command of Probus, who, in every step of his promotion,
showed himself superior to the station which he filled. Africa and
Pontus, the Rhine, the Danube, the Euphrates, and the Nile, by turns
afforded him the most splendid occasions of displaying his personal
prowess and his conduct in war. Aurelian was indebted for the honest
courage with which he often checked the cruelty of his master.
Tacitus, who desired by the abilities of his generals to supply his own
deficiency of military talents, named him commander-in-chief of all the
eastern provinces, with five times the usual salary, the promise of the
consulship, and the hope of a triumph. When Probus ascended the Imperial
throne, he was about forty-four years of age; [24] in the full possession
of his fame, of the love of the army, and of a mature vigor of mind
and body.

[Footnote 23: For the private life of Probus, see Vopiscus in Hist.
August p. 234--237]

[Footnote 24: According to the Alexandrian chronicle, he was fifty at
the time of his death.]

His acknowledge merit, and the success of his arms against Florianus,
left him without an enemy or a competitor. Yet, if we may credit his own
professions, very far from being desirous of the empire, he had accepted
it with the most sincere reluctance. "But it is no longer in my power,"
says Probus, in a private letter, "to lay down a title so full of envy
and of danger. I must continue to personate the character which the
soldiers have imposed upon me." [25] His dutiful address to the senate
displayed the sentiments, or at least the language, of a Roman patriot:
"When you elected one of your order, conscript fathers! to succeed the
emperor Aurelian, you acted in a manner suitable to your justice and
wisdom. For you are the legal sovereigns of the world, and the power
which you derive from your ancestors will descend to your posterity.
Happy would it have been, if Florianus, instead of usurping the purple
of his brother, like a private inheritance, had expected what your
majesty might determine, either in his favor, or in that of other
person. The prudent soldiers have punished his rashness. To me they
have offered the title of Augustus. But I submit to your clemency my
pretensions and my merits." [26] When this respectful epistle was read
by the consul, the senators were unable to disguise their satisfaction,
that Probus should condescend thus numbly to solicit a sceptre which
he already possessed. They celebrated with the warmest gratitude
his virtues, his exploits, and above all his moderation. A decree
immediately passed, without a dissenting voice, to ratify the election
of the eastern armies, and to confer on their chief all the several
branches of the Imperial dignity: the names of Caesar and Augustus,
the title of Father of his country, the right of making in the same day
three motions in the senate, [27] the office of Pontifex, Maximus, the
tribunitian power, and the proconsular command; a mode of investiture,
which, though it seemed to multiply the authority of the emperor,
expressed the constitution of the ancient republic. The reign of Probus
corresponded with this fair beginning. The senate was permitted to
direct the civil administration of the empire. Their faithful general
asserted the honor of the Roman arms, and often laid at their feet
crowns of gold and barbaric trophies, the fruits of his numerous
victories. [28] Yet, whilst he gratified their vanity, he must secretly
have despised their indolence and weakness. Though it was every moment
in their power to repeal the disgraceful edict of Gallienus, the proud
successors of the Scipios patiently acquiesced in their exclusion from
all military employments. They soon experienced, that those who refuse
the sword must renounce the sceptre.

[Footnote 25: This letter was addressed to the Praetorian praefect, whom
(on condition of his good behavior) he promised to continue in his great
office. See Hist. August. p. 237.]

[Footnote 26: Vopiscus in Hist. August. p. 237. The date of the letter
is assuredly faulty. Instead of Nen. Februar. we may read Non August.]

[Footnote 27: Hist. August. p. 238. It is odd that the senate should
treat Probus less favorably than Marcus Antoninus. That prince had
received, even before the death of Pius, Jus quintoe relationis. See
Capitolin. in Hist. August. p. 24.]

[Footnote 28: See the dutiful letter of Probus to the senate, after his
German victories. Hist. August. p. 239.]




