## Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.--Part I.

     The Cruelty, Follies, And Murder Of Commodus--Election Of
     Pertinax--His Attempts To Reform The State--His
     Assassination By The Praetorian Guards.

The mildness of Marcus, which the rigid discipline of the Stoics was
unable to eradicate, formed, at the same time, the most amiable, and the
only defective part of his character. His excellent understanding was
often deceived by the unsuspecting goodness of his heart. Artful men,
who study the passions of princes, and conceal their own, approached his
person in the disguise of philosophic sanctity, and acquired riches and
honors by affecting to despise them. [1] His excessive indulgence to
his brother, [105] his wife, and his son, exceeded the bounds of private
virtue, and became a public injury, by the example and consequences of
their vices.

[Footnote 1: See the complaints of Avidius Cassius, Hist. August. p.
45. These are, it is true, the complaints of faction; but even faction
exaggerates, rather than invents.]

[Footnote 105: His brother by adoption, and his colleague, L. Verus.
Marcus Aurelius had no other brother.--W.]

Faustina, the daughter of Pius and the wife of Marcus, has been as much
celebrated for her gallantries as for her beauty. The grave simplicity
of the philosopher was ill calculated to engage her wanton levity, or to
fix that unbounded passion for variety, which often discovered personal
merit in the meanest of mankind. [2] The Cupid of the ancients was, in
general, a very sensual deity; and the amours of an empress, as they
exact on her side the plainest advances, are seldom susceptible of much
sentimental delicacy. Marcus was the only man in the empire who seemed
ignorant or insensible of the irregularities of Faustina; which,
according to the prejudices of every age, reflected some disgrace on the
injured husband. He promoted several of her lovers to posts of honor and
profit, [3] and during a connection of thirty years, invariably gave her
proofs of the most tender confidence, and of a respect which ended not
with her life. In his Meditations, he thanks the gods, who had bestowed
on him a wife so faithful, so gentle, and of such a wonderful simplicity
of manners. [4] The obsequious senate, at his earnest request, declared
her a goddess. She was represented in her temples, with the attributes
of Juno, Venus, and Ceres; and it was decreed, that, on the day of their
nuptials, the youth of either sex should pay their vows before the altar
of their chaste patroness. [5]

[Footnote 2: Faustinam satis constat apud Cajetam conditiones sibi et
nauticas et gladiatorias, elegisse. Hist. August. p. 30. Lampridius
explains the sort of merit which Faustina chose, and the conditions
which she exacted. Hist. August. p. 102.]

[Footnote 3: Hist. August. p. 34.]

[Footnote 4: Meditat. l. i. The world has laughed at the credulity of
Marcus but Madam Dacier assures us, (and we may credit a lady,) that the
husband will always be deceived, if the wife condescends to dissemble.]
[Footnote 5: Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. [c. 31,] p. 1195. Hist. August.
p. 33. Commentaire de Spanheim sur les Caesars de Julien, p. 289. The
deification of Faustina is the only defect which Julian's criticism is
able to discover in the all-accomplished character of Marcus.]

The monstrous vices of the son have cast a shade on the purity of the
father's virtues. It has been objected to Marcus, that he sacrificed the
happiness of millions to a fond partiality for a worthless boy; and that
he chose a successor in his own family, rather than in the republic.
Nothing however, was neglected by the anxious father, and by the men of
virtue and learning whom he summoned to his assistance, to expand the
narrow mind of young Commodus, to correct his growing vices, and to
render him worthy of the throne for which he was designed. But the
power of instruction is seldom of much efficacy, except in those happy
dispositions where it is almost superfluous. The distasteful lesson of
a grave philosopher was, in a moment, obliterated by the whisper of
a profligate favorite; and Marcus himself blasted the fruits of this
labored education, by admitting his son, at the age of fourteen or
fifteen, to a full participation of the Imperial power. He lived
but four years afterwards: but he lived long enough to repent a rash
measure, which raised the impetuous youth above the restraint of reason
and authority.

Most of the crimes which disturb the internal peace of society, are
produced by the restraints which the necessary but unequal laws of
property have imposed on the appetites of mankind, by confining to a
few the possession of those objects that are coveted by many. Of all our
passions and appetites, the love of power is of the most imperious and
unsociable nature, since the pride of one man requires the submission of
the multitude. In the tumult of civil discord, the laws of society lose
their force, and their place is seldom supplied by those of humanity.
The ardor of contention, the pride of victory, the despair of success,
the memory of past injuries, and the fear of future dangers, all
contribute to inflame the mind, and to silence the voice of pity. From
such motives almost every page of history has been stained with civil
blood; but these motives will not account for the unprovoked cruelties
of Commodus, who had nothing to wish and every thing to enjoy. The
beloved son of Marcus succeeded to his father, amidst the acclamations
of the senate and armies; [6] and when he ascended the throne, the happy
youth saw round him neither competitor to remove, nor enemies to punish.
In this calm, elevated station, it was surely natural that he should
prefer the love of mankind to their detestation, the mild glories of his
five predecessors to the ignominious fate of Nero and Domitian.

[Footnote 6: Commodus was the first Porphyrogenitus, (born since his
father's accession to the throne.) By a new strain of flattery,
the Egyptian medals date by the years of his life; as if they were
synonymous to those of his reign. Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom.
ii. p. 752.]

Yet Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born with an
insatiate thirst of human blood, and capable, from his infancy, of the
most inhuman actions. [7] Nature had formed him of a weak rather than a
wicked disposition. His simplicity and timidity rendered him the slave
of his attendants, who gradually corrupted his mind. His cruelty, which
at first obeyed the dictates of others, degenerated into habit, and at
length became the ruling passion of his soul. [8]

[Footnote 7: Hist. August. p. 46.]

[Footnote 8: Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1203.]

Upon the death of his father, Commodus found himself embarrassed with
the command of a great army, and the conduct of a difficult war against
the Quadi and Marcomanni. [9] The servile and profligate youths whom
Marcus had banished, soon regained their station and influence about the
new emperor. They exaggerated the hardships and dangers of a campaign
in the wild countries beyond the Danube; and they assured the indolent
prince that the terror of his name, and the arms of his lieutenants,
would be sufficient to complete the conquest of the dismayed barbarians,
or to impose such conditions as were more advantageous than any
conquest. By a dexterous application to his sensual appetites, they
compared the tranquillity, the splendor, the refined pleasures of Rome,
with the tumult of a Pannonian camp, which afforded neither leisure nor
materials for luxury. [10] Commodus listened to the pleasing advice; but
whilst he hesitated between his own inclination and the awe which he
still retained for his father's counsellors, the summer insensibly
elapsed, and his triumphal entry into the capital was deferred till the
autumn. His graceful person, [11] popular address, and imagined virtues,
attracted the public favor; the honorable peace which he had recently
granted to the barbarians, diffused a universal joy; [12] his impatience
to revisit Rome was fondly ascribed to the love of his country; and
his dissolute course of amusements was faintly condemned in a prince of
nineteen years of age.

[Footnote 9: According to Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 25,) he died at
Sirmium. But the situation of Vindobona, or Vienna, where both the
Victors place his death, is better adapted to the operations of the war
against the Marcomanni and Quadi.]

[Footnote 10: Herodian, l. i. p. 12.]

[Footnote 11: Herodian, l. i. p. 16.]

[Footnote 12: This universal joy is well described (from the medals as
well as historians) by Mr. Wotton, Hist. of Rome, p. 192, 193.] During
the three first years of his reign, the forms, and even the spirit, of
the old administration, were maintained by those faithful counsellors,
to whom Marcus had recommended his son, and for whose wisdom and
integrity Commodus still entertained a reluctant esteem. The young
prince and his profligate favorites revelled in all the license of
sovereign power; but his hands were yet unstained with blood; and he
had even displayed a generosity of sentiment, which might perhaps have
ripened into solid virtue. [13] A fatal incident decided his fluctuating
character.

[Footnote 13: Manilius, the confidential secretary of Avidius Cassius,
was discovered after he had lain concealed several years. The emperor
nobly relieved the public anxiety by refusing to see him, and burning
his papers without opening them. Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1209.]

One evening, as the emperor was returning to the palace, through a dark
and narrow portico in the amphitheatre, [14] an assassin, who waited his
passage, rushed upon him with a drawn sword, loudly exclaiming, "The
senate sends you this." The menace prevented the deed; the assassin
was seized by the guards, and immediately revealed the authors of the
conspiracy. It had been formed, not in the state, but within the walls
of the palace. Lucilla, the emperor's sister, and widow of Lucius Verus,
impatient of the second rank, and jealous of the reigning empress, had
armed the murderer against her brother's life. She had not ventured to
communicate the black design to her second husband, Claudius Pompeiarus,
a senator of distinguished merit and unshaken loyalty; but among the
crowd of her lovers (for she imitated the manners of Faustina) she found
men of desperate fortunes and wild ambition, who were prepared to serve
her more violent, as well as her tender passions. The conspirators
experienced the rigor of justice, and the abandoned princess was
punished, first with exile, and afterwards with death. [15]

[Footnote 14: See Maffei degli Amphitheatri, p. 126.]

[Footnote 15: Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1205 Herodian, l. i. p. 16 Hist. August
p. 46.]

But the words of the assassin sunk deep into the mind of Commodus, and
left an indelible impression of fear and hatred against the whole body
of the senate. [151] Those whom he had dreaded as importunate ministers,
he now suspected as secret enemies. The Delators, a race of men
discouraged, and almost extinguished, under the former reigns, again
became formidable, as soon as they discovered that the emperor was
desirous of finding disaffection and treason in the senate. That
assembly, whom Marcus had ever considered as the great council of
the nation, was composed of the most distinguished of the Romans; and
distinction of every kind soon became criminal. The possession of wealth
stimulated the diligence of the informers; rigid virtue implied a tacit
censure of the irregularities of Commodus; important services implied a
dangerous superiority of merit; and the friendship of the father always
insured the aversion of the son. Suspicion was equivalent to proof;
trial to condemnation. The execution of a considerable senator was
attended with the death of all who might lament or revenge his fate; and
when Commodus had once tasted human blood, he became incapable of
pity or remorse.

[Footnote 151: The conspirators were senators, even the assassin
himself. Herod. 81.--G.]

Of these innocent victims of tyranny, none died more lamented than the
two brothers of the Quintilian family, Maximus and Condianus; whose
fraternal love has saved their names from oblivion, and endeared their
memory to posterity. Their studies and their occupations, their pursuits
and their pleasures, were still the same. In the enjoyment of a great
estate, they never admitted the idea of a separate interest: some
fragments are now extant of a treatise which they composed in common;
[152] and in every action of life it was observed that their two bodies
were animated by one soul. The Antonines, who valued their virtues, and
delighted in their union, raised them, in the same year, to the
consulship; and Marcus afterwards intrusted to their joint care the
civil administration of Greece, and a great military command, in which
they obtained a signal victory over the Germans. The kind cruelty of
Commodus united them in death. [16]

[Footnote 152: This work was on agriculture, and is often quoted by later
writers. See P. Needham, Proleg. ad Geoponic. Camb. 1704.--W.]

[Footnote 16: In a note upon the Augustan History, Casaubon has
collected a number of particulars concerning these celebrated brothers.
See p. 96 of his learned commentary.]

The tyrant's rage, after having shed the noblest blood of the senate,
at length recoiled on the principal instrument of his cruelty. Whilst
Commodus was immersed in blood and luxury, he devolved the detail of the
public business on Perennis, a servile and ambitious minister, who had
obtained his post by the murder of his predecessor, but who possessed a
considerable share of vigor and ability. By acts of extortion, and
the forfeited estates of the nobles sacrificed to his avarice, he had
accumulated an immense treasure. The Praetorian guards were under
his immediate command; and his son, who already discovered a military
genius, was at the head of the Illyrian legions. Perennis aspired to the
empire; or what, in the eyes of Commodus, amounted to the same crime, he
was capable of aspiring to it, had he not been prevented, surprised, and
put to death. The fall of a minister is a very trifling incident in the
general history of the empire; but it was hastened by an extraordinary
circumstance, which proved how much the nerves of discipline were
already relaxed. The legions of Britain, discontented with the
administration of Perennis, formed a deputation of fifteen hundred
select men, with instructions to march to Rome, and lay their complaints
before the emperor. These military petitioners, by their own determined
behaviour, by inflaming the divisions of the guards, by exaggerating
the strength of the British army, and by alarming the fears of Commodus,
exacted and obtained the minister's death, as the only redress of their
grievances. [17] This presumption of a distant army, and their discovery
of the weakness of government, was a sure presage of the most dreadful
convulsions.

[Footnote 17: Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1210. Herodian, l. i. p. 22. Hist.
August. p. 48. Dion gives a much less odious character of Perennis, than
the other historians. His moderation is almost a pledge of his veracity.
Note: Gibbon praises Dion for the moderation with which he speaks of
Perennis: he follows, nevertheless, in his own narrative, Herodian and
Lampridius. Dion speaks of Perennis not only with moderation, but with
admiration; he represents him as a great man, virtuous in his life, and
blameless in his death: perhaps he may be suspected of partiality; but
it is singular that Gibbon, having adopted, from Herodian and
Lampridius, their judgment on this minister, follows Dion's improbable
account of his death. What likelihood, in fact, that fifteen hundred men
should have traversed Gaul and Italy, and have arrived at Rome without
any understanding with the Praetorians, or without detection or
opposition from Perennis, the Praetorian praefect? Gibbon, foreseeing,
perhaps, this difficulty, has added, that the military deputation
inflamed the divisions of the guards; but Dion says expressly that they
did not reach Rome, but that the emperor went out to meet them: he even
reproaches him for not having opposed them with the guards, who were
superior in number. Herodian relates that Commodus, having learned, from
a soldier, the ambitious designs of Perennis and his son, caused them to
be attacked and massacred by night.--G. from W. Dion's narrative is
remarkably circumstantial, and his authority higher than either of the
other writers. He hints that Cleander, a new favorite, had already
undermined the influence of Perennis.--M.]

The negligence of the public administration was betrayed, soon
afterwards, by a new disorder, which arose from the smallest beginnings.
A spirit of desertion began to prevail among the troops: and the
deserters, instead of seeking their safety in flight or concealment,
infested the highways. Maternus, a private soldier, of a daring boldness
above his station, collected these bands of robbers into a little army,
set open the prisons, invited the slaves to assert their freedom, and
plundered with impunity the rich and defenceless cities of Gaul and
Spain. The governors of the provinces, who had long been the spectators,
and perhaps the partners, of his depredations, were, at length, roused
from their supine indolence by the threatening commands of the emperor.
Maternus found that he was encompassed, and foresaw that he must be
overpowered. A great effort of despair was his last resource. He ordered
his followers to disperse, to pass the Alps in small parties and various
disguises, and to assemble at Rome, during the licentious tumult of the
festival of Cybele. [18] To murder Commodus, and to ascend the vacant
throne, was the ambition of no vulgar robber. His measures were so ably
concerted that his concealed troops already filled the streets of
Rome. The envy of an accomplice discovered and ruined this singular
enterprise, in a moment when it was ripe for execution. [19]

[Footnote 18: During the second Punic war, the Romans imported from Asia
the worship of the mother of the gods. Her festival, the Megalesia,
began on the fourth of April, and lasted six days. The streets were
crowded with mad processions, the theatres with spectators, and the
public tables with unbidden guests. Order and police were suspended, and
pleasure was the only serious business of the city. See Ovid. de Fastis,
l. iv. 189, &c.]

[Footnote 19: Herodian, l. i. p. 23, 23.]

Suspicious princes often promote the last of mankind, from a vain
persuasion, that those who have no dependence, except on their favor,
will have no attachment, except to the person of their benefactor.
Cleander, the successor of Perennis, was a Phrygian by birth; of
a nation over whose stubborn, but servile temper, blows only could
prevail. [20] He had been sent from his native country to Rome, in the
capacity of a slave. As a slave he entered the Imperial palace, rendered
himself useful to his master's passions, and rapidly ascended to the
most exalted station which a subject could enjoy. His influence over
the mind of Commodus was much greater than that of his predecessor; for
Cleander was devoid of any ability or virtue which could inspire the
emperor with envy or distrust. Avarice was the reigning passion of his
soul, and the great principle of his administration. The rank of Consul,
of Patrician, of Senator, was exposed to public sale; and it would have
been considered as disaffection, if any one had refused to purchase
these empty and disgraceful honors with the greatest part of his
fortune. [21] In the lucrative provincial employments, the minister
shared with the governor the spoils of the people. The execution of the
laws was penal and arbitrary. A wealthy criminal might obtain, not only
the reversal of the sentence by which he was justly condemned, but might
likewise inflict whatever punishment he pleased on the accuser, the
witnesses, and the judge.

[Footnote 20: Cicero pro Flacco, c. 27.]

[Footnote 21: One of these dear-bought promotions occasioned a
current... that Julius Solon was banished into the senate.]

By these means, Cleander, in the space of three years, had accumulated
more wealth than had ever yet been possessed by any freedman. [22]
Commodus was perfectly satisfied with the magnificent presents which
the artful courtier laid at his feet in the most seasonable moments.
To divert the public envy, Cleander, under the emperor's name, erected
baths, porticos, and places of exercise, for the use of the people.
[23] He flattered himself that the Romans, dazzled and amused by this
apparent liberality, would be less affected by the bloody scenes which
were daily exhibited; that they would forget the death of Byrrhus, a
senator to whose superior merit the late emperor had granted one of
his daughters; and that they would forgive the execution of Arrius
Antoninus, the last representative of the name and virtues of the
Antonines. The former, with more integrity than prudence, had attempted
to disclose, to his brother-in-law, the true character of Cleander. An
equitable sentence pronounced by the latter, when proconsul of Asia,
against a worthless creature of the favorite, proved fatal to him. [24]
After the fall of Perennis, the terrors of Commodus had, for a short
time, assumed the appearance of a return to virtue. He repealed the most
odious of his acts; loaded his memory with the public execration, and
ascribed to the pernicious counsels of that wicked minister all the
errors of his inexperienced youth. But his repentance lasted only thirty
days; and, under Cleander's tyranny, the administration of Perennis was
often regretted.

[Footnote 22: Dion (l. lxxii. p. 12, 13) observes, that no freedman had
possessed riches equal to those of Cleander. The fortune of Pallas
amounted, however, to upwards of five and twenty hundred thousand
pounds; Ter millies.]

[Footnote 23: Dion, l. lxxii. p. 12, 13. Herodian, l. i. p. 29. Hist.
August. p. 52. These baths were situated near the Porta Capena. See
Nardini Roma Antica, p. 79.]

[Footnote 24: Hist. August. p. 79.]




