## Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of Marcinus.--Part III.

To this temple, as to the common centre of religious worship, the
Imperial fanatic attempted to remove the Ancilia, the Palladium, [54] and
all the sacred pledges of the faith of Numa. A crowd of inferior deities
attended in various stations the majesty of the god of Emesa; but his
court was still imperfect, till a female of distinguished rank was
admitted to his bed. Pallas had been first chosen for his consort;
but as it was dreaded lest her warlike terrors might affright the soft
delicacy of a Syrian deity, the Moon, adorned by the Africans under the
name of Astarte, was deemed a more suitable companion for the Sun. Her
image, with the rich offerings of her temple as a marriage portion, was
transported with solemn pomp from Carthage to Rome, and the day of these
mystic nuptials was a general festival in the capital and throughout the
empire. [55]

[Footnote 54: He broke into the sanctuary of Vesta, and carried away a
statue, which he supposed to be the palladium; but the vestals boasted
that, by a pious fraud, they had imposed a counterfeit image on the
profane intruder. Hist. August., p. 103.]

[Footnote 55: Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1360. Herodian, l. v. p. 193. The
subjects of the empire were obliged to make liberal presents to the
new married couple; and whatever they had promised during the life of
Elagabalus was carefully exacted under the administration of Mamaea.]

A rational voluptuary adheres with invariable respect to the temperate
dictates of nature, and improves the gratifications of sense by social
intercourse, endearing connections, and the soft coloring of taste and
the imagination. But Elagabalus, (I speak of the emperor of that name,)
corrupted by his youth, his country, and his fortune, abandoned himself
to the grossest pleasures with ungoverned fury, and soon found disgust
and satiety in the midst of his enjoyments. The inflammatory powers of
art were summoned to his aid: the confused multitude of women, of wines,
and of dishes, and the studied variety of attitude and sauces, served
to revive his languid appetites. New terms and new inventions in these
sciences, the only ones cultivated and patronized by the monarch, [56]
signalized his reign, and transmitted his infamy to succeeding times.
A capricious prodigality supplied the want of taste and elegance; and
whilst Elagabalus lavished away the treasures of his people in the
wildest extravagance, his own voice and that of his flatterers applauded
a spirit of magnificence unknown to the tameness of his predecessors.
To confound the order of seasons and climates, [57] to sport with the
passions and prejudices of his subjects, and to subvert every law of
nature and decency, were in the number of his most delicious amusements.
A long train of concubines, and a rapid succession of wives, among whom
was a vestal virgin, ravished by force from her sacred asylum, [58] were
insufficient to satisfy the impotence of his passions. The master of the
Roman world affected to copy the dress and manners of the female sex,
preferred the distaff to the sceptre, and dishonored the principal
dignities of the empire by distributing them among his numerous lovers;
one of whom was publicly invested with the title and authority of the
emperor's, or, as he more properly styled himself, of the empress's
husband. [59]

[Footnote 56: The invention of a new sauce was liberally rewarded; but
if it was not relished, the inventor was confined to eat of nothing else
till he had discovered another more agreeable to the Imperial palate
Hist. August. p. 111.]

[Footnote 57: He never would eat sea-fish except at a great distance
from the sea; he then would distribute vast quantities of the rarest
sorts, brought at an immense expense, to the peasants of the inland
country. Hist. August. p. 109.]

[Footnote 58: Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1358. Herodian, l. v. p. 192.]

[Footnote 59: Hierocles enjoyed that honor; but he would have been
supplanted by one Zoticus, had he not contrived, by a potion, to
enervate the powers of his rival, who, being found on trial unequal
to his reputation, was driven with ignominy from the palace. Dion,
l. lxxix. p. 1363, 1364. A dancer was made praefect of the city, a
charioteer praefect of the watch, a barber praefect of the provisions.
These three ministers, with many inferior officers, were all recommended
enormitate membrorum. Hist. August. p. 105.]

It may seem probable, the vices and follies of Elagabalus have been
adorned by fancy, and blackened by prejudice. [60] Yet, confining
ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the Roman people, and
attested by grave and contemporary historians, their inexpressible
infamy surpasses that of any other age or country. The license of an
eastern monarch is secluded from the eye of curiosity by the
inaccessible walls of his seraglio. The sentiments of honor and
gallantry have introduced a refinement of pleasure, a regard for
decency, and a respect for the public opinion, into the modern courts of
Europe; [601] but the corrupt and opulent nobles of Rome gratified every
vice that could be collected from the mighty conflux of nations and
manners. Secure of impunity, careless of censure, they lived without
restraint in the patient and humble society of their slaves and
parasites. The emperor, in his turn, viewing every rank of his subjects
with the same contemptuous indifference, asserted without control his
sovereign privilege of lust and luxury.

[Footnote 60: Even the credulous compiler of his life, in the Augustan
History (p. 111) is inclined to suspect that his vices may have been
exaggerated.]

[Footnote 601: Wenck has justly observed that Gibbon should have
reckoned the influence of Christianity in this great change. In the most
savage times, and the most corrupt courts, since the introduction of
Christianity there have been no Neros or Domitians, no Commodus or
Elagabalus.--M.]

The most worthless of mankind are not afraid to condemn
in others the same disorders which they allow in themselves; and can
readily discover some nice difference of age, character, or station, to
justify the partial distinction. The licentious soldiers, who had
raised to the throne the dissolute son of Caracalla, blushed at their
ignominious choice, and turned with disgust from that monster, to
contemplate with pleasure the opening virtues of his cousin Alexander,
the son of Mamaea. The crafty Maesa, sensible that her grandson
Elagabalus must inevitably destroy himself by his own vices, had
provided another and surer support of her family. Embracing a favorable
moment of fondness and devotion, she had persuaded the young emperor to
adopt Alexander, and to invest him with the title of Caesar, that his
own divine occupations might be no longer interrupted by the care of
the earth. In the second rank that amiable prince soon acquired the
affections of the public, and excited the tyrant's jealousy, who
resolved to terminate the dangerous competition, either by corrupting
the manners, or by taking away the life, of his rival. His arts proved
unsuccessful; his vain designs were constantly discovered by his own
loquacious folly, and disappointed by those virtuous and faithful
servants whom the prudence of Mamaea had placed about the person of
her son. In a hasty sally of passion, Elagabalus resolved to execute
by force what he had been unable to compass by fraud, and by a despotic
sentence degraded his cousin from the rank and honors of Caesar. The
message was received in the senate with silence, and in the camp with
fury. The Praetorian guards swore to protect Alexander, and to revenge
the dishonored majesty of the throne. The tears and promises of the
trembling Elagabalus, who only begged them to spare his life, and to
leave him in the possession of his beloved Hierocles, diverted their
just indignation; and they contented themselves with empowering their
praefects to watch over the safety of Alexander, and the conduct of the
emperor. [61]

[Footnote 61: Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1365. Herodian, l. v. p. 195--201.
Hist. August. p. 105. The last of the three historians seems to have
followed the best authors in his account of the revolution.]

It was impossible that such a reconciliation should last, or that even
the mean soul of Elagabalus could hold an empire on such humiliating
terms of dependence. He soon attempted, by a dangerous experiment, to
try the temper of the soldiers. The report of the death of Alexander,
and the natural suspicion that he had been murdered, inflamed their
passions into fury, and the tempest of the camp could only be appeased
by the presence and authority of the popular youth. Provoked at this new
instance of their affection for his cousin, and their contempt for
his person, the emperor ventured to punish some of the leaders of the
mutiny. His unseasonable severity proved instantly fatal to his minions,
his mother, and himself. Elagabalus was massacred by the indignant
Praetorians, his mutilated corpse dragged through the streets of the
city, and thrown into the Tiber. His memory was branded with eternal
infamy by the senate; the justice of whose decree has been ratified by
posterity. [62]

[See Island In The Tiber: Elagabalus was thrown into the Tiber]

[Footnote 62: The aera of the death of Elagabalus, and of the accession
of Alexander, has employed the learning and ingenuity of Pagi,
Tillemont, Valsecchi, Vignoli, and Torre, bishop of Adria. The question
is most assuredly intricate; but I still adhere to the authority of
Dion, the truth of whose calculations is undeniable, and the purity of
whose text is justified by the agreement of Xiphilin, Zonaras, and
Cedrenus. Elagabalus reigned three years nine months and four days, from
his victory over Macrinus, and was killed March 10, 222. But what shall
we reply to the medals, undoubtedly genuine, which reckon the fifth year
of his tribunitian power? We shall reply, with the learned Valsecchi,
that the usurpation of Macrinus was annihilated, and that the son of
Caracalla dated his reign from his father's death? After resolving this
great difficulty, the smaller knots of this question may be easily
untied, or cut asunder. Note: This opinion of Valsecchi has been
triumphantly contested by Eckhel, who has shown the impossibility of
reconciling it with the medals of Elagabalus, and has given the most
satisfactory explanation of the five tribunates of that emperor. He
ascended the throne and received the tribunitian power the 16th of May,
in the year of Rome 971; and on the 1st January of the next year, 972,
he began a new tribunate, according to the custom established by
preceding emperors. During the years 972, 973, 974, he enjoyed the
tribunate, and commenced his fifth in the year 975, during which he was
killed on the 10th March. Eckhel de Doct. Num. viii. 430 &c.--G.]


In the room of Elagabalus, his cousin Alexander was raised to the throne by the
Praetorian guards. His relation to the family of Severus, whose name
he assumed, was the same as that of his predecessor; his virtue and his
danger had already endeared him to the Romans, and the eager liberality
of the senate conferred upon him, in one day, the various titles and
powers of the Imperial dignity. [63] But as Alexander was a modest and
dutiful youth, of only seventeen years of age, the reins of government
were in the hands of two women, of his mother, Mamaea, and of Maesa,
his grandmother. After the death of the latter, who survived but a short
time the elevation of Alexander, Mamaea remained the sole regent of
her son and of the empire.

[Footnote 63: Hist. August. p. 114. By this unusual precipitation, the
senate meant to confound the hopes of pretenders, and prevent the
factions of the armies.]

In every age and country, the wiser, or at least the stronger, of the
two sexes, has usurped the powers of the state, and confined the other
to the cares and pleasures of domestic life. In hereditary monarchies,
however, and especially in those of modern Europe, the gallant spirit of
chivalry, and the law of succession, have accustomed us to allow a
singular exception; and a woman is often acknowledged the absolute
sovereign of a great kingdom, in which she would be deemed incapable of
exercising the smallest employment, civil or military. But as the Roman
emperors were still considered as the generals and magistrates of the
republic, their wives and mothers, although distinguished by the name of
Augusta were never associated to their personal honors; and a female
reign would have appeared an inexpiable prodigy in the eyes of those
primitive Romans, who married without love, or loved without delicacy
and respect. [64] The haughty Agripina aspired, indeed, to share the
honors of the empire which she had conferred on her son; but her mad
ambition, detested by every citizen who felt for the dignity of Rome,
was disappointed by the artful firmness of Seneca and Burrhus. [65] The
good sense, or the indifference, of succeeding princes, restrained them
from offending the prejudices of their subjects; and it was reserved for
the profligate Elagabalus to discharge the acts of the senate with the
name of his mother Soaemias, who was placed by the side of the consuls,
and subscribed, as a regular member, the decrees of the legislative
assembly. Her more prudent sister, Mamaea, declined the useless and
odious prerogative, and a solemn law was enacted, excluding women
forever from the senate, and devoting to the infernal gods the head of
the wretch by whom this sanction should be violated. [66] The substance,
not the pageantry, of power was the object of Mamaea's manly ambition.
She maintained an absolute and lasting empire over the mind of her son,
and in his affection the mother could not brook a rival. Alexander, with
her consent, married the daughter of a patrician; but his respect for
his father-in-law, and love for the empress, were inconsistent with the
tenderness of interest of Mamaea. The patrician was executed on the
ready accusation of treason, and the wife of Alexander driven with
ignominy from the palace, and banished into Africa. [67]

[Footnote 64: Metellus Numidicus, the censor, acknowledged to the Roman
people, in a public oration, that had kind nature allowed us to exist
without the help of women, we should be delivered from a very
troublesome companion; and he could recommend matrimony only as the
sacrifice of private pleasure to public duty. Aulus Gellius, i. 6.]

[Footnote 65: Tacit. Annal. xiii. 5.]

[Footnote 66: Hist. August. p. 102, 107.]

[Footnote 67: Dion, l. lxxx. p. 1369. Herodian, l. vi. p. 206. Hist.
August. p. 131. Herodian represents the patrician as innocent. The
Augustian History, on the authority of Dexippus, condemns him, as guilty
of a conspiracy against the life of Alexander. It is impossible to
pronounce between them; but Dion is an irreproachable witness of the
jealousy and cruelty of Mamaea towards the young empress, whose hard
fate Alexander lamented, but durst not oppose.]

Notwithstanding this act of jealous cruelty, as well as some instances
of avarice, with which Mamaea is charged, the general tenor of her
administration was equally for the benefit of her son and of the empire.
With the approbation of the senate, she chose sixteen of the wisest and
most virtuous senators as a perpetual council of state, before whom
every public business of moment was debated and determined. The
celebrated Ulpian, equally distinguished by his knowledge of, and his
respect for, the laws of Rome, was at their head; and the prudent
firmness of this aristocracy restored order and authority to the
government. As soon as they had purged the city from foreign
superstition and luxury, the remains of the capricious tyranny of
Elagabalus, they applied themselves to remove his worthless creatures
from every department of the public administration, and to supply their
places with men of virtue and ability. Learning, and the love of
justice, became the only recommendations for civil offices; valor, and
the love of discipline, the only qualifications for military
employments. [68]

[Footnote 68: Herodian, l. vi. p. 203. Hist. August. p. 119. The latter
insinuates, that when any law was to be passed, the council was assisted
by a number of able lawyers and experienced senators, whose opinions
were separately given, and taken down in writing.]

But the most
important care of Mamaea and her wise counsellors, was to form the
character of the young emperor, on whose personal qualities the
happiness or misery of the Roman world must ultimately depend. The
fortunate soil assisted, and even prevented, the hand of cultivation.
An excellent understanding soon convinced Alexander of the advantages of
virtue, the pleasure of knowledge, and the necessity of labor. A natural
mildness and moderation of temper preserved him from the assaults of
passion, and the allurements of vice. His unalterable regard for his
mother, and his esteem for the wise Ulpian, guarded his unexperienced
youth from the poison of flattery. [581]

[Footnote 681: Alexander received into his chapel all the religions
which prevailed in the empire; he admitted Jesus Christ, Abraham,
Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, &c. It was almost certain that his mother
Mamaea had instructed him in the morality of Christianity. Historians in
general agree in calling her a Christian; there is reason to believe
that she had begun to have a taste for the principles of Christianity.
(See Tillemont, Alexander Severus) Gibbon has not noticed this
circumstance; he appears to have wished to lower the character of this
empress; he has throughout followed the narrative of Herodian, who, by
the acknowledgment of Capitolinus himself, detested Alexander. Without
believing the exaggerated praises of Lampridius, he ought not to have
followed the unjust severity of Herodian, and, above all, not to have
forgotten to say that the virtuous Alexander Severus had insured to the
Jews the preservation of their privileges, and permitted the exercise of
Christianity. Hist. Aug. p. 121. The Christians had established their
worship in a public place, of which the victuallers (cauponarii)
claimed, not the property, but possession by custom. Alexander answered,
that it was better that the place should be used for the service of God,
in any form, than for victuallers.--G. I have scrupled to omit this
note, as it contains some points worthy of notice; but it is very unjust
to Gibbon, who mentions almost all the circumstances, which he is
accused of omitting, in another, and, according to his plan, a better
place, and, perhaps, in stronger terms than M. Guizot. See Chap. xvi.--
M.]

The simple journal of his ordinary occupations exhibits a pleasing
picture of an accomplished emperor, [69] and, with some allowance for
the difference of manners, might well deserve the imitation of modern
princes. Alexander rose early: the first moments of the day were
consecrated to private devotion, and his domestic chapel was filled with
the images of those heroes, who, by improving or reforming human life,
had deserved the grateful reverence of posterity. But as he deemed the
service of mankind the most acceptable worship of the gods, the greatest
part of his morning hours was employed in his council, where he
discussed public affairs, and determined private causes, with a patience
and discretion above his years. The dryness of business was relieved by
the charms of literature; and a portion of time was always set apart for
his favorite studies of poetry, history, and philosophy. The works of
Virgil and Horace, the republics of Plato and Cicero, formed his taste,
enlarged his understanding, and gave him the noblest ideas of man and
government. The exercises of the body succeeded to those of the mind;
and Alexander, who was tall, active, and robust, surpassed most of his
equals in the gymnastic arts. Refreshed by the use of the bath and a
slight dinner, he resumed, with new vigor, the business of the day; and,
till the hour of supper, the principal meal of the Romans, he was
attended by his secretaries, with whom he read and answered the
multitude of letters, memorials, and petitions, that must have been
addressed to the master of the greatest part of the world. His table was
served with the most frugal simplicity, and whenever he was at liberty
to consult his own inclination, the company consisted of a few select
friends, men of learning and virtue, amongst whom Ulpian was constantly
invited. Their conversation was familiar and instructive; and the pauses
were occasionally enlivened by the recital of some pleasing composition,
which supplied the place of the dancers, comedians, and even gladiators,
so frequently summoned to the tables of the rich and luxurious Romans.
[70] The dress of Alexander was plain and modest, his demeanor courteous
and affable: at the proper hours his palace was open to all his
subjects, but the voice of a crier was heard, as in the Eleusinian
mysteries, pronouncing the same salutary admonition: "Let none enter
these holy walls, unless he is conscious of a pure and innocent mind."
[71]

[Footnote 69: See his life in the Augustan History. The undistinguishing
compiler has buried these interesting anecdotes under a load of trivial
unmeaning circumstances.]

[Footnote 70: See the 13th Satire of Juvenal.]

[Footnote 71: Hist. August. p. 119.]

Such a uniform
tenor of life, which left not a moment for vice or folly, is a better
proof of the wisdom and justice of Alexander's government, than all the
trifling details preserved in the compilation of Lampridius. Since the
accession of Commodus, the Roman world had experienced, during the term
of forty years, the successive and various vices of four tyrants. From
the death of Elagabalus, it enjoyed an auspicious calm of thirteen
years. [711] The provinces, relieved from the oppressive taxes invented by
Caracalla and his pretended son, flourished in peace and prosperity,
under the administration of magistrates, who were convinced by
experience that to deserve the love of the subjects, was their best and
only method of obtaining the favor of their sovereign. While some gentle
restraints were imposed on the innocent luxury of the Roman people, the
price of provisions and the interest of money, were reduced by the
paternal care of Alexander, whose prudent liberality, without
distressing the industrious, supplied the wants and amusements of the
populace. The dignity, the freedom, the authority of the senate was
restored; and every virtuous senator might approach the person of the
emperor without a fear and without a blush.

[Footnote 711: Wenck observes that Gibbon, enchanted with the virtue of
Alexander has heightened, particularly in this sentence, its effect on
the state of the world. His own account, which follows, of the
insurrections and foreign wars, is not in harmony with this beautiful
picture.--M.]

The name of Antoninus,
ennobled by the virtues of Pius and Marcus, had been communicated by
adoption to the dissolute Verus, and by descent to the cruel Commodus.
It became the honorable appellation of the sons of Severus, was bestowed
on young Diadumenianus, and at length prostituted to the infamy of the
high priest of Emesa. Alexander, though pressed by the studied, and,
perhaps, sincere importunity of the senate, nobly refused the borrowed
lustre of a name; whilst in his whole conduct he labored to restore the
glories and felicity of the age of the genuine Antonines. [72]

[Footnote 72: See, in the Hist. August. p. 116, 117, the whole contest
between Alexander and the senate, extracted from the journals of that
assembly. It happened on the sixth of March, probably of the year 223,
when the Romans had enjoyed, almost a twelvemonth, the blessings of his
reign. Before the appellation of Antoninus was offered him as a title of
honor, the senate waited to see whether Alexander would not assume it as
a family name.]

In the civil administration of Alexander, wisdom was
enforced by power, and the people, sensible of the public felicity,
repaid their benefactor with their love and gratitude. There still
remained a greater, a more necessary, but a more difficult enterprise;
the reformation of the military order, whose interest and temper,
confirmed by long impunity, rendered them impatient of the restraints of
discipline, and careless of the blessings of public tranquillity. In the
execution of his design, the emperor affected to display his love, and
to conceal his fear of the army. The most rigid economy in every other
branch of the administration supplied a fund of gold and silver for the
ordinary pay and the extraordinary rewards of the troops. In their
marches he relaxed the severe obligation of carrying seventeen days'
provision on their shoulders. Ample magazines were formed along the
public roads, and as soon as they entered the enemy's country, a
numerous train of mules and camels waited on their haughty laziness. As
Alexander despaired of correcting the luxury of his soldiers, he
attempted, at least, to direct it to objects of martial pomp and
ornament, fine horses, splendid armor, and shields enriched with silver
and gold. He shared whatever fatigues he was obliged to impose, visited,
in person, the sick and wounded, preserved an exact register of their
services and his own gratitude, and expressed on every occasion, the
warmest regard for a body of men, whose welfare, as he affected to
declare, was so closely connected with that of the state. [73] By the
most gentle arts he labored to inspire the fierce multitude with a sense
of duty, and to restore at least a faint image of that discipline to
which the Romans owed their empire over so many other nations, as
warlike and more powerful than themselves. But his prudence was vain,
his courage fatal, and the attempt towards a reformation served only to
inflame the ills it was meant to cure.

[Footnote 73: It was a favorite saying of the emperor's Se milites magis
servare, quam seipsum, quod salus publica in his esset. Hist. Aug. p.
130.]

The Praetorian guards
were attached to the youth of Alexander. They loved him as a tender
pupil, whom they had saved from a tyrant's fury, and placed on the
Imperial throne. That amiable prince was sensible of the obligation; but
as his gratitude was restrained within the limits of reason and justice,
they soon were more dissatisfied with the virtues of Alexander, than
they had ever been with the vices of Elagabalus. Their praefect, the
wise Ulpian, was the friend of the laws and of the people; he was
considered as the enemy of the soldiers, and to his pernicious counsels
every scheme of reformation was imputed. Some trifling accident blew up
their discontent into a furious mutiny; and the civil war raged, during
three days, in Rome, whilst the life of that excellent minister was
defended by the grateful people. Terrified, at length, by the sight of
some houses in flames, and by the threats of a general conflagration,
the people yielded with a sigh, and left the virtuous but unfortunate
Ulpian to his fate. He was pursued into the Imperial palace, and
massacred at the feet of his master, who vainly strove to cover him with
the purple, and to obtain his pardon from the inexorable soldiers. [731]
Such was the deplorable weakness of government, that the emperor was
unable to revenge his murdered friend and his insulted dignity, without
stooping to the arts of patience and dissimulation. Epagathus, the
principal leader of the mutiny, was removed from Rome, by the honorable
employment of praefect of Egypt: from that high rank he was gently
degraded to the government of Crete; and when at length, his popularity
among the guards was effaced by time and absence, Alexander ventured to
inflict the tardy but deserved punishment of his crimes. [74] Under the
reign of a just and virtuous prince, the tyranny of the army threatened
with instant death his most faithful ministers, who were suspected of an
intention to correct their intolerable disorders. The historian Dion
Cassius had commanded the Pannonian legions with the spirit of ancient
discipline. Their brethren of Rome, embracing the common cause of
military license, demanded the head of the reformer. Alexander, however,
instead of yielding to their seditious clamors, showed a just sense of
his merit and services, by appointing him his colleague in the
consulship, and defraying from his own treasury the expense of that vain
dignity: but as was justly apprehended, that if the soldiers beheld him
with the ensigns of his office, they would revenge the insult in his
blood, the nominal first magistrate of the state retired, by the
emperor's advice, from the city, and spent the greatest part of his
consulship at his villas in Campania. [75] [751]

[Footnote 731: Gibbon has confounded two events altogether different--
the quarrel of the people with the Praetorians, which lasted three days,
and the assassination of Ulpian by the latter. Dion relates first the
death of Ulpian, afterwards, reverting back according to a manner which
is usual with him, he says that during the life of Ulpian, there had
been a war of three days between the Praetorians and the people. But
Ulpian was not the cause. Dion says, on the contrary, that it was
occasioned by some unimportant circumstance; whilst he assigns a weighty
reason for the murder of Ulpian, the judgment by which that Praetorian
praefect had condemned his predecessors, Chrestus and Flavian, to death,
whom the soldiers wished to revenge. Zosimus (l. 1, c. xi.) attributes
this sentence to Mamaera; but, even then, the troops might have imputed
it to Ulpian, who had reaped all the advantage and was otherwise odious
to them.--W.]

[Footnote 74: Though the author of the life of Alexander (Hist. August.
p. 182) mentions the sedition raised against Ulpian by the soldiers, he
conceals the catastrophe, as it might discover a weakness in the
administration of his hero. From this designed omission, we may judge of
the weight and candor of that author.]

[Footnote 75: For an account of Ulpian's fate and his own danger, see
the mutilated conclusion of Dion's History, l. lxxx. p. 1371.]

[Footnote 751: Dion possessed no estates in Campania, and was not rich.
He only says that the emperor advised him to reside, during his
consulate, in some place out of Rome; that he returned to Rome after the
end of his consulate, and had an interview with the emperor in Campania.
He asked and obtained leave to pass the rest of his life in his native
city, (Nice, in Bithynia: ) it was there that he finished his history,
which closes with his second consulship.--W.]




