## Chapter XXVIII: Destruction Of Paganism.--Part I.

     Final Destruction Of Paganism.--Introduction Of The Worship
     Of Saints, And Relics, Among The Christians.

The ruin of Paganism, in the age of Theodosius, is perhaps the
only example of the total extirpation of any ancient and popular
superstition; and may therefore deserve to be considered as a singular
event in the history of the human mind. The Christians, more especially
the clergy, had impatiently supported the prudent delays of Constantine,
and the equal toleration of the elder Valentinian; nor could they deem
their conquest perfect or secure, as long as their adversaries were
permitted to exist. The influence which Ambrose and his brethren had
acquired over the youth of Gratian, and the piety of Theodosius, was
employed to infuse the maxims of persecution into the breasts of their
Imperial proselytes. Two specious principles of religious jurisprudence
were established, from whence they deduced a direct and rigorous
conclusion, against the subjects of the empire who still adhered to the
ceremonies of their ancestors: that the magistrate is, in some measure,
guilty of the crimes which he neglects to prohibit, or to punish; and,
that the idolatrous worship of fabulous deities, and real daemons, is
the most abominable crime against the supreme majesty of the Creator.
The laws of Moses, and the examples of Jewish history, [1] were hastily,
perhaps erroneously, applied, by the clergy, to the mild and universal
reign of Christianity. [2] The zeal of the emperors was excited to
vindicate their own honor, and that of the Deity: and the temples of the
Roman world were subverted, about sixty years after the conversion of
Constantine.

[Footnote 1: St. Ambrose (tom. ii. de Obit. Theodos. p. 1208) expressly
praises and recommends the zeal of Josiah in the destruction of idolatry
The language of Julius Firmicus Maternus on the same subject (de Errore
Profan. Relig. p. 467, edit. Gronov.) is piously inhuman. Nec filio
jubet (the Mosaic Law) parci, nec fratri, et per amatam conjugera
gladium vindicem ducit, &c.]

[Footnote 2: Bayle (tom. ii. p. 406, in his Commentaire Philosophique)
justifies, and limits, these intolerant laws by the temporal reign of
Jehovah over the Jews. The attempt is laudable.]

From the age of Numa to the reign of Gratian, the Romans preserved the
regular succession of the several colleges of the sacerdotal order. [3]
Fifteen Pontiffs exercised their supreme jurisdiction over all things,
and persons, that were consecrated to the service of the gods; and the
various questions which perpetually arose in a loose and traditionary
system, were submitted to the judgment of their holy tribunal Fifteen
grave and learned Augurs observed the face of the heavens, and
prescribed the actions of heroes, according to the flight of birds.
Fifteen keepers of the Sibylline books (their name of Quindecemvirs was
derived from their number) occasionally consulted the history of future,
and, as it should seem, of contingent, events. Six Vestals devoted their
virginity to the guard of the sacred fire, and of the unknown pledges of
the duration of Rome; which no mortal had been suffered to behold with
impunity. [4] Seven Epulos prepared the table of the gods, conducted the
solemn procession, and regulated the ceremonies of the annual festival.
The three Flamens of Jupiter, of Mars, and of Quirinus, were considered
as the peculiar ministers of the three most powerful deities, who
watched over the fate of Rome and of the universe. The King of the
Sacrifices represented the person of Numa, and of his successors, in the
religious functions, which could be performed only by royal hands. The
confraternities of the Salians, the Lupercals, &c., practised such rites
as might extort a smile of contempt from every reasonable man, with
a lively confidence of recommending themselves to the favor of the
immortal gods. The authority, which the Roman priests had formerly
obtained in the counsels of the republic, was gradually abolished by the
establishment of monarchy, and the removal of the seat of empire. But
the dignity of their sacred character was still protected by the laws,
and manners of their country; and they still continued, more especially
the college of pontiffs, to exercise in the capital, and sometimes
in the provinces, the rights of their ecclesiastical and civil
jurisdiction. Their robes of purple, chariotz of state, and sumptuous
entertainments, attracted the admiration of the people; and they
received, from the consecrated lands, and the public revenue, an ample
stipend, which liberally supported the splendor of the priesthood, and
all the expenses of the religious worship of the state. As the service
of the altar was not incompatible with the command of armies, the
Romans, after their consulships and triumphs, aspired to the place of
pontiff, or of augur; the seats of Cicero [5] and Pompey were filled, in
the fourth century, by the most illustrious members of the senate;
and the dignity of their birth reflected additional splendor on their
sacerdotal character. The fifteen priests, who composed the college of
pontiffs, enjoyed a more distinguished rank as the companions of their
sovereign; and the Christian emperors condescended to accept the robe
and ensigns, which were appropriated to the office of supreme
pontiff. But when Gratian ascended the throne, more scrupulous or more
enlightened, he sternly rejected those profane symbols; [6] applied to
the service of the state, or of the church, the revenues of the priests
and vestals; abolished their honors and immunities; and dissolved
the ancient fabric of Roman superstition, which was supported by the
opinions and habits of eleven hundred years. Paganism was still the
constitutional religion of the senate. The hall, or temple, in which
they assembled, was adorned by the statue and altar of Victory; [7] a
majestic female standing on a globe, with flowing garments, expanded
wings, and a crown of laurel in her outstretched hand. [8] The senators
were sworn on the altar of the goddess to observe the laws of the
emperor and of the empire: and a solemn offering of wine and incense was
the ordinary prelude of their public deliberations. The removal of this
ancient monument was the only injury which Constantius had offered to
the superstition of the Romans. The altar of Victory was again restored
by Julian, tolerated by Valentinian, and once more banished from the
senate by the zeal of Gratian. [10] But the emperor yet spared the
statues of the gods which were exposed to the public veneration: four
hundred and twenty-four temples, or chapels, still remained to satisfy
the devotion of the people; and in every quarter of Rome the delicacy of
the Christians was offended by the fumes of idolatrous sacrifice. [11]

[Footnote 3: See the outlines of the Roman hierarchy in Cicero, (de
Legibus, ii. 7, 8,) Livy, (i. 20,) Dionysius Halicarnassensis, (l. ii.
p. 119-129, edit. Hudson,) Beaufort, (Republique Romaine, tom. i. p.
1-90,) and Moyle, (vol. i. p. 10-55.) The last is the work of an English
whig, as well as of a Roman antiquary.]

[Footnote 4: These mystic, and perhaps imaginary, symbols have given
birth to various fables and conjectures. It seems probable, that the
Palladium was a small statue (three cubits and a half high) of Minerva,
with a lance and distaff; that it was usually enclosed in a seria, or
barrel; and that a similar barrel was placed by its side to disconcert
curiosity, or sacrilege. See Mezeriac (Comment. sur les Epitres d'Ovide,
tom i. p. 60--66) and Lipsius, (tom. iii. p. 610 de Vesta, &c. c 10.)]

[Footnote 5: Cicero frankly (ad Atticum, l. ii. Epist. 5) or indirectly
(ad Familiar. l. xv. Epist. 4) confesses that the Augurate is the
supreme object of his wishes. Pliny is proud to tread in the footsteps
of Cicero, (l. iv. Epist. 8,) and the chain of tradition might be
continued from history and marbles.]

[Footnote 6: Zosimus, l. iv. p. 249, 250. I have suppressed the foolish
pun about Pontifex and Maximus.]

[Footnote 7: This statue was transported from Tarentum to Rome, placed
in the Curia Julia by Caesar, and decorated by Augustus with the spoils
of Egypt.]

[Footnote 8: Prudentius (l. ii. in initio) has drawn a very awkward
portrait of Victory; but the curious reader will obtain more
satisfaction from Montfaucon's Antiquities, (tom. i. p. 341.)]

[Footnote 9: See Suetonius (in August. c. 35) and the Exordium of
Pliny's Panegyric.]

[Footnote 10: These facts are mutually allowed by the two advocates,
Symmachus and Ambrose.]

[Footnote 11: The Notitia Urbis, more recent than Constantine, does not
find one Christian church worthy to be named among the edifices of
the city. Ambrose (tom. ii. Epist. xvii. p. 825) deplores the public
scandals of Rome, which continually offended the eyes, the ears, and the
nostrils of the faithful.]

But the Christians formed the least numerous party in the senate of
Rome: [12] and it was only by their absence, that they could express
their dissent from the legal, though profane, acts of a Pagan majority.
In that assembly, the dying embers of freedom were, for a moment,
revived and inflamed by the breath of fanaticism. Four respectable
deputations were successively voted to the Imperial court, [13] to
represent the grievances of the priesthood and the senate, and to
solicit the restoration of the altar of Victory. The conduct of this
important business was intrusted to the eloquent Symmachus, [14] a
wealthy and noble senator, who united the sacred characters of pontiff
and augur with the civil dignities of proconsul of Africa and praefect
of the city. The breast of Symmachus was animated by the warmest zeal
for the cause of expiring Paganism; and his religious antagonists
lamented the abuse of his genius, and the inefficacy of his moral
virtues. [15] The orator, whose petition is extant to the emperor
Valentinian, was conscious of the difficulty and danger of the office
which he had assumed. He cautiously avoids every topic which might
appear to reflect on the religion of his sovereign; humbly declares,
that prayers and entreaties are his only arms; and artfully draws
his arguments from the schools of rhetoric, rather than from those of
philosophy. Symmachus endeavors to seduce the imagination of a young
prince, by displaying the attributes of the goddess of victory;
he insinuates, that the confiscation of the revenues, which were
consecrated to the service of the gods, was a measure unworthy of his
liberal and disinterested character; and he maintains, that the Roman
sacrifices would be deprived of their force and energy, if they were
no longer celebrated at the expense, as well as in the name, of the
republic. Even scepticism is made to supply an apology for superstition.
The great and incomprehensible secret of the universe eludes the inquiry
of man. Where reason cannot instruct, custom may be permitted to
guide; and every nation seems to consult the dictates of prudence, by a
faithful attachment to those rites and opinions, which have received
the sanction of ages. If those ages have been crowned with glory and
prosperity, if the devout people have frequently obtained the blessings
which they have solicited at the altars of the gods, it must appear
still more advisable to persist in the same salutary practice; and not
to risk the unknown perils that may attend any rash innovations. The
test of antiquity and success was applied with singular advantage to the
religion of Numa; and Rome herself, the celestial genius that presided
over the fates of the city, is introduced by the orator to plead her
own cause before the tribunal of the emperors. "Most excellent princes,"
says the venerable matron, "fathers of your country! pity and respect
my age, which has hitherto flowed in an uninterrupted course of piety.
Since I do not repent, permit me to continue in the practice of my
ancient rites. Since I am born free, allow me to enjoy my domestic
institutions. This religion has reduced the world under my laws. These
rites have repelled Hannibal from the city, and the Gauls from the
Capitol. Were my gray hairs reserved for such intolerable disgrace? I
am ignorant of the new system that I am required to adopt; but I am
well assured, that the correction of old age is always an ungrateful
and ignominious office." [16] The fears of the people supplied what
the discretion of the orator had suppressed; and the calamities,
which afflicted, or threatened, the declining empire, were unanimously
imputed, by the Pagans, to the new religion of Christ and of
Constantine.

[Footnote 12: Ambrose repeatedly affirms, in contradiction to common
sense (Moyle's Works, vol. ii. p. 147,) that the Christians had a
majority in the senate.]

[Footnote 13: The first (A.D. 382) to Gratian, who refused them
audience; the second (A.D. 384) to Valentinian, when the field was
disputed by Symmachus and Ambrose; the third (A.D. 388) to Theodosius;
and the fourth (A.D. 392) to Valentinian. Lardner (Heathen Testimonies,
vol. iv. p. 372-399) fairly represents the whole transaction.]

[Footnote 14: Symmachus, who was invested with all the civil and
sacerdotal honors, represented the emperor under the two characters of
Pontifex Maximus, and Princeps Senatus. See the proud inscription at the
head of his works. * Note: Mr. Beugnot has made it doubtful whether
Symmachus was more than Pontifex Major. Destruction du Paganisme, vol.
i. p. 459.--M.]

[Footnote 15: As if any one, says Prudentius (in Symmach. i. 639) should
dig in the mud with an instrument of gold and ivory. Even saints, and
polemic saints, treat this adversary with respect and civility.]

[Footnote 16: See the fifty-fourth Epistle of the tenth book of
Symmachus. In the form and disposition of his ten books of Epistles, he
imitated the younger Pliny; whose rich and florid style he was supposed,
by his friends, to equal or excel, (Macrob. Saturnal. l. v. c. i.) But
the luxcriancy of Symmachus consists of barren leaves, without fruits,
and even without flowers. Few facts, and few sentiments, can be
extracted from his verbose correspondence.]

But the hopes of Symmachus were repeatedly baffled by the firm and
dexterous opposition of the archbishop of Milan, who fortified the
emperors against the fallacious eloquence of the advocate of Rome.
In this controversy, Ambrose condescends to speak the language of a
philosopher, and to ask, with some contempt, why it should be thought
necessary to introduce an imaginary and invisible power, as the cause
of those victories, which were sufficiently explained by the valor and
discipline of the legions. He justly derides the absurd reverence for
antiquity, which could only tend to discourage the improvements of
art, and to replunge the human race into their original barbarism.
From thence, gradually rising to a more lofty and theological tone,
he pronounces, that Christianity alone is the doctrine of truth and
salvation; and that every mode of Polytheism conducts its deluded
votaries, through the paths of error, to the abyss of eternal perdition.
[17] Arguments like these, when they were suggested by a favorite
bishop, had power to prevent the restoration of the altar of Victory;
but the same arguments fell, with much more energy and effect, from the
mouth of a conqueror; and the gods of antiquity were dragged in triumph
at the chariot-wheels of Theodosius. [18] In a full meeting of the
senate, the emperor proposed, according to the forms of the republic,
the important question, Whether the worship of Jupiter, or that of
Christ, should be the religion of the Romans. [1811] The liberty of
suffrages, which he affected to allow, was destroyed by the hopes and
fears that his presence inspired; and the arbitrary exile of Symmachus
was a recent admonition, that it might be dangerous to oppose the
wishes of the monarch. On a regular division of the senate, Jupiter was
condemned and degraded by the sense of a very large majority; and it
is rather surprising, that any members should be found bold enough to
declare, by their speeches and votes, that they were still attached to
the interest of an abdicated deity. [19] The hasty conversion of the
senate must be attributed either to supernatural or to sordid motives;
and many of these reluctant proselytes betrayed, on every favorable
occasion, their secret disposition to throw aside the mask of odious
dissimulation. But they were gradually fixed in the new religion, as the
cause of the ancient became more hopeless; they yielded to the authority
of the emperor, to the fashion of the times, and to the entreaties of
their wives and children, [20] who were instigated and governed by the
clergy of Rome and the monks of the East. The edifying example of the
Anician family was soon imitated by the rest of the nobility: the Bassi,
the Paullini, the Gracchi, embraced the Christian religion; and "the
luminaries of the world, the venerable assembly of Catos (such are the
high-flown expressions of Prudentius) were impatient to strip themselves
of their pontifical garment; to cast the skin of the old serpent; to
assume the snowy robes of baptismal innocence, and to humble the pride
of the consular fasces before tombs of the martyrs." [21] The citizens,
who subsisted by their own industry, and the populace, who were
supported by the public liberality, filled the churches of the Lateran,
and Vatican, with an incessant throng of devout proselytes. The decrees
of the senate, which proscribed the worship of idols, were ratified by
the general consent of the Romans; [22] the splendor of the Capitol was
defaced, and the solitary temples were abandoned to ruin and contempt.
[23] Rome submitted to the yoke of the Gospel; and the vanquished
provinces had not yet lost their reverence for the name and authority of
Rome. [2311]

[Footnote 17: See Ambrose, (tom. ii. Epist. xvii. xviii. p. 825-833.)
The former of these epistles is a short caution; the latter is a formal
reply of the petition or libel of Symmachus. The same ideas are more
copiously expressed in the poetry, if it may deserve that name, of
Prudentius; who composed his two books against Symmachus (A.D. 404)
while that senator was still alive. It is whimsical enough that
Montesquieu (Considerations, &c. c. xix. tom. iii. p. 487) should
overlook the two professed antagonists of Symmachus, and amuse himself
with descanting on the more remote and indirect confutations of Orosius,
St. Augustin, and Salvian.]

[Footnote 18: See Prudentius (in Symmach. l. i. 545, &c.) The Christian
agrees with the Pagan Zosimus (l. iv. p. 283) in placing this visit of
Theodosius after the second civil war, gemini bis victor caede Tyranni,
(l. i. 410.) But the time and circumstances are better suited to his
first triumph.]

[Footnote 1811: M. Beugnot (in his Histoire de la Destruction du
Paganisme en Occident, i. p. 483-488) questions, altogether, the truth
of this statement. It is very remarkable that Zosimus and Prudentius
concur in asserting the fact of the question being solemnly deliberated
by the senate, though with directly opposite results. Zosimus declares
that the majority of the assembly adhered to the ancient religion of
Rome; Gibbon has adopted the authority of Prudentius, who, as a Latin
writer, though a poet, deserves more credit than the Greek historian.
Both concur in placing this scene after the second triumph of
Theodosius; but it has been almost demonstrated (and Gibbon--see the
preceding note--seems to have acknowledged this) by Pagi and Tillemont,
that Theodosius did not visit Rome after the defeat of Eugenius. M.
Beugnot urges, with much force, the improbability that the Christian
emperor would submit such a question to the senate, whose authority was
nearly obsolete, except on one occasion, which was almost hailed as
an epoch in the restoration of her ancient privileges. The silence of
Ambrose and of Jerom on an event so striking, and redounding so much to
the honor of Christianity, is of considerable weight. M. Beugnot would
ascribe the whole scene to the poetic imagination of Prudentius; but
I must observe, that, however Prudentius is sometimes elevated by the
grandeur of his subject to vivid and eloquent language, this flight of
invention would be so much bolder and more vigorous than usual with this
poet, that I cannot but suppose there must have been some foundation
for the story, though it may have been exaggerated by the poet, or
misrepresented by the historian.--M]

[Footnote 19: Prudentius, after proving that the sense of the senate is
declared by a legal majority, proceeds to say, (609, &c.)--

     Adspice quam pleno subsellia nostra Senatu
     Decernant infame Jovis pulvinar, et omne
     Idolum longe purgata ex urbe fugandum,
     Qua vocat egregii sententia Principis, illuc
     Libera, cum pedibus, tum corde, frequentia transit.

Zosimus ascribes to the conscript feathers a heathenish courage, which
few of them are found to possess.]

[Footnote 20: Jerom specifies the pontiff Albinus, who was surrounded
with such a believing family of children and grandchildren, as would
have been sufficient to convert even Jupiter himself; an extraordinary
proselyted (tom. i. ad Laetam, p. 54.)]

[Footnote 21:

     Exultare Patres videas, pulcherrima mundi
     Lumina; Conciliumque senum gestire Catonum
     Candidiore toga niveum pietatis amictum
     Sumere; et exuvias deponere pontificales.

The fancy of Prudentius is warmed and elevated by victory]

[Footnote 22: Prudentius, after he has described the conversion of the
senate and people, asks, with some truth and confidence,

    Et dubitamus adhuc Romam, tibi, Christe, dicatam
    In leges transisse tuas?]

[Footnote 23: Jerom exults in the desolation of the Capitol, and the
other temples of Rome, (tom. i. p. 54, tom. ii. p. 95.)]

[Footnote 2311: M. Beugnot is more correct in his general estimate of
the measures enforced by Theodosius for the abolition of Paganism. He
seized (according to Zosimus) the funds bestowed by the public for the
expense of sacrifices. The public sacrifices ceased, not because they
were positively prohibited, but because the public treasury would no
longer bear the expense. The public and the private sacrifices in the
provinces, which were not under the same regulations with those of the
capital, continued to take place. In Rome itself, many pagan ceremonies,
which were without sacrifice, remained in full force. The gods,
therefore, were invoked, the temples were frequented, the pontificates
inscribed, according to ancient usage, among the family titles of honor;
and it cannot be asserted that idolatry was completely destroyed by
Theodosius. See Beugnot, p. 491.--M.]




