## Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines.--Part II.

The tender respect of Augustus for a free constitution which he had
destroyed, can only be explained by an attentive consideration of the
character of that subtle tyrant. A cool head, an unfeeling heart, and a
cowardly disposition, prompted him at the age of nineteen to assume the
mask of hypocrisy, which he never afterwards laid aside. With the same
hand, and probably with the same temper, he signed the proscription of
Cicero, and the pardon of Cinna. His virtues, and even his vices, were
artificial; and according to the various dictates of his interest, he
was at first the enemy, and at last the father, of the Roman world.
[26] When he framed the artful system of the Imperial authority, his
moderation was inspired by his fears. He wished to deceive the people
by an image of civil liberty, and the armies by an image of civil
government.

[Footnote 26: As Octavianus advanced to the banquet of the Caesars,
his color changed like that of the chameleon; pale at first, then red,
afterwards black, he at last assumed the mild livery of Venus and
the Graces, (Caesars, p. 309.) This image, employed by Julian in his
ingenious fiction, is just and elegant; but when he considers this
change of character as real and ascribes it to the power of philosophy,
he does too much honor to philosophy and to Octavianus.]


I. The death of Caesar was ever before his eyes. He had lavished wealth
and honors on his adherents; but the most favored friends of his uncle
were in the number of the conspirators. The fidelity of the legions
might defend his authority against open rebellion; but their vigilance
could not secure his person from the dagger of a determined republican;
and the Romans, who revered the memory of Brutus, [27] would applaud the
imitation of his virtue. Caesar had provoked his fate, as much as by
the ostentation of his power, as by his power itself. The consul or the
tribune might have reigned in peace. The title of king had armed the
Romans against his life. Augustus was sensible that mankind is governed
by names; nor was he deceived in his expectation, that the senate and
people would submit to slavery, provided they were respectfully assured
that they still enjoyed their ancient freedom. A feeble senate and
enervated people cheerfully acquiesced in the pleasing illusion, as
long as it was supported by the virtue, or even by the prudence, of
the successors of Augustus. It was a motive of self-preservation, not a
principle of liberty, that animated the conspirators against Caligula,
Nero, and Domitian. They attacked the person of the tyrant, without
aiming their blow at the authority of the emperor.

[Footnote 27: Two centuries after the establishment of monarchy, the
emperor Marcus Antoninus recommends the character of Brutus as a perfect
model of Roman virtue. * Note: In a very ingenious essay, Gibbon has
ventured to call in question the preeminent virtue of Brutus. Misc
Works, iv. 95.--M.]

There appears, indeed, one memorable occasion, in which the senate,
after seventy years of patience, made an ineffectual attempt to
re-assume its long-forgotten rights. When the throne was vacant by the
murder of Caligula, the consuls convoked that assembly in the Capitol,
condemned the memory of the Caesars, gave the watchword liberty to the
few cohorts who faintly adhered to their standard, and during
eight-and-forty hours acted as the independent chiefs of a free
commonwealth. But while they deliberated, the praetorian guards had
resolved. The stupid Claudius, brother of Germanicus, was already in
their camp, invested with the Imperial purple, and prepared to support
his election by arms. The dream of liberty was at an end; and the senate
awoke to all the horrors of inevitable servitude. Deserted by the
people, and threatened by a military force, that feeble assembly was
compelled to ratify the choice of the praetorians, and to embrace the
benefit of an amnesty, which Claudius had the prudence to offer, and the
generosity to observe. [28]

[See The Capitol: When the throne was vacant by the murder of Caligula,
the consuls convoked that assembly in the Capitol.]

[Footnote 28: It is much to be regretted that we have lost the part
of Tacitus which treated of that transaction. We are forced to content
ourselves with the popular rumors of Josephus, and the imperfect hints
of Dion and Suetonius.]


II. The insolence of the armies inspired Augustus with fears of a still
more alarming nature. The despair of the citizens could only attempt,
what the power of the soldiers was, at any time, able to execute. How
precarious was his own authority over men whom he had taught to violate
every social duty! He had heard their seditious clamors; he dreaded
their calmer moments of reflection. One revolution had been purchased by
immense rewards; but a second revolution might double those rewards. The
troops professed the fondest attachment to the house of Caesar; but the
attachments of the multitude are capricious and inconstant. Augustus
summoned to his aid whatever remained in those fierce minds of Roman
prejudices; enforced the rigor of discipline by the sanction of law;
and, interposing the majesty of the senate between the emperor and the
army, boldly claimed their allegiance, as the first magistrate of the
republic.

During a long period of two hundred and twenty years from the
establishment of this artful system to the death of Commodus, the
dangers inherent to a military government were, in a great measure,
suspended. The soldiers were seldom roused to that fatal sense of their
own strength, and of the weakness of the civil authority, which was,
before and afterwards, productive of such dreadful calamities. Caligula
and Domitian were assassinated in their palace by their own domestics:
[281] the convulsions which agitated Rome on the death of the former, were
confined to the walls of the city. But Nero involved the whole empire in
his ruin. In the space of eighteen months, four princes perished by
the sword; and the Roman world was shaken by the fury of the contending
armies. Excepting only this short, though violent eruption of military
license, the two centuries from Augustus [29] to Commodus passed away
unstained with civil blood, and undisturbed by revolutions. The emperor
was elected by the authority of the senate, and the consent of the
soldiers. [30] The legions respected their oath of fidelity; and it
requires a minute inspection of the Roman annals to discover three
inconsiderable rebellions, which were all suppressed in a few months,
and without even the hazard of a battle. [31]

[Footnote 281: Caligula perished by a conspiracy formed by the officers
of the praetorian troops, and Domitian would not, perhaps, have been
assassinated without the participation of the two chiefs of that guard
in his death.--W.]

[Footnote 29: Augustus restored the ancient severity of discipline.
After the civil wars, he dropped the endearing name of Fellow-Soldiers,
and called them only Soldiers, (Sueton. in August. c. 25.) See the use
Tiberius made of the Senate in the mutiny of the Pannonian legions,
(Tacit. Annal. i.)]

[Footnote 30: These words seem to have been the constitutional language.
See Tacit. Annal. xiii. 4. * Note: This panegyric on the soldiery is
rather too liberal. Claudius was obliged to purchase their consent to
his coronation: the presents which he made, and those which the
praetorians received on other occasions, considerably embarrassed the
finances. Moreover, this formidable guard favored, in general, the
cruelties of the tyrants. The distant revolts were more frequent than
Gibbon thinks: already, under Tiberius, the legions of Germany would
have seditiously constrained Germanicus to assume the Imperial purple.
On the revolt of Claudius Civilis, under Vespasian, the legions of Gaul
murdered their general, and offered their assistance to the Gauls who
were in insurrection. Julius Sabinus made himself be proclaimed emperor,
&c. The wars, the merit, and the severe discipline of Trajan, Hadrian,
and the two Antonines, established, for some time, a greater degree of
subordination.--W]

[Footnote 31: The first was Camillus Scribonianus, who took up arms in
Dalmatia against Claudius, and was deserted by his own troops in five
days, the second, L. Antonius, in Germany, who rebelled against
Domitian; and the third, Avidius Cassius, in the reign of M. Antoninus.
The two last reigned but a few months, and were cut off by their own
adherents. We may observe, that both Camillus and Cassius colored their
ambition with the design of restoring the republic; a task, said Cassius
peculiarly reserved for his name and family.]

In elective monarchies, the vacancy of the throne is a moment big with
danger and mischief. The Roman emperors, desirous to spare the legions
that interval of suspense, and the temptation of an irregular choice,
invested their designed successor with so large a share of present
power, as should enable him, after their decease, to assume the
remainder, without suffering the empire to perceive the change of
masters. Thus Augustus, after all his fairer prospects had been snatched
from him by untimely deaths, rested his last hopes on Tiberius, obtained
for his adopted son the censorial and tribunitian powers, and dictated a
law, by which the future prince was invested with an authority equal to
his own, over the provinces and the armies. [32] Thus Vespasian subdued
the generous mind of his eldest son. Titus was adored by the eastern
legions, which, under his command, had recently achieved the conquest of
Judaea. His power was dreaded, and, as his virtues were clouded by the
intemperance of youth, his designs were suspected. Instead of listening
to such unworthy suspicions, the prudent monarch associated Titus to the
full powers of the Imperial dignity; and the grateful son ever approved
himself the humble and faithful minister of so indulgent a father. [33]

[Footnote 32: Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 121. Sueton. in Tiber. c.
26.]

[Footnote 33: Sueton. in Tit. c. 6. Plin. in Praefat. Hist. Natur.]

The good sense of Vespasian engaged him indeed to embrace every measure
that might confirm his recent and precarious elevation. The military
oath, and the fidelity of the troops, had been consecrated, by the
habits of a hundred years, to the name and family of the Caesars; and
although that family had been continued only by the fictitious rite of
adoption, the Romans still revered, in the person of Nero, the grandson
of Germanicus, and the lineal successor of Augustus. It was not without
reluctance and remorse, that the praetorian guards had been persuaded to
abandon the cause of the tyrant. [34] The rapid downfall of Galba,
Otho, and Vitellus, taught the armies to consider the emperors as the
creatures of their will, and the instruments of their license. The birth
of Vespasian was mean: his grandfather had been a private soldier, his
father a petty officer of the revenue; [35] his own merit had raised him,
in an advanced age, to the empire; but his merit was rather useful than
shining, and his virtues were disgraced by a strict and even sordid
parsimony. Such a prince consulted his true interest by the association
of a son, whose more splendid and amiable character might turn the
public attention from the obscure origin, to the future glories, of the
Flavian house. Under the mild administration of Titus, the Roman world
enjoyed a transient felicity, and his beloved memory served to protect,
above fifteen years, the vices of his brother Domitian.

[Footnote 34: This idea is frequently and strongly inculcated by
Tacitus. See Hist. i. 5, 16, ii. 76.]

[Footnote 35: The emperor Vespasian, with his usual good sense, laughed
at the genealogists, who deduced his family from Flavius, the founder of
Reate, (his native country,) and one of the companions of Hercules Suet
in Vespasian, c. 12.]

Nerva had scarcely accepted the purple from the assassins of Domitian,
before he discovered that his feeble age was unable to stem the torrent
of public disorders, which had multiplied under the long tyranny of his
predecessor. His mild disposition was respected by the good; but the
degenerate Romans required a more vigorous character, whose justice
should strike terror into the guilty. Though he had several relations,
he fixed his choice on a stranger. He adopted Trajan, then about forty
years of age, and who commanded a powerful army in the Lower Germany;
and immediately, by a decree of the senate, declared him his colleague
and successor in the empire. [36] It is sincerely to be lamented, that
whilst we are fatigued with the disgustful relation of Nero's crimes
and follies, we are reduced to collect the actions of Trajan from the
glimmerings of an abridgment, or the doubtful light of a panegyric.
There remains, however, one panegyric far removed beyond the suspicion
of flattery. Above two hundred and fifty years after the death of
Trajan, the senate, in pouring out the customary acclamations on the
accession of a new emperor, wished that he might surpass the felicity of
Augustus, and the virtue of Trajan. [37]

[Footnote 36: Dion, l. lxviii. p. 1121. Plin. Secund. in Panegyric.]

[Footnote 37: Felicior Augusto, Melior Trajano. Eutrop. viii. 5.]

We may readily believe, that the father of his country hesitated whether
he ought to intrust the various and doubtful character of his kinsman
Hadrian with sovereign power. In his last moments the arts of the
empress Plotina either fixed the irresolution of Trajan, or boldly
supposed a fictitious adoption; [38] the truth of which could not be
safely disputed, and Hadrian was peaceably acknowledged as his lawful
successor. Under his reign, as has been already mentioned, the empire
flourished in peace and prosperity. He encouraged the arts, reformed
the laws, asserted military discipline, and visited all his provinces
in person. His vast and active genius was equally suited to the most
enlarged views, and the minute details of civil policy. But the ruling
passions of his soul were curiosity and vanity. As they prevailed, and
as they were attracted by different objects, Hadrian was, by turns,
an excellent prince, a ridiculous sophist, and a jealous tyrant.
The general tenor of his conduct deserved praise for its equity and
moderation. Yet in the first days of his reign, he put to death four
consular senators, his personal enemies, and men who had been judged
worthy of empire; and the tediousness of a painful illness rendered
him, at last, peevish and cruel. The senate doubted whether they should
pronounce him a god or a tyrant; and the honors decreed to his memory
were granted to the prayers of the pious Antoninus. [39]

[Footnote 38: Dion (l. lxix. p. 1249) affirms the whole to have been
a fiction, on the authority of his father, who, being governor of the
province where Trajan died, had very good opportunities of sifting
this mysterious transaction. Yet Dodwell (Praelect. Camden. xvii.) has
maintained that Hadrian was called to the certain hope of the empire,
during the lifetime of Trajan.]

[Footnote 39: Dion, (l. lxx. p. 1171.) Aurel. Victor.]

The caprice of Hadrian influenced his choice of a successor.

After revolving in his mind several men of distinguished merit, whom
he esteemed and hated, he adopted Aelius Verus a gay and voluptuous
nobleman, recommended by uncommon beauty to the lover of Antinous. [40]
But whilst Hadrian was delighting himself with his own applause, and
the acclamations of the soldiers, whose consent had been secured by an
immense donative, the new Caesar [41] was ravished from his embraces by
an untimely death. He left only one son. Hadrian commended the boy to
the gratitude of the Antonines. He was adopted by Pius; and, on the
accession of Marcus, was invested with an equal share of sovereign
power. Among the many vices of this younger Verus, he possessed
one virtue; a dutiful reverence for his wiser colleague, to whom he
willingly abandoned the ruder cares of empire. The philosophic emperor
dissembled his follies, lamented his early death, and cast a decent veil
over his memory.

[Footnote 40: The deification of Antinous, his medals, his statues,
temples, city, oracles, and constellation, are well known, and still
dishonor the memory of Hadrian. Yet we may remark, that of the first
fifteen emperors, Claudius was the only one whose taste in love was
entirely correct. For the honors of Antinous, see Spanheim, Commentaire
sui les Caesars de Julien, p. 80.]

[Footnote 41: Hist. August. p. 13. Aurelius Victor in Epitom.]

As soon as Hadrian's passion was either gratified or disappointed, he
resolved to deserve the thanks of posterity, by placing the most exalted
merit on the Roman throne. His discerning eye easily discovered a
senator about fifty years of age, blameless in all the offices of life;
and a youth of about seventeen, whose riper years opened a fair prospect
of every virtue: the elder of these was declared the son and successor
of Hadrian, on condition, however, that he himself should immediately
adopt the younger. The two Antonines (for it is of them that we are now
speaking,) governed the Roman world forty-two years, with the same
invariable spirit of wisdom and virtue. Although Pius had two sons, [42]
he preferred the welfare of Rome to the interest of his family, gave his
daughter Faustina, in marriage to young Marcus, obtained from the senate
the tribunitian and proconsular powers, and, with a noble disdain, or
rather ignorance of jealousy, associated him to all the labors of
government. Marcus, on the other hand, revered the character of his
benefactor, loved him as a parent, obeyed him as his sovereign, [43]
and, after he was no more, regulated his own administration by the
example and maxims of his predecessor. Their united reigns are possibly
the only period of history in which the happiness of a great people was
the sole object of government.

[Footnote 42: Without the help of medals and inscriptions, we should be
ignorant of this fact, so honorable to the memory of Pius. Note: Gibbon
attributes to Antoninus Pius a merit which he either did not possess, or
was not in a situation to display.

1. He was adopted only on the condition that he would adopt, in his
turn, Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus.

2. His two sons died children, and one of them, M. Galerius, alone,
appears to have survived, for a few years, his father's coronation.
Gibbon is also mistaken when he says (note 42) that "without the help
of medals and inscriptions, we should be ignorant that Antoninus had
two sons." Capitolinus says expressly, (c. 1,) Filii mares duo,
duae-foeminae; we only owe their names to the medals. Pagi. Cont. Baron,
i. 33, edit Paris.--W.]

[Footnote 43: During the twenty-three years of Pius's reign, Marcus was
only two nights absent from the palace, and even those were at different
times. Hist. August. p. 25.]

Titus Antoninus Pius has been justly denominated a second Numa. The
same love of religion, justice, and peace, was the distinguishing
characteristic of both princes. But the situation of the latter opened
a much larger field for the exercise of those virtues. Numa could
only prevent a few neighboring villages from plundering each other's
harvests. Antoninus diffused order and tranquillity over the greatest
part of the earth. His reign is marked by the rare advantage of
furnishing very few materials for history; which is, indeed, little more
than the register of the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind.
In private life, he was an amiable, as well as a good man. The native
simplicity of his virtue was a stranger to vanity or affectation.
He enjoyed with moderation the conveniences of his fortune, and the
innocent pleasures of society; [44] and the benevolence of his soul
displayed itself in a cheerful serenity of temper.

[Footnote 44: He was fond of the theatre, and not insensible to the
charms of the fair sex. Marcus Antoninus, i. 16. Hist. August. p. 20,
21. Julian in Caesar.]

The virtue of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was of severer and more
laborious kind. [45] It was the well-earned harvest of many a learned
conference, of many a patient lecture, and many a midnight lucubration.
At the age of twelve years he embraced the rigid system of the Stoics,
which taught him to submit his body to his mind, his passions to his
reason; to consider virtue as the only good, vice as the only evil, all
things external as things indifferent. [46] His meditations, composed in
the tumult of the camp, are still extant; and he even condescended to
give lessons of philosophy, in a more public manner than was perhaps
consistent with the modesty of sage, or the dignity of an emperor. [47]
But his life was the noblest commentary on the precepts of Zeno. He was
severe to himself, indulgent to the imperfections of others, just
and beneficent to all mankind. He regretted that Avidius Cassius, who
excited a rebellion in Syria, had disappointed him, by a voluntary
death, [471] of the pleasure of converting an enemy into a friend;; and he
justified the sincerity of that sentiment, by moderating the zeal of the
senate against the adherents of the traitor. [48] War he detested, as the
disgrace and calamity of human nature; [481] but when the necessity of
a just defence called upon him to take up arms, he readily exposed his
person to eight winter campaigns, on the frozen banks of the Danube, the
severity of which was at last fatal to the weakness of his constitution.
His memory was revered by a grateful posterity, and above a century
after his death, many persons preserved the image of Marcus Antoninus
among those of their household gods. [49]

[Footnote 45: The enemies of Marcus charged him with hypocrisy, and
with a want of that simplicity which distinguished Pius and even Verus.
(Hist. August. 6, 34.) This suspicions, unjust as it was, may serve to
account for the superior applause bestowed upon personal qualifications,
in preference to the social virtues. Even Marcus Antoninus has been
called a hypocrite; but the wildest scepticism never insinuated that
Caesar might probably be a coward, or Tully a fool. Wit and valor are
qualifications more easily ascertained than humanity or the love of
justice.]

[Footnote 46: Tacitus has characterized, in a few words, the principles
of the portico: Doctores sapientiae secutus est, qui sola bona quae
honesta, main tantum quae turpia; potentiam, nobilitatem, aeteraque
extra... bonis neque malis adnumerant. Tacit. Hist. iv. 5.]

[Footnote 47: Before he went on the second expedition against the
Germans, he read lectures of philosophy to the Roman people, during
three days. He had already done the same in the cities of Greece and
Asia. Hist. August. in Cassio, c. 3.]

[Footnote 471: Cassius was murdered by his own partisans. Vulcat. Gallic.
in Cassio, c. 7. Dion, lxxi. c. 27.--W.]

[Footnote 48: Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1190. Hist. August. in Avid. Cassio.
Note: See one of the newly discovered passages of Dion Cassius. Marcus
wrote to the senate, who urged the execution of the partisans of
Cassius, in these words: "I entreat and beseech you to preserve my reign
unstained by senatorial blood. None of your order must perish either by
your desire or mine." Mai. Fragm. Vatican. ii. p. 224.--M.]

[Footnote 481: Marcus would not accept the services of any of the
barbarian allies who crowded to his standard in the war against Avidius
Cassius. "Barbarians," he said, with wise but vain sagacity, "must not
become acquainted with the dissensions of the Roman people." Mai. Fragm
Vatican l. 224.--M.]

[Footnote 49: Hist. August. in Marc. Antonin. c. 18.]

If a man were called to fix the period in the history of the world,
during which the condition of the human race was most happy and
prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which elapsed from
the death of Domitian to the accession of Commodus. The vast extent of
the Roman empire was governed by absolute power, under the guidance of
virtue and wisdom. The armies were restrained by the firm but gentle
hand of four successive emperors, whose characters and authority
commanded involuntary respect. The forms of the civil administration
were carefully preserved by Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines,
who delighted in the image of liberty, and were pleased with considering
themselves as the accountable ministers of the laws. Such princes
deserved the honor of restoring the republic, had the Romans of their
days been capable of enjoying a rational freedom.

The labors of these monarchs were overpaid by the immense reward that
inseparably waited on their success; by the honest pride of virtue, and
by the exquisite delight of beholding the general happiness of which
they were the authors. A just but melancholy reflection imbittered,
however, the noblest of human enjoyments. They must often have
recollected the instability of a happiness which depended on the
character of single man. The fatal moment was perhaps approaching,
when some licentious youth, or some jealous tyrant, would abuse, to the
destruction, that absolute power, which they had exerted for the benefit
of their people. The ideal restraints of the senate and the laws might
serve to display the virtues, but could never correct the vices, of the
emperor. The military force was a blind and irresistible instrument
of oppression; and the corruption of Roman manners would always supply
flatterers eager to applaud, and ministers prepared to serve, the fear
or the avarice, the lust or the cruelty, of their master. These gloomy
apprehensions had been already justified by the experience of the
Romans. The annals of the emperors exhibit a strong and various picture
of human nature, which we should vainly seek among the mixed and
doubtful characters of modern history. In the conduct of those monarchs
we may trace the utmost lines of vice and virtue; the most exalted
perfection, and the meanest degeneracy of our own species. The golden
age of Trajan and the Antonines had been preceded by an age of iron. It
is almost superfluous to enumerate the unworthy successors of Augustus.
Their unparalleled vices, and the splendid theatre on which they were
acted, have saved them from oblivion. The dark, unrelenting Tiberius,
the furious Caligula, the feeble Claudius, the profligate and cruel
Nero, the beastly Vitellius, [50] and the timid, inhuman Domitian, are
condemned to everlasting infamy. During fourscore years (excepting only
the short and doubtful respite of Vespasian's reign) [51] Rome groaned
beneath an unremitting tyranny, which exterminated the ancient families
of the republic, and was fatal to almost every virtue and every talent
that arose in that unhappy period.

[Footnote 50: Vitellius consumed in mere eating at least six millions
of our money in about seven months. It is not easy to express his vices
with dignity, or even decency. Tacitus fairly calls him a hog, but it
is by substituting for a coarse word a very fine image. "At Vitellius,
umbraculis hortorum abditus, ut ignava animalia, quibus si cibum
suggeras, jacent torpentque, praeterita, instantia, futura, pari
oblivione dimiserat. Atque illum nemore Aricino desidem et marcentum,"
&c. Tacit. Hist. iii. 36, ii. 95. Sueton. in Vitell. c. 13. Dion.
Cassius, l xv. p. 1062.]

[Footnote 51: The execution of Helvidius Priscus, and of the virtuous
Eponina, disgraced the reign of Vespasian.]

Under the reign of these monsters, the slavery of the Romans was
accompanied with two peculiar circumstances, the one occasioned by their
former liberty, the other by their extensive conquests, which rendered
their condition more completely wretched than that of the victims of
tyranny in any other age or country. From these causes were derived, 1.
The exquisite sensibility of the sufferers; and, 2. The impossibility of
escaping from the hand of the oppressor.


I. When Persia was governed by the descendants of Sefi, a race of
princes whose wanton cruelty often stained their divan, their table, and
their bed, with the blood of their favorites, there is a saying recorded
of a young nobleman, that he never departed from the sultan's presence,
without satisfying himself whether his head was still on his shoulders.
The experience of every day might almost justify the scepticism of
Rustan. [52] Yet the fatal sword, suspended above him by a single
thread, seems not to have disturbed the slumbers, or interrupted the
tranquillity, of the Persian. The monarch's frown, he well knew, could
level him with the dust; but the stroke of lightning or apoplexy might
be equally fatal; and it was the part of a wise man to forget the
inevitable calamities of human life in the enjoyment of the fleeting
hour. He was dignified with the appellation of the king's slave; had,
perhaps, been purchased from obscure parents, in a country which he
had never known; and was trained up from his infancy in the severe
discipline of the seraglio. [53] His name, his wealth, his honors, were
the gift of a master, who might, without injustice, resume what he had
bestowed. Rustan's knowledge, if he possessed any, could only serve to
confirm his habits by prejudices. His language afforded not words for
any form of government, except absolute monarchy. The history of the
East informed him, that such had ever been the condition of mankind.
[54] The Koran, and the interpreters of that divine book, inculcated to
him, that the sultan was the descendant of the prophet, and the
vicegerent of heaven; that patience was the first virtue of a Mussulman,
and unlimited obedience the great duty of a subject.

[Footnote 52: Voyage de Chardin en Perse, vol. iii. p. 293.]

[Footnote 53: The practice of raising slaves to the great offices of
state is still more common among the Turks than among the Persians. The
miserable countries of Georgia and Circassia supply rulers to the
greatest part of the East.]

[Footnote 54: Chardin says, that European travellers have diffused among
the Persians some ideas of the freedom and mildness of our governments.
They have done them a very ill office.]

The minds of the Romans were very differently prepared for slavery.
Oppressed beneath the weight of their own corruption and of military
violence, they for a long while preserved the sentiments, or at least
the ideas, of their free-born ancestors. The education of Helvidius and
Thrasea, of Tacitus and Pliny, was the same as that of Cato and Cicero.
From Grecian philosophy, they had imbibed the justest and most liberal
notions of the dignity of human nature, and the origin of civil society.
The history of their own country had taught them to revere a free, a
virtuous, and a victorious commonwealth; to abhor the successful crimes
of Caesar and Augustus; and inwardly to despise those tyrants whom they
adored with the most abject flattery. As magistrates and senators they
were admitted into the great council, which had once dictated laws
to the earth, whose authority was so often prostituted to the vilest
purposes of tyranny. Tiberius, and those emperors who adopted his
maxims, attempted to disguise their murders by the formalities of
justice, and perhaps enjoyed a secret pleasure in rendering the senate
their accomplice as well as their victim. By this assembly, the last of
the Romans were condemned for imaginary crimes and real virtues. Their
infamous accusers assumed the language of independent patriots, who
arraigned a dangerous citizen before the tribunal of his country; and
the public service was rewarded by riches and honors. [55] The servile
judges professed to assert the majesty of the commonwealth, violated
in the person of its first magistrate, [56] whose clemency they most
applauded when they trembled the most at his inexorable and impending
cruelty. [57] The tyrant beheld their baseness with just contempt, and
encountered their secret sentiments of detestation with sincere and
avowed hatred for the whole body of the senate.

[Footnote 55: They alleged the example of Scipio and Cato, (Tacit.
Annal. iii. 66.) Marcellus Epirus and Crispus Vibius had acquired two
millions and a half under Nero. Their wealth, which aggravated their
crimes, protected them under Vespasian. See Tacit. Hist. iv. 43. Dialog.
de Orator. c. 8. For one accusation, Regulus, the just object of Pliny's
satire, received from the senate the consular ornaments, and a present
of sixty thousand pounds.]

[Footnote 56: The crime of majesty was formerly a treasonable offence
against the Roman people. As tribunes of the people, Augustus and
Tiberius applied tit to their own persons, and extended it to an
infinite latitude. Note: It was Tiberius, not Augustus, who first took
in this sense the words crimen laesae majestatis. Bachii Trajanus, 27.
--W.]

[Footnote 57: After the virtuous and unfortunate widow of Germanicus had
been put to death, Tiberius received the thanks of the senate for his
clemency. she had not been publicly strangled; nor was the body drawn
with a hook to the Gemoniae, where those of common male factors were
exposed. See Tacit. Annal. vi. 25. Sueton. in Tiberio c. 53.]


II. The division of Europe into a number of independent states,
connected, however, with each other by the general resemblance of
religion, language, and manners, is productive of the most beneficial
consequences to the liberty of mankind. A modern tyrant, who should find
no resistance either in his own breast, or in his people, would soon
experience a gentle restraint from the example of his equals, the dread
of present censure, the advice of his allies, and the apprehension of
his enemies. The object of his displeasure, escaping from the narrow
limits of his dominions, would easily obtain, in a happier climate,
a secure refuge, a new fortune adequate to his merit, the freedom of
complaint, and perhaps the means of revenge. But the empire of the
Romans filled the world, and when the empire fell into the hands of a
single person, he would became a safe and dreary prison for his enemies.
The slave of Imperial despotism, whether he was condemned to drag his
gilded chain in rome and the senate, or to were out a life of exile on
the barren rock of Seriphus, or the frozen bank of the Danube, expected
his fate in silent despair. [58] To resist was fatal, and it was
impossible to fly. On every side he was encompassed with a vast extent
of sea and land, which he could never hope to traverse without being
discovered, seized, and restored to his irritated master. Beyond the
frontiers, his anxious view could discover nothing, except the ocean,
inhospitable deserts, hostile tribes of barbarians, of fierce manners
and unknown language, or dependent kings, who would gladly purchase
the emperor's protection by the sacrifice of an obnoxious fugitive. [59]
"Wherever you are," said Cicero to the exiled Marcellus, "remember that
you are equally within the power of the conqueror." [60]

[Footnote 58: Seriphus was a small rocky island in the Aegean Sea, the
inhabitants of which were despised for their ignorance and obscurity.
The place of Ovid's exile is well known, by his just, but unmanly
lamentations. It should seem, that he only received an order to leave
rome in so many days, and to transport himself to Tomi. Guards and
jailers were unnecessary.]

[Footnote 59: Under Tiberius, a Roman knight attempted to fly to the
Parthians. He was stopped in the straits of Sicily; but so little danger
did there appear in the example, that the most jealous of tyrants
disdained to punish it. Tacit. Annal. vi. 14.]

[Footnote 60: Cicero ad Familiares, iv. 7.]




