## Chapter IX: State Of Germany Until The Barbarians.--Part III.

The Germans respected only those duties which they imposed on
themselves. The most obscure soldier resisted with disdain the authority
of the magistrates. The noblest youths blushed not to be numbered among
the faithful companions of some renowned chief, to whom they devoted
their arms and service. A noble emulation prevailed among the
companions, to obtain the first place in the esteem of their chief;
amongst the chiefs, to acquire the greatest number of valiant
companions. To be ever surrounded by a band of select youths was the
pride and strength of the chiefs, their ornament in peace, their defence
in war. The glory of such distinguished heroes diffused itself beyond
the narrow limits of their own tribe. Presents and embassies solicited
their friendship, and the fame of their arms often insured victory to
the party which they espoused. In the hour of danger it was shameful for
the chief to be surpassed in valor by his companions; shameful for the
companions not to equal the valor of their chief. To survive his fall
in battle, was indelible infamy. To protect his person, and to adorn his
glory with the trophies of their own exploits, were the most sacred of
their duties. The chiefs combated for victory, the companions for the
chief. The noblest warriors, whenever their native country was sunk into
the laziness of peace, maintained their numerous bands in some distant
scene of action, to exercise their restless spirit, and to acquire
renown by voluntary dangers. Gifts worthy of soldiers--the warlike
steed, the bloody and even victorious lance--were the rewards which the
companions claimed from the liberality of their chief. The rude plenty
of his hospitable board was the only pay that he could bestow, or they
would accept. War, rapine, and the free-will offerings of his friends,
supplied the materials of this munificence. [53] This institution,
however it might accidentally weaken the several republics, invigorated
the general character of the Germans, and even ripened amongst them all
the virtues of which barbarians are susceptible; the faith and valor,
the hospitality and the courtesy, so conspicuous long afterwards in the
ages of chivalry.

The honorable gifts, bestowed by the chief on his brave companions, have
been supposed, by an ingenious writer, to contain the first rudiments of
the fiefs, distributed after the conquest of the Roman provinces, by the
barbarian lords among their vassals, with a similar duty of homage and
military service. [54] These conditions are, however, very repugnant to
the maxims of the ancient Germans, who delighted in mutual presents; but
without either imposing, or accepting, the weight of obligations. [55]

[Footnote 53: Tacit. Germ. 13, 14.]

[Footnote 54: Esprit des Loix, l. xxx. c. 3. The brilliant imagination
of Montesquieu is corrected, however, by the dry, cold reason of the
Abbe de Mably. Observations sur l'Histoire de France, tom. i. p. 356.]

[Footnote 55: Gaudent muneribus, sed nec data imputant, nec acceptis
obligautur. Tacit. Germ. c. 21.]

"In the days of chivalry, or more properly of romance, all the men were
brave, and all the women were chaste;" and notwithstanding the latter of
these virtues is acquired and preserved with much more difficulty than
the former, it is ascribed, almost without exception, to the wives of
the ancient Germans. Polygamy was not in use, except among the princes,
and among them only for the sake of multiplying their alliances.
Divorces were prohibited by manners rather than by laws. Adulteries were
punished as rare and inexpiable crimes; nor was seduction justified by
example and fashion. [56] We may easily discover that Tacitus indulges an
honest pleasure in the contrast of barbarian virtue with the dissolute
conduct of the Roman ladies; yet there are some striking circumstances
that give an air of truth, or at least probability, to the conjugal
faith and chastity of the Germans.

[Footnote 56: The adulteress was whipped through the village. Neither
wealth nor beauty could inspire compassion, or procure her a second
husband. 18, 19.]

Although the progress of civilization has undoubtedly contributed to
assuage the fiercer passions of human nature, it seems to have been less
favorable to the virtue of chastity, whose most dangerous enemy is the
softness of the mind. The refinements of life corrupt while they polish
the intercourse of the sexes. The gross appetite of love becomes
most dangerous when it is elevated, or rather, indeed, disguised by
sentimental passion. The elegance of dress, of motion, and of
manners, gives a lustre to beauty, and inflames the senses through the
imagination. Luxurious entertainments, midnight dances, and licentious
spectacles, present at once temptation and opportunity to female
frailty. [57] From such dangers the unpolished wives of the barbarians
were secured by poverty, solitude, and the painful cares of a domestic
life. The German huts, open, on every side, to the eye of indiscretion
or jealousy, were a better safeguard of conjugal fidelity, than the
walls, the bolts, and the eunuchs of a Persian haram. To this reason
another may be added, of a more honorable nature. The Germans treated
their women with esteem and confidence, consulted them on every occasion
of importance, and fondly believed, that in their breasts resided a
sanctity and wisdom more than human. Some of the interpreters of fate,
such as Velleda, in the Batavian war, governed, in the name of the
deity, the fiercest nations of Germany. [58] The rest of the sex,
without being adored as goddesses, were respected as the free and equal
companions of soldiers; associated even by the marriage ceremony to a
life of toil, of danger, and of glory. [59] In their great invasions,
the camps of the barbarians were filled with a multitude of women, who
remained firm and undaunted amidst the sound of arms, the various forms
of destruction, and the honorable wounds of their sons and husbands. [60]
Fainting armies of Germans have, more than once, been driven back upon
the enemy, by the generous despair of the women, who dreaded death much
less than servitude. If the day was irrecoverably lost, they well knew
how to deliver themselves and their children, with their own hands,
from an insulting victor. [61] Heroines of such a cast may claim our
admiration; but they were most assuredly neither lovely, nor very
susceptible of love. Whilst they affected to emulate the stern virtues
of man, they must have resigned that attractive softness, in which
principally consist the charm and weakness of woman. Conscious pride
taught the German females to suppress every tender emotion that stood
in competition with honor, and the first honor of the sex has ever been
that of chastity. The sentiments and conduct of these high-spirited
matrons may, at once, be considered as a cause, as an effect, and as a
proof of the general character of the nation. Female courage, however it
may be raised by fanaticism, or confirmed by habit, can be only a faint
and imperfect imitation of the manly valor that distinguishes the age or
country in which it may be found.

[Footnote 57: Ovid employs two hundred lines in the research of places
the most favorable to love. Above all, he considers the theatre as the
best adapted to collect the beauties of Rome, and to melt them into
tenderness and sensuality,]

[Footnote 58: Tacit. Germ. iv. 61, 65.]

[Footnote 59: The marriage present was a yoke of oxen, horses, and
arms. See Germ. c. 18. Tacitus is somewhat too florid on the subject.]

[Footnote 60: The change of exigere into exugere is a most excellent
correction.]

[Footnote 61: Tacit. Germ. c. 7. Plutarch in Mario. Before the wives of
the Teutones destroyed themselves and their children, they had offered
to surrender, on condition that they should be received as the slaves
of the vestal virgins.]

The religious system of the Germans (if the wild opinions of savages can
deserve that name) was dictated by their wants, their fears, and their
ignorance. [62] They adored the great visible objects and agents of
nature, the Sun and the Moon, the Fire and the Earth; together with
those imaginary deities, who were supposed to preside over the most
important occupations of human life. They were persuaded, that, by some
ridiculous arts of divination, they could discover the will of the
superior beings, and that human sacrifices were the most precious and
acceptable offering to their altars. Some applause has been hastily
bestowed on the sublime notion, entertained by that people, of the
Deity, whom they neither confined within the walls of the temple, nor
represented by any human figure; but when we recollect, that the Germans
were unskilled in architecture, and totally unacquainted with the art of
sculpture, we shall readily assign the true reason of a scruple, which
arose not so much from a superiority of reason, as from a want of
ingenuity. The only temples in Germany were dark and ancient groves,
consecrated by the reverence of succeeding generations. Their secret
gloom, the imagined residence of an invisible power, by presenting no
distinct object of fear or worship, impressed the mind with a still
deeper sense of religious horror; [63] and the priests, rude and
illiterate as they were, had been taught by experience the use of every
artifice that could preserve and fortify impressions so well suited to
their own interest.

[Footnote 62: Tacitus has employed a few lines, and Cluverius one
hundred and twenty-four pages, on this obscure subject. The former
discovers in Germany the gods of Greece and Rome. The latter is
positive, that, under the emblems of the sun, the moon, and the fire,
his pious ancestors worshipped the Trinity in unity]

[Footnote 63: The sacred wood, described with such sublime horror by
Lucan, was in the neighborhood of Marseilles; but there were many of the
same kind in Germany. * Note: The ancient Germans had shapeless idols,
and, when they began to build more settled habitations, they raised also
temples, such as that to the goddess Teufana, who presided over
divination. See Adelung, Hist. of Ane Germans, p 296--G]

The same ignorance, which renders barbarians incapable of conceiving or
embracing the useful restraints of laws, exposes them naked and unarmed
to the blind terrors of superstition. The German priests, improving this
favorable temper of their countrymen, had assumed a jurisdiction even in
temporal concerns, which the magistrate could not venture to exercise;
and the haughty warrior patiently submitted to the lash of correction,
when it was inflicted, not by any human power, but by the immediate
order of the god of war. [64] The defects of civil policy were sometimes
supplied by the interposition of ecclesiastical authority. The latter
was constantly exerted to maintain silence and decency in the popular
assemblies; and was sometimes extended to a more enlarged concern for
the national welfare. A solemn procession was occasionally celebrated in
the present countries of Mecklenburgh and Pomerania. The unknown symbol
of the Earth, covered with a thick veil, was placed on a carriage drawn
by cows; and in this manner the goddess, whose common residence was in
the Isles of Rugen, visited several adjacent tribes of her worshippers.
During her progress the sound of war was hushed, quarrels were
suspended, arms laid aside, and the restless Germans had an opportunity
of tasting the blessings of peace and harmony. [65] The truce of God,
so often and so ineffectually proclaimed by the clergy of the eleventh
century, was an obvious imitation of this ancient custom. [66]

[Footnote 64: Tacit. Germania, c. 7.]

[Footnote 65: Tacit. Germania, c. 40.]

[Footnote 66: See Dr. Robertson's History of Charles V. vol. i. note
10.]

But the influence of religion was far more powerful to inflame,
than to moderate, the fierce passions of the Germans. Interest and
fanaticism often prompted its ministers to sanctify the most daring
and the most unjust enterprises, by the approbation of Heaven, and full
assurances of success. The consecrated standards, long revered in the
groves of superstition, were placed in the front of the battle; [67] and
the hostile army was devoted with dire execrations to the gods of war
and of thunder. [68] In the faith of soldiers (and such were the Germans)
cowardice is the most unpardonable of sins. A brave man was the worthy
favorite of their martial deities; the wretch who had lost his shield
was alike banished from the religious and civil assemblies of his
countrymen. Some tribes of the north seem to have embraced the doctrine
of transmigration, [69] others imagined a gross paradise of immortal
drunkenness. [70] All agreed, that a life spent in arms, and a glorious
death in battle, were the best preparations for a happy futurity, either
in this or in another world.

[Footnote 67: Tacit. Germania, c. 7. These standards were only the heads
of wild beasts.]

[Footnote 68: See an instance of this custom, Tacit. Annal. xiii. 57.]

[Footnote 69: Caesar Diodorus, and Lucan, seem to ascribe this doctrine
to the Gauls, but M. Pelloutier (Histoire des Celtes, l. iii. c. 18)
labors to reduce their expressions to a more orthodox sense.]

[Footnote 70: Concerning this gross but alluring doctrine of the Edda,
see Fable xx. in the curious version of that book, published by M.
Mallet, in his Introduction to the History of Denmark.]

The immortality so vainly promised by the priests, was, in some degree,
conferred by the bards. That singular order of men has most deservedly
attracted the notice of all who have attempted to investigate the
antiquities of the Celts, the Scandinavians, and the Germans. Their
genius and character, as well as the reverence paid to that important
office, have been sufficiently illustrated. But we cannot so easily
express, or even conceive, the enthusiasm of arms and glory which they
kindled in the breast of their audience. Among a polished people, a
taste for poetry is rather an amusement of the fancy, than a passion
of the soul. And yet, when in calm retirement we peruse the combats
described by Homer or Tasso, we are insensibly seduced by the fiction,
and feel a momentary glow of martial ardor. But how faint, how cold is
the sensation which a peaceful mind can receive from solitary study! It
was in the hour of battle, or in the feast of victory, that the bards
celebrated the glory of the heroes of ancient days, the ancestors of
those warlike chieftains, who listened with transport to their artless
but animated strains. The view of arms and of danger heightened the
effect of the military song; and the passions which it tended to
excite, the desire of fame, and the contempt of death, were the habitual
sentiments of a German mind. [71] [711]

[Footnote 71: See Tacit. Germ. c. 3. Diod. Sicul. l. v. Strabo, l. iv.
p. 197. The classical reader may remember the rank of Demodocus in the
Phaeacian court, and the ardor infused by Tyrtaeus into the fainting
Spartans. Yet there is little probability that the Greeks and the
Germans were the same people. Much learned trifling might be spared, if
our antiquarians would condescend to reflect, that similar manners will
naturally be produced by similar situations.]

[Footnote 711: Besides these battle songs, the Germans sang at their
festival banquets, (Tac. Ann. i. 65,) and around the bodies of their
slain heroes. King Theodoric, of the tribe of the Goths, killed in a
battle against Attila, was honored by songs while he was borne from
the field of battle. Jornandes, c. 41. The same honor was paid to
the remains of Attila. Ibid. c. 49. According to some historians,
the Germans had songs also at their weddings; but this appears to me
inconsistent with their customs, in which marriage was no more than the
purchase of a wife. Besides, there is but one instance of this, that
of the Gothic king, Ataulph, who sang himself the nuptial hymn when
he espoused Placidia, sister of the emperors Arcadius and Honorius,
(Olympiodor. p. 8.) But this marriage was celebrated according to the
Roman rites, of which the nuptial songs formed a part. Adelung, p.
382.--G. Charlemagne is said to have collected the national songs of the
ancient Germans. Eginhard, Vit. Car. Mag.--M.]

Such was the situation, and such were the manners of the ancient
Germans. Their climate, their want of learning, of arts, and of laws,
their notions of honor, of gallantry, and of religion, their sense of
freedom, impatience of peace, and thirst of enterprise, all contributed
to form a people of military heroes. And yet we find, that during more
than two hundred and fifty years that elapsed from the defeat of
Varus to the reign of Decius, these formidable barbarians made few
considerable attempts, and not any material impression on the luxurious
and enslaved provinces of the empire. Their progress was checked by
their want of arms and discipline, and their fury was diverted by the
intestine divisions of ancient Germany. I. It has been observed, with
ingenuity, and not without truth, that the command of iron soon gives
a nation the command of gold. But the rude tribes of Germany, alike
destitute of both those valuable metals, were reduced slowly to acquire,
by their unassisted strength, the possession of the one as well as
the other. The face of a German army displayed their poverty of iron.
Swords, and the longer kind of lances, they could seldom use. Their
frameoe (as they called them in their own language) were long spears
headed with a sharp but narrow iron point, and which, as occasion
required, they either darted from a distance, or pushed in close onset.
With this spear, and with a shield, their cavalry was contented.
A multitude of darts, scattered [72] with incredible force, were an
additional resource of the infantry. Their military dress, when they
wore any, was nothing more than a loose mantle. A variety of colors was
the only ornament of their wooden or osier shields. Few of the chiefs
were distinguished by cuirasses, scarcely any by helmets. Though the
horses of Germany were neither beautiful, swift, nor practised in the
skilful evolutions of the Roman manege, several of the nations obtained
renown by their cavalry; but, in general, the principal strength of the
Germans consisted in their infantry, [73] which was drawn up in several
deep columns, according to the distinction of tribes and families.
Impatient of fatigue and delay, these half-armed warriors rushed to
battle with dissonant shouts and disordered ranks; and sometimes, by
the effort of native valor, prevailed over the constrained and more
artificial bravery of the Roman mercenaries. But as the barbarians
poured forth their whole souls on the first onset, they knew not how to
rally or to retire. A repulse was a sure defeat; and a defeat was most
commonly total destruction. When we recollect the complete armor of
the Roman soldiers, their discipline, exercises, evolutions, fortified
camps, and military engines, it appears a just matter of surprise,
how the naked and unassisted valor of the barbarians could dare to
encounter, in the field, the strength of the legions, and the various
troops of the auxiliaries, which seconded their operations. The contest
was too unequal, till the introduction of luxury had enervated the
vigor, and a spirit of disobedience and sedition had relaxed the
discipline, of the Roman armies. The introduction of barbarian
auxiliaries into those armies, was a measure attended with very obvious
dangers, as it might gradually instruct the Germans in the arts of war
and of policy. Although they were admitted in small numbers and with the
strictest precaution, the example of Civilis was proper to convince the
Romans, that the danger was not imaginary, and that their precautions
were not always sufficient. [74] During the civil wars that followed
the death of Nero, that artful and intrepid Batavian, whom his enemies
condescended to compare with Hannibal and Sertorius, [75] formed a great
design of freedom and ambition. Eight Batavian cohorts renowned in the
wars of Britain and Italy, repaired to his standard. He introduced an
army of Germans into Gaul, prevailed on the powerful cities of Treves
and Langres to embrace his cause, defeated the legions, destroyed their
fortified camps, and employed against the Romans the military knowledge
which he had acquired in their service. When at length, after an
obstinate struggle, he yielded to the power of the empire, Civilis
secured himself and his country by an honorable treaty. The Batavians
still continued to occupy the islands of the Rhine, [76] the allies, not
the servants, of the Roman monarchy.

[Footnote 72: Missilia spargunt,
Tacit. Germ. c. 6. Either that historian used a vague expression, or
he meant that they were thrown at random.]

[Footnote 73: It was their
principal distinction from the Sarmatians, who generally fought on
horseback.]

[Footnote 74: The relation of this enterprise occupies a great part
of the fourth and fifth books of the History of Tacitus, and is more
remarkable for its eloquence than perspicuity. Sir Henry Saville has
observed several inaccuracies.]

[Footnote 75: Tacit. Hist. iv. 13. Like them he had lost an eye.]

[Footnote 76: It was contained between the two branches of the old
Rhine, as they subsisted before the face of the country was changed by
art and nature. See Cluver German. Antiq. l. iii. c. 30, 37.]


II. The strength of ancient Germany appears formidable, when we consider
the effects that might have been produced by its united effort. The wide
extent of country might very possibly contain a million of warriors, as
all who were of age to bear arms were of a temper to use them. But
this fierce multitude, incapable of concerting or executing any plan
of national greatness, was agitated by various and often hostile
intentions. Germany was divided into more than forty independent states;
and, even in each state, the union of the several tribes was extremely
loose and precarious. The barbarians were easily provoked; they knew not
how to forgive an injury, much less an insult; their resentments were
bloody and implacable. The casual disputes that so frequently happened
in their tumultuous parties of hunting or drinking, were sufficient
to inflame the minds of whole nations; the private feuds of any
considerable chieftains diffused itself among their followers and
allies. To chastise the insolent, or to plunder the defenceless, were
alike causes of war. The most formidable states of Germany affected
to encompass their territories with a wide frontier of solitude and
devastation. The awful distance preserved by their neighbors attested
the terror of their arms, and in some measure defended them from the
danger of unexpected incursions. [77]

[Footnote 77: Caesar de Bell. Gal. l. vi. 23.]

"The Bructeri [771] (it is Tacitus who now speaks) were totally
exterminated by the neighboring tribes, [78] provoked by their insolence,
allured by the hopes of spoil, and perhaps inspired by the tutelar
deities of the empire. Above sixty thousand barbarians were destroyed;
not by the Roman arms, but in our sight, and for our entertainment. May
the nations, enemies of Rome, ever preserve this enmity to each other!
We have now attained the utmost verge of prosperity, [79] and
have nothing left to demand of fortune, except the discord of the
barbarians." [80]--These sentiments, less worthy of the humanity than of
the patriotism of Tacitus, express the invariable maxims of the policy
of his countrymen. They deemed it a much safer expedient to divide than
to combat the barbarians, from whose defeat they could derive neither
honor nor advantage. The money and negotiations of Rome insinuated
themselves into the heart of Germany; and every art of seduction was
used with dignity, to conciliate those nations whom their proximity to
the Rhine or Danube might render the most useful friends as well as the
most troublesome enemies. Chiefs of renown and power were flattered
by the most trifling presents, which they received either as marks of
distinction, or as the instruments of luxury. In civil dissensions the
weaker faction endeavored to strengthen its interest by entering into
secret connections with the governors of the frontier provinces. Every
quarrel among the Germans was fomented by the intrigues of Rome; and
every plan of union and public good was defeated by the stronger bias of
private jealousy and interest. [81]

[Footnote 771: The Bructeri were a non-Suevian tribe, who dwelt below the
duchies of Oldenburgh, and Lauenburgh, on the borders of the Lippe, and
in the Hartz Mountains. It was among them that the priestess Velleda
obtained her renown.--G.]

[Footnote 78: They are mentioned, however, in the ivth and vth centuries
by Nazarius, Ammianus, Claudian, &c., as a tribe of Franks. See Cluver.
Germ. Antiq. l. iii. c. 13.]

[Footnote 79: Urgentibus is the common reading; but good sense, Lipsius,
and some Mss. declare for Vergentibus.]

[Footnote 80: Tacit Germania, c. 33. The pious Abbe de la Bleterie is
very angry with Tacitus, talks of the devil, who was a murderer from the
beginning, &c., &c.]

[Footnote 81: Many traces of this policy may be discovered in Tacitus
and Dion: and many more may be inferred from the principles of human
nature.]

The general conspiracy which terrified the Romans under the reign of
Marcus Antoninus, comprehended almost all the nations of Germany, and
even Sarmatia, from the mouth of the Rhine to that of the Danube. [82]
It is impossible for us to determine whether this hasty confederation
was formed by necessity, by reason, or by passion; but we may rest
assured, that the barbarians were neither allured by the indolence, nor
provoked by the ambition, of the Roman monarch. This dangerous invasion
required all the firmness and vigilance of Marcus. He fixed generals of
ability in the several stations of attack, and assumed in person the
conduct of the most important province on the Upper Danube. After a long
and doubtful conflict, the spirit of the barbarians was subdued. The
Quadi and the Marcomanni, [83] who had taken the lead in the war, were
the most severely punished in its catastrophe. They were commanded to
retire five miles [84] from their own banks of the Danube, and to
deliver up the flower of the youth, who were immediately sent into
Britain, a remote island, where they might be secure as hostages, and
useful as soldiers. [85] On the frequent rebellions of the Quadi and
Marcomanni, the irritated emperor resolved to reduce their country into
the form of a province. His designs were disappointed by death. This
formidable league, however, the only one that appears in the two first
centuries of the Imperial history, was entirely dissipated, without
leaving any traces behind in Germany.

[Footnote 82: Hist. Aug. p. 31. Ammian. Marcellin. l. xxxi. c. 5. Aurel.
Victor. The emperor Marcus was reduced to sell the rich furniture of the
palace, and to enlist slaves and robbers.]

[Footnote 83: The Marcomanni, a colony, who, from the banks of the Rhine
occupied Bohemia and Moravia, had once erected a great and formidable
monarchy under their king Maroboduus. See Strabo, l. vii. [p. 290.]
Vell. Pat. ii. 108. Tacit. Annal. ii. 63. * Note: The Mark-manaen, the
March-men or borderers. There seems little doubt that this was an
appellation, rather than a proper name of a part of the great Suevian or
Teutonic race.--M.]

[Footnote 84: Mr. Wotton (History of Rome, p. 166) increases the
prohibition to ten times the distance. His reasoning is specious, but
not conclusive. Five miles were sufficient for a fortified barrier.]

[Footnote 85: Dion, l. lxxi. and lxxii.]

In the course of this introductory chapter, we have confined ourselves
to the general outlines of the manners of Germany, without attempting
to describe or to distinguish the various tribes which filled that
great country in the time of Caesar, of Tacitus, or of Ptolemy. As the
ancient, or as new tribes successively present themselves in the
series of this history, we shall concisely mention their origin, their
situation, and their particular character. Modern nations are fixed and
permanent societies, connected among themselves by laws and government,
bound to their native soil by arts and agriculture. The German tribes
were voluntary and fluctuating associations of soldiers, almost of
savages. The same territory often changed its inhabitants in the tide
of conquest and emigration. The same communities, uniting in a plan of
defence or invasion, bestowed a new title on their new confederacy. The
dissolution of an ancient confederacy restored to the independent tribes
their peculiar but long-forgotten appellation. A victorious state often
communicated its own name to a vanquished people. Sometimes crowds of
volunteers flocked from all parts to the standard of a favorite leader;
his camp became their country, and some circumstance of the enterprise
soon gave a common denomination to the mixed multitude. The distinctions
of the ferocious invaders were perpetually varied by themselves, and
confounded by the astonished subjects of the Roman empire. [86]

[Footnote 86: See an excellent dissertation on the origin and migrations
of nations, in the Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xviii.
p. 48--71. It is seldom that the antiquarian and the philosopher are so
happily blended.]

Wars, and the administration of public affairs, are the principal
subjects of history; but the number of persons interested in these
busy scenes is very different, according to the different condition of
mankind. In great monarchies, millions of obedient subjects pursue their
useful occupations in peace and obscurity. The attention of the writer,
as well as of the reader, is solely confined to a court, a capital, a
regular army, and the districts which happen to be the occasional scene
of military operations. But a state of freedom and barbarism, the season
of civil commotions, or the situation of petty republics, [87] raises
almost every member of the community into action, and consequently into
notice. The irregular divisions, and the restless motions, of the people
of Germany, dazzle our imagination, and seem to multiply their numbers.
The profuse enumeration of kings, of warriors, of armies and nations,
inclines us to forget that the same objects are continually repeated
under a variety of appellations, and that the most splendid appellations
have been frequently lavished on the most inconsiderable objects.

[Footnote 87: Should we suspect that Athens contained only 21,000
citizens, and Sparta no more than 39,000? See Hume and Wallace on the
number of mankind in ancient and modern times. * Note: This number,
though too positively stated, is probably not far wrong, as an average
estimate. On the subject of Athenian population, see St. Croix, Acad.
des Inscrip. xlviii. Boeckh, Public Economy of Athens, i. 47. Eng Trans,
Fynes Clinton, Fasti Hellenici, vol. i. p. 381. The latter author
estimates the citizens of Sparta at 33,000--M.]




