## Chapter XLVI: Troubles In Persia.--Part III.

A daughter of Phocas, his only child, was given in marriage to the
patrician Crispus, [52] and the royal images of the bride and bridegroom
were indiscreetly placed in the circus, by the side of the emperor. The
father must desire that his posterity should inherit the fruit of his
crimes, but the monarch was offended by this premature and popular
association: the tribunes of the green faction, who accused the
officious error of their sculptors, were condemned to instant death:
their lives were granted to the prayers of the people; but Crispus might
reasonably doubt, whether a jealous usurper could forget and pardon
his involuntary competition. The green faction was alienated by the
ingratitude of Phocas and the loss of their privileges; every province
of the empire was ripe for rebellion; and Heraclius, exarch of Africa,
persisted above two years in refusing all tribute and obedience to the
centurion who disgraced the throne of Constantinople. By the secret
emissaries of Crispus and the senate, the independent exarch was
solicited to save and to govern his country; but his ambition was
chilled by age, and he resigned the dangerous enterprise to his
son Heraclius, and to Nicetas, the son of Gregory, his friend and
lieutenant. The powers of Africa were armed by the two adventurous
youths; they agreed that the one should navigate the fleet from Carthage
to Constantinople, that the other should lead an army through Egypt and
Asia, and that the Imperial purple should be the reward of diligence and
success. A faint rumor of their undertaking was conveyed to the ears of
Phocas, and the wife and mother of the younger Heraclius were secured
as the hostages of his faith: but the treacherous heart of Crispus
extenuated the distant peril, the means of defence were neglected or
delayed, and the tyrant supinely slept till the African navy cast anchor
in the Hellespont. Their standard was joined at Abidus by the fugitives
and exiles who thirsted for revenge; the ships of Heraclius, whose lofty
masts were adorned with the holy symbols of religion, [53] steered their
triumphant course through the Propontis; and Phocas beheld from the
windows of the palace his approaching and inevitable fate. The green
faction was tempted, by gifts and promises, to oppose a feeble and
fruitless resistance to the landing of the Africans: but the people, and
even the guards, were determined by the well-timed defection of Crispus;
and they tyrant was seized by a private enemy, who boldly invaded the
solitude of the palace. Stripped of the diadem and purple, clothed in a
vile habit, and loaded with chains, he was transported in a small boat
to the Imperial galley of Heraclius, who reproached him with the crimes
of his abominable reign. "Wilt thou govern better?" were the last words
of the despair of Phocas. After suffering each variety of insult and
torture, his head was severed from his body, the mangled trunk was cast
into the flames, and the same treatment was inflicted on the statues
of the vain usurper, and the seditious banner of the green faction. The
voice of the clergy, the senate, and the people, invited Heraclius to
ascend the throne which he had purified from guilt and ignominy; after
some graceful hesitation, he yielded to their entreaties. His coronation
was accompanied by that of his wife Eudoxia; and their posterity, till
the fourth generation, continued to reign over the empire of the East.
The voyage of Heraclius had been easy and prosperous; the tedious march
of Nicetas was not accomplished before the decision of the contest:
but he submitted without a murmur to the fortune of his friend, and
his laudable intentions were rewarded with an equestrian statue, and a
daughter of the emperor. It was more difficult to trust the fidelity of
Crispus, whose recent services were recompensed by the command of the
Cappadocian army. His arrogance soon provoked, and seemed to excuse,
the ingratitude of his new sovereign. In the presence of the senate, the
son-in-law of Phocas was condemned to embrace the monastic life; and the
sentence was justified by the weighty observation of Heraclius, that the
man who had betrayed his father could never be faithful to his friend.
[54]

[Footnote 52: In the writers, and in the copies of those writers, there
is such hesitation between the names of Priscus and Crispus, (Ducange,
Fam Byzant. p. 111,) that I have been tempted to identify the son-in-law
of Phocas with the hero five times victorious over the Avars.]

[Footnote 53: According to Theophanes. Cedrenus adds, which Heraclius
bore as a banner in the first Persian expedition. See George Pisid.
Acroas L 140. The manufacture seems to have flourished; but Foggini, the
Roman editor, (p. 26,) is at a loss to determine whether this picture
was an original or a copy.]

[Footnote 54: See the tyranny of Phocas and the elevation of Heraclius,
in Chron. Paschal. p. 380--383. Theophanes, p. 242-250. Nicephorus, p.
3--7. Cedrenus, p. 404--407. Zonaras, tom. ii. l. xiv. p. 80--82.]

Even after his death the republic was afflicted by the crimes of Phocas,
which armed with a pious cause the most formidable of her enemies.
According to the friendly and equal forms of the Byzantine and Persian
courts, he announced his exaltation to the throne; and his ambassador
Lilius, who had presented him with the heads of Maurice and his sons,
was the best qualified to describe the circumstances of the tragic
scene. [55] However it might be varnished by fiction or sophistry,
Chosroes turned with horror from the assassin, imprisoned the pretended
envoy, disclaimed the usurper, and declared himself the avenger of his
father and benefactor. The sentiments of grief and resentment, which
humanity would feel, and honor would dictate, promoted on this occasion
the interest of the Persian king; and his interest was powerfully
magnified by the national and religious prejudices of the Magi and
satraps. In a strain of artful adulation, which assumed the language
of freedom, they presumed to censure the excess of his gratitude and
friendship for the Greeks; a nation with whom it was dangerous to
conclude either peace or alliance; whose superstition was devoid of
truth and justice, and who must be incapable of any virtue, since they
could perpetrate the most atrocious of crimes, the impious murder of
their sovereign. [56] For the crime of an ambitious centurion, the
nation which he oppressed was chastised with the calamities of war; and
the same calamities, at the end of twenty years, were retaliated
and redoubled on the heads of the Persians. [57] The general who had
restored Chosroes to the throne still commanded in the East; and the
name of Narses was the formidable sound with which the Assyrian mothers
were accustomed to terrify their infants. It is not improbable, that a
native subject of Persia should encourage his master and his friend to
deliver and possess the provinces of Asia. It is still more probable,
that Chosroes should animate his troops by the assurance that the sword
which they dreaded the most would remain in its scabbard, or be drawn in
their favor. The hero could not depend on the faith of a tyrant; and
the tyrant was conscious how little he deserved the obedience of a hero.
Narses was removed from his military command; he reared an independent
standard at Hierapolis, in Syria: he was betrayed by fallacious
promises, and burnt alive in the market-place of Constantinople.
Deprived of the only chief whom they could fear or esteem, the bands
which he had led to victory were twice broken by the cavalry, trampled
by the elephants, and pierced by the arrows of the Barbarians; and a
great number of the captives were beheaded on the field of battle by
the sentence of the victor, who might justly condemn these seditious
mercenaries as the authors or accomplices of the death of Maurice. Under
the reign of Phocas, the fortifications of Merdin, Dara, Amida, and
Edessa, were successively besieged, reduced, and destroyed, by the
Persian monarch: he passed the Euphrates, occupied the Syrian cities,
Hierapolis, Chalcis, and Berrhaea or Aleppo, and soon encompassed the
walls of Antioch with his irresistible arms. The rapid tide of success
discloses the decay of the empire, the incapacity of Phocas, and the
disaffection of his subjects; and Chosroes provided a decent apology for
their submission or revolt, by an impostor, who attended his camp as the
son of Maurice [58] and the lawful heir of the monarchy.

[Footnote 55: Theophylact, l. viii. c. 15. The life of Maurice was
composed about the year 628 (l. viii. c. 13) by Theophylact Simocatta,
ex-praefect, a native of Egypt. Photius, who gives an ample extract of
the work, (cod. lxv. p. 81--100,) gently reproves the affectation and
allegory of the style. His preface is a dialogue between Philosophy and
History; they seat themselves under a plane-tree, and the latter touches
her lyre.]

[Footnote 56: Christianis nec pactum esse, nec fidem nec foedus .....
quod si ulla illis fides fuisset, regem suum non occidissent. Eutych.
Annales tom. ii. p. 211, vers. Pocock.]

[Footnote 57: We must now, for some ages, take our leave of contemporary
historians, and descend, if it be a descent, from the affectation of
rhetoric to the rude simplicity of chronicles and abridgments. Those of
Theophanes (Chronograph. p. 244--279) and Nicephorus (p. 3--16) supply
a regular, but imperfect, series of the Persian war; and for any
additional facts I quote my special authorities. Theophanes, a
courtier who became a monk, was born A.D. 748; Nicephorus patriarch
of Constantinople, who died A.D. 829, was somewhat younger: they both
suffered in the cause of images Hankius, de Scriptoribus Byzantinis, p.
200-246.]

[Footnote 58: The Persian historians have been themselves deceived: but
Theophanes (p. 244) accuses Chosroes of the fraud and falsehood; and
Eutychius believes (Annal. tom. ii. p. 212) that the son of Maurice, who
was saved from the assassins, lived and died a monk on Mount Sinai.]

The first intelligence from the East which Heraclius received, [59]
was that of the loss of Antioch; but the aged metropolis, so often
overturned by earthquakes, and pillaged by the enemy, could supply but
a small and languid stream of treasure and blood. The Persians were
equally successful, and more fortunate, in the sack of Caesarea, the
capital of Cappadocia; and as they advanced beyond the ramparts of
the frontier, the boundary of ancient war, they found a less obstinate
resistance and a more plentiful harvest. The pleasant vale of Damascus
has been adorned in every age with a royal city: her obscure felicity
has hitherto escaped the historian of the Roman empire: but Chosroes
reposed his troops in the paradise of Damascus before he ascended the
hills of Libanus, or invaded the cities of the Phoenician coast. The
conquest of Jerusalem, [60] which had been meditated by Nushirvan,
was achieved by the zeal and avarice of his grandson; the ruin of the
proudest monument of Christianity was vehemently urged by the intolerant
spirit of the Magi; and he could enlist for this holy warfare with
an army of six-and-twenty thousand Jews, whose furious bigotry might
compensate, in some degree, for the want of valor and discipline. [6011]
After the reduction of Galilee, and the region beyond the Jordan, whose
resistance appears to have delayed the fate of the capital, Jerusalem
itself was taken by assault. The sepulchre of Christ, and the stately
churches of Helena and Constantine, were consumed, or at least damaged,
by the flames; the devout offerings of three hundred years were rifled
in one sacrilegious day; the Patriarch Zachariah, and the true cross,
were transported into Persia; and the massacre of ninety thousand
Christians is imputed to the Jews and Arabs, who swelled the disorder
of the Persian march. The fugitives of Palestine were entertained at
Alexandria by the charity of John the Archbishop, who is distinguished
among a crowd of saints by the epithet of almsgiver: [61] and the
revenues of the church, with a treasure of three hundred thousand
pounds, were restored to the true proprietors, the poor of every country
and every denomination. But Egypt itself, the only province which had
been exempt, since the time of Diocletian, from foreign and domestic
war, was again subdued by the successors of Cyrus. Pelusium, the key of
that impervious country, was surprised by the cavalry of the Persians:
they passed, with impunity, the innumerable channels of the Delta, and
explored the long valley of the Nile, from the pyramids of Memphis to
the confines of Aethiopia. Alexandria might have been relieved by a
naval force, but the archbishop and the praefect embarked for Cyprus;
and Chosroes entered the second city of the empire, which still
preserved a wealthy remnant of industry and commerce. His western trophy
was erected, not on the walls of Carthage, [62] but in the neighborhood
of Tripoli; the Greek colonies of Cyrene were finally extirpated; and
the conqueror, treading in the footsteps of Alexander, returned in
triumph through the sands of the Libyan desert. In the same campaign,
another army advanced from the Euphrates to the Thracian Bosphorus;
Chalcedon surrendered after a long siege, and a Persian camp was
maintained above ten years in the presence of Constantinople. The
sea-coast of Pontus, the city of Ancyra, and the Isle of Rhodes, are
enumerated among the last conquests of the great king; and if Chosroes
had possessed any maritime power, his boundless ambition would have
spread slavery and desolation over the provinces of Europe.

[Footnote 59: Eutychius dates all the losses of the empire under the
reign of Phocas; an error which saves the honor of Heraclius, whom
he brings not from Carthage, but Salonica, with a fleet laden with
vegetables for the relief of Constantinople, (Annal. tom. ii. p. 223,
224.) The other Christians of the East, Barhebraeus, (apud Asseman,
Bibliothec. Oriental. tom. iii. p. 412, 413,) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen.
p. 13--16,) Abulpharagius, (Dynast. p. 98, 99,) are more sincere and
accurate. The years of the Persian war are disposed in the chronology of
Pagi.]

[Footnote 60: On the conquest of Jerusalem, an event so interesting to
the church, see the Annals of Eutychius, (tom. ii. p. 212--223,) and the
lamentations of the monk Antiochus, (apud Baronium, Annal. Eccles. A.D.
614, No. 16--26,) whose one hundred and twenty-nine homilies are still
extant, if what no one reads may be said to be extant.]

[Footnote 6011: See Hist. of Jews, vol. iii. p. 240.--M.]

[Footnote 61: The life of this worthy saint is composed by Leontius, a
contemporary bishop; and I find in Baronius (Annal. Eccles. A.D. 610,
No. 10, &c.) and Fleury (tom. viii. p. 235-242) sufficient extracts of
this edifying work.]

[Footnote 62: The error of Baronius, and many others who have carried
the arms of Chosroes to Carthage instead of Chalcedon, is founded on
the near resemblance of the Greek words, in the text of Theophanes, &c.,
which have been sometimes confounded by transcribers, and sometimes by
critics.]

From the long-disputed banks of the Tigris and Euphrates, the reign of
the grandson of Nushirvan was suddenly extended to the Hellespont and
the Nile, the ancient limits of the Persian monarchy. But the provinces,
which had been fashioned by the habits of six hundred years to the
virtues and vices of the Roman government, supported with reluctance
the yoke of the Barbarians. The idea of a republic was kept alive by the
institutions, or at least by the writings, of the Greeks and Romans, and
the subjects of Heraclius had been educated to pronounce the words of
liberty and law. But it has always been the pride and policy of Oriental
princes to display the titles and attributes of their omnipotence; to
upbraid a nation of slaves with their true name and abject condition,
and to enforce, by cruel and insolent threats, the rigor of their
absolute commands. The Christians of the East were scandalized by the
worship of fire, and the impious doctrine of the two principles: the
Magi were not less intolerant than the bishops; and the martyrdom of
some native Persians, who had deserted the religion of Zoroaster, [63]
was conceived to be the prelude of a fierce and general persecution.
By the oppressive laws of Justinian, the adversaries of the church were
made the enemies of the state; the alliance of the Jews, Nestorians, and
Jacobites, had contributed to the success of Chosroes, and his partial
favor to the sectaries provoked the hatred and fears of the Catholic
clergy. Conscious of their fear and hatred, the Persian conqueror
governed his new subjects with an iron sceptre; and, as if he suspected
the stability of his dominion, he exhausted their wealth by exorbitant
tributes and licentious rapine despoiled or demolished the temples of
the East; and transported to his hereditary realms the gold, the silver,
the precious marbles, the arts, and the artists of the Asiatic cities.
In the obscure picture of the calamities of the empire, [64] it is not
easy to discern the figure of Chosroes himself, to separate his actions
from those of his lieutenants, or to ascertain his personal merit in the
general blaze of glory and magnificence. He enjoyed with ostentation the
fruits of victory, and frequently retired from the hardships of war to
the luxury of the palace. But in the space of twenty-four years, he was
deterred by superstition or resentment from approaching the gates of
Ctesiphon: and his favorite residence of Artemita, or Dastagerd,
was situate beyond the Tigris, about sixty miles to the north of the
capital. [65] The adjacent pastures were covered with flocks and
herds: the paradise or park was replenished with pheasants, peacocks,
ostriches, roebucks, and wild boars, and the noble game of lions and
tigers was sometimes turned loose for the bolder pleasures of the chase.
Nine hundred and sixty elephants were maintained for the use or splendor
of the great king: his tents and baggage were carried into the field by
twelve thousand great camels and eight thousand of a smaller size; [66]
and the royal stables were filled with six thousand mules and horses,
among whom the names of Shebdiz and Barid are renowned for their speed
or beauty. [6611] Six thousand guards successively mounted before the
palace gate; the service of the interior apartments was performed by
twelve thousand slaves, and in the number of three thousand virgins, the
fairest of Asia, some happy concubine might console her master for the
age or the indifference of Sira.

The various treasures of gold, silver, gems, silks, and aromatics, were
deposited in a hundred subterraneous vaults and the chamber Badaverd
denoted the accidental gift of the winds which had wafted the spoils
of Heraclius into one of the Syrian harbors of his rival. The vice of
flattery, and perhaps of fiction, is not ashamed to compute the thirty
thousand rich hangings that adorned the walls; the forty thousand
columns of silver, or more probably of marble, and plated wood, that
supported the roof; and the thousand globes of gold suspended in the
dome, to imitate the motions of the planets and the constellations of
the zodiac. [67] While the Persian monarch contemplated the wonders of
his art and power, he received an epistle from an obscure citizen of
Mecca, inviting him to acknowledge Mahomet as the apostle of God. He
rejected the invitation, and tore the epistle. "It is thus," exclaimed
the Arabian prophet, "that God will tear the kingdom, and reject the
supplications of Chosroes." [68] [] Placed on the verge of the two great
empires of the East, Mahomet observed with secret joy the progress of
their mutual destruction; and in the midst of the Persian triumphs,
he ventured to foretell, that before many years should elapse, victory
should again return to the banners of the Romans. [69]

[Footnote 63: The genuine acts of St. Anastasius are published in those
of the with general council, from whence Baronius (Annal. Eccles. A.D.
614, 626, 627) and Butler (Lives of the Saints, vol. i. p. 242--248)
have taken their accounts. The holy martyr deserted from the Persian to
the Roman army, became a monk at Jerusalem, and insulted the worship of
the Magi, which was then established at Caesarea in Palestine.]

[Footnote 64: Abulpharagius, Dynast. p. 99. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen. p.
14.]

[Footnote 65: D'Anville, Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
xxxii. p. 568--571.]

[Footnote 66: The difference between the two races consists in one or
two humps; the dromedary has only one; the size of the proper camel is
larger; the country he comes from, Turkistan or Bactriana; the dromedary
is confined to Arabia and Africa. Buffon, Hist. Naturelle, tom. xi. p.
211, &c. Aristot. Hist. Animal. tom. i. l. ii. c. 1, tom. ii. p. 185.]

[Footnote 6611: The ruins of these scenes of Khoosroo's magnificence
have been visited by Sir R. K. Porter. At the ruins of Tokht i Bostan,
he saw a gorgeous picture of a hunt, singularly illustrative of this
passage. Travels, vol. ii. p. 204. Kisra Shirene, which he afterwards
examined, appears to have been the palace of Dastagerd. Vol. ii. p.
173--175.--M.]

[Footnote 67: Theophanes, Chronograph. p. 268. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque
Orientale, p. 997. The Greeks describe the decay, the Persians the
splendor, of Dastagerd; but the former speak from the modest witness of
the eye, the latter from the vague report of the ear.]

[Footnote 68: The historians of Mahomet, Abulfeda (in Vit. Mohammed,
p. 92, 93) and Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet, tom. ii. p. 247,) date this
embassy in the viith year of the Hegira, which commences A.D. 628, May
11. Their chronology is erroneous, since Chosroes died in the month of
February of the same year, (Pagi, Critica, tom. ii. p. 779.) The count
de Boulainvilliers (Vie de Mahomed, p. 327, 328) places this embassy
about A.D. 615, soon after the conquest of Palestine. Yet Mahomet would
scarcely have ventured so soon on so bold a step.]

[Footnote 6811: Khoosroo Purveez was encamped on the banks of the
Karasoo River when he received the letter of Mahomed. He tore the letter
and threw it into the Karasoo. For this action, the moderate author
of the Zeenut-ul-Tuarikh calls him a wretch, and rejoices in all his
subsequent misfortunes. These impressions still exist. I remarked to a
Persian, when encamped near the Karasoo, in 1800, that the banks
were very high, which must make it difficult to apply its waters to
irrigation. "It once fertilized the whole country," said the zealous
Mahomedan, "but its channel sunk with honor from its banks, when that
madman, Khoosroo, threw our holy Prophet's letter into its stream; which
has ever since been accursed and useless." Malcolm's Persia, vol. i. p.
126--M.]

[Footnote 69: See the xxxth chapter of the Koran, entitled the Greeks.
Our honest and learned translator, Sale, (p. 330, 331,) fairly states
this conjecture, guess, wager, of Mahomet; but Boulainvilliers, (p.
329--344,) with wicked intentions, labors to establish this evident
prophecy of a future event, which must, in his opinion, embarrass the
Christian polemics.]

At the time when this prediction is said to have been delivered, no
prophecy could be more distant from its accomplishment, since the first
twelve years of Heraclius announced the approaching dissolution of the
empire. If the motives of Chosroes had been pure and honorable, he
must have ended the quarrel with the death of Phocas, and he would have
embraced, as his best ally, the fortunate African who had so generously
avenged the injuries of his benefactor Maurice. The prosecution of the
war revealed the true character of the Barbarian; and the suppliant
embassies of Heraclius to beseech his clemency, that he would spare the
innocent, accept a tribute, and give peace to the world, were rejected
with contemptuous silence or insolent menace. Syria, Egypt, and the
provinces of Asia, were subdued by the Persian arms, while Europe, from
the confines of Istria to the long wall of Thrace, was oppressed by the
Avars, unsatiated with the blood and rapine of the Italian war. They had
coolly massacred their male captives in the sacred field of Pannonia;
the women and children were reduced to servitude, and the noblest
virgins were abandoned to the promiscuous lust of the Barbarians. The
amorous matron who opened the gates of Friuli passed a short night in
the arms of her royal lover; the next evening, Romilda was condemned to
the embraces of twelve Avars, and the third day the Lombard princess was
impaled in the sight of the camp, while the chagan observed with a cruel
smile, that such a husband was the fit recompense of her lewdness and
perfidy. [70] By these implacable enemies, Heraclius, on either side,
was insulted and besieged: and the Roman empire was reduced to the walls
of Constantinople, with the remnant of Greece, Italy, and Africa, and
some maritime cities, from Tyre to Trebizond, of the Asiatic coast.
After the loss of Egypt, the capital was afflicted by famine and
pestilence; and the emperor, incapable of resistance, and hopeless of
relief, had resolved to transfer his person and government to the more
secure residence of Carthage. His ships were already laden with the
treasures of the palace; but his flight was arrested by the patriarch,
who armed the powers of religion in the defence of his country; led
Heraclius to the altar of St. Sophia, and extorted a solemn oath, that
he would live and die with the people whom God had intrusted to his
care. The chagan was encamped in the plains of Thrace; but he dissembled
his perfidious designs, and solicited an interview with the emperor
near the town of Heraclea. Their reconciliation was celebrated with
equestrian games; the senate and people, in their gayest apparel,
resorted to the festival of peace; and the Avars beheld, with envy and
desire, the spectacle of Roman luxury. On a sudden the hippodrome was
encompassed by the Scythian cavalry, who had pressed their secret and
nocturnal march: the tremendous sound of the chagan's whip gave the
signal of the assault, and Heraclius, wrapping his diadem round his arm,
was saved with extreme hazard, by the fleetness of his horse. So rapid
was the pursuit, that the Avars almost entered the golden gate of
Constantinople with the flying crowds: [71] but the plunder of the
suburbs rewarded their treason, and they transported beyond the Danube
two hundred and seventy thousand captives. On the shore of Chalcedon,
the emperor held a safer conference with a more honorable foe, who,
before Heraclius descended from his galley, saluted with reverence and
pity the majesty of the purple. The friendly offer of Sain, the Persian
general, to conduct an embassy to the presence of the great king, was
accepted with the warmest gratitude, and the prayer for pardon and peace
was humbly presented by the Praetorian praefect, the praefect of the
city, and one of the first ecclesiastics of the patriarchal church. [72]
But the lieutenant of Chosroes had fatally mistaken the intentions of
his master. "It was not an embassy," said the tyrant of Asia, "it was
the person of Heraclius, bound in chains, that he should have brought to
the foot of my throne. I will never give peace to the emperor of Rome,
till he had abjured his crucified God, and embraced the worship of the
sun." Sain was flayed alive, according to the inhuman practice of his
country; and the separate and rigorous confinement of the ambassadors
violated the law of nations, and the faith of an express stipulation.
Yet the experience of six years at length persuaded the Persian monarch
to renounce the conquest of Constantinople, and to specify the annual
tribute or ransom of the Roman empire; a thousand talents of gold, a
thousand talents of silver, a thousand silk robes, a thousand horses,
and a thousand virgins. Heraclius subscribed these ignominious terms;
but the time and space which he obtained to collect such treasures from
the poverty of the East, was industriously employed in the preparations
of a bold and desperate attack. [Footnote 70: Paul Warnefrid, de Gestis
Langobardorum, l. iv. c. 38, 42. Muratori, Annali d'Italia, tom. v. p.
305, &c.]

[Footnote 71: The Paschal Chronicle, which sometimes introduces
fragments of history into a barren list of names and dates, gives the
best account of the treason of the Avars, p. 389, 390. The number of
captives is added by Nicephorus.]

[Footnote 72: Some original pieces, such as the speech or letter of the
Roman ambassadors, (p. 386--388,) likewise constitute the merit of the
Paschal Chronicle, which was composed, perhaps at Alexandria, under the
reign of Heraclius.]

Of the characters conspicuous in history, that of Heraclius is one of
the most extraordinary and inconsistent. In the first and last years of
a long reign, the emperor appears to be the slave of sloth, of pleasure,
or of superstition, the careless and impotent spectator of the public
calamities. But the languid mists of the morning and evening are
separated by the brightness of the meridian sun; the Arcadius of the
palace arose the Caesar of the camp; and the honor of Rome and Heraclius
was gloriously retrieved by the exploits and trophies of six adventurous
campaigns. It was the duty of the Byzantine historians to have revealed
the causes of his slumber and vigilance. At this distance we can
only conjecture, that he was endowed with more personal courage than
political resolution; that he was detained by the charms, and perhaps
the arts, of his niece Martina, with whom, after the death of Eudocia,
he contracted an incestuous marriage; [73] and that he yielded to the
base advice of the counsellors, who urged, as a fundamental law, that
the life of the emperor should never be exposed in the field. [74]
Perhaps he was awakened by the last insolent demand of the Persian
conqueror; but at the moment when Heraclius assumed the spirit of a
hero, the only hopes of the Romans were drawn from the vicissitudes of
fortune, which might threaten the proud prosperity of Chosroes, and must
be favorable to those who had attained the lowest period of depression.
[75] To provide for the expenses of war, was the first care of the
emperor; and for the purpose of collecting the tribute, he was allowed
to solicit the benevolence of the eastern provinces. But the revenue no
longer flowed in the usual channels; the credit of an arbitrary prince
is annihilated by his power; and the courage of Heraclius was first
displayed in daring to borrow the consecrated wealth of churches, under
the solemn vow of restoring, with usury, whatever he had been compelled
to employ in the service of religion and the empire. The clergy
themselves appear to have sympathized with the public distress; and the
discreet patriarch of Alexandria, without admitting the precedent
of sacrilege, assisted his sovereign by the miraculous or seasonable
revelation of a secret treasure. [76] Of the soldiers who had conspired
with Phocas, only two were found to have survived the stroke of time and
of the Barbarians; [77] the loss, even of these seditious veterans, was
imperfectly supplied by the new levies of Heraclius, and the gold of the
sanctuary united, in the same camp, the names, and arms, and languages
of the East and West. He would have been content with the neutrality of
the Avars; and his friendly entreaty, that the chagan would act, not as
the enemy, but as the guardian, of the empire, was accompanied with a
more persuasive donative of two hundred thousand pieces of gold. Two
days after the festival of Easter, the emperor, exchanging his purple
for the simple garb of a penitent and warrior, [78] gave the signal
of his departure. To the faith of the people Heraclius recommended
his children; the civil and military powers were vested in the most
deserving hands, and the discretion of the patriarch and senate was
authorized to save or surrender the city, if they should be oppressed
in his absence by the superior forces of the enemy. [Footnote 73:
Nicephorus, (p. 10, 11,) is happy to observe, that of two sons, its
incestuous fruit, the elder was marked by Providence with a stiff neck,
the younger with the loss of hearing.]

[Footnote 74: George of Pisidia, (Acroas. i. 112--125, p. 5,) who states
the opinions, acquits the pusillanimous counsellors of any sinister
views. Would he have excused the proud and contemptuous admonition of
Crispus?]

[Footnote 75: George Pisid. Acroas. i. 51, &c. p: 4. The Orientals are
not less fond of remarking this strange vicissitude; and I remember
some story of Khosrou Parviz, not very unlike the ring of Polycrates of
Samos.]

[Footnote 76: Baronius gravely relates this discovery, or rather
transmutation, of barrels, not of honey, but of gold, (Annal. Eccles.
A.D. 620, No. 3, &c.) Yet the loan was arbitrary, since it was collected
by soldiers, who were ordered to leave the patriarch of Alexandria no
more than one hundred pounds of gold. Nicephorus, (p. 11,) two hundred
years afterwards, speaks with ill humor of this contribution, which the
church of Constantinople might still feel.]

[Footnote 77: Theophylact Symocatta, l. viii. c. 12. This circumstance
need not excite our surprise. The muster-roll of a regiment, even in
time of peace, is renewed in less than twenty or twenty-five years.]

[Footnote 78: He changed his purple for black, buckskins, and dyed them
red in the blood of the Persians, (Georg. Pisid. Acroas. iii. 118, 121,
122 See the notes of Foggini, p. 35.)]

The neighboring heights of Chalcedon were covered with tents and arms:
but if the new levies of Heraclius had been rashly led to the attack,
the victory of the Persians in the sight of Constantinople might have
been the last day of the Roman empire. As imprudent would it have been
to advance into the provinces of Asia, leaving their innumerable cavalry
to intercept his convoys, and continually to hang on the lassitude and
disorder of his rear. But the Greeks were still masters of the sea;
a fleet of galleys, transports, and store-ships, was assembled in the
harbor; the Barbarians consented to embark; a steady wind carried them
through the Hellespont the western and southern coast of Asia Minor lay
on their left hand; the spirit of their chief was first displayed in a
storm, and even the eunuchs of his train were excited to suffer and
to work by the example of their master. He landed his troops on the
confines of Syria and Cilicia, in the Gulf of Scanderoon, where
the coast suddenly turns to the south; [79] and his discernment was
expressed in the choice of this important post. [80] From all sides,
the scattered garrisons of the maritime cities and the mountains might
repair with speed and safety to his Imperial standard. The natural
fortifications of Cilicia protected, and even concealed, the camp
of Heraclius, which was pitched near Issus, on the same ground where
Alexander had vanquished the host of Darius. The angle which the emperor
occupied was deeply indented into a vast semicircle of the Asiatic,
Armenian, and Syrian provinces; and to whatsoever point of the
circumference he should direct his attack, it was easy for him to
dissemble his own motions, and to prevent those of the enemy. In the
camp of Issus, the Roman general reformed the sloth and disorder of the
veterans, and educated the new recruits in the knowledge and practice of
military virtue. Unfolding the miraculous image of Christ, he urged them
to revenge the holy altars which had been profaned by the worshippers
of fire; addressing them by the endearing appellations of sons and
brethren, he deplored the public and private wrongs of the republic. The
subjects of a monarch were persuaded that they fought in the cause
of freedom; and a similar enthusiasm was communicated to the foreign
mercenaries, who must have viewed with equal indifference the interest
of Rome and of Persia. Heraclius himself, with the skill and patience
of a centurion, inculcated the lessons of the school of tactics, and the
soldiers were assiduously trained in the use of their weapons, and the
exercises and evolutions of the field. The cavalry and infantry in light
or heavy armor were divided into two parties; the trumpets were fixed
in the centre, and their signals directed the march, the charge, the
retreat or pursuit; the direct or oblique order, the deep or extended
phalanx; to represent in fictitious combat the operations of genuine
war. Whatever hardships the emperor imposed on the troops, he inflicted
with equal severity on himself; their labor, their diet, their sleep,
were measured by the inflexible rules of discipline; and, without
despising the enemy, they were taught to repose an implicit confidence
in their own valor and the wisdom of their leader. Cilicia was soon
encompassed with the Persian arms; but their cavalry hesitated to
enter the defiles of Mount Taurus, till they were circumvented by the
evolutions of Heraclius, who insensibly gained their rear, whilst he
appeared to present his front in order of battle. By a false motion,
which seemed to threaten Armenia, he drew them, against their wishes, to
a general action. They were tempted by the artful disorder of his
camp; but when they advanced to combat, the ground, the sun, and the
expectation of both armies, were unpropitious to the Barbarians; the
Romans successfully repeated their tactics in a field of battle, [81]
and the event of the day declared to the world, that the Persians were
not invincible, and that a hero was invested with the purple. Strong in
victory and fame, Heraclius boldly ascended the heights of Mount Taurus,
directed his march through the plains of Cappadocia, and established
his troops, for the winter season, in safe and plentiful quarters on the
banks of the River Halys. [82] His soul was superior to the vanity of
entertaining Constantinople with an imperfect triumph; but the presence
of the emperor was indispensably required to soothe the restless and
rapacious spirit of the Avars.

[Footnote 79: George of Pisidia, (Acroas. ii. 10, p. 8) has fixed this
important point of the Syrian and Cilician gates. They are elegantly
described by Xenophon, who marched through them a thousand years
before. A narrow pass of three stadia between steep, high rocks, and the
Mediterranean, was closed at each end by strong gates, impregnable
to the land, accessible by sea, (Anabasis, l. i. p. 35, 36, with
Hutchinson's Geographical Dissertation, p. vi.) The gates were
thirty-five parasangs, or leagues, from Tarsus, (Anabasis, l. i. p. 33,
34,) and eight or ten from Antioch. Compare Itinerar. Wesseling, p. 580,
581. Schultens, Index Geograph. ad calcem Vit. Saladin. p. 9. Voyage en
Turquie et en Perse, par M. Otter, tom. i. p. 78, 79.]

[Footnote 80: Heraclius might write to a friend in the modest words of
Cicero: "Castra habuimus ea ipsa quae contra Darium habuerat apud Issum
Alexander, imperator haud paulo melior quam aut tu aut ego." Ad Atticum,
v. 20. Issus, a rich and flourishing city in the time of Xenophon, was
ruined by the prosperity of Alexandria or Scanderoon, on the other side
of the bay.]

[Footnote 81: Foggini (Annotat. p. 31) suspects that the Persians were
deceived by the of Aelian, (Tactic. c. 48,) an intricate spiral motion
of the army. He observes (p. 28) that the military descriptions of
George of Pisidia are transcribed in the Tactics of the emperor Leo.]

[Footnote 82: George of Pisidia, an eye-witness, (Acroas. ii. 122,
&c.,) described in three acroaseis, or cantos, the first expedition of
Heraclius. The poem has been lately (1777) published at Rome; but such
vague and declamatory praise is far from corresponding with the sanguine
hopes of Pagi, D'Anville, &c.]

Since the days of Scipio and Hannibal, no bolder enterprise has been
attempted than that which Heraclius achieved for the deliverance of
the empire [83] He permitted the Persians to oppress for a while the
provinces, and to insult with impunity the capital of the East; while
the Roman emperor explored his perilous way through the Black Sea, [84]
and the mountains of Armenia, penetrated into the heart of Persia,
[85] and recalled the armies of the great king to the defence of
their bleeding country. With a select band of five thousand soldiers,
Heraclius sailed from Constantinople to Trebizond; assembled his forces
which had wintered in the Pontic regions; and, from the mouth of the
Phasis to the Caspian Sea, encouraged his subjects and allies to march
with the successor of Constantine under the faithful and victorious
banner of the cross. When the legions of Lucullus and Pompey first
passed the Euphrates, they blushed at their easy victory over the
natives of Armenia. But the long experience of war had hardened the
minds and bodies of that effeminate peeple; their zeal and bravery were
approved in the service of a declining empire; they abhorred and feared
the usurpation of the house of Sassan, and the memory of persecution
envenomed their pious hatred of the enemies of Christ. The limits of
Armenia, as it had been ceded to the emperor Maurice, extended as far as
the Araxes: the river submitted to the indignity of a bridge, [86] and
Heraclius, in the footsteps of Mark Antony, advanced towards the city
of Tauris or Gandzaca, [87] the ancient and modern capital of one of the
provinces of Media. At the head of forty thousand men, Chosroes himself
had returned from some distant expedition to oppose the progress of the
Roman arms; but he retreated on the approach of Heraclius, declining the
generous alternative of peace or of battle. Instead of half a million of
inhabitants, which have been ascribed to Tauris under the reign of the
Sophys, the city contained no more than three thousand houses; but the
value of the royal treasures was enhanced by a tradition, that they
were the spoils of Croesus, which had been transported by Cyrus from the
citadel of Sardes. The rapid conquests of Heraclius were suspended
only by the winter season; a motive of prudence, or superstition, [88]
determined his retreat into the province of Albania, along the shores of
the Caspian; and his tents were most probably pitched in the plains of
Mogan, [89] the favorite encampment of Oriental princes. In the course
of this successful inroad, he signalized the zeal and revenge of a
Christian emperor: at his command, the soldiers extinguished the fire,
and destroyed the temples, of the Magi; the statues of Chosroes, who
aspired to divine honors, were abandoned to the flames; and the ruins of
Thebarma or Ormia, [90] which had given birth to Zoroaster himself, made
some atonement for the injuries of the holy sepulchre. A purer spirit
of religion was shown in the relief and deliverance of fifty
thousand captives. Heraclius was rewarded by their tears and grateful
acclamations; but this wise measure, which spread the fame of his
benevolence, diffused the murmurs of the Persians against the pride
and obstinacy of their own sovereign. [Footnote 83: Theophanes (p. 256)
carries Heraclius swiftly into Armenia. Nicephorus, (p. 11,) though he
confounds the two expeditions, defines the province of Lazica. Eutychius
(Annal. tom. ii. p. 231) has given the 5000 men, with the more probable
station of Trebizond.]

[Footnote 84: From Constantinople to Trebizond, with a fair wind,
four or five days; from thence to Erzerom, five; to Erivan, twelve; to
Taurus, ten; in all, thirty-two. Such is the Itinerary of Tavernier,
(Voyages, tom. i. p. 12--56,) who was perfectly conversant with the
roads of Asia. Tournefort, who travelled with a pacha, spent ten or
twelve days between Trebizond and Erzerom, (Voyage du Levant, tom. iii.
lettre xviii.;) and Chardin (Voyages, tom. i. p. 249--254) gives the
more correct distance of fifty-three parasangs, each of 5000 paces,
(what paces?) between Erivan and Tauris.]

[Footnote 85: The expedition of Heraclius into Persia is finely
illustrated by M. D'Anville, (Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions,
tom. xxviii. p. 559--573.) He discovers the situation of Gandzaca,
Thebarma, Dastagerd, &c., with admirable skill and learning; but the
obscure campaign of 624 he passes over in silence.]

[Footnote 86: Et pontem indignatus Araxes.--Virgil, Aeneid, viii. 728.
The River Araxes is noisy, rapid, vehement, and, with the melting of the
snows, irresistible: the strongest and most massy bridges are swept away
by the current; and its indignation is attested by the ruins of many
arches near the old town of Zulfa. Voyages de Chardin, tom. i. p. 252.]

[Footnote 87: Chardin, tom. i. p. 255--259. With the Orientals,
(D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient. p. 834,) he ascribes the foundation of
Tauris, or Tebris, to Zobeide, the wife of the famous Khalif Haroun
Alrashid; but it appears to have been more ancient; and the names of
Gandzaca, Gazaca, Gaza, are expressive of the royal treasure. The number
of 550,000 inhabitants is reduced by Chardin from 1,100,000, the popular
estimate.]

[Footnote 88: He opened the gospel, and applied or interpreted the first
casual passage to the name and situation of Albania. Theophanes, p.
258.]

[Footnote 89: The heath of Mogan, between the Cyrus and the Araxes, is
sixty parasangs in length and twenty in breadth, (Olearius, p. 1023,
1024,) abounding in waters and fruitful pastures, (Hist. de Nadir Shah,
translated by Mr. Jones from a Persian Ms., part ii. p. 2, 3.) See the
encampments of Timur, (Hist. par Sherefeddin Ali, l. v. c. 37, l. vi. c.
13,) and the coronation of Nadir Shah, (Hist. Persanne, p. 3--13 and the
English Life by Mr. Jones, p. 64, 65.)]

[Footnote 90: Thebarma and Ormia, near the Lake Spauta, are proved to
be the same city by D'Anville, (Memoires de l'Academie, tom. xxviii. p.
564, 565.) It is honored as the birthplace of Zoroaster, according to
the Persians, (Schultens, Index Geograph. p. 48;) and their tradition is
fortified by M. Perron d'Anquetil, (Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript. tom.
xxxi. p. 375,) with some texts from his, or their, Zendavesta. * Note:
D'Anville (Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript. tom. xxxii. p. 560) labored to
prove the identity of these two cities; but according to M. St. Martin,
vol. xi. p. 97, not with perfect success. Ourmiah. called Ariema in the
ancient Pehlvi books, is considered, both by the followers of Zoroaster
and by the Mahometans, as his birthplace. It is situated in the southern
part of Aderbidjan.--M.]





