## Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.--Part V.

IV. But the primitive Christian demonstrated his faith by his virtues;
and it was very justly supposed that the divine persuasion, which
enlightened or subdued the understanding, must, at the same time, purify
the heart, and direct the actions, of the believer. The first apologists
of Christianity who justify the innocence of their brethren, and the
writers of a later period who celebrate the sanctity of their ancestors,
display, in the most lively colors, the reformation of manners which was
introduced into the world by the preaching of the gospel. As it is my
intention to remark only such human causes as were permitted to second
the influence of revelation, I shall slightly mention two motives which
might naturally render the lives of the primitive Christians much purer
and more austere than those of their Pagan contemporaries, or their
degenerate successors; repentance for their past sins, and the laudable
desire of supporting the reputation of the society in which they were
engaged. [83]

[Footnote 83: These, in the opinion of the editor, are the most uncandid
paragraphs in Gibbon's History. He ought either, with manly courage, to
have denied the moral reformation introduced by Christianity, or fairly
to have investigated all its motives; not to have confined himself to
an insidious and sarcastic description of the less pure and generous
elements of the Christian character as it appeared even at that early
time.--M.]

It is a very ancient reproach, suggested by the ignorance or the malice
of infidelity, that the Christians allured into their party the most
atrocious criminals, who, as soon as they were touched by a sense of
remorse, were easily persuaded to wash away, in the water of baptism,
the guilt of their past conduct, for which the temples of the gods
refused to grant them any expiation. But this reproach, when it is
cleared from misrepresentation, contributes as much to the honor as it
did to the increase of the church. [83] The friends of Christianity may
acknowledge without a blush, that many of the most eminent saints had
been before their baptism the most abandoned sinners. Those persons, who
in the world had followed, though in an imperfect manner, the dictates
of benevolence and propriety, derived such a calm satisfaction from the
opinion of their own rectitude, as rendered them much less susceptible
of the sudden emotions of shame, of grief, and of terror, which have
given birth to so many wonderful conversions. After the example of their
divine Master, the missionaries of the gospel disdained not the society
of men, and especially of women, oppressed by the consciousness, and
very often by the effects, of their vices. As they emerged from sin
and superstition to the glorious hope of immortality, they resolved to
devote themselves to a life, not only of virtue, but of penitence. The
desire of perfection became the ruling passion of their soul; and it is
well known, that while reason embraces a cold mediocrity, our passions
hurry us, with rapid violence, over the space which lies between the
most opposite extremes.

[Footnote 83: The imputations of Celsus and Julian, with the defence of
the fathers, are very fairly stated by Spanheim, Commentaire sur les
Cesars de Julian, p. 468.]

When the new converts had been enrolled in the number of the faithful,
and were admitted to the sacraments of the church, they found themselves
restrained from relapsing into their past disorders by another
consideration of a less spiritual, but of a very innocent and
respectable nature. Any particular society that has departed from
the great body of the nation, or the religion to which it belonged,
immediately becomes the object of universal as well as invidious
observation. In proportion to the smallness of its numbers, the
character of the society may be affected by the virtues and vices of the
persons who compose it; and every member is engaged to watch with the
most vigilant attention over his own behavior, and over that of his
brethren, since, as he must expect to incur a part of the common
disgrace, he may hope to enjoy a share of the common reputation. When
the Christians of Bithynia were brought before the tribunal of the
younger Pliny, they assured the proconsul, that, far from being engaged
in any unlawful conspiracy, they were bound by a solemn obligation to
abstain from the commission of those crimes which disturb the private
or public peace of society, from theft, robbery, adultery, perjury,
and fraud. [84] [841] Near a century afterwards, Tertullian with an honest
pride, could boast, that very few Christians had suffered by the hand of
the executioner, except on account of their religion. [85] Their serious
and sequestered life, averse to the gay luxury of the age, inured
them to chastity, temperance, economy, and all the sober and domestic
virtues. As the greater number were of some trade or profession, it was
incumbent on them, by the strictest integrity and the fairest dealing,
to remove the suspicions which the profane are too apt to conceive
against the appearances of sanctity. The contempt of the world exercised
them in the habits of humility, meekness, and patience. The more they
were persecuted, the more closely they adhered to each other. Their
mutual charity and unsuspecting confidence has been remarked by
infidels, and was too often abused by perfidious friends. [86]

[Footnote 84: Plin. Epist. x. 97. * Note: Is not the sense of Tertullian
rather, if guilty of any other offence, he had thereby ceased to be a
Christian?--M.]

[Footnote 841: And this blamelessness was fully admitted by the candid and
enlightened Roman.--M.]

[Footnote 85: Tertullian, Apolog. c. 44. He adds, however, with some
degree of hesitation, "Aut si aliud, jam non Christianus." * Note:
Tertullian says positively no Christian, nemo illic Christianus; for the
rest, the limitation which he himself subjoins, and which Gibbon quotes
in the foregoing note, diminishes the force of this assertion, and
appears to prove that at least he knew none such.--G.]

[Footnote 86: The philosopher Peregrinus (of whose life and death Lucian
has left us so entertaining an account) imposed, for a long time, on the
credulous simplicity of the Christians of Asia.]

It is a very honorable circumstance for the morals of the primitive
Christians, that even their faults, or rather errors, were derived
from an excess of virtue. The bishops and doctors of the church, whose
evidence attests, and whose authority might influence, the professions,
the principles, and even the practice of their contemporaries, had
studied the Scriptures with less skill than devotion; and they often
received, in the most literal sense, those rigid precepts of Christ
and the apostles, to which the prudence of succeeding commentators has
applied a looser and more figurative mode of interpretation. Ambitious
to exalt the perfection of the gospel above the wisdom of philosophy,
the zealous fathers have carried the duties of self-mortification, of
purity, and of patience, to a height which it is scarcely possible to
attain, and much less to preserve, in our present state of weakness and
corruption. A doctrine so extraordinary and so sublime must inevitably
command the veneration of the people; but it was ill calculated to
obtain the suffrage of those worldly philosophers, who, in the conduct
of this transitory life, consult only the feelings of nature and the
interest of society. [87]

[Footnote 87: See a very judicious treatise of Barbeyrac sur la Morale
des Peres.]

There are two very natural propensities which we may distinguish in the
most virtuous and liberal dispositions, the love of pleasure and the
love of action. If the former is refined by art and learning, improved
by the charms of social intercourse, and corrected by a just regard to
economy, to health, and to reputation, it is productive of the greatest
part of the happiness of private life. The love of action is a principle
of a much stronger and more doubtful nature. It often leads to anger,
to ambition, and to revenge; but when it is guided by the sense of
propriety and benevolence, it becomes the parent of every virtue, and if
those virtues are accompanied with equal abilities, a family, a state,
or an empire, may be indebted for their safety and prosperity to the
undaunted courage of a single man. To the love of pleasure we may
therefore ascribe most of the agreeable, to the love of action we
may attribute most of the useful and respectable, qualifications. The
character in which both the one and the other should be united and
harmonized, would seem to constitute the most perfect idea of human
nature. The insensible and inactive disposition, which should be
supposed alike destitute of both, would be rejected, by the common
consent of mankind, as utterly incapable of procuring any happiness to
the individual, or any public benefit to the world. But it was not
in this world, that the primitive Christians were desirous of making
themselves either agreeable or useful. [*871]

[Footnote 871: El que me fait cette homelie semi-stoicienne,
semi-epicurienne? t'on jamais regarde l'amour du plaisir comme l'un des
principes de la perfection morale? Et de quel droit faites vous de
l'amour de l'action, et de l'amour du plaisir, les seuls elemens de
l'etre humain? Est ce que vous faites abstraction de la verite en
elle-meme, de la conscience et du sentiment du devoir? Est ce que vous ne
sentez point, par exemple, que le sacrifice du moi a la justice et a la
verite, est aussi dans le coeur de l'homme: que tout n'est pas pour lui
action ou plaisir, et que dans le bien ce n'est pas le mouvement, mais
la verite, qu'il cherche? Et puis * * Thucy dide et Tacite. ces maitres
de l'histoire, ont ils jamais introduits dans leur recits un fragment de
dissertation sur le plaisir et sur l'action. Villemain Cours de Lit.
Franc part ii. Lecon v.--M.]

The acquisition of knowledge, the exercise of our reason or fancy, and
the cheerful flow of unguarded conversation, may employ the leisure of
a liberal mind. Such amusements, however, were rejected with abhorrence,
or admitted with the utmost caution, by the severity of the fathers,
who despised all knowledge that was not useful to salvation, and who
considered all levity of discours eas a criminal abuse of the gift of
speech. In our present state of existence the body is so inseparably
connected with the soul, that it seems to be our interest to taste,
with innocence and moderation, the enjoyments of which that faithful
companion is susceptible. Very different was the reasoning of our devout
predecessors; vainly aspiring to imitate the perfection of angels, they
disdained, or they affected to disdain, every earthly and corporeal
delight. [88] Some of our senses indeed are necessary for our
preservation, others for our subsistence, and others again for our
information; and thus far it was impossible to reject the use of them.
The first sensation of pleasure was marked as the first moment of their
abuse. The unfeeling candidate for heaven was instructed, not only to
resist the grosser allurements of the taste or smell, but even to
shut his ears against the profane harmony of sounds, and to view with
indifference the most finished productions of human art. Gay apparel,
magnificent houses, and elegant furniture, were supposed to unite
the double guilt of pride and of sensuality; a simple and mortified
appearance was more suitable to the Christian who was certain of his
sins and doubtful of his salvation. In their censures of luxury, the
fathers are extremely minute and circumstantial; [89] and among the
various articles which excite their pious indignation, we may enumerate
false hair, garments of any color except white, instruments of music,
vases of gold or silver, downy pillows, (as Jacob reposed his head on a
stone,) white bread, foreign wines, public salutations, the use of warm
baths, and the practice of shaving the beard, which, according to the
expression of Tertullian, is a lie against our own faces, and an impious
attempt to improve the works of the Creator. [90] When Christianity
was introduced among the rich and the polite, the observation of these
singular laws was left, as it would be at present, to the few who
were ambitious of superior sanctity. But it is always easy, as well as
agreeable, for the inferior ranks of mankind to claim a merit from the
contempt of that pomp and pleasure which fortune has placed beyond their
reach. The virtue of the primitive Christians, like that of the first
Romans, was very frequently guarded by poverty and ignorance.

[Footnote 88: Lactant. Institut. Divin. l. vi. c. 20, 21, 22.]

[Footnote 89: Consult a work of Clemens of Alexandria, entitled The
Paedagogue, which contains the rudiments of ethics, as they were taught
in the most celebrated of the Christian schools.]

[Footnote 90: Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 23. Clemens Alexandrin.
Paedagog. l. iii. c. 8.]

The chaste severity of the fathers, in whatever related to the commerce
of the two sexes, flowed from the same principle; their abhorrence
of every enjoyment which might gratify the sensual, and degrade the
spiritual, nature of man. It was their favorite opinion, that if Adam
had preserved his obedience to the Creator, he would have lived forever
in a state of virgin purity, and that some harmless mode of vegetation
might have peopled paradise with a race of innocent and immortal beings.
[91] The use of marriage was permitted only to his fallen posterity, as
a necessary expedient to continue the human species, and as a restraint,
however imperfect, on the natural licentiousness of desire. The
hesitation of the orthodox casuists on this interesting subject, betrays
the perplexity of men, unwilling to approve an institution which they
were compelled to tolerate. [92] The enumeration of the very whimsical
laws, which they most circumstantially imposed on the marriage-bed,
would force a smile from the young and a blush from the fair. It was
their unanimous sentiment, that a first marriage was adequate to all the
purposes of nature and of society. The sensual connection was refined
into a resemblance of the mystic union of Christ with his church, and
was pronounced to be indissoluble either by divorce or by death.
The practice of second nuptials was branded with the name of a egal
adultery; and the persons who were guilty of so scandalous an offence
against Christian purity, were soon excluded from the honors, and even
from the alms, of the church. [93] Since desire was imputed as a crime,
and marriage was tolerated as a defect, it was consistent with the same
principles to consider a state of celibacy as the nearest approach to
the divine perfection. It was with the utmost difficulty that ancient
Rome could support the institution of six vestals; [94] but the primitive
church was filled with a great number of persons of either sex, who had
devoted themselves to the profession of perpetual chastity. [95] A few of
these, among whom we may reckon the learned Origen, judged it the most
prudent to disarm the tempter. [96] Some were insensible and some were
invincible against the assaults of the flesh. Disdaining an ignominious
flight, the virgins of the warm climate of Africa encountered the enemy
in the closest engagement; they permitted priests and deacons to share
their bed, and gloried amidst the flames in their unsullied purity. But
insulted Nature sometimes vindicated her rights, and this new species
of martyrdom served only to introduce a new scandal into the church. [97]
Among the Christian ascetics, however, (a name which they soon acquired
from their painful exercise,) many, as they were less presumptuous, were
probably more successful. The loss of sensual pleasure was supplied
and compensated by spiritual pride. Even the multitude of Pagans
were inclined to estimate the merit of the sacrifice by its apparent
difficulty; and it was in the praise of these chaste spouses of
Christ that the fathers have poured forth the troubled stream of their
eloquence. [98] Such are the early traces of monastic principles and
institutions, which, in a subsequent age, have counterbalanced all the
temporal advantages of Christianity. [99]

[Footnote 91: Beausobro, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. vii. c.
3. Justin, Gregory of Nyssa, Augustin, &c., strongly incline to this
opinion. Note: But these were Gnostic or Manichean opinions. Beausobre
distinctly describes Autustine's bias to his recent escape from
Manicheism; and adds that he afterwards changed his views.--M.]

[Footnote 92: Some of the Gnostic heretics were more consistent; they
rejected the use of marriage.]

[Footnote 93: See a chain of tradition, from Justin Martyr to Jerome, in
the Morale des Peres, c. iv. 6--26.]

[Footnote 94: See a very curious Dissertation on the Vestals, in
the Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. iv. p. 161--227.
Notwithstanding the honors and rewards which were bestowed on those
virgins, it was difficult to procure a sufficient number; nor could the
dread of the most horrible death always restrain their incontinence.]

[Footnote 95: Cupiditatem procreandi aut unam scimus aut nullam.
Minutius Faelix, c. 31. Justin. Apolog. Major. Athenagoras in Legat. c
28. Tertullian de Cultu Foemin. l. ii.]

[Footnote 96: Eusebius, l. vi. 8. Before the fame of Origen had excited
envy and persecution, this extraordinary action was rather admired than
censured. As it was his general practice to allegorize Scripture, it
seems unfortunate that in this instance only, he should have adopted the
literal sense.]

[Footnote 97: Cyprian. Epist. 4, and Dodwell, Dissertat. Cyprianic. iii.
Something like this rash attempt was long afterwards imputed to the
founder of the order of Fontevrault. Bayle has amused himself and his
readers on that very delicate subject.]

[Footnote 98: Dupin (Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 195) gives
a particular account of the dialogue of the ten virgins, as it was
composed by Methodius, Bishop of Tyre. The praises of virginity are
excessive.]

[Footnote 99: The Ascetics (as early as the second century) made a
public profession of mortifying their bodies, and of abstaining from the
use of flesh and wine. Mosheim, p. 310.]

The Christians were not less averse to the business than to the
pleasures of this world. The defence of our persons and property they
knew not how to reconcile with the patient doctrine which enjoined an
unlimited forgiveness of past injuries, and commanded them to invite the
repetition of fresh insults. Their simplicity was offended by the use of
oaths, by the pomp of magistracy, and by the active contention of public
life; nor could their humane ignorance be convinced that it was lawful
on any occasion to shed the blood of our fellow-creatures, either by
the sword of justice, or by that of war; even though their criminal
or hostile attempts should threaten the peace and safety of the whole
community. [100] It was acknowledged, that, under a less perfect law,
the powers of the Jewish constitution had been exercised, with the
approbation of Heaven, by inspired prophets and by anointed kings. The
Christians felt and confessed that such institutions might be necessary
for the present system of the world, and they cheerfully submitted to
the authority of their Pagan governors. But while they inculcated the
maxims of passive obedience, they refused to take any active part in
the civil administration or the military defence of the empire. Some
indulgence might, perhaps, be allowed to those persons who, before
their conversion, were already engaged in such violent and sanguinary
occupations; [101] but it was impossible that the Christians, without
renouncing a more sacred duty, could assume the character of soldiers,
of magistrates, or of princes. [102] This indolent, or even criminal
disregard to the public welfare, exposed them to the contempt and
reproaches of the Pagans who very frequently asked, what must be the
fate of the empire, attacked on every side by the barbarians, if all
mankind should adopt the pusillanimous sentiments of the new sect. [103]
To this insulting question the Christian apologists returned obscure and
ambiguous answers, as they were unwilling to reveal the secret cause of
their security; the expectation that, before the conversion of mankind
was accomplished, war, government, the Roman empire, and the world
itself, would be no more. It may be observed, that, in this instance
likewise, the situation of the first Christians coincided very happily
with their religious scruples, and that their aversion to an active life
contributed rather to excuse them from the service, than to exclude them
from the honors, of the state and army.

[Footnote 100: See the Morale des Peres. The same patient principles
have been revived since the Reformation by the Socinians, the modern
Anabaptists, and the Quakers. Barclay, the Apologist of the Quakers, has
protected his brethren by the authority of the primitive Christian; p.
542-549]

[Footnote 101: Tertullian, Apolog. c. 21. De Idololatria, c. 17, 18.
Origen contra Celsum, l. v. p. 253, l. vii. p. 348, l. viii.
p. 423-428.]

[Footnote 102: Tertullian (de Corona Militis, c. 11) suggested to
them the expedient of deserting; a counsel which, if it had been
generally known, was not very proper to conciliate the favor of the
emperors towards the Christian sect. * Note: There is nothing which
ought to astonish us in the refusal of the primitive Christians to take
part in public affairs; it was the natural consequence of the
contrariety of their principles to the customs, laws, and active life of
the Pagan world. As Christians, they could not enter into the senate,
which, according to Gibbon himself, always assembled in a temple or
consecrated place, and where each senator, before he took his seat, made
a libation of a few drops of wine, and burnt incense on the altar; as
Christians, they could not assist at festivals and banquets, which
always terminated with libations, &c.; finally, as "the innumerable
deities and rites of polytheism were closely interwoven with every
circumstance of public and private life," the Christians could not
participate in them without incurring, according to their principles,
the guilt of impiety. It was then much less by an effect of their
doctrine, than by the consequence of their situation, that they stood
aloof from public business. Whenever this situation offered no
impediment, they showed as much activity as the Pagans. Proinde, says
Justin Martyr, (Apol. c. 17,) nos solum Deum adoramus, et vobis in rebus
aliis laeti inservimus.--G. -----This latter passage, M. Guizot quotes
in Latin; if he had consulted the original, he would have found it to be
altogether irrelevant: it merely relates to the payment of taxes.--M. --
--Tertullian does not suggest to the soldiers the expedient of
deserting; he says that they ought to be constantly on their guard to do
nothing during their service contrary to the law of God, and to resolve
to suffer martyrdom rather than submit to a base compliance, or openly
to renounce the service. (De Cor. Mil. ii. p. 127.) He does not
positively decide that the military service is not permitted to
Christians; he ends, indeed, by saying, Puta denique licere militiam
usque ad causam coronae.--G. ----M. Guizot is. I think, again
unfortunate in his defence of Tertullian. That father says, that many
Christian soldiers had deserted, aut deserendum statim sit, ut a multis
actum. The latter sentence, Puta, &c, &c., is a concession for the sake
of argument: wha follows is more to the purpose.--M. Many other passages
of Tertullian prove that the army was full of Christians, Hesterni sumus
et vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia,
conciliabula, castra ipsa. (Apol. c. 37.) Navigamus et not vobiscum et
militamus. (c. 42.) Origen, in truth, appears to have maintained a more
rigid opinion, (Cont. Cels. l. viii.;) but he has often renounced this
exaggerated severity, perhaps necessary to produce great results, and he
speaks of the profession of arms as an honorable one. (l. iv. c. 218.)--
G. ----On these points Christian opinion, it should seem, was much
divided Tertullian, when he wrote the De Cor. Mil., was evidently
inclining to more ascetic opinions, and Origen was of the same class.
See Neander, vol. l part ii. p. 305, edit. 1828.--M.]

[Footnote 103: As well as we can judge from the mutilated representation
of Origen, (1. viii. p. 423,) his adversary, Celsus, had urged his
objection with great force and candor.]




