## Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Aemilianus, Valerian And Gallienus.--Part II.

The Goths were now in possession of the Ukraine, a country of
considerable extent and uncommon fertility, intersected with navigable
rivers, which, from either side, discharge themselves into the
Borysthenes; and interspersed with large and leafy forests of oaks.
The plenty of game and fish, the innumerable bee-hives deposited in the
hollow of old trees, and in the cavities of rocks, and forming, even in
that rude age, a valuable branch of commerce, the size of the cattle,
the temperature of the air, the aptness of the soil for every species of
grain, and the luxuriancy of the vegetation, all displayed the liberality
of Nature, and tempted the industry of man. [28] But the Goths withstood
all these temptations, and still adhered to a life of idleness, of
poverty, and of rapine.

[Footnote 28: Genealogical History of the Tartars, p. 593. Mr. Bell
(vol. ii. p 379) traversed the Ukraine, in his journey from
Petersburgh to Constantinople. The modern face of the country is a just
representation of the ancient, since, in the hands of the Cossacks, it
still remains in a state of nature.]

The Scythian hordes, which, towards the east, bordered on the new
settlements of the Goths, presented nothing to their arms, except the
doubtful chance of an unprofitable victory. But the prospect of the
Roman territories was far more alluring; and the fields of Dacia were
covered with rich harvests, sown by the hands of an industrious, and
exposed to be gathered by those of a warlike, people. It is probable
that the conquests of Trajan, maintained by his successors, less for
any real advantage than for ideal dignity, had contributed to weaken the
empire on that side. The new and unsettled province of Dacia was neither
strong enough to resist, nor rich enough to satiate, the rapaciousness
of the barbarians. As long as the remote banks of the Niester were
considered as the boundary of the Roman power, the fortifications of the
Lower Danube were more carelessly guarded, and the inhabitants of
Maesia lived in supine security, fondly conceiving themselves at an
inaccessible distance from any barbarian invaders. The irruptions of
the Goths, under the reign of Philip, fatally convinced them of their
mistake. The king, or leader, of that fierce nation, traversed with
contempt the province of Dacia, and passed both the Niester and the
Danube without encountering any opposition capable of retarding his
progress. The relaxed discipline of the Roman troops betrayed the most
important posts, where they were stationed, and the fear of deserved
punishment induced great numbers of them to enlist under the Gothic
standard. The various multitude of barbarians appeared, at length,
under the walls of Marcianopolis, a city built by Trajan in honor of
his sister, and at that time the capital of the second Maesia. [29] The
inhabitants consented to ransom their lives and property by the payment
of a large sum of money, and the invaders retreated back into their
deserts, animated, rather than satisfied, with the first success of
their arms against an opulent but feeble country. Intelligence was soon
transmitted to the emperor Decius, that Cniva, king of the Goths, had
passed the Danube a second time, with more considerable forces; that his
numerous detachments scattered devastation over the province of Maesia,
whilst the main body of the army, consisting of seventy thousand Germans
and Sarmatians, a force equal to the most daring achievements, required
the presence of the Roman monarch, and the exertion of his military
power.

[Footnote 29: In the sixteenth chapter of Jornandes, instead
of secundo Maesiam we may venture to substitute secundam, the second
Maesia, of which Marcianopolis was certainly the capital. (See Hierocles
de Provinciis, and Wesseling ad locum, p. 636. Itinerar.) It is
surprising how this palpable error of the scribe should escape the
judicious correction of Grotius. Note: Luden has observed that Jornandes
mentions two passages over the Danube; this relates to the second
irruption into Maesia. Geschichte des T V. ii. p. 448.--M.]

Decius found the Goths engaged before Nicopolis, one of the many
monuments of Trajan's victories. [30] On his approach they raised the
siege, but with a design only of marching away to a conquest of greater
importance, the siege of Philippopolis, a city of Thrace, founded by the
father of Alexander, near the foot of Mount Haemus. [31] Decius followed
them through a difficult country, and by forced marches; but when he
imagined himself at a considerable distance from the rear of the Goths,
Cniva turned with rapid fury on his pursuers. The camp of the Romans was
surprised and pillaged, and, for the first time, their emperor fled
in disorder before a troop of half-armed barbarians. After a long
resistance, Philoppopolis, destitute of succor, was taken by storm. A
hundred thousand persons are reported to have been massacred in the sack
of that great city. [32] Many prisoners of consequence became a valuable
accession to the spoil; and Priscus, a brother of the late emperor
Philip, blushed not to assume the purple, under the protection of the
barbarous enemies of Rome. [33] The time, however, consumed in that
tedious siege, enabled Decius to revive the courage, restore the
discipline, and recruit the numbers of his troops. He intercepted
several parties of Carpi, and other Germans, who were hastening to
share the victory of their countrymen, [34] intrusted the passes of the
mountains to officers of approved valor and fidelity, [35] repaired and
strengthened the fortifications of the Danube, and exerted his utmost
vigilance to oppose either the progress or the retreat of the Goths.
Encouraged by the return of fortune, he anxiously waited for an
opportunity to retrieve, by a great and decisive blow, his own glory,
and that of the Roman arms. [36]

[Footnote 30: The place is still called Nicop. D'Anville, Geographie
Ancienne, tom. i. p. 307. The little stream, on whose banks it stood,
falls into the Danube.]

[Footnote 31: Stephan. Byzant. de Urbibus, p. 740. Wesseling, Itinerar.
p. 136. Zonaras, by an odd mistake, ascribes the foundation of
Philippopolis to the immediate predecessor of Decius. * Note: Now
Philippopolis or Philiba; its situation among the hills caused it to be
also called Trimontium. D'Anville, Geog. Anc. i. 295.--G.]

[Footnote 32: Ammian. xxxi. 5.]

[Footnote 33: Aurel. Victor. c. 29.]

[Footnote 34: Victorioe Carpicoe, on some medals of Decius, insinuate
these advantages.]

[Footnote 35: Claudius (who afterwards reigned with so much glory) was
posted in the pass of Thermopylae with 200 Dardanians, 100 heavy and
160 light horse, 60 Cretan archers, and 1000 well-armed recruits. See
an original letter from the emperor to his officer, in the Augustan
History, p. 200.]

[Footnote 36: Jornandes, c. 16--18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22. In the general
account of this war, it is easy to discover the opposite prejudices of
the Gothic and the Grecian writer. In carelessness alone they are
alike.]

At the same time when Decius was struggling with the violence of the
tempest, his mind, calm and deliberate amidst the tumult of war,
investigated the more general causes, that, since the age of the
Antonines, had so impetuously urged the decline of the Roman greatness.
He soon discovered that it was impossible to replace that greatness on a
permanent basis, without restoring public virtue, ancient principles and
manners, and the oppressed majesty of the laws. To execute this noble
but arduous design, he first resolved to revive the obsolete office of
censor; an office which, as long as it had subsisted in its pristine
integrity, had so much contributed to the perpetuity of the state, [37]
till it was usurped and gradually neglected by the Caesars. [38]
Conscious that the favor of the sovereign may confer power, but that the
esteem of the people can alone bestow authority, he submitted the choice
of the censor to the unbiased voice of the senate. By their unanimous
votes, or rather acclamations, Valerian, who was afterwards emperor, and
who then served with distinction in the army of Decius, was declared the
most worthy of that exalted honor. As soon as the decree of the senate
was transmitted to the emperor, he assembled a great council in his
camp, and before the investiture of the censor elect, he apprised him of
the difficulty and importance of his great office. "Happy Valerian,"
said the prince to his distinguished subject, "happy in the general
approbation of the senate and of the Roman republic! Accept the
censorship of mankind; and judge of our manners. You will select those
who deserve to continue members of the senate; you will restore the
equestrian order to its ancient splendor; you will improve the revenue,
yet moderate the public burdens. You will distinguish into regular
classes the various and infinite multitude of citizens, and accurately
view the military strength, the wealth, the virtue, and the resources of
Rome. Your decisions shall obtain the force of laws. The army, the
palace, the ministers of justice, and the great officers of the empire,
are all subject to your tribunal. None are exempted, excepting only the
ordinary consuls, [39] the praefect of the city, the king of the
sacrifices, and (as long as she preserves her chastity inviolate) the
eldest of the vestal virgins. Even these few, who may not dread the
severity, will anxiously solicit the esteem, of the Roman censor." [40]

[Footnote 37: Montesquieu, Grandeur et Decadence des Romains, c. viii.
He illustrates the nature and use of the censorship with his usual
ingenuity, and with uncommon precision.]

[Footnote 38: Vespasian and Titus were the last censors, (Pliny, Hist.
Natur vii. 49. Censorinus de Die Natali.) The modesty of Trajan
refused an honor which he deserved, and his example became a law to the
Antonines. See Pliny's Panegyric, c. 45 and 60.]

[Footnote 39: Yet in spite of his exemption, Pompey appeared before
that tribunal during his consulship. The occasion, indeed, was equally
singular and honorable. Plutarch in Pomp. p. 630.]

[Footnote 40: See the original speech in the Augustan Hist. p. 173-174.]

A magistrate, invested with such extensive powers, would have appeared
not so much the minister, as the colleague of his sovereign. [41]
Valerian justly dreaded an elevation so full of envy and of suspicion.
He modestly argued the alarming greatness of the trust, his own
insufficiency, and the incurable corruption of the times. He artfully
insinuated, that the office of censor was inseparable from the Imperial
dignity, and that the feeble hands of a subject were unequal to the
support of such an immense weight of cares and of power. [42] The
approaching event of war soon put an end to the prosecution of a project
so specious, but so impracticable; and whilst it preserved Valerian
from the danger, saved the emperor Decius from the disappointment, which
would most probably have attended it. A censor may maintain, he can
never restore, the morals of a state. It is impossible for such a
magistrate to exert his authority with benefit, or even with effect,
unless he is supported by a quick sense of honor and virtue in the minds
of the people, by a decent reverence for the public opinion, and by a
train of useful prejudices combating on the side of national manners.
In a period when these principles are annihilated, the censorial
jurisdiction must either sink into empty pageantry, or be converted
into a partial instrument of vexatious oppression. [43] It was easier to
vanquish the Goths than to eradicate the public vices; yet even in the
first of these enterprises, Decius lost his army and his life.

[Footnote 41: This transaction might deceive Zonaras, who supposes that
Valerian was actually declared the colleague of Decius, l. xii. p. 625.]

[Footnote 42: Hist. August. p. 174. The emperor's reply is omitted.]

[Footnote 43: Such as the attempts of Augustus towards a reformation of
manness. Tacit. Annal. iii. 24.]

The Goths were now, on every side, surrounded and pursued by the Roman
arms. The flower of their troops had perished in the long siege
of Philippopolis, and the exhausted country could no longer afford
subsistence for the remaining multitude of licentious barbarians.
Reduced to this extremity, the Goths would gladly have purchased, by
the surrender of all their booty and prisoners, the permission of
an undisturbed retreat. But the emperor, confident of victory, and
resolving, by the chastisement of these invaders, to strike a salutary
terror into the nations of the North, refused to listen to any terms of
accommodation. The high-spirited barbarians preferred death to slavery.
An obscure town of Maesia, called Forum Terebronii, [44] was the scene of
the battle. The Gothic army was drawn up in three lines, and either from
choice or accident, the front of the third line was covered by a morass.
In the beginning of the action, the son of Decius, a youth of the
fairest hopes, and already associated to the honors of the purple, was
slain by an arrow, in the sight of his afflicted father; who, summoning
all his fortitude, admonished the dismayed troops, that the loss of
a single soldier was of little importance to the republic. [45] The
conflict was terrible; it was the combat of despair against grief and
rage. The first line of the Goths at length gave way in disorder; the
second, advancing to sustain it, shared its fate; and the third only
remained entire, prepared to dispute the passage of the morass, which
was imprudently attempted by the presumption of the enemy. "Here the
fortune of the day turned, and all things became adverse to the Romans;
the place deep with ooze, sinking under those who stood, slippery to
such as advanced; their armor heavy, the waters deep; nor could they
wield, in that uneasy situation, their weighty javelins. The barbarians,
on the contrary, were inured to encounter in the bogs, their persons
tall, their spears long, such as could wound at a distance." [46] In this
morass the Roman army, after an ineffectual struggle, was irrecoverably
lost; nor could the body of the emperor ever be found. [47] Such was the
fate of Decius, in the fiftieth year of his age; an accomplished prince,
active in war and affable in peace; [48] who, together with his son,
has deserved to be compared, both in life and death, with the brightest
examples of ancient virtue. [49]

[Footnote 44: Tillemont, Histoire des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 598. As
Zosimus and some of his followers mistake the Danube for the Tanais,
they place the field of battle in the plains of Scythia.]

[Footnote 45: Aurelius Victor allows two distinct actions for the
deaths of the two Decii; but I have preferred the account of Jornandes.]

[Footnote 46: I have ventured to copy from Tacitus (Annal. i. 64)
the picture of a similar engagement between a Roman army and a German
tribe.]

[Footnote 47: Jornandes, c. 18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22, [c. 23.]
Zonaras, l. xii. p. 627. Aurelius Victor.]

[Footnote 48: The Decii were killed before the end of the year two
hundred and fifty-one, since the new princes took possession of the
consulship on the ensuing calends of January.]

[Footnote 49: Hist. August. p. 223, gives them a very honorable place
among the small number of good emperors who reigned between Augustus and
Diocletian.]

This fatal blow humbled, for a very little time, she insolence of the
legions. They appeared to have patiently expected, and submissively
obeyed, the decree of the senate which regulated the succession to the
throne. From a just regard for the memory of Decius, the Imperial title
was conferred on Hostilianus, his only surviving son; but an equal rank,
with more effectual power, was granted to Gallus, whose experience and
ability seemed equal to the great trust of guardian to the young prince
and the distressed empire. [50] The first care of the new emperor was
to deliver the Illyrian provinces from the intolerable weight of the
victorious Goths. He consented to leave in their hands the rich
fruits of their invasion, an immense booty, and what was still more
disgraceful, a great number of prisoners of the highest merit and
quality. He plentifully supplied their camp with every conveniency that
could assuage their angry spirits or facilitate their so much wished-for
departure; and he even promised to pay them annually a large sum
of gold, on condition they should never afterwards infest the Roman
territories by their incursions. [51]

[Footnote 50: Haec ubi Patres comperere.. .. decernunt. Victor in
Caesaribus.]

[Footnote 51: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]

In the age of the Scipios, the most opulent kings of the earth, who
courted the protection of the victorious commonwealth, were gratified
with such trifling presents as could only derive a value from the hand
that bestowed them; an ivory chair, a coarse garment of purple, an
inconsiderable piece of plate, or a quantity of copper coin. [52] After
the wealth of nations had centred in Rome, the emperors displayed their
greatness, and even their policy, by the regular exercise of a steady
and moderate liberality towards the allies of the state. They relieved
the poverty of the barbarians, honored their merit, and recompensed
their fidelity. These voluntary marks of bounty were understood to flow,
not from the fears, but merely from the generosity or the gratitude of
the Romans; and whilst presents and subsidies were liberally distributed
among friends and suppliants, they were sternly refused to such as
claimed them as a debt. [53] But this stipulation, of an annual payment
to a victorious enemy, appeared without disguise in the light of an
ignominious tribute; the minds of the Romans were not yet accustomed to
accept such unequal laws from a tribe of barbarians; and the prince,
who by a necessary concession had probably saved his country, became the
object of the general contempt and aversion. The death of Hostiliamus,
though it happened in the midst of a raging pestilence, was interpreted
as the personal crime of Gallus; [54] and even the defeat of the later
emperor was ascribed by the voice of suspicion to the perfidious
counsels of his hated successor. [55] The tranquillity which the empire
enjoyed during the first year of his administration, [56] served rather
to inflame than to appease the public discontent; and as soon as the
apprehensions of war were removed, the infamy of the peace was more
deeply and more sensibly felt.

[Footnote 52: A Sella, a Toga, and a golden Patera of five pounds
weight, were accepted with joy and gratitude by the wealthy king of
Egypt. (Livy, xxvii. 4.) Quina millia Aeris, a weight of copper, in
value about eighteen pounds sterling, was the usual present made to
foreign are ambassadors. (Livy, xxxi. 9.)]

[Footnote 53: See the firmness of a Roman general so late as the time
of Alexander Severus, in the Excerpta Legationum, p. 25, edit. Louvre.]

[Footnote 54: For the plague, see Jornandes, c. 19, and Victor in
Caesaribus.]

[Footnote 55: These improbable accusations are alleged by Zosimus, l. i.
p. 28, 24.]

[Footnote 56: Jornandes, c. 19. The Gothic writer at least observed
the peace which his victorious countrymen had sworn to Gallus.]

But the Romans were irritated to a still higher degree, when they
discovered that they had not even secured their repose, though at the
expense of their honor. The dangerous secret of the wealth and weakness
of the empire had been revealed to the world. New swarms of barbarians,
encouraged by the success, and not conceiving themselves bound by the
obligation of their brethren, spread devastation though the Illyrian
provinces, and terror as far as the gates of Rome. The defence of the
monarchy, which seemed abandoned by the pusillanimous emperor, was
assumed by Aemilianus, governor of Pannonia and Maesia; who rallied the
scattered forces, and revived the fainting spirits of the troops. The
barbarians were unexpectedly attacked, routed, chased, and pursued
beyond the Danube. The victorious leader distributed as a donative the
money collected for the tribute, and the acclamations of the soldiers
proclaimed him emperor on the field of battle. [57] Gallus, who,
careless of the general welfare, indulged himself in the pleasures of
Italy, was almost in the same instant informed of the success, of the
revolt, and of the rapid approach of his aspiring lieutenant. He
advanced to meet him as far as the plains of Spoleto. When the armies
came in sight of each other, the soldiers of Gallus compared the
ignominious conduct of their sovereign with the glory of his rival. They
admired the valor of Aemilianus; they were attracted by his liberality,
for he offered a considerable increase of pay to all deserters. [58] The
murder of Gallus, and of his son Volusianus, put an end to the civil
war; and the senate gave a legal sanction to the rights of conquest. The
letters of Aemilianus to that assembly displayed a mixture of moderation
and vanity. He assured them, that he should resign to their wisdom the
civil administration; and, contenting himself with the quality of their
general, would in a short time assert the glory of Rome, and deliver the
empire from all the barbarians both of the North and of the East. [59]
His pride was flattered by the applause of the senate; and medals are
still extant, representing him with the name and attributes of Hercules
the Victor, and Mars the Avenger. [60]

[Footnote 57: Zosimus, l. i. p. 25, 26.]

[Footnote 58: Victor in Caesaribus.]

[Footnote 59: Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]

[Footnote 60: Banduri Numismata, p. 94.]

If the new monarch possessed the abilities, he wanted the time,
necessary to fulfil these splendid promises. Less than four months
intervened between his victory and his fall. [61] He had vanquished
Gallus: he sunk under the weight of a competitor more formidable than
Gallus. That unfortunate prince had sent Valerian, already distinguished
by the honorable title of censor, to bring the legions of Gaul and
Germany [62] to his aid. Valerian executed that commission with zeal and
fidelity; and as he arrived too late to save his sovereign, he resolved
to revenge him. The troops of Aemilianus, who still lay encamped in the
plains of Spoleto, were awed by the sanctity of his character, but much
more by the superior strength of his army; and as they were now
become as incapable of personal attachment as they had always been of
constitutional principle, they readily imbrued their hands in the blood
of a prince who so lately had been the object of their partial choice.
The guilt was theirs, [621] but the advantage of it was Valerian's; who
obtained the possession of the throne by the means indeed of a civil
war, but with a degree of innocence singular in that age of revolutions;
since he owed neither gratitude nor allegiance to his predecessor, whom
he dethroned.

[Footnote 61: Eutropius, l. ix. c. 6, says tertio mense.
Eusebio this emperor.]

[Footnote 62: Zosimus, l. i. p. 28. Eutropius and Victor station
Valerian's army in Rhaetia.]

[Footnote 621: Aurelius Victor says that Aemilianus died of a natural
disorder. Tropius, in speaking of his death, does not say that he was
assassinated--G.]

Valerian was about sixty years of age [63] when he was invested with the
purple, not by the caprice of the populace, or the clamors of the army,
but by the unanimous voice of the Roman world. In his gradual ascent
through the honors of the state, he had deserved the favor of virtuous
princes, and had declared himself the enemy of tyrants. [64] His noble
birth, his mild but unblemished manners, his learning, prudence, and
experience, were revered by the senate and people; and if mankind
(according to the observation of an ancient writer) had been left at
liberty to choose a master, their choice would most assuredly have
fallen on Valerian. [65] Perhaps the merit of this emperor was
inadequate to his reputation; perhaps his abilities, or at least his
spirit, were affected by the languor and coldness of old age. The
consciousness of his decline engaged him to share the throne with a
younger and more active associate; [66] the emergency of the times
demanded a general no less than a prince; and the experience of the
Roman censor might have directed him where to bestow the Imperial
purple, as the reward of military merit. But instead of making a
judicious choice, which would have confirmed his reign and endeared his
memory, Valerian, consulting only the dictates of affection or vanity,
immediately invested with the supreme honors his son Gallienus, a youth
whose effeminate vices had been hitherto concealed by the obscurity of a
private station. The joint government of the father and the son
subsisted about seven, and the sole administration of Gallien continued
about eight, years. But the whole period was one uninterrupted series of
confusion and calamity. As the Roman empire was at the same time, and on
every side, attacked by the blind fury of foreign invaders, and the wild
ambition of domestic usurpers, we shall consult order and perspicuity,
by pursuing, not so much the doubtful arrangement of dates, as the more
natural distribution of subjects. The most dangerous enemies of Rome,
during the reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, were, 1. The Franks; 2. The
Alemanni; 3. The Goths; and, 4. The Persians. Under these general
appellations, we may comprehend the adventures of less considerable
tribes, whose obscure and uncouth names would only serve to oppress the
memory and perplex the attention of the reader.

[Footnote 63: He was about seventy at the time of his accession, or, as
it is more probable, of his death. Hist. August. p. 173. Tillemont,
Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 893, note 1.]

[Footnote 64: Inimicus tyrannorum. Hist. August. p. 173. In the glorious
struggle of the senate against Maximin, Valerian acted a very spirited
part. Hist. August. p. 156.]

[Footnote 65: According to the distinction of Victor, he seems to have
received the title of Imperator from the army, and that of Augustus from
the senate.]

[Footnote 66: From Victor and from the medals, Tillemont (tom. iii. p.
710) very justly infers, that Gallienus was associated to the empire
about the month of August of the year 253.]

I. As the posterity of the Franks compose one of the greatest and most
enlightened nations of Europe, the powers of learning and ingenuity have
been exhausted in the discovery of their unlettered ancestors. To the
tales of credulity have succeeded the systems of fancy. Every passage
has been sifted, every spot has been surveyed, that might possibly
reveal some faint traces of their origin. It has been supposed that
Pannonia, [67] that Gaul, that the northern parts of Germany, [68] gave
birth to that celebrated colony of warriors. At length the most rational
critics, rejecting the fictitious emigrations of ideal conquerors, have
acquiesced in a sentiment whose simplicity persuades us of its truth.
[69] They suppose, that about the year two hundred and forty, [70] a new
confederacy was formed under the name of Franks, by the old inhabitants
of the Lower Rhine and the Weser. [701] The present circle of Westphalia,
the Landgraviate of Hesse, and the duchies of Brunswick and Luneburg,
were the ancient of the Chauci who, in their inaccessible morasses,
defied the Roman arms; [71] of the Cherusci, proud of the fame of
Arminius; of the Catti, formidable by their firm and intrepid infantry;
and of several other tribes of inferior power and renown. [72] The love
of liberty was the ruling passion of these Germans; the enjoyment of it
their best treasure; the word that expressed that enjoyment, the most
pleasing to their ear. They deserved, they assumed, they maintained the
honorable appellation of Franks, or Freemen; which concealed, though
it did not extinguish, the peculiar names of the several states of the
confederacy. [73] Tacit consent, and mutual advantage, dictated the first
laws of the union; it was gradually cemented by habit and experience.
The league of the Franks may admit of some comparison with the Helvetic
body; in which every canton, retaining its independent sovereignty,
consults with its brethren in the common cause, without acknowledging
the authority of any supreme head, or representative assembly. [74] But
the principle of the two confederacies was extremely different. A peace
of two hundred years has rewarded the wise and honest policy of the
Swiss. An inconstant spirit, the thirst of rapine, and a disregard
to the most solemn treaties, disgraced the character of the Franks.
[Footnote 67: Various systems have been formed to explain a difficult
passage in Gregory of Tours, l. ii. c. 9.]

[Footnote 68: The Geographer of Ravenna, i. 11, by mentioning
Mauringania, on the confines of Denmark, as the ancient seat of the
Franks, gave birth to an ingenious system of Leibritz.]

[Footnote 69: See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, l. iii. c. 20. M. Freret, in
the Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xviii.]

[Footnote 70: Most probably under the reign of Gordian, from an
accidental circumstance fully canvassed by Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 710,
1181.]

[Footnote 701: The confederation of the Franks appears to have been
formed, 1. Of the Chauci. 2. Of the Sicambri, the inhabitants of the
duchy of Berg. 3. Of the Attuarii, to the north of the Sicambri, in
the principality of Waldeck, between the Dimel and the Eder. 4. Of
the Bructeri, on the banks of the Lippe, and in the Hartz. 5. Of the
Chamavii, the Gambrivii of Tacitua, who were established, at the time
of the Frankish confederation, in the country of the Bructeri. 6. Of
the Catti, in Hessia.--G. The Salii and Cherasci are added. Greenwood's
Hist. of Germans, i 193.--M.]

[Footnote 71: Plin. Hist. Natur. xvi. l. The Panegyrists frequently
allude to the morasses of the Franks.]

[Footnote 72: Tacit. Germania, c. 30, 37.]

[Footnote 73: In a subsequent period, most of those old names are
occasionally mentioned. See some vestiges of them in Cluver. Germ.
Antiq. l. iii.]

[Footnote 74: Simler de Republica Helvet. cum notis Fuselin.]




