## Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines.--Part II.

Till the privileges of Romans had been progressively extended to all
the inhabitants of the empire, an important distinction was preserved
between Italy and the provinces. The former was esteemed the centre of
public unity, and the firm basis of the constitution. Italy claimed the
birth, or at least the residence, of the emperors and the senate. [26]
The estates of the Italians were exempt from taxes, their persons from
the arbitrary jurisdiction of governors. Their municipal corporations,
formed after the perfect model of the capital, [261] were intrusted, under
the immediate eye of the supreme power, with the execution of the laws.
From the foot of the Alps to the extremity of Calabria, all the natives
of Italy were born citizens of Rome. Their partial distinctions were
obliterated, and they insensibly coalesced into one great nation, united
by language, manners, and civil institutions, and equal to the weight of
a powerful empire. The republic gloried in her generous policy, and was
frequently rewarded by the merit and services of her adopted sons. Had
she always confined the distinction of Romans to the ancient families
within the walls of the city, that immortal name would have been
deprived of some of its noblest ornaments. Virgil was a native of
Mantua; Horace was inclined to doubt whether he should call himself
an Apulian or a Lucanian; it was in Padua that an historian was found
worthy to record the majestic series of Roman victories. The patriot
family of the Catos emerged from Tusculum; and the little town of
Arpinum claimed the double honor of producing Marius and Cicero, the
former of whom deserved, after Romulus and Camillus, to be styled the
Third Founder of Rome; and the latter, after saving his country from the
designs of Catiline, enabled her to contend with Athens for the palm of
eloquence. [27]

[Footnote 26: The senators were obliged to have one third of their own
landed property in Italy. See Plin. l. vi. ep. 19. The qualification was
reduced by Marcus to one fourth. Since the reign of Trajan, Italy had
sunk nearer to the level of the provinces.]

[Footnote 261: It may be doubted whether the municipal government of the
cities was not the old Italian constitution rather than a transcript
from that of Rome. The free government of the cities, observes Savigny,
was the leading characteristic of Italy. Geschichte des Romischen
Rechts, i. p. G.--M.]

[Footnote 27: The first part of the Verona Illustrata of the Marquis
Maffei gives the clearest and most comprehensive view of the state of
Italy under the Caesars. * Note: Compare Denina, Revol. d' Italia, l.
ii. c. 6, p. 100, 4 to edit.]

The provinces of the empire (as they have been described in the
preceding chapter) were destitute of any public force, or constitutional
freedom. In Etruria, in Greece, [28] and in Gaul, [29] it was the first
care of the senate to dissolve those dangerous confederacies, which
taught mankind that, as the Roman arms prevailed by division, they might
be resisted by union. Those princes, whom the ostentation of gratitude
or generosity permitted for a while to hold a precarious sceptre, were
dismissed from their thrones, as soon as they had performed their
appointed task of fashioning to the yoke the vanquished nations.
The free states and cities which had embraced the cause of Rome
were rewarded with a nominal alliance, and insensibly sunk into real
servitude. The public authority was every where exercised by the
ministers of the senate and of the emperors, and that authority was
absolute, and without control. [291] But the same salutary maxims of
government, which had secured the peace and obedience of Italy were
extended to the most distant conquests. A nation of Romans was gradually
formed in the provinces, by the double expedient of introducing
colonies, and of admitting the most faithful and deserving of the
provincials to the freedom of Rome.

[Footnote 28: See Pausanias, l. vii. The Romans condescended to restore
the names of those assemblies, when they could no longer be dangerous.]

[Footnote 29: They are frequently mentioned by Caesar. The Abbe Dubos
attempts, with very little success, to prove that the assemblies of Gaul
were continued under the emperors. Histoire de l'Etablissement de la
Monarchie Francoise, l. i. c. 4.]

[Footnote 291: This is, perhaps, rather overstated. Most cities retained
the choice of their municipal officers: some retained valuable
privileges; Athens, for instance, in form was still a confederate city.
(Tac. Ann. ii. 53.) These privileges, indeed, depended entirely on the
arbitrary will of the emperor, who revoked or restored them according to
his caprice. See Walther Geschichte les Romischen Rechts, i. 324--an
admirable summary of the Roman constitutional history.--M.]

"Wheresoever the Roman conquers, he inhabits," is a very just
observation of Seneca, [30] confirmed by history and experience. The
natives of Italy, allured by pleasure or by interest, hastened to enjoy
the advantages of victory; and we may remark, that, about forty years
after the reduction of Asia, eighty thousand Romans were massacred in
one day, by the cruel orders of Mithridates. [31] These voluntary
exiles were engaged, for the most part, in the occupations of commerce,
agriculture, and the farm of the revenue. But after the legions were
rendered permanent by the emperors, the provinces were peopled by a race
of soldiers; and the veterans, whether they received the reward of their
service in land or in money, usually settled with their families in
the country, where they had honorably spent their youth. Throughout the
empire, but more particularly in the western parts, the most fertile
districts, and the most convenient situations, were reserved for the
establishment of colonies; some of which were of a civil, and others of
a military nature. In their manners and internal policy, the colonies
formed a perfect representation of their great parent; and they were
soon endeared to the natives by the ties of friendship and alliance,
they effectually diffused a reverence for the Roman name, and a desire,
which was seldom disappointed, of sharing, in due time, its honors and
advantages. [32] The municipal cities insensibly equalled the rank and
splendor of the colonies; and in the reign of Hadrian, it was disputed
which was the preferable condition, of those societies which had issued
from, or those which had been received into, the bosom of Rome. [33] The
right of Latium, as it was called, [331] conferred on the cities to which
it had been granted, a more partial favor. The magistrates only, at the
expiration of their office, assumed the quality of Roman citizens; but
as those offices were annual, in a few years they circulated round the
principal families. [34] Those of the provincials who were permitted to
bear arms in the legions; [35] those who exercised any civil employment;
all, in a word, who performed any public service, or displayed any
personal talents, were rewarded with a present, whose value was
continually diminished by the increasing liberality of the emperors. Yet
even, in the age of the Antonines, when the freedom of the city had
been bestowed on the greater number of their subjects, it was still
accompanied with very solid advantages. The bulk of the people acquired,
with that title, the benefit of the Roman laws, particularly in the
interesting articles of marriage, testaments, and inheritances; and the
road of fortune was open to those whose pretensions were seconded by
favor or merit. The grandsons of the Gauls, who had besieged Julius
Caesar in Alcsia, commanded legions, governed provinces, and were
admitted into the senate of Rome. [36] Their ambition, instead of
disturbing the tranquillity of the state, was intimately connected with
its safety and greatness.

[Footnote 30: Seneca in Consolat. ad Helviam, c. 6.]

[Footnote 31: Memnon apud Photium, (c. 33,) [c. 224, p. 231, ed Bekker.]
Valer. Maxim. ix. 2. Plutarch and Dion Cassius swell the massacre to
150,000 citizens; but I should esteem the smaller number to be more than
sufficient.]

[Footnote 32: Twenty-five colonies were settled in Spain, (see Plin.
Hist. Nat. iii. 3, 4; iv. 35;) and nine in Britain, of which London,
Colchester, Lincoln, Chester, Gloucester, and Bath still remain
considerable cities. (See Richard of Cirencester, p. 36, and Whittaker's
History of Manchester, l. i. c. 3.)]

[Footnote 33: Aul. Gel. Noctes Atticae, xvi 13. The Emperor Hadrian
expressed his surprise, that the cities of Utica, Gades, and Italica,
which already enjoyed the rights of Municipia, should solicit the title
of colonies. Their example, however, became fashionable, and the empire
was filled with honorary colonies. See Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum
Dissertat. xiii.]

[Footnote 331: The right of Latium conferred an
exemption from the government of the Roman praefect. Strabo states this
distinctly, l. iv. p. 295, edit. Caesar's. See also Walther, p. 233.--M]

[Footnote 34: Spanheim, Orbis Roman. c. 8, p. 62.]

[Footnote 35: Aristid. in Romae Encomio. tom. i. p. 218, edit. Jebb.]

[Footnote 36: Tacit. Annal. xi. 23, 24. Hist. iv. 74.]

So sensible were the Romans of the influence of language over national
manners, that it was their most serious care to extend, with the
progress of their arms, the use of the Latin tongue. [37] The ancient
dialects of Italy, the Sabine, the Etruscan, and the Venetian, sunk into
oblivion; but in the provinces, the east was less docile than the west
to the voice of its victorious preceptors. This obvious difference
marked the two portions of the empire with a distinction of colors,
which, though it was in some degree concealed during the meridian
splendor of prosperity, became gradually more visible, as the shades
of night descended upon the Roman world. The western countries
were civilized by the same hands which subdued them. As soon as the
barbarians were reconciled to obedience, their minds were open to any
new impressions of knowledge and politeness. The language of Virgil
and Cicero, though with some inevitable mixture of corruption, was so
universally adopted in Africa, Spain, Gaul Britain, and Pannonia, [38]
that the faint traces of the Punic or Celtic idioms were preserved
only in the mountains, or among the peasants. [39] Education and study
insensibly inspired the natives of those countries with the sentiments
of Romans; and Italy gave fashions, as well as laws, to her Latin
provincials. They solicited with more ardor, and obtained with more
facility, the freedom and honors of the state; supported the national
dignity in letters [40] and in arms; and at length, in the person of
Trajan, produced an emperor whom the Scipios would not have disowned for
their countryman. The situation of the Greeks was very different from
that of the barbarians. The former had been long since civilized and
corrupted. They had too much taste to relinquish their language, and
too much vanity to adopt any foreign institutions. Still preserving the
prejudices, after they had lost the virtues, of their ancestors, they
affected to despise the unpolished manners of the Roman conquerors,
whilst they were compelled to respect their superior wisdom and power.
[41] Nor was the influence of the Grecian language and sentiments
confined to the narrow limits of that once celebrated country. Their
empire, by the progress of colonies and conquest, had been diffused from
the Adriatic to the Euphrates and the Nile. Asia was covered with Greek
cities, and the long reign of the Macedonian kings had introduced a
silent revolution into Syria and Egypt. In their pompous courts, those
princes united the elegance of Athens with the luxury of the East, and
the example of the court was imitated, at an humble distance, by the
higher ranks of their subjects. Such was the general division of the
Roman empire into the Latin and Greek languages. To these we may add a
third distinction for the body of the natives in Syria, and especially
in Egypt, the use of their ancient dialects, by secluding them from the
commerce of mankind, checked the improvements of those barbarians. [42]
The slothful effeminacy of the former exposed them to the contempt,
the sullen ferociousness of the latter excited the aversion, of the
conquerors. [43] Those nations had submitted to the Roman power, but they
seldom desired or deserved the freedom of the city: and it was remarked,
that more than two hundred and thirty years elapsed after the ruin of
the Ptolemies, before an Egyptian was admitted into the senate of Rome.
[44]

[Footnote 37: See Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5. Augustin. de Civitate Dei,
xix 7 Lipsius de Pronunciatione Linguae Latinae, c. 3.]

[Footnote 38: Apuleius and Augustin will answer for Africa; Strabo
for Spain and Gaul; Tacitus, in the life of Agricola, for Britain; and
Velleius Paterculus, for Pannonia. To them we may add the language of
the Inscriptions. * Note: Mr. Hallam contests this assertion as regards
Britain. "Nor did the Romans ever establish their language--I know not
whether they wished to do so--in this island, as we perceive by that
stubborn British tongue which has survived two conquests." In his note,
Mr. Hallam examines the passage from Tacitus (Agric. xxi.) to which
Gibbon refers. It merely asserts the progress of Latin studies among the
higher orders. (Midd. Ages, iii. 314.) Probably it was a kind of court
language, and that of public affairs and prevailed in the Roman
colonies.--M.]

[Footnote 39: The Celtic was preserved in the mountains of Wales,
Cornwall, and Armorica. We may observe, that Apuleius reproaches an
African youth, who lived among the populace, with the use of the Punic;
whilst he had almost forgot Greek, and neither could nor would speak
Latin, (Apolog. p. 596.) The greater part of St. Austin's congregations
were strangers to the Punic.]

[Footnote 40: Spain alone produced Columella, the Senecas, Lucan,
Martial, and Quintilian.]

[Footnote 41: There is not, I believe, from Dionysius to Libanus, a
single Greek critic who mentions Virgil or Horace. They seem ignorant
that the Romans had any good writers.]

[Footnote 42: The curious reader may see in Dupin, (Bibliotheque
Ecclesiastique, tom. xix. p. 1, c. 8,) how much the use of the Syriac
and Egyptian languages was still preserved.]

[Footnote 43: See Juvenal, Sat. iii. and xv. Ammian. Marcellin. xxii.
16.]

[Footnote 44: Dion Cassius, l. lxxvii. p. 1275. The first instance
happened under the reign of Septimius Severus.]

It is a just though trite observation, that victorious Rome was herself
subdued by the arts of Greece. Those immortal writers who still command
the admiration of modern Europe, soon became the favorite object of
study and imitation in Italy and the western provinces. But the elegant
amusements of the Romans were not suffered to interfere with their sound
maxims of policy. Whilst they acknowledged the charms of the Greek, they
asserted the dignity of the Latin tongue, and the exclusive use of the
latter was inflexibly maintained in the administration of civil as well
as military government. [45] The two languages exercised at the same time
their separate jurisdiction throughout the empire: the former, as the
natural idiom of science; the latter, as the legal dialect of public
transactions. Those who united letters with business were equally
conversant with both; and it was almost impossible, in any province, to
find a Roman subject, of a liberal education, who was at once a stranger
to the Greek and to the Latin language.

[Footnote 45: See Valerius Maximus, l. ii. c. 2, n. 2. The emperor
Claudius disfranchised an eminent Grecian for not understanding Latin.
He was probably in some public office. Suetonius in Claud. c. 16. *
Note: Causes seem to have been pleaded, even in the senate, in both
languages. Val. Max. loc. cit. Dion. l. lvii. c. 15.--M]

It was by such institutions that the nations of the empire insensibly
melted away into the Roman name and people. But there still remained, in
the centre of every province and of every family, an unhappy condition
of men who endured the weight, without sharing the benefits, of society.
In the free states of antiquity, the domestic slaves were exposed to the
wanton rigor of despotism. The perfect settlement of the Roman empire
was preceded by ages of violence and rapine. The slaves consisted,
for the most part, of barbarian captives, [451] taken in thousands by the
chance of war, purchased at a vile price, [46] accustomed to a life
of independence, and impatient to break and to revenge their fetters.
Against such internal enemies, whose desperate insurrections had more
than once reduced the republic to the brink of destruction, [47] the most
severe [471] regulations, [48] and the most cruel treatment, seemed almost
justified by the great law of self-preservation. But when the principal
nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa were united under the laws of
one sovereign, the source of foreign supplies flowed with much less
abundance, and the Romans were reduced to the milder but more tedious
method of propagation. [481] In their numerous families, and particularly
in their country estates, they encouraged the marriage of their slaves.
[482] The sentiments of nature, the habits of education, and the possession
of a dependent species of property, contributed to alleviate the
hardships of servitude. [49] The existence of a slave became an object of
greater value, and though his happiness still depended on the temper
and circumstances of the master, the humanity of the latter, instead
of being restrained by fear, was encouraged by the sense of his own
interest. The progress of manners was accelerated by the virtue or
policy of the emperors; and by the edicts of Hadrian and the Antonines,
the protection of the laws was extended to the most abject part of
mankind. The jurisdiction of life and death over the slaves, a power
long exercised and often abused, was taken out of private hands, and
reserved to the magistrates alone. The subterraneous prisons were
abolished; and, upon a just complaint of intolerable treatment, the
injured slave obtained either his deliverance, or a less cruel master.
[50]

[Footnote 451: It was this which rendered the wars so sanguinary,
and the battles so obstinate. The immortal Robertson, in an excellent
discourse on the state of the world at the period of the establishment
of Christianity, has traced a picture of the melancholy effects of
slavery, in which we find all the depth of his views and the strength of
his mind. I shall oppose successively some passages to the reflections
of Gibbon. The reader will see, not without interest, the truths which
Gibbon appears to have mistaken or voluntarily neglected, developed by
one of the best of modern historians. It is important to call them to
mind here, in order to establish the facts and their consequences with
accuracy. I shall more than once have occasion to employ, for this
purpose, the discourse of Robertson. "Captives taken in war were, in all
probability, the first persons subjected to perpetual servitude; and,
when the necessities or luxury of mankind increased the demand for
slaves, every new war recruited their number, by reducing the vanquished
to that wretched condition. Hence proceeded the fierce and desperate
spirit with which wars were carried on among ancient nations. While
chains and slavery were the certain lot of the conquered, battles were
fought, and towns defended with a rage and obstinacy which nothing but
horror at such a fate could have inspired; but, putting an end to the
cruel institution of slavery, Christianity extended its mild influences
to the practice of war, and that barbarous art, softened by its humane
spirit, ceased to be so destructive. Secure, in every event, of personal
liberty, the resistance of the vanquished became less obstinate, and the
triumph of the victor less cruel. Thus humanity was introduced into the
exercise of war, with which it appears to be almost incompatible; and it
is to the merciful maxims of Christianity, much more than to any other
cause, that we must ascribe the little ferocity and bloodshed which
accompany modern victories."--G.]

[Footnote 46: In the camp of Lucullus, an ox sold for a drachma, and a
slave for four drachmae, or about three shillings. Plutarch. in Lucull.
p. 580. * Note: Above 100,000 prisoners were taken in the Jewish
war.--G. Hist. of Jews, iii. 71. According to a tradition preserved by S.
Jerom, after the insurrection in the time of Hadrian, they were sold as
cheap as horse. Ibid. 124. Compare Blair on Roman Slavery, p. 19.--M.,
and Dureau de la blalle, Economie Politique des Romains, l. i. c. 15.
But I cannot think that this writer has made out his case as to the
common price of an agricultural slave being from 2000 to 2500 francs,
(80l. to 100l.) He has overlooked the passages which show the ordinary
prices, (i. e. Hor. Sat. ii. vii. 45,) and argued from extraordinary and
exceptional cases.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 47: Diodorus Siculus in Eclog. Hist. l. xxxiv. and xxxvi.
Florus, iii. 19, 20.]

[Footnote 471: The following is the example: we shall see whether the word
"severe" is here in its place. "At the time in which L. Domitius was
praetor in Sicily, a slave killed a wild boar of extraordinary size. The
praetor, struck by the dexterity and courage of the man, desired to see
him. The poor wretch, highly gratified with the distinction, came to
present himself before the praetor, in hopes, no doubt, of praise and
reward; but Domitius, on learning that he had only a javelin to attack
and kill the boar, ordered him to be instantly crucified, under the
barbarous pretext that the law prohibited the use of this weapon, as
of all others, to slaves." Perhaps the cruelty of Domitius is less
astonishing than the indifference with which the Roman orator relates
this circumstance, which affects him so little that he thus expresses
himself: "Durum hoc fortasse videatur, neque ego in ullam partem
disputo." "This may appear harsh, nor do I give any opinion on the
subject." And it is the same orator who exclaims in the same oration,
"Facinus est cruciare civem Romanum; scelus verberare; prope parricidium
necare: quid dicam in crucem tollere?" "It is a crime to imprison a
Roman citizen; wickedness to scourge; next to parricide to put to death,
what shall I call it to crucify?"

In general, this passage of Gibbon on slavery, is full, not only of
blamable indifference, but of an exaggeration of impartiality which
resembles dishonesty. He endeavors to extenuate all that is appalling
in the condition and treatment of the slaves; he would make us consider
those cruelties as possibly "justified by necessity." He then describes,
with minute accuracy, the slightest mitigations of their deplorable
condition; he attributes to the virtue or the policy of the emperors the
progressive amelioration in the lot of the slaves; and he passes over
in silence the most influential cause, that which, after rendering the
slaves less miserable, has contributed at length entirely to enfranchise
them from their sufferings and their chains,--Christianity. It would be
easy to accumulate the most frightful, the most agonizing details, of
the manner in which the Romans treated their slaves; whole works have
been devoted to the description. I content myself with referring to
them. Some reflections of Robertson, taken from the discourse already
quoted, will make us feel that Gibbon, in tracing the mitigation of the
condition of the slaves, up to a period little later than that which
witnessed the establishment of Christianity in the world, could not have
avoided the acknowledgment of the influence of that beneficent cause, if
he had not already determined not to speak of it.

"Upon establishing despotic government in the Roman empire, domestic
tyranny rose, in a short time, to an astonishing height. In that rank
soil, every vice, which power nourishes in the great, or oppression
engenders in the mean, thrived and grew up apace. * * * It is not the
authority of any single detached precept in the gospel, but the spirit
and genius of the Christian religion, more powerful than any particular
command, which hath abolished the practice of slavery throughout the
world. The temper which Christianity inspired was mild and gentle; and
the doctrines it taught added such dignity and lustre to human nature,
as rescued it from the dishonorable servitude into which it was sunk."

It is in vain, then, that Gibbon pretends to attribute solely to the
desire of keeping up the number of slaves, the milder conduct which the
Romans began to adopt in their favor at the time of the emperors. This
cause had hitherto acted in an opposite direction; how came it on
a sudden to have a different influence? "The masters," he says,
"encouraged the marriage of their slaves; * * * the sentiments of
nature, the habits of education, contributed to alleviate the hardships
of servitude." The children of slaves were the property of their master,
who could dispose of or alienate them like the rest of his property. Is
it in such a situation, with such notions, that the sentiments of nature
unfold themselves, or habits of education become mild and peaceful? We
must not attribute to causes inadequate or altogether without force,
effects which require to explain them a reference to more influential
causes; and even if these slighter causes had in effect a manifest
influence, we must not forget that they are themselves the effect of
a primary, a higher, and more extensive cause, which, in giving to the
mind and to the character a more disinterested and more humane bias,
disposed men to second or themselves to advance, by their conduct,
and by the change of manners, the happy results which it tended to
produce.--G.

I have retained the whole of M. Guizot's note, though, in his zeal for
the invaluable blessings of freedom and Christianity, he has done Gibbon
injustice. The condition of the slaves was undoubtedly improved under
the emperors. What a great authority has said, "The condition of a slave
is better under an arbitrary than under a free government," (Smith's
Wealth of Nations, iv. 7,) is, I believe, supported by the history of
all ages and nations. The protecting edicts of Hadrian and the Antonines
are historical facts, and can as little be attributed to the influence
of Christianity, as the milder language of heathen writers, of Seneca,
(particularly Ep. 47,) of Pliny, and of Plutarch. The latter influence
of Christianity is admitted by Gibbon himself. The subject of Roman
slavery has recently been investigated with great diligence in a very
modest but valuable volume, by Wm. Blair, Esq., Edin. 1833. May we be
permitted, while on the subject, to refer to the most splendid
passage extant of Mr. Pitt's eloquence, the description of the Roman
slave-dealer. on the shores of Britain, condemning the island to
irreclaimable barbarism, as a perpetual and prolific nursery of slaves?
Speeches, vol. ii. p. 80.

Gibbon, it should be added, was one of the first and most consistent
opponents of the African slave-trade. (See Hist. ch. xxv. and Letters to
Lor Sheffield, Misc. Works)--M.]

[Footnote 48: See a remarkable instance of severity in Cicero in Verrem,
v. 3.]

[Footnote 481: An active slave-trade, which was carried on in many
quarters, particularly the Euxine, the eastern provinces, the coast of
Africa, and British must be taken into the account. Blair, 23--32.--M.]

[Footnote 482: The Romans, as well in the first ages of the republic as
later, allowed to their slaves a kind of marriage, (contubernium: )
notwithstanding this, luxury made a greater number of slaves in demand.
The increase in their population was not sufficient, and recourse was
had to the purchase of slaves, which was made even in the provinces of
the East subject to the Romans. It is, moreover, known that slavery is a
state little favorable to population. (See Hume's Essay, and Malthus on
population, i. 334.--G.) The testimony of Appian (B.C. l. i. c. 7)
is decisive in favor of the rapid multiplication of the agricultural
slaves; it is confirmed by the numbers engaged in the servile wars.
Compare also Blair, p. 119; likewise Columella l. viii.--M.]

[Footnote 49: See in Gruter, and the other collectors, a great number
of inscriptions addressed by slaves to their wives, children,
fellow-servants, masters, &c. They are all most probably of the Imperial
age.]

[Footnote 50: See the Augustan History, and a Dissertation of M.
de Burigny, in the xxxvth volume of the Academy of Inscriptions, upon
the Roman slaves.]

Hope, the best comfort of our imperfect condition, was not denied to the
Roman slave; and if he had any opportunity of rendering himself either
useful or agreeable, he might very naturally expect that the diligence
and fidelity of a few years would be rewarded with the inestimable gift
of freedom. The benevolence of the master was so frequently prompted
by the meaner suggestions of vanity and avarice, that the laws found
it more necessary to restrain than to encourage a profuse and
undistinguishing liberality, which might degenerate into a very
dangerous abuse. [51] It was a maxim of ancient jurisprudence, that a
slave had not any country of his own; he acquired with his liberty an
admission into the political society of which his patron was a member.
The consequences of this maxim would have prostituted the privileges
of the Roman city to a mean and promiscuous multitude. Some seasonable
exceptions were therefore provided; and the honorable distinction
was confined to such slaves only as, for just causes, and with the
approbation of the magistrate, should receive a solemn and legal
manumission. Even these chosen freedmen obtained no more than the
private rights of citizens, and were rigorously excluded from civil or
military honors. Whatever might be the merit or fortune of their sons,
they likewise were esteemed unworthy of a seat in the senate; nor were
the traces of a servile origin allowed to be completely obliterated till
the third or fourth generation. [52] Without destroying the distinction
of ranks, a distant prospect of freedom and honors was presented, even
to those whom pride and prejudice almost disdained to number among the
human species.

[Footnote 51: See another Dissertation of M. de Burigny,
in the xxxviith volume, on the Roman freedmen.]

[Footnote 52: Spanheim, Orbis Roman. l. i. c. 16, p. 124, &c.] It was
once proposed to discriminate the slaves by a peculiar habit; but it was
justly apprehended that there might be some danger in acquainting
them with their own numbers. [53] Without interpreting, in their utmost
strictness, the liberal appellations of legions and myriads, [54] we may
venture to pronounce, that the proportion of slaves, who were valued
as property, was more considerable than that of servants, who can be
computed only as an expense. [55] The youths of a promising genius were
instructed in the arts and sciences, and their price was ascertained
by the degree of their skill and talents. [56] Almost every profession,
either liberal [57] or mechanical, might be found in the household of an
opulent senator. The ministers of pomp and sensuality were multiplied
beyond the conception of modern luxury. [58] It was more for the interest
of the merchant or manufacturer to purchase, than to hire his workmen;
and in the country, slaves were employed as the cheapest and
most laborious instruments of agriculture. To confirm the general
observation, and to display the multitude of slaves, we might allege a
variety of particular instances. It was discovered, on a very melancholy
occasion, that four hundred slaves were maintained in a single palace of
Rome. [59] The same number of four hundred belonged to an estate which an
African widow, of a very private condition, resigned to her son, whilst
she reserved for herself a much larger share of her property. [60] A
freedman, under the name of Augustus, though his fortune had suffered
great losses in the civil wars, left behind him three thousand six
hundred yoke of oxen, two hundred and fifty thousand head of smaller
cattle, and what was almost included in the description of cattle, four
thousand one hundred and sixteen slaves. [61]

[Footnote 53: Seneca de Clementia, l. i. c. 24. The original is much
stronger, "Quantum periculum immineret si servi nostri numerare nos
coepissent."]

[Footnote 54: See Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii.) and Athenaeus
(Deipnosophist. l. vi. p. 272.) The latter boldly asserts, that he knew
very many Romans who possessed, not for use, but ostentation, ten and
even twenty thousand slaves.]

[Footnote 55: In Paris there are not more than 43,000 domestics of every
sort, and not a twelfth part of the inhabitants. Messange, Recherches
sui la Population, p. 186.]

[Footnote 56: A learned slave sold for many hundred pounds sterling:
Atticus always bred and taught them himself. Cornel. Nepos in Vit. c.
13, [on the prices of slaves. Blair, 149.]--M.]

[Footnote 57: Many of the Roman physicians were slaves. See Dr.
Middleton's Dissertation and Defence.]

[Footnote 58: Their ranks and offices are very copiously enumerated by
Pignorius de Servis.]

[Footnote 59: Tacit. Annal. xiv. 43. They were all executed for not
preventing their master's murder. * Note: The remarkable speech of
Cassius shows the proud feelings of the Roman aristocracy on this
subject.--M]

[Footnote 60: Apuleius in Apolog. p. 548. edit. Delphin]

[Footnote 61: Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. 47.]

The number of subjects who acknowledged the laws of Rome, of citizens,
of provincials, and of slaves, cannot now be fixed with such a degree
of accuracy, as the importance of the object would deserve. We are
informed, that when the Emperor Claudius exercised the office of censor,
he took an account of six millions nine hundred and forty-five thousand
Roman citizens, who, with the proportion of women and children, must
have amounted to about twenty millions of souls. The multitude of
subjects of an inferior rank was uncertain and fluctuating. But, after
weighing with attention every circumstance which could influence the
balance, it seems probable that there existed, in the time of Claudius,
about twice as many provincials as there were citizens, of either sex,
and of every age; and that the slaves were at least equal in number to
the free inhabitants of the Roman world. [611] The total amount of this
imperfect calculation would rise to about one hundred and twenty
millions of persons; a degree of population which possibly exceeds that
of modern Europe, [62] and forms the most numerous society that has ever
been united under the same system of government.

[Footnote 611]: According to Robertson, there were twice as many slaves
as free citizens.--G. Mr. Blair (p. 15) estimates three slaves to one
freeman, between the conquest of Greece, B.C. 146, and the reign of
Alexander Severus, A. D. 222, 235. The proportion was probably larger
in Italy than in the provinces.--M. On the other hand, Zumpt, in his
Dissertation quoted below, (p. 86,) asserts it to be a gross error
in Gibbon to reckon the number of slaves equal to that of the free
population. The luxury and magnificence of the great, (he observes,) at
the commencement of the empire, must not be taken as the groundwork of
calculations for the whole Roman world. "The agricultural laborer, and
the artisan, in Spain, Gaul, Britain, Syria, and Egypt, maintained
himself, as in the present day, by his own labor and that of his
household, without possessing a single slave." The latter part of my
note was intended to suggest this consideration. Yet so completely was
slavery rooted in the social system, both in the east and the west, that
in the great diffusion of wealth at this time, every one, I doubt not,
who could afford a domestic slave, kept one; and generally, the number
of slaves was in proportion to the wealth. I do not believe that the
cultivation of the soil by slaves was confined to Italy; the holders
of large estates in the provinces would probably, either from choice
or necessity, adopt the same mode of cultivation. The latifundia, says
Pliny, had ruined Italy, and had begun to ruin the provinces. Slaves
were no doubt employed in agricultural labor to a great extent in
Sicily, and were the estates of those six enormous landholders who
were said to have possessed the whole province of Africa, cultivated
altogether by free coloni? Whatever may have been the case in the rural
districts, in the towns and cities the household duties were almost
entirely discharged by slaves, and vast numbers belonged to the public
establishments. I do not, however, differ so far from Zumpt, and from
M. Dureau de la Malle, as to adopt the higher and bolder estimate of
Robertson and Mr. Blair, rather than the more cautious suggestions of
Gibbon. I would reduce rather than increase the proportion of the slave
population. The very ingenious and elaborate calculations of the French
writer, by which he deduces the amount of the population from the
produce and consumption of corn in Italy, appear to me neither precise
nor satisfactory bases for such complicated political arithmetic.
I am least satisfied with his views as to the population of the city
of Rome; but this point will be more fitly reserved for a note on the
thirty-first chapter of Gibbon. The work, however, of M. Dureau de la
Malle is very curious and full on some of the minuter points of Roman
statistics.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 62: Compute twenty millions in France, twenty-two in Germany,
four in Hungary, ten in Italy with its islands, eight in Great Britain
and Ireland, eight in Spain and Portugal, ten or twelve in the European
Russia, six in Poland, six in Greece and Turkey, four in Sweden, three
in Denmark and Norway, four in the Low Countries. The whole would
amount to one hundred and five, or one hundred and seven millions. See
Voltaire, de l'Histoire Generale. * Note: The present population of
Europe is estimated at 227,700,000. Malts Bran, Geogr. Trans edit. 1832
See details in the different volumes Another authority, (Almanach de
Gotha,) quoted in a recent English publication, gives the following
details:--

France, 32,897,521 Germany, (including Hungary, Prussian and Austrian
Poland,) 56,136,213 Italy, 20,548,616 Great Britain and Ireland,
24,062,947 Spain and Portugal, 13,953,959. 3,144,000 Russia, including
Poland, 44,220,600 Cracow, 128,480 Turkey, (including Pachalic of
Dschesair,) 9,545,300 Greece, 637,700 Ionian Islands, 208,100 Sweden and
Norway, 3,914,963 Denmark, 2,012,998 Belgium, 3,533,538 Holland,
2,444,550 Switzerland, 985,000. Total, 219,344,116

Since the publication of my first annotated edition of Gibbon, the
subject of the population of the Roman empire has been investigated by
two writers of great industry and learning; Mons. Dureau de la Malle, in
his Economie Politique des Romains, liv. ii. c. 1. to 8, and M. Zumpt,
in a dissertation printed in the Transactions of the Berlin Academy,
1840. M. Dureau de la Malle confines his inquiry almost entirely to
the city of Rome, and Roman Italy. Zumpt examines at greater length
the axiom, which he supposes to have been assumed by Gibbon as
unquestionable, "that Italy and the Roman world was never so populous
as in the time of the Antonines." Though this probably was Gibbon's
opinion, he has not stated it so peremptorily as asserted by Mr. Zumpt.
It had before been expressly laid down by Hume, and his statement was
controverted by Wallace and by Malthus. Gibbon says (p. 84) that there
is no reason to believe the country (of Italy) less populous in the age
of the Antonines, than in that of Romulus; and Zumpt acknowledges that
we have no satisfactory knowledge of the state of Italy at that early
age. Zumpt, in my opinion with some reason, takes the period just before
the first Punic war, as that in which Roman Italy (all south of the
Rubicon) was most populous. From that time, the numbers began to
diminish, at first from the enormous waste of life out of the free
population in the foreign, and afterwards in the civil wars; from the
cultivation of the soil by slaves; towards the close of the republic,
from the repugnance to marriage, which resisted alike the dread of legal
punishment and the offer of legal immunity and privilege; and from the
depravity of manners, which interfered with the procreation, the birth,
and the rearing of children. The arguments and the authorities of Zumpt
are equally conclusive as to the decline of population in Greece.
Still the details, which he himself adduces as to the prosperity and
populousness of Asia Minor, and the whole of the Roman East, with the
advancement of the European provinces, especially Gaul, Spain, and
Britain, in civilization, and therefore in populousness, (for I have
no confidence in the vast numbers sometimes assigned to the barbarous
inhabitants of these countries,) may, I think, fairly compensate for any
deduction to be made from Gibbon's general estimate on account of Greece
and Italy. Gibbon himself acknowledges his own estimate to be vague and
conjectural; and I may venture to recommend the dissertation of Zumpt as
deserving respectful consideration.--M 1815.]




