## Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.--Part IV.

The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was intimately
connected with the second coming of Christ. As the works of the creation
had been finished in six days, their duration in their present state,
according to a tradition which was attributed to the prophet Elijah, was
fixed to six thousand years. [61] By the same analogy it was inferred,
that this long period of labor and contention, which was now almost
elapsed, [62] would be succeeded by a joyful Sabbath of a thousand years;
and that Christ, with the triumphant band of the saints and the elect
who had escaped death, or who had been miraculously revived, would
reign upon earth till the time appointed for the last and general
resurrection. So pleasing was this hope to the mind of believers,
that the New Jerusalem, the seat of this blissful kingdom, was quickly
adorned with all the gayest colors of the imagination. A felicity
consisting only of pure and spiritual pleasure would have appeared too
refined for its inhabitants, who were still supposed to possess their
human nature and senses. A garden of Eden, with the amusements of the
pastoral life, was no longer suited to the advanced state of society
which prevailed under the Roman empire. A city was therefore erected of
gold and precious stones, and a supernatural plenty of corn and wine
was bestowed on the adjacent territory; in the free enjoyment of whose
spontaneous productions, the happy and benevolent people was never to be
restrained by any jealous laws of exclusive property. [63] The assurance
of such a Millennium was carefully inculcated by a succession of fathers
from Justin Martyr, [64] and Irenaeus, who conversed with the immediate
disciples of the apostles, down to Lactantius, who was preceptor to the
son of Constantine. [65] Though it might not be universally received, it
appears to have been the reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers;
and it seems so well adapted to the desires and apprehensions of
mankind, that it must have contributed in a very considerable degree to
the progress of the Christian faith. But when the edifice of the church
was almost completed, the temporary support was laid aside. The
doctrine of Christ's reign upon earth was at first treated as a profound
allegory, was considered by degrees as a doubtful and useless opinion,
and was at length rejected as the absurd invention of heresy and
fanaticism. [66] A mysterious prophecy, which still forms a part of the
sacred canon, but which was thought to favor the exploded sentiment, has
very narrowly escaped the proscription of the church. [67]

[Footnote 61: See Burnet's Sacred Theory, part iii. c. 5. This tradition
may be traced as high as the the author of Epistle of Barnabas, who
wrote in the first century, and who seems to have been half a Jew. *
Note: In fact it is purely Jewish. See Mosheim, De Reb. Christ. ii. 8.
Lightfoot's Works, 8vo. edit. vol. iii. p. 37. Bertholdt, Christologia
Judaeorum ch. 38.--M.]

[Footnote 62: The primitive church of Antioch computed almost 6000 years
from the creation of the world to the birth of Christ. Africanus,
Lactantius, and the Greek church, have reduced that number to 5500, and
Eusebius has contented himself with 5200 years. These calculations were
formed on the Septuagint, which was universally received during the six
first centuries. The authority of the vulgate and of the Hebrew text has
determined the moderns, Protestants as well as Catholics, to prefer a
period of about 4000 years; though, in the study of profane antiquity,
they often find themselves straitened by those narrow limits. * Note:
Most of the more learned modern English Protestants, Dr. Hales, Mr.
Faber, Dr. Russel, as well as the Continental writers, adopt the larger
chronology. There is little doubt that the narrower system was framed by
the Jews of Tiberias; it was clearly neither that of St. Paul, nor of
Josephus, nor of the Samaritan Text. It is greatly to be regretted that
the chronology of the earlier Scriptures should ever have been made a
religious question--M.]

[Footnote 63: Most of these pictures were borrowed from a
misrepresentation of Isaiah, Daniel, and the Apocalypse. One of the
grossest images may be found in Irenaeus, (l. v. p. 455,) the disciple
of Papias, who had seen the apostle St. John.]

[Footnote 64: See the second dialogue of Justin with Triphon, and
the seventh book of Lactantius. It is unnecessary to allege all the
intermediate fathers, as the fact is not disputed. Yet the curious
reader may consult Daille de Uus Patrum, l. ii. c. 4.]

[Footnote 65: The testimony of Justin of his own faith and that of his
orthodox brethren, in the doctrine of a Millennium, is delivered in the
clearest and most solemn manner, (Dialog. cum Tryphonte Jud. p. 177,
178, edit. Benedictin.) If in the beginning of this important passage
there is any thing like an inconsistency, we may impute it, as we think
proper, either to the author or to his transcribers. * Note: The
Millenium is described in what once stood as the XLIst Article of the
English Church (see Collier, Eccles. Hist., for Articles of Edw. VI.) as
"a fable of Jewish dotage." The whole of these gross and earthly images
may be traced in the works which treat on the Jewish traditions, in
Lightfoot, Schoetgen, and Eisenmenger; "Das enthdeckte Judenthum" t. ii
809; and briefly in Bertholdt, i. c. 38, 39.--M.]

[Footnote 66: Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 223, tom.
ii. p. 366, and Mosheim, p. 720; though the latter of these learned
divines is not altogether candid on this occasion.]

[Footnote 67: In the council of Laodicea, (about the year 360,) the
Apocalypse was tacitly excluded from the sacred canon, by the same
churches of Asia to which it is addressed; and we may learn from the
complaint of Sulpicius Severus, that their sentence had been ratified by
the greater number of Christians of his time. From what causes then is
the Apocalypse at present so generally received by the Greek, the Roman,
and the Protestant churches? The following ones may be assigned. 1. The
Greeks were subdued by the authority of an impostor, who, in the sixth
century, assumed the character of Dionysius the Areopagite. 2. A just
apprehension that the grammarians might become more important than
the theologians, engaged the council of Trent to fix the seal of their
infallibility on all the books of Scripture contained in the Latin
Vulgate, in the number of which the Apocalypse was fortunately included.
(Fr. Paolo, Istoria del Concilio Tridentino, l. ii.) 3. The advantage
of turning those mysterious prophecies against the See of Rome, inspired
the Protestants with uncommon veneration for so useful an ally. See the
ingenious and elegant discourses of the present bishop of Litchfield on
that unpromising subject. * Note: The exclusion of the Apocalypse is
not improbably assigned to its obvious unfitness to be read in
churches. It is to be feared that a history of the interpretation of the
Apocalypse would not give a very favorable view either of the wisdom
or the charity of the successive ages of Christianity. Wetstein's
interpretation, differently modified, is adopted by most Continental
scholars.--M.]

Whilst the happiness and glory of a temporal reign were promised to the
disciples of Christ, the most dreadful calamities were denounced against
an unbelieving world. The edification of a new Jerusalem was to advance
by equal steps with the destruction of the mystic Babylon; and as
long as the emperors who reigned before Constantine persisted in the
profession of idolatry, the epithet of babylon was applied to the city
and to the empire of Rome. A regular series was prepared of all the
moral and physical evils which can afflict a flourishing nation;
intestine discord, and the invasion of the fiercest barbarians from
the unknown regions of the North; pestilence and famine, comets and
eclipses, earthquakes and inundations. [68] All these were only so many
preparatory and alarming signs of the great catastrophe of Rome, when
the country of the Scipios and Caesars should be consumed by a flame
from Heaven, and the city of the seven hills, with her palaces, her
temples, and her triumphal arches, should be buried in a vast lake of
fire and brimstone. It might, however, afford some consolation to Roman
vanity, that the period of their empire would be that of the world
itself; which, as it had once perished by the element of water, was
destined to experience a second and a speedy destruction from the
element of fire. In the opinion of a general conflagration, the faith of
the Christian very happily coincided with the tradition of the East,
the philosophy of the Stoics, and the analogy of Nature; and even the
country, which, from religious motives, had been chosen for the origin
and principal scene of the conflagration, was the best adapted for that
purpose by natural and physical causes; by its deep caverns, beds of
sulphur, and numero is volcanoes, of which those of Aetna, of Vesuvius,
and of Lipari, exhibit a very imperfect representation. The calmest
and most intrepid sceptic could not refuse to acknowledge that the
destruction of the present system of the world by fire, was in itself
extremely probable. The Christian, who founded his belief much less on
the fallacious arguments of reason than on the authority of tradition
and the interpretation of Scripture, expected it with terror and
confidence as a certain and approaching event; and as his mind was
perpetually filled with the solemn idea, he considered every disaster
that happened to the empire as an infallible symptom of an expiring
world. [69]

[Footnote 68: Lactantius (Institut. Divin. vii. 15, &c.) relates the
dismal talk of futurity with great spirit and eloquence. * Note:
Lactantius had a notion of a great Asiatic empire, which was previously
to rise on the ruins of the Roman: quod Romanum nomen animus dicere, sed
dicam. quia futurum est tolletur de terra, et impere. Asiam
revertetur.--M.]

[Footnote 69: On this subject every reader of taste will be entertained
with the third part of Burnet's Sacred Theory. He blends philosophy,
Scripture, and tradition, into one magnificent system; in the
description of which he displays a strength of fancy not inferior
to that of Milton himself.]

The condemnation of the wisest and most
virtuous of the Pagans, on account of their ignorance or disbelief of
the divine truth, seems to offend the reason and the humanity of the
present age. [70] But the primitive church, whose faith was of a much
firmer consistence, delivered over, without hesitation, to eternal
torture, the far greater part of the human species. A charitable hope
might perhaps be indulged in favor of Socrates, or some other sages
of antiquity, who had consulted the light of reason before that of the
gospel had arisen. [71] But it was unanimously affirmed, that those who,
since the birth or the death of Christ, had obstinately persisted in the
worship of the daemons, neither deserved nor could expect a pardon from
the irritated justice of the Deity. These rigid sentiments, which had
been unknown to the ancient world, appear to have infused a spirit of
bitterness into a system of love and harmony. The ties of blood and
friendship were frequently torn asunder by the difference of religious
faith; and the Christians, who, in this world, found themselves
oppressed by the power of the Pagans, were sometimes seduced by
resentment and spiritual pride to delight in the prospect of their
future triumph. "You are fond of spectacles," exclaims the stern
Tertullian; "expect the greatest of all spectacles, the last and eternal
judgment of the universe. How shall I admire, how laugh, how rejoice,
how exult, when I behold so many proud monarchs, so many fancied gods,
groaning in the lowest abyss of darkness; so many magistrates, who
persecuted the name of the Lord, liquefying in fiercer fires than they
ever kindled against the Christians; so many sage philosophers blushing
in red-hot flames with their deluded scholars; so many celebrated poets
trembling before the tribunal, not of Minos, but of Christ; so many
tragedians, more tuneful in the expression of their own sufferings; so
many dancers."

[711] But the humanity of the reader will permit me to draw a veil over the
rest of this infernal description, which the zealous African pursues in
a long variety of affected and unfeeling witticisms. [72]

[Footnote 70: And yet whatever may be the language of
individuals, it is still the public doctrine of all the Christian
churches; nor can even our own refuse to admit the conclusions which
must be drawn from the viiith and the xviiith of her Articles. The
Jansenists, who have so diligently studied the works of the fathers,
maintain this sentiment with distinguished zeal; and the learned M. de
Tillemont never dismisses a virtuous emperor without pronouncing his
damnation. Zuinglius is perhaps the only leader of a party who has
ever adopted the milder sentiment, and he gave no less offence to the
Lutherans than to the Catholics. See Bossuet, Histoire des Variations
des Eglises Protestantes, l. ii. c. 19--22.]

[Footnote 71: Justin and Clemens of Alexandria allow that some of
the philosophers were instructed by the Logos; confounding its double
signification of the human reason, and of the Divine Word.]

[Footnote 711: This translation is not exact: the first sentence is imperfect.
Tertullian says, Ille dies nationibus insperatus, ille derisus, cum
tanta sacculi vetustas et tot ejus nativitates uno igne haurientur.
The text does not authorize the exaggerated expressions, so many
magistrates, so many sago philosophers, so many poets, &c.; but simply
magistrates, philosophers, poets.--G. --It is not clear that Gibbon's
version or paraphrase is incorrect: Tertullian writes, tot tantosque
reges item praesides, &c.--M.]

[Footnote 72: Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 30. In order to ascertain
the degree of authority which the zealous African had acquired it may be
sufficient to allege the testimony of Cyprian, the doctor and guide of
all the western churches. (See Prudent. Hym. xiii. 100.) As often as he
applied himself to his daily study of the writings of Tertullian, he was
accustomed to say, "Da mihi magistrum, Give me my master." (Hieronym. de
Viris Illustribus, tom. i. p. 284.)]

[Footnote 72: The object of Tertullian's vehemence in his Treatise, was
to keep the Christians away from the secular games celebrated by the
Emperor Severus: It has not prevented him from showing himself in other
places full of benevolence and charity towards unbelievers: the spirit
of the gospel has sometimes prevailed over the violence of human
passions: Qui ergo putaveris nihil nos de salute Caesaris curare (he
says in his Apology) inspice Dei voces, literas nostras. Scitote ex
illis praeceptum esse nobis ad redudantionem, benignitates etiam pro
inimicis Deum orare, et pro persecutoribus cona precari. Sed etiam
nominatim atque manifeste orate inquit (Christus) pro regibus et pro
principibus et potestatibus ut omnia sint tranquilla vobis Tert. Apol.
c. 31.--G. ----It would be wiser for Christianity, retreating upon its
genuine records in the New Testament, to disclaim this fierce African,
than to identify itself with his furious invectives by unsatisfactory
apologies for their unchristian fanaticism.--M.]

Doubtless there were many among the primitive Christians of a temper
more suitable to the meekness and charity of their profession. There
were many who felt a sincere compassion for the danger of their friends
and countrymen, and who exerted the most benevolent zeal to save them
from the impending destruction.

The careless Polytheist, assailed by new and unexpected terrors, against
which neither his priests nor his philosophers could afford him any
certain protection, was very frequently terrified and subdued by the
menace of eternal tortures. His fears might assist the progress of his
faith and reason; and if he could once persuade himself to suspect that
the Christian religion might possibly be true, it became an easy task to
convince him that it was the safest and most prudent party that he could
possibly embrace.

III. The supernatural gifts, which even in this life were ascribed to
the Christians above the rest of mankind, must have conduced to their
own comfort, and very frequently to the conviction of infidels. Besides
the occasional prodigies, which might sometimes be effected by the
immediate interposition of the Deity when he suspended the laws of
Nature for the service of religion, the Christian church, from the
time of the apostles and their first disciples, [73] has claimed an
uninterrupted succession of miraculous powers, the gift of tongues, of
vision, and of prophecy, the power of expelling daemons, of healing the
sick, and of raising the dead. The knowledge of foreign languages
was frequently communicated to the contemporaries of Irenaeus, though
Irenaeus himself was left to struggle with the difficulties of a
barbarous dialect, whilst he preached the gospel to the natives of Gaul.
[74] The divine inspiration, whether it was conveyed in the form of a
waking or of a sleeping vision, is described as a favor very liberally
bestowed on all ranks of the faithful, on women as on elders, on boys as
well as upon bishops. When their devout minds were sufficiently prepared
by a course of prayer, of fasting, and of vigils, to receive the
extraordinary impulse, they were transported out of their senses, and
delivered in ecstasy what was inspired, being mere organs of the Holy
Spirit, just as a pipe or flute is of him who blows into it. [75] We may
add, that the design of these visions was, for the most part, either to
disclose the future history, or to guide the present administration,
of the church. The expulsion of the daemons from the bodies of those
unhappy persons whom they had been permitted to torment, was considered
as a signal though ordinary triumph of religion, and is repeatedly
alleged by the ancient apoligists, as the most convincing evidence of
the truth of Christianity. The awful ceremony was usually performed in a
public manner, and in the presence of a great number of spectators;
the patient was relieved by the power or skill of the exorcist, and the
vanquished daemon was heard to confess that he was one of the fabled
gods of antiquity, who had impiously usurped the adoration of mankind.
[76] But the miraculous cure of diseases of the most inveterate or
even preternatural kind, can no longer occasion any surprise, when we
recollect, that in the days of Iranaeus, about the end of the second
century, the resurrection of the dead was very far from being esteemed
an uncommon event; that the miracle was frequently performed on
necessary occasions, by great fasting and the joint supplication of the
church of the place, and that the persons thus restored to their prayers
had lived afterwards among them many years. [77] At such a period, when
faith could boast of so many wonderful victories over death, it seems
difficult to account for the scepticism of those philosophers, who still
rejected and derided the doctrine of the resurrection. A noble Grecian
had rested on this important ground the whole controversy, and promised
Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, that if he could be gratified with the
sight of a single person who had been actually raised from the dead,
he would immediately embrace the Christian religion. It is somewhat
remarkable, that the prelate of the first eastern church, however
anxious for the conversion of his friend, thought proper to decline this
fair and reasonable challenge. [78]

[Footnote 73: Notwithstanding the evasions of Dr. Middleton, it is
impossible to overlook the clear traces of visions and inspiration,
which may be found in the apostolic fathers. * Note: Gibbon should have
noticed the distinct and remarkable passage from Chrysostom, quoted by
Middleton, (Works, vol. i. p. 105,) in which he affirms the long
discontinuance of miracles as a notorious fact.--M.]

[Footnote 74: Irenaeus adv. Haeres. Proem. p.3 Dr. Middleton (Free
Inquiry, p. 96, &c.) observes, that as this pretension of all others was
the most difficult to support by art, it was the soonest given up. The
observation suits his hypothesis. * Note: This passage of Irenaeus
contains no allusion to the gift of tongues; it is merely an apology for
a rude and unpolished Greek style, which could not be expected from one
who passed his life in a remote and barbarous province, and was
continually obliged to speak the Celtic language.--M. Note: Except in
the life of Pachomius, an Egyptian monk of the fourth century. (see
Jortin, Ecc. Hist. i. p. 368, edit. 1805,) and the latter (not earlier)
lives of Xavier, there is no claim laid to the gift of tongues since the
time of Irenaeus; and of this claim, Xavier's own letters are profoundly
silent. See Douglas's Criterion, p. 76 edit. 1807.--M.]

[Footnote 75: Athenagoras in Legatione. Justin Martyr, Cohort. ad Gentes
Tertullian advers. Marcionit. l. iv. These descriptions are not
very unlike the prophetic fury, for which Cicero (de Divinat.ii. 54)
expresses so little reverence.]

[Footnote 76: Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23) throws out a bold defiance
to the Pagan magistrates. Of the primitive miracles, the power of
exorcising is the only one which has been assumed by Protestants. *
Note: But by Protestants neither of the most enlightened ages nor most
reasoning minds.--M.]

[Footnote 77: Irenaeus adv. Haereses, l. ii. 56, 57, l. v. c. 6. Mr.
Dodwell (Dissertat. ad Irenaeum, ii. 42) concludes, that the second
century was still more fertile in miracles than the first. * Note: It is
difficult to answer Middleton's objection to this statement of Irenae
us: "It is very strange, that from the time of the apostles there is not
a single instance of this miracle to be found in the three first
centuries; except a single case, slightly intimated in Eusebius, from
the Works of Papias; which he seems to rank among the other fabulous
stories delivered by that weak man." Middleton, Works, vol. i. p. 59.
Bp. Douglas (Criterion, p 389) would consider Irenaeus to speak of what
had "been performed formerly." not in his own time.--M.]

[Footnote 78: Theophilus ad Autolycum, l. i. p. 345. Edit. Benedictin.
Paris, 1742. * Note: A candid sceptic might discern some impropriety in
the Bishop being called upon to perform a miracle on demand.--M.]

The miracles of the primitive church, after obtaining the sanction of
ages, have been lately attacked in a very free and ingenious inquiry,
[79] which, though it has met with the most favorable reception from the
public, appears to have excited a general scandal among the divines of
our own as well as of the other Protestant churches of Europe. [80] Our
different sentiments on this subject will be much less influenced by any
particular arguments, than by our habits of study and reflection; and,
above all, by the degree of evidence which we have accustomed ourselves
to require for the proof of a miraculous event. The duty of an historian
does not call upon him to interpose his private judgment in this nice
and important controversy; but he ought not to dissemble the difficulty
of adopting such a theory as may reconcile the interest of religion with
that of reason, of making a proper application of that theory, and of
defining with precision the limits of that happy period, exempt from
error and from deceit, to which we might be disposed to extend the gift
of supernatural powers. From the first of the fathers to the last of the
popes, a succession of bishops, of saints, of martyrs, and of miracles,
is continued without interruption; and the progress of superstition
was so gradual, and almost imperceptible, that we know not in what
particular link we should break the chain of tradition. Every age bears
testimony to the wonderful events by which it was distinguished, and
its testimony appears no less weighty and respectable than that of the
preceding generation, till we are insensibly led on to accuse our own
inconsistency, if in the eighth or in the twelfth century we deny to the
venerable Bede, or to the holy Bernard, the same degree of confidence
which, in the second century, we had so liberally granted to Justin or
to Irenaeus. [81] If the truth of any of those miracles is appreciated by
their apparent use and propriety, every age had unbelievers to convince,
heretics to confute, and idolatrous nations to convert; and sufficient
motives might always be produced to justify the interposition of Heaven.
And yet, since every friend to revelation is persuaded of the reality,
and every reasonable man is convinced of the cessation, of miraculous
powers, it is evident that there must have been some period in which
they were either suddenly or gradually withdrawn from the Christian
church. Whatever aera is chosen for that purpose, the death of the
apostles, the conversion of the Roman empire, or the extinction of the
Arian heresy, [82] the insensibility of the Christians who lived at that
time will equally afford a just matter of surprise. They still supported
their pretensions after they had lost their power. Credulity performed
the office of faith; fanaticism was permitted to assume the language of
inspiration, and the effects of accident or contrivance were ascribed
to supernatural causes. The recent experience of genuine miracles should
have instructed the Christian world in the ways of Providence, and
habituated their eye (if we may use a very inadequate expression) to the
style of the divine artist. Should the most skilful painter of modern
Italy presume to decorate his feeble imitations with the name of Raphael
or of Correggio, the insolent fraud would be soon discovered, and
indignantly rejected.

[Footnote 79: Dr. Middleton sent out his Introduction in the year 1747,
published his Free Inquiry in 1749, and before his death, which happened
in 1750, he had prepared a vindication of it against his numerous
adversaries.]

[Footnote 80: The university of Oxford conferred degrees
on his opponents. From the indignation of Mosheim, (p. 221,) we may
discover the sentiments of the Lutheran divines. * Note: Yet many
Protestant divines will now without reluctance confine miracles to the
time of the apostles, or at least to the first century.--M]

[Footnote 81: It may seem somewhat remarkable, that Bernard of
Clairvaux, who records so many miracles of his friend St. Malachi, never
takes any notice of his own, which, in their turn, however, are
carefully related by his companions and disciples. In the long series of
ecclesiastical history, does there exist a single instance of a saint
asserting that he himself possessed the gift of miracles?]

[Footnote 82: The conversion of Constantine is the aera which is most
usually fixed by Protestants. The more rational divines are unwilling to
admit the miracles of the ivth, whilst the more credulous are unwilling
to reject those of the vth century. * Note: All this appears to proceed
on the principle that any distinct line can be drawn in an unphilosophic
age between wonders and miracles, or between what piety, from their
unexpected and extraordinary nature, the marvellous concurrence of
secondary causes to some remarkable end, may consider providential
interpositions, and miracles strictly so called, in which the laws of
nature are suspended or violated. It is impossible to assign, on one
side, limits to human credulity, on the other, to the influence of the
imagination on the bodily frame; but some of the miracles recorded in
the Gospels are such palpable impossibilities, according to the known
laws and operations of nature, that if recorded on sufficient evidence,
and the evidence we believe to be that of eye-witnesses, we cannot
reject them, without either asserting, with Hume, that no evidence can
prove a miracle, or that the Author of Nature has no power of suspending
its ordinary laws. But which of the post-apostolic miracles will bear
this test?--M.]

Whatever opinion may be entertained of the miracles of the primitive
church since the time of the apostles, this unresisting softness of
temper, so conspicuous among the believers of the second and third
centuries, proved of some accidental benefit to the cause of truth and
religion. In modern times, a latent and even involuntary scepticism
adheres to the most pious dispositions. Their admission of supernatural
truths is much less an active consent than a cold and passive
acquiescence. Accustomed long since to observe and to respect the
variable order of Nature, our reason, or at least our imagination, is
not sufficiently prepared to sustain the visible action of the Deity.

But, in the first ages of Christianity, the situation of mankind was
extremely different. The most curious, or the most credulous, among the
Pagans, were often persuaded to enter into a society which asserted an
actual claim of miraculous powers. The primitive Christians perpetually
trod on mystic ground, and their minds were exercised by the habits of
believing the most extraordinary events. They felt, or they fancied,
that on every side they were incessantly assaulted by daemons, comforted
by visions, instructed by prophecy, and surprisingly delivered from
danger, sickness, and from death itself, by the supplications of the
church. The real or imaginary prodigies, of which they so frequently
conceived themselves to be the objects, the instruments, or the
spectators, very happily disposed them to adopt with the same ease,
but with far greater justice, the authentic wonders of the evangelic
history; and thus miracles that exceeded not the measure of their own
experience, inspired them with the most lively assurance of mysteries
which were acknowledged to surpass the limits of their understanding. It
is this deep impression of supernatural truths, which has been so much
celebrated under the name of faith; a state of mind described as
the surest pledge of the divine favor and of future felicity, and
recommended as the first, or perhaps the only merit of a Christian.
According to the more rigid doctors, the moral virtues, which may be
equally practised by infidels, are destitute of any value or efficacy in
the work of our justification.




