## Chapter IX: State Of Germany Until The Barbarians.--Part I.

     The State Of Germany Till The Invasion Of The Barbarians In
     The Time Of The Emperor Decius.

The government and religion of Persia have deserved some notice, from
their connection with the decline and fall of the Roman empire. We shall
occasionally mention the Scythian or Sarmatian tribes, [1001] which, with
their arms and horses, their flocks and herds, their wives and families,
wandered over the immense plains which spread themselves from the
Caspian Sea to the Vistula, from the confines of Persia to those of
Germany. But the warlike Germans, who first resisted, then invaded, and
at length overturned the Western monarchy of Rome, will occupy a much
more important place in this history, and possess a stronger, and, if
we may use the expression, a more domestic, claim to our attention and
regard. The most civilized nations of modern Europe issued from the
woods of Germany; and in the rude institutions of those barbarians we
may still distinguish the original principles of our present laws and
manners. In their primitive state of simplicity and independence, the
Germans were surveyed by the discerning eye, and delineated by the
masterly pencil, of Tacitus, [1002] the first of historians who applied the
science of philosophy to the study of facts. The expressive conciseness
of his descriptions has served to exercise the diligence of innumerable
antiquarians, and to excite the genius and penetration of the
philosophic historians of our own times. The subject, however various
and important, has already been so frequently, so ably, and so
successfully discussed, that it is now grown familiar to the reader,
and difficult to the writer. We shall therefore content ourselves
with observing, and indeed with repeating, some of the most important
circumstances of climate, of manners, and of institutions, which
rendered the wild barbarians of Germany such formidable enemies to the
Roman power.

[Footnote 1001: The Scythians, even according to the ancients, are not
Sarmatians. It may be doubted whether Gibbon intended to confound
them.--M. ----The Greeks, after having divided the world into Greeks and
barbarians. divided the barbarians into four great classes, the Celts,
the Scythians, the Indians, and the Ethiopians. They called Celts all
the inhabitants of Gaul. Scythia extended from the Baltic Sea to the
Lake Aral: the people enclosed in the angle to the north-east, between
Celtica and Scythia, were called Celto-Scythians, and the Sarmatians
were placed in the southern part of that angle. But these names of
Celts, of Scythians, of Celto-Scythians, and Sarmatians, were invented,
says Schlozer, by the profound cosmographical ignorance of the Greeks,
and have no real ground; they are purely geographical divisions, without
any relation to the true affiliation of the different races. Thus all
the inhabitants of Gaul are called Celts by most of the ancient writers;
yet Gaul contained three totally distinct nations, the Belgae, the
Aquitani, and the Gauls, properly so called. Hi omnes lingua institutis,
legibusque inter se differunt. Caesar. Com. c. i. It is thus the Turks
call all Europeans Franks. Schlozer, Allgemeine Nordische Geschichte, p.
289. 1771. Bayer (de Origine et priscis Sedibus Scytharum, in Opusc.
p. 64) says, Primus eorum, de quibus constat, Ephorus, in quarto
historiarum libro, orbem terrarum inter Scythas, Indos, Aethiopas et
Celtas divisit. Fragmentum ejus loci Cosmas Indicopleustes in
topographia Christiana, f. 148, conservavit. Video igitur Ephorum, cum
locorum positus per certa capita distribuere et explicare constitueret,
insigniorum nomina gentium vastioribus spatiis adhibuisse, nulla mala
fraude et successu infelici. Nam Ephoro quoquomodo dicta pro exploratis
habebant Graeci plerique et Romani: ita gliscebat error posteritate.
Igitur tot tamque diversae stirpis gentes non modo intra communem
quandam regionem definitae, unum omnes Scytharum nomen his auctoribus
subierunt, sed etiam ab illa regionis adpellatione in eandem nationem
sunt conflatae. Sic Cimmeriorum res cum Scythicis, Scytharum cum
Sarmaticis, Russicis, Hunnicis, Tataricis commiscentur.--G.]

[Footnote 1002: The Germania of Tacitus has been a fruitful source of
hypothesis to the ingenuity of modern writers, who have endeavored to
account for the form of the work and the views of the author. According
to Luden, (Geschichte des T. V. i. 432, and note,) it contains the
unfinished and disarranged for a larger work. An anonymous writer,
supposed by Luden to be M. Becker, conceives that it was intended as an
episode in his larger history. According to M. Guizot, "Tacite a peint
les Germains comme Montaigne et Rousseau les sauvages, dans un acces
d'humeur contre sa patrie: son livre est une satire des moeurs Romaines,
l'eloquente boutade d'un patriote philosophe qui veut voir la vertu la,
ou il ne rencontre pas la mollesse honteuse et la depravation savante
d'une vielle societe." Hist. de la Civilisation Moderne, i. 258.--M.]

Ancient Germany, excluding from its independent limits the province
westward of the Rhine, which had submitted to the Roman yoke, extended
itself over a third part of Europe. [1] Almost the whole of modern
Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia, Prussia, and the
greater part of Poland, were peopled by the various tribes of one great
nation, whose complexion, manners, and language denoted a common origin,
and preserved a striking resemblance. On the west, ancient Germany was
divided by the Rhine from the Gallic, and on the south, by the Danube,
from the Illyrian, provinces of the empire. A ridge of hills, rising
from the Danube, and called the Carpathian Mountains, covered Germany on
the side of Dacia or Hungary. The eastern frontier was faintly marked
by the mutual fears of the Germans and the Sarmatians, and was often
confounded by the mixture of warring and confederating tribes of the two
nations. In the remote darkness of the north, the ancients imperfectly
descried a frozen ocean that lay beyond the Baltic Sea, and beyond the
Peninsula, or islands [1001] of Scandinavia.

[Footnote 1: Germany was not of such vast extent. It is from Caesar, and
more particularly from Ptolemy, (says Gatterer,) that we can know what
was the state of ancient Germany before the wars with the Romans had
changed the positions of the tribes. Germany, as changed by these wars,
has been described by Strabo, Pliny, and Tacitus. Germany, properly so
called, was bounded on the west by the Rhine, on the east by the
Vistula, on the north by the southern point of Norway, by Sweden, and
Esthonia. On the south, the Maine and the mountains to the north of
Bohemia formed the limits. Before the time of Caesar, the country
between the Maine and the Danube was partly occupied by the Helvetians
and other Gauls, partly by the Hercynian forest but, from the time of
Caesar to the great migration, these boundaries were advanced as far as
the Danube, or, what is the same thing, to the Suabian Alps, although
the Hercynian forest still occupied, from north to south, a space of
nine days' journey on both banks of the Danube. "Gatterer, Versuch einer
all-gemeinen Welt-Geschichte," p. 424, edit. de 1792. This vast country
was far from being inhabited by a single nation divided into different
tribes of the same origin. We may reckon three principal races, very
distinct in their language, their origin, and their customs. 1. To the
east, the Slaves or Vandals. 2. To the west, the Cimmerians or Cimbri.
3. Between the Slaves and Cimbrians, the Germans, properly so called,
the Suevi of Tacitus. The South was inhabited, before Julius Caesar, by
nations of Gaulish origin, afterwards by the Suevi.--G. On the position
of these nations, the German antiquaries differ. I. The Slaves, or
Sclavonians, or Wendish tribes, according to Schlozer, were originally
settled in parts of Germany unknown to the Romans, Mecklenburgh,
Pomerania, Brandenburgh, Upper Saxony; and Lusatia. According to
Gatterer, they remained to the east of the Theiss, the Niemen, and the
Vistula, till the third century. The Slaves, according to Procopius and
Jornandes, formed three great divisions. 1. The Venedi or Vandals, who
took the latter name, (the Wenden,) having expelled the Vandals,
properly so called, (a Suevian race, the conquerors of Africa,) from the
country between the Memel and the Vistula. 2. The Antes, who inhabited
between the Dneister and the Dnieper. 3. The Sclavonians, properly so
called, in the north of Dacia. During the great migration, these races
advanced into Germany as far as the Saal and the Elbe. The Sclavonian
language is the stem from which have issued the Russian, the Polish, the
Bohemian, and the dialects of Lusatia, of some parts of the duchy of
Luneburgh, of Carniola, Carinthia, and Styria, &c.; those of Croatia,
Bosnia, and Bulgaria. Schlozer, Nordische Geschichte, p. 323, 335. II.
The Cimbric race. Adelung calls by this name all who were not Suevi.
This race had passed the Rhine, before the time of Caesar, occupied
Belgium, and are the Belgae of Caesar and Pliny. The Cimbrians also
occupied the Isle of Jutland. The Cymri of Wales and of Britain are of
this race. Many tribes on the right bank of the Rhine, the Guthini in
Jutland, the Usipeti in Westphalia, the Sigambri in the duchy of Berg,
were German Cimbrians. III. The Suevi, known in very early times by the
Romans, for they are mentioned by L. Corn. Sisenna, who lived 123 years
before Christ, (Nonius v. Lancea.) This race, the real Germans, extended
to the Vistula, and from the Baltic to the Hercynian forest. The name of
Suevi was sometimes confined to a single tribe, as by Caesar to the
Catti. The name of the Suevi has been preserved in Suabia. These three
were the principal races which inhabited Germany; they moved from east
to west, and are the parent stem of the modern natives. But northern
Europe, according to Schlozer, was not peopled by them alone; other
races, of different origin, and speaking different languages, have
inhabited and left descendants in these countries. The German tribes
called themselves, from very remote times, by the generic name of
Teutons, (Teuten, Deutschen,) which Tacitus derives from that of one of
their gods, Tuisco. It appears more probable that it means merely men,
people. Many savage nations have given themselves no other name. Thus
the Laplanders call themselves Almag, people; the Samoiedes Nilletz,
Nissetsch, men, &c. As to the name of Germans, (Germani,) Caesar found
it in use in Gaul, and adopted it as a word already known to the Romans.
Many of the learned (from a passage of Tacitus, de Mor Germ. c. 2) have
supposed that it was only applied to the Teutons after Caesar's time;
but Adelung has triumphantly refuted this opinion. The name of Germans
is found in the Fasti Capitolini. See Gruter, Iscrip. 2899, in which the
consul Marcellus, in the year of Rome 531, is said to have defeated the
Gauls, the Insubrians, and the Germans, commanded by Virdomar. See
Adelung, Aelt. Geschichte der Deutsch, p. 102.--Compressed from G.]

[Footnote 1001: The modern philosophers of Sweden seem agreed that the
waters of the Baltic gradually sink in a regular proportion, which they
have ventured to estimate at half an inch every year. Twenty centuries
ago the flat country of Scandinavia must have been covered by the
sea; while the high lands rose above the waters, as so many islands of
various forms and dimensions. Such, indeed, is the notion given us by
Mela, Pliny, and Tacitus, of the vast countries round the Baltic. See
in the Bibliotheque Raisonnee, tom. xl. and xlv. a large abstract of
Dalin's History of Sweden, composed in the Swedish language. * Note:
Modern geologists have rejected this theory of the depression of the
Baltic, as inconsistent with recent observation. The considerable
changes which have taken place on its shores, Mr. Lyell, from actual
observation now decidedly attributes to the regular and uniform
elevation of the land.--Lyell's Geology, b. ii. c. 17--M.]

Some ingenious writers [2] have suspected that Europe was much colder
formerly than it is at present; and the most ancient descriptions of the
climate of Germany tend exceedingly to confirm their theory. The general
complaints of intense frost and eternal winter, are perhaps little to be
regarded, since we have no method of reducing to the accurate standard
of the thermometer, the feelings, or the expressions, of an orator
born in the happier regions of Greece or Asia. But I shall select two
remarkable circumstances of a less equivocal nature. 1. The great
rivers which covered the Roman provinces, the Rhine and the Danube,
were frequently frozen over, and capable of supporting the most enormous
weights. The barbarians, who often chose that severe season for their
inroads, transported, without apprehension or danger, their numerous
armies, their cavalry, and their heavy wagons, over a vast and solid
bridge of ice. [3] Modern ages have not presented an instance of a like
phenomenon. 2. The reindeer, that useful animal, from whom the savage
of the North derives the best comforts of his dreary life, is of a
constitution that supports, and even requires, the most intense cold.
He is found on the rock of Spitzberg, within ten degrees of the Pole; he
seems to delight in the snows of Lapland and Siberia: but at present he
cannot subsist, much less multiply, in any country to the south of the
Baltic. [4] In the time of Caesar the reindeer, as well as the elk
and the wild bull, was a native of the Hercynian forest, which
then overshadowed a great part of Germany and Poland. [5] The modern
improvements sufficiently explain the causes of the diminution of the
cold. These immense woods have been gradually cleared, which intercepted
from the earth the rays of the sun. [6] The morasses have been drained,
and, in proportion as the soil has been cultivated, the air has become
more temperate. Canada, at this day, is an exact picture of ancient
Germany. Although situated in the same parallel with the finest
provinces of France and England, that country experiences the most
rigorous cold. The reindeer are very numerous, the ground is covered
with deep and lasting snow, and the great river of St. Lawrence is
regularly frozen, in a season when the waters of the Seine and the
Thames are usually free from ice. [7]

[Footnote 2: In particular, Mr. Hume, the Abbe du Bos, and M.
Pelloutier. Hist. des Celtes, tom. i.]

[Footnote 3: Diodorus Siculus, l. v. p. 340, edit. Wessel. Herodian, l.
vi. p. 221. Jornandes, c. 55. On the banks of the Danube, the wine, when
brought to table, was frequently frozen into great lumps, frusta vini.
Ovid. Epist. ex Ponto, l. iv. 7, 9, 10. Virgil. Georgic. l. iii.
355. The fact is confirmed by a soldier and a philosopher, who had
experienced the intense cold of Thrace. See Xenophon, Anabasis, l. vii.
p. 560, edit. Hutchinson. Note: The Danube is constantly frozen over. At
Pesth the bridge is usually taken up, and the traffic and communication
between the two banks carried on over the ice. The Rhine is likewise in
many parts passable at least two years out of five. Winter campaigns are
so unusual, in modern warfare, that I recollect but one instance of an
army crossing either river on the ice. In the thirty years' war,
(1635,) Jan van Werth, an Imperialist partisan, crossed the Rhine from
Heidelberg on the ice with 5000 men, and surprised Spiers. Pichegru's
memorable campaign, (1794-5,) when the freezing of the Meuse and Waal
opened Holland to his conquests, and his cavalry and artillery attacked
the ships frozen in, on the Zuyder Zee, was in a winter of unprecedented
severity.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 4: Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, tom. xii. p. 79, 116.]

[Footnote 5: Caesar de Bell. Gallic. vi. 23, &c. The most inquisitive of
the Germans were ignorant of its utmost limits, although some of them
had travelled in it more than sixty days' journey. * Note: The passage
of Caesar, "parvis renonum tegumentis utuntur," is obscure, observes
Luden, (Geschichte des Teutschen Volkes,) and insufficient to prove the
reindeer to have existed in Germany. It is supported however, by a
fragment of Sallust. Germani intectum rhenonibus corpus tegunt.--M. It
has been suggested to me that Caesar (as old Gesner supposed) meant the
reindeer in the following description. Est bos cervi figura cujus a
media fronte inter aures unum cornu existit, excelsius magisque directum
(divaricatum, qu?) his quae nobis nota sunt cornibus. At ejus summo,
sicut palmae, rami quam late diffunduntur. Bell. vi.--M. 1845.]

[Footnote 6: Cluverius (Germania Antiqua, l. iii. c. 47) investigates
the small and scattered remains of the Hercynian wood.]

[Footnote 7: Charlevoix, Histoire du Canada.]

It is difficult to ascertain, and easy to exaggerate, the influence of
the climate of ancient Germany over the minds and bodies of the natives.
Many writers have supposed, and most have allowed, though, as it should
seem, without any adequate proof, that the rigorous cold of the North
was favorable to long life and generative vigor, that the women were
more fruitful, and the human species more prolific, than in warmer or
more temperate climates. [8] We may assert, with greater confidence,
that the keen air of Germany formed the large and masculine limbs of the
natives, who were, in general, of a more lofty stature than the people
of the South, [9] gave them a kind of strength better adapted to violent
exertions than to patient labor, and inspired them with constitutional
bravery, which is the result of nerves and spirits. The severity of
a winter campaign, that chilled the courage of the Roman troops, was
scarcely felt by these hardy children of the North, [10] who, in their
turn, were unable to resist the summer heats, and dissolved away in
languor and sickness under the beams of an Italian sun. [11]

[Footnote 8: Olaus Rudbeck asserts that the Swedish women often bear
ten or twelve children, and not uncommonly twenty or thirty; but the
authority of Rudbeck is much to be suspected.]

[Footnote 9: In hos artus, in haec corpora, quae miramur, excrescunt.
Taeit Germania, 3, 20. Cluver. l. i. c. 14.]

[Footnote 10: Plutarch. in Mario. The Cimbri, by way of amusement, often
did down mountains of snow on their broad shields.]

[Footnote 11: The Romans made war in all climates, and by their
excellent discipline were in a great measure preserved in health and
vigor. It may be remarked, that man is the only animal which can live
and multiply in every country from the equator to the poles. The hog
seems to approach the nearest to our species in that privilege.]




