# BOOK IV. THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED MELPOMENE


1. After Babylon had been taken, the march of Dareios himself 1 against
the Scythians took place: for now that Asia was flourishing in respect
of population, and large sums were being gathered in as revenue, Dareios
formed the desire to take vengeance upon the Scythians, because they
had first invaded the Median land and had overcome in fight those
who opposed them; and thus they had been the beginners of wrong. The
Scythians in truth, as I have before said, 2 had ruled over Upper Asia
3 for eight-and-twenty years; for they had invaded Asia in their pursuit
of the Kimmerians, and they had deposed 4 the Medes from their rule, who
had rule over Asia before the Scythians came. Now when the Scythians had
been absent from their own land for eight-and-twenty years, as they were
returning to it after that interval of time, they were met by a contest
5 not less severe than that which they had had with the Medes, since
they found an army of no mean size opposing them. For the wives of the
Scythians, because their husbands were absent from them for a long time,
had associated with the slaves.

2. Now the Scythians put out the eyes of all their slaves because of the
milk which they drink; and they do as follows:they take blow-pipes of
bone just like flutes, and these they insert into the vagina of the mare
and blow with their mouths, and others milk while they blow: and they
say that they do this because the veins of the mare are thus filled,
being blown out, and so the udder is let down. When they had drawn the
milk they pour it into wooden vessels hollowed out, and they set the
blind slaves in order about 6 the vessels and agitate the milk. Then
that which comes to the top they skim off, considering it the more
valuable part, whereas they esteem that which settles down to be less
good than the other. For this reason 7 the Scythians put out the eyes of
all whom they catch; for they are not tillers of the soil but nomads.

3. From these their slaves then, I say, and from their wives had been
born and bred up a generation of young men, who having learnt the manner
of their birth set themselves to oppose the Scythians as they were
returning from the Medes. And first they cut off their land by digging
a broad trench extending from the Tauric mountains to the Maiotian
lake, at the point where 8 this is broadest; then afterwards when the
Scythians attempted to invade the land, they took up a position against
them and fought; and as they fought many times, and the Scythians were
not able to get any advantage in the fighting, one of them said: "What a
thing is this that we are doing, Scythians! We are fighting against our
own slaves, and we are not only becoming fewer in number ourselves by
being slain in battle, but also we are killing them, and so we shall
have fewer to rule over in future. Now therefore to me it seems good
that we leave spears and bows and that each one take his horse-whip
and so go up close to them: for so long as they saw us with arms in our
hands, they thought themselves equal to us and of equal birth; but when
they shall see that we have whips instead of arms, they will perceive
that they are our slaves, and having acknowledged this they will not
await our onset."

4. When they heard this, the Scythians proceeded to do that which he
said, and the others being panic-stricken by that which was done forgot
their fighting and fled. Thus the Scythians had ruled over Asia; and
in such manner, when they were driven out again by the Medes, they had
returned to their own land. For this Dareios wished to take vengeance
upon them, and was gathering together an army to go against them.

5. Now the Scythians say that their nation is the youngest of all
nations, and that this came to pass as follows:The first man who ever
existed in this region, which then was desert, was one named Targitaos:
and of this Targitaos they say, though I do not believe it for my part,
however they say the parents were Zeus and the daughter of the river
Borysthenes. Targitaos, they report, was produced from some such origin
as this, and of him were begotten three sons, Lipoxaïs and Arpoxaïs
and the youngest Colaxaïs. In the reign of these 9 there came down from
heaven certain things wrought of gold, a plough, a yoke, a battle-axe,
10 and a cup, and fell in the Scythian land: and first the eldest saw
and came near them, desiring to take them, but the gold blazed with fire
when he approached it: then when he had gone away from it, the second
approached, and again it did the same thing. These then the gold
repelled by blazing with fire; but when the third and youngest came up
to it, the flame was quenched, and he carried them to his own house.
The elder brothers then, acknowledging the significance of this thing,
delivered the whole of the kingly power to the youngest.

6. From Lixopaïs, they say, are descended those Scythians who are called
the race of the Auchatai; from the middle brother Arpoxaïs those who are
called Catiaroi and Traspians, and from the youngest of them the "Royal"
tribe, 11 who are called Paralatai: and the whole together are called,
they say, Scolotoi, after the name of their king; 12 but the Hellenes
gave them the name of Scythians.

7. Thus the Scythians say they were produced; and from the time of their
origin, that is to say from the first king Targitaos, to the passing
over of Dareios against them, they say that there is a period of a
thousand years and no more. Now this sacred gold is guarded by the
kings with the utmost care, and they visit it every year with solemn
sacrifices of propitiation: moreover if any one goes to sleep while
watching in the open air over this gold during the festival, the
Scythians say that he does not live out the year; and there is given him
for this so much land as he shall ride round himself on his horse in one
day. Now as the land was large, Colaxaïs, they say, established three
kingdoms for his sons; and of these he made one larger than the rest,
and in this the gold is kept. But as to the upper parts which lie on the
North side of those who dwell above this land, they say one can neither
see nor pass through any further by reason of feathers which are poured
down; for both the earth and the air are full of feathers, and this is
that which shuts off the view.

8. Thus say the Scythians about themselves and about the region
above them; but the Hellenes who dwell about the Pontus say as
follows:Heracles driving the cattle of Geryones came to this land, then
desert, which the Scythians now inhabit; and Geryones, says the tale,
dwelt away from the region of the Pontus, living in the island called
by the Hellenes Erytheia, near Gadeira which is outside the Pillars of
Heracles by the Ocean.As to the Ocean, they say indeed that it flows
round the whole earth beginning from the place of the sunrising, but
they do not prove this by facts.From thence Heracles came to the land
now called Scythia; and as a storm came upon him together with icy cold,
he drew over him his lion's skin and went to sleep. Meanwhile the mares
harnessed in his chariot disappeared by a miraculous chance, as they
were feeding.

9. Then when Heracles woke he sought for them; and having gone over the
whole land, at last he came to the region which is called Hylaia; and
there he found in a cave a kind of twofold creature formed by the union
of a maiden and a serpent, whose upper parts from the buttocks upwards
were those of a woman, but her lower parts were those of a snake. Having
seen her and marvelled at her, he asked her then whether she had seen
any mares straying anywhere; and she said that she had them herself and
would not give them up until he lay with her; and Heracles lay with her
on condition of receiving them. She then tried to put off the giving
back of the mares, desiring to have Heracles with her as long as
possible, while he on the other hand desired to get the mares and
depart; and at last she gave them back and said: "These mares when they
came hither I saved for thee, and thou didst give me reward for saving
them; for I have by thee three sons. Tell me then, what must I do with
these when they shall be grown to manhood, whether I shall settle them
here, for over this land I have power alone, or send them away to thee?"
She thus asked of him, and he, they say, replied: "When thou seest that
the boys are grown to men, do this and thou shalt not fail of doing
right:whichsoever of them thou seest able to stretch this bow as I do
now, and to be girded 1201 with this girdle, him cause to be the settler
of this land; but whosoever of them fails in the deeds which I enjoin,
send him forth out of the land: and if thou shalt do thus, thou wilt
both have delight thyself and perform that which has been enjoined to
thee."

10. Upon this he drew one of his bows (for up to that time Heracles,
they say, was wont to carry two) and showed her the girdle, and then he
delivered to her both the bow and the girdle, which had at the end of
its clasp a golden cup; and having given them he departed. She then,
when her sons had been born and had grown to be men, gave them names
first, calling one of them Agathyrsos and the next Gelonos and the
youngest Skythes; then bearing in mind the charge given to her, she did
that which was enjoined. And two of her sons, Agathyrsos and Gelonos,
not having proved themselves able to attain to the task set before them,
departed from the land, being cast out by her who bore them; but Skythes
the youngest of them performed the task and remained in the land:
and from Skythes the son of Heracles were descended, they say, the
succeeding kings of the Scythians (Skythians): and they say moreover
that it is by reason of the cup that the Scythians still even to this
day wear cups attached to their girdles: and this alone his mother
contrived for Skythes. 13 Such is the story told by the Hellenes who
dwell about the Pontus.

11. There is however also another story, which is as follows, and to
this I am most inclined myself. It is to the effect that the nomad
Scythians dwelling in Asia, being hard pressed in war by the Massagetai,
left their abode and crossing the river Araxes came towards the
Kimmerian land (for the land which now is occupied by the Scythians is
said to have been in former times the land of the Kimmerians); and the
Kimmerians, when the Scythians were coming against them, took counsel
together, seeing that a great host was coming to fight against them;
and it proved that their opinions were divided, both opinions being
vehemently maintained, but the better being that of their kings: for the
opinion of the people was that it was necessary to depart and that they
ought not to run the risk of fighting against so many, 14 but that of
the kings was to fight for their land with those who came against them:
and as neither the people were willing by means to agree to the counsel
of the kings nor the kings to that of the people, the people planned
to depart without fighting and to deliver up the land to the invaders,
while the kings resolved to die and to be laid in their own land, and
not to flee with the mass of the people, considering the many goods of
fortune which they had enjoyed, and the many evils which it might be
supposed would come upon them, if they fled from their native land.
Having resolved upon this, they parted into two bodies, and making their
numbers equal they fought with one another: and when these had all been
killed by one another's hands, then the people of the Kimmerians buried
them by the bank of the river Tyras (where their burial-place is still
to be seen), and having buried them, then they made their way out
from the land, and the Scythians when they came upon it found the land
deserted of its inhabitants.

12. And there are at the present time in the land of Scythia Kimmerian
walls, and a Kimmerian ferry; and there is also a region which is called
Kimmeria, and the so-called Kimmerian Bosphorus. It is known moreover
that the Kimmerians, in their flight to Asia from the Scythians, also
made a settlement on that peninsula on which now stands the Hellenic
city of Sinope; and it is known too that the Scythians pursued them
and invaded the land of Media, having missed their way; for while the
Kimmerians kept ever along by the sea in their flight, the Scythians
pursued them keeping Caucasus on their right hand, until at last they
invaded Media, directing their course inland. This then which has been
told is another story, and it is common both to Hellenes and Barbarians.

13. Aristeas however the son of Caÿstrobios, a man of Proconnesos,
said in the verses which he composed, that he came to the land of the
Issedonians being possessed by Phoebus, and that beyond the Issedonians
dwelt Arimaspians, a one-eyed race, and beyond these the gold-guarding
griffins, and beyond them the Hyperboreans extending as far as the sea:
and all these except the Hyperboreans, beginning with the Arimaspians,
were continually making war on their neighbours, and the Issedonians
were gradually driven out of their country by the Arimaspians and the
Scythians by the Issedonians, and so the Kimmerians, who dwelt on the
Southern Sea, being pressed by the Scythians left their land. Thus
neither does he agree in regard to this land with the report of the
Scythians.

14. As to Aristeas who composed 15 this, I have said already whence
he was; and I will tell also the tale which I heard about him in
Proconnesos and Kyzicos. They say that Aristeas, who was in birth
inferior to none of the citizens, entered into a fuller's shop in
Proconnesos and there died; and the fuller closed his workshop and went
away to report the matter to those who were related to the dead man. And
when the news had been spread abroad about the city that Aristeas was
dead, a man of Kyzicos who had come from the town of Artake entered into
controversy with those who said so, and declared that he had met him
going towards Kyzicos and had spoken with him: and while he was vehement
in dispute, those who were related to the dead man came to the fuller's
shop with the things proper in order to take up the corpse for burial;
and when the house was opened, Aristeas was not found there either dead
or alive. In the seventh year after this he appeared at Proconnesos
and composed those verses which are now called by the Hellenes the
Arimaspeia, and having composed them he disappeared the second time.

15. So much is told by these cities; and what follows I know happened
to the people of Metapontion in Italy 16 two hundred 17 and forty
years after the second disappearance of Aristeas, as I found by putting
together the evidence at Proconnesos and Metapontion. The people of
Metapontion say that Aristeas himself appeared in their land and bade
them set up an altar of Apollo and place by its side a statue bearing
the name of Aristeas of Proconnesos; for he told them that to their
land alone of all the Italiotes 18 Apollo had come, and he, who now was
Aristeas, was accompanying him, being then a raven when he accompanied
the god. Having said this he disappeared; and the Metapontines say that
they sent to Delphi and asked the god what the apparition of the man
meant: and the Pythian prophetess bade them obey the command of the
apparition, and told them that if they obeyed, it would be the better
for them. They therefore accepted this answer and performed the
commands; and there stands a statue now bearing the name of Aristeas
close by the side of the altar dedicated to Apollo, 19 and round it
stand laurel trees; and the altar is set up in the market-place. Let
this suffice which has been said about Aristeas.

16. Now of the land about which this account has been begun, no one
knows precisely what lies beyond it: 20 for I am not able to hear of any
one who alleges that he knows as an eye-witness; and even Aristeas,
the man of whom I was making mention just now, even he, I say, did not
allege, although he was composing verse, 21 that he went further than
the Issedonians; but that which is beyond them he spoke of by hearsay,
and reported that it was the Issedonians who said these things. So far
however as we were able to arrive at certainty by hearsay, carrying
inquiries as far as possible, all this shall be told.

17. Beginning with the trading station of the Borysthenites,for of the
parts along the sea this is the central point of all Scythia,beginning
with this, the first regions are occupied by the Callipidai, who are
Hellenic Scythians; and above these is another race, who are called
Alazonians. 22 These last and the Callipidai in all other respects have
the same customs as the Scythians, but they both sow corn and use it as
food, and also onions, leeks, lentils and millet. Above the Alazonians
dwell Scythians who till the ground, and these sow their corn not for
food but to sell.

18.Beyond them dwell the Neuroi; and beyond the Neuroi towards the North
Wind is a region without inhabitants, as far as we know. These races
are along the river Hypanis to the West of the Borysthenes; but after
crossing the Borysthenes, first from the sea-coast is Hylaia, and beyond
this as one goes up the river dwell agricultural Scythians, whom the
Hellenes who live upon the river Hypanis call Borysthenites, calling
themselves at the same time citizens of Olbia. 23 These agricultural
Scythians occupy the region which extends Eastwards for a distance of
three days' journey, 24 reaching to a river which is called Panticapes,
and Northwards for a distance of eleven days' sail up the Borysthenes.
Then immediately beyond these begins the desert 25 and extends for
a great distance; and on the other side of the desert dwell the
Androphagoi, 26 a race apart by themselves and having no connection with
the Scythians. Beyond them begins a region which is really desert and
has no race of men in it, as far as we know.

19. The region which lies to the East of these agricultural Scythians,
after one has crossed the river Panticapes, is occupied by nomad
Scythians, who neither sow anything nor plough the earth; and this whole
region is bare of trees except Hylaia. These nomads occupy a country
which extends to the river Gerros, a distance of fourteen 27 days'
journey Eastwards.

20. Then on the other side of the Gerros we have those parts which are
called the "Royal" lands and those Scythians who are the bravest and
most numerous and who esteem the other Scythians their slaves. These
reach Southwards to the Tauric land, and Eastwards to the trench which
those who were begotten of the blind slaves dug, and to the trading
station which is called Cremnoi 28 upon the Maiotian lake; and some
parts of their country reach to the river Tanaïs. Beyond the Royal
Scythians towards the North Wind dwell the Melanchlainoi, 29 of a
different race and not Scythian. The region beyond the Melanchlainoi is
marshy and not inhabited by any, so far as we know.

21. After one has crossed the river Tanaïs the country is no longer
Scythia, but the first of the divisions belongs to the Sauromatai,
who beginning at the corner of the Maiotian lake occupy land extending
towards the North Wind fifteen days' journey, and wholly bare of trees
both cultivated and wild. Above these, holding the next division of
land, dwell the Budinoi, who occupy a land wholly overgrown with forest
consisting of all kinds of trees.

22. Then beyond the Budinoi towards the North, first there is desert for
seven days' journey; and after the desert turning aside somewhat more
towards the East Wind we come to land occupied by the Thyssagetai, a
numerous people and of separate race from the others. These live by
hunting; and bordering upon them there are settled also in these same
regions men who are called Irycai, who also live by hunting, which they
practise in the following manner:the hunter climbs up a tree and lies
in wait there for his game (now trees are abundant in all this country),
and each has a horse at hand, which has been taught to lie down upon its
belly in order that it may make itself low, and also a dog: and when he
sees the wild animal from the tree, he first shoots his arrow and then
mounts upon his horse and pursues it, and the dog seizes hold of it.
Above these in a direction towards the East dwell other Scythians, who
have revolted from the Royal Scythians and so have come to this region.

23. As far as the country of these Scythians the whole land which has
been described is level plain and has a deep soil; but after this point
it is stony and rugged. Then when one has passed through a great extent
of this rugged country, there dwell in the skirts of lofty mountains
men who are said to be all bald-headed from their birth, male and female
equally, and who have flat noses and large chins and speak a language of
their own, using the Scythian manner of dress, and living on the produce
of trees. The tree on the fruit of which they live is called the Pontic
tree, and it is about the size of a fig-tree: this bears a fruit the
size of a bean, containing a stone. When the fruit has ripened, they
strain it through cloths and there flows from it a thick black juice,
and this juice which flows from it is called as-chy. This they either
lick up or drink mixed with milk, and from its lees, that is the solid
part, they make cakes and use them for food; for they have not many
cattle, since the pastures there are by no means good. Each man has his
dwelling under a tree, in winter covering the tree all round with close
white felt-cloth, and in summer without it. These are injured by no men,
for they are said to be sacred, and they possess no weapon of war. These
are they also who decide the disputes rising among their neighbours; and
besides this, whatever fugitive takes refuge with them is injured by no
one: and they are called Argippaians. 30

24. Now as far as these bald-headed men there is abundantly clear
information about the land and about the nations on this side of them;
for not only do certain of the Scythians go to them, from whom it is not
difficult to get information, but also some of the Hellenes who are at
the trading-station of the Borysthenes and the other trading-places of
the Pontic coast: and those of the Scythians who go to them transact
their business through seven interpreters and in seven different
languages.

25. So far as these, I say, the land is known; but concerning the region
to the North of the bald-headed men no one can speak with certainty,
for lofty and impassable mountains divide it off, and no one passes over
them. However these bald-headed men say (though I do not believe it)
that the mountains are inhabited by men with goats' feet; and that after
one has passed beyond these, others are found who sleep through six
months of the year. This I do not admit at all as true. However, the
country to the East of the bald-headed men is known with certainty,
being inhabited by the Issedonians, but that which lies beyond both the
bald-headed men and the Issedonians towards the North Wind is unknown,
except so far as we know it from the accounts given by these nations
which have just been mentioned.

26. The Issedonians are said to have these customs:when a man's father
is dead, all the relations bring cattle to the house, and then having
slain them and cut up the flesh, they cut up also the dead body of the
father of their entertainer, and mixing all the flesh together they set
forth a banquet. His skull however they strip of the flesh and clean it
out and then gild it over, and after that they deal with it as a sacred
thing 31 and perform for the dead man great sacrifices every year.
This each son does for his father, just as the Hellenes keep the day of
memorial for the dead. 32 In other respects however this race also is
said to live righteously, and their women have equal rights with the
men.

27. These then also are known; but as to the region beyond them, it
is the Issedonians who report that there are there one-eyed men and
gold-guarding griffins; and the Scythians report this having received it
from them, and from the Scythians we, that is the rest of mankind, have
got our belief; and we call them in Scythian language Arimaspians, for
the Scythians call the number one arima and the eye spu.

28. This whole land which has been described is so exceedingly severe in
climate, that for eight months of the year there is frost so hard as to
be intolerable; and during these if you pour out water you will not be
able to make mud, but only if you kindle a fire can you make it; and
the sea is frozen and the whole of the Kimmerian Bosphorus, so that the
Scythians who are settled within the trench make expeditions and drive
their waggons over into the country of the Sindians. Thus it continues
to be winter for eight months, and even for the remaining four it is
cold in those parts. This winter is distinguished in its character from
all the winters which come in other parts of the world; for in it there
is no rain to speak of at the usual season for rain, whereas in summer
it rains continually; and thunder does not come at the time when it
comes in other countries, but is very frequent, 33 in the summer; and if
thunder comes in winter, it is marvelled at as a prodigy: just so, if
an earthquake happens, whether in summer or in winter, it is accounted
a prodigy in Scythia. Horses are able to endure this winter, but neither
mules nor asses can endure it at all, whereas in other countries horses
if they stand in frost lose their limbs by mortification, while asses
and mules endure it.

29. I think also that it is for this reason that the hornless breed
of oxen in that country have no horns growing; and there is a verse of
Homer in the Odyssey 34 supporting my opinion, which runs this:


    "Also the Libyan land, where the sheep very quickly grow hornèd,"

for it is rightly said that in hot regions the horns come quickly,
whereas in extreme cold the animals either have no horns growing at all,
or hardly any. 35

30. In that land then this takes place on account of the cold; but
(since my history proceeded from the first seeking occasions for
digression) 36 I feel wonder that in the whole land of Elis mules cannot
be bred, though that region is not cold, nor is there any other evident
cause. The Eleians themselves say that in consequence of some curse
mules are not begotten in their land; but when the time approaches for
the mares to conceive, they drive them out into the neighbouring
lands and there in the land of their neighbours they admit to them the
he-asses until the mares are pregnant, and then they drive them back.

31. As to the feathers of which the Scythians say that the air is full,
and that by reason of them they are not able either to see or to pass
through the further parts of the continent, the opinion which I have is
this:in the parts beyond this land it snows continually, though less
in summer than in winter, as might be supposed. Now whomsoever has seen
close at hand snow falling thickly, knows what I mean without further
explanation, for the snow is like feathers: and on account of this
wintry weather, being such as I have said, the Northern parts of this
continent are uninhabitable. I think therefore that by the feathers the
Scythians and those who dwell near them mean symbolically the snow. This
then which has been said goes to the furthest extent of the accounts
given.

32. About a Hyperborean people the Scythians report nothing, nor do any
of those who dwell in this region, unless it be the Issedonians: but
in my opinion neither do these report anything; for if they did the
Scythians also would report it, as they do about the one-eyed people.
Hesiod however has spoken of Hyperboreans, and so also has Homer in the
poem of the "Epigonoi," at least if Homer was really the composer of
that Epic.

33. But much more about them is reported by the people of Delos than by
any others. For these say that sacred offerings bound up in wheat straw
are carried from the land of the Hyperboreans and come to the Scythians,
and then from the Scythians the neighbouring nations in succession
receive them and convey them Westwards, finally as far as the Adriatic:
thence they are sent forward towards the South, and the people of Dodona
receive them first of all the Hellenes, and from these they come down to
the Malian gulf and are passed over to Euboea, where city sends them on
to city till they come to Carystos. After this Andros is left out, for
the Carystians are those who bring them to Tenos, and the Tenians to
Delos. Thus they say that these sacred offerings come to Delos; but at
first, they say, the Hyperboreans sent two maidens bearing the sacred
offerings, whose names, say the Delians, were Hyperoche and Laodike, and
with them for their protection the Hyperboreans sent five men of their
nation to attend them, those namely who are now called Perphereës and
have great honours paid to them in Delos. Since however the Hyperboreans
found that those who were sent away did not return back, they were
troubled to think that it would always befall them to send out and not
to receive back; and so they bore the offerings to the borders of their
land bound up in wheat straw, and laid a charge upon their neighbours,
bidding them send these forward from themselves to another nation. These
things then, they say, come to Delos being thus sent forward; and I know
of my own knowledge that a thing is done which has resemblance to
these offerings, namely that the women of Thrace and Paionia, when they
sacrifice to Artemis "the Queen," do not make their offerings without
wheat straw.

34. These I know do as I have said; and for those maidens from the
Hyperboreans, who died in Delos, both the girls and the boys of the
Delians cut off their hair: the former before marriage cut off a lock
and having wound it round a spindle lay it upon the tomb (now the tomb
is on the left hand as one goes into the temple of Artemis, and over it
grows an olive-tree), and all the boys of the Delians wind some of their
hair about a green shoot of some tree, and they also place it upon the
tomb.

35. The maidens, I say, have this honour paid them by the dwellers in
Delos: and the same people say that Arge and Opis also, being maidens,
came to Delos, passing from the Hyperboreans by the same nations which
have been mentioned, even before Hyperoche and Laodike. These last, they
say, came bearing for Eileithuia the tribute which they had laid upon
themselves for the speedy birth, 37 but Arge and Opis came with the
divinities themselves, and other honours have been assigned to them by
the people of Delos: for the women, they say, collect for them, naming
them by their names in the hymn which Olen a man of Lykia composed in
their honour; and both the natives of the other islands and the
Ionians have learnt from them to sing hymns naming Opis and Arge and
collecting:now this Olen came from Lukia and composed also the other
ancient hymns which are sung in Delos:and moreover they say that when
the thighs of the victim are consumed upon the altar, the ashes of them
are used to cast upon the grave of Opis and Arge. Now their grave is
behind the temple of Artemis, turned towards the East, close to the
banqueting hall of the Keïeans.

36. Let this suffice which has been said of the Hyperboreans; for the
tale of Abaris, who is reported to have been a Hyperborean, I do not
tell, namely 3701 how he carried the arrow about all over the earth,
eating no food. If however there are any Hyperboreans, it follows that
there are also Hypernotians; and I laugh when I see that, though many
before this have drawn maps of the Earth, yet no one has set the matter
forth in an intelligent way; seeing that they draw Ocean flowing round
the Earth, which is circular exactly as if drawn with compasses, and
they make Asia equal in size to Europe. In a few words I shall declare
the size of each division and of what nature it is as regards outline.

37. The Persians inhabit Asia 38 extending to the Southern Sea, which is
called the Erythraian; and above these towards the North Wind dwell the
Medes, and above the Medes the Saspeirians, and above the Saspeirians
the Colchians, extending to the Northern Sea, into which the river
Phasis runs. These four nations inhabit from sea to sea.

38. From them Westwards two peninsulas 39 stretch out from Asia into the
sea, and these I will describe. The first peninsula on the one of its
sides, that is the Northern, stretches along beginning from the Phasis
and extending to the sea, going along the Pontus and the Hellespont as
far as Sigeion in the land of Troy; and on the Southern side the same
peninsula stretches from the Myriandrian gulf, which lies near Phenicia,
in the direction of the sea as far as the headland Triopion; and in this
peninsula dwell thirty races of men.

39. This then is one of the peninsulas, and the other beginning from the
land of the Persians stretches along to the Erythraian Sea, including
Persia and next after it Assyria, and Arabia after Assyria: and this
ends, or rather is commonly supposed to end, 40 at the Arabian gulf,
into which Dareios conducted a channel from the Nile. Now in the line
stretching to Phenicia from the land of the Persians the land is broad
and the space abundant, but after Phenicia this peninsula goes by the
shore of our Sea along Palestine, Syria, and Egypt, where it ends; and
in it there are three nations only.

40. These are the parts of Asia which tend towards the West from the
Persian land; but as to those which lie beyond the Persians and Medes
and Saspeirians and Colchians towards the East and the sunrising, on one
side the Erythraian Sea runs along by them, and on the North both the
Caspian Sea and the river Araxes, which flows towards the rising sun:
and Asia is inhabited as far as the Indian land; but from this onwards
towards the East it becomes desert, nor can any one say what manner of
land it is.

41. Such and so large is Asia: and Libya is included in the second
peninsula; for after Egypt Libya succeeds at once. Now about Egypt
this peninsula is narrow, for from our Sea to the Erythraian Sea is a
distance there of ten myriads of fathoms, 41 which would amount to
a thousand furlongs; but after this narrow part, the portion of the
peninsula which is called Libya is, as it chances, extremely broad.

42. I wonder then at those who have parted off and divided the world
into Libya, Asia, and Europe, since the difference between these is not
small; for in length Europe extends along by both, while in breadth
it is clear to me that it is beyond comparison larger; 42 for Libya
furnishes proofs about itself that it is surrounded by sea, except so
much of it as borders upon Asia; and this fact was shown by Necos king
of the Egyptians first of all those about whom we have knowledge. He
when he had ceased digging the channel 43 which goes through from the
Nile to the Arabian gulf, sent Phenicians with ships, bidding them sail
and come back through the Pillars of Heracles to the Northern Sea and so
to Egypt. The Phenicians therefore set forth from the Erythraian Sea and
sailed through the Southern Sea; and when autumn came, they would put
to shore and sow the land, wherever in Libya they might happen to be as
they sailed, and then they waited for the harvest: and having reaped
the corn they would sail on, so that after two years had elapsed, in the
third year they turned through the Pillars of Heracles and arrived again
in Egypt. And they reported a thing which I cannot believe, but another
man may, namely that in sailing round Libya they had the sun on their
right hand.

43. Thus was this country first known to be what it is, and after this
it is the Carthaginians who make report of it; for as to Sataspes the
son of Teaspis the Achaimenid, he did not sail round Libya, though he
was sent for this very purpose, but was struck with fear by the length
of the voyage and the desolate nature of the land, and so returned back
and did not accomplish the task which his mother laid upon him. For this
man had outraged a daughter of Zopyros the son of Megabyzos, a virgin;
and then when he was about to be impaled by order of king Xerxes for
this offence, the mother of Sataspes, who was a sister of Dareios,
entreated for his life, saying that she would herself lay upon him a
greater penalty than Xerxes; for he should be compelled (she said) to
sail round Libya, until in sailing round it he came to the Arabian gulf.
So then Xerxes having agreed upon these terms, Sataspes went to Egypt,
and obtaining a ship and sailors from the Egyptians, he sailed to the
Pillars of Heracles; and having sailed through them and turned the point
of Libya which is called the promontory of Soloeis, he sailed on towards
the South. Then after he had passed over much sea in many months, as
there was needed ever more and more voyaging, he turned about and sailed
back again to Egypt: and having come from thence into the presence of
king Xerxes, he reported saying that at the furthest point which he
reached he was sailing by dwarfish people, who used clothing made from
the palm-tree, and who, whenever they came to land with their ship, left
their towns and fled away to the mountains: and they, he said, did no
injury when they entered into the towns, but took food 4301 from them
only. And the cause, he said, why he had not completely sailed round
Libya was that the ship could not advance any further but stuck fast.
Xerxes however did not believe that he was speaking the truth, and since
he had not performed the appointed task, he impaled him, inflicting upon
him the penalty pronounced before. A eunuch belonging to this Sataspes
ran away to Samos as soon as he heard that his master was dead,
carrying with him large sums of money; and of this a man of Samos took
possession, whose name I know, but I purposely pass it over without
mention.

44. Of Asia the greater part was explored by Dareios, who desiring to
know of the river Indus, which is a second river producing crocodiles of
all the rivers in the world,to know, I say, of this river where it runs
out into the sea, sent with ships, besides others whom he trusted to
speak the truth, Skylax also, a man of Caryanda. These starting from
the city of Caspatyros and the land of Pactyïke, sailed down the river
towards the East and the sunrising to the sea; and then sailing over the
sea Westwards they came in the thirtieth month to that place from whence
the king of the Egyptians had sent out the Phenicians of whom I spoke
before, to sail round Libya. After these had made their voyage round the
coast, Dareios both subdued the Indians and made use of this sea. Thus
Asia also, excepting the parts of it which are towards the rising sun,
has been found to be similar 44 to Libya.

45. As to Europe, however, it is clearly not known by any, either as
regards the parts which are towards the rising sun or those towards the
North, whether it be surrounded by sea: but in length it is known
to stretch along by both the other divisions. And I am not able to
understand for what reason it is that to the Earth, which is one, three
different names are given derived from women, and why there were set
as boundaries to divide it the river Nile of Egypt and the Phasis in
Colchis (or as some say the Maiotian river Tanaïs and the Kimmerian
ferry); nor can I learn who those persons were who made the boundaries,
or for what reason they gave the names. Libya indeed is said by most of
the Hellenes to have its name from Libya a woman of that country, and
Asia from the wife of Prometheus: but this last name is claimed by the
Lydians, who say that Asia has been called after Asias the son of Cotys
the son of Manes, and not from Asia the wife of Prometheus; and from
him too they say the Asian tribe in Sardis has its name. As to Europe
however, it is neither known by any man whether it is surrounded by sea,
nor does it appear whence it got this name or who he was who gave it,
unless we shall say that the land received its name from Europa the
Tyrian; and if so, it would appear that before this it was nameless like
the rest. She however evidently belongs to Asia and did not come to this
land which is now called by the Hellenes Europe, but only from Phenicia
to Crete, and from Crete to Lykia. Let this suffice now which has been
said about these matters; for we will adopt those which are commonly
accepted of the accounts.

46. Now the region of the Euxine upon which Dareios was preparing to
march has, apart from the Scythian race, the most ignorant nations
within it of all lands: for we can neither put forward any nation of
those who dwell within the region of Pontus as eminent in ability, nor
do we know of any man of learning 45 having arisen there, apart from the
Scythian nation and Anacharsis. By the Scythian race one thing which is
the most important of all human things has been found out more cleverly
than by any other men of whom we know; but in other respects I have no
great admiration for them: and that most important thing which they have
discovered is such that none can escape again who has come to attack
them, and if they do not desire to be found, it is not possible to catch
them: for they who have neither cities founded nor walls built, but all
carry their houses with them and are mounted archers, living not by the
plough but by cattle, and whose dwellings are upon cars, these assuredly
are invincible and impossible to approach.

47. This they have found out, seeing that their land is suitable to it
and at the same time the rivers are their allies: for first this land
is plain land and is grassy and well watered, and then there are rivers
flowing through it not much less in number than the channels in Egypt.
Of these as many as are noteworthy and also can be navigated from the
sea, I will name: there is Ister with five mouths, and after this Tyras,
Hypanis, Borysthenes, Panticapes, Kypakyris, Gerros and Tanaïs. These
flow as I shall now describe.

48. The Ister, which is the greatest of all the rivers which we know,
flows always with equal volume in summer and winter alike. It is the
first towards the West of all the Scythian rivers, and it has become the
greatest of all rivers because other rivers flow into it. And these
are they which make it great: 46five in number are those 47 which flow
through the Scythian land, namely that which the Scythians call Porata
and the Hellenes Pyretos, and besides this, Tiarantos and Araros and
Naparis and Ordessos. The first-mentioned of these is a great river
lying towards the East, and there it joins waters with the Ister, the
second Tiarantos is more to the West and smaller, and the Araros and
Naparis and Ordessos flow into the Ister going between these two.

49. These are the native Scythian rivers which join to swell its stream,
while from the Agathyrsians flows the Maris and joins the Ister, and
from the summits of Haimos flow three other great rivers towards the
North Wind and fall into it, namely Atlas and Auras and Tibisis. Through
Thrace and the Thracian Crobyzians flow the rivers Athrys and Noes
and Artanes, running into the Ister; and from the Paionians and Mount
Rhodope the river Kios, 48 cutting through Haimos in the midst, runs
into it also. From the Illyrians the river Angros flows Northwards and
runs out into the Triballian plain and into the river Brongos, and the
Brongos flows into the Ister; thus the Ister receives both these, being
great rivers. From the region which is above the Ombricans, the river
Carpis and another river, the Alpis, flow also towards the North Wind
and run into it; for the Ister flows in fact through the whole of
Europe, beginning in the land of the Keltoi, who after the Kynesians
dwell furthest towards the sun-setting of all the peoples of Europe;
and thus flowing through all Europe it falls into the sea by the side of
Scythia.

50. So then it is because these which have been named and many others
join their waters together, that Ister becomes the greatest of rivers;
since if we compare the single streams, the Nile is superior in volume
of water; for into this no river or spring flows, to contribute to its
volume. And the Ister flows at an equal level always both in summer and
in winter for some such cause as this, as I suppose:in winter it is
of the natural size, or becomes only a little larger than its nature,
seeing that this land receives very little rain in winter, but
constantly has snow; whereas in summer the snow which fell in the
winter, in quantity abundant, melts and runs from all parts into the
Ister. This snow of which I speak, running into the river helps to swell
its volume, and with it also many and violent showers of rain, for it
rains during the summer: and thus the waters which mingle with the Ister
are more copious in summer than they are in winter by about as much as
the water which the Sun draws to himself in summer exceeds that which he
draws in winter; and by the setting of these things against one another
there is produced a balance; so that the river is seen to be of equal
volume always.

51. One, I say, of the rivers which the Scythians have is the Ister; and
after it the Tyras, which starts from the North and begins its course
from a large lake which is the boundary between the land of the
Scythians and that of the Neuroi. At its mouth are settled those
Hellenes who are called Tyritai.

52. The third river is the Hypanis, which starts from Scythia and flows
from a great lake round which feed white wild horses; and this lake is
rightly called "Mother of Hypanis." From this then the river Hypanis
takes its rise and for a distance of five days' sail it flows shallow
and with sweet water still; 49 but from this point on towards the sea
for four days' sail it is very bitter, for there flows into it the water
of a bitter spring, which is so exceedingly bitter that, small as it is,
it changes the water of the Hypanis by mingling with it, though that
is a river to which few are equal in greatness. This spring is on
the border between the lands of the agricultural Scythians and of the
Alazonians, and the name of the spring and of the place from which it
flows is in Scythian Exampaios, and in the Hellenic tongue Hierai Hodoi.
50 Now the Tyras and the Hypanis approach one another in their windings
in the land of the Alazonians, but after this each turns off and widens
the space between them as they flow.

53. Fourth is the river Borysthenes, which is both the largest of these
after the Ister, and also in our opinion the most serviceable not only
of the Scythian rivers but also of all the rivers of the world besides,
excepting only the Nile of Egypt, for to this it is not possible to
compare any other river: of the rest however the Borysthenes is the most
serviceable, seeing that it provides both pastures which are the fairest
and the richest for cattle, and fish which are better by far and more
numerous than those of any other river, and also it is the sweetest
water to drink, and flows with clear stream, though others beside it are
turbid, and along its banks crops are produced better than elsewhere,
while in parts where it is not sown, grass grows deeper. Moreover at its
mouth salt forms of itself in abundance, and it produces also huge fish
without spines, which they call antacaioi, to be used for salting, and
many other things also worthy of wonder. Now as far as the region of the
Gerrians, 51 to which it is a voyage of forty 52 days, the Borysthenes
is known as flowing from the North Wind; but above this none can tell
through what nations it flows: it is certain however that it runs
through desert 53 to the land of the agricultural Scythians; for these
Scythians dwell along its banks for a distance of ten days' sail. Of
this river alone and of the Nile I cannot tell where the sources are,
nor, I think, can any of the Hellenes. When the Borysthenes comes near
the sea in its course, the Hypanis mingles with it, running out into the
same marsh; 5301 and the space between these two rivers, which is as it
were a beak of land, 54 is called the point of Hippoles, and in it is
placed a temple of the Mother, 55 and opposite the temple upon the river
Hypanis are settled the Borysthenites.

54. This is that which has to do with these rivers; and after these
there is a fifth river besides, called Panticapes. This also flows 56
both from the North and from a lake, and in the space between this river
and the Borysthenes dwell the agricultural Scythians: it runs out into
the region of Hylaia, and having passed by this it mingles with the
Borysthenes.

55. Sixth comes the river Hypakyris, which starts from a lake, and
flowing through the midst of the nomad Scythians runs out into the sea
by the city of Carkinitis, skirting on its right bank the region of
Hylaia and the so-called racecourse of Achilles.

56. Seventh is the Gerros, which parts off from the Borysthenes near
about that part of the country where the Borysthenes ceases to be
known,it parts off, I say, in this region and has the same name which
this region itself has, namely Gerros; and as it flows to the sea it
borders the country of the nomad and that of the Royal Scythians, and
runs out into the Hypakyris.

57. The eighth is the river Tanaïs, which starts in its flow at first
from a large lake, and runs out into a still larger lake called Maiotis,
which is the boundary between the Royal Scythians and the Sauromatai.
Into this Tanaïs falls another river, whose name is Hyrgis.

58. So many are the rivers of note with which the Scythians are
provided: and for cattle the grass which comes up in the land of Scythia
is the most productive of bile of any grass which we know; and that this
is so you may judge when you open the bodies of the cattle.

59. Thus abundant supply have they of that which is most important;
and as for the rest their customs are as follows. The gods whom they
propitiate by worship are these only:Hestia most of all, then Zeus and
the Earth, supposing that Earth is the wife of Zeus, and after these
Apollo, and Aphrodite Urania, and Heracles, and Ares. Of these all
the Scythians have the worship established, and the so-called Royal
Scythians sacrifice also to Poseidon. Now Hestia is called in Scythian
Tabiti, and Zeus, being most rightly named in my opinion, is called
Papaios, and Earth Api, 57 and Apollo Oitosyros, 58 and Aphrodite Urania
is called Argimpasa, 59 and Poseidon Thagimasidas. 60 It is not their
custom however to make images, altars or temples to any except Ares, but
to him it is their custom to make them.

60. They have all the same manner of sacrifice established for all their
religious rites equally, and it is thus performed:the victim stands
with its fore-feet tied, and the sacrificing priest stands behind the
victim, and by pulling the end of the cord he throws the beast down; and
as the victim falls, he calls upon the god to whom he is sacrificing,
and then at once throws a noose round its neck, and putting a small
stick into it he turns it round and so strangles the animal, without
either lighting a fire or making any first offering from the victim or
pouring any libation over it: and when he has strangled it and flayed
off the skin, he proceeds to boil it.

61. Now as the land of Scythia is exceedingly ill wooded, this
contrivance has been invented for the boiling of the flesh:having
flayed the victims, they strip the flesh off the bones and then put it
into caldrons, if they happen to have any, of native make, which
very much resemble Lesbian mixing-bowls except that they are much
larger,into these they put the flesh and boil it by lighting under it
the bones of the victim: if however thy have not at hand the caldron,
they put all the flesh into the stomachs of the victims and adding water
they light the bones under them; and these blaze up beautifully, and the
stomachs easily hold the flesh when it has been stripped off the bones:
thus an ox is made to boil itself, and the other kinds of victims each
boil themselves also. Then when the flesh is boiled, the sacrificer
takes a first offering of the flesh and of the vital organs and casts
it in front of him. And they sacrifice various kinds of cattle, but
especially horses.

62. To the others of the gods they sacrifice thus and these kinds
of beasts, but to Ares as follows:In each district of the several
governments 61 they have a temple of Ares set up in this way:bundles
of brushwood are heaped up for about three furlongs 62 in length and
in breadth, but less in height; and on the top of this there is a level
square made, and three of the sides rise sheer but by the remaining one
side the pile may be ascended. Every year they pile on a hundred and
fifty waggon-loads of brushwood, for it is constantly settling down by
reason of the weather. 63 Upon this pile of which I speak each people
has an ancient iron sword 64 set up, and this is the sacred symbol 65 of
Ares. To this sword they bring yearly offerings of cattle and of horses;
and they have the following sacrifice in addition, beyond what they make
to the other gods, that is to say, of all the enemies whom they take
captive in war they sacrifice one man in every hundred, not in the same
manner as they sacrifice cattle, but in a different manner: for they
first pour wine over their heads, and after that they cut the throats of
the men, so that the blood runs into a bowl; and then they carry this up
to the top of the pile of brushwood and pour the blood over the sword.
This, I say, they carry up; and meanwhile below by the side of the
temple they are doing thus:they cut off all the right arms of the
slaughtered men with the hands and throw them up into the air, and then
when they have finished offering the other victims, they go away; and
the arm lies wheresoever it has chanced to fall, and the corpse apart
from it.

63. Such are the sacrifices which are established among them; but of
swine these make no use, nor indeed are they wont to keep them at all in
their land.

64. That which relates to war is thus ordered with them:When a Scythian
has slain his first man, he drinks some of his blood: and of all those
whom he slays in the battle he bears the heads to the king; for if he
has brought a head he shares in the spoil which they have taken, but
otherwise not. And he takes off the skin of the head by cutting it round
about the ears and then taking hold of the scalp and shaking it off;
afterwards he scrapes off the flesh with the rib of an ox, and works the
skin about with his hands; and when he has thus tempered it, he keeps it
as a napkin to wipe the hands upon, and hangs it from the bridle of the
horse on which he himself rides, and takes pride in it; for whosoever
has the greatest number of skins to wipe the hands upon, he is judged to
be the bravest man. Many also make cloaks to wear of the skins stripped
off, sewing them together like shepherds' cloaks of skins; 66 and many
take the skin together with the finger-nails off the right hands of
their enemies when they are dead, and make them into covers for their
quivers: now human skin it seems is both thick and glossy in appearance,
more brilliantly white than any other skin. Many also take the skins
off the whole bodies of men and stretch them on pieces of wood and carry
them about on their horses.

65. Such are their established customs about these things; and to the
skulls themselves, not of all but of their greatest enemies, they do
thus:the man saws off all below the eyebrows and clears out the inside;
and if he is a poor man he only stretches ox-hide round it and then
makes use of it; but if he be rich, besides stretching the ox-hide he
gilds it over within, and makes use of it as a drinking-cup. They do
this also if any of their own family have been at variance with them and
the man gets the better of his adversary in trial before the king; and
when strangers come to him whom he highly esteems, he sets these skulls
before them, and adds the comment that they being of his own family had
made war against him, and that he had got the better of them; and this
they hold to be a proof of manly virtue.

66. Once every year each ruler of a district mixes in his own district
a bowl of wine, from which those of the Scythians drink by whom enemies
have been slain; but those by whom this has not been done do not taste
of the wine, but sit apart dishonoured; and this is the greatest of
all disgraces among them: but those of them who have slain a very great
number of men, drink with two cups together at the same time.

67. Diviners there are many among the Scythians, and they divine with a
number of willow rods in the following manner:they bring large bundles
of rods, and having laid them on the ground they unroll them, and
setting each rod by itself apart they prophesy; and while speaking thus,
they roll the rods together again, and after that they place them in
order a second time one by one. 67 This manner of divination they have
from their fathers: but the Enareës or "man-women" 68 say that Aphrodite
gave them the gift of divination, and they divine accordingly with
the bark of the linden-tree. Having divided the linden-bark into three
strips, the man twists them together in his fingers and untwists them
again, and as he does this he utters the oracle.

68. When the king of the Scythians is sick, he sends for three of the
diviners, namely those who are most in repute, who divine in the manner
which has been said: and these say for the most part something like
this, namely that so and so has sworn falsely by the hearth of the king,
and they name one of the citizens, whosoever it may happen to be: now it
is the prevailing custom of the Scythians to swear by the hearth of the
king at the times when they desire to swear the most solemn oath. He
then who they say has sworn falsely, is brought forthwith held fast on
both sides; and when he has come the diviners charge him with this, that
he is shown by their divination to have sworn falsely by the hearth of
the king, and that for this reason the king is suffering pain: and
he denies and says that he did not swear falsely, and complains
indignantly: and when he denies it, the king sends for other diviners
twice as many in number, and if these also by looking into their
divination pronounce him guilty of having sworn falsely, at once they
cut off the man's head, and the diviners who came first part his goods
among them by lot; but if the diviners who came in afterwards acquit
him, other diviners come in, and again others after them. If then the
greater number acquit the man, the sentence is that the first diviners
shall themselves be put to death.

69. They put them to death accordingly in the following manner:first
they fill a waggon with brushwood and yoke oxen to it; then having bound
the feet of the diviners and tied their hands behind them and stopped
their mouths with gags, they fasten them down in the middle of the
brushwood, and having set fire to it they scare the oxen and let them
go: and often the oxen are burnt to death together with the diviners,
and often they escape after being scorched, when the pole to which they
are fastened has been burnt: and they burn the diviners in the manner
described for other causes also, calling them false prophets. Now when
the king puts any to death, he does not leave alive their sons either,
but he puts to death all the males, not doing any hurt to the females.

70. In the following manner the Scythians make oaths to whomsoever they
make them:they pour wine into a great earthenware cup and mingle with
it blood of those who are taking the oath to one another, either making
a prick with an awl or cutting with a dagger a little way into their
body, and then they dip into the cup a sword and arrows and a battle-axe
and a javelin; and having done this, they invoke many curses on the
breaker of the oath, and afterwards they drink it off, both they who are
making the oath and the most honourable of their company.

71. The burial-place of the kings is in the land of the Gerrians, the
place up to which the Borysthenes is navigable. In this place, when
their king has died, they make a large square excavation in the earth;
and when they have made this ready, they take up the corpse (the body
being covered over with wax and the belly ripped up and cleansed, and
then sewn together again, after it has been filled with kyperos 69
cut up and spices and parsley-seed and anise), and they convey it in
a waggon to another nation. Then those who receive the corpse thus
conveyed to them do the same as the Royal Scythians, that is they
cut off a part of their ear and shave their hair round about and cut
themselves all over the arms and tear their forehead and nose and pass
arrows through their left hand. Thence they convey in the waggon the
corpse of the king to another of the nations over whom they rule; and
they to whom they came before accompany them: and when they have gone
round to all conveying the corpse, then they are in the land of the
Gerrians, who have their settlements furthest away of all the nations
over whom they rule, and they have reached the spot where the burial
place is. After that, having placed the corpse in the tomb upon a bed of
leaves, they stick spears along on this side and that of the corpse and
stretch pieces of wood over them, and then they cover the place in with
matting. Then they strangle and bury in the remaining space of the
tomb one of the king's mistresses, his cup-bearer, his cook, his
horse-keeper, his attendant, and his bearer of messages, and also
horses, and a first portion of all things else, and cups of gold; for
silver they do not use at all, nor yet bronze. 70 Having thus done they
all join together to pile up a great mound, vying with one another and
zealously endeavouring to make it as large as possible.

72. Afterwards, when the year comes round again, they do as
follows:they take the most capable of the remaining servants,and these
are native Scythians, for those serve him whom the king himself commands
to do so, and his servants are not bought for money,of these attendants
then they strangle fifty and also fifty of the finest horses; and when
they have taken out their bowels and cleansed the belly, they fill it
with chaff and sew it together again. Then they set the half of a wheel
upon two stakes with the hollow side upwards, and the other half of the
wheel upon other two stakes, and in this manner they fix a number of
these; and after this they run thick stakes through the length of the
horses as far as the necks, and they mount them upon the wheels; and the
front pieces of wheel support the shoulders of the horses, while those
behind bear up their bellies, going by the side of the thighs; and both
front and hind legs hang in the air. On the horses they put bridles and
bits, and stretch the bridles tight in front of them and then tie them
up to pegs: and of the fifty young men who have been strangled they
mount each one upon his horse, having first 71 run a straight stake
through each body along by the spine up to the neck; and a part of this
stake projects below, which they fasten into a socket made in the other
stake that runs through the horse. Having set horsemen such as I have
described in a circle round the tomb, they then ride away.

73. Thus they bury their kings; but as for the other Scythians, when
they die their nearest relations carry them round laid in waggons to
their friends in succession; and of them each one when he receives the
body entertains those who accompany it, and before the corpse they serve
up of all things about the same quantity as before the others. Thus
private persons are carried about for forty days, and then they are
buried: and after burying them the Scythians cleanse themselves in the
following way:they soap their heads and wash them well, and then, for
their body, they set up three stakes leaning towards one another and
about them they stretch woollen felt coverings, and when they have
closed them as much as possible they throw stones heated red-hot into a
basin placed in the middle of the stakes and the felt coverings.

74. Now they have hemp growing in their land, which is very like flax
except in thickness and in height, for in these respects the hemp is
much superior. This grows both of itself and with cultivation; and of
it the Thracians even make garments, which are very like those made of
flaxen thread, so that he who was not specially conversant with it would
not be able to decide whether the garments were of flax or of hemp; and
he who had not before seen stuff woven of hemp would suppose that the
garment was made of flax.

75. The Scythians then take the seed of this hemp and creep under the
felt coverings, and then they throw the seed upon the stones which have
been heated red-hot: and it burns like incense and produces a vapour so
thick that no vapour-bath in Hellas would surpass it: and the Scythians
being delighted with the vapour-bath howl like wolves. 72 This is to
them instead of washing, for in fact they do not wash their bodies at
all in water. Their women however pound with a rough stone the wood of
the cypress and cedar and frankincense tree, pouring in water with it,
and then with this pounded stuff, which is thick, they plaster over all
their body and also their face; and not only does a sweet smell attach
to them by reason of this, but also when they take off the plaster on
the next day, their skin is clean and shining.

76. This nation also 73 is very averse to adopting strange customs,
rejecting even those of other tribes among themselves, 74 but especially
those of the Hellenes, as the history of Anacharsis and also afterwards
of Skyles proved. 75 For as to Anacharsis first, when he was returning
to the abodes of the Scythians, after having visited many lands 76 and
displayed in them much wisdom, as he sailed through the Hellespont he
put in to Kyzicos: and since he found the people of Kyzicos celebrating
a festival very magnificently in honour of the Mother of the gods,
Anacharsis vowed to the Mother that if he should return safe and sound
to his own land, he would both sacrifice to her with the same rites as
he saw the men of Kyzicos do, and also hold a night festival. So when
he came to Scythia he went down into the region called Hylaia (this is
along by the side of the racecourse of Achilles and is quite full, as it
happens, of trees of all kinds),into this, I say, Anacharsis went down,
and proceeded to perform all the ceremonies of the festival in honour of
the goddess, with a kettle-drum and with images hung about himself. And
one of the Scythians perceived him doing this and declared it to Saulios
the king; and the king came himself also, and when he saw Anacharsis
doing this, he shot him with an arrow and killed him. Accordingly at the
present time if one asks about Anacharsis, the Scythians say that they
do not know him, and for this reason, because he went out of his own
country to Hellas and adopted foreign customs. And as I heard from
Tymnes the steward 77 of Ariapeithes, he was the uncle on the father's
side of Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians, and the son of Gnuros, the
son of Lycos, the son of Spargapeithes. If then Anacharsis was of
this house, let him know that he died by the hand of his brother,
for Idanthyrsos was the son of Saulios, and Saulios was he who killed
Anacharsis.

77. However I have heard also another story, told by the Peloponnesians,
that Anacharsis was sent out by the king of the Scythians, and so made
himself a disciple of Hellas; and that when he returned back he said
to him that had sent him forth, that the Hellenes were all busied about
every kind of cleverness except the Lacedemonians; but these alone knew
how to exchange speech sensibly. This story however has been invented 78
without any ground by the Hellenes themselves; and however that may be,
the man was slain in the way that was related above.

78. This man then fared thus badly by reason of foreign customs and
communication with Hellenes; and very many years afterwards Skyles the
son of Ariapeithes suffered nearly the same fate as he. For Ariapeithes
the king of the Scythians with other sons had Skyles born to him: and
he was born of a woman who was of Istria, and certainly not a native of
Scythia; and this mother taught him the language and letters of Hellas.
Afterwards in course of time Ariapeithes was brought to his end by
treachery at the hands of Spargapeithes the king of the Agathyrsians,
and Skyles succeeded to the kingdom; and he took not only that but also
the wife of his father, whose name was Opoia: this Opoia was a native
Scythian and from her was born Oricos to Ariapeithes. Now when Skyles
was king of the Scythians, he was by no means satisfied with the
Scythian manner of life, but was much more inclined towards Hellenic
ways because of the training with which he had been brought up, and he
used to do somewhat as follows:When he came with the Scythians in arms
to the city of the Borysthenites (now these Borysthenites say that they
are of Miletos),when Skyles came to these, he would leave his band in
the suburbs of the city and go himself within the walls and close the
gates. After that he would lay aside his Scythian equipments and
take Hellenic garments, and wearing them he would go about in the
market-place with no guards or any other man accompanying him (and they
watched the gates meanwhile, that none of the Scythians might see him
wearing this dress): and while in other respects too he adopted Hellenic
manners of life, he used also to perform worship to the gods according
to the customs of the Hellenes. Then having stayed a month or more than
that, he would put on the Scythian dress and depart. This he did many
times, and he both built for himself a house in Borysthenes and also
took to it a woman of the place as his wife.

79. Since however it was fated that evil should happen to him, it
happened by an occasion of this kind:he formed a desire to be initiated
in the rites of Bacchus-Dionysos, and as he was just about to receive 79
the initiation, there happened a very great portent. He had in the city
of the Borysthenites a house of great size and built with large expense,
of which also I made mention a little before this, and round it were
placed sphinxes and griffins of white stone: on this house Zeus 7901
caused a bolt to fall; and the house was altogether burnt down,
but Skyles none the less for this completed his initiation. Now the
Scythians make the rites of Bacchus a reproach against the Hellenes, for
they say that it is not fitting to invent a god like this, who impels
men to frenzy. So when Skyles had been initiated into the rites of
Bacchus, one of the Borysthenites went off 80 to the Scythians and said:
"Whereas ye laugh at us, O Scythians, because we perform the rite of
Bacchus and because the god seizes us, now this divinity has seized also
your king; and he is both joining in the rite of Bacchus and maddened
by the influence of the god. And if ye disbelieve me, follow and I
will show you." The chief men of the Scythians followed him, and the
Borysthenite led them secretly into the town and set them upon a
tower. So when Skyles passed by with the company of revellers, and the
Scythians saw him joining in the rite of Bacchus, they were exceedingly
grieved at it, and they went out and declared to the whole band that
which they had seen.

80. After this when Skyles was riding out again to his own abode, the
Scythians took his brother Octamasades for their leader, who was a son
of the daughter of Teres, and made insurrection against Skyles. He then
when he perceived that which was being done to his hurt and for what
reason it was being done, fled for refuge to Thrace; and Octamasades
being informed of this, proceeded to march upon Thrace. So when he had
arrived at the river Ister, the Thracians met him; and as they were
about to engage battle, Sitalkes sent a messenger to Octamasades and
said: "Why must we make trial of one another in fight? Thou art my
sister's son and thou hast in thy power my brother. Do thou give him
back to me, and I will deliver to thee thy brother Skyles: and let
us not either of us set our armies in peril, either thou or I." Thus
Sitalkes proposed to him by a herald; for there was with Octamasades
a brother of Sitalkes, who had gone into exile for fear of him. And
Octamasades agreed to this, and by giving up his own mother's brother to
Sitalkes he received his brother Skyles in exchange: and Sitalkes when
he received his brother led him away as a prisoner, but Octamasades
cut off the head of Skyles there upon the spot. Thus do the Scythians
carefully guard their own customary observances, and such are the
penalties which they inflict upon those who acquire foreign customs
besides their own.

81. How many the Scythians are I was not able to ascertain precisely,
but I heard various reports of the number: for reports say both that
they are very many in number and also that they are few, at least as
regards the true Scythians. 81 Thus far however they gave me evidence of
my own eyesight:there is between the river Borysthenes and the Hypanis
a place called Exampaios, of which also I made mention somewhat before
this, saying that there was in it a spring of bitter water, from which
the water flows and makes the river Hypanis unfit to drink. In this
place there is set a bronze bowl, in size at least six times as large as
the mixing-bowl at the entrance of the Pontus, which Pausanias the son
of Cleombrotos dedicated: and for him who has never seen that, I will
make the matter clear by saying that the bowl in Scythia holds easily
six hundred amphors, 82 and the thickness of this Scythian bowl is six
fingers. This then the natives of the place told me had been made of
arrow-heads: for their king, they said, whose name was Ariantas, wishing
to know how many the Scythians were, ordered all the Scythians to bring
one arrow-head, each from his own arrow, and whosoever should not bring
one, he threatened with death. So a great multitude of arrow-heads was
brought, and he resolved to make of them a memorial and to leave it
behind him: from these then, they said, he made this bronze bowl and
dedicated it in this place Exampaios.

82. This is what I heard about the number of the Scythians. Now this
land has no marvellous things except that it has rivers which are by far
larger and more numerous than those of any other land. One thing however
shall be mentioned which it has to show, and which is worthy of wonder
even besides the rivers and the greatness of the plain, that is to say,
they point out a footprint of Heracles in the rock by the bank of the
river Tyras, which in shape is like the mark of a man's foot but in size
is two cubits long. This then is such as I have said; and I will go back
now to the history which I was about to tell at first.

83. While Dareios was preparing to go against the Scythians and was
sending messengers to appoint to some the furnishing of a land-army, to
others that of ships, and to others the bridging over of the Thracian
Bosphorus, Artabanos, the son of Hystaspes and brother of Dareios, urged
him by no means to make the march against the Scythians, telling him
how difficult the Scythians were to deal with. Since however he did not
persuade him, though he gave him good counsel, he ceased to urge; and
Dareios, when all his preparations had been made, began to march his
army forth from Susa.

84. Then one of the Persians, Oiobazos, made request to Dareios that as
he had three sons and all were serving in the expedition, one might be
left behind for him: and Dareios said that as he was a friend and made a
reasonable request, he would leave behind all the sons. So Oiobazos was
greatly rejoiced, supposing that his sons had been freed from service,
but Dareios commanded those who had the charge of such things to put to
death all the sons of Oiobazos.

85. These then were left, having been slain upon the spot where they
were: and Dareios meanwhile set forth from Susa and arrived at the
place on the Bosphorus where the bridge of ships had been made, in the
territory of Chalcedon; and there he embarked in a ship and sailed
to the so-called Kyanean rocks, which the Hellenes say formerly moved
backwards and forwards; and taking his seat at the temple 83 he gazed
upon the Pontus, which is a sight well worth seeing. Of all seas indeed
it is the most marvellous in its nature. The length of it is eleven
thousand one hundred furlongs, 84 and the breadth, where it is broadest,
three thousand three hundred: and of this great Sea the mouth is but
four furlongs broad, and the length of the mouth, that is of the neck of
water which is called Bosphorus, where, as I said, the bridge of ships
had been made, is not less than a hundred and twenty furlongs. This
Bosphorus extends to the Propontis; and the Propontis, being in breadth
five hundred furlongs and in length one thousand four hundred, has its
outlet into the Hellespont, which is but seven furlongs broad at the
narrowest place, though it is four hundred furlongs in length: and the
Hellespont runs out into that expanse of sea which is called the Egean.

86. These measurements I have made as follows:a ship completes on an
average in a long day a distance of seventy thousand fathoms, and in
a night sixty thousand. Now we know that to the river Phasis from the
mouth of the Sea (for it is here that the Pontus is longest) is a voyage
of nine days and eight nights, which amounts to one hundred and eleven
myriads 85 of fathoms; and these fathoms are eleven thousand one hundred
furlongs. Then from the land of the Sindians to Themiskyra on the river
Thermodon (for here is the broadest part of the Pontus) it is a voyage
of three days and two nights, which amounts to thirty-three myriads 86
of fathoms or three thousand three hundred furlongs. This Pontus then
and also the Bosphorus and the Hellespont have been measured by me thus,
and their nature is such as has been said: and this Pontus also has a
lake which has its outlet into it, which lake is not much less in size
than the Pontus itself, and it is called Maiotis and "Mother of the
Pontus."

87. Dareios then having gazed upon the Pontus sailed back to the bridge,
of which Mandrocles a Samian had been chief constructor; and having
gazed upon the Bosphorus also, he set up two pillars 8601 by it of white
stone with characters cut upon them, on the one Assyrian and on the
other Hellenic, being the names of all the nations which he was leading
with him: and he was leading with him all over whom he was ruler. The
whole number of them without the naval force was reckoned to be seventy
myriads 87 including cavalry, and ships had been gathered together to
the number of six hundred. These pillars the Byzantians conveyed to
their city after the events of which I speak, and used them for the
altar of Artemis Orthosia, excepting one stone, which was left standing
by the side of the temple of Dionysos in Byzantion, covered over with
Assyrian characters. Now the place on the Bosphorus where Dareios made
his bridge is, as I conclude, 8701 midway between Byzantion and the
temple at the mouth of the Pontus.

88. After this Dareios being pleased with the floating bridge rewarded
the chief constructor of it, Mandrocles the Samian, with gifts tenfold;
88 and as an offering from these Mandrocles had a painting made of
figures to present the whole scene of the bridge over the Bosphorus and
king Dareios sitting in a prominent seat and his army crossing over;
this he caused to be painted and dedicated it as an offering in the
temple of Hera, with the following inscription:


 "Bosphorus having bridged over, the straits fish-abounding, to Hera
    Mandrocleës dedicates this, of his work to record;
  A crown on himself he set, and he brought to the Samians glory,
    And for Dareios performed everything after his mind."

89. This memorial was made of him who constructed the bridge: and
Dareios, after he had rewarded Mandrocles with gifts, passed over into
Europe, having first commanded the Ionians to sail into the Pontus as
far as the river Ister, and when they arrived at the Ister, there to
wait for him, making a bridge meanwhile over the river; for the chief of
his naval force were the Ionians, the Aiolians and the Hellespontians.
So the fleet sailed through between the Kyanean rocks and made straight
for the Ister; and then they sailed up the river a two days' voyage from
the sea and proceeded to make a bridge across the neck, as it were, of
the river, where the mouths of the Ister part off. Dareios meanwhile,
having crossed the Bosphorus on the floating bridge, was advancing
through Thrace, and when he came to the sources of the river Tearos he
encamped for three days.

90. Now the Tearos is said by those who dwell near it to be the best of
all rivers, both in other respects which tend to healing and especially
for curing diseases of the skin 89 both in men and in horses: and its
springs are thirty-eight in number, flowing all from the same rock, of
which some are cold and others warm. The way to them is of equal length
from the city of Heraion near Perinthos and from Apollonia upon the
Euxine Sea, that is to say two days' journey by each road. This Tearos
runs into the river Contadesdos and the Contadesdos into the Agrianes
and the Agrianes into the Hebros, which flows into the sea by the city
of Ainos.

91. Dareios then, having come to this river and having encamped there,
was pleased with the river and set up a pillar there also, with an
inscription as follows: "The head-springs of the river Tearos give the
best and fairest water of all rivers; and to them came leading an army
against the Scythians the best and fairest of all men, Dareios the son
of Hystaspes, of the Persians and of all the Continent king." These were
the words which were there written.

92. Dareios then set out from thence and came to another river whose
name is Artescos, which flows through the land of the Odrysians. Having
come to this river he did as follows:he appointed a place for his
army and bade every man as he passed out by it place one stone in this
appointed place: and when the army had performed this, then he marched
away his army leaving behind great mounds of these stones.

93. But before he came to the Ister he conquered first the Getai, who
believe in immortality: for the Thracians who occupy Salmydessos and
are settled above the cities of Apollonian and Mesambria, called the
Kyrmianai 90 and the Nipsaioi, delivered themselves over to Dareios
without fighting; but the Getai, who are the bravest and the most
upright in their dealings of all the Thracians, having betaken
themselves to obstinacy were forthwith subdued.

94. And their belief in immortality is of this kind, that is to say,
they hold that they do not die, but that he who is killed goes to
Salmoxis, 91 a divinity, 92 whom some of them call Gebeleizis; and at
intervals of four years 93 they send one of themselves, whomsoever
the lot may select, as a messenger to Salmoxis, charging him with
such requests as they have to make on each occasion; and they send him
thus:certain of them who are appointed for this have three javelins,
and others meanwhile take hold on both sides of him who is being sent to
Salmoxis, both by his hands and his feet, and first they swing him up,
then throw him into the air so as to fall upon the spear-points: and
if when he is pierced through he is killed, they think that the god is
favourable to them; but if he is not killed, they find fault with the
messenger himself, calling him a worthless man, and then having
found fault with him they send another: and they give him the charge
beforehand, while he is yet alive. These same Thracians also shoot
arrows up towards the sky when thunder and lightning come, and use
threats to the god, not believing that there exists any other god except
their own.

95. This Salmoxis I hear from the Hellenes who dwell about the
Hellespont and the Pontus, was a man, and he became a slave in Samos,
and was in fact a slave of Pythagoras the son of Mnesarchos. Then having
become free he gained great wealth, and afterwards returned to his
own land: and as the Thracians both live hardly and are rather
simple-minded, this Salmoxis, being acquainted with the Ionian way of
living and with manners more cultivated 94 than the Thracians were used
to see, since he had associated with Hellenes (and not only that but
with Pythagoras, not the least able philosopher 95 of the Hellenes),
prepared a banqueting-hall, 96 where he received and feasted the chief
men of the tribe and instructed them meanwhile that neither he himself
nor his guests nor their descendants in succession after them would die;
but that they would come to a place where they would live for ever and
have all things good. While he was doing that which has been mentioned
and was saying these things, he was making for himself meanwhile
a chamber under the ground; and when his chamber was finished, he
disappeared from among the Thracians and went down into the underground
chamber, where he continued to live for three years: and they grieved
for his loss and mourned for him as dead. Then in the fourth year he
appeared to the Thracians, and in this way the things which Salmoxis
said became credible to them.

96. Thus they say that he did; but as to this matter and the chamber
under ground, I neither disbelieve it nor do I very strongly believe,
but I think that this Salmoxis lived many years before Pythagoras.
However, whether there ever lived a man Salmoxis, or whether he is
simply a native deity of the Getai, let us bid farewell to him now.

97. These, I say, having such manners as I have said, were subdued by
the Persians and accompanied the rest of the army: and when Dareios and
with him the land-army arrived at the Ister, then after all had passed
over, Dareios commanded the Ionians to break up the floating bridge and
to accompany him by land, as well as the rest of the troops which were
in the ships: and when the Ionians were just about to break it up and to
do that which he commanded, Coës the son of Erxander, who was commander
of the Mytilenians, said thus to Dareios, having first inquired whether
he was disposed to listen to an opinion from one who desired to declare
it: "O king, seeing that thou art about to march upon a land where no
cultivated ground will be seen nor any inhabited town, do thou therefore
let this bridge remain where it is, leaving to guard it those same
men who constructed it. Then, if we find the Scythians and fare as we
desire, we have a way of return; and also even if we shall not be able
to find them, at least our way of return is secured: for that we should
be worsted by the Scythians in fight I never feared yet, but rather that
we might not be able to find them, and might suffer some disaster in
wandering about. Perhaps some one will say that in speaking thus I am
speaking for my own advantage, in order that I may remain behind; but in
truth I am bringing forward, O king, the opinion which I found best for
thee, and I myself will accompany thee and not be left behind." With
this opinion Dareios was very greatly pleased and made answer to him in
these words: "Friend from Lesbos, when I have returned safe to my house,
be sure that thou appear before me, in order that I may requite thee
with good deeds for good counsel."

98. Having thus said and having tied sixty knots in a thong, he called
the despots of the Ionians to speak with him and said as follows:
"Men of Ionia, know that I have given up the opinion which I formerly
declared with regard to the bridge; and do ye keep this thong and do
as I shall say:so soon as ye shall have seen me go forward against the
Scythians, from that time begin, and untie a knot on each day: and if
within this time I am not here, and ye find that the days marked by the
knots have passed by, then sail away to your own lands. Till then, since
our resolve has thus been changed, guard the floating bridge, showing
all diligence to keep it safe and to guard it. And thus acting, ye will
do for me a very acceptable service." Thus said Dareios and hastened on
his march forwards.

99. Now in front of Scythia in the direction towards the sea 97 lies
Thrace; and where a bay is formed in this land, there begins Scythia,
into which the Ister flows out, the mouth of the river being turned
towards the South-East Wind. Beginning at the Ister then I am about to
describe the coast land of the true Scythia, with regard to measurement.
At once from the Ister begins this original land of Scythia, and it
lies towards the midday and the South Wind, extending as far as the city
called Carkinitis. After this the part which lies on the coast of the
same sea still, a country which is mountainous and runs out in the
direction of the Pontus, is occupied by the Tauric race, as far as the
peninsula which is called the "Rugged Chersonese"; and this extends to
the sea which lies towards the East Wind: for two sides of the Scythian
boundaries lie along by the sea, one by the sea on the South, and the
other by that on the East, just as it is with Attica: and in truth the
Tauroi occupy a part of Scythia which has much resemblance to Attica; it
is as if in Attica another race and not the Athenians occupied the hill
region 98 of Sunion, supposing it to project more at the point into
the sea, that region namely which is cut off by a line from Thoricos to
Anaphlystos. Such I say, if we may be allowed to compare small things
such as this with great, is the form of the Tauric land. 99 For him
however who has not sailed along this part of the coast of Attica I will
make it clear by another comparison:it is as if in Iapygia another race
and not the Iapygians had cut off for themselves and were holding
that extremity of the land which is bounded by a line beginning at the
harbour of Brentesion and running to Taras. And in mentioning these two
similar cases I am suggesting many other things also to which the Tauric
land has resemblance.

100. After the Tauric land immediately come Scythians again, occupying
the parts above the Tauroi and the coasts of the Eastern sea, that is to
say the parts to the West of the Kimmerian Bosphorus and of the Maiotian
lake, as far as the river Tanaïs, which runs into the corner of this
lake. In the upper parts which tend inland Scythia is bounded (as we
know) 100 by the Agathyrsians first, beginning from the Ister, and
then by the Neuroi, afterwards by the Androphagoi, and lastly by the
Melanchlainoi.

101. Scythia then being looked upon as a four-sided figure with two of
its sides bordered by the sea, has its border lines equal to one another
in each direction, that which tends inland and that which runs along
by the sea: for from Ister to the Borysthenes is ten days' journey,
and from the Borysthenes to the Maiotian lake ten days' more; and
the distance inland to the Melanchlainoi, who are settled above the
Scythians, is a journey of twenty days. Now I have reckoned the day's
journey at two hundred furlongs: 101 and by this reckoning the cross
lines of Scythia 102 would be four thousand furlongs in length, and the
perpendiculars which tend inland would be the same number of furlongs.
Such is the size of this land.

102. The Scythians meanwhile having considered with themselves that they
were not able to repel the army of Dareios alone by a pitched battle,
proceeded to send messengers to those who dwelt near them: and already
the kings of these nations had come together and were taking counsel
with one another, since so great an army was marching towards them. Now
those who had come together were the kings of the Tauroi, Agathyrsians,
Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi, Gelonians, Budinoi and Sauromatai.

103. Of these the Tauroi have the following customs:they sacrifice to
the "Maiden" both ship-wrecked persons and also those Hellenes whom they
can capture by putting out to sea against them; 103 and their manner
of sacrifice is this:when they have made the first offering from the
victim they strike his head with a club: and some say that they push
the body down from the top of the cliff (for it is upon a cliff that
the temple is placed) and set the head up on a stake; but others, while
agreeing as to the heads, say nevertheless that the body is not pushed
down from the top of the cliff, but buried in the earth. This divinity
to whom they sacrifice, the Tauroi themselves say is Iphigeneia the
daughter of Agamemnon. Whatsoever enemies they have conquered they
treat in this fashion:each man cuts off a head and bears it away to his
house; then he impales it on a long stake and sets it up above his house
raised to a great height, generally above the chimney; and they say that
these are suspended above as guards to preserve the whole house. This
people has its living by plunder and war.

104. The Agathyrsians are the most luxurious of men and wear gold
ornaments for the most part: also they have promiscuous intercourse with
their women, in order that they may be brethren to one another and being
all nearly related may not feel envy or malice one against another. In
their other customs they have come to resemble the Thracians.

105. The Neuroi practise the Scythian customs: and one generation before
the expedition of Dareios it so befell them that they were forced
to quit their land altogether by reason of serpents: for their land
produced serpents in vast numbers, and they fell upon them in still
larger numbers from the desert country above their borders; until at
last being hard pressed they left their own land and settled among the
Budinoi. These men it would seem are wizards; for it is said of them by
the Scythians and by the Hellenes who are settled in the Scythian land
that once in every year each of the Neuroi becomes a wolf for a few
days and then returns again to his original form. For my part I do not
believe them when they say this, but they say it nevertheless, and swear
it moreover.

106. The Androphagoi have the most savage manners of all human beings,
and they neither acknowledge any rule of right nor observe any customary
law. They are nomads and wear clothing like that of the Scythians, but
have a language of their own; and alone of all these nations they are
man-eaters.

107. The Melanchlainoi wear all of them black clothing, whence also they
have their name; and they practise the customs of the Scythians.

108. The Budinoi are a very great and numerous race, and are all very
blue-eyed and fair of skin: and in their land is built a city of wood,
the name of which is Gelonos, and each side of the wall is thirty
furlongs in length and lofty at the same time, all being of wood; and
the houses are of wood also and the temples; for there are in it temples
of Hellenic gods furnished after Hellenic fashion with sacred images and
altars and cells, 104 all of wood; and they keep festivals every
other year 105 to Dionysos and celebrate the rites of Bacchus: for the
Gelonians are originally Hellenes, and they removed 106 from the trading
stations on the coast and settled among the Budinoi; and they use partly
the Scythian language and partly the Hellenic. The Budinoi however
do not use the same language as the Gelonians, nor is their manner of
living the same:

109, for the Budinoi are natives of the soil and a nomad people, and
alone of the nations in these parts feed on fir-cones; 107 but the
Gelonians are tillers of the ground and feed on corn and have gardens,
and resemble them not at all either in appearance or in complexion of
skin. However by the Hellenes the Budinoi also are called Gelonians,
not being rightly so called. Their land is all thickly overgrown with
forests of all kinds of trees, and in the thickest forest there is a
large and deep lake, and round it marshy ground and reeds. In this
are caught otters and beavers and certainly other wild animals with
square-shaped faces. The fur of these is sewn as a fringe round their
coats of skin, and the testicles are made use of by them for curing
diseases of the womb.

110. About the Sauromatai the following tale is told:When the Hellenes
had fought with the Amazons,now the Amazons are called by the Scythians
Oiorpata, 108 which name means in the Hellenic tongue "slayers of men,"
for "man" they call oior, and pata means "to slay,"then, as the
story goes, the Hellenes, having conquered them in the battle at the
Thermodon, were sailing away and conveying with them in three ships as
many Amazons as they were able to take prisoners. These in the open sea
set upon the men and cast them out of the ships; but they knew nothing
about ships, nor how to use rudders or sails or oars, and after they
had cast out the men they were driven about by wave and wind and came to
that part of the Maiotian lake where Cremnoi stands; now Cremnoi is in
the land of the free Scythians. 109 There the Amazons disembarked from
their ships and made their way into the country, and having met first
with a troop of horses feeding they seized them, and mounted upon these
they plundered the property of the Scythians.

111. The Scythians meanwhile were not able to understand the matter,
for they did not know either their speech or their dress or the race to
which they belonged, but were in wonder as to whence they had come and
thought that they were men, of an age corresponding to their appearance:
and finally they fought a battle against them, and after the battle
the Scythians got possession of the bodies of the dead, and thus
they discovered that they were women. They took counsel therefore and
resolved by no means to go on trying to kill them, but to send against
them the youngest men from among themselves, making conjecture of the
number so as to send just as many men as there were women. These were
told to encamp near them, and do whatsoever they should do; if however
the women should come after them, they were not to fight but to retire
before them, and when the women stopped, they were to approach near and
encamp. This plan was adopted by the Scythians because they desired to
have children born from them.

112. The young men accordingly were sent out and did that which had been
commanded them: and when the Amazons perceived that they had not come
to do them any harm, they let them alone; and the two camps approached
nearer to one another every day: and the young men, like the Amazons,
had nothing except their arms and their horses, and got their living, as
the Amazons did, by hunting and by taking booty.

113. Now the Amazons at midday used to scatter abroad either one by one
or by two together, dispersing to a distance from one another to ease
themselves; and the Scythians also having perceived this did the same
thing: and one of the Scythians came near to one of those Amazons who
were apart by themselves, and she did not repulse him but allowed him
to lie with her: and she could not speak to him, for they did not
understand one another's speech, but she made signs to him with her hand
to come on the following day to the same place and to bring another with
him, signifying to him that there should be two of them, and that she
would bring another with her. The young man therefore, when he returned,
reported this to the others; and on the next day he came himself to the
place and also brought another, and he found the Amazon awaiting him
with another in her company. Then hearing this the rest of the young men
also in their turn tamed for themselves the remainder of the Amazons;

114, and after this they joined their camps and lived together, each man
having for his wife her with whom he had had dealings at first; and the
men were not able to learn the speech of the women, but the women came
to comprehend that of the men. So when they understood one another,
the men spoke to the Amazons as follows: "We have parents and we have
possessions; now therefore let us no longer lead a life of this kind,
but let us go away to the main body of our people and dwell with them;
and we will have you for wives and no others." They however spoke thus
in reply: "We should not be able to live with your women, for we and
they have not the same customs. We shoot with bows and hurl javelins and
ride horses, but the works of women we never learnt; whereas your women
do none of these things which we said, but stay in the waggons and work
at the works of women, neither going out to the chase nor anywhither
else. We therefore should not be able to live in agreement with them:
but if ye desire to keep us for your wives and to be thought honest men,
go to your parents and obtain from them your share of the goods, and
then let us go and dwell by ourselves."

115. The young men agreed and did this; and when they had obtained the
share of the goods which belonged to them and had returned back to the
Amazons, the women spoke to them as follows: "We are possessed by fear
and trembling to think that we must dwell in this place, having not
only separated you from your fathers, but also done great damage to your
land. Since then ye think it right to have us as your wives, do this
together with us,come and let us remove from this land and pass over
the river Tanaïs and there dwell."

116. The young men agreed to this also, and they crossed over the Tanaïs
and made their way towards the rising sun for three days' journey from
Tanaïs, and also towards the North Wind for three days' journey from
the Maiotian lake: and having arrived at the place where they are now
settled, they took up their abode there: and from thenceforward the
women of the Sauromatai practise their ancient way of living, going out
regularly on horseback to the chase both in company with the men and
apart from them, and going regularly to war, and wearing the same dress
as the men.

117. And the Sauromatai make use of the Scythian tongue, speaking it
barbarously however from the first, since the Amazons did not learn it
thoroughly well. As regards marriages their rule is this, that no maiden
is married until she has slain a man of their enemies; and some of them
even grow old and die before they are married, because they are not able
to fulfil the requirement of the law.

118. To the kings of these nations then, which have been mentioned
in order, the messengers of the Scythians came, finding them gathered
together, and spoke declaring to them how the Persian king, after having
subdued all things to himself in the other continent, had laid a bridge
over the neck of the Bosphorus and had crossed over to that continent,
and having crossed over and subdued the Thracians, was making a bridge
over the river Ister, desiring to bring under his power all these
regions also. "Do ye therefore," they said, "by no means stand aloof and
allow us to be destroyed, but let us become all of one mind and oppose
him who is coming against us. If ye shall not do so, we on our part
shall either be forced by necessity to leave our land, or we shall stay
in it and make a treaty with the invader; for what else can we do if ye
are not willing to help us? and for you after this 110 it will be in
no respect easier; for the Persian has come not at all less against you
than against us, nor will it content him to subdue us and abstain from
you. And of the truth of that which we say we will mention a strong
evidence: if the Persian had been making his expedition against us
alone, because he desired to take vengeance for the former servitude,
he ought to have abstained from all the rest and to have come at once to
invade our land, and he would thus have made it clear to all that he
was marching to fight against the Scythians and not against the rest.
In fact however, ever since he crossed over to this continent, he has
compelled all who came in his way to submit to him, and he holds under
him now not only the other Thracians but also the Getai, who are our
nearest neighbours."

119. When the Scythians proposed this, the kings who had come from the
various nations took counsel together, and their opinions were divided.
The kings of the Gelonians, of the Budinoi and of the Sauromatai agreed
together and accepted the proposal that they should help the Scythians,
but those of the Agathyrsians, Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi and
Tauroi returned answer to the Scythians as follows: "If ye had not been
the first to do wrong to the Persians and to begin war, then we should
have surely thought that ye were speaking justly in asking for those
things for which ye now ask, and we should have yielded to your request
and shared your fortunes. As it is however, ye on the one hand made
invasion without us into their land, and bare rule over the Persians for
so long a time as God permitted you; and they in their turn, since
the same God stirs them up, are repaying you with the like. As for us
however, neither at that time did we do any wrong to these men nor now
shall we attempt to do any wrong to them unprovoked: if however the
Persians shall come against our land also, and do wrong first to us, we
also shall refuse to submit 111: but until we shall see this, we shall
remain by ourselves, for we are of opinion that the Persians have come
not against us, but against those who were the authors of the wrong."

120. When the Scythians heard this answer reported, they planned not to
fight a pitched battle openly, since these did not join them as allies,
but to retire before the Persians and to drive away their cattle from
before them, choking up with earth the wells and the springs of water by
which they passed and destroying the grass from off the ground, having
parted themselves for this into two bodies; and they resolved that the
Sauromatai should be added to one of their divisions, namely that over
which Scopasis was king, and that these should move on, if the Persians
turned in that direction, straight towards the river Tanaïs, retreating
before him by the shore of the Maiotian lake; and when the Persian
marched back again, they should come after and pursue him. This was one
division of their kingdom, appointed to go by the way which has been
said; and the other two of the kingdoms, the large one over which
Idanthyrsos was king, and the third of which Taxakis was king, were to
join together in one, with the Gelonians and the Budinoi added to them,
and they also were to retire before the Persians one day's march in
front of them, going on out of their way and doing that which had been
planned. First they were to move on straight for the countries which had
refused to give their alliance, in order that they might involve these
also in the war, and though these had not voluntarily undertaken the war
with the Persians, they were to involve them in it nevertheless against
their will; and after that they were to return to their own land and
attack the enemy, if it should seem good to them in council so to do.

121. Having formed this plan the Scythians went to meet the army of
Dareios, sending off the best of their horsemen before them as scouts;
but all 112 the waggons in which their children and their women lived
they sent on, and with them all their cattle (leaving only so much as
was sufficient to supply them with food), and charged them that they
should proceed continually towards the North Wind. These, I say, were
being carried on before:

122, but when the scouts who went in front of the Scythians discovered
the Persians distant about three days' march from Ister, then the
Scythians having discovered them continued to pitch their camp one day's
march in front, destroying utterly that which grew from the ground: and
when the Persians saw that the horsemen of the Scythians had made their
appearance, they came after them following in their track, while the
Scythians continually moved on. After this, since they had directed
their march towards the first of the divisions, the Persians continued
to pursue towards the East and the river Tanaïs; and when the Scythians
crossed over the river Tanaïs, the Persians crossed over after them and
continued still to pursue, until they had passed quite through the land
of the Sauromatai and had come to that of the Budinoi.

123. Now so long as the Persians were passing through Scythia and the
land of the Sauromatai, they had nothing to destroy, seeing that the
land was bare, 113 but when they invaded the land of the Budinoi,
then they fell in with the wooden wall, which had been deserted by the
Budinoi and left wholly unoccupied, and this they destroyed by fire.
Having done so they continued to follow on further in the tracks of
the enemy, until they had passed through the whole of this land and had
arrived at the desert. This desert region is occupied by no men, and it
lies above the land of the Budinoi, extending for a seven days' journey;
and above this desert dwell the Thyssagetai, and four large rivers flow
from them through the land of the Maiotians and run into that which is
called the Maiotian lake, their names being as follows,Lycos, Oaros,
Tanaïs, Syrgis. 114

124. When therefore Dareios came to the desert region, he ceased from
his course and halted his army upon the river Oaros. Having so done he
began to build eight large fortifications at equal distances from one
another, that is to say about sixty furlongs, of which the ruins
still existed down to my time; and while he was occupied in this,
the Scythians whom he was pursuing came round by the upper parts and
returned back to Scythia. Accordingly, since these had altogether
disappeared and were no longer seen by the Persians at all, Dareios left
those fortifications half finished, and turning back himself began to
go towards the West, supposing that these were the whole body of the
Scythians and that they were flying towards the West.

125. And marching his army as quickly as possible, when he came to
Scythia he met with the two divisions of the Scythians together, and
having fallen in with these he continued to pursue them, while they
retired out of his way one day's journey in advance: and as Dareios did
not cease to come after them, the Scythians according to the plan which
they had made continued to retire before him towards the land of those
who had refused to give their alliance, and first towards that of the
Melanchlainoi; and when Scythians and Persians both together had invaded
and disturbed these, the Scythians led the way to the country of the
Androphagoi; and when these had also been disturbed, they proceeded to
the land of the Neuroi; and while these too were being disturbed, the
Scythians went on retiring before the enemy to the Agathyrsians. The
Agathyrsians however, seeing that their next neighbours also were flying
from the Scythians and had been disturbed, sent a herald before the
Scythians invaded their land and proclaimed to the Scythians not to set
foot upon their confines, warning them that if they should attempt
to invade the country, they would first have to fight with them. The
Agathyrsians then having given this warning came out in arms to their
borders, meaning to drive off those who were coming upon them; but
the Melanchlainoi and Androphagoi and Neuroi, when the Persians and
Scythians together invaded them, did not betake themselves to brave
defence but forgot their former threat 115 and fled in confusion ever
further towards the North to the desert region. The Scythians however,
when the Agathyrsians had warned them off, did not attempt any more to
come to these, but led the Persians from the country of the Neuroi back
to their own land.

126. Now as this went on for a long time and did not cease, Dareios sent
a horseman to Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians and said as follows:
"Thou most wondrous man, why dost thou fly for ever, when thou mightest
do of these two things one?if thou thinkest thyself able to make
opposition to my power, stand thou still and cease from wandering
abroad, and fight; but if thou dost acknowledge thyself too weak, cease
then in that case also from thy course, and come to speech with thy
master, bringing to him gifts of earth and water."

127. To this the king of the Scythians Idanthyrsos made answer thus: "My
case, O Persian, stands thus:Never yet did I fly because I was afraid,
either before this time from any other man, or now from thee; nor have
I done anything different now from that which I was wont to do also in
time of peace: and as to the cause why I do not fight with thee at once,
this also I will declare to thee. We have neither cities nor land sown
with crops, about which we should fear lest they should be captured
or laid waste, and so join battle more speedily with you; but if it
be necessary by all means to come to this speedily, know that we have
sepulchres in which our fathers are buried; therefore come now, find
out these and attempt to destroy them, and ye shall know then whether we
shall fight with you for the sepulchres or whether we shall not fight.
Before that however, unless the motion comes upon us, we shall not join
battle with thee. About fighting let so much as has been said suffice;
but as to masters, I acknowledge none over me but Zeus my ancestor and
Hestia the queen of the Scythians. To thee then in place of gifts of
earth and water I shall send such things as it is fitting that thou
shouldest receive; and in return for thy saying that thou art my master,
for that I say, woe betide thee." 116 This is the proverbial "saying of
the Scythians." 117

128. The herald then had departed to report this to Dareios; and the
kings of the Scythians, having heard mention of subjection to a master,
were filled with wrath. They sent accordingly the division which was
appointed to be joined with the Sauromatai, that division of which
Scopasis was in command, bidding them come to speech with the Ionians,
namely those who were guarding the bridge of the Ister, and meanwhile
they who were left behind resolved not to lead the Persians wandering
about any more, but to attack them constantly as they were getting
provisions. Therefore they observed the soldiers of Dareios as they got
provisions, and did that which they had determined: and the cavalry of
the Scythians always routed that of the enemy, but the Persian horsemen
as they fled fell back upon the men on foot, and these would come up to
their assistance; and meanwhile the Scythians when they had driven in
the cavalry turned back, fearing the men on foot. Also by night the
Scythians used to make similar attacks:

129, and the thing which, strange to say, most helped the Persians and
hindered the Scythians in their attacks upon the camp of Dareios, I will
mention, namely the voice of the asses and the appearance of the mules;
for Scythia produces neither ass nor mule, as I have declared before,
nor is there at all in the Scythian country either ass or mule on
account of the cold. The asses accordingly by riotously braying used to
throw into confusion the cavalry of the Scythians; and often, as they
were in the middle of riding against the Persians, when the horses heard
the voice of the asses they turned back in confusion and were possessed
with wonder, pricking up their ears, because they had never heard such a
voice nor seen the form of the creature before.

130. So far then the Persians had the advantage for a small part of the
war. 118 But the Scythians, whenever they saw that the Persians were
disquieted, then in order that they might remain a longer time in
Scythia and in remaining might suffer by being in want of everything,
would leave some of their own cattle behind with the herdsmen, while
they themselves rode out of the way to another place, and the Persians
would come upon the cattle and take them, and having taken them they
were elated at what they had done.

131. As this happened often, at length Dareios began to be in straits;
and the kings of the Scythians perceiving this sent a herald bearing
as gifts to Dareios a bird and a mouse and a frog and five arrows. The
Persians accordingly asked the bearer of the gifts as to the meaning
of the gifts which were offered; but he said that nothing more had been
commanded to him but to give them and get away as speedily as possible;
and he bade the Persians find out for themselves, if they had wisdom,
that which the gifts were meant to express.

132. Having heard this the Persians took counsel with one another; and
the opinion of Dareios was that the Scythians were giving to him both
themselves and also earth and water, making his conjecture by this,
namely that a mouse is produced in the earth and feeds on the same
produce of the earth as man, and a frog in the water, while a bird has
great resemblance to a horse; 119 and moreover that in giving the arrows
they were delivering up their own might in battle. This was the opinion
expressed by Dareios; but the opinion of Gobryas, one of the seven men
who killed the Magian, was at variance with it, for he conjectured that
the gifts expressed this: "Unless ye become birds and fly up into the
heaven, O Persians, or become mice and sink down under the earth, or
become frogs and leap into the lakes, ye shall not return back home, but
shall be smitten by these arrows."

133. The Persians then, I say, were making conjecture of the gifts:
and meanwhile the single division of the Scythians, that which had been
appointed at first to keep guard along the Maiotian lake and then to go
to the Ister and come to speech with the Ionians, when they arrived
at the bridge spoke as follows: "Ionians, we have come bringing you
freedom, if at least ye are willing to listen to us; for we are informed
that Dareios gave you command to guard the bridge for sixty days only,
and then, if he had not arrived within that time, to get you away to
your own land. Now therefore, if ye do as we say, ye will be without
blame from his part and without blame also from ours: stay the appointed
days and then after that get you away." They then, when the Ionians had
engaged themselves to do this, hastened back again by the quickest way:

134, and meanwhile, after the coming of the gifts to Dareios, the
Scythians who were left had arrayed themselves against the Persians with
both foot and horse, meaning to engage battle. Now when the Scythians
had been placed in battle-array, a hare darted through them into the
space between the two armies, and each company of them, as they saw the
hare, began to run after it. When the Scythians were thus thrown into
disorder and were raising loud cries, Dareios asked what was this
clamour arising from the enemy; and hearing that they were running after
the hare, he said to those men to whom he was wont to say things at
other times: "These men have very slight regard for us, and I perceive
now that Gobryas spoke rightly about the Scythian gifts. Seeing then
that now I myself too think that things are so, we have need of good
counsel, in order that our retreat homewards may be safely made." To
this replied Gobryas and said: "O king, even by report I was almost
assured of the difficulty of dealing with these men; and when I came I
learnt it still more thoroughly, since I saw that they were mocking us.
Now therefore my opinion is, that as soon as night comes on, we kindle
the camp-fires as we are wont to do at other times also, and deceive
with a false tale those of our men who are weakest to endure hardships,
and tie up all the asses and get us away, before either the Scythians
make for the Ister to destroy the bridge or something be resolved by the
Ionians which may be our ruin."

135. Thus Gobryas advised; and after this, when night came on, Dareios
acted on this opinion. Those of his men who were weakened by fatigue and
whose loss was of least account, these he left behind in the camp, and
the asses also tied up: and for the following reasons he left behind the
asses and the weaker men of his army,the asses in order that they might
make a noise which should be heard, and the men really because of their
weakness, but on a pretence stated openly that he was about to attack
the Scythians with the effective part of the army, and that they
meanwhile were to be defenders of the camp. Having thus instructed those
who were left behind, and having kindled camp-fires, Dareios hastened
by the quickest way towards the Ister: and the asses, having no longer
about them the usual throng, 120 very much more for that reason caused
their voice to be heard; 121 so the Scythians, hearing the asses,
supposed surely that the Persians were remaining in their former place.

136. But when it was day, those who were left behind perceived that
they had been betrayed by Dareios, and they held out their hands in
submission to the Scythians, telling them what their case was; and the
Scythians, when they heard this, joined together as quickly as possible,
that is to say the two combined divisions of the Scythians and the
single division, and also the Sauromatai, 122 Budinoi, and Gelonians,
and began to pursue the Persians, making straight for the Ister: but as
the Persian army for the most part consisted of men on foot, and was
not acquainted with the roads (the roads not being marked with tracks),
while the Scythian army consisted of horsemen and was acquainted
with the shortest cuts along the way, they missed one another and the
Scythians arrived at the bridge much before the Persians. Then having
learnt that the Persians had not yet arrived, they said to the Ionians
who were in the ships: "Ionians, the days of your number are past, and
ye are not acting uprightly in that ye yet remain waiting: but as ye
stayed before from fear, so now break up the passage as quickly as ye
may, and depart free and unhurt, 123 feeling thankfulness both to the
gods and to the Scythians: and him who was formerly your master we
will so convince, that he shall never again march with an army upon any
nation."

137. Upon this the Ionians took counsel together; and Miltiades the
Athenian on the one hand, who was commander and despot of the men of
the Chersonese in Hellespont, was of opinion that they should follow the
advice of the Scythians and set Ionia free: but Histiaios the Milesian
was of the opposite opinion to this; for he said that at the present
time it was by means of Dareios that each one of them was ruling as
despot over a city; and if the power of Dareios should be destroyed,
neither he himself would be able to bear rule over the Milesians, nor
would any other of them be able to bear rule over any other city; for
each of the cities would choose to have popular rather than despotic
rule. When Histiaios declared his opinion thus, forthwith all turned to
this opinion, whereas at the first they were adopting that of Miltiades.

138. Now these were they who gave the vote between the two opinions, and
were men of consequence in the eyes of the king, 124first the despots
of the Hellespontians, Daphnis of Abydos, Hippoclos of Lampsacos,
Herophantos of Parion, Metrodoros of Proconnesos, Aristagoras of
Kyzicos, and Ariston of Byzantion, these were those from the Hellespont;
and from Ionia, Strattis of Chios, Aiakes of Samos, Laodamas of Phocaia,
and Histiaios of Miletos, whose opinion had been proposed in opposition
to that of Miltiades; and of the Aiolians the only man of consequence
there present was Aristagoras of Kyme.

139. When these adopted the opinion of Histiaios, they resolved to add
to it deeds and words as follows, namely to break up that part of the
bridge which was on the side towards the Scythians, to break it up, I
say, for a distance equal to the range of an arrow, both in order that
they might be thought to be doing something, though in fact they were
doing nothing, and for fear that the Scythians might make an attempt
using force and desiring to cross the Ister by the bridge: and in
breaking up that part of the bridge which was towards Scythia they
resolved to say that they would do all that which the Scythians desired.
This they added to the opinion proposed, and then Histiaios coming forth
from among them made answer to the Scythians as follows: "Scythians, ye
are come bringing good news, and it is a timely haste that ye make to
bring it; and ye on your part give us good guidance, while we on ours
render to you suitable service. For, as ye see, we are breaking up the
passage, and we shall show all zeal in our desire to be free: and while
we are breaking up the bridge, it is fitting that ye should be seeking
for those of whom ye speak, and when ye have found them, that ye should
take vengeance on them on behalf of us as well as of yourselves in such
manner as they deserve."

140. The Scythians then, believing for the second time that the Ionians
were speaking the truth, turned back to make search for the Persians,
but they missed altogether their line of march through the land. Of this
the Scythians themselves were the cause, since they had destroyed the
pastures for horses in that region and had choked up with earth the
springs of water; for if they had not done this, it would have been
possible for them easily, if they desired it, to discover the Persians:
but as it was, by those things wherein they thought they had taken their
measures best, they failed of success. The Scythians then on their part
were passing through those regions of their own land where there was
grass for the horses and springs of water, and were seeking for the
enemy there, thinking that they too were taking a course in their
retreat through such country as this; while the Persians in fact marched
keeping carefully to the track which they had made before, and so they
found the passage of the river, though with difficulty: 125 and as they
arrived by night and found the bridge broken up, they were brought to
the extreme of fear, lest the Ionians should have deserted them.

141. Now there was with Dareios an Egyptian who had a voice louder than
that of any other man on earth, and this man Dareios ordered to take his
stand upon the bank of the Ister and to call Histiaios of Miletos. He
accordingly proceeded to do so; and Histiaios, hearing the first hail,
produced all the ships to carry the army over and also put together the
bridge.

142. Thus the Persians escaped, and the Scythians in their search missed
the Persians the second time also: and their judgment of the Ionians is
that on the one hand, if they be regarded as free men, they are the most
worthless and cowardly of all men, but on the other hand, if regarded
as slaves, they are the most attached to their master and the least
disposed to run away of all slaves. This is the reproach which is cast
against the Ionians by the Scythians.

143. Dareios then marching through Thrace arrived at Sestos in the
Chersonese; and from that place, he passed over himself in his ships to
Asia, but to command his army in Europe he left Megabazos a Persian, to
whom Dareios once gave honour by uttering in the land of Persia 126 this
saying:Dareios was beginning to eat pomegranates, and at once when he
opened the first of them, Artabanos his brother asked him of what he
would desire to have as many as there were seeds in the pomegranate: and
Dareios said that he would desire to have men like Megabazos as many as
that in number, rather than to have Hellas subject to him. In Persia, I
say, he honoured him by saying these words, and at this time he left him
in command with eight myriads 127 of his army.

144. This Megabazos uttered one saying whereby he left of himself an
imperishable memory with the peoples of Hellespont: for being once at
Byzantion he heard that the men of Calchedon had settled in that region
seventeen years before the Byzantians, and having heard it he said that
those of Calchedon at that time chanced to be blind; for assuredly they
would not have chosen the worse place, when they might have settled in
that which was better, if they had not been blind. This Megabazos it was
who was left in command at that time in the land of the Hellespontians,
and he proceeded to subdue all who did not take the side of the Medes.

145. He then was doing thus; and at this very same time a great
expedition was being made also against Libya, on an occasion which
I shall relate when I have first related this which follows.The
children's children of those who voyaged in the Argo, having been driven
forth by those Pelasgians who carried away at Brauron the women of the
Athenians,having been driven forth I say by these from Lemnos, had
departed and sailed to Lacedemon, and sitting down on Mount Taÿgetos
they kindled a fire. The Lacedemonians seeing this sent a messenger to
inquire who they were and from whence; and they answered the question
of the messenger saying that they were Minyai and children of heroes who
sailed in the Argo, for 128 these, they said, had put in to Lemnos and
propagated the race of which they sprang. The Lacedemonians having heard
the story of the descent of the Minyai, sent a second time and asked for
what purpose they had come into the country and were causing a fire to
blaze. They said that they had been cast out by the Pelasgians, and were
come now to the land of their fathers, 129 for most just it was that
this should so be done; and they said that their request was to be
permitted to dwell with these, having a share of civil rights and a
portion allotted to them of the land. And the Lacedemonians were content
to receive the Minyai upon the terms which they themselves desired,
being most of all impelled to do this by the fact that the sons of
Tyndareus were voyagers in the Argo. So having received the Minyai they
gave them a share of land and distributed them in the tribes; and they
forthwith made marriages, and gave in marriage to others the women whom
they brought with them from Lemnos.

146. However, when no very long time had passed, the Minyai forthwith
broke out into insolence, asking for a share of the royal power and also
doing other impious things: therefore the Lacedemonians resolved to put
them to death; and having seized them they cast them into a prison.
Now the Lacedemonians put to death by night all those whom they put to
death, but no man by day. When therefore they were just about to kill
them, the wives of the Minyai, being native Spartans and daughters
of the first citizens of Sparta, entreated to be allowed to enter the
prison and come to speech every one with her own husband: and they let
them pass in, not supposing that any craft would be practised by them.
They however, when they had entered, delivered to their husbands all the
garments which they were wearing, and themselves received those of their
husbands: thus the Minyai having put on the women's clothes went forth
out of prison as women, and having escaped in this manner they went
again to Taÿgetos and sat down there.

147. Now at this very same time Theras the son of Autesion, the son of
Tisamenos, the son of Thersander, the son of Polyneikes, was preparing
to set forth from Lacedemon to found a settlement. This Theras, who was
of the race of Cadmos, was mother's brother to the sons of Aristodemos,
Eurysthenes and Procles; and while these sons were yet children, Theras
as their guardian held the royal power in Sparta. When however his
nephews were grown and had taken the power into their hands, then
Theras, being grieved that he should be ruled by others after he had
tasted of rule himself, said that he would not remain in Lacedemon, but
would sail away to his kinsmen. Now there were in the island which
is now called Thera, but formerly was called Callista, descendants
of Membliaros the son of Poikiles, a Phenician: for Cadmos the son of
Agenor in his search for Europa put in to land at the island which is
now called Thera; and, whether it was that the country pleased him when
he had put to land, or whether he chose to do so for any other reason,
he left in this island, besides other Phenicians, Membliaros also, of
his own kinsmen. These occupied the island called Callista for eight
generations of men, before Theras came from Lacedemon.

148. To these then, I say, Theras was preparing to set forth, taking
with him people from the tribes, and intending to settle together with
those who have been mentioned, not with any design to drive them out,
but on the contrary claiming them very strongly as kinfolk. And when
the Minyai after having escaped from the prison went and sat down on
Taÿgetos, Theras entreated of the Lacedemonians, as they were proposing
to put them to death, that no slaughter might take place, and at the
same time he engaged himself to take them forth out of the land. The
Lacedemonians having agreed to this proposal, he sailed away with three
thirty-oared galleys to the descendants of Membliaros, not taking with
him by any means all the Minyai, but a few only; for the greater number
of them turned towards the land of the Paroreatai and Caucones, and
having driven these out of their country, they parted themselves
into six divisions and founded in their territory the following
towns,Lepreon, Makistos, Phrixai, Pyrgos, Epion, Nudion; of these the
Eleians sacked the greater number within my own lifetime. The island
meanwhile got its name of Thera after Theras 130 who led the settlement.

149. And since his son said that he would not sail with him, therefore
he said that he would leave him behind as a sheep among wolves; and in
accordance with that saying this young man got the name of Oiolycos, 131
and it chanced that this name prevailed over his former name: then from
Oiolycos was begotten Aigeus, after whom are called the Aigeidai, a
powerful clan 132 in Sparta: and the men of this tribe, since their
children did not live to grow up, established by the suggestion of an
oracle a temple to the Avenging Deities 133 of Laïos and OEdipus, and
after this the same thing was continued 134 in Thera by the descendants
of these men.

150. Up to this point of the story the Lacedemonians agree in their
report with the men of Thera; but in what is to come it is those of
Thera alone who report that it happened as follows. Grinnos 135 the son
of Aisanios, a descendant of the Theras who has been mentioned, and
king of the island of Thera, came to Delphi bringing the offering of a
hecatomb from his State; and there were accompanying him, besides others
of the citizens, also Battos the son of Polymnestos, who was by descent
of the family of Euphemos 136 of the race of the Minyai. Now when
Grinnos the king of the Theraians was consulting the Oracle about other
matters, the Pythian prophetess gave answer bidding him found a city in
Libya; and he made reply saying: "Lord, 137 I am by this time somewhat
old and heavy to stir, but do thou bid some one of these younger ones do
this." As he thus said he pointed towards Battos. So far at that time:
but afterwards when he had come away they were in difficulty about the
saying of the Oracle, neither having any knowledge of Libya, in what
part of the earth it was, nor venturing to send a colony to the unknown.

151. Then after this for seven years there was no rain in Thera, and
in these years all the trees in their island were withered up excepting
one: and when the Theraians consulted the Oracle, the Pythian prophetess
alleged this matter of colonising Libya to be the cause. As then they
had no remedy for their evil, they sent messengers to Crete, to find out
whether any of the Cretans or of the sojourners in Crete had ever come
to Libya. These as they wandered round about the country came also
the city of Itanos, and there they met with a fisher for purple named
Corobios, who said that he had been carried away by winds and had come
to Libya, and in Libya to the island of Platea. This man they persuaded
by payment of money and took him to Thera, and from Thera there set sail
men to explore, at first not many in number; and Corobios having guided
them to this same island of Platea, they left Corobios there, leaving
behind with him provisions for a certain number of months, and sailed
themselves as quickly as possible to make report about the island to the
men of Thera.

152. Since however these stayed away longer than the time appointed,
Corobios found himself destitute; and after this a ship of Samos, of
which the master was Colaios, while sailing to Egypt was carried out of
its course and came to this island of Platea; and the Samians hearing
from Corobios the whole story left him provisions for a year.
They themselves then put out to sea from the island and sailed on,
endeavouring to reach Egypt but carried away continually by the East
Wind; and as the wind did not cease to blow, they passed through the
Pillars of Heracles and came to Tartessos, guided by divine providence.
Now this trading-place was at that time untouched by any, so that when
these returned back home they made profit from their cargo greater than
any other Hellenes of whom we have certain knowledge, with the exception
at least of Sostratos the son of Laodamas the Eginetan, for with him it
is not possible for any other man to contend. And the Samians set apart
six talents, the tenth part of their gains, and had a bronze vessel made
like an Argolic mixing-bowl with round it heads of griffins projecting
in a row; and this they dedicated as an offering in the temple of Hera,
setting as supports under it three colossal statues of bronze seven
cubits in height, resting upon their knees. By reason first of this
deed great friendship was formed by those of Kyrene and Thera with the
Samians.

153. The Theraians meanwhile, when they arrived at Thera after having
left Corobios in the island, reported that they had colonised an island
on the coast of Libya: and the men of Thera resolved to send one of
every two brothers selected by lot and men besides taken from all the
regions of the island, which are seven in number; and further that
Battos should be both their leader and their king. Thus then they sent
forth two fifty-oared galleys to Platea.

154. This is the report of the Theraians; and for the remainder of the
account from this point onwards the Theraians are in agreement with the
men of Kyrene: from this point onwards, I say, since in what concerns
Battos the Kyrenians tell by no means the same tale as those of Thera;
for their account is this:There is in Crete a city called Oäxos 138
in which one Etearchos became king, who when he had a daughter,
whose mother was dead, named Phronime, took to wife another woman
notwithstanding. She having come in afterwards, thought fit to be a
stepmother to Phronime in deed as well as in name, giving her evil
treatment and devising everything possible to her hurt; and at last she
brings against her a charge of lewdness and persuades her husband that
the truth is so. He then being convinced by his wife, devised an unholy
deed against the daughter: for there was in Oäxos one Themison, a
merchant of Thera, whom Etearchos took to himself as a guest-friend
and caused him to swear that he would surely serve him in whatsoever he
should require: and when he had caused him to swear this, he brought and
delivered to him his daughter and bade him take her away and cast
her into the sea. Themison then was very greatly vexed at the
deceit practised in the matter of the oath, and he dissolved his
guest-friendship and did as follows, that is to say, he received the
girl and sailed away, and when he got out into the open sea, to free
himself from blame as regards the oath which Etearchos had made him
swear, he tied her on each side with ropes and let her down into the
sea, and then drew her up and came to Thera.

155. After that, Polymnestos, a man of repute among the Theraians,
received Phronime from him and kept her as his concubine; and in course
of time there was born to him from her a son with an impediment in his
voice and lisping, to whom, as both Theraians and Kyrenians say, was
given the name Battos, but I think that some other name was then given,
139 and he was named Battos instead of this after he came to Libya,
taking for himself this surname from the oracle which was given to him
at Delphi and from the rank which he had obtained; for the Libyans call
a king battos: and for this reason, I think, the Pythian prophetess in
her prophesying called him so, using the Libyan tongue, because she knew
that he would be a king in Libya. For when he had grown to be a man,
he came to Delphi to inquire about his voice; and when he asked, the
prophetess thus answered him:


 "For a voice thou camest, O Battos, but thee lord Phoebus Apollo
  Sendeth as settler forth to the Libyan land sheep-abounding,"

just as if she should say using the Hellenic tongue, "For a voice thou
camest, O king." He thus made answer: "Lord, I came to thee to inquire
concerning my voice, but thou answerest me other things which are not
possible, bidding me go as a settler to Libya; but with what power,
or with what force of men should I go?" Thus saying he did not at all
persuade her to give him any other reply; and as she was prophesying to
him again the same things as before, Battos departed while she was yet
speaking, 140 and went away to Thera.

156. After this there came evil fortune both to himself and to the other
men of Thera; 141 and the Theraians, not understanding that which
befell them, sent to Delphi to inquire about the evils which they were
suffering: and the Pythian prophetess gave them reply that if they
joined with Battos in founding Kyrene in Libya, they would fare the
better. After this the Theraians sent Battos with two fifty-oared
galleys; and these sailed to Libya, and then came away back to Thera,
for they did not know what else to do: and the Theraians pelted them
with missiles when they endeavoured to land, and would not allow them
to put to shore, but bade them sail back again. They accordingly being
compelled sailed away back, and they made a settlement in an island
lying near the coast of Libya, called, as was said before, Platea.
This island is said to be of the same size as the now existing city of
Kyrene.

157. In this they continued to dwell two years; but as they had no
prosperity, they left one of their number behind and all the rest sailed
away to Delphi, and having come to the Oracle they consulted it, saying
that they were dwelling in Libya and that, though they were dwelling
there, they fared none the better: and the Pythian prophetess made
answer to them thus:


 "Better than I if thou knowest the Libyan land sheep-abounding,
  Not having been there than I who have been, at thy wisdom I wonder."

Having heard this Battos and his companions sailed away back again; for
in fact the god would not let them off from the task of settlement till
they had come to Libya itself: and having arrived at the island and
taken up him whom they had left, they made a settlement in Libya itself
at a spot opposite the island, called Aziris, which is enclosed by most
fair woods on both sides and a river flows by it on one side.

158. In this spot they dwelt for six years; and in the seventh year the
Libyans persuaded them to leave it, making request and saying that they
would conduct them to a better region. So the Libyans led them from that
place making them start towards evening; and in order that the Hellenes
might not see the fairest of all the regions as they passed through it,
they led them past it by night, having calculated the time of daylight:
and this region is called Irasa. Then having conducted them to the
so-called spring of Apollo, they said, "Hellenes, here is a fit place
for you to dwell, for here the heaven is pierced with holes."

159. Now during the lifetime of the first settler Battos, who reigned
forty years, and of his son Arkesilaos, who reigned sixteen years, the
Kyrenians continued to dwell there with the same number as 142 when they
first set forth to the colony; but in the time of the third king, called
Battos the Prosperous, the Pythian prophetess gave an oracle wherein
she urged the Hellenes in general to sail and join with the Kyrenians
in colonising Libya. For the Kyrenians invited them, giving promise of a
division of land; and the oracle which she uttered was as follows:


 "Who to the land much desirèd, to Libya, afterwards cometh,
  After the land be divided, 143 I say he shall some day repent it."

Then great numbers were gathered at Kyrene, and the Libyans who dwelt
round had much land cut off from their possessions; therefore they with
their king whose name was Adicran, as they were not only deprived of
their country but also were dealt with very insolently by the Kyrenians,
sent to Egypt and delivered themselves over to Apries king of Egypt. He
then having gathered a great army of Egyptians, sent it against Kyrene;
and the men of Kyrene marched out to the region of Irasa and to the
spring Theste, 144 and there both joined battle with the Egyptians and
defeated them in the battle: for since the Egyptians had not before made
trial of the Hellenes in fight and therefore despised them, they were so
slaughtered that but few of them returned back to Egypt. In consequence
of this and because they laid the blame of it upon Apries, the Egyptians
revolted from him.

160. This Battos had a son called Arkesilaos, who first when he became
king made a quarrel with his own brothers, until they finally departed
to another region of Libya, and making the venture for themselves
founded that city which was then and is now called Barca; and at the
same time as they founded this, they induced the Libyans to revolt from
the Kyrenians. After this, Arkesilaos made an expedition against those
Libyans who had received them and who had also revolted from Kyrene, and
the Libyans fearing him departed and fled towards the Eastern tribes
of Libyans: and Arkesilaos followed after them as they fled, until
he arrived in his pursuit at Leucon in Libya, and there the Libyans
resolved to attack him. Accordingly they engaged battle and defeated the
Kyrenians so utterly that seven thousand hoplites of the Kyrenians fell
there. After this disaster Arkesilaos, being sick and having swallowed a
potion, was strangled by his brother Haliarchos, 145 and Haliarchos was
killed treacherously by the wife of Arkesilaos, whose name was Eryxo.

161. Then Battos the son of Arkesilaos succeeded to the kingdom, who
was lame and not sound in his feet: and the Kyrenians with a view to the
misfortune which had befallen them sent men to Delphi to ask what form
of rule they should adopt, in order to live in the best way possible;
and the Pythian prophetess bade them take to themselves a reformer
of their State from Mantineia of the Arcadians. The men of Kyrene
accordingly made request, and those of Mantineia gave them the man
of most repute among their citizens, whose name was Demonax. This
man therefore having come to Kyrene and having ascertained all things
exactly, 146 in the first place caused them to have three tribes,
distributing them thus:one division he made of the Theraians and their
dependants, 147 another of the Peloponnesians and Cretans, and a third
of all the islanders. 148 Then secondly for the king Battos he set apart
domains of land and priesthoods, but all the other powers which the
kings used to possess before, he assigned as of public right to the
people.

162. During the reign of this Battos things continued to be thus, but in
the reign of his son Arkesilaos there arose much disturbance about
the offices of the State: for Arkesilaos son of Battos the Lame and
of Pheretime said that he would not suffer it to be according as the
Mantineian Demonax had arranged, but asked to have back the royal rights
of his forefathers. After this, stirring up strife he was worsted and
went as an exile to Samos, and his mother to Salamis in Cyprus. Now at
that time the ruler of Salamis was Euelthon, the same who dedicated as
an offering the censer at Delphi, a work well worth seeing, which is
placed in the treasury of the Corinthians. To him having come, Pheretime
asked him for an army to restore herself and her son to Kyrene. Euelthon
however was ready to give her anything else rather than that; and she
when she received that which he gave her said that this too was a fair
gift, but fairer still would be that other gift of an army for which she
was asking. As she kept saying this to every thing which was given, at
last Euelthon sent out to her a present of a golden spindle and distaff,
with wool also upon it: and when Pheretime uttered again the same saying
about this present, Euelthon said that such things as this were given as
gifts to women and not an army.

163. Arkesilaos meanwhile, being in Samos, was gathering every one
together by a promise of dividing land; and while a great host was being
collected, Arkesilaos set out to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle about
returning from exile: and the Pythian prophetess gave him this answer:
"For four named Battos and four named Arkesilaos, eight generations
of men, Loxias grants to you to be kings of Kyrene, but beyond this he
counsels you not even to attempt it. Thou however must keep quiet when
thou hast come back to thy land; and if thou findest the furnace full of
jars, heat not the jars fiercely, but let them go with a fair wind: if
however thou heat the furnace fiercely, enter not thou into the place
flowed round by water; for if thou dost thou shalt die, both thou and
the bull which is fairer than all the rest."

164. Thus the Pythian prophetess gave answer to Arkesilaos; and he,
having taken to him those in Samos, made his return to Kyrene; and when
he had got possession of the power, he did not remember the saying of
the Oracle but endeavoured to exact penalties from those of the opposite
faction for having driven him out. Of these some escaped out of the
country altogether, but some Arkesilaos got into his power and sent them
away to Cyprus to be put to death. These were driven out of their course
to Cnidos, and the men of Cnidos rescued them and sent them away to
Thera. Some others however of the Kyrenians fled to a great tower
belonging to Aglomachos a private citizen, and Arkesilaos burnt them by
piling up brushwood round. Then after he had done the deed he perceived
that the Oracle meant this, in that the Pythian prophetess forbade
him, if he found the jars in the furnace, to heat them fiercely; and he
voluntarily kept away from the city of the Kyrenians, fearing the death
which had been prophesied by the Oracle and supposing that Kyrene was
flowed round by water. 149 Now he had to wife a kinswoman of his own,
the daughter of the king of Barca whose name was Alazeir: to him he
came, and men of Barca together with certain of the exiles from Kyrene,
perceiving him going about in the market-place, killed him, and also
besides him his father-in-law Alazeir. Arkesilaos accordingly, having
missed the meaning of the oracle, whether with his will or against his
will, fulfilled his own destiny.

165. His mother Pheretime meanwhile, so long as Arkesilaos having worked
evil for himself dwelt at Barca, herself held the royal power of her son
at Kyrene, both exercising his other rights and also sitting in council:
but when she heard that her son had been slain in Barca, she departed
and fled to Egypt: for she had on her side services done for Cambyses
the son of Cyrus by Arkesilaos, since this was the Arkesilaos who had
given over Kyrene to Cambyses and had laid a tribute upon himself.
Pheretime then having come to Egypt sat down as a suppliant of Aryandes,
bidding him help her, and alleging as a reason that it was on account
of his inclination to the side of the Medes that her son had been slain.
166. Now this Aryandes had been appointed ruler of the province of Egypt
by Cambyses; and after the time of these events he lost his life because
he would measure himself with Dareios. For having heard and seen that
Dareios desired to leave behind him as a memorial of himself a thing
which had not been made by any other king, he imitated him, until at
last he received his reward: for whereas Dareios refined gold and made
it as pure as possible, and of this caused coins to be struck, Aryandes,
being ruler of Egypt, did the same thing with silver; and even now the
purest silver is that which is called Aryandic. Dareios then having
learnt that he was doing this put him to death, bringing against him
another charge of attempting rebellion.

167. Now at the time of which I speak this Aryandes had compassion on
Pheretime and gave her all the troops that were in Egypt, both the
land and the sea forces, appointing Amasis a Maraphian to command the
land-army and Badres, of the race of the Pasargadai, to command the
fleet: but before he sent away the army, Aryandes despatched a herald
to Barca and asked who it was who had killed Arkesilaos; and the men of
Barca all took it upon themselves, for they said they suffered formerly
many great evils at his hands. Having heard this, Aryandes at last sent
away the army together with Pheretime. This charge then was the pretext
alleged; but in fact the army was being sent out (as I believe) for the
purpose of subduing Libya: for of the Libyans there are many nations of
nations of various kinds, and but few of them are subject to the king,
while the greater number paid no regard to Dareios.

168. Now the Libyans have their dwelling as follows:Beginning from
Egypt, first of the Libyans are settled the Adyrmachidai, who practise
for the most part the same customs as the Egyptians, but wear clothing
similar to that of the other Libyans. Their women wear a bronze ring
150 upon each leg, and they have long hair on their heads, and when they
catch their lice, each one bites her own in retaliation and then throws
them away. These are the only people of the Lybians who do this; and
they alone display to the king their maidens when they are about to
be married, and whosoever of them proves to be pleasing to the king is
deflowered by him. These Adyrmachidai extend along the coast from Egypt
as far as the port which is called Plynos.

169. Next after these come the Giligamai, 151 occupying the country
towards the West as far as the island of Aphrodisias. In the space
within this limit lies off the coast the island of Platea, where the
Kyrenians made their settlement; and on the coast of the mainland there
is Port Menelaos, and Aziris, where the Kyrenians used to dwell. From
this point begins the silphion 152 and it extends along the coast from
the island of Platea as far as the entrance of the Syrtis. This nation
practises customs nearly resembling those of the rest.

170. Next to the Giligamai on the West are the Asbystai: 153 these dwell
above 154 Kyrene, and the Asbystai do not reach down the sea, for the
region along the sea is occupied by Kyrenians. These most of all the
Libyans are drivers of four-horse chariots, and in the greater number of
their customs they endeavour to imitate the Kyrenians.

171. Next after the Asbystai on the West come the Auchisai: these dwell
above Barca and reach down to the sea by Euesperides: and in the middle
of the country of the Auchisai dwell the Bacales, 155 a small tribe,
who reach down to the sea by the city of Taucheira in the territory of
Barca: these practise the same customs as those above Kyrene.

172. Next after these Auschisai towards the West come the Nasamonians,
a numerous race, who in the summer leave their flocks behind by the sea
and go up to the region of Augila to gather the fruit of the date-palms,
which grow in great numbers and very large and are all fruit-bearing:
these hunt the wingless locusts, and they dry them in the sun and then
pound them up, and after that they sprinkle them upon milk and drink
them. Their custom is for each man to have many wives, and they make
their intercourse with them common in nearly the same manner as the
Massagetai, 156 that is they set up a staff in front of the door and
so have intercourse. When a Nasamonian man marries his first wife,
the custom is for the bride on the first night to go through the whole
number of the guests having intercourse with them, and each man when he
has lain with her gives a gift, whatsoever he has brought with him from
his house. The forms of oath and of divination which they use are as
follows:they swear by the men among themselves who are reported to have
been the most righteous and brave, by these, I say, laying hands upon
their tombs; and they divine by visiting the sepulchral mounds of their
ancestors and lying down to sleep upon them after having prayed; and
whatsoever thing the man sees in his dream, this he accepts. They
practise also the exchange of pledges in the following manner, that is
to say, one gives the other to drink from his hand, and drinks himself
from the hand of the other; and if they have no liquid, they take of the
dust from the ground and lick it.

173. Adjoining the Nasamonians is the country of the Psylloi. These have
perished utterly in the following manner:The South Wind blowing upon
them dried up all their cisterns of water, and their land was waterless,
lying all within the Syrtis. They then having taken a resolve by common
consent, marched in arms against the South Wind (I report that which is
reported by the Libyans), and when they had arrived at the sandy tract,
the South Wind blew and buried them in the sand. These then having
utterly perished, the Nasamonians from that time forward possess their
land.

174. Above these towards the South Wind in the region of wild beasts
dwell the Garamantians, 157 who fly from every man and avoid the company
of all; and they neither possess any weapon of war, nor know how to
defend themselves against enemies.

175. These dwell above the Nasamonians; and next to the Nasamonians
along the sea coast towards the West come the Macai, who shave their
hair so as to leave tufts, letting the middle of their hair grow long,
but round this on all sides shaving it close to the skin; and for
fighting they carry shields made of ostrich skins. Through their land
the river Kinyps runs out into the sea, flowing from a hill called the
"Hill of the Charites." This Hill of the Charites is overgrown thickly
with wood, while the rest of Libya which has been spoken of before is
bare of trees; and the distance from the sea to this hill is two hundred
furlongs.

176. Next to these Macai are the Gindanes, whose women wear each of
them a number of anklets made of the skins of animals, for the following
reason, as it is said:for every man who has commerce with her she binds
on an anklet, and the woman who has most is esteemed the best, since she
has been loved by the greatest number of men.

177. In a peninsula which stands out into the sea from the land of these
Gindanes dwell the Lotophagoi, who live by eating the fruit of the
lotos only. Now the fruit of the lotos is in size like that of the
mastich-tree, and in flavour 158 it resembles that of the date-palm. Of
this fruit the Lotophagoi even make for themselves wine.

178. Next after the Lotophagoi along the sea-coast are the Machlyans,
who also make use of the lotos, but less than those above mentioned.
These extend to a great river named the river Triton, and this runs out
into a great lake called Tritonis, in which there is an island named
Phla. About this island they say there was an oracle given to the
Lacedemonians that they should make a settlement in it.

179. The following moreover is also told, namely that Jason, when
the Argo had been completed by him under Mount Pelion, put into it
a hecatomb and with it also 159 a tripod of bronze, and sailed round
Pelopponese, desiring to come to Delphi; and when in sailing he got near
Malea, a North Wind seized his ship and carried it off to Libya, and
before he caught sight of land he had come to be in the shoals of the
lake Tritonis. Then as he was at a loss how he should bring his ship
forth, the story goes that Triton appeared to him and bade Jason give
him the tripod, saying that he would show them the right course and let
them go away without hurt: and when Jason consented to it, then Triton
showed them the passage out between the shoals and set the tripod in his
own temple, after having first uttered a prophecy over the tripod 160
and having declared to Jason and his company the whole matter, namely
that whensoever one of the descendants of those who sailed with him in
the Argo should carry away this tripod, then it was determined by fate
that a hundred cities of Hellenes should be established about the lake
Tritonis. Having heard this the native Libyans concealed the tripod.

180. Next to these Machlyans are the Auseans. These and the Machlyans
dwell round the lake Tritonis, and the river Triton is the boundary
between them: and while the Machlyans grow their hair long at the back
of the head, the Auseans do so in front. At a yearly festival of Athene
their maidens take their stand in two parties and fight against one
another with stones and staves, and they say that in doing so they are
fulfilling the rites handed down by their fathers for the divinity who
was sprung from that land, whom we call Athene: and those of the maidens
who die of the wounds received they call "false-maidens." But before
they let them begin the fight they do this:all join together and equip
the maiden who is judged to be the fairest on each occasion, with a
Corinthian helmet and with full Hellenic armour, and then causing her to
go up into a chariot they conduct her round the lake. Now I cannot tell
with what they equipped the maidens in old time, before the Hellenes
were settled near them; but I suppose that they used to be equipped
with Egyptian armour, for it is from Egypt that both the shield and the
helmet have come to the Hellenes, as I affirm. They say moreover that
Athene is the daughter of Poseidon and of the lake Tritonis, and that
she had some cause of complaint against her father and therefore gave
herself to Zeus, and Zeus made her his own daughter. Such is the story
which these tell; and they have their intercourse with women in common,
not marrying but having intercourse like cattle: and when the child of
any woman has grown big, he is brought before a meeting of the men held
within three months of that time, 161 and whomsoever of the men the
child resembles, his son he is accounted to be.

181. Thus then have been mentioned those nomad Libyans who live along
the sea-coast: and above these inland is the region of Libya which has
wild beasts; and above the wild-beast region there stretches a raised
belt of sand, extending from Thebes of the Egyptians to the Pillars of
Heracles. In this belt at intervals of about ten days' journey there are
fragments of salt in great lumps forming hills, and at the top of each
hill there shoots up from the middle of the salt a spring of water cold
and sweet; and about the spring dwell men, at the furthest limit towards
the desert, and above the wild-beast region. First, at a distance of ten
days' journey from Thebes, are the Ammonians, whose temple is derived
from that of the Theban Zeus, for the image of Zeus in Thebes also, as I
have said before, 162 has the head of a ram. These, as it chances, have
also other water of a spring, which in the early morning is warm; at the
time when the market fills, 163 cooler; when midday comes, it is quite
cold, and then they water their gardens; but as the day declines, it
abates from its coldness, until at last, when the sun sets, the water is
warm; and it continues to increase in heat still more until it reaches
midnight, when it boils and throws up bubbles; and when midnight passes,
it becomes cooler gradually till dawn of day. This spring is called the
fountain of the Sun.

182. After the Ammonians, as you go on along the belt of sand, at an
interval again of ten days' journey there is a hill of salt like that
of the Ammonians, and a spring of water, with men dwelling about it; and
the name of this place is Augila. To this the Nasamonians come year by
year to gather the fruit of the date-palms.

183. From Augila at a distance again of ten days' journey there
is another hill of salt and spring of water and a great number of
fruit-bearing date-palms, as there are also in the other places: and
men dwell here who are called the Garmantians, a very great nation, who
carry earth to lay over the salt and then sow crops. From this point is
the shortest way to the Lotophagoi, for from these it is a journey
of thirty days to the country of the Garmantians. Among them also are
produced the cattle which feed backwards; and they feed backwards for
this reason, because they have their horns bent down forwards, and
therefore they walk backwards as they feed; for forwards they cannot go,
because the horns run into the ground in front of them; but in nothing
else do they differ from other cattle except in this and in the
thickness and firmness to the touch 164 of their hide. These
Garamantians of whom I speak hunt the "Cave-dwelling" 165 Ethiopians
with their four-horse chariots, for the Cave-dwelling Ethiopians are
the swiftest of foot of all men about whom we hear report made: and the
Cave-dwellers feed upon serpents and lizards and such creeping things,
and they use a language which resembles no other, for in it they squeak
just like bats.

184. From the Garmantians at a distance again of ten days' journey there
is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men dwell round
it called Atarantians, who alone of all men about whom we know are
nameless; for while all taken together have the name Atarantians,
each separate man of them has no name given to him. These utter curses
against the Sun when he is at his height, 166 and moreover revile him
with all manner of foul terms, because he oppresses them by his burning
heat, both themselves and their land. After this at a distance of ten
days' journey there is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men
dwell round it. Near this salt hill is a mountain named Atlas, which is
small in circuit and rounded on every side; and so exceedingly lofty is
it said to be, that it is not possible to see its summits, for clouds
never leave them either in the summer or in the winter. This the natives
say is the pillar of the heaven. After this mountain these men got their
name, for they are called Atlantians; and it is said that they neither
eat anything that has life nor have any dreams.

185. As far as these Atlantians I am able to mention in order the names
of those who are settled in the belt of sand; but for the parts beyond
these I can do so no more. However, the belt extends as far as the
Pillars of Heracles and also in the parts outside them: and there is
a mine of salt in it at a distance of ten days' journey from the
Atlantians, and men dwelling there; and these all have their houses
built of the lumps of salt, since these parts of Libya which we have now
reached 167 are without rain; for if it rained, the walls being made of
salt would not be able to last: and the salt is dug up there both white
and purple in colour. 168 Above the sand-belt, in the parts which are in
the direction of the South Wind and towards the interior of Libya, the
country is uninhabited, without water and without wild beasts, rainless
and treeless, and there is no trace of moisture in it.

186. I have said that from Egypt as far as the lake Tritonis Libyans
dwell who are nomads, eating flesh and drinking milk; and these do not
taste at all of the flesh of cows, for the same reason as the Egyptians
also abstain from it, nor do they keep swine. Moreover the women of
the Kyrenians too think it not right to eat cows' flesh, because of the
Egyptian Isis, and they even keep fasts and celebrate festivals for her;
and the women of Barca, in addition from cows' flesh, do not taste of
swine either.

187. Thus it is with these matters: but in the region to the West of
lake Tritonis the Libyans cease to be nomads, and they do not practise
the same customs, nor do to their children anything like that which
the nomads are wont to do; for the nomad Libyans, whether all of them
I cannot say for certain, but many of them, do as follows:when their
children are four years old, they burn with a greasy piece of sheep's
wool the veins in the crowns of their heads, and some of them burn
the veins of the temples, so that for all their lives to come the cold
humour may not run down from their heads and do them hurt: and for this
reason it is (they say) that they are so healthy; for the Libyans are in
truth the most healthy of all races concerning which we have knowledge,
whether for this reason or not I cannot say for certain, but the most
healthy they certainly are: and if, when they burn the children, a
convulsion comes on, they have found out a remedy for this; for they
pour upon them the water of a he-goat and so save them. I report that
which is reported by the Libyans themselves.

188. The following is the manner of sacrifice which the nomads
have:they cut off a part of the animal's ear as a first offering and
throw it over the house, 169 and having done this they twist its neck.
They sacrifice only to the Sun and the Moon; that is to say, to these
all the Libyans sacrifice, but those who dwell round the lake Tritonis
sacrifice most of all to Athene, and next to Triton and Poseidon.

189. It would appear also that the Hellenes made the dress and the aigis
of the images of Athene after the model of the Libyan women; for except
that the dress of the Libyan women is of leather, and the tassels which
hang from their aigis are not formed of serpents but of leather thongs,
in all other respects Athene is dressed like them. Moreover the name too
declares that the dress of the figures of Pallas has come from Libya,
for the Libyan women wear over their other garments bare goat-skins
(aigeas) with tasselled fringes and coloured over with red madder, and
from the name of these goat-skins the Hellenes formed the name aigis.
I think also that in these regions first arose the practice of crying
aloud during the performance of sacred rites, for the Libyan women do
this very well. 170 The Hellenes learnt from the Libyans also the yoking
together of four horses.

190. The nomads bury those who die just in the same manner as the
Hellenes, except only the Nasamonians: these bury bodies in a sitting
posture, taking care at the moment when the man expires to place
him sitting and not to let him die lying down on his back. They have
dwellings composed of the stems of asphodel entwined with rushes, and
so made that they can be carried about. Such are the customs followed by
these tribes.

191. On the West of the river Triton next after the Auseans come Libyans
who are tillers of the soil, and whose custom it is to possess fixed
habitations; and they are called Maxyans. They grow their hair long on
the right side of their heads and cut it short upon the left, and smear
their bodies over with red ochre. These say that they are of the men who
came from Troy.

This country and the rest of Libya which is towards the West is both
much more frequented by wild beasts and much more thickly wooded than
the country of the nomads: for whereas the part of Libya which is
situated towards the East, where the nomads dwell, is low-lying and
sandy up to the river Triton, that which succeeds it towards the West,
the country of those who till the soil, is exceedingly mountainous and
thickly-wooded and full of wild beasts: for in the land of these are
found both the monstrous serpent and the lion and the elephant, and
bears and venomous snakes and horned asses, besides the dog-headed men,
and the headless men with their eyes set in their breasts (at least
so say the Libyans about them), and the wild men and wild women, and a
great multitude of other beasts which are not fabulous like these. 171

192. In the land of the nomads however there exist none of these, but
other animals as follows:white-rump antelopes, gazelles, buffaloes,
asses, not the horned kind but others which go without water (for in
fact these never drink), oryes, 172 whose horns are made into the sides
of the Phenician lyre (this animal is in size about equal to an ox),
small foxes, hyenas, porcupines, wild rams, wolves, 173 jackals,
panthers, boryes, land-crocodiles about three cubits in length and very
much resembling lizards, ostriches, and small snakes, each with one
horn: these wild animals there are in this country, as well as those
which exist elsewhere, except the stag and the wild-boar; but Libya has
no stags nor wild boars at all. Also there are in this country three
kinds of mice, one is called the "two-legged" mouse, another the zegeris
(a name which is Libyan and signifies in the Hellenic tongue a "hill"),
and a third the "prickly" mouse. 174 There are also weasels produced in
the silphion, which are very like those of Tartessos. Such are the wild
animals which the land of the Libyans possesses, so far as we were able
to discover by inquiries extended as much as possible.

193. Next to the Maxyan Libyans are the Zauekes, 175 whose women drive
their chariots for them to war.

194. Next to these are the Gyzantes, 176 among whom honey is made in
great quantity by bees, but in much greater quantity still it is said
to be made by men, who work at it as a trade. However that may be, these
all smear themselves over with red ochre and eat monkeys, which are
produced in very great numbers upon their mountains.

195. Opposite these, as the Carthaginians say, there lies an island
called Kyrauis, two hundred furlongs in length but narrow, to which one
may walk over from the mainland; and it is full of olives and vines.
In it they say there is a pool, from which the native girls with birds'
feathers smeared over with pitch bring up gold-dust out of the mud.
Whether this is really so I do not know, but I write that which is
reported; and nothing is impossible, 177 for even in Zakynthos I saw
myself pitch brought up out of a pool of water. There are there several
pools, and the largest of them measures seventy feet each way and is
two fathoms in depth. Into this they plunge a pole with a myrtle-branch
bound to it, and then with the branch of the myrtle they bring up pitch,
which has the smell of asphalt, but in other respects it is superior to
the pitch of Pieria. This they pour into a pit dug near the pool; and
when they have collected a large quantity, then they pour it into the
jars from the pit: and whatever thing falls into the pool goes under
ground and reappears in the sea, which is distant about four furlongs
from the pool. Thus then the report about the island lying near the
coast of Libya is also probably enough true.

196. The Carthaginians say also this, namely that there is a place in
Libya and men dwelling there, outside the Pillars of Heracles, to whom
when they have come and have taken the merchandise forth from their
ships, they set it in order along the beach and embark again in their
ships, and after that they raise a smoke; and the natives of the country
seeing the smoke come to the sea, and then they lay down gold as an
equivalent for the merchandise and retire to a distance away from the
merchandise. The Carthaginians upon that disembark and examine it,
and if the gold is in their opinion sufficient for the value of the
merchandise, they take it up and go their way; but if not, they
embark again in their ships and sit there; and the others approach and
straightway add more gold to the former, until they satisfy them:
and they say that neither party wrongs the other; for neither do the
Carthaginians lay hands on the gold until it is made equal to the value
of their merchandise, nor do the others lay hands on the merchandise
until the Carthaginians have taken the gold.

197. These are the Libyan tribes whom we are able to name; and of these
the greater number neither now pay any regard to the king of the Medes
nor did they then. Thus much also I have to say about this land, namely
that it is occupied by four races and no more, so far as we know; and
of these races two are natives of the soil and the other two not so; for
the Libyans and the Ethiopians are natives, the one race dwelling in
the Northern parts of Libya and the other in the Southern, while the
Phenicians and the Hellenes are strangers.

198. I think moreover that (besides other things) in goodness of soil
Libya does not very greatly excel 178 as compared with Asia or Europe,
except only the region of Kinyps, for the same name is given to the land
as to the river. This region is equal to the best of lands in bringing
forth the fruit of Demeter, 179 nor does it at all resemble the rest of
Libya; for it has black soil and is watered by springs, and neither has
it fear of drought nor is it hurt by drinking too abundantly of rain;
for rain there is in this part of Libya. Of the produce of the crops
the same measures hold good here as for the Babylonian land. And that is
good land also which the Euesperites occupy, for when it bears best it
produces a hundred-fold, but the land in the region of Kinyps produces
sometimes as much as three-hundred-fold.

199. Moreover the land of Kyrene, which is the highest land of the part
of Libya which is occupied by nomads, has within its confines three
seasons of harvest, at which we may marvel: for the parts by the
sea-coasts first have their fruits ripe for reaping and for gathering
the vintage; and when these have been gathered in, the parts which lie
above the sea-side places, those situated in the middle, which they call
the hills, 180 are ripe for the gathering in; and as soon as this middle
crop has been gathered in, that in the highest part of the land comes
to perfection and is ripe; so that by the time the first crop has been
eaten and drunk up, the last is just coming in. Thus the harvest for the
Kyrenians lasts eight months. Let so much as has been said suffice for
these things.

200. Now when the Persian helpers of Pheretime, 181 having been sent
from Egypt by Aryandes, had arrived at Barca, they laid siege to the
city, proposing to the inhabitants that they should give up those who
were guilty of the murder of Arkesilaos: but as all their people had
taken a share in the guilt, they did not accept the proposals. Then they
besieged Barca for nine months, both digging underground passages which
led to the wall and making vigorous attacks upon it. Now the passages
dug were discovered by a worker of bronze with a shield covered over
with bronze, who had thought of a plan as follows:carrying it round
within the wall he applied it to the ground in the city, and whereas
the other places to which he applied it were noiseless, at those places
where digging was going on the bronze of the shield gave a sound; and
the men of Barca would make a countermine there and slay the Persians
who were digging mines. This then was discovered as I have said, and the
attacks were repulsed by the men of Barca.

201. Then as they were suffering hardship for a long time and many were
falling on both sides, and especially on that of the Persians, Amasis
the commander of the land-army contrived as follows:perceiving that the
Barcaians were not to be conquered by force but might be conquered by
guile, he dug by night a broad trench and over it he laid timber of no
great strength, and brought earth and laid it above on the top of the
timber, making it level with the rest of the ground: then at daybreak he
invited the men of Barca to a parley; and they gladly consented, and
at last they agreed to make a treaty: and the treaty they made with one
another was taken over the hidden trench, namely that so long as this
earth should continue to be as it was, so long the oath should remain
firm, and that the men of Barca should promise to pay tribute of due
amount to the king, and the Persians should do no further violence to
the men of Barca. 182 After the oath the men of Barca trusting to these
engagements both went forth themselves from their city and let any who
desired it of the enemy pass within their walls, having opened all the
gates; but the Persians first broke down the concealed bridge and then
began to run inside the city wall. And the reason why they broke down
the bridge which they had made was that they might keep their oaths,
since they had sworn to the men of Barca that the oath should remain
firm continually for so long time as the earth should remain as it then
was, but after that they had broken it down, the oath no longer remained
firm.

202. Now the most guilty of the Barcaians, when they were delivered to
her by the Persians, Pheretime impaled in a ring round about the wall;
and she cut off the breasts of their wives and set the wall round with
these also in order: but the rest of the men of Barca she bade the
Persians carry off as spoil, except so many of them as were of the
house of Battos and not sharers in the guilt of the murder; and to these
Pheretime gave the city in charge.

203. So the Persians having made slaves of the rest of the Barcaians
departed to go back: and when they appeared at the gates of the city of
Kyrene, the Kyrenians let them go through their town in order to avoid
neglect of some oracle. Then as the army was going through, Badres the
commander of the fleet urged that they should capture the city, but
Amasis the commander of the land-army would not consent to it; for
he said that they had been sent against no other city of the Hellenes
except Barca. When however they had passed through and were encamping on
the hill of Zeus Lycaios, they repented of not having taken possession
of Kyrene; and they endeavoured again to pass into it, but the men of
Kyrene would not allow them. Then upon the Persians, although no one
fought against them, there fell a sudden panic, and they ran away for
about sixty furlongs and then encamped. And when the camp had been
placed here, there came to it a messenger from Aryandes summoning them
back; so the Persians asked the Kyrenians to give them provisions for
their march and obtained their request; and having received these, they
departed to go to Egypt. After this the Libyans took them up, 183 and
killed for the sake of their clothes and equipment those of them who
at any time were left or straggled behind, until at last they came to
Egypt.

204. This army of the Persians reached Euesperides, and this was their
furthest point in Libya: and those of the Barcaians whom they had
reduced to slavery they removed again from Egypt and brought them to
the king, and king Dareios gave them a village in the land of Bactria in
which to make a settlement. To this village they gave the name of Barca,
and it still continued to be inhabited by them even down to my own time,
in the land of Bactria.

205. Pheretime however did not bring her life happily to an end any more
than they: for as soon as she had returned from Libya to Egypt after
having avenged herself on the Barcaians, she died an evil death, having
become suddenly full of worms while yet alive: for, as it seems, too
severe punishments inflicted by men prove displeasing 184 to the gods.
Such and so great was the punishment inflicted by Pheretime the wife of
Battos on the men of Barca.





NOTES TO BOOK IV.

1 [ Some enterprises had been entrusted to others, e.g. the attack
on Samos; but this had not been the case with the capture of Babylon,
therefore some Editors have proposed corrections, e.g. {au tou}
(Schweighäuser), and {autika} (Stein).]

2 [ See i. 106.]

3 [ {tes ano 'Asies}: this means Eastern Asia as distinguished from the
coasts of Asia Minor; see i. 103 and 177.]

4 [ {katapausantes}: the expression is awkward if meant to be equivalent
to {kai katepausan}, but it is hardly improved by the alteration to
{katapausontes}. Perhaps the clause is out of place.]

5 [ {ponos}.]

6 [ {peristixantes}: so the two best MSS.; others have {peristesantes}
or {peristexantes}. The word {peristixantes} would be from {peristikho},
equivalent to {peristikhizo}, and is acknowledged in this sense by
Hesychius.]

7 [ The connexion is not clear either at the beginning of the chapter or
here. This clause would seem to be a repetition of that at the beginning
of the chapter, and that which comes between should be an explanation
of the reason why the slaves are blinded. As it stands, however, we
can only refer it to the clause which follows, {ou gar arotai eisi alla
nomades}, and even so there is no real solution of the difficulty, for
it is not explained why nomads should have blinded slaves. Perhaps
the best resource is to suppose that some part of the explanation, in
connexion with the manner of dealing with the milk, has been lost.]

8 [ {te per}: a conjectural emendation for {e per}, "which is a very
great lake".]

9 [ {epi touton arkhonton}: the word {arkhonton} is omitted in some MSS.
and by some Editors.]

10 [ {sagarin}.]

11 [ {tous basileious}: so Wesseling. The MSS. have {tous basileas},
"the kings," which may perhaps be used here as equivalent to {tous
basileious}: some Editors, including Stein, adopt the conjecture {tou
basileos}, "from the youngest of them who, was king, those who," etc.]

12 [ {tou basileos}: some Editors read by conjecture {Skolotou
basileos}, "after their king Scolotos".]

1201 [ {katazonnumenon}: or {kata tade zonnumenon}, "girded in this
manner".]

13 [ {mekhanesasthai ten metera Skuthe}: the better MSS. read
{mekhanasthai} and {Skuthen}: the meaning seems doubtful, and some
Editors would omit the clause as an interpolation.]

14 [ {pros pollous deomenon}: the better MSS. read {pro pollou deomena}.
The passage has been emended in various ways, e.g. {pros pollous deoi
menontas} (Buttmann), {pros pollous menontas} (Bredow), {pro spodou
deomenon} (Stein).]

15 [ {poiesas}: some authorities have {eipas}.]

16 [ Italy means for Herodotus only the Southern part of the peninsula.]

17 [ {diekosioisi}: so the best authorities; others have
{priekosioisi}.]

18 [ {'Italioteon}, i.e. Hellenic settlers in Italy.]

19 [ {to agalmati to 'Apollonos}: {agalma} is used for anything
dedicated to a god, most commonly the sacred image.]

20 [ {katuperthe}: "above," i.e. beyond them towards the North.
Similarly when dealing with Libya the writer uses the same word of those
further from the coast towards the South; see ch. 174.]

21 [ {en autoisi toisi epesi poieon}: "even in the verses which he
composed," in which he might be expected as a poet to go somewhat beyond
the literal truth.]

22 [ Or, "Alizonians".]

23 [ {'Olbiopolitas}.]

24 [ See ch. 101, where the day's journey is reckoned at 200 stades (23
English miles).]

25 [ The meaning of {eremos} here is not waste and barren land, but land
without settled inhabitants.]

26 [ i.e. "Man-eaters".]

27 [ This is the reading of the MSS., but it is not consistent with
the distance given in ch. 101, nor with the actual facts: some Editors
therefore read "four" instead of "fourteen".]

28 [ i.e. "Cliffs".]

29 [ i.e. "Black-cloaks".]

30 [ {'Argippaioi}: it is not certain that this is the form which ought
to be read here: Latin writers make the name "Arimphaei," and in some
MSS. it is given here as {'Orgempaioi}.]

31 [ {agalmati}.]

32 [ {ta genesia}.]

33 [ Or, "violent".]

34 [ Od. iv. 85.]

35 [ {e phuonta phuein mogis}.]

36 [ {prosthekas}, "additions".]

37 [ i.e. of Apollo and Artemis.]

3701 [ Omitting {legon}.]

38 [ The word "Asia" is not contained in the MSS. and need not be
inserted in the text, but it is implied, if not expressed; see chap.
41.]

39 [ {aktai}.]

40 [ {ou legousa ei me nomo}.]

41 [ i.e. 100,000 fathoms, equivalent to 1000 stades; see ii. 6, note
10.]

42 [ {oude sumballein axie}.]

43 [ ii. 158.]

4301 [ {brota}: some MSS. have {probata} "cattle".]

44 [ {omoia parekhomene}: the construction is confused, but the meaning
is that all but the Eastern parts are known to be surrounded by sea.]

45 [ {logion}: some MSS. have {logimon}, "of reputation".]

46 [ Stein reads {eisi de} for {eisi de}, and punctuates so that the
meaning is, "it has become the greatest of all rivers in the following
manner:besides other rivers which flow into it, those which especially
make it great are as follows".]

47 [ {pente men oi}: this perhaps requires emendation, but the
corrections proposed are hardly satisfactory, e.g. {pente megaloi} or
{pente monoi}.]

48 [ Or "Skios": called by Thucydides "Oskios" (ii. 96).]

49 [ {eti}: most of the MSS. give {esti}, which is adopted by some
Editors.]

50 [ "Sacred Ways".]

51 [ {Gerreon}: in some MSS. {Gerrou}, "the region called Gerros".]

52 [ {tesserakonta}: some Editors have altered this number, but without
authority or sufficient reason.]

53 [ {di eremou}: see note 25 on ch. 18. The region here spoken of is
that between the Gerrians and the agricultural Scythians.]

5301 [ {es touto elos}: i.e. the Dneiper-Liman. (The Medicean and
Florentine MSS. read {es to elos}, not {es to telos}, as hitherto
reported.)]

54 [ {eon embolon tes khores}.]

55 [ {Metros}: i.e. the Mother of the gods, Kybele, cp. ch. 76; some
less good authorities have {Demetros}.]

56 [ {reei de}: most MSS. have {reei men gar}.]

57 [ Or, "Apia".]

58 [ Or, "Goitosyros".]

59 [ The MSS. have also "Arippasa" and "Artimpasa".]

60 [ The authorities have also "Thagimasa" and "Thamimasidas".]

61 [ {ton arkheion}: some read by conjecture {en to arkheio}, "at the
seat of government," or "in the public place".]

62 [ {eson t' epi stadious treis}.]

63 [ {upo ton kheimonon}.]

64 [ {akinakes}.]

65 [ {agalma}: see note 19 on ch. 15.]

66 [ {kata per baitas}.]

67 [ Or, "and put them together in one bundle".]

68 [ See i. 105.]

69 [ {kuperou}: it is not clear what plant is meant.]

70 [ i.e. for this purpose. The general use of bronze is attested by ch.
81.]

71 [ {ode anabibazontes, epean k.t.l}: the reference of {ode} is
directly to the clause {epeantrakhelou}, though in sense it refers
equally to the following, {katothen de k.t.l}. Some Editors punctuate
thus, {ode anabibazontes epean} and omit {de} after {katothen}, making
the reference of {ode} to the latter clause alone.]

72 [ {oruontai}, as in iii. 117, but here they howl for pleasure.]

73 [ Like the Egyptians for example, cp. ii. 91.]

74 [ {mete ge on allelon}: the MSS. have {me ti ge on allelon}. Most
Editors read {allon} for {allelon} and alter the other words in various
ways ({me toi ge on, me toigaron} etc.), taking {me} as in {me oti} (ne
dicam aliorum). The reading which I have adopted is based on that of
Stein, who reads {mete teon allon} and quotes vii. 142, {oute ge alloisi
'Ellenon oudamoisi, umin de de kai dia panton ekista}. With {allon} the
meaning is, "rejecting those of other nations and especially those of
the Hellenes". For the use of {me} after {pheugein} cp. ii. 91.]

75 [ Or, according to some MSS., "as they proved in the case of
Anacharsis and afterwards of Skyles".]

76 [ {gen pollen}.]

77 [ {epitropou}.]

78 [ {peplastai}: some authorities give {pepaistai}, "has been invented
as a jest".]

79 [ {es kheiras agesthai}.]

7901 [ {o theos}.]

80 [ {diepresteuse}: this or {epresteuse} is the reading of most of the
MSS. The meaning is uncertain, since the word does not occur elsewhere.
Stein suggests that it may mean "scoffed (at the Scythians)". Various
conjectures have been tried, e.g. {diedresteuse}, {diedrepeteuse}, etc.]

81 [ {os Skuthas einai}: cp. ii. 8. Some (e.g. Dindorf and Bähr)
translate "considering that they are Scythians," i.e. for a nation so
famous and so widely extended.]

82 [ i.e. about 5300 gallons.]

83 [ {epi to iro}: the MSS. mostly have {epi iro}, and Stein adopts the
conjecture {epi rio}, "on a projecting point". The temple would be that
of {Zeus ourios} mentioned in ch. 87. (In the Medicean MS. the omitted
{i} is inserted above the line beforethe {r}, not directly over it, as
represented by Stein, and the accent is not omitted.)]

84 [ {stadioi}, and so throughout.]

85 [ i.e. 1,110,000.]

86 [ i.e. 330,000.]

8601 [ {stelas}, i.e. "square blocks"; so also in ch. 91.]

87 [ i.e. 700,000.]

8701 [ {os emoi dokeei sumballomeno}, "putting the evidence together".]

88 [ {pasi deka}: probably a loose expression like {ta panta muria},
iii. 74.]

89 [ {psoren}, "mange".]

90 [ Or (less probably) "Skyrmiadai".]

91 [ {Salmoxin}: some inferior MSS. have {Zalmoxin}, or {Zamolxin}, and
the spelling in other writers varies between these forms.]

92 [ {daimona}, sometimes used for deified men as distinguished from
gods, cp. ch. 103.]

93 [ {dia penteteridos}.]

94 [ {bathutera}.]

95 [ {ou to asthenestato sophiste}. No depreciation seems to be intended
here.]

96 [ {andreona}.]

97 [ i.e. the Mediterranean: or the passage may mean simply, "Thrace
runs out further into the sea than Scythia".]

98 [ {gounon}.]

99 [ More literally, "I say this, so far as it is allowed to compare,
etc. Such is the form of the Tauric land".]

100 [ {ede}. The Agathyrsians however have not been mentioned before in
this connection.]

101 [ {stadia}.]

102 [ {tes Skuthikes ta epikarsia}, i.e. the lines running from West to
East.]

103 [ {epanakhthentes}: so the Medicean MS. and another: the rest have
{epanakhthentas}. Some Editors read by conjecture {apeneikhthentas},
"cast away on their coast".]

104 [ {neoisi}.]

105 [ {trieteridas}.]

106 [ Or, "were driven out".]

107 [ {phtheirotrageousi}.]

108 [ Or, "Aiorpata," and "aior" below.]

109 [ i.e. the Royal Scythians: see ch. 20.]

110 [ {epi touto}, the reading of the Aldine edition. The MSS. have {epi
touto}. Stein suggests {dia touto}.]

111 [ {ou peisometha}: some MSS. read {ouk oisometha}. Editors have
emended by conjecture in various ways, e.g. {ou periopsometha}, "we
shall not allow it"; {oi epoisometha} or {oi epeisometha}, "we shall go
out to attack him"; {aposometha}, "we shall repel him".]

112 [ {paras}, or {pasai}, belonging to {gunaikes}.]

113 [ {khersou}, "dry".]

114 [ Perhaps the same as the "Hyrgis" mentioned in ch. 57. Some Editors
read "Hyrgis" in this passage.]

115 [ See ch. 119.]

116 [ {klaiein lego}.]

117 [ {touto esti e apo Skutheon resis}: this refers to the last words,
{klaiein lego}. Most Editors have doubts about the genuineness of the
sentence, regarding it a marginal gloss which has crept into the text;
but perhaps without sufficient reason.]

118 [ Or, "with some slight effect on the course of the war".]

119 [ See i. 216.]

120 [ {eremothentes tou omilou}.]

121 [ {iesan tes phones}.]

122 [ {e mia kai Sauromatai}: some Editors read {e meta Sauromateon}.
The MSS. give {e mia Sauromatai} (some {Sauromateon}). Stein inserts
{kai}.]

123 [ {khairontes eleutheroi}.]

124 [ The list includes only those who voted in favour of the proposal
of Histiaios (i.e. Miltiades is not included in it): hence perhaps Stein
is right in suggesting some change in the text, e.g. {oi diapherontes te
ten psephon basileos kai eontes logou pleistou}. The absence of the
name of Coës is remarked by several commentators, who forget that he had
accompanied Dareios: see ch. 97.]

125 [ Or, "and even so they found the passage of the river with
difficulty".]

126 [ {en Persesi}.]

127 [ i.e. 80,000.]

128 [ {gar}: some MSS. read {de}; so Stein and other Editors.]

129 [ i.e. Castor and Polydeukes the sons of Tyndareus, who were among
the Argonauts.]

130 [ {Phera} (genitive).]

131 [ From {ois} "sheep" and {lukos} "wolf" ({oin en lukoisi}).]

132 [ {phule}, the word being here apparently used loosely.]

133 [ {'Erinuon}.]

134 [ {meta touto upemeine touto touto}: some Editors mark a lacuna
after {upemeine}, or supply some words like {sunebe de}: "after this the
children survived, and the same thing happened also in Thera, etc".]

135 [ Or, "Grinos".]

136 [ {Euphemides}: the MSS. have {Euthumides}: the correction is from
Pindar, Pyth. iv. 455.]

137 [ {onax}, the usual form of address to Apollo; so in ch. 155.]

138 [ Or, "Axos".]

139 [ i.e. Aristoteles, Pind. Pyth. v. 87.]

140 [ {metaxu apolipon}.]

141 [ Or, "it happened both to himself and to the other men of Thera
according to their former evil fortune"; but this would presuppose the
truth of the story told in ch. 151, and {paligkotos} may mean simply
"adverse" or "hostile".]

142 [ {eontes tosoutoi osoi k.t.l.} They could hardly have failed to
increase in number, but no new settlers had been added.]

143 [ {usteron elthe gas anadaiomenes}, "too late for the division of
land".]

144 [ Or, "Thestis".]

145 [ The MSS. give also "Aliarchos" and "Learchos".]

146 [ {mathon ekasta}.]

147 [ {ton terioikon}: i.e. conquered Libyans.]

148 [ {nesioteon panton}: i.e. the natives of the Cyclades, cp. vi. 99.]

149 [ {amphirruton ten Kurenen einai}: some Editors read by conjecture
{ten amphirruton Kurenen einai} (or {Kurenen ten amph, einai}), "that
Kyrene was the place flowed round by water".]

150 [ {pselion}.]

151 [ Or, "Giligammai".]

152 [ i.e. the plant so called, figured on the coins of Kyrene and
Barca.]

153 [ Or, "Asbytai".]

154 [ i.e. further from the coast, so {katuperthe}, ch. 174 etc., cp.
ch. 16.]

155 [ Or "Cabales".]

156 [ See i. 216.]

157 [ Distinct from the people of the same name mentioned in ch. 183:
those here mentioned are called "Gamphasantes" by Pliny.]

158 [ {glukuteta}, "sweetness".]

159 [ {allen te ekatomben kai de kai}.]

160 [ {epithespisanta to tripodi}, which can hardly mean "prophesied
sitting upon the tripod".]

161 [ Lit. "the men come together regularly to one place within three
months," which seems to mean that meetings are held every three months,
before one of which the child is brought.]

162 [ See ii. 42.]

163 [ i.e. in the middle of the morning.]

164 [ {tripsin}: the "feel" to the touch: hence it might mean either
hardness or softness according to the context.]

165 [ {troglodutas}: "Troglodytes".]

166 [ {uperballonti}: "when his heat is greatest".]

167 [ {ede}.]

168 [ Or "red".]

169 [ {domon}: Reiske reads {omon} by conjecture, "over his shoulder".]

170 [ Or (according to some MSS.), "practise this much and do it well".]

171 [ {akatapseusta}. Several Editors have adopted the conjecture
{katapseusta}, "other fabulous beasts".]

172 [ {orues}: perhaps for {oruges} from {orux}, a kind of antelope.]

173 [ {diktues}: the meaning is uncertain.]

174 [ {ekhinees}, "urchins".]

175 [ Or "Zabykes".]

176 [ Or "Zygantes".]

177 [ {eie d' an pan}: cp. v. 9. Some translate, "and this might well be
so".]

178 [ {oud' areten einai tis e Libue spoudaie}.]

179 [ i.e. corn; cp. i. 193.]

180 [ {bounous}.]

181 [ See ch. 167.]

182 [ {meden allo neokhmoun kata Barkaious}: cp. v. 19.]

183 [ {paralabontes}.]

184 [ {epiphthonoi}.]

  


