## III.--THE INDIVIDUAL AS AN EXCERPT OF THE COLLECTIVE PSYCHE.

We now come to a problem the overlooking of which would cause the
greatest confusion.

As I said before, the immediate result of the analysis of the
unconscious is that additional personal portions of the unconscious are
incorporated into the conscious. I called those parts of the unconscious
which are repressed but capable of being made conscious, _the personal
unconscious_. I showed moreover that through the annexation of the
deeper layers of the unconscious, which I called the _impersonal
unconscious_, an extension of the personality is brought about which
leads to the state of God-Almightiness ("Gottähnlichkeit"). This state
is reached by a continuation of the analytical work, by means of which
we have already re-introduced what is repressed to consciousness. By
continuing analysis further we incorporate some distinctly impersonal
universal basic qualities of humanity with the personal consciousness,
which brings about the aforesaid enlargement, and this to some extent
may be described as an unpleasant consequence of analysis.

From this standpoint, the conscious personality seems to be a more or
less arbitrary excerpt of the collective psyche. It appears to consist
of a number of universal basic human qualities of which it is _à priori_
unconscious, and further of a series of impulses and forms which might
just as well have been conscious, but were more or less arbitrarily
repressed, in order to attain that excerpt of the collective psyche,
which we call personality. The term _persona_ is really an excellent
one, for persona was originally the mask which an actor wore, that
served to indicate the character in which he appeared. For if we really
venture to undertake to decide what psychic material must be accounted
personal and what impersonal, we shall soon reach a state of great
perplexity; for, in truth, we must make the same assertion regarding the
contents of the personality as we have already made with respect to the
impersonal unconscious, that is to say that it is _collective_, whereas
we can only concede _individuality to the bounds of the persona_, that
is to the particular choice of personal elements, and that only to a
very limited extent. It is only by virtue of the fact that the persona
is a more or less accidental or arbitrary excerpt of the collective
psyche that we can lapse into the error of deeming it to be _in toto_
individual, whereas as its name denotes, it is only a mask of the
collective psyche; _a mask which simulates individuality_, making others
and oneself believe that one is individual, whilst one is only acting a
part through which the collective psyche speaks.

If we analyse the persona we remove the mask and discover that what
appeared to be individual is at bottom collective. We thus trace
"the Little God of the World" back to his origin, that is, to a
personification of the collective psyche. Finally, to our astonishment,
we realise that the persona was only the mask of the collective psyche.
Whether we follow Freud and reduce the primary impulse to sexuality,
or Adler and reduce it to the elementary desire for power, or reduce
it to the general principle of the collective psyche which contains
the principles of both Freud and Adler, we arrive at the same result;
namely, the dissolution of the personal into the collective. Therefore
in every analysis that is continued sufficiently far, the moment arrives
when the aforesaid God-Almightiness must be realised. This condition
is often ushered in by peculiar symptoms; for instance, by dreams of
flying through space like a comet, of being either the earth, the sun,
or a star, or of being either extraordinarily big or small, of having
died, etc. Physical sensations also occur, such as sensations of being
too large for one's skin, or too fat; or hypnagogic feelings of endless
sinking or rising occur, of enlargement of the body or of dizziness.
This state is characterised psychologically by an extraordinary loss of
orientation about one's personality, about what one really is, or else
the individual has a positive but mistaken idea of that which he has
just become. Intolerance, dogmatism, self-conceit, self-depreciation,
contempt and belittling of "not analysed" fellow-beings, and also of
their opinions and activities, all very frequently occur. An increased
disposition to physical disorders may also occasionally be observed,
but this occurs only if pleasure be taken therein, thus prolonging this
stage unduly.

The wealth of the possibilities of the collective psyche is both
confusing and dazzling. The dissolution of the persona results in
the release of phantasy, which apparently is nothing else but the
functioning of the collective psyche. This release brings materials into
consciousness of whose existence we had no suspicion before. A rich mine
of mythological thought and feeling is revealed. It is very hard to hold
one's own against such an overwhelming impression. That is why this
phase must be reckoned one of the real dangers of analysis, a fact that
should not be concealed.

As may easily be understood, this condition is hardly bearable, and one
would like to put an end to it as soon as possible, for the analogy with
a mental derangement is too close. The essence of the most frequent form
of derangement--dementia præcox or schizophrenia--consists, as is well
known, in the fact that the unconscious to a large extent ejects and
replaces the conscious. The unconscious is given the value of reality,
being substituted for the reality function. The unconscious thoughts
become audible as voices, or visible as visions, or perceptible as
physical hallucinations, or they become fixed ideas of a kind that
supersede reality. In a similar, although not in the same way, by the
resolution of the persona of the collective psyche, the unconscious is
drawn into the conscious. The difference between this state of mind and
that of mental derangement consists in the fact that the unconscious is
brought up by the help of the conscious analysis; at least that is the
case in the beginning of analysis, when there are still strong cultural
resistances against the unconscious to be overcome. Later on, after the
removal of the barriers erected by time and custom, the unconscious
usually proceeds, so to say, in a peremptory manner, sometimes even
discharging itself in torrents into the consciousness. In this phase
the analogy with mental derangement is very close. But it would only
be a real mental disorder should the content of the unconscious _take
the place of the conscious reality_, that is, in other words, if the
contents of the unconscious were believed absolutely and without reserve.


