## SUMMARY.

A. _Psychological Material must be divided into_ CONSCIOUS _and_
UNCONSCIOUS _Contents_.

1. The _conscious contents_ are partly _personal_, in so far as their
universal validity is not recognised; and partly _impersonal_, that is,
collective, in so far as their universal validity is recognised.

2. The _unconscious contents_ are partly _personal_, in so far as they
concern solely repressed materials of a personal nature, that have once
been relatively conscious and whose universal validity is therefore not
recognised when they are made conscious; partly _impersonal_, in so far
as the materials concerned are recognised as _impersonal_ and of purely
universal validity, of whose earlier even relative consciousness we have
no means of proof.


B. _The Composition of the Persona._

1. The conscious personal contents constitute the conscious personality,
the conscious ego.

2. The unconscious personal contents constitute the _self_, the
unconscious or subconscious ego.

3. The conscious and unconscious contents of a personal nature
constitute the persona.


C. _The Composition of the Collective Psyche._

1. The conscious and unconscious contents of an _impersonal_ or
collective nature compose the psychological _non-ego_, the _image of
the object_. These materials can appear analytically as projections of
feeling or of opinion, but they are _a priori_ collectively identical
with the object-imago, that is they appear as qualities of the object,
and are only _a posteriori_ recognised as subjective psychological
qualities.

2. The persona is that grouping of conscious and unconscious contents
which is opposed as ego to the non-ego. The general comparison
of personal contents of different individuals establishes their
far-reaching similarity, extending even to identity, by which the
_individual_ nature of personal contents, and therewith of the persona,
is for the most part suspended. To this extent the persona must be
considered an excerpt of the collective psyche, and also a component of
the collective psyche.

3. The collective psyche is therefore composed of the object-imago and
the persona.


D. _What is Individual._

1. What is individual appears partly as the principle that decides the
selection and limitation of the contents that are accepted as personal.

2. What is individual is the principle by which an increasing
differentiation from the collective psyche is made possible and enforced.

3. What is individual manifests itself partly as an impediment to
collective accomplishment, and as a resistance against collective
thinking and feeling.

4. What is individual is the uniqueness of the combination of universal
(collective) psychological elements.


E. _We must divide the Conscious and Unconscious Contents into
Individualistic and Collectivistic._

1. A content is individualistic whose developing tendency is directed
towards the differentiation from the collective.

2. A content is collectivistic whose developing tendency aims at
universal validity.

3. There are insufficient criteria by which to designate a given content
as simply individual or collective, for uniqueness is very difficult to
prove, although it is a perpetually and universally recurrent phenomenon.

4. The life-line of an individual is the resultant of the
individualistic and collectivistic tendency of the psychological process
at any given moment.


