# CHAPTER XIV

## FOREWORD TO CHAPTER XIV

This essay was originally written in 1913, when I limited myself
entirely to presenting an essential part of the psychological point
of view inaugurated by _Freud_. A few months ago my Swiss publisher
asked for a second and revised edition. The many and great changes
which the last few years have brought about in our understanding of the
psychology of the unconscious necessitated a substantial enlargement
of my essay. In this new edition some expositions about _Freud's_
theories are shortened, whilst _Adler's_ psychological views are more
fully considered, and--so far as the scope of this paper permits--a
general outline of my own views are given. I must at the outset draw
the reader's attention to the fact that this is no longer an easy
"popular" scientific paper, but a presentation making great demands upon
the patience and attention of the reader. The material is extremely
complicated and difficult. I do not for a moment deceive myself into
thinking this contribution is in any way conclusive or adequately
convincing. Only detailed scientific treatises about the various
problems touched upon in these pages could really do justice to the
subject. Any one who wishes to go deeply into the questions that are
raised here must be referred to the special literature of the subject.
My attention is solely to give the orientation in regard to the newest
concepts of the inner nature of unconscious psychology. I consider the
subject of the unconscious to be specially important and opportune at
this moment. In my opinion, it would be a great loss if this problem,
concerning every one so closely as it does, were to disappear from
the horizon of the educated lay public, by being interned in some
inaccessible specialised scientific journal. The psychological events
that accompany the present war--the incredible brutalisation of public
opinion, the epidemic of mutual calumnies, the unsuspected mania for
destruction, the unexampled flood of mendacity, and man's incapacity
to arrest the bloody demon--are they not, one and all, better adapted
than anything else, to force obtrusively the problem of the chaotic
unconscious--which slumbers uneasily beneath the ordered world of
consciousness,--before the eyes of every thinking individual? This
war has inexorably shown to the man of culture that he is still a
barbarian. It testifies also what an iron scourge awaits him, if ever
again it should occur to him to make his neighbour responsible for his
own bad qualities. The psychology of the individual corresponds to the
psychology of nations. What nations do, each individual does also,
and as long as the individual does it, the nation will do it too. A
metamorphosis in the attitude of the individual is the only possible
beginning of a transformation in the psychology of the nation. The
great problems of humanity have never been solved by universal laws,
but always and only by a remodelling of the attitude of the individual.
If ever there was a time when self-examination was the absolutely
indispensable and the only right thing, it is now, in the present
catastrophic epoch. But he who bethinks himself about his own being
strikes against the confines of the unconscious, which indeed contains
precisely that which it is most needful for him to know.

    C. G. JUNG.

    KÜSNACHT-ZÜRICH,
    _March, 1917_.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 194: First Edition, 1908 = Part I. (unaltered); Second
Edition, 1914 = Part II. Translator, M. D. Eder.]

[Footnote 195: "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox," translated by Brill
and Peterson, _Monograph Series of the Journal of Nervous and Mental
Diseases_, New York.]

[Footnote 196: Bresler, "Kulturhistorischer Beitrag zur Hysterie."
_Allg. Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie_, Bd. LIII., p. 333. Zündel,
"Biographie Blumhardts."]

[Footnote 197: Central Asylum and University Psychiatric Clinic in
Zürich.]

[Footnote 198: In psychiatry "inadequate" is employed to denote
disproportion between feeling and idea whether in excess or the reverse.]

[Footnote 199: I am indebted for this example to my colleague Dr.
Abraham of Berlin.]

[Footnote 200: As one might say in England, "a Bond Street dressmaker."]

[Footnote 201: This is an addition to the second edition, 1914.]

[Footnote 202: "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox."]

[Footnote 203: _Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische Forschung_, vol. III. pp.
9 and 558.]

[Footnote 204: Comp. also Ferenczi: "Über die Rolle der Homosexualität
in der Pathogenese der Paranoia," _Jahrb._, III., p. 101.]

[Footnote 205: Maeder: "Psychologische Untersuchungen an Dementia præcox
Kranken," _Jahrbuch f. psychoanalyt. Forsch._, II., p. 185.]

[Footnote 206: Spielrein: "Über den psychologischen Inhalt eines Falles
von Schizophrene," _l.c._, III., p. 329 ff.]

[Footnote 207: Nelken: "Analytische Beobachtungen über Phantasien eines
Schizophrenen," _l.c._, IV., p. 505 ff.]

[Footnote 208: Grebelskaja: "Psychologische Analyse eines Paranoiden,"
_l.c._, IV., p. 116 ff.]

[Footnote 209: Itten: "Beiträge zur Psychologie der Dementia præcox,"
_l.c._, p. V., 1 ff.]

[Footnote 210: Nietzsche, "Thus spake Zarathustra."]

[Footnote 211: "Quelques faits d'imagination créatrice subconsciente,"
Miss Miller, vol. V., p. 36.]

[Footnote 212: Here "objective" understanding is not identical with
causal understanding.]

[Footnote 213: This energy may also be designated as hormé. Hormé is a
Greek word [Greek: hormê]--force, attack, press, impetuosity, violence,
urgency, zeal. It is related to Bergson's "élan vital." The concept
hormé is an energic expression for psychological values.]

[Footnote 214: See p. 287.]

[Footnote 215: "Die zerebrale Sekundärfunktion." Leipzig, 1902.]




