# 10
[Metadata]: # {11}
[Descriptor]: # {11}
[Author]: # {original}
# 10
Darkness had descended on Manassas, the countryside alive with nocturnal
undercurrents, as Bourne crept through the woods bordering the “farm” of
General Norman Swayne. Startled birds fluttered out of their black recesses;
crows awoke in the trees and cawed their alarms, then, as if calmed by a
foraging co-conspirator, kept silent.

He reached it, wondering, if indeed it would be there. A fence—high, with thick
crisscrossing links embedded in green plastic, a coiled-barbed-wire addition
above slanting outward. Entry prohibited. Beijing. The Jing Shan Sanctuary.
There had been things to conceal within that Oriental wildlife preserve, so it
was protected by an all but impassable government barrier. But why would a
desk-bound general on military pay erect such a barricade around a “farm” in
Manassas, Virginia, an obstruction costing thousands of dollars? It was not
designed to fence in livestock; it was, instead, built to keep out human life.

As with the sanctuary in China, there would be no electric alarms threaded
through the links, for the animals and the birds of the forest would set them
off repeatedly. Nor would there be the unseen beams of trip lights for the same
reason; instead, they would be on the flat ground nearer the house, and
waist-high, if they existed. Bourne pulled the small wire cutters out of his
rear pocket and started with the links at earth level.

With each scissoring cut, he again understood the obvious, the inevitable,
confirmed by his heavy breathing and the sweat that had formed on his hairline.
No matter how hard he tried—not fanatically but at least assiduously—to keep
himself in reasonably good shape, he was now fifty and his body knew it. Again,
it was something to think about, not dwell upon, and with every inch of
progress not think about at all. There were Marie and the children, his family;
there was nothing he could not do as long as he willed it. David Webb was gone
from his psyche, only the predator Jason Bourne remained.

He was through! The parallel vertical links were cut, the ground wires as well.
He gripped the fence and pulled the opening toward him, making each half foot
of space an ordeal. He crawled inside this strangely fortified acreage and
stood up, listening, his eyes darting in every direction, scanning the
darkness—which was not complete darkness. He saw—filtered through the thick
branches of the tall overlapping pines bordering the tamed grounds—flickerings
of light coming from the large house. Slowly, he made his way toward what he
knew was the circular drive. He reached the outer border of the asphalt and lay
prone beneath a spreading pine, gathering his thoughts and his breath as he
studied the scene in front of him. Suddenly there was a flash of light on his
far right, deep inside the grounds at the end of a straight graveled road that
branched off from the circular drive.

A door had been opened; it belonged to what appeared to be a small house or a
large cabin and it remained open. Two men and a woman came out and were talking
... no, they were not just talking, they were arguing heatedly. Bourne ripped
the short powerful binoculars out of their Velcro recess and put them up to his
eyes. Quickly he focused on the trio, whose voices grew in volume, the words
indistinguishable but the anger apparent. As the blurred image sharpened, he
studied the three people, knowing instantly that the medium-sized,
medium-built, ramrod-straight protesting man on the left was the Pentagon’s
General Swayne, and the large-breasted woman with streaked dark hair his wife,
but what struck him—and fascinated him—was the hulking overweight figure
nearest the open door. He knew him! Jason could not remember from where or
when, which was certainly not unusual, but his visceral reaction to the sight
of the man was not usual. It was one of instant loathing and he did not know
why, since no connection with anything in the past came to him. Only feelings
of disgust and revulsion. Where were the images, the brief flashes of time or
circumstance that so often illuminated his inner screen? They did not come; he
only knew that the man he focused on in the binoculars was his enemy.

Then that huge man did an extraordinary thing. He reached for Swayne’s wife,
throwing his large left arm protectively around her shoulders, his right hand
accusingly jabbing the space between him and the general. Whatever he said—or
yelled—caused Swayne to react with what seemed to be stoic resolve mixed with
feigned indifference. He turned around, and in military fashion strode back
across the lawn toward a rear entrance to the house. Bourne lost him in the
darkness and swung back to the couple in the light of the door. The large obese
man released the general’s wife and spoke to her. She nodded, brushed her lips
against his, and ran after her husband. The obvious consort walked back into
the small house and slammed the door shut, removing the light.

Jason reattached the binoculars to his trousers and tried to understand what he
had observed. It had been like watching a silent movie minus the subtitles, the
gestures far more real and without exaggerated theatricality. That there was in
the confines of this fenced acreage a ménage à trois was obvious, but this
could hardly explain the fence. There was another reason, a reason he had to
learn.

Further, instinct told him that whatever it was, was linked to the huge
overweight man who had walked angrily back into the small house. He had to
reach that house; he had to reach that man who had been a part of his forgotten
past. He slowly got to his feet, and ducking from one pine to the next, he made
his way to the end of the circular drive, and then continued down the
tree-lined border of the narrow graveled road.

He stopped, lurching to the ground at a sudden sound that was no part of the
murmuring woods. Somewhere wheels were spinning, crushing stone and displacing
it; he rolled over and over into the dark recesses of the low-hanging,
wide-spreading branches of a pine tree, swinging his body around to locate the
disturbance.

Within seconds he saw something racing out of the shadows of the circular
drive, rushing over the gravel of the extended road. It was a small odd-shaped
vehicle, half three-wheeled motorbike, half miniature golf cart, the tires
large and deeply treaded, capable of both high speed and balance. It was also,
in its way, ominous, for, in addition to a high flexible antenna, thick curved
Plexiglas shields shot up from all sides, bulletproof windows that protected
the driver from gunfire while alerting by radio anyone inside the residences of
an assault. General Norman Swayne’s “farm” took on an even stranger ambience.
... Then, abruptly, it was macabre.

A second three-wheeled cart swung out from the shadows behind the cabin—and it
was a cabin with split logs on the exterior—and came to a stop only feet from
the first vehicle on the graveled road. Both drivers’ heads swung militarily
toward the small house as if they were robots in a public gallery, and then the
words shot out from an unseen speaker.

“Secure the gates,” said the amplified voice, a voice in command. “Release the
dogs and resume your rounds.”

As if choreographed, the vehicles swung in unison, each in the opposite
direction, the drivers gunning their engines as one, the strange-looking carts
racing forward into the shadows. At the mention of dogs Bourne had
automatically reached into his back pocket and removed the CO2 gun; he then
crawled laterally, rapidly, through the underbrush to within feet of the
extended fence. If the dogs were in a pack, he would have no choice but to
scramble up the links and spring over the coiled barbed wire to the other side.
His dual-chambered dart pistol could eliminate two animals, not more; there
would be no time to reload. He crouched, waiting, ready to leap up on the
fence, the sightlines beneath the lower branches relatively clear.

Suddenly a black Doberman raced by on the graveled road, no hesitation in his
pace, no scent picked up, the animal’s only objective apparently to reach a
given place. Then another dog appeared, this a long-haired shepherd. It slowed
down, awkwardly yet instinctively, as if programmed to halt at a specific area;
it stopped, an obscure moving silhouette up the road. Standing motionless,
Bourne understood. These were trained male attack dogs, each with its own
territory, which was constantly urinated upon, forever its own turf. It was a
behavioral discipline favored by Oriental peasants and small landowners who
knew too well the price of feeding the animals who guarded their minuscule
fiefdoms of survival. Train a few, as few as possible, to protect their
separated areas from thieves, and if alarms were raised the others would
converge. Oriental. Vietnam. ... Medusa. It was coming back to him! Vague,
obscure outlines—images. A young, powerful man in uniform, driving a Jeep,
stepping out, and—through the mists of Jason’s inner screen—yelling at what was
left of an assault team that had returned from interdicting an ordnance route
paralleling the Ho Chi Minh Trail. That same man, older, larger, had been in
his binoculars only moments ago! And years ago that same man had promised
supplies. Ammunition, mortars, grenades, radios. He had brought nothing! Only
complaints from Command Saigon that “you fucking illegals fed us crap!” But
they hadn’t. Saigon had acted too late, reacted too late, and twenty-six men
had been killed or captured for nothing.

As if it were an hour ago, a minute ago, Bourne remembered. He had yanked his
.45 out of his holster and, without warning, jabbed the barrel into the
approaching noncom’s forehead.

“One more word and you’re dead, Sergeant.” The man had been a sergeant! “You
bring us our requisitions by O-five-hundred tomorrow morning or I’ll get to
Saigon and personally blow you into the wall of whatever whorehouse you’re
frequenting. Do I make myself clear or do you care to save me a trip to
publicity city? Frankly, in light of our losses, I’d rather waste you now.”

“You’ll get what you need.”

“Très bien!” had yelled the oldest French member of Medusa, who years later
would save his life in a wildlife sanctuary in Beijing. “Tu es formidable, mon
fils!” How right he was. And how dead he was. D’Anjou, a man legends were
written about. Jason’s thoughts were abruptly shattered. The long-haired attack
dog was suddenly circling in the road, its snarls growing louder, its nostrils
picking up the human scent. Within seconds, as the animal found its directional
bearings, a frenzy developed. The dog lunged through the foliage, its teeth
bared, the snarls now the throated growls of a kill. Bourne sprang back into
the fence, pulling the CO2 pistol out of its nylon shoulder holster with his
right hand; his left arm crooked, extended, prepared for a vital counterassault
that if not executed properly would cost him the night. The crazed animal
leaped, a hurling mass of rage. Jason fired, first one cartridge and then the
second, and as the darts were embedded, he whipped his left arm around the
attack dog’s head, yanking the skull counterclockwise, slamming his right knee
up into the animal’s body to ward off the lashing sharp-nailed paws. It was
over in moments—moments of raging, panicked, finally disintegrating
fury—without the howling sounds that might have carried across the lawn of the
general’s estate. The long-haired dog, its narcotized eyes wide, fell limp in
Bourne’s arms. He lowered it to the ground and once again waited, afraid to
move until he knew that no converging inhuman alarms had been sent to the other
animals.

There were none; there was only the constant murmuring of the forest beyond the
prohibiting fence. Jason replaced the CO2 pistol in his holster and crept
forward, back to the graveled road, beads of sweat rolling down his face and
into his eyes. He had been away too long. Years ago such a feat as silencing an
attack dog would have rolled off him—un exercise ordinaire, as the legend
d’Anjou would have said—but it was no longer ordinary. What permeated his being
was fear. Pure, unadulterated fear. Where was the man that was? Still, Marie
and the children were out there; that man had to be summoned. Summon him!

Bourne stripped out the binoculars and raised them to his eyes again. The
moonlight was sporadic, low-flying clouds intercepting the rays, but the yellow
wash was sufficient. He focused on the shrubbery that fronted the stockade
fence that bordered the road outside. Pacing back and forth on a bisecting dirt
path like an angry, impatient panther was the black Doberman, stopping now and
then to urinate and poke its long snout into the bushes. As he had been
programmed to do, the animal roamed between the opposing closed iron gates of
the enormous circular drive. At each halting checkpoint it snarled, spinning
around several times as if both expecting and loathing the sharp electrical
shock it would receive through its collar if it transgressed without cause.
Again, the method of training went back to Vietnam; soldiers disciplined the
attack dogs around ammunition and matériel depots with such remote-signaling
devices. Jason focused the binoculars on the far side of the expansive front
lawn. He zeroed in on a third animal, this a huge Weimaraner, gentle in
appearance but lethal in attack. The hyperactive dog raced back and forth,
aroused perhaps by squirrels or rabbits in the brush, but not by human scent;
it did not raise a throated growl, the signal of assault.

Jason tried to analyze what he observed, for that analysis would determine his
moves. He had to assume that there was a fourth or a fifth, or even a sixth
animal patrolling the perimeters of Swayne’s grounds. But why this way? Why not
a pack roaming at will and in unison, a far more frightening and inhibiting
sight? The expense that concerned the Oriental farmer was no object. ... Then
the explanation struck him; it was so basic it was obvious. He shifted the
binoculars back and forth between the Weimaraner and the Doberman, the picture
of the longhaired German shepherd still all too clear in his mind. Beyond the
fact that these were trained attack dogs, they were also something else. They
were the top of their breeds, groomed to a fare-thee-well—vicious animals
posing as champion show dogs by day, violent predators at night. Of course.
General Norman Swayne’s “farm” was not unrecorded property, not concealed real
estate, but very much out in the open and undoubtedly, jealously perhaps,
visited by friends, neighbors and colleagues. During the daylight hours, guests
could admire these docile champions in their well-appointed kennels without
realizing what they really were. Norman Swayne, Pentagon Procurements and
alumnus of Medusa, was merely a dog aficionado, attested to by the quality of
his animals’ bloodlines. He might very well charge stud fees, but there was
nothing in the canon of military ethics that precluded the practice.

A sham. If one such aspect of the general’s “farm” was a sham, it had to follow
that the estate itself was a sham, as false as the “inheritance” that made its
purchase possible. Medusa.

One of the two strange three-wheeled carts appeared far across the lawn, out of
the shadows of the house and down the exit road of the circular drive. Bourne
focused on it, not surprised to see the Weimaraner romp over and playfully race
beside the vehicle, yapping and seeking approval from the driver. The driver.
The drivers were the handlers! The familiar scent of their bodies was calming
to the dogs, reassuring them. The observation formed the analysis and the
analysis determined his next tactic. He had to move, at least more freely than
he was moving now, about the general’s grounds. To do so he had to be in the
company of a handler. He had to take one of the roving patrols; he raced back
in the cover of the pine trees to his point of penetration.

The mechanized, bulletproof vehicle stopped on the narrow path at midpoint
between the two front gates nearly obscured by the shrubbery; Jason adjusted
his binoculars. The black Doberman was apparently a favored dog; the driver
opened the right panel as the animal sprang up, placing his huge paws on the
seat. The man chucked biscuits or pieces of meat into the wide, anticipating
jaws, then reached over and massaged the dog’s throat.

Bourne knew instantly that he had only moments to put his uncertain strategy
together. He had to stop the cart and force the driver outside but without
alarming the man, without giving him any reason whatsoever to use his radio and
call for help. The dog? Lying in the road? No, the driver might assume it had
been shot from the other side of the fence and alert the house. What could he
do? He looked around in the near-total darkness feeling the panic of
indecision, his anxiety growing as his eyes swept the area. Then, again, the
obvious struck him.

The large expanse of close-cropped manicured lawn, the precisely cut shrubbery,
the swept circular drive—neatness was the order of the general’s turf. Jason
could almost hear Swayne commanding his groundskeepers to “police the area!”

Bourne glanced over at the cart by the Doberman; the driver was playfully
pushing the dog away, about to close the shielded panel. Only seconds now!
What? How?

He saw the outlines of a tree limb on the ground; a rotted branch had fallen
from the pine above him. He crossed quickly to it and crouched, yanking it out
of the dirt and debris and dragged it toward the paved asphalt. To lay it
across the drive might appear too obvious a trap, but partially on the road—an
intrusion on the pervasive neatness—would be offensive to the eye, the task of
removing it better done now than later in the event the general drove out and
saw it upon his return. The men in Swayne’s compound were either soldiers or
ex-soldiers still under military authority; they would try to avoid reprimands,
especially over the inconsequential. The odds were on Jason’s side. He gripped
the base of the limb, swung it around and pushed it roughly five feet into the
drive. He heard the panel of the cart slam shut; the vehicle rolled forward,
gathering speed as Bourne raced back into the darkness of the pine tree.

The driver steered the vehicle around the dirt curve into the drive. As rapidly
as he had accelerated, he slowed down, his single headlight beam picking up the
new obstruction protruding on the road. He approached it cautiously, at minimum
speed, as if he were unsure of what it was; then he realized what it was and
rushed forward. Without hesitation, he opened his side door, the tall Plexiglas
shield swinging forward as he stepped out on the drive and walked around the
front of the cart.

“Big Rex, you’re one bad dog, buddy,” said the driver in a half-loud, very
Southern voice. “What’d you drag out of there, you dumb bastard? The
brass-plated asshole would shave your coat for messing up his eestate! ... Rex?
Rex, you come here, you fuckin’ hound!” The man grabbed the limb and pulled it
off the road under the pine tree into the shadows. “Rex, you hear me! You
humpin’ knotholes, you horny stud?”

“Stay completely still and put your arms out in front of you,” said Jason
Bourne, walking into view.

“Holy shit! Who are you?”

“Someone who doesn’t give a damn whether you live or die,” replied the intruder
calmly.

“You got a gun! I can see it!”

“So do you. Yours is in your holster. Mine’s in my hand and it’s pointed at
your head.”

“The dog! Where the hell’s the dawg?”

“Indisposed.”

“What?”

“He looks like a good dog. He could be anything a trainer wanted him to be. You
don’t blame the animal, you blame the human who taught it.”

“What are you talkin’ about?”

“I guess the bottom line is that I’d rather kill the man than the animal, do I
make myself clear?”

“Nothin’s clear! I jest know this man don’t want to get killed.”

“Then let’s talk, shall we?”

“I got words, but only one life, mister.”

“Lower your right arm and take out your gun—by the fingers, mister.” The guard
did so, holding the weapon by his thumb and forefinger. “Lob it toward me,
please.” The man obeyed. Bourne picked it up.

“What the hell’s this all about?” cried the guard, pleading.

“I want information. I was sent here to get it.”

“I’ll give you what I got if you let me get out of here. I don’t want nothin’
more to do with this place! I figured it was comin’ someday, I told Barbie Jo,
you ask her! I told her someday people’d be comin’ around asking questions. But
not this way, not your way! Not with guns aimed at our heads.”

“I assume Barbie Jo is your wife.”

“Sort of.”

“Then let’s start with why ‘people’ would come out here asking questions. My
superiors want to know. Don’t worry, you won’t be involved, nobody’s interested
in you. You’re just a security guard.”

“That’s all I am, mister!” interrupted the frightened man. “Then why did you
tell Barbie Jo what you did? That people would someday come out here asking
questions.”

“Hell, I’m not sure.... Jest so many crazy things, y’know?”

“No, I don’t know. Like what?”

“Well, like the brass-plated screamer, the general. He’s a big wheel, right?
He’s got Pentagon cars and drivers and even helicopters whenever he wants ’em,
right? He owns this place, right?”

“So?”

“So that big mick of a sergeant—a lousy master sergeant—orders him around like
he wasn’t toilet-trained, y’know what I mean? And that big-titty wife of his
he’s got a thing goin’ with the hulk and she don’t give a damn who knows it.
It’s all crazy, y’see what I mean?”

“I see a domestic mess, but I’m not sure it’s anybody’s business. Why would
people come out here and ask questions?”

“Why are you out here, man? You figured there was a meetin’ tonight, didn’t
you?”

“A meeting?”

“Them fancy limousines with the chauffeurs and the big shots, right? Well, you
picked the wrong night. The dogs are out and they’re never let out when there’s
a meetin’.”

Bourne paused, then spoke as he approached the guard. “We’ll continue this in
the cart,” he said with authority. “I’ll crouch down and you’ll do exactly what
I tell you to do.”

“You promised me I could get out of here!”

“You can, you will. Both you and the other fellow making the rounds. The gates
over there, are they on an alarm?”

“Not when the dogs are loose. If those hounds see something out on the road and
get excited, they’d jump up and set it off.”

“Where’s the alarm panel?”

“There are two of ’em. One’s in the sergeant’s place, the other’s in the front
hall of the house. As long as the gates are closed, you can turn it on.”

“Come on, let’s go.”

“Where are we goin’?”

“I want to see every dog on the premises.”



Twenty-one minutes later, the remaining five attack dogs drugged and carried to
their kennels, Bourne unlatched the entrance gate and let the two guards
outside. He had given each three hundred dollars. “This will make up for any
pay you lose,” he said.

“Hey, what about my car?” asked the second guard. “It ain’t much but it gets me
around. Me and Willie come out here in it.”

“Do you have the keys?”

“Yeah, in my pocket. It’s parked in the back by the kennels.”

“Get it tomorrow.”

“Why don’t I get it now?”

“You’d make too much noise driving out, and my superiors will be arriving any
moment. It’s best that they don’t see you. Take my word for it.”

“Holy shit! What’d I tell you, Jim-Bob? Jest like I tole Barbie Jo. This place
is weird, man!”

“Three hundred bucks ain’t weird, Willie. C’mon, we’ll hitch. T’ain’t late and
some of the boys’ll be on the road. ... Hey, mister, who’s gonna take care of
the hounds when they wake up? They got to be walked and fed before the morning
shift, and they’ll tear apart any stranger who gets near ’em.”

“What about Swayne’s master sergeant? He can handle them, can’t he?”

“They don’t like him much,” offered the guard named Willie, “but they obey him.
They’re better with the general’s wife, the horny bastards.”

“What about the general?” asked Bourne.

“He pisses bright yeller at the sight of ’em,” replied Jim-Bob.

“Thanks for the information. Go on now, get down the road a piece before you
start hitchhiking. My superiors are coming from the other direction.”

“You know,” said the second guard, squinting in the moonlight at Jason, “this
is the craziest fuckin’ night I ever expect to see. You get in here dressed
like some gawddamn terrorist, but you talk and act like a shit-kickin’ army
officer. You keep mentioning these ‘soopeeriors’ of yours; you drug the pups
and pay us three hundred bucks to get out. I don’t understand nothin’!”

“You’re not supposed to. On the other hand, if I was really a terrorist, you’d
probably be dead, wouldn’t you?”

“He’s right, Jim-Bob. Let’s get outta here!”

“What the hell are we supposed to say?”

“Tell anyone who asks you the truth. Describe what happened tonight. Also, you
can add that the code name is Cobra.”

“My Gawd!” yelled Willie as both men fled into the road. Bourne secured the
gate and walked back to the patrol cart certain in the knowledge that whatever
happened during the next hours, an appendage of Medusa had been thrown into a
state of further anxiety. Questions would be asked feverishly—questions for
which there were no answers. Nothing. Enigma.

He climbed into the cart, shifted gears and started for the cabin at the end of
the graveled road that branched off from the immaculate circular drive.

f f f

He stood by the window peering inside, his face at the edge of the glass. The
huge, overweight master sergeant was sitting in a large leather armchair, his
feet on an ottoman, watching television. From the sounds penetrating the
window, specifically the rapid, high-pitched speech of an announcer, the
general’s aide was engrossed in a baseball game. Jason scanned the room as best
he could; it was typically rustic, a profusion of browns and reds, from dark
furniture to checkered curtains, comfortable and masculine, a man’s cabin in
the country. However, there were no weapons in sight, not even the accepted
antique rifle over the fireplace, and no general-issue .45 automatic either on
the sergeant’s person or on the table beside the chair. The aide had no
concerns for his immediate safety and why should he? The estate of General
Norman Swayne was totally secure—fence, gates, patrols and disciplined roving
attack dogs at all points of entry. Bourne stared through the glass at the
strong jowled face of the master sergeant. What secrets did that large head
hold? He would find out. Medusa’s Delta One would find out if he had to carve
that skull apart. Jason pushed himself away from the window and walked around
the cabin to the front door. He knocked twice with the knuckles of his left
hand; in his right was the untraceable automatic supplied by Alexander Conklin,
the crown prince of dark operations.

“It’s open, Rachel!” yelled the rasping voice from within.

Bourne twisted the knob and shoved the door back; it swung slowly on its hinges
and made contact with the wall. He walked inside.

“Jesus Christ!” roared the master sergeant, his heavy legs plunging off the
ottoman as he wriggled his massive body out of the chair. “You! ... You’re a
goddamned ghost! You’re dead!”

“Try again,” said Delta of Medusa. “The name’s Flannagan, isn’t it? That’s what
comes to mind.”

“You’re dead!” repeated the general’s aide, screaming, his eyes bulging in
panic. “You bought it in Hong Kong! You were killed in Hong Kong ... four, five
years ago!”

“You kept tabs—”

“We know ... I know!”

“You’ve got connections in the right places, then.”

“You’re Bourne!”

“Obviously born again, you might say.”

“I don’t believe this!”

“Believe, Flannagan. It’s the ‘we’ we’re going to talk about. Snake Lady, to be
precise.”

“You’re the one—the one Swayne called ‘Cobra’!”

“It’s a snake.”

“I don’t get it—”

“It’s confusing.”

“You’re one of us!”

“I was. I was also cut out. I snaked back in, as it were.”

The sergeant frantically looked at the door, then the windows. “How’d you get
in here? Where are the guards, the dogs? Jesus! Where are they?”

“The dogs are asleep in the kennels, so I gave the guards the night off.”

“You gave ... ? The dogs are on the grounds!”

“Not any longer. They were persuaded to rest.”

“The guards—the goddamned guards!”

“They were persuaded to leave. What they think is happening here tonight is
even more confusing.”

“What’ve you done—what are you doing?”

“I thought I just mentioned it. We’re going to talk, Sergeant Flannagan. I want
to get caught up with some old comrades.”

The frightened man backed awkwardly away from the chair. “You’re the maniac
they called Delta before you turned and went in business for yourself!” he
cried in a guttural whisper. “There was a picture, a photograph—you were laid
out on a slab, bloodstains all over the sheet from the bullet wounds; your face
was uncovered, your eyes wide open, holes still bleeding on your forehead and
your throat. ... They asked me who you were and I said, ‘He’s Delta. Delta One
from the illegals,’ and they said, ‘No, he’s not, he’s Jason Bourne, the
killer, the assassin,’ so I said, ‘Then they’re one and the same because that
man is Delta—I knew him.’ They thanked me and told me to go back and join the
others.”

“Who were ‘they’?”

“Some people over at Langley. The one who did all the talking had a limp; he
carried a cane.”

“And ‘the others’—they told you to go back and join?”

“About twenty-five or thirty of the old Saigon crowd.”

“Command Saigon?”

“Yeah.”

“Men who worked with our crowd, the ‘illegals’?”

“Mostly, yeah.”

“When was this?”

“For Christ’s sake, I told you!” roared the panicked aide. “Four or five years
ago! I saw the photograph—you were dead!”

“Only a single photograph,” interrupted Bourne quietly, staring at the master
sergeant. “You have a very good memory.”

“You held a gun to my head. Thirty-three years, two wars and twelve combat
tours, nobody ever did that to me—nobody but you. ... Yeah, I gotta good
memory.”

“I think I understand.”

“I don’t! I don’t understand a goddamned thing! You were dead!”

“You’ve said that. But I’m not, am I? Or maybe I am. Maybe this is the
nightmare that’s been visited upon you after twenty years of deceit.”

“What kind of crap is that? What the hell—”

“Don’t move!”

“I’m not!”

Suddenly, in the distance, there was a loud report. A gunshot! Jason spun
around ... then instinct commanded him to keep turning! All around! The massive
general’s aide was lunging at him, his huge hands like battering rams grazing
off Bourne’s shoulders as Delta One viciously lashed up his right foot,
catching the sergeant’s kidney, embedding his shoe deep into the flesh while
crashing the barrel of his automatic into the base of the man’s neck. Flannagan
lurched downward, splayed on the floor; Jason hammered his left foot into the
sergeant’s head, stunning him into silence.

A silence that was broken by the continuous hysterical screams of a woman
racing outside toward the open door of the cabin. Within seconds, General
Norman Swayne’s wife burst into the room, recoiling at the sight in front of
her, gripping the back of the nearest chair, unable to contain her panic.

“He’s dead!” she shrieked, collapsing, swerving the chair to her side as she
fell to the floor reaching for her lover. “He shot himself, Eddie! Oh, my God,
he killed himself!”

Jason Bourne rose from his crouched position and walked to the door of the
strange cabin that held so many secrets. Calmly, watching his two prisoners, he
closed it. The woman wept, gasping, trembling, but they were tears not of
sorrow but of fear. The sergeant blinked his eyes and raised his huge head. If
any emotion could be defined in his expression, it was an admixture of fury and
bewilderment.

