# 7
[Metadata]: # {08}
[Descriptor]: # {08}
[Author]: # {original}
# 7
Marie St. Jacques Webb greeted the Caribbean morning by stretching in bed
and-looking over at the crib several feet away. Alison was deep in sleep, which
she had not been four or five hours ago. The little dear had been a basket case
then, so much so that Marie’s brother Johnny had knocked on the door, walked
cowardly inside, and asked if he could do anything, which he profoundly trusted
he could not.

“How are you at changing a nasty diaper?”

“I don’t even want to think about it,” said St. Jacques, fleeing.

Now, however, she heard his voice through the shutters outside. She also knew
that she was meant to hear it; he was enticing her son, Jamie, into a race in
the pool and speaking so loudly he could be heard on the big island of
Montserrat. Marie literally crawled out of bed, headed for the bathroom, and
four minutes later, ablutions completed, her auburn hair brushed and, wearing a
bathrobe, walked out through the shuttered door to the patio overlooking the
pool.

“Well, hi there, Mare!” shouted her tanned, dark-haired, handsome younger
brother beside her son in the water. “I hope we didn’t wake you up. We just
wanted to take a swim.”

“So you decided to let the British coastal patrols in Plymouth know about it.”

“Hey, come on, it’s almost nine o’clock. That’s late in the islands.”

“Hello, Mommy. Uncle John’s been showing me how to scare off sharks with a
stick!”

“Your uncle is full of terribly important information that I hope to God you’ll
never use.”

“There’s a pot of coffee on the table, Mare. And Mrs. Cooper will make you
whatever you like for breakfast.”

“Coffee’s fine, Johnny. The telephone rang last night—was it David?”

“Himself,” replied the brother. “And you and I are going to talk. ... Come on,
Jamie, up we go. Grip the ladder.”

“What about the sharks?”

“You got ’em all, buddy. Go get yourself a drink.”

“Johnny!”

“Orange juice, there’s a pitcher in the kitchen.” John St. Jacques walked
around the rim of the pool and up the steps to the bedroom patio as his nephew
raced into the house.

Marie watched her brother approach, noting the similarities between him and her
husband. Both were tall and muscular; both had in their strides an absence of
compromise, but where David usually won, Johnny more often than not lost, and
she did not know why. Or why David had such trust in his younger brother-in-law
when the two older St. Jacques sons would appear to be more responsible.
David—or was it Jason Bourne?—never discussed the question in depth; he simply
laughed it off and said Johnny had a streak in him that appealed to David—or
was it Bourne?

“Let’s level,” said the youngest St. Jacques sitting down, the water dripping
off his body onto the patio. “What kind of trouble is David in? He couldn’t
talk on the phone and you were in no shape last night for an extended chat.
What’s happened?”

“The Jackal. ... The Jackal’s what’s happened.”

“Christ!” exploded the brother. “After all these years?”

“After all these years,” repeated Marie, her voice drifting off.”

“How far has that bastard gotten?”

“David’s in Washington trying to find out. All we know for certain is that he
dug up Alex Conklin and Mo Panov from the horrors of Hong Kong and Kowloon.”
She told him about the false telegrams and the trap at the amusement park in
Baltimore.

“I presume Alex has them all under protection or whatever they call it.”

“Around the clock, I’m sure. Outside of ourselves and McAllister, Alex and Mo
are the only two people still alive who know that David was—oh, Jesus, I can’t
even say the name!” Marie slammed the coffee mug down on the patio table.

“Easy, Sis.” St. Jacques reached for her hand, placing his on top of hers.
“Conklin knows what he’s doing. David told me that Alex was the best—‘field
man,’ he called him—that ever worked for the Americans.”

“You don’t understand, Johnny!” cried Marie, trying to control her voice and
emotions, her wide eyes denying the attempt. “David never said that, David Webb
never knew that! Jason Bourne said it, and he’s back! ... That ice-cold
calculating monster they created is back in David’s head. You don’t know what
it’s like. With a look in those unfocused eyes that see things I can’t see—or
with a tone of voice, a quiet freezing voice I don’t know—and I’m suddenly with
a stranger.”

St. Jacques held up his free hand telling her to stop. “Come on,” he said
softly.

“The children? Jamie ... ?” She looked frantically around.

“No, you. What do you expect David to do? Crawl inside a Wing or Ming dynasty
vase and pretend his wife and children aren’t in danger—that only he is?
Whether you ladies like it or not, we boys still think it’s up to us to keep
the big cats from the cave. We honestly believe we’re more equipped. We revert
to those strengths, the ugliest of them, of course, because we have to. That’s
what David’s doing.”

“When did little brother get so philosophical?” asked Marie, studying John St.
Jacques’s face.

“That ain’t philosophy, girl, I just know it. Most men do—apologies to the
feminist crowd.”

“Don’t apologize; most of us wouldn’t have it any other way. Would you believe
that your big scholarly sister who called a lot of economic shots in Ottawa
still yells like hell when she sees a mouse in our country kitchen, and goes
into panic if it’s a rat?”

“Certain bright women are more honest than others.”

“I’ll accept what you say, Johnny, but you’re missing my point. David’s been
doing so well these last five years, every month just a little bit better than
the last. He’ll never be totally cured, we all know that—he was damaged too
severely—but the furies, his own personal furies, have almost disappeared. The
solitary walks in the woods when he’d come back with hands bruised from
attacking tree trunks; the quiet, stifled tears in his study late at night when
he couldn’t remember what he was or what he’d done, thinking the worst of
himself—they were gone, Johnny! There was real sunlight, do you know what I
mean?”

“Yes, I do,” said the brother solemnly.

“What’s happening now could bring them all back, that’s what’s frightening me
so!”

“Then let’s hope it’s over quickly.”

Marie stopped, once again studying her brother. “Hold it, little bro, I know
you too well. You’re pulling back.”

“Not a bit.”

“Yes, you are. ... You and David—I never understood. Our two older brothers, so
solid, so on top of everything, perhaps not intellectually but certainly
pragmatically. Yet he turned to you. Why, Johnny?”

“Let’s not go into it,” said St. Jacques curtly, removing his hand from his
sister’s.

“But I have to. This is my life, he’s my life! There can’t be any more secrets
where he’s concerned—I can’t stand any more! ... Why you?”

St. Jacques leaned back in the patio chair, his stretched fingers now covering
his forehead. He raised his eyes, an unspoken plea in them. “All right, I know
where you’re coming from. Do you remember six or seven years ago I left our
ranch saying I wanted to try things on my own?”

“Certainly. I think you broke both Mom’s and Dad’s hearts. Let’s face it, you
were always kind of the favorite—”

“I was always the kid!” interrupted the youngest St. Jacques. “Playing out some
moronic Bonanza where my thirty-year-old brothers were blindly taking orders
from a pontificating, bigoted French Canadian father whose only smarts came
with his money and his land.”

“There was more to him than that, but I won’t argue—from a ‘kid’s’ viewpoint.”

“You couldn’t, Mare. You did the same thing, and sometimes you didn’t come home
for over a year.”

“I was busy.”

“So was I.”

“What did you do?”

“I killed two men. Two animals who’d killed a friend of mine—raped her and
killed her.”

“What?”

“Keep your voice down—”

“My God, what happened?”

“I didn’t want to call home, so I reached your husband ... my friend, David,
who didn’t treat me like a brain-damaged kid. At the time it seemed like a
logical thing to do and it was the best decision I could have made. He was owed
favors by his government, and a quiet team of bright people from Washington and
Ottawa flew up to James Bay and I was acquitted. Self-defense, and it was just
that.”

“He never said a word to me—”

“I begged him not to.”

“So that’s why. ... But I still don’t understand!”

“It’s not difficult, Mare. A part of him knows I can kill, will kill, if I
think it’s necessary.”

A telephone rang inside the house as Marie stared at her younger brother.
Before she could get her voice back, an elderly black woman emerged from the
door to the kitchen. “It’s for you, Mr. John. It’s that pilot over on the big
island. He says it’s real important, mon.”

“Thanks, Mrs. Cooper,” said St. Jacques, getting out of the chair and walking
rapidly down to an extension phone by the pool. He spoke for several moments,
looked up at Marie, slammed down the telephone and rushed back up to his
sister. “Pack up. You’re getting out of here!”

“Why? Was that the man who flew us—”

“He’s back from Martinique and just learned that someone was asking questions
at the airport last night. About a woman and two small children. None of the
crews said anything, but that may not last. Quickly.”

“My God, where will we go?”

“Over to the inn until we think of something else. There’s only one road and my
own Tonton Macoute patrols it. No one gets in or out. Mrs. Cooper will help you
with Alison. Hurry!”

The telephone started ringing again as Marie dashed through the bedroom door.
St. Jacques raced down the steps to the pool extension, reaching it as Mrs.
Cooper once more stepped out of the kitchen. “It’s Government House over in
’Serrat, Mr. John.”

“What the hell do they want ... ?”

“Shall I ask them?”

“Never mind, I’ll get it. Help my sister with the kids and pack everything they
brought with them into the Rover. They’re leaving right away!”

“Oh, a bad time pity, mon. I was just getting to know the little babies.”

“ ‘Bad time pity’ is right,” mumbled St. Jacques, picking up the telephone.
“Yes?”

“Hello, John?” said the chief aide to the Crown governor, a man who had
befriended the Canadian developer and helped him through the maze of the
colony’s Territorial Regulations.

“Can I call you back, Henry? I’m kind of harried at the moment.”

“I’m afraid there’s no time, chap. This is straight from the Foreign Office.
They want our immediate cooperation, and it won’t do you any harm, either.”

“Oh?”

“It seems there’s an old fellow and his wife arriving on Air France’s
connecting flight from Antigua at ten-thirty and Whitehall wants the red-carpet
treatment. Apparently the old boy had a splendid war, with a slew of
decorations, and worked with a lot of our chaps across the Channel.”

“Henry, I’m really in a hurry. What’s any of this got to do with me?”

“Well, I rather assumed you might have more of an idea about that than we do.
Probably one of your rich Canadian guests, perhaps a Frenchie from Montreal who
came out of the Résistance and who thought of you—”

“Insults will only get you a bottle of superior French Canadian wine. What do
you want?”

“Put up our hero and his lady in the finest accommodations you’ve got, with a
room for the French-speaking nurse we’ve assigned to them.”

“On an hour’s notice?”

“Well, chap, our buns could be in a collective sling, if you know what I
mean—and your so vital but erratic telephone service does depend on a degree of
Crown intervention, if you also know what I mean.”

“Henry, you’re a terrific negotiator. You so politely kick a person so
accurately where it hurts. What’s our hero’s name? Quickly, please!”



“Our names are Jean Pierre and Regine Fontaine, Monsieur le Directeur, and here
are our passports,” said the soft-spoken. old man inside the immigration
officer’s glass-enclosed office, the chief aide of the Crown governor at his
side. “My wife can be seen over there,” he added, pointing through the window.
“She is talking with the mademoiselle in the white uniform.”

“Please, Monsieur Fontaine,” protested the stocky black immigration official in
a pronounced British accent. “This is merely an informal formality, a stamping
procedure, if you like. Also to remove you from the inconvenience of so many
admirers. Rumors have gone throughout the airport that a great man has
arrived.”

“Really?” Fontaine smiled; it was a pleasant smile.

“Oh, but not to be concerned, sir. The press has been barred. We know you want
complete privacy, and you shall have it.”

“Really?” The old man’s smile faded. “I was to meet someone here, an associate,
you might say, I must consult with confidentially. I hope your most considerate
arrangements do not prevent him from reaching me.”

“A small, select group with proper standing and credentials will greet you in
Blackburne’s honored-guest corridor, Monsieur Fontaine,” said the Crown
governor’s chief aide. “May we proceed? The reception line will be swift, I
assure you.”

“Really? That swift?”

It was, less than five minutes actually, but five seconds would have been
enough. The first person the Jackal’s courier-killer met was the beribboned
Crown governor himself. As the Queen’s royal representative embraced the hero
in Gallic style, he whispered into Jean Pierre Fontaine’s ear. “We’ve learned
where the woman and her children were taken. We are sending you there. The
nurse has your instructions.”

The rest was somewhat anticlimactic for the old man, especially the absence of
the press. He had never had his picture in the newspapers except as a felon.



Morris Panov, M.D., was a very angry man, and he always tried to control his
very angry moments because they never helped him or his patients. At the
moment, however, sitting at his office desk, he was having difficulty curbing
his emotions. He had not heard from David Webb. He had to hear from him, he had
to talk to him. What was happening could negate thirteen years of therapy,
couldn’t they understand that? ... No, of course they couldn’t; it was not what
interested them; they had other priorities and did not care to be burdened by
problems beyond their purview. But he had to care. The damaged mind was so
fragile, so given to setbacks, the horrors of the past were so capable of
taking over the present. It could not happen with David! He was so close to
being as normal as he would ever be (and who the hell was “normal” in this
fucked-up world). He could function wonderfully as a teacher; he had near-total
recall where his scholarly expertise was called upon, and he was remembering
more and more as each year progressed. But it could all blow apart with a
single act of violence, for violence was the way of life for Jason Bourne.
Damn!

It was crippling enough that they even permitted David to stay around; he had
tried to explain the potential damage to Alex, but Conklin had an irrefutable
reply: We can’t stop him. At least this way we can watch him, protect him.
Perhaps so. “They” did not stint where protection was involved—the guards down
the hall from his office and on the roof of the building, to say nothing of a
temporary receptionist bearing arms as well as a strange computer, attested to
their concern. Still it would be so much better for David if he was simply
sedated and flown down to his island retreat, leaving the hunt for the Jackal
to the professionals. ... Panov suddenly caught himself as the realization
swept over him: there was no one more professional than Jason Bourne.

The doctor’s thoughts were interrupted by the telephone, the telephone he could
not pick up until all the security procedures were activated. A trace was
placed on the incoming call; a scanner determined whether there were intercepts
on the line, and finally the identity of the caller was approved by Panov
himself. His intercom buzzed; he flipped the switch on his console. “Yes?”

“All systems are cleared, sir,” announced the temporary receptionist, who was
the only one in the office who would know. “The man on the line said his name
was Treadstone, Mr. D. Treadstone.”

“I’ll take it,” said Mo Panov firmly. “And you can remove whatever other
‘systems’ you’ve got on that machine out there. This is doctor-patient
confidentiality.”

“Yes, sir. Monitor is terminated.”

“It’s what? ... Never mind.” The psychiatrist picked up the phone and was
barely able to keep from shouting. “Why didn’t you call me before this, you son
of a bitch!”

“I didn’t want to give you cardiac arrest, is that sufficient?”

“Where are you and what are you doing?”

“At the moment?”

“That’ll suffice.”

“Let’s see, I rented a car and right now I’m a half a block from a town house
in Georgetown owned by the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, talking to
you on a pay phone.”

“For Christ’s sake, why?”

“Alex will fill you in, but what I want you to do is call Marie on the island.
I’ve tried a couple of times since leaving the hotel but I can’t get through.
Tell her I’m fine, that I’m perfectly fine, and not to worry. Have you got
that?”

“I’ve got it, but I don’t buy it. You don’t even sound like yourself.”

“You can’t tell her that, Doctor. If you’re my friend, you can’t tell her
anything like that.”

“Stop it, David. This Jekyll-and-Hyde crap doesn’t wash anymore.”

“Don’t tell her that, not if you’re my friend.”

“You’re spiraling, David. Don’t let it happen. Come to me, talk to me.”

“No time, Mo. The fat cat’s limousine is parking in front of his house. I’ve
got to go to work.”

“Jason!”

The line went dead.



Brendan Patrick Pierre Prefontaine walked down the jet’s metal steps into the
hot Caribbean sun of Montserrat’s Blackburne Airport. It was shortly past three
o’clock in the afternoon, and were it not for the many thousands of dollars on
his person he might have felt lost. It was remarkable how a supply of
hundred-dollar bills in various pockets made one feel so secure. In truth, he
had to keep reminding himself that his loose change—fifties, twenties and
tens—were in his right front trousers pocket so as not to make a mistake and
either appear ostentatious or be a mark for some unprincipled hustler. Above
all, it was vital for him to keep a low profile to the point of insignificance.
He had to insignificantly ask significant questions around the airport
regarding a woman and two small children who had arrived on a private aircraft
the previous afternoon.

Which was why to his astonishment and alarm he heard the absolutely adorable
black female immigration clerk say to him after hanging up a telephone, “Would
you be so kind, sir, as to come with me, please?”

Her lovely face, lilting voice and perfect smile did nothing to allay the
former judge’s fears. Far too many extremely guilty criminals had such assets.
“Is there something wrong with my passport, young lady?”

“Not that I can see, sir.”

“Then why the delay? Why not simply stamp it and allow me to proceed?”

“Oh, it is stamped and entry is permitted, sir. There is no problem.”

“Then why ... ?”

“Please come with me, sir.”

They approached a large glass-enclosed cubicle with a sign on the left window,
the gold letters announcing the occupant: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF IMMIGRATION
SERVICES. The attractive clerk opened the door and, again smiling, gestured for
the elderly visitor to go inside. Prefontaine did so, suddenly terrified that
he would be searched, the money found, and all manner of charges leveled
against him. He did not know which islands were involved in narcotics, but if
this was one of them the thousands of dollars in his pockets would be instantly
suspect. Explanations raced through his mind as the clerk crossed to the desk
handing his passport to the short, heavyset deputy of immigration. The woman
gave Brendan a last bright smile and went out the door, closing it behind her.

“Mr. Brendan Patrick Pierre Prefontaine,” intoned the immigration official
reading the passport.

“Not that it matters,” said Brendan kindly but with summoned authority.
“However, the ‘Mister’ is usually replaced with ‘Judge’—as I say, I don’t
believe it’s relevant under the circumstances, or perhaps it is, I really don’t
know. Did one of my law clerks make an error? If so, I’ll fly the whole group
down to apologize.”

“Oh, not at all, sir—Judge,” replied the uniformed wide-girthed black man with
a distinct British accent as he rose from the chair and extended his hand over
the desk. “Actually, it is I who may have made the error.”

“Come now, Colonel, we all do occasionally.” Brendan gripped the official’s
hand. “Then perhaps I may be on my way? There’s someone here I must meet.”

“That’s what he said!”

Brendan released the hand. “I beg your pardon?”

“I may have to beg yours. … The confidentiality, of course.”

“The what? Could we get to the point, please?”

“I realize that privacy,” continued the official, pronouncing the word as
privvissy, “is of utmost importance—that’s been explained to us—but whenever we
can be of assistance, we try to oblige the Crown.”

“Extremely commendable, Brigadier, but I’m afraid I don’t understand.”

The official needlessly lowered his voice. “A great man arrived here this
morning, are you aware of that?”

“I’m sure many men of stature come to your beautiful island. It was highly
recommended to me, in fact.”

“Ah, yes, the privvissy!”

“Yes, of course, the privvissy,” agreed the ex-convict judge, wondering if the
official had both his oars in the water. “Could you be clearer?”

“Well, he said he was to meet someone, an associate he had to consult with, but
after the very private reception line—no press, of course—he was taken directly
to the charter that flew him to the out island, and obviously never met the
person he was to confidentially meet. Now, am I clearer?”

“Like Boston harbor in a squall, General.”

“Very good. I understand. Privvissy. ... So all our personnel are alerted to
the fact that the great man’s friend might be seeking him here at the
airport—confidentially, of course.”

“Of course.” Not even a paddle, thought Brendan.

“Then I considered another possibility,” said the official in minor triumph.
“Suppose the great man’s friend was also flying to our island for a rendezvous
with the great man?”

“Brilliant.”

“Not without logic. Then it struck me to obtain the passenger manifests of all
the incoming flights, concentrating, of course, on those in first class, which
would be proper for the great man’s associate.”

“Clairvoyance,” mumbled the once and former judge. “And you selected me?”

“The name, my good man! Pierre Prefontaine!”

“My pious, departed mother would no doubt take offense at your omitting the
‘Brendan Patrick.’ Like the French, the Irish are quite sensitive in such
matters.”

“But it was the family. I understood that immediately!”

“You did?”

“Pierre Prefontaine! ... Jean Pierre Fontaine. I am an expert on immigration
procedures, having studied the methods in many countries. Your own name is a
fascinating example, most honored Judge. Wave after wave of immigrants flocked
to the United States, the melting pot of nations, races and languages. In the
process names were altered, combined or simply misunderstood by armies of
confused, overworked clerks. But roots frequently survived and thus it was for
you. The family Fontaine became Prefontaine in America and the great man’s
associate was in reality an esteemed member of the American branch!”

“Positively awesome,” muttered Brendan, eyeing the official as if he expected
several male nurses to barge into the room with restraining equipment. “But
isn’t it possible that this is merely coincidence? Fontaine is a common name
throughout France, but, as I understand it, the Prefontaines were distinctly
centered around Alsace-Lorraine.”

“Yes, of course,” said the deputy, again, lowering his voice rather than
conceivably winking. “Yet without any prior word whatsoever, the Quai d’Orsay
in Paris calls, then the UK’s Foreign Office follows with instructions—a great
man is soon to drop out of the sky. Acknowledge him, honor him, spirit him off
to a remote resort known for its confidentiality—for that, too, is paramount.
The great one is to have total privvissy. ... Yet that same great warrior is
anxious; he is to confidentially meet with an associate he does not find.
Perhaps the great man has secrets—all great men do, you know.”

Suddenly, the thousands of dollars in Prefontaine’s pockets felt very heavy.
Washington’s Four Zero clearance in Boston, the Quai d’Orsay in Paris, the
Foreign Office in London—Randolph Gates needlessly parting with an
extraordinary amount of money out of sheer panic. There was a pattern of
strange convergence, the strangest being the inclusion of a frightened,
unscrupulous attorney named Gates. Was he an inclusion or an aberration? What
did it all mean? “You are an extraordinary man,” said Brendan quickly, covering
his thoughts with rapid words. “Your perceptions are nothing short of
brilliant, but you do understand that confidentiality is paramount.”

“I will hear no more, honored Judge!” exclaimed the deputy. “Except to add that
your appraisal of my abilities might not be lost on my superiors.”

“They will be made clear, I assure you. ... Precisely where did my not too
distant and distinguished cousin go?”

“A small out island where the seaplanes must land on the water. Its name is
Tranquility Isle and the resort is called Tranquility Inn.”

“You will be personally thanked by those above you, be assured of that.”

“And I shall personally clear you through customs.”

Brendan Patrick Pierre Prefontaine, carrying his suitcase of burnished leather,
walked out into the terminal of Blackburne Airport a bewildered man.
Bewildered, hell, he was stunned! He could not decide whether to take the next
flight back to Boston or to ... his feet were apparently deciding for him. He
found himself walking toward a counter beneath a large sea-blue sign with white
lettering: INTER-ISLAND AIRWAYS. It couldn’t do any harm to inquire, he mused,
then he would buy a ticket on the next plane to Boston.

On the wall beyond the counter a list of nearby “Out Isles” was next to a
larger column of the well-known Leeward and Windward Islands from St. Kitts and
Nevis south to the Grenadines. Tranquility was sandwiched between Canada Cay
and Turtle Rock. Two clerks, both young, one black and one white, the former a
young woman, the latter a blond-haired man in his early twenties, were talking
quietly. The girl approached. “May I help you, sir?”

“I’m not really sure,” replied Brendan hesitantly. “My schedule’s so unsettled,
but it seems I have a friend on Tranquility Isle.”

“At the inn, sir?”

“Yes, apparently so. Does it take long to fly over there?”

“If the weather’s clear, no more than fifteen minutes, but that would be an
amphibious charter. I’m not sure one’s available until tomorrow morning.”

“Sure, there is, babe,” interrupted the young man with small gold wings pinned
crookedly on his white shirt. “I’m running over some supplies to Johnny St. Jay
pretty soon,” he added, stepping forward.

“He’s not scheduled for today.”

“As of an hour ago he is. Pronto.”

At that instant and with those words, Prefontaine’s eyes fell in astonishment
on two stacks of cartons moving slowly down Inter-Island’s luggage carousel
toward the exterior loading area. Even if he had the time to debate with
himself, he knew his decision was made.

“I’d like to purchase a ticket on that flight, if I may,” he said, watching the
boxes of Gerber’s Assorted Baby Foods and Pampers Medium Diapers disappear into
the hold.

He had found the unknown woman with the small male child and the infant.

