# 18
[Metadata]: # {19}
[Descriptor]: # {19}
[Author]: # {original}
# 18
Steven DeSole, keeper of the deepest secrets for the Central Intelligence
Agency, forced his overweight frame out of the driver’s seat. He stood in the
deserted parking lot of the small shopping center in Annapolis, Maryland, where
the only source of light was the storefront neons of a closed gas station, with
a large German shepherd sleeping in the window. DeSole adjusted his
steel-rimmed glasses and squinted at his watch, barely able to see the radium
hands. As near as he could determine, it was between 3:15 and 3:20 in the
morning, which meant he was early and that was good. He had to adjust his
thoughts; he was unable to do so while driving, as his severe night blindness
necessitated complete concentration on the road, and hiring a taxi or a driver
was out of the question.

The information was at first ... well, merely a name ... a rather common name.
His name is Webb, the caller had said. Thank you, he had replied. A sketchy
description was given, one fitting several million men, so he had thanked the
informer again and hung up the phone. But then, in the recesses of his
analyst’s mind, by profession and training a warehouse for both essential and
incidental data, an alarm went off. Webb, Webb ... amnesia? A clinic in
Virginia years ago. A man more dead than alive had been flown down from a
hospital in New York, the medical file so maximum classified it could not even
be shown to the Oval Office. Yet interrogation specialists talk in dark
corners, as often to relieve frustration as to impress a listener, and he had
heard about a recalcitrant, unmanageable patient, an amnesiac they called
“Davey” and sometimes just a short, sharp, hostile “Webb,” formerly a member of
Saigon’s infamous Medusa, and a man they suspected of feigning his loss of
memory. ... Loss of memory? Alex Conklin had told them that the Medusan they
had trained to go out in deep cover for Carlos the Jackal, an agent provocateur
they called Jason Bourne, had lost his memory. Lost his memory and nearly lost
his life because his controls disbelieved the story of amnesia! That was the
man they called “Davey” ... David. David Webb was Conklin’s Jason Bourne! How
could it be otherwise?

David Webb! And he had been at Norman Swayne’s house the night the Agency was
told that poor cuckolded Swayne had taken his own life, a suicide that had not
been reported in the papers for reasons DeSole could not possibly understand!
David Webb. The old Medusa. Jason Bourne. Conklin. Why?

The headlights of an approaching limousine shot through the darkness at the far
end of the parking lot, swerving in a semicircle toward the CIA analyst,
causing him to shut his eyes—the refracted light through his thick lenses was
painful. He had to make the sequence of his revelations clear to these men.
They were his means to a life he and his wife had dreamed of—money. Not
bureaucratic less-than-money, but real money. Education at the best
universities for their grandchildren, not the state colleges and the begged-for
scholarships that came with the government salary of a bureaucrat—a bureaucrat
so much better than those around him it was pitiful. DeSole the Mute Mole, they
called him, but would not pay him for his expertise, the very expertise that
prohibited him from going into the private sector, surrounding him with so many
legal restrictions that it was pointless to apply. Someday Washington would
learn; that day would not come in his lifetime, so six grandchildren had made
the decision for him. The empathetic new Medusa had beckoned with generosity,
and in his bitterness he had come running.

He rationalized that it was no more an unethical decision on his part than
those made every year by scores of Pentagon personnel who walked out of
Arlington and into the corporate arms of their old friends the defense
contractors. As an army colonel once said to him, “It’s work now and get paid
later,” and God knew that one Steven DeSole worked like hell for his country,
but his country hardly reciprocated in kind. He hated the name Medusa, though,
and rarely if ever used it because it was a symbol from another time, ominous
and misleading. The great oil companies and railroads sprang from the chicanery
and the venality of the robber barons, but they were not now what they were
then. Medusa may have been born in the corruption of a war-ravaged Saigon, its
early funding may have been a result of it, but that Medusa no longer existed;
it had been replaced by a dozen different names and companies.

“We’re not pure, Mr. DeSole, no American-controlled international conglomerate
is,” said his recruiter, “and it’s true that we seek what some might call
unfair economic advantage based on privileged information. Secrets, if you
like. You see, we have to because our competitors throughout Europe and the Far
East consistently have it. The difference between them and us is that their
governments support their efforts—ours doesn’t. ... Trade, Mr. DeSole, trade
and profits. They’re the healthiest pursuits on earth. Chrysler may not like
Toyota, but the astute Mr. Iacocca does not call for an air strike against
Tokyo. At least not yet. He finds ways to join forces with the Japanese.”

Yes, mused DeSole as the limousine came to a stop ten feet away from him. What
he did for the “corporation,” which he preferred to call it, as opposed to what
he did for the Company, might even be considered benevolent. Profits, after
all, were more desirable than bombs ... and his grandchildren would go to the
finest schools and universities in the country. Two men got out of the
limousine and approached him.

“What’s this Webb look like?” asked Albert Armbruster, chairman of the Federal
Trade Commission, as they walked along the edge of the parking lot.

“I only have a description from the gardener, who was hiding behind a fence
thirty feet away.”

“What did he tell you?” The unidentified associate of the chairman, a short
stocky man with penetrating dark eyes and dark eyebrows beneath dark hair,
looked at DeSole. “Be precise,” he added.

“Now, just a minute,” protested the analyst defensively but firmly. “I’m
precise in everything I say, and, frankly, whoever you are, I don’t like the
tone of your voice one bit.”

“He’s upset,” said Armbruster, as if his associate was dismissible. “He’s a
spaghetti head from New York and doesn’t trust anybody.”

“Who’s to trust in New Yawk?” asked the short, dark man, laughing and poking
his elbow into the wide girth of Albert Armbruster. “You WASPs are the worst,
you got the banks, amico!”

“Let’s keep it that way and out of the courts. ... The description, please?”
The chairman looked at DeSole.

“It’s incomplete, but there is a long-ago tie-in with Medusa that I’ll
describe—precisely.”

“Go ahead, pal,” said the man from New York.

“He’s rather large—tall, that is—and in his late forties or early fifties and—”

“Has he got some gray around his temples?” asked Armbruster, interrupting.

“Well, yes, I think the gardener said something to that effect—graying, or gray
in his hair, or something like that. It’s obviously why he judged him to be in
his forties or fifties.”

“It’s Simon,” said Armbruster, looking at the New Yorker.

“Who?” DeSole stopped, as the other two stopped and looked at him.

“He called himself Simon, and he knew all about you, Mr. CIA,” said the
chairman. “About you and Brussels and our whole thing.”

“What are you talking about?”

“For starters, your goddamn fax machine exclusively between you and that
fruitcake in Brussels.”

“It’s a buried, dedicated line! It’s locked up!”

“Someone found the key, Mr. Precision,” said the New Yorker, not smiling.

“Oh, my God, that’s terrible! What should I do?”

“Make up a story between you and Teagarten, but do it from public phones,”
continued the mafioso. “One of you will come up with something.”

“You know about ... Brussels?”

“There’s very little I don’t know.”

“That son of a bitch conned me into thinking he was one of us and he had me by
the balls!” said Armbruster angrily, continuing to walk along the edge of the
parking lot, the other two joining him, DeSole hesitantly, apprehensively. “He
seemed to know everything, but when I think back, he only brought up bits and
pieces—damned big bits and pieces like Burton and you and Brussels—and I, like
a fucking idiot, filled in a hell of a lot more. Shit!”

“Now, just wait a minute!” cried the CIA analyst, once again forcing the others
to stop. “I don’t understand—I’m a strategist, and I don’t understand. What was
David Webb Jason Bourne, if he is Jason Bourne—doing at Swayne’s place the
other night?”

“Who the hell is Jason Bourne?” roared the chairman of the Federal Trade
Commission.

“He’s the tie-in with Saigon’s Medusa that I just mentioned. Thirteen years ago
the Agency gave him the name Jason Bourne, the original Bourne a dead man by
then, and sent him out in deep cover on a Four Zero assignment—a termination
with extreme prejudice, if you like—”

“A hit, if you want to speak English, paisan.”

“Yes, yes, that’s what it was. ... But things went wrong; he had a loss of
memory and the operation collapsed. It collapsed, but he survived.”

“Holy Christ, what a bunch of zucchinis!”

“What can you tell us about this Webb ... or Bourne—this Simon or the ‘Cobra’?
Jesus, he’s a walking vaudeville act!”

“Apparently that’s what he did before. He assumed different names, different
appearances, different personalities. He was trained to do that when he was
sent out to challenge the assassin called the Jackal—to draw him out and kill
him.”

“The Jackal?” asked the astonished capo supremo of the Cosa Nostra. “Like in
the movie?”

“No, not the movie or the book, you idiot—”

“Hey, easy, amico.”

“Oh, shut up. ... Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, otherwise known as Carlos the Jackal,
is a living person, a professional killer the international authorities have
been hunting for over a quarter of a century. Outside of scores of confirmed
hits, many think he was the puff of smoke on the grassy knoll in Dallas, the
true killer of John Kennedy.”

“You’re shittin’ me.”

“I can assure you, I am not shitting you. The word we got at the Agency at the
highest secure levels was that after all these years Carlos had tracked down
the only man alive who could identify him, Jason Bourne—or, as I’m firmly
convinced, David Webb.”

“That word had to come from somebody!” exploded Albert Armbruster. “Who was
it?”

“Oh, yes. Everything’s so sudden, so bewildering. ... He’s a retired field
agent with a crippled leg, a man named Conklin, Alexander Conklin. He and a
psychiatrist—Panov, Morris Panov—are close friends of Webb ... or Jason
Bourne.”

“Where are they?” asked the capo supremo grimly.

“Oh, you couldn’t reach either one, talk to either of them. They’re both under
maximum security.”

“I didn’t ask for the rules of engagement, paisan, I asked where they were.”

“Well, Conklin’s at a condominium in Vienna, a proprietary of ours no one could
penetrate, and Panov’s apartment and office are both under round-the-clock
surveillance.”

“You’ll give me the addresses, won’t you?”

“Certainly, but I guarantee they won’t talk to you.”

“Oh, that would be a pity. We’re just looking for a guy with a dozen names,
asking questions, offering assistance.”

“They won’t buy it.”

“Maybe I can sell it.”

“Goddamn it, why?” spouted Armbruster, then immediately lowered his voice. “Why
was this Webb or Bourne or whoever the hell he is at Swayne’s?”

“It’s a gap I can’t fill,” said DeSole.

“A what?”

“That’s an Agency term for no answer.”

“No wonder the country’s up shit’s creek.”

“That’s not true—”

“Now you shut up!” ordered the man from New York, reaching into his pocket and
pulling out a small notepad and a ballpoint pen. “Write out the addresses of
this retired spook and the yid shrink. Now!”

“It’s difficult to see,” said DeSole, writing, angling the small pad of paper
toward the neon lights of the closed gas station. “There. The apartment number
may be wrong but it’s close, and Panov’s name will be on the mailbox. But I
tell you again, he won’t talk to you.”

“Then we’ll just have to apologize for interrupting him.”

“Yes, you probably will. I gather he’s very dedicated where his patients are
concerned.”

“Oh? Like that telephone line into your fax machine.”

“No, no, that’s a technical term. Number Three wire, to be precise.”

“And you’re always precise, aren’t you, paisan?”

“And you’re very irritating—”

“We’ve got to go,” broke in Armbruster, watching the New Yorker take back the
pad and the ballpoint pen. “Stay calm, Steven,” he added, obviously suppressing
his anger and heading back to the limousine. “Remember, there’s nothing we
can’t handle. When you talk to Jimmy T in Brussels, see if you two can come up
with a reasonable explanation, okay? If not, don’t worry, we’ll figure it out
upstairs.”

“Of course, Mr. Armbruster. But if I may ask? Is my account in Bern ready for
immediate release—in case ... well, you understand ... in case—”

“Of course it is, Steven. All you have to do is fly over and write out the
numbers of your account in your own handwriting. That’s your signature, the one
on file, remember?”

“Yes, yes, I do.”

“It must be over two million by now.”

“Thank you. Thank you ... sir.”

“You’ve earned it, Steven. Good night.”

The two men settled back in the rear seat of the limousine, but there was no
lack of tension. Armbruster glanced at the mafioso as the chauffeur, beyond the
glass partition, turned on the ignition. “Where’s the other car?”

The Italian switched on the reading light and looked at his watch. “By now he’s
parked less than a mile down the road from the gas station. He’ll pick up
DeSole on his way back and stay with him until the circumstances are right.”

“Your man knows exactly what to do?”

“Come on, a virgin he’s not. He’s got a searchlight mounted on that car so
powerful it can be seen in Miami. He comes alongside, switches it on high, and
wiggles the handle. Your two million-dollar flunky is blinded and out of
business, and we’re only charging a quarter of that amount for the job. It’s
your day, Alby.”

The chairman of the Federal Trade Commission sat back in the shadows of the
left rear seat and stared out the window at the dark, rushing images beyond the
smoked glass. “You know,” he said quietly, “if anyone had ever told me twenty
years ago that I’d be sitting in this car with someone like you, saying what
I’m saying, I would’ve told him it was impossible.”

“Oh, that’s what we like about you class-act characters. You look down your
noses and drip your snot on us until you need us. Then all of a sudden we’re
‘associates.’ Live and be well, Alby, we’re eliminating another problem for
you. Go back to your big federal commission and decide which companies are
clean and which aren’t—decisions not necessarily based on soap, right?”

“Shut up!” roared Armbruster, pounding his hand on the armrest. “This
Simon—this Webb! Where’s he coming from? What’s he on our case for? What’s he
want?”

“Something to do with that Jackal character maybe.”

“That doesn’t make sense. We don’t have anything to do with the Jackal.”

“Why should you?” asked the mafioso, grinning. “You got us, right?”

“It’s a very loose association and don’t you forget it. ... Webb—Simon, goddamn
it, whoever he is, we’ve got to find him! With what he already knew, plus what
I told him, he’s a fucking menace!”

“He’s a real major item, isn’t he?”

“A major item,” agreed the chairman, again staring out the window, his right
fist clenched, the fingers of his left hand drumming furiously on the armrest.

“You want to negotiate?”

“What?” snapped Armbruster, turning and looking at the calm Sicilian face of
his companion.

“You heard me, only I used the wrong word and I apologize for that. I’ll give
you a nonnegotiable figure and you can either accept it or reject it.”

“A ... contract? On Simon—Webb?”

“No,” replied the mafioso, slowly shaking his head. “On a character named Jason
Bourne. It’s cleaner to kill someone who’s already dead, isn’t it? ... Since we
just saved you one and a half mill, the price of the contract is five.”

“Five million?”

“The cost of eliminating problems in the category of major items is high.
Menaces are even higher. Five million, Alby, half on acceptance within the
usual twenty-four hours.”

“That’s outrageous!”

“Then turn me down. You come back, it’s seven-fifty; and if you come back
again, it’s double that. Fifteen million.”

“What guarantee do we have that you can even find him? You heard DeSole. He’s
Four Zero, which means he’s out of reach, buried.”

“Oh, we’ll dig him up just so we can replant him.”

“How? Two and a half million is a lot to pay on your word. How?”

Again smiling, the Mafia supremo reached into his pocket and pulled out the
small notebook Steven DeSole had returned to him. “Close friends are the best
sources, Alby. Ask the sleazes who write all those gossip books. I got two
addresses.”

“You won’t get near them.”

“Hey, come on. You think you’re dealing with old Chicago and the animals? With
Mad Dog Capone and Nitti, the nervous finger. We got sophisticated people on
the payroll these days. Geniuses. Scientists, electronics whiz kids—doctors. By
the time we get finished with the spook and the yid, they won’t know what
happened. But we’ll have Jason Bourne, the character who doesn’t exist because
he’s already dead.”

Albert Armbruster nodded once and turned to the window in silence.



“I’ll close up for six months, change the name, then start a promotional
campaign in the magazines before reopening,” said John St. Jacques, standing by
the window as the doctor worked on his brother-in-law.

“There’s no one left?” asked Bourne, wincing as he sat in a chair dressed in a
bathrobe, the last suture on his neck being pincered.

“Sure, there is. Seven crazy Canadian couples, including my old buddy, who’s
needlepointing your throat at the moment. Would you believe they wanted to
start up a brigade, Renfrews of the Mounties, after the evil people.”

“That was Scotty’s idea,” interrupted the doctor softly, concentrating on the
wound. “Count me out. I’m too old.”

“So’s he but he doesn’t know it. Then he wanted to advertise a reward to the
tune of a hundred thousand for information leading to the et cetera! I finally
convinced him that the less said the better.”

“Nothing said is the best,” added Jason. “That’s the way it’s got to be.”

“That’s a little tough, David,” said St. Jacques, misunderstanding the sharp
glance Bourne leveled at him. “I’m sorry, but it is. We’re deflecting most of
the local inquiries with an ersatz story about a massive propane-gas leak, but
not too many people are buying it. Of course, to the world outside, an
earthquake down here wouldn’t rate six lines buried in the last pages of the
want ads, but rumors are flying around the Leewards.”

“You said local inquiries ... what about that world outside? Has there been
anything from it?”

“There will be but not about here, not about Tranquility. Montserrat, yes, and
the news will get a column in the London Times and maybe an inch in the New
York and Washington papers, but I don’t think it’ll touch us.”

“Stop being so cryptic.”

“We’ll talk later.”

“Say whatever you like, John,” broke in the doctor. “I’m just about finished,
so I’m not paying much attention, and even if I heard you, I’m entitled to.”

“I’ll make it brief,” said St. Jacques, walking to the right of the chair. “The
Crown governor,” he continued. “You were right, at least I have to assume you
were right.”

“Why?”

“The news came in while you were getting cleaned up. The CG’s boat was found
smashed on one of the nastier reefs off Antigua, halfway to Barbuda. There was
no sign of survivors. Plymouth assumes it was one of those whipsaw squalls that
can come out of south Nevis, but it’s hard to swallow. Not a squall
necessarily, but the circumstances.”

“Which were?”

“His usual two crewmen weren’t with him. He dismissed them at the yacht club,
saying he wanted to take the boat out by himself, yet he told Henry he was
going out for the running big fish—”

“Which means he would’ve had to have a crew,” interrupted the Canadian
physician. “Oh, sorry.”

“Yes, he would’ve,” agreed the owner of Tranquility Inn. “You can’t fish the
big fellas and skipper a boat at the same time—at least the CG couldn’t. He was
afraid to take his eyes off the charts.”

“But he could read them, couldn’t he?” asked Jason. “The charts?”

“As a navigator, he was no Captain Bligh sailing by the Pacific stars, but he
was good enough to stay out of trouble.”

“He was told to go out alone,” said Bourne. “Ordered to rendezvous with a boat
in waters that called for him to really keep his eyes on the charts.” Jason
suddenly realized that the doctor’s nimble fingers were no longer touching his
neck; instead, there was the constricting bandage and the physician was
standing beside him looking down. “How are we doing?” asked Bourne, looking up,
an appreciative smile creasing his lips.

“We’re done,” said the Canadian.

“Well ... then I think we’d better meet later, for a drink, all right?”

“Good heavens, you’re just getting to the good part.”

“It’s not good, Doctor, it’s not good at all, and I’d be a very ungrateful
patient—which I’m not—if I even unwittingly let you hear things I don’t think
you should hear.”

The elderly Canadian locked his eyes with Jason’s. “You mean that, don’t you?
In spite of everything that’s happened, you really don’t want to involve me any
further. And you’re not playing melodramatic games, secrecy for secrecy’s
sake—an old dodge for inferior doctors, incidentally—but you’re really
concerned, aren’t you?”

“I guess I am.”

“Considering what’s happened to you, and I don’t just mean these past few
hours, which I’ve been a part of, but what the scars on your body tell me
you’ve been through before, it’s rather remarkable that you can be concerned
for anyone but yourself. You’re a strange man, Mr. Webb. At times you even
sound like two different people.”

“I’m not strange, Doctor,” said Jason Bourne, momentarily closing his eyes, his
lids briefly tight. “I don’t want to be strange or different or anything exotic
at all. I want to be as normal and ordinary as the next fellow, no games at
all. I’m just a teacher, and that’s all I want to be. But in the present
circumstances, I have to do things my way.”

“Which means I leave for my own benefit?”

“Yes, it does.”

“And if I ever learn all the facts, I’ll realize that your instructions were
very educational.”

“I hope so.”

“I’ll bet you’re one hell of a teacher, Mr. Webb.”

“Doctor Webb,” interjected John St. Jacques spontaneously, as if the
clarification were mandatory. “My brother-in-law’s a doctor, too. Like my
sister, he’s got a Ph.D.; he speaks a couple of Oriental languages and is a
full professor. Places like Harvard, McGill and Yale have been after him for
years, but he won’t budge—”

“Will you please be quiet,” said Bourne, close to laughing, albeit kindly, at
his wife’s brother. “My entrepreneurial young friend is impressed with any
alphabet after a name despite the fact that left to my own resources I couldn’t
afford one of these villas for more than a couple of days.”

“That’s a crock.”

“I said my own resources.”

“You’ve got a point.”

“I’ve got a rich wife. ... Forgive us, Doctor, it’s an old family argument.”

“Not only a good teacher,” the physician repeated, “but under the grim exterior
I suspect a very engaging one.” The Canadian walked to the door; he turned and
added, “I’ll take you up on that drink later, I’d really like that.”

“Thanks,” said Jason. “Thanks for everything.” The doctor nodded and left,
closing the door firmly behind him. Bourne turned to his brother-in-law. “He’s
a good friend, Johnny.”

“Actually, he’s a cold fish but a hell of a doctor. That’s the most human I’ve
ever seen him. ... So you figure the Jackal had the Crown governor meet him
somewhere off the Antigua coast, got the CG’s information, killed him, and fed
him to the sharks.”

“Conveniently foundering the boat in reef waters,” completed Jason. “Perhaps
opening the throttle and setting a short high-speed course into the shoals. A
tragedy at sea and a link to Carlos vanishes—that’s vital to him.”

“That’s also something I have trouble with,” said St. Jacques. “I didn’t go
into it, but the section of reef north of Falmouth where he bought it is called
Devil’s Mouth, and it’s not the kind of place that’s advertised. Charters just
stay away from it, and no one boasts about the number of lives and boats it’s
claimed.”

“So?”

“So assuming the Jackal told the CG where to rendezvous, someplace obviously
close to Devil’s Mouth, how the hell did the Jackal know about it?”

“Your two commandos didn’t tell you?”

“Tell me what? I sent them right over to Henry to give him a full report while
we took care of you. There wasn’t time to sit down and talk and I figured every
moment counted.”

“Then Henry knows by now; he’s probably in shock. He’s lost two drug boats in
two days, and only one is likely to be paid for, and he still doesn’t know
about his boss, the so honorable Crown governor, lackey of the Jackal who made
fools of the Foreign Office by passing off a small-time Paris hit man as a
venerable hero of France. The wires will be burning all night between
Government House and Whitehall.”

“Another drug boat? What are you trying to tell me? What does Henry know
now—what could my guards tell him?”

“Your question a minute ago was how did the Jackal know about the reef off the
coast of Antigua called Devil’s Mouth.”

“Take my word for it, Doctor Webb, I remember the question. How could he?”

“Because he had a third man here, that’s what your Royal Commandos have told
Henry by now. A blond-haired son of a bitch who heads up Montserrat’s drug
patrols.”

“Him? Rickman? The one-man British Ku Klux Klan? By-the-Rules-Rickman, scourge
of anybody who’s afraid to yell back at him? Holy Christ, Henry won’t believe
it!”

“Why not? You just described a likely disciple of Carlos.”

“I suppose I did, but it seems so unlikely. He’s the original sanctimonious
deacon. Prayer meetings before work in the morning, calling on God to aid him
in his battle against Satan, no alcohol, no women—”

“Savonarola?”

“I’d say that fits—from what I remember reading for history courses.”

“Then I’d say he’s prime meat for the Jackal. And Henry will believe it when
his lead boat doesn’t come back to Plymouth and the bodies of the crew float up
on shore or simply don’t show up for the prayer meetings.”

“That’s how Carlos got away?”

“Yes.” Bourne nodded and gestured at the couch several feet in front of him,
the space between taken up by a glass-topped coffee table. “Sit down, Johnny.
We have to talk.”

“What have we been doing?”

“Not about what has happened, Bro, but about what’s going to happen.”

“What’s going to happen?” asked St. Jacques, lowering himself on the couch.

“I’m leaving.”

“No!” cried the younger man, shooting to his feet as if propelled by a bolt of
electricity. “You can’t!”

“I have to. He knows our names, where we live. Everything.”

“Where are you going?”

“Paris.”

“Goddamn it, no! You can’t do that to Marie! Or to the kids, for Christ’s sake.
I won’t let you!”

“You can’t stop me.”

“For God’s sake, David, listen to me! If Washington’s too cheap or doesn’t give
a shit, believe me, Ottawa’s cut from better stock. My sister worked for the
government and our government doesn’t kiss people off because it’s inconvenient
or too expensive. I know people—like Scotty, the Doc and others. A few words
from them and you’ll be put in a fortress in Calgary. No one could touch you!”

“You think my government wouldn’t do the same? Let me tell you something, Bro,
there are people in Washington who’ve put their lives on the line to keep Marie
and the children and me alive. Selflessly, without any reward for themselves or
the government. If I wanted a safe house where no one could touch us, I’d
probably get an estate in Virginia, with horses and servants and a full platoon
of armed soldiers protecting us around the clock.”

“Then that’s the answer. Take it!”

“To what end, Johnny? To live in our own personal prison? The kids not allowed
to go over to friends’ houses, guards with them if they go to school and not
tutored by themselves, no over nights, no pillow fights—no neighbors? Marie and
I staring at each other, glancing over at the searchlights outside the windows,
hearing the footsteps of the guards, the occasional cough or sneeze, or, heaven
forbid, the crack of a rifle bolt because a rabbit disturbed a garden? That’s
not living, that’s imprisonment. Your sister and I couldn’t handle it.”

“Neither could I, not the way you describe it. But what can Paris solve?”

“I can find him. I can take him.”

“He’s got the manpower over there.”

“I’ve got Jason Bourne,” said David Webb.

“I don’t buy that crap!”

“Neither do I, but it seems to work. ... I’m calling in your debt to me,
Johnny. Cover for me. Tell Marie I’m fine, not hurt at all, and that I’ve got a
lead on the Jackal that only old Fontaine could have provided—which is the
truth, actually. A café in Argenteuil called Le Coeur du Soldat. Tell her I’m
bringing in Alex Conklin and all the help Washington can provide.”

“But you’re not, are you?”

“No. The Jackal would hear about it; he’s got ears up and down the Quai
d’Orsay. Solo’s the only way.”

“Don’t you think she’ll know that?”

“She’ll suspect it, but she can’t be certain. I’ll have Alex call her,
confirming that he’s in touch with all the heavy covert firepower in Paris. But
first it comes from you.”

“Why the lie?”

“You shouldn’t have to ask that, Bro. I’ve put her through enough.”

“All right, I’ll tell her, but she won’t believe me. She’ll see right through
me, she always has. Since I was a kid, those big brown eyes would look into
mine, most of the time pissed off, but not like our brothers’, not—oh, I don’t
know—not with that disgust in their faces because the ‘kid’ was a screwup. Can
you understand that?”

“It’s called caring. She’s always cared for you—even when you were a screwup.”

“Yeah, Mare’s okay.”

“Somewhat more than that, I think. Call her in a couple of hours and bring them
back here. It’s the safest place they can be.

“What about you? How are you going to get to Paris? The connections out of
Antigua and Martinique are lousy, sometimes booked days in advance.”

“I can’t use those airlines anyway. I’ve got to get in secretly under a shroud.
Somehow, a man in Washington will have to figure it out. Somehow. He’s got to.”



Alexander Conklin limped out of the small kitchen in the CIA’s Vienna
apartment, his face and hair soaking wet. In the old days, before the old days
fell into a distillery vat, he would calmly leave the office—wherever it
was—when things got too heavy too fast and indulge himself in an unwavering
ritual. He would seek out the best steak house—again, wherever he was—have two
dry martinis and a thick rare slab of meat with the greasiest potatoes on the
menu. The combination of the solitude, the limited intake of alcohol, the
blood-rare hunk of beef and, in particular, the grease-laden potatoes, had such
a calming effect on him that all the rushing, conflicting complexities of the
hectic day sorted themselves out and reason prevailed. He would return to his
office—whether a smart flat in London’s Belgravia Square or the back rooms of a
whorehouse in Katmandu—with multiple solutions. It was how he got the sobriquet
of Saint Alex of Conklin. He had once mentioned this gastronomical phenomenon
to Mo Panov, who had a succinct reply: “If your crazy head doesn’t kill you,
your stomach will.”

These days, however, with postalcoholic vacuum and various other impediments,
such as high cholesterol and dumb little triglycerides, whatever the hell they
were, he had to come up with a different solution. It came about by accident.
One morning during the Iran-contra hearings, which he found to be the finest
hours of comedy on television, his set blew out. He was furious, so he turned
on his portable radio, an instrument he had not used in months or perhaps
years, as the television set had a built-in radio component—also inoperable at
the time—but the portable radio’s batteries had long since melted into white
slime. His artificial foot in pain, he walked to his kitchen telephone, knowing
that a call to his television repairman, for whom he had done several favors,
would bring the man running to his emergency. Unfortunately, the call only
brought forth a hostile diatribe from the repairman’s wife, who screamed that
her husband, the “customerfucker,” had run off with a “horny rich black bitch
from Embassy Row!” (Zaire, as it later turned out in the Puerta Vallarta
papers.) Conklin, in progressive apoplexy, had rushed to the kitchen sink,
where his stress and blood pressure pills stood on the windowsill above the
sink, and turned on the cold water. The faucet exploded, surging out of its
recess into the ceiling as a powerful gush of water inundated his entire head.
Caramba! The shock calmed him down, and he remembered that the Cable Network
was scheduled to rebroadcast the hearings in full that evening. A happy man, he
called the plumber and went out and bought a new television set.

So, since that morning, whenever his own furies or the state of the world
disturbed him—the world he knew—he lowered his head in a kitchen sink and let
the cold water pour over his head. He had done so this morning. This goddamned,
fucked-up morning!

DeSole! Killed in an accident on a deserted country road in Maryland at 4:30
that morning. What the hell was Steven DeSole, a man whose driver’s license
clearly stated that he was afflicted with night blindness, doing on a
backcountry road outside Annapolis at 4:30 in the morning? And then Charlie
Casset, a very angry Casset, calling him at six o’clock, yelling his usually
cool head off, telling Alex he was going to put the commander of NATO on the
goddamned spit and demand an explanation for the buried fax connection between
the general and the dead chief of clandestine reports, who was not a victim of
an accident but of murder! Furthermore, one retired field officer named Conklin
had better damned well come clean with everything he knew about DeSole and
Brussels and related matters, or all bets were off where said retired field
agent and his elusive friend Jason Bourne were concerned. Noon at the latest!
And then, Ivan Jax! The brilliant black doctor from Jamaica phoned, telling him
he wanted to put Norman Swayne’s body back where he had found it because he did
not want to be loused up by another Agency fiasco. But it was not Agency, cried
Conklin to himself, unable to explain to Ivan Jax the real reason he had asked
for his help. Medusa. And Jax could not simply drive the corpse back to
Manassas because the police, on federal orders—the orders of one retired field
agent using appropriated codes he was not entitled to use—had sealed off
General Norman Swayne’s estate without explanation.

“What do I do with the body?” Jax had yelled.

“Keep it cold for a while, Cactus would want it that way.”

“Cactus? I’ve been with him at the hospital all night. He’s going to be okay,
but he doesn’t know what the hell is going on any more than I do!”

“We in the clandestine services can’t always explain things,” Alex said,
wincing as he spoke the ridiculous words. “I’ll call you back.”

So he had gone into the kitchen and put his head under a spray of cold water.
What else could go wrong? And naturally the telephone rang.

“Dunkin’ Donuts,” said Conklin, the phone to his ear.

“Get me out of here,” said Jason Bourne, not a trace of David Webb in his
voice. “To Paris!”

“What happened?”

“He got away, that’s what happened, and I have to get to Paris under a cover,
no immigration, no customs. He’s got them all wired and I can’t give him the
chance to track me. ... Alex, are you listening to me?”

“DeSole was killed last night, killed in an accident that was no accident at
four o’clock in the morning. Medusa’s closing in.”

“I don’t give a damn about Medusa! For me it’s history; we made a wrong turn. I
want the Jackal and I’ve got a place to start. I can find him, take him!”

“Leaving me with Medusa ...”

“You said you wanted to go higher—you said you’d only give me forty-eight hours
until you did. Shove the clock ahead. The forty-eight hours are over, so go
higher, just get me out of here and over to Paris.”

“They’ll want to talk to you.”

“Who?”

“Peter Holland, Casset, whoever else they bring in ... the attorney general,
Christ, the President himself.”

“About what?”

“You spoke at length with Armbruster, with Swayne’s wife and that sergeant,
Flannagan. I didn’t. I just used a few code words that triggered responses from
Armbruster and Ambassador Atkinson in London, nothing substantive. You’ve got
the fuller picture firsthand. I’m too deniable. They’ll have to talk to you.”

“And put the Jackal on a back burner?”

“Just for a day, two at the most.”

“Goddamn it, no. Because it doesn’t work that way and you know it! Once I’m
back there I’m their only material witness, shunted from one closed
interrogation to another; and if I refuse to cooperate, I’m in custody. No way,
Alex. I’ve got only one priority and he’s in Paris!”

“Listen to me,” said Conklin. “There are some things I can control, others I
can’t. We needed Charlie Casset and he helped us, but he’s not someone you can
con, nor would I want to. He knows DeSole’s death was no accident—a man with
night blindness doesn’t take a five-hour drive at four o’clock in the
morning—and he also knows that we know a lot more about DeSole and Brussels
than we’re telling him. If we want the Agency’s help, and we need it for things
like getting you on a military or a diplomatic flight into France, and God
knows what else when you’re there, I can’t ignore Casset. He’ll step on us and
by his lights, he should.”

Bourne was silent; only his breathing was heard. “All right,” he said. “I see
where we’re at. You tell Casset that if he gives us whatever we ask for now,
we’ll give him—no, I’ll give him; keep yourself cleaner than me—enough
information for the Department of Justice to go after some of the biggest fish
in the government, assuming Justice isn’t part of Snake Lady. ... You might add
that’ll include the location of a cemetery that might prove enlightening.”

It was Conklin’s turn to be silent for a moment. “He may want more than that,
considering your current pursuits.”

“Oh ... ? Oh, I see. In case I lose. Okay, add that when I get to Paris I’ll
hire a stenographer and dictate everything I know, everything I’ve learned, and
send it to you. I’ll trust Saint Alex to carry it from there. Maybe a page or
two at a time to keep them cooperative.”

“I’ll handle that part. ... Now Paris, or close by. From what I recall,
Montserrat’s near Dominica and Martinique, isn’t it?”

“Less than an hour to each, and Johnny knows every pilot on the big island.”

“Martinique’s French, we’ll go with that. I know people in the Deuxième Bureau.
Get down there and call me from the airport terminal. I’ll have made the
arrangements by then.”

“Will do. ... There’s a last item, Alex. Marie. She and the children will be
back here this afternoon. Call her and tell her I’m covered with all the
firepower in Paris.”

“You lying son of a bitch—”

“Do it!”

“Of course I will. On that score and not lying, if I live through the day, I’m
having dinner with Mo Panov at his place tonight. He’s a terrible cook, but he
thinks he’s the Jewish Julia Child. I’d like to bring him up to date; he’ll go
crazy if I don’t.”

“Sure. Without him we’d both be in padded cells chewing rawhide.”

“Talk to you later. Good luck.”



The next day at 10:25 in the morning, Washington time, Dr. Morris Panov,
accompanied by his guard, walked out of Walter Reed Hospital after a
psychiatric session with a retired army lieutenant suffering from the
aftereffects of a training exercise in Georgia that took the lives of
twenty-odd recruits under his command eight weeks before. There was not much Mo
could do; the man was guilty of competitive overachievement, military style,
and had to live with his guilt. The fact that he was a financially privileged
black and a graduate of West Point did not help. Most of the twenty dead
recruits were also black and they had been underprivileged.

Panov, muddling over the available options with his patient, looked at his
guard, suddenly startled. “You’re a new man, aren’t you? I mean, I thought I
knew all of you.”

“Yes, sir. We’re often reassigned on short notice, keeps all of us on our
toes.”

“Habit-oriented anticipation—it can lull anybody.” The psychiatrist continued
across the pavement to where his armor-plated car was usually waiting for him.
It was a different vehicle. “This isn’t my car,” he said, bewildered.

“Get in,” ordered his guard, politely opening the door.

“What?” A pair of hands from inside the car grabbed him and a uniformed man
pulled him into the backseat as the guard followed, sandwiching Panov between
them. The two men held the psychiatrist as the one who had been inside yanked
Mo’s seersucker jacket off his shoulder and shoved up the short sleeve of his
summer shirt. He plunged a hypodermic needle into Panov’s arm.

“Good night, Doctor,” said the soldier with the insignia of the Medical Corps
on the lapels of his uniform. “Call New York,” he added.

