# 23
[Metadata]: # {24}
[Descriptor]: # {24}
[Author]: # {original}
# 23
“We’re alone,” said the voice across the dark room as Bourne opened his eyes.
Santos’s huge frame minimized the size of his large armchair, and the low
wattage of the single floor lamp heightened the whiteness of his immense bald
head. Jason arched his neck and felt the angry swelling on top of his skull; he
was angled into the corner of a sofa. “There’s no break, no blood, only what I
imagine is a very painful lump,” commented the Jackal’s man.

“Your diagnosis is accurate, especially the last part.”

“The instrument was hard rubber and cushioned. The results are predictable
except where concussions are concerned. At your side, on a tray, is an ice bag.
It might be well to use it.”

Bourne reached down in the dim light, grabbed the bulky cold bag and brought it
to his head. “You’re very considerate,” he said flatly.

“Why not? We have several things to discuss ... perhaps a million, if broken
down into francs.”

“It’s yours under the conditions stated.”

“Who are you?” asked Santos sharply.

“That’s not one of the conditions.”

“You’re not a young man.”

“Not that it matters, but neither are you.”

“You carried a gun and a knife. The latter is for younger men.”

“Who said so?”

“Our reflexes. ... What do you know about a blackbird?”

“You might as well ask me how I knew about Le Coeur du Soldat.”

“How did you?”

“Someone told me.”

“Who?”

“Sorry, not one of the conditions. I’m a broker and that’s the way I work. My
clients expect it.”

“Do they also expect you to bind your knee so as to feign an injury? As your
eyes opened I pressed the area; there was no sign of pain, no sprain, no break.
Also, you carry no identification but considerable amounts of money?”

“I don’t explain my methods, I only clarify my restrictions as I understand
them to be. I got my message through to you, didn’t I? Since I had no telephone
number, I doubt I could have done so very successfully had I arrived at your
establishment in a business suit carrying an attaché case.”

Santos laughed. “You never would have gotten inside. You would have been rudely
stopped in the alley and stripped.”

“The thought occurred to me. ... Do we do business, say a million francs’
worth?”

The Jackal’s man shrugged. “It would seem to me that if a buyer mentions such
an amount in his first offer, he will go higher. Say a million and a half.
Perhaps even two.”

“But I’m not the buyer, I’m the broker. I was authorized to pay one million,
which is far too much in my opinion, but time is of the essence. Take it or
leave it, I have other options.”

“Do you really?”

“Certainly.”

“Not if you’re a corpse found floating in the Seine without any
identification.”

“I see.” Jason looked around the darkened flat; it bore little relationship to
the shabby café below. The furniture was large, as required by the oversized
owner, but tastefully selected, not elegant but certainly not cheap. What was
mildly astonishing were the bookshelves covering the wall between the two front
windows. The academic in Bourne wished he could read the titles; they might
give him a clearer picture of this strange, huge man whose speech might have
been formed at the Sorbonne—a committed brute on the outside, perhaps someone
else inside. His eyes returned to Santos. “Then my leaving here freely under my
own power is not a given, is it?”

“No,” answered the Jackal’s conduit. “It might have been had you answered my
simple questions, but you tell me that your conditions, or should I say your
restrictions, forbid you to do so. ... Well, I, too, have conditions and you
will live or die by them.”

“That’s succinct.”

“There’s no reason not to be.”

“Of course, you’re forfeiting any chance of collecting a million francs—or, as
you suggested, perhaps a great deal more.”

“Then may I also suggest,” said Santos, crossing his thick arms in front of him
and absently glancing at the large tattoos on his skin, “that a man with such
funds available will not only part with them in exchange for his life, but will
happily deliver the information requested so as to avoid unnecessary and
excruciating pain.” The Jackal’s man suddenly slammed his clenched right fist
down on the armrest and shouted, “What do you know about a blackbird? Who told
you about Le Coeur du Soldat? Where do you come from and who are you and who is
your client?”

Bourne froze, his body rigid but his mind spinning, whirling, racing. He had to
get out! He had to reach Bernardine—how many hours was his call overdue? Where
was Marie? Yet what he wanted to do, had to do, could not be done by opposing
the giant across the room. Santos was neither a liar nor a fool. He would and
could kill his prisoner handily and without hesitation ... and he would not be
duped by outright false or convoluted information. The Jackal’s man was
protecting two turfs—his own and his mentor’s. The Chameleon had only one
option open: to expose a part of the truth so dangerous as to be credible, the
ring of authenticity so plausible that the risk of rejecting it was
unacceptable. Jason put the ice bag on the tray and spoke slowly from the
shadows of the large couch.

“Obviously I don’t care to die for a client or be tortured to protect his
information, so I’ll tell you what I know, which isn’t as much as I’d like
under the present circumstances. I’ll take your points in order if I’m not too
damned frightened to forget the sequence. To begin with, the funds are not
available to me personally. I meet with a man in London to whom I deliver the
information, and he releases an account in Bern, Switzerland, to a name and a
number—any name, any number—that I give him. ... We’ll skip over my life and
the ‘excruciating pain’—I’ve answered both. Let’s see, what do I know about a
blackbird? The Coeur du Soldat is part of that question, incidentally. ... I
was told that an old man—name and nationality unknown, at least to me, but I
suspect French—approached a well-known public figure and told him he was the
target of an assassination. Who believes a drunken old man, especially one with
a long police record looking for a reward? Unfortunately the assassination took
place, but fortunately an aide to the deceased was by his side when the old man
warned him. Even more fortunate, the aide was and is extremely close to my
client and the assassination was a welcome event to both. The aide secretly
passed on the old man’s information. A blackbird is sent a message through a
café known as Le Coeur du Soldat in Argenteuil. This blackbird must be an
extraordinary man, and now my client wants to reach him. ... As for myself, my
offices are hotel rooms in various cities. I’m currently registered under the
name of Simon at the Pont-Royal, where I keep my passport and other papers.”
Bourne paused, his palms outstretched. “I’ve just told you the entire truth as
I know it.”

“Not the entire truth,” corrected Santos, his voice low and guttural. “Who is
your client?”

“I’ll be killed if I tell you.”

“I’ll kill you right now if you don’t,” said the Jackal’s conduit, removing
Jason’s hunting knife from his wide leather belt, the blade glistening in the
light of the floor lamp.

“Why not give me the information my client wants along with a name and a
number—any name, any number—and I’ll guarantee you two million francs. All my
client asks is for me to be the only intermediary. Where’s the harm? The
blackbird can turn me down and tell me to go to hell. ... Three million!”

Santos’s eyes wavered as if the temptation were almost too much for his
imagination. “Perhaps we’ll do business later—”

“Now.”

“No!” Carlos’s man pushed his immense body out of the chair and walked toward
the couch, the knife held threateningly in front of him. “Your client.”

“Plural,” replied Bourne. “A group of powerful men in the United States.”

“Who?”

“They guard their names like nuclear secrets, but I know of one and he should
be enough for you.”

“Who?”

“Find out for yourself—at least learn the enormity of what I’m trying to tell
you. Protect your blackbird by all means! Ascertain that I’m telling you the
truth and in the process make yourself so rich you can do anything you want to
do for the rest of your life. You could travel, disappear, perhaps have time
for those books of yours rather than being concerned with all that garbage
downstairs. As you pointed out, neither of us is young. I make a generous
brokering fee and you’re a wealthy man, free of care, of unpleasant drudgery.
... Again, where’s the harm? I can be turned down, my clients turned down.
There’s no trap. My clients don’t ever want to see him. They want to hire him.”

“How could this be done? How could I be satisfied?”

“Invent some high position for yourself and reach the American ambassador in
London—the name is Atkinson. Tell him you’ve received confidential instructions
from Snake Lady. Ask him if you should carry them out.”

“Snake Lady? What’s that?”

“Medusa. They call themselves Medusa.”



Mo Panov excused himself and slid out of the booth. He made his way through the
crowded highway diner toward the men’s room, frantically scanning the wall at
the far end for a pay phone. There was none! The only goddamned phone was ten
feet from the booth and in clear sight of the wild-eyed platinum blonde whose
paranoia was as deeply embedded as the dark roots of her hair. He had casually
mentioned that he thought he should call his office and tell his staff about
the accident and where he was, and was instantly met with invective.

“And have a swarm of cops coming out to pick you up! Not on your fuckin’ life,
Medicine Man. Your office calls the fuzz, they call my devoted Chief
Fork-in-Mouth, and my ass is bouncing into every barbed-wire fence in the
county. He’s in with every cop on the roads. I think he tells ’em where to get
laid.”

“There’d be no reason for me to mention you and I certainly wouldn’t. If you
recall, you said he might resent me.”

“Resent don’t count. He’d just cut your cute little nose off. I’m not takin’
any chances—you don’t look like you’re too with-it. You’d blurt out about your
accident—next thing the cops.”

“You know, you’re not really making sense.”

“All right, I’ll make sense. I’ll yell ‘Rape!’ and tell these not-so-pansy
truckers I picked you up on the road two days ago and I’ve been a sex slave
ever since. How does that grab you?”

“Very firmly. May I at least go to the men’s room? It’s urgent that I do.”

“Be my guest. They don’t put phones in the can in these places.”

“Really? ... No, honestly, I’m not chagrined, not disappointed—just curious.
Why don’t they? Truckers make good money; they’re not interested in stealing
dimes or quarters.”

“Boy, you’re from La La Land, Doc. Things happen on the highways; things get
switched or snitched, you dig? If people make phone calls, other people want to
know who makes them.”

“Really ... ?”

“Oh, Jesus. Hurry up. We only got time for a couple of greasies, so I’ll order.
He’ll head up Seventy, not Ninety-seven. He wouldn’t figure.”

“Figure what? What are Seventy and Ninety-seven?”

“Routes, for Christ’s sake! There are routes and there are routes. You are one
dumb medicine man. Hit the head, then maybe later we’ll stop at a motel where
we can continue our business discussion while you get an advance bonus.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“I’m pro-choice. Is that against your religion?”

“Good Lord, no. I’m a firm advocate.”

“Good. Hurry up!”

So Panov headed for the men’s room, and indeed the woman was right. There was
no phone, and the window to the outside was too small for anyone but a small
cat or a large rat to crawl through. ... But he had money, a great deal of
money, along with five driver’s licenses from five different states. In Jason
Bourne’s lexicon these were weapons, especially the money. Mo went to the
urinal—long overdue—and then to the door; he pulled it back several inches to
observe the blonde. Suddenly, the door swung violently back several feet and
Panov crashed into the wall.

“Hey, sorry, pal!” cried a short heavyset man, who grabbed the psychiatrist by
the shoulders as Mo grabbed his face. “You okay, buddy?”

“Oh, certainly. Yes, of course.”

“The hell you are, you got a nosebleed! C’mon over here by the towels,” ordered
the T-shirted trucker, one sleeve rolled up to hold a pack of cigarettes.
“C’mon, put your head back while I get some cold water on your schnoz. ...
Loosen up and lean against the wall. There, that’s better; we’ll stop this
sucker in a moment or two.” The short man reached up and gently pressed the wet
paper towels across Panov’s face while holding the back of his neck, and every
few seconds checking the flow of blood from Mo’s nostrils. “There y’are, buddy,
it’s damned near stopped. Just breathe through your mouth, deep breaths, you
got me? Head tilted, okay?”

“Thank you,” said Panov, holding the towels and amazed that a nosebleed could
be stopped so quickly. “Thank you very much.”

“Don’t thank me, I bashed you one by mistake,” answered the trucker, relieving
himself. “Feel better now?” he asked, zipping up his trousers.

“Yes, I do.” And against the advice of his dear deceased mother, Mo decided to
take advantage of the moment and forgo righteousness. “But I should explain
that it was my mistake, not yours.”

“Waddaya mean?” asked the trucker, washing his hands.

“Frankly, I was hiding behind the door looking at a woman I’m trying to get
away from—if that makes sense to you.”

Panov’s personal medic laughed as he dried his hands. “Whose sense wouldn’t it
make? It’s the story of mankind, pal! They getcha in their clutches and whammo,
they whine and you don’t know what to do, they scream and you’re at their feet.
Now me, I got it different. I married a real Eur’pean, you know? She don’t
speak so good English, but she’s grateful. ... Great with the kids, great with
me, and I still get excited when I see her. Not like these fuckin’ princesses
over here.”

“That’s an extremely interesting, even visceral, statement,” said the
psychiatrist.

“It’s who?”

“Nothing. I still want to get out of here without her seeing me leave. I have
some money—”

“Hold the money, who is she?”

Both men went to the door and Panov pulled it back a few inches. “She’s the one
over there, the blonde’ who keeps looking in this direction and at the front
door. She’s getting very agitated—”

“Holy shit,” interrupted the short trucker. “That’s the Bronk’s wife! She’s way
off course.”

“Off course? The Bronk?”

“He trucks the eastern routes, not these. What the hell is she doing here?”

“I think she’s trying to avoid him.”

“Yeah,” agreed Mo’s companion. “I heard she’s been messing around and don’t
charge no money.”

“Do you know her?”

“Hell, yeah. I been to a couple of their barbecues. He makes a hell of a
sauce.”

“I have to get out of here. As I told you, I have some money—”

“So you told me and we’ll discuss it later.”

“Where?”

“In my truck. It’s a red semi with white stripes, like the flag. It’s parked
out front, on the right. Get around the cab and stay out of sight.”

“She’ll see me leave.”

“No she won’t. I’m goin’ over and give her a big surprise. I’ll tell her all
the CBs are hummin’ and the Bronk is headin’ south to the Carolinas—at least
that’s what I heard.”

“How can I ever repay you?”

“Probably with some of that money you keep talkin’ about. Not too much, though.
The Bronk’s an animal and I’m a born-again Christian.” The short trucker swung
back the door, nearly shoving Panov back into the wall again. Mo watched as his
conspiratorial colleague approached the booth, his conspiratorial arms extended
as the trucker embraced an old friend and started talking rapidly; the woman’s
eyes were attentive—she was mesmerized. Panov rushed out of the men’s room,
through the diner’s entrance and toward the huge red-and-white-striped truck.
He crouched breathlessly behind the cab, his chest pounding, and waited.

Suddenly, the Bronk’s wife came racing out of the diner, her platinum hair
rising grotesquely in the air behind her as she ran to her bright red
automobile. She climbed inside and in seconds the engine roared; she continued
north as Mo watched, astonished.

“How are y’doing, buddy—wherever the hell you are?” shouted the short man with
no name who had not only amazingly stopped a nosebleed but had rescued him from
a manic wife whose paranoid mood swings were rooted in equal parts of vengeance
and guilt.

Stop it, asshole, cried Panov to himself as he raised his voice. “Over here ...
buddy!”

Thirty-five minutes later they reached the outskirts of an unidentified town
and the trucker stopped in front of a cluster of stores that bordered the
highway. “You’ll find a phone there, buddy. Good luck.”

“Are you sure?” asked Mo. “About the money, I mean.”

“Sure I’m sure,” replied the short man behind the wheel. “Two hundred dollars
is fine—maybe even what I earned—but more than that corrupts, don’t it? I been
offered fifty times that to haul stuff I won’t haul, and you know what I tell
’em?”

“What do you tell them?”

“I tell ’em to go piss into the wind with their poison. It’s gonna flash back
and blind ’em.”

“You’re a good person,” said Panov, climbing out onto the pavement.

“I got a few things to make up for.” The door of the cab slammed shut and the
huge truck shot forward as Mo turned away, looking for a telephone.

“Where the hell are you?” shouted Alexander Conklin in Virginia.

“I don’t know!” answered Panov. “If I were a patient, I’d ponderously explain
that it was an extension of some Freudian dream sequence because it never
happens but it happened to me. They shot me up, Alex!”

“Stay cold. We assumed that. We have to know where you are. Let’s face it,
others are looking for you, too.”

“All right, all right. ... Wait a minute! There’s a drugstore across the
street. The sign says ‘Battle Ford’s Best,’ will that help?”

The sigh on the line from Virginia was the reply. “Yes, it does. If you were a
socially productive Civil War buff rather than an insignificant shrink, you’d
know it, too.”

“What the hell does that mean?”

“Head for the old battleground at Ford’s Bluff. It’s a national landmark; there
are signs everywhere. A helicopter will be there in thirty minutes, and don’t
say a goddamned thing to anybody!”

“Do you know how extreme you sound? Yet I was the object of hostility—”

“Out, coach!”



Bourne walked into the Pont-Royal and immediately approached the night
concierge, peeling off a five-hundred-franc note and placing it quietly in the
man’s hand. “The name is Simon,” he said, smiling. “I’ve been away. Any
messages?”

“No messages, Monsieur Simon,” was the quiet reply, “but two men are outside,
one on Montalembert, the other across on the rue du Bac.”

Jason removed a thousand-franc note and palmed it to the man. “I pay for such
eyes and I pay well. Keep it up.”

“Of course, monsieur.”

Bourne crossed to the brass elevator. Reaching his floor, he walked rapidly
down the intersecting corridors to his room. Nothing was disturbed; everything
was as he had left it, except that the bed had been made up. The bed. Oh, God,
he needed to rest, to sleep. He couldn’t do it any longer. Something was
happening inside him—less energy, less breath. Yet he had to have both, now
more than ever. Oh, Christ, he wanted to lie down. ... No. There was Marie.
There was Bernardine. He went to the telephone and dialed the number he had
committed to memory.

“I’m sorry I’m late,” he said.

“Four hours late, mon ami. What happened?”

“No time. What about Marie?”

“There is nothing. Absolutely nothing. She is not on any international flight
currently in the air or scheduled for departure. I even checked the transfers
from London, Lisbon, Stockholm and Amsterdam—nothing. There is no Marie Elise
St. Jacques Webb en route to Paris.”

“There has to be. She wouldn’t change her mind, it’s not like her. And she
wouldn’t know how to bypass immigration.”

“I repeat. She’s not listed on any flight from any country coming into Paris.”

“Damn!”

“I will keep trying, my friend. The words of Saint Alex keep ringing in my
ears. Do not underestimate la belle mademoiselle.”

“She’s not a goddamned mademoiselle, she’s my wife. ... She’s not one of us,
Bernardine; she’s not an agent in the field who can cross and double-cross and
triple-cross. That’s not her. But she’s on her way to Paris. I know it!”

“The airlines do not, what more can I say?”

“Just what you said,” said Jason, his lungs seemingly incapable of absorbing
the air he needed, his eyelids heavy. “Keep trying.”

“What happened tonight? Tell me.”

“Tomorrow,” replied David Webb, barely audible. “Tomorrow. ... I’m so tired and
I have to be somebody else.”

“What are you talking about? You don’t even sound like yourself.”

“Nothing. Tomorrow. I have to think. ... Or maybe I shouldn’t think.”

f f f

Marie stood in Marseilles’s immigration line, mercifully short because of the
early hour, and assumed an air of boredom, the last thing she felt. It was her
turn to go to the passport counter.

“Américaine,” said the half-awake official. “Are you beer on bizziness or
playseeoor, madame?”

“Je parle français, monsieur. Je suis canadienne d’origine—Québec.
Séparatiste.”

“Ah, bien!” The sleepy clerk’s eyes opened somewhat wider as he proceeded in
French. “You are in business?”

“No, I’m not. This is a journey of memories. My parents came from Marseilles
and both died recently. I want to see where they came from, where they
lived—perhaps what I missed.”

“How extraordinarily touching, lovely lady,” said the immigration official,
appraising the most appealing traveler. “Perhaps also you might need a guide?
There is no part of this city that is not indelibly printed on my mind.”

“You’re most kind. I’ll be at the Sofitel Vieux Port. What’s your name? You
have mine.”

“Lafontaine, madame. At your service!”

“Lafontaine? You don’t say?”

“I do indeed!”

“How interesting.”

“I am very interesting,” said the official, his eyelids half closed but not
with sleepiness, as his rubber stamps flew recklessly down to process the
tourist. “I am at your every service, madame!”

It must run in that very peculiar clan, thought Marie as she headed for the
luggage area. From there she would board a domestic flight to Paris under any
name she chose.



François Bernardine awoke with a start, shooting up on his elbows, frowning,
disturbed. She’s on her way to Paris, I know it! The words of the husband who
knew her best. She’s not listed on any flight from any other country coming
into Paris. His own words. Paris: The operative word was Paris!

But suppose it was not Paris?

The Deuxième veteran crawled rapidly out of bed in the early morning light
shining through the tall narrow windows of his flat. In fewer minutes than his
face appreciated, he shaved, then completed his ablutions, dressed, and walked
down into the street to his Peugeot, where there was the inevitable ticket on
the windshield; alas, it was no longer officially dismissible with a quiet
phone call. He sighed, picked it off the glass, and climbed in behind the
wheel.

Fifty-eight minutes later he swung the car into the parking lot of a small
brick building in the huge cargo complex of Orly Airport. The building was
nondescript; the work inside was not. It was a branch of the Department of
Immigration, an all-important arm known simply as the Bureau of Air Entries,
where sophisticated computers kept up-to-the-minute records of every traveler
flying into France at all the international airports. It was vital to
immigration but not often consulted by the Deuxième, for there were far too
many other points of entry used by the people in which the Deuxième was
interested. Nevertheless, over the years, Bernardine, operating on the theory
of the obvious being unnoticed, had sought information from the Bureau of Air
Entries. Every now and then he had been rewarded. He wondered if that would be
the case this morning.

Nineteen minutes later he had his answer. It was the case, but the reward was
considerably diminished in value, for the information came too late. There was
a pay phone in the bureau’s lobby; Bernardine inserted a coin and dialed the
Pont-Royal.

“Yes?” coughed the voice of Jason Bourne.

“I apologize for waking you.”

“François?”

“Yes.”

“I was just getting up. There are two men down in the street far more tired
than I am, unless they’re replacements.”

“Relative to last night? All night?”

“Yes. I’ll tell you about it when I see you. Is that why you called?”

“No. I’m out at Orly and I’m afraid I have bad news, information that proves me
an idiot. I should have considered it. ... Your wife flew into Marseilles
slightly over two hours ago. Not Paris. Marseilles.”

“Why is that bad news?” cried Jason. “We know where she is! We can— Oh, Christ,
I see what you mean.” Subdued, Bourne’s words trailed off. “She can take a
train, hire a car. ...”

“She can even fly up to Paris under any name she cares to,” added Bernardine.
“Still, I have an idea. It’s probably as worthless as my brain but I suggest it
anyway. ... Do you and she have special—how do you say it?—nicknames for each
other? Sobriquets of endearment perhaps?”

“We’re not much for the cute stuff, frankly. ... Wait a minute. A couple of
years ago, Jamie, that’s our son, had trouble with ‘Mommy.’ He turned it around
and called her ‘Meemom.’ We kidded about it and I called her that for a few
months off and on until he got it right.”

“I know she speaks French fluently. Does she read the papers?”

“Religiously, at least the financial pages. I’m not sure she goes seriously
much beyond them; it’s her morning ritual.”

“Even in a crisis?”

“Especially in a crisis. She claims it calms her.”

“Let’s send her a message—on the financial pages.”



Ambassador Phillip Atkinson settled in for a morning of dreary paperwork at the
American embassy in London. The dreariness was compounded by a dull throbbing
at his temples and a sickening taste in his mouth. It was hardly a typical
hangover because he rarely drank whisky and for over twenty-five years had
never been drunk. He had learned a long time ago, roughly thirty months after
Saigon fell, the limits of his talents, his opportunities and, above all, his
resources. When he returned from the war with reasonable, if not exceptional,
commendations at twenty-nine, his family had purchased him an available seat on
the New York Stock Exchange, where in thirty additional months he had lost
something over three million dollars.

“Didn’t you ever learn a goddamned thing at Andover and Yale?” his father had
roared. “At least make a few connections on the Street?”

“Dad, they were all jealous of me, you know that. My looks, the girls—I look
like you, Dad—they all conspired against me. Sometimes I think they were really
getting at you through me! You know how they talk. Senior and Junior, dashing
socialites and all that crap. ... Remember the column in the Daily News when
they compared us to the Fairbankses?”

“I’ve known Doug for forty years!” yelled the father. “He’s got it upstairs,
one of the best.”

“He didn’t go to Andover and Yale, Dad.”

“He didn’t have to, for Christ’s sake! ... Hold it. Foreign Service ... ? What
the hell was that degree you got at Yale?”

“Bachelor of Arts.”

“Screw that! There was something else. The courses or something.”

“I majored in English literature and minored in political science.”

“That’s it! Shove the fairy stuff on the back burner. You were outstanding in
the other one—the political science bullshit.”

“Dad, it wasn’t my strongest course.”

“You passed?”

“Yes. ... Barely.”

“Not barely, with honors! That’s it!”

And so Phillip Atkinson III began his career in the Foreign Service by way of a
valuable political contributor who was his father, and never looked back. And
although that illustrious man had died eight years ago, he never forgot the old
war horse’s last admonition: “Don’t fuck this up, son. You want to drink or you
want to whore around, you do it inside your own house or in a goddamned desert
somewhere, understand? And you treat that wife of yours, whatever the hell her
name is, with real affection wherever anybody can see you, got it?”

“Yes, Dad.”

Which was why Phillip Atkinson felt so blah on this particular morning. He had
spent the previous evening at a dinner party with unimportant royals who drank
until the drink flowed out of their nostrils, and with his wife who excused
their behavior because they were royals, all of which he could tolerate only
with seven glasses of Chablis. There were times when he longed for the
freewheeling, free-drinking days of the old Saigon.

The telephone rang, causing Atkinson to blur his signature on a document that
made no sense to him. “Yes?”

“The high commissioner from the Hungarian Central Committee is on the line,
sir.”

“Oh? Who’s that—who are they? Do we recognize them—it—him?”

“I don’t know, Mr. Ambassador. I really can’t pronounce his name.

“Very well, put him through.”

“Mr. Ambassador?” said the deep accented voice on the phone. “Mr. Atkinson?”

“Yes, this is Atkinson. Forgive me, but I don’t recollect either your name or
the Hungarian affiliation you speak for.”

“It does not matter. I speak on behalf of Snake Lady—”

“Stop!” cried the ambassador to the Court of St. James’s. “Stay on the line and
we’ll resume talking in twenty seconds.” Atkinson reached down, snapped on his
scrambler, and waited until the spiraling sounds of the pre-interceptor
subsided. “All right, continue.”

“I have received instructions from Snake Lady and was told to confirm the
origin from you.”

“Confirmed!”

“And therefore I am to carry out these instructions?”

“Good Lord, yes! Whatever they say. My God, look what happened to Teagarten in
Brussels, Armbruster in Washington! Protect me! Do whatever they say!”

“Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.”



Bourne first sat in the hottest tub he could endure, then took the coldest
shower he could tolerate. He then changed the dressing around his neck, walked
back into the small hotel room and fell on the bed. ... So Marie had found a
simple, ingenious way to reach Paris. Goddamn it! How could he find her,
protect her? Had she any idea what she was doing? David would go out of his
mind. He’d panic and make a thousand mistakes. ... Oh, my God, I am David!

Stop it. Control. Pull back.

The telephone rang; he grabbed it off the bedside table. “Yes?”

“Santos wants to see you. With peace in his heart.”

