# 1
[Metadata]: # {02}
[Descriptor]: # {02}
[Author]: # {original}
# 1
The cacophony spun out of control as the crowds swelled through the amusement
park in the countryside on the outskirts of Baltimore. The summer night was
hot, and nearly everywhere faces and necks were drenched with sweat, except for
those screaming as they plunged over the crests of a roller coaster, or
shrieking as they plummeted down the narrow, twisting gullies of racing water
in torpedo sleds. The garishly colored, manically blinking lights along the
midway were joined by the grating sounds of emphatic music metallically
erupting out of an excess of loudspeakers—calliopes presto, marches
prestissimo. Pitchmen yelled above the din, nasally hawking their wares in
monotonic harangues while erratic explosions in the sky lit up the darkness,
sending sprays of myriad fireworks cascading over a small adjacent black lake.
Roman candles bright, arcing bursts of fire blinding.

A row of Hit-the-Gong machines drew contorted faces and thick necks bulging
with veins as men sought furiously and frequently in frustration to prove their
manhood, crashing heavy wooden mallets down on the deceitful planks that too
often refused to send the little red balls up to the bells. Across the way,
others shrieked with menacing enthusiasm as they crashed their Dodge ’Em carts
into the whirling, surrounding vehicles, each collision a triumph of superior
aggression, each combatant a momentary movie star who overcomes all odds
against him. Gunfight at O.K. Corral at 9:27 in the evening in a conflict that
meant nothing.

Farther along was a minor monument to sudden death, a shooting gallery that
bore little resemblance to the innocent minimum-caliber variety found in state
fairs and rural carnivals. Instead, it was a microcosm of the most lethal
equipment of modern weaponry. There were mocked-up versions of MAC-10 and Uzi
machine pistols, steel-framed missile launchers and antitank bazookas, and,
finally, a frightening replica of a flamethrower spewing out harsh, straight
beams of light through billowing clouds of dark smoke. And again there were the
perspiring faces, continuous beads of sweat rolling over maniacal eyes and down
across stretched necks—husbands, wives and children—their features grotesque,
twisted out of shape as if each were blasting away at hated enemies—wives,
husbands, parents and offspring. All were locked in a never-ending war without
meaning—at 9:29 in the evening, in an amusement park whose theme was violence.
Unmitigated and unwarranted, man against himself and all his hostilities, the
worst, of course, being his fears.

A slender figure, a cane gripped in his right hand, limped past a booth where
angry, excited customers were hurling sharp-pointed darts into balloons on
which were stenciled the faces of public figures. As the rubber heads exploded
the bursts gave rise to fierce arguments for and against the sagging, pinched
remnants of political icons and their dart-wielding executioners. The limping
man continued down the midway, peering ahead through the maze of strollers as
if he were looking for a specific location in a hectic, crowded, unfamiliar
part of town. He was dressed casually but neatly in a jacket and sport shirt as
though the oppressive heat had no effect on him and the jacket was somehow a
requirement. His face was the pleasant face of a middle-aged man, but worn with
premature lines and deep shadows under the eyes, all of which was the result
more of the life he had led than of the accumulated years. His name was
Alexander Conklin, and he was a retired covert operations officer in the
Central Intelligence Agency. He was also at this moment apprehensive and
consumed with anxiety. He did not wish to be in this place at this hour, and he
could not imagine what catastrophic event had taken place that forced him to be
there.

He approached the pandemonium of the shooting gallery and suddenly gasped,
stopping all movement, his eyes locked on a tall, balding man about his own age
with a seersucker jacket slung over his shoulder. Morris Panov was walking
toward the thunderous counter of the shooting gallery from the opposite
direction! Why? What had happened? Conklin snapped his head around in every
direction, his eyes darting toward faces and bodies, instinctively knowing that
he and the psychiatrist were being watched. It was too late to stop Panov from
entering the inner circle of the meeting ground but perhaps not too late to get
them both out! The retired intelligence officer reached under his jacket for
the small Beretta automatic that was his constant companion, and lurched
rapidly forward, limping and flailing his cane against the crowd, smashing
kneecaps and prodding stomachs and breasts and kidneys until the stunned, angry
strollers erupted in successive cries of shock, a near riot in the making. He
then rushed forward, slamming his frail body into the bewildered doctor and
shouting into Panov’s face through the roars of the crowd, “What the hell are
you doing here?”

“The same thing I assume you are. David, or should I say Jason? That’s what the
telegram said.”

“It’s a trap!”

There was a piercing scream overriding the surrounding melee. Both Conklin and
Panov instantly looked over at the shooting gallery only yards away. An obese
woman with a pinched face had been shot in the throat. The crowd went into a
frenzy. Conklin spun around trying to see where the shot came from, but the
panic was at full pitch; he saw nothing but rushing figures. He grabbed Panov
and propelled him through the screaming, frantic bodies across the midway and
again through the strolling crowds to the base of the massive roller coaster at
the end of the park, where excited customers were edging toward the booth
through the deafening noise.

“My God!” yelled Panov. “Was that meant for one of us?”

“Maybe ... maybe not,” replied the former intelligence officer breathlessly as
sirens and whistles were heard in the distance.

“You said it was a trap!”

“Because we both got a crazy telegram from David using a name he hasn’t used in
five years—Jason Bourne! And if I’m not mistaken, your message also said that
under no condition should we call his house.”

“That’s right.”

“It’s a trap. ... You move better than I do, Mo, so move those legs of yours.
Get out of here—run like a son of a bitch and find a telephone. A pay phone,
nothing traceable!”

“What?”

“Call his house! Tell David to pack up Marie and the kids and get out of
there!”

“What?”

“Someone found us, Doctor! Someone looking for Jason Bourne—who’s been looking
for him for years and won’t stop until he’s got him in his gun sight. ... You
were in charge of David’s messed-up head, and I pulled every rotten string in
Washington to get him and Marie out of Hong Kong alive. ... The rules were
broken and we were found, Mo. You and me! The only officially recorded
connections to Jason Bourne, address and occupation unknown.”

“Do you know what you’re saying, Alex?”

“You’re goddamned right I do. ... It’s Carlos. Carlos the Jackal. Get out of
here, Doctor. Reach your former patient and tell him to disappear!”

“Then what’s he to do?”

“I don’t have many friends, certainly no one I trust, but you do. Give him the
name of somebody—say, one of your medical buddies who gets urgent calls from
his patients the way I used to call you. Tell David to reach him or her when
he’s secure. Give him a code.”

“A code?”

“Jesus, Mo, use your head! An alias, a Jones or a Smith—”

“They’re rather common names—”

“Then Schicklgruber or Moskowitz, whatever you like! Just tell him to let us
know where he is.”

“I understand.”

“Now get out of here, and don’t go home! ... Take a room at the Brookshire in
Baltimore under the name of—Morris, Phillip Morris. I’ll meet you there later.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Something I hate. ... Without my cane I’m buying a ticket for this fucking
roller coaster. Nobody’ll look for a cripple on one of these things. It scares
the hell out of me, but it’s a logical exit even if I have to stay on the damn
thing all night. ... Now get out of here! Hurry!”



The station wagon raced south down a backcountry road through the hills of New
Hampshire toward the Massachusetts border, the driver a long-framed man, his
sharp-featured face intense, the muscles of his jaw pulsating, his clear
light-blue eyes furious. Beside him sat his strikingly attractive wife, the
reddish glow of her auburn hair heightened by the dashboard lights. In her arms
was an infant, a baby girl of eight months; in the first backseat was another
child, a blond-haired boy of five, asleep under a blanket, a portable guardrail
protecting him from sudden stops. The father was David Webb, professor of
Oriental studies, but once part of the notorious, unspoken-of Medusa, twice the
legend that was Jason Bourne—assassin.

“We knew it had to happen,” said Marie St. Jacques Webb, Canadian by birth,
economist by profession, savior of David Webb by accident. “It was merely a
question of time.”

“It’s crazy!” David whispered so as not to wake the children, his intensity in
no way diminished by his whisper. “Everything’s buried, maximum archive
security and all the rest of that crap! How did anyone find Alex and Mo?”

“We don’t know, but Alex will start looking. There’s no one better than Alex,
you said that yourself—”

“He’s marked now—he’s a dead man,” interrupted Webb grimly.

“That’s premature, David. ‘He’s the best there ever was,’ those were your
words.”

“The only time he wasn’t was thirteen years ago in Paris.”

“Because you were better—”

“No! Because I didn’t know who I was, and he was operating on prior data that I
didn’t know a damn thing about. He assumed it was me out there, but I didn’t
know me, so I couldn’t act according to his script. ... He’s still the best. He
saved both our lives in Hong Kong.”

“Then you’re saying what I’m saying, aren’t you? We’re in good hands.”

“Alex’s, yes. Not Mo’s. That poor beautiful man is dead. They’ll take him and
break him!”

“He’d go to his grave before giving anyone information about us.”

“He won’t have a choice. They’ll shoot him up to the moon with Amytals and his
whole life will be on tape. Then they’ll kill him and come after me ... after
us, which is why you and the kids are heading south, way south. The Caribbean.”

“I’ll send them, darling. Not me.”

“Will you stop it! We agreed when Jamie was born. It’s why we got the place
down there, why we damn near bought your kid brother’s soul to look after it
for us. ... Also, he’s done pretty damn well. We now own half interest in a
flourishing inn down a dirt road on an island nobody ever heard of until that
Canadian hustler landed therein a seaplane.”

“Johnny was always the aggressive type. Dad once said he could sell a
broken-down heifer as a prime steer and no one would check the parts.”

“The point is he loves you ... and the kids. I’m also counting on that wild
man’s— Never mind, I trust Johnny.”

“While you’re trusting so much in my younger brother, don’t trust your sense of
direction. You just passed the turn to the cabin.”

“Goddamn it!” cried Webb, braking the car and swerving around. “Tomorrow! You
and Jamie and Alison are heading out of Logan Airport. To the island!”

“We’ll discuss it, David.”

“There’s nothing to discuss.” Webb breathed deeply, steadily, imposing a
strange control. “I’ve been here before,” he said quietly.

Marie looked at her husband, his suddenly passive face outlined in the dim wash
of the dashboard lights. What she saw frightened her far more than the specter
of the Jackal. She was not looking at David Webb the soft-spoken scholar. She
was staring at a man they both thought had disappeared from their lives forever.

