# Prologue
[Metadata]: # {01}
[Descriptor]: # {01}
[Author]: # {original}
# Prologue
Darkness had descended on Manassas, Virginia, the countryside alive with
nocturnal undercurrents, as Bourne crept through the woods bordering the estate
of General Norman Swayne. Startled birds fluttered out of their black recesses;
crows awoke in the trees and cawed their alarms, and then, as if calmed by a
foraging co-conspirator, kept silent.

Manassas! The key was here! The key that would unlock the subterranean door
that led to Carlos the Jackal, the assassin who wanted only to destroy David
Webb and his family. ... Webb! Get away from me, David! screamed Jason Bourne
in the silence of his mind. Let me be the killer you cannot be!

With each scissoring cut into the thick, high wire fence, he understood the
inevitable, confirmed by his heavy breathing and the sweat that fell from his
hairline. No matter how hard he tried to keep his body in reasonable shape, he
was fifty years of age; he could not do with ease what he did thirteen years
ago in Paris when, under orders, he had stalked the Jackal. It was something to
think about, not dwell upon. There were Marie and his children now—David’s
wife, David’s children—and there was nothing he could not do as long as he
willed it! David Webb was disappearing from his psyche, only the predator Jason
Bourne would remain.

He was through! He crawled inside and stood up, instinctively, rapidly checking
his equipment with the fingers of both hands. Weapons: an automatic, as well as
a CO2 dart pistol; Zeiss Ikon binoculars; a scabbarded hunting knife. They were
all the predator needed, for he was now behind the lines in enemy territory,
the enemy that would lead him to Carlos.

Medusa. The bastard battalion from Vietnam, the unlogged, unsanctioned,
unacknowledged collection of killers and misfits who roamed the jungles of
Southeast Asia directed by Command Saigon, the original death squads who
brought Saigon more intelligence input than all the search-and-destroys put
together. Jason Bourne had come out of Medusa with David Webb only a memory—a
scholar who had another wife, other children, all slaughtered.

General Norman Swayne had been an elite member of Command Saigon, the sole
supplier of the old Medusa. And now there was a new Medusa: different, massive,
evil incarnate cloaked in contemporary respectability, searching out and
destroying whole segments of global economies, all for the benefit of the few,
all financed by the profits from a long-ago bastard battalion, unlogged,
unacknowledged—non-history. This modern Medusa was the bridge to Carlos the
Jackal. The assassin would find the principals irresistible as clients, and
both camps would demand the death of Jason Bourne. That had to happen! And for
it to happen, Bourne had to learn the secrets concealed within the grounds
belonging to General Swayne, head of all procurements for the Pentagon, a
panicked man with a small tattoo on his inner forearm. A Medusan.

Without sound or warning, a black Doberman crashed through the dense foliage,
its frenzy in full force. Jason whipped the CO2 pistol from its nylon holster
as the salivating attack dog lunged for his stomach, its teeth bared. He fired
into its head; the dart took effect in seconds. He cradled the animal’s
unconscious body to the ground.

Cut its throat! roared Jason Bourne in silence.

No, countered his other self, David Webb. Blame the trainer, not the animal.

Get away from me, David!

