# 15
[Metadata]: # {16}
[Descriptor]: # {16}
[Author]: # {original}
# 15
“God, I love you!” said David Webb, leaning into the pay phone in the
preboarding room at the private airfield in Reston, Virginia. “The waiting was
the worst part, waiting to talk to you, to hear from you that you were all all
right.”

“How do you think I felt, darling? Alex said the telephone lines had been cut
and he was sending the police when I wanted him to send the whole damned army.”

“We can’t even allow the police, nothing official anywhere at the moment.
Conklin’s promised me at least another thirty-six hours. ... We may not need
that now. Not with the Jackal in Montserrat.”

“David, what happened? Alex mentioned Medusa—”

“It’s a mess and he’s right, he has to go higher up with it. Him, not us. We
stay out. Far away out.”

“What happened?” repeated Marie. “What’s the old Medusa got to do with
anything?”

“There’s a new Medusa—an extension of the old one, actually—and it’s big and
ugly and it kills, they kill. I saw that tonight; one of their guns tried to
kill me after thinking he’d killed Cactus and murdering two innocent men.”

“Good God! Alex told me about Cactus when he called me back, but nothing else.
How is your Uncle Remus?”

“He’ll make it. The Agency doctor came out and took him and the last brother
away.”

“ ‘Brother’?”

“I’ll tell you when I see you. ... Conklin’s out there now. He’ll take care of
everything and have the telephone fixed. I’ll call him from Tranquility.”

“You’re exhausted—”

“I’m tired, but I’m not sure why. Cactus insisted I get some sleep and I must
have had all of twelve minutes.”

“My poor darling.”

“I like the tone of your voice,” said David. “The words even better, except I’m
not poor. You took care of that in Paris thirteen years ago.” Suddenly his wife
was silent and Webb was alarmed. “What is it? Are you all right?”

“I’m not sure,” answered Marie softly, but with a strength that was the result
of thought, not feeling. “You say this new Medusa is big and ugly and it tried
to kill you—they tried to kill you.”

“They didn’t.”

“Yet they, or it, wanted you dead. Why?”

“Because I was there.”

“You don’t kill a man because he was at someone’s house—”

“A lot happened at that house tonight. Alex and I penetrated its circle of
secrets and I was seen. The idea was to bait the Jackal with a few rich and all
too famous bandits from the old Saigon who would hire him to come after me. It
was a hell of a strategy but it spiraled out of control.”

“My God, David, don’t you understand? You’re marked! They’ll come after you
themselves!”

“How can they? The hit man from Medusa who was there never saw my face except
while I was running in shadows, and they have no idea who I am. I’m a nonperson
who’ll simply disappear. ... No, Marie, if Carlos shows up and if I can do what
I know I can do in Montserrat, we’ll be free. To borrow a phrase, ‘free at
last.’ ”

“Your voice changes; doesn’t it?”

“My what does which?”

“It really does. I can tell.”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” said Jason Bourne. “I’m being
signaled. The plane’s here. Tell Johnny to keep those two old men under guard!”



The whispers spread through Montserrat like rolling pockets of mist. Something
terrible had happened on the out island of Tranquility. ... Bad times, mon.”
... “The evil obeah come across the Antilles from Jamaic’ and there was death
and madness.” ... “And blood on the walls of death, mon, a curse put on the
family of an animal.” ... “Sshh! There was a cat mother and two cat children
... !”

And there were other voices. ... “Dear God, keep it quiet! It could ruin what
tourism we’ve built!” ... “Never anything like this before—an isolated
incident, obviously drug related, brought over from another island! ... “All
too true, mon! I hear it was a madman, his body filled with dope.” ... “I’m
told a fast boat running like the wind of a hurricane took him out to sea. He’s
gone! ... Keep it quiet, I say! Remember the Virgins? The Fountainhead
massacre? It took them years to recover. Quiet!”

And a single voice. “It’s a trap, sir, and if successful, as we believe it will
be, we’ll be the talk of the West Indies, the heroes of the Caribbean. It’ll be
positively mahvelous for our image. Law and order and all that.”

“Thank heavens! Was anyone actually killed?”

“One person, and she was in the act of taking another’s life.”

“She? Good God, I don’t want to hear another word until it’s all over.”

“It’s better that you not be available for comment.”

“Damned good idea. I’ll go out on the boat; the fish are running well after the
storm.”

“Excellent, sir. And I’ll stay in radio contact with developments.”

“Perhaps you shouldn’t. Anything can be picked up out there.”

“I only meant so as to advise you when to return—at the appropriate moment to
make a most advantageous appearance. I’ll fill you in, of course.”

“Yes, of course. You’re a good man, Henry.”

“Thank you, Crown Governor.”



It was ten o’clock in the morning and they held each other fiercely, but there
was no time for talk, only the brief comfort of being together, safe together,
secure in the knowledge that they knew things the Jackal did not know and that
knowledge gave them an enormous advantage. Still, it was only an advantage, not
a guarantee, not where Carlos was concerned. And both Jason and John St.
Jacques were adamant: Marie and the children were being flown south to
Guadeloupe’s Basse-Terre island. They would stay there with the Webbs’ regal
maid, Mrs. Cooper, all under guard until they were called back to Montserrat.
Marie objected, but her objections were met with silence; her husband’s orders
were delivered abruptly, icily.

“You’re leaving because I have work to do. We won’t discuss it any further.”

“It’s Switzerland again ... Zurich again, isn’t it, Jason?”

“It’s whatever you like,” replied Bourne, now preoccupied as the three of them
stood at the base of the dock, two seaplanes bobbing in the water only yards
apart at the far end. One had brought Jason directly to Tranquility from
Antigua; the other was fueled for the flight to Guadeloupe with Mrs. Cooper and
the children already inside. “Hurry up, Marie,” added Bourne. “I want to go
over things with Johnny and then grill those two old scumballs.”

“They’re not scumballs, David. Because of them we’re alive.”

“Why? Because they blew it and had to turn to save their asses?”

“That’s not fair.”

“It’s fair until I say otherwise, and they’re scum until they convince me
they’re not. You don’t know the Jackal’s old men, I do. They’ll say anything,
do anything, lie and snivel to hell and back, and if you turn the other way,
they’ll shove a knife in your spine. He owns them—body, mind and what’s left of
their souls. ... Now get to the plane, it’s waiting.”

“Don’t you want to see the children, tell Jamie that—”

“No, there isn’t time! Take her out there, Johnny. I want to check the beach.”

“There’s nothing I haven’t checked, David,” said St. Jacques, his voice on the
edge of defiance.

“I’ll tell you whether you have or not,” shot back Bourne, his eyes angry as he
started across the sand, adding in a loud voice without looking around, “I’m
going to have a dozen questions for you, and I hope to Christ you can answer
them!”

St. Jacques tensed, taking a step forward but stopped by his sister. “Leave it
alone, Bro,” said Marie, her hand on his arm. “He’s frightened.”

“He’s what? He’s one nasty son of a bitch is what he is!”

“Yes, I know.”

The brother looked at his sister. “That stranger you were talking about
yesterday at the house?”

“Yes, only now it’s worse. That’s why he’s frightened.”

“I don’t understand.”

“He’s older, Johnny. He’s fifty now and he wonders if he can still do the
things he did before, years ago—in the war, in Paris, in Hong Kong. It’s all
gnawing at him, eating into him, because he knows he’s got to be better than he
ever was.”

“I think he can be.”

“I know he will be, for he has an extraordinary reason going for him. A wife
and two children were taken from him once before. He barely remembers them, but
they’re at the core of his torment; Mo Panov believes that and I do, too. ...
Now, years later, another wife and two children are threatened. Every nerve in
him has to be on fire.”

Suddenly, from three hundred feet away on the beach, Bourne’s voice erupted,
splitting through the breezes from the sea. “Goddamn it, I told you to hurry!
... And you, Mr. Expert, there’s a reef out here with the color of a sandbar
beyond it! Have you considered that?”

“Don’t answer, Johnny. We’ll go out to the plane.”

“A sandbar? What the hell’s he talking about? ... Oh, my God, I do see!”

“I don’t,” said Marie as they walked rapidly up the pier.

“There are reefs around eighty percent of the island, ninety-five percent where
this beach is concerned. They brake the waves, it’s why it’s called
Tranquility; there’s no surf at all.”

“So what?”

“So someone using a tank under water wouldn’t risk crashing into a reef, but he
would into a sandbar in front of a reef. He could watch the beach and the
guards and crawl up when his landing was clear, lying in the water only feet
from shore until he could take the guard. I never thought about that.”

“He did, Bro.”



Bourne sat on the corner of the desk, the two old men on a couch in front of
him, his brother-in-law standing by a window fronting the beach in the
unoccupied villa.

“Why would I—why would we—lie to you, monsieur?” asked the hero of France.

“Because it all sounds like a classic French farce. Similar but different
names; one door opening as another closes, look-alikes disappearing and
entering on cue. It smells, gentlemen.”

“Perhaps you are a student of Molière or Racine ... ?”

“I’m a student of uncanny coincidence, especially where the Jackal is
concerned.”

“I don’t think there’s the slightest similarity in our appearances,” offered
the judge from Boston. “Except, perhaps, our ages.”

The telephone rang. Jason quickly reached down and picked it up. “Yes?”

“Everything checks out in Boston,” said Conklin. “His name’s Prefontaine,
Brendan Prefontaine. He was a federal judge of the first circuit caught in a
government scam and convicted of felonious misconduct on the bench—read that as
being very large in the bribery business. He was sentenced to twenty-one years
and did ten, which was enough to blow him away in every department. He’s what
they call a functioning alcoholic, something of a character in Bean Town’s
shadier districts, but harmless—actually kind of liked in a warped sort of way.
He’s also considered very bright when he’s clearheaded, and I’m told a lot of
crumbs wouldn’t have gone court-free and others would be doing longer jail
terms if he hadn’t given shrewd advice to their attorneys of record. You might
say he’s a behind-the-scenes storefront lawyer, the ‘stores’ in his case being
saloons, pool halls and probably warehouses.... Since I’ve been where he’s at
in the booze terrain, he sounds straight arrow to me. He’s handling it better
than I ever did.”

“You quit.”

“If I could have managed better in that twilight zone, I might not have.
There’s something to be said for the grape on many occasions.”

“What about his client?”

“Awesome, and our once and former judge was an adjunct professor at Harvard
Law, where Gates was a student in two of his classes. No question about it,
Prefontaine knows the man. ... Trust him, Jason. There’s no reason for him to
lie. He was simply after a score.”

“You’re following up on the client?”

“With all the quiet ammunition I can pull out of my personal woodwork. He’s our
link to Carlos.. . . The Medusa connection was a false lead, a stupid attempt
by a stupid general in the Pentagon to put someone inside Gates’s inner legal
circle.”

“You’re sure of that?”

“I am now. Gates is a highly paid consultant to a law firm representing a
megadefense contractor under antitrust scrutiny. He wouldn’t even return
Swayne’s calls, which, if he did, would make him more stupid than Swayne, which
he isn’t.”

“That’s your problem, friend, not mine. If everything goes the way I intend it
to go here, I don’t even want to hear about Snake Lady. In fact, I can’t
remember ever having heard of it.”

“Thanks for dumping it in my lap—and in a way I guess I mean that.
Incidentally, the grammar-school notebook you grabbed from the gunslinger in
Manassas has some interesting things in it.”

“Oh?”

“Do you remember those three frequent fliers from the Mayflower’s registry who
flew into Philadelphia eight months ago and just happened to be at the hotel at
the same time eight months later?”

“Certainly.”

“Their names are in Swayne’s Mickey Mouse loose-leaf. They had nothing to do
with Carlos; they’re part of Medusa. It’s a mother lode of disconnected
information.”

“I’m not interested. Use it in good health.”

“We will, and very quietly. That notebook’ll be on the most wanted list in a
matter of days.”

“I’m happy for you, but I’ve got work to do.”

“And you refuse any help?”

“Absolutely. This is what I’ve been waiting thirteen years for. It’s what I
said at the beginning, it’s one on one.”

“High Noon, you goddamn fool?”

“No, the logical extension of a very intellectual chess game, the player with
the better trap wins, and I’ve got that trap because I’m using his. He’d smell
out any deviation.”

“We trained you too well, scholar.”

“Thank you for that.”

“Good hunting, Delta.”

“Good-bye.” Bourne hung up the phone and looked over at the two pathetically
curious old men on the couch. “You passed a sleaze-factored muster, Judge,” he
said to Prefontaine. “And you, ‘Jean Pierre,’ what can I say? My own wife, who
admits to me that you might very well have killed her without the slightest
compunction, tells me that I have to trust you. Nothing makes a hell of a lot
of sense, does it?”

“I am what I am, and I did what I did,” said the disgraced attorney with
dignity. “But my client has gone too far. His magisterial persona must come to
an end in ashes.”

“My words are not so well phrased as those of my learned, newfound relative,”
added the aged hero of France. “But I know the killing must stop; it’s what my
woman tried to tell me. I am a hypocrite, of course, for I am no stranger to
killing, so I shall only say that this kind of killing must stop. There is no
business arrangement here, no profit in the kill, only a sick madman’s
vengeance that demands the unnecessary death of a mother and her children.
Where is the profit there? ... No, the Jackal has gone too far. He, too, must
now be stopped.”

“That’s the most cold-blooded fucking reasoning I’ve ever heard!” cried John
St. Jacques by the window.

“I thought your words were very well chosen,” said the former judge to the
felon from Paris. “Très bien.”

“D’accord.”

“And I think I’m out of my mind to have anything to do with either of you,”
broke in Jason Bourne. “But right now I don’t have a choice. ... It’s
eleven-thirty-five, gentlemen. The clock is running.”

“The what?” asked Prefontaine.

“Whatever’s going to happen will happen during the next two, five, ten or
twenty-four hours. I’m flying back to Blackburne Airport, where I’ll create a
scene, the bereaved husband and father who’s gone crazy over the killing of his
wife and children. It won’t be difficult for me, I assure you; I’ll make a hell
of a ruckus. ... I’ll demand an immediate flight to Tranquility, and when I get
here there’ll be three pine coffins on the pier, supposedly containing my wife
and children.”

“Everything as it should be,” interrupted the Frenchman. “Bien.”

“Very bien,” agreed Bourne. “I’ll insist that one be opened, and then I’ll
scream or collapse or both, whatever comes to mind, so that whoever’s watching
won’t forget what they’ve seen. St. Jacques here will have to control me—be
rough, Johnny, be convincing—and finally I’ll be taken up to another villa, the
one nearest the steps to the beach on the east path. ... Then the waiting
begins.”

“For this Jackal?” asked the Bostonian. “He’ll know where you are?”

“Of course he will. A lot of people, including the staff, will have seen where
I was taken. He’ll find out, that’s child’s play for him.”

“So you wait for him, monsieur? You think the monseigneur will walk into such a
trap? Ridicule!’

“Not at all, monsieur,” replied Jason calmly. “To begin with, I won’t be there,
and by the time he finds that out, I’ll have found him.”

“For Christ’s sake, how?” half shouted St. Jacques.

“Because I’m better than he is,” answered Jason Bourne. “I always was.”



The scenario went as planned, the personnel at Montserrat’s Blackburne Airport
still smoldering from the abuse hurled at them by the tall hysterical American
who accused them all of murder, of allowing his wife and children to be killed
by terrorists—of being willing nigger accomplices of filthy killers! Not only
were the people of the island quietly furious, but they were also hurt. Quiet
because they understood his anguish, hurt because they could not understand how
he could blame them and use such vicious words, words he had never used before.
Was this good mon, this wealthy brother of the gregarious Johnny Saint Jay,
this rich-rich friend who had put so much money into Tranquility Isle not a
friend at all but, instead, white garbage who blamed them for terrible things
they had nothing to do with because their skins were dark? It was an evil
puzzle, mon. It was part of the madness, the obeah that had crossed the waters
from the mountains of Jamaic’ and put a curse on their islands. Watch him,
brothers. Watch his every move. Perhaps he is another sort of storm, one not
born in the south or the east, but whose winds are more destructive. Watch him,
mon. His anger is dangerous.

So he was watched. By many—the uninformed, civilians and authorities alike—as a
nervous Henry Sykes at Government House kept his word. The official
investigation was solely under his command. It was quiet, thorough—and
nonexistent.

Bourne behaved far worse on the pier of Tranquility Inn, striking his own
brother, the amiable Saint Jay, until the younger man subdued him and had him
carried up the steps to the nearest villa. Servants came and went bringing
trays of food and drink to the porch. Selected visitors were permitted to pay
their condolences, including the chief aide to the Crown governor who wore his
full military regalia, a symbol of the Crown’s concern. And an old man who knew
death from the brutalities of war and who insisted on seeing the bereaved
husband and father—he was accompanied by a woman in a nurse’s uniform, properly
topped by a hat and a dark mourning veil. And two Canadian guests of the hotel,
close friends of the owner, both of whom had met the disconsolate man when
Tranquility Inn opened with great fireworks several years ago—they asked to pay
their respects and offer whatever support or comfort they could. John St.
Jacques agreed, suggesting that their visit be brief and to understand that his
brother-in-law remained in a corner of the darkened living room, the drapes
having been drawn.

“It’s all so horrible, so meaningless!” said the visitor from Toronto softly to
the shadowed figure in a chair across the room. “I hope you’re a religious man,
David. I am. Faith helps in such times as these. Your loved ones are in the
arms of Christ now.”

“Thank you.” A momentary breeze off the water rustled the drapes, permitting a
narrow shaft of sunlight to flash across the room. It was enough.

“Wait a minute,” said the second Canadian. “You’re not—good Lord, you’re not
Dave Webb! Dave has—”

“Be quiet,” ordered St. Jacques, standing at the door behind the two visitors.

“Johnny, I spent seven hours in a fishing boat with Dave and I damn well know
him when I see him!”

“Shut up,” said the owner of Tranquility Inn.

“Oh, dear God!” cried the aide to the Crown governor of Montserrat in a clipped
British accent.

“Listen to me, both of you,” said St. Jacques, rushing forward between the two
Canadians and turning to stand in front of the armchair. “I wish I’d never let
you in here, but there’s nothing we can do about that now. ... I thought you’d
add weight, two more observers, if anyone asked you questions, which they will,
and that’s exactly what you’re going to do. You’ve been talking to David Webb,
consoling David Webb. Do you understand that?”

“I don’t understand a damn thing,” objected the bewildered visitor who had
spoken of the comfort of faith. “Who the hell is he?”

“He’s the senior aide to the Crown governor,” answered St. Jacques. “I’m
telling you this so you will understand—”

“You mean the army brass who showed up in full uniform with a squad of black
soldiers?” asked the guest who had fished with David Webb.

“Among his duties is chief military aide-de-camp. He’s a brigadier—”

“We saw the bastard leave,” protested the fisherman. “From the dining room, we
all saw him leave! He was with the old Frenchman and the nurse—”

“You saw someone else leave. Wearing sunglasses.”

“Webb ... ?”

“Gentlemen!” The governor’s aide rose from the chair, wearing the ill-fitting
jacket worn by Jason Bourne when he had flown back to Tranquility from
Blackburne Airport. “You are welcome guests on our island but, as guests, you
will abide by the Crown’s decisions in emergencies. You will either abide by
them, or, as we would do in extreme weather, we will be forced to place you in
custody.”

“Hey, come on, Henry. They’re friends. ...”

“Friends do not call brigadiers ‘bastards’—”

“You might if you were once a busted corporal, General,” inserted the man of
faith. “My companion here didn’t mean anything. Long before the whole damned
Canadian army needed his company’s engineers, he was a screwed-up infantry
grunt. His company, incidentally. He wasn’t too bright in Korea.”

“Let’s cut the crap,” said Webb’s fishing companion. “So we’ve been in here
talking to Dave, right?”

“Right. And that’s all I can tell you.”

“It’s enough, Johnny. Dave’s in trouble, so what can we do?”

“Nothing—absolutely nothing but what’s on the inn’s agenda. You all got a copy
delivered to your villas an hour ago.”

“You’d better explain,” said the religious Canadian. “I never read those
goddamn happy-hour schedules.”

“The inn’s having a special buffet, everything on the house, and a
meteorologist from the Leeward Islands Weather Control will speak for a few
minutes on what happened last night.”

“The storm?” asked the fisherman, the former busted corporal and current owner
of Canada’s largest industrial engineering company. “A storm’s a storm in these
islands. What’s to explain?”

“Oh, things like why they happen and why they’re over so quickly; how to
behave—the elimination of fear, basically.”

“You want us all up there, is that what you mean?”

“Yes, I do.”

“That’ll help Dave?”

“Yes; it will.”

“Then the whole place’ll be up there. I guarantee it.”

“I appreciate that, but how can you?”

“I’ll circulate another happy-hour notice that Angus MacPherson McLeod,
chairman of All Canada Engineering, will award ten thousand dollars to whoever
asks the most intelligent question. How about that, Johnny? The rich always
want more for nothing, that’s our profound weakness.”

“I’ll take your word for it,” mumbled St. Jacques.

“C’mon,” said McLeod to his religious friend from Toronto. “We’ll circulate
with tears in our eyes and spread the word. Then, you idiot colonel—that’s what
you were, y’ bastard—in an hour or so we’ll shift gears and only talk of ten
thousand dollars and a free-for-all dinner. With the beach and the sun,
people’s attention spans are roughly two and a half minutes; in cold weather,
no more than four. Believe me, I’ve had it calculated by computer research. ...
You’ll have a full party tonight, Johnny.” McLeod turned and walked toward the
door.

“Scotty,” cried the man of faith following the fisherman. “You’re going off
half-cocked again! Attention spans, two minutes, four minutes, computer
research—I don’t believe a word of it!”

“Really?” said Angus, his hand on the knob. “You believe in ten thousand
dollars, don’t you?”

“I certainly do.”

“You watch, that’s my market research. ... That’s also why I own the company.
And now I intend to summon those tears to my eyes; it’s another reason I own
the company.”



In a dark storage room on the third floor of Tranquility Inn’s main complex,
Bourne, who had shed the military tunic, and the old Frenchman sat on two
stools in front of a window overlooking the east and west paths of the
shoreline resort. The villas below extended out on both sides of the stone
steps leading down to the beach and the dock. Each man held a pair of powerful
binoculars to his eyes, scanning the people walking back and forth on the paths
and up and down the rock staircase. A handheld radio with the hotel’s private
frequency was on the sill in front of Jason.

“He’s near us,” said Fontaine softly.

“What?” shot out Bourne, yanking the glasses from his face and turning to the
old man. “Where? Tell me where!”

“He’s not in our vision, monsieur, but he is near us.”

“What do you mean?”

“I can feel it. Like an animal that senses the approach of distant thunder.
It’s inside of you; it’s the fear.”

“That’s not very clear.”

“It is to me. Perhaps you wouldn’t understand. The Jackal’s challenger, the man
of many appearances, the Chameleon—the killer known as Jason Bourne—was not
given to fear, we are told, only a great bravado that came from his strength.”

Jason smiled grimly, in contradiction. “Then you were told a lie,” he said
softly. “A part of that man lives with a kind of raw fear few people have ever
experienced.”

“I find that hard to believe, monsieur—”

“Believe. I’m he.”

“Are you, Mr. Webb? It’s not difficult to piece things together. Do you force
yourself to assume your other self because of this fear?”

David Webb stared at the old man. “For God’s sake, what choice do I have?”

“You could disappear for a time, you and your family. You could live
peacefully, in complete security, your government would see to it.”

“He’d come after me—after us—wherever we were.”

“For how long? A year? Eighteen months? Certainly less than two years. He’s a
sick man; all Paris—my Paris—knows it. Considering the enormous expense and
complexity of the current situation—these events designed to trap you—I would
suggest that it’s Carlos’s last attempt. Leave, monsieur. Join your wife in
Basse-Terre and then fly thousands of miles away while you can. Let him go back
to Paris and die in frustration. Is it not enough?”

“No. He’d come after me, after us! It’s got to be settled here, now.”

“I will soon join my woman, if such is to be, so I can disagree with certain
people, men like you, for instance, Monsieur le Caméléon, whom I would have
automatically agreed with before. I do so now. I think you can go far away. I
think you know that you can put the Jackal in a side pocket and get on with
your life, altered only slightly for a while, but you won’t do it. Something
inside stops you; you cannot permit yourself a strategic retreat, no less
honorable for its avoidance of violence. Your family is safe but others may
die, but even that doesn’t stop you. You have to win—”

“I think that’s enough psychobabble,” interrupted Bourne, bringing the
binoculars again to his eyes, concentrating on the scene below beyond the
windows.

“That’s it, isn’t it?” said the Frenchman, studying Le Caméléon, his binoculars
still at his side. “They trained you too well, instilled in you too completely
the person you had to become. Jason Bourne against Carlos the Jackal and Bourne
must win, it’s imperative that he win. ... Two aging lions, each pitted against
the other years ago, both with a burning hatred created by far-off strategists
who had no idea what the consequences would be. How many have lost their lives
because they crossed your converging paths? How many unknowing men and women
have been killed—”

“Shut up!” cried Jason as flashing images of Paris, even peripherally of Hong
Kong, Macao and Beijing—and most recently last night in Manassas,
Virginia—assaulted his fragmented inner screen. So much death!

Suddenly, abruptly, the door of the dark storage room opened and Judge Brendan
Prefontaine walked rapidly, breathlessly inside. “He’s here,” said the
Bostonian. “One of St. Jacques’s patrols, a three-man unit a mile down the east
shoreline, couldn’t be reached by radio. St. Jacques sent a guard to find them
and he just returned—then ran away himself. All three were killed, each man
with a bullet in his throat.”

“The Jackal!” exclaimed the Frenchman. “It is his carte de visite—his calling
card. He announces his arrival.”

