# 24
[Metadata]: # {25}
[Descriptor]: # {25}
[Author]: # {original}
# 24
The Emergency Medical Service helicopter was lowered into its threshold; the
rotors were cut and the blades thumped to a stop. Following EMS procedure when
disembarking ambulatory patients, only then did the exit door open and the
metal steps slap down to the ground. A uniformed paramedic preceded Panov,
turning and assisting the doctor to the tarmac, where a second man in civilian
clothes escorted him to a waiting limousine. Inside were Peter Holland,
director of the CIA, and Alex Conklin, the latter in the right jump seat,
obviously for conversational purposes. The psychiatrist climbed in beside
Holland; he took several deep breaths, sighed audibly and fell back into the
seat.

“I am a maniac,” he stated, emphasizing each word. “Certifiably insane and I’ll
sign the papers of commitment myself.”

“You’re safe, that’s all that matters, Doctor,” said Holland. “Good to see you,
Crazy Mo,” added Conklin.

“Have you any idea what I did? ... I purposely crashed a car into a tree with
me in it! Then after walking at least half the distance to the Bronx, I was
picked up by the only person I know who may have more loose bananas in her head
than I do. Her libido is unhinged and she’s running away from her trucker
husband—hot on her French heels—who I subsequently learned has the cuddly name
of the Bronk. My hooker chauffeur proceeds to hold me hostage with such wiles
as threatening to yell ‘Rape!’ in a diner filled with a collection of the NFL’s
most carnivorous linebackers—except for one who got me out.” Panov abruptly
stopped and reached into his pocket. “Here,” he continued, thrusting the five
driver’s licenses and the roughly six thousand dollars into Conklin’s hands.

“What’s this?” asked the bewildered Alex.

“I robbed a bank and decided to become a professional driver! ... What do you
think it is? I took it from the man who was guarding me. I described as best I
could to the chopper’s crew where the crash took place. They’re flying back to
find him. They will; he’s not walking anywhere.”

Peter Holland reached for the limousine’s telephone, pushing three buttons. In
less than two seconds, he spoke. “Get word to EMS-Arlington, Equipment
Fifty-seven. The man they’re picking up is to be brought directly to Langley.
To the infirmary. And keep me informed as to their progress. ... Sorry, Doctor.
Go on.”

“Go on? What’s to go on to? I was kidnapped and held in some farmhouse and
injected with enough sodium pentothal, if I’m not mistaken, to make me a
resident of—of La La Land, which I was recently accused of being by Madame
Scylla Charybdis.”

“What the hell are you talking about?” said Holland flatly. “Nothing, Admiral,
or Mr. Director or—”

“Peter’s fine, Mo,” completed Holland. “I simply didn’t understand you.”

“There’s nothing to understand but the facts. My allusions are compulsive
attempts at false erudition. It’s called posttraumatic stress.”

“Of course, now you’re perfectly clear.”

Panov turned to the DCI with a nervous smile. “It’s my turn to be sorry, Peter.
I’m still wound up. This last day or so hasn’t exactly been representative of
my normal life-style.”

“I don’t think it’s anybody’s,” concurred Holland. “I’ve seen my share of
rotten stuff, but nothing like this, nothing that tampers with the mind. I
missed all that.”

“There’s no hurry, Mo,” added Conklin. “Don’t press yourself; you’ve taken a
lot of punishment. If you like, we can postpone the briefing for a few hours so
you can rest, calm down.”

“Don’t be a damn fool, Alex!” protested the psychiatrist sharply. “For the
second time I’ve put David’s life in jeopardy. The knowledge of that is far
worse punishment. There’s not a minute to lose. ... Forget Langley, Peter. Take
me to one of your clinics. Free-floating, I want to get out everything I can
recall, consciously or unconsciously. Hurry. I’ll tell the doctors what to do.”

“You’ve got to be joking,” said Holland, staring at Panov.

“I’m not joking for an instant. You both have to know what I know—whether I
realize I know it or not. Can’t you understand that?”

The director again reached for the telephone and pressed a single button. In
the front seat, beyond the glass partition, the driver picked up the phone
recessed in the seat beside him. “There’s been a change of plans,” said
Holland. “Head for Sterile Five.”

The limousine slowed down, and at the next intersection turned right toward the
rolling hills and verdant fields of the Virginia hunt country. Morris Panov
closed his eyes, as if in a trance or as a man might do facing some appalling
ordeal—his own execution perhaps. Alex looked at Peter Holland; they both
glanced at Mo, then back at each other. Whatever Panov was doing, there was a
reason for it. Until they reached the gates of the estate that was Sterile
House Five thirty minutes later, no one spoke.

“DCI and company,” announced the driver to the guard wearing the uniform of a
private security firm, in reality a CIA proprietary. The limousine proceeded
down the long tree-lined entrance.

“Thanks,” said Mo, opening his eyes and blinking. “As I’m sure you gathered,
I’m trying to clear my head and with any luck bring down my blood pressure.”

“You don’t have to do this,” insisted Holland.

“Yes, I do,” said Panov. “Maybe with time I could piece things together with a
degree of clarity, but I can’t now and we don’t have the time.” Mo turned to
Conklin. “How much can you tell me?”

“Peter knows everything. For the sake of that blood pressure of yours, I won’t
fill you in on all the details, but the bottom line is that David’s all right.
At least we haven’t heard otherwise.”

“Marie? The children?”

“On the island,” replied Alex, avoiding Holland’s eyes.

“What about this Sterile Five?” asked Panov, now looking at Holland. “I assume
there’s a specialist, or specialists, the kind I need.”

“In relays and around the clock. You probably know a few of them.”

“I’d rather not.” The long dark vehicle swung around the circular drive and
stopped in front of the stone steps of the pillared Georgian mansion that was
the focal point of the estate. “Let’s go,” said Mo quietly, stepping outside.

The sculptured white doors, the rose-colored marble floors and the elegant
winding staircase in the great hall all combined to furnish a superb cover for
the work done at Sterile Five. Defectors, double and triple agents, and field
officers returned from complex assignments for rest and debriefing were
continuously processed through its various agendas. The staff, each with a Four
Zero clearance, consisted of two doctors and three nurses in relay units, cooks
and domestic attendants recruited from the foreign service—in the main,
overseas embassies—and guards, all with Ranger training or its equivalent. They
moved about the house and grounds unobtrusively, eyes constantly alert, each
with either a concealed or an unconcealed weapon, except for the medical
personnel. Visitors without exception were given small lapel pins by the
well-spoken, dark-suited house steward, who admitted them and directed them to
the locations of their scheduled appointments. The man was a retired
gray-haired interpreter for the Central Intelligence Agency, but he suited his
position so well in appearance he might have come from Central Casting.

Naturally, at the sight of Peter Holland, the steward was astonished. He prided
himself on committing to memory every schedule at Sterile Five. “A surprise
visit, sir?”

“Good to see you, Frank.” The DCI shook hands with the former interpreter. “You
may remember Alex Conklin—”

“Good Lord, is that you, Alex? It’s been years!” Again hands were shaken. “When
was the last time? ... That crazy woman from Warsaw, wasn’t it?”

“The KGB’s been chuckling ever since,” laughed Conklin. “The only secret she
had was the recipe for the worst golumpki I’ve ever tasted. ... Still keeping
your hand in, Frank?”

“Every now and then,” replied the steward, grimacing in mock disapproval.
“These young translators don’t know a quiche from a kluski.”

“Since I don’t either,” said Holland, “may I have a word with you, Frank?” The
two older men walked off to the side speaking quietly as Alex and Mo Panov held
their places, the latter frowning and sporadically breathing deeply. The
director returned, handing lapel pins to his colleagues. “I know where to go
now,” he said. “Frank will call ahead.”

The three of them walked up the curving ornate staircase, Conklin limping, and
down a lushly carpeted hallway on the left to the rear of the enormous house.
On the right wall was a door unlike any of the doors they had passed; it was
made of thick varnished oak with four small windows in the upper recessed
panels and two black buttons set in an outlet casing beside the knob. Holland
inserted a key, twisted it and pressed the lower button; instantly a red light
appeared in the small stationary camera mounted on the ceiling. Twenty seconds
later there was the familiar muffled metallic clanking of an elevator coming to
a stop. “Inside, gentlemen,” ordered the DCI. The door closed and the elevator
began its descent.

“We walked up to go down?” asked Conklin.

“Security,” answered the director. “It’s the only way to get where we’re going.
There’s no elevator on the first floor.”

“Why not, may the man with one foot missing ask?” said Alex.

“I’d think you’d be able to answer that better than me,” retorted the DCI.
“Apparently all accesses to the cellars are sealed off except for two elevators
that bypass the first floor and for which you need a key. This one and another
on the other side; this takes us to where we want to go, the other leads to the
furnaces, air-conditioning units and all the rest of the normal basement
equipment. Frank gave me the key, incidentally. If it doesn’t return to its
slot within a given period of time, another alarm goes off.”

“It all strikes me as unnecessarily complicated,” said Panov curtly, nervously.
“Expensive games.”

“Not necessarily, Mo,” interrupted Conklin gently. “Explosives can be concealed
pretty easily in heating pipes and ducts. And did you know that during the last
days of Hitler’s bunker a few of his saner aides tried to insert poison gas
into the air-filtering machinery? These are just precautions.”

The elevator stopped and the door opened. “To your left, Doctor,” Holland said.
The hallway was a glistening pristine white, antiseptic in its way, which was
altogether proper, as this underground complex was a highly sophisticated
medical center. It was devoted not only to the healing of men and women, but
also to the process of breaking them down, crippling their resistance so that
information might be revealed, truths learned that could prevent the
penetration of high-risk operations, frequently saving lives as a result.

They entered a room that was in stark contrast to the antiseptic quality of the
fluorescent-lit hallway. There were heavy armchairs and soft indirect lighting,
a coffee urn on a table with cups and saucers; newspapers and magazines were
folded neatly on other tables, all the comforts of a lounge designed for those
waiting for someone or something. From an inner door a man in a white medical
jacket appeared; he was frowning, looking uncertain.

“Director Holland?” he said, approaching Peter, extending his hand. “I’m Dr.
Walsh, second shift. Needless to say, we didn’t expect you.”

“I’m afraid it’s an emergency and hardly one of my choosing. May I introduce
you to Dr. Morris Panov—unless you know him?”

“Of him, of course.” Walsh again extended his hand. “A pleasure, Doctor, also a
privilege.”

“You may take both back before we’re finished, Doctor. May we talk privately?”

“Certainly. My office is inside.” The two men disappeared through the inner
door.

“Shouldn’t you go with them?” asked Conklin, looking at Peter.

“Why not you?”

“Goddamn it, you’re the director. You should insist!”

“You’re his closest friend. So should you.”

“I don’t have any clout here.”

“Mine disappeared when Mo dismissed us. Come on, let’s have some coffee. This
place gives me the proverbial creeps.” Holland went to the table with the
coffee urn and poured two cups. “How do you like it?”

“With more milk and sugar than I’m supposed to have. I’ll do it.”

“I still take it black,” said the director, moving away from the table and
removing a pack of cigarettes from his shirt pocket. “My wife says the acid
will kill me one day.”

“Other people say tobacco will.”

“What?”

“Look.” Alex pointed at the sign on the opposite wall. It read: THANK YOU FOR
NOT SMOKING.

“That I’ve got enough clout for,” announced Holland quietly as he snapped his
lighter and lit a cigarette.

Nearly twenty minutes passed. Every now and then one or the other of them
picked up a magazine or a newspaper only to put it down moments later and look
up at the inner door. Finally, twenty-eight minutes after he had disappeared
with Panov, the doctor named Walsh reappeared.

“He tells me you know what he’s requesting and that you have no objections,
Director Holland.”

“I’ve got plenty of objections, but it seems he’s overruled them. ... Oh,
excuse me, Doctor, this is Alex Conklin. He’s one of us and a close friend of
Panov.”

“How do you feel, Mr. Conklin?” asked Walsh, nodding at Alex as he returned the
greeting.

“I hate what he’s doing—what he wants to do—but he says it makes sense. If it
does, it’s right for him and I understand why he insists on doing it. If it
doesn’t make sense, I’ll pull him out of there myself, one foot and all. Does
it make sense, Doctor? And what’s the risk of damage?”

“There’s always a risk where drugs are concerned, especially in terms of
chemical balance, and he knows that. It’s why he’s designed an intravenous flow
that prolongs his own psychological pain but somewhat reduces the potential
damage.”

“Somewhat?” cried Alex.

“I’m being honest. So is he.”

“Bottom line, Doctor,” said Holland.

“If things go wrong, two or three months of therapy, not permanent.”

“And the sense?” insisted Conklin. “Does it make sense?”

“Yes,” replied Walsh. “What happened to him is not only recent, it’s consumed
him. It’s obsessed his conscious, which can only mean that it’s inflamed his
subconscious. He’s right. His unreachable recall is on the cutting edge. ... I
came in here as a courtesy. He’s insisted we proceed, and from what he’s told
me, I’d do the same thing. Each of us would.”

“What’s the security?” asked Alex.

“The nurse will be dismissed and stay outside the door. There’ll be only a
single battery-operated tape recorder and me ... and one or both of you.” The
doctor turned to the door, then glanced back. “I’ll send for you at the proper
time,” he added, again disappearing inside.

Conklin and Peter Holland looked at each other. The second period of waiting
began.

To their astonishment, it ended barely ten minutes later. A nurse came out into
the lounge and asked them to follow her. They walked through what appeared to
be a maze of antiseptic white walls broken up only by recessed white panels
with glass knobs that denoted doors. Only once on their brief journey did they
see another human being; it was a man in a white smock, wearing a white
surgical mask, who walked out of yet another white door, his sharp, intense
eyes above the white cloth somehow accusing, determining them to be aliens from
some different world that had not been cleared for Sterile House Five.

The nurse opened a door; there was a blinking red light above its top frame.
She put her index finger to her lips, indicating silence. Holland and Conklin
walked quietly inside a dark room and confronted a drawn white curtain
concealing a bed or an examining table beyond, a small circle of intense light
shining through the cloth. They heard the softly spoken words of Dr. Walsh.

“You are going back, Doctor, not far back, just a day or so, just when you
began to feel the dull, constant pain in your arm ... your arm, Doctor. Why are
they inflicting pain on your arm? You were in a farmhouse, a small farmhouse
with fields outside your window, and then they put a blindfold on you and began
hurting your arm. Your arm, Doctor.”

Suddenly, there was a muted flashing of green light reflected on the ceiling.
The curtain parted electronically several feet, revealing the bed, the patient
and the doctor. Walsh took his finger off a bedside button and looked at them,
gesturing slowly with his hands as if to say, There’s no one else here.
Confirmed?

Both witnesses nodded, at first mesmerized, then repelled at the sight of
Panov’s grimacing pale face and the tears that began to flow from his wide-open
eyes. Then, as one, they saw the white straps that emerged from under the white
sheet, holding Mo in place; the order had to be his.

“The arm, Doctor. We have to begin with the physically invasive procedure,
don’t we? Because you know what it does, Doctor, don’t you? It leads to another
invasive procedure that you cannot permit. You must stop its progression.”

The ear-shattering scream was a prolonged shriek of defiance and horror. “No,
no! I won’t tell you! I killed him once, I won’t kill him again! Get away from
meeeee ... !”

Alex slumped, falling to the floor. Peter Holland grabbed him and gently the
strong, broad-shouldered admiral, a veteran of the darkest operations in the
Far East, led Conklin silently through the door to the nurse. “Get him away
from here, please.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Peter,” coughed Alex, trying to stand, collapsing on his false foot. “I’m
sorry, Christ, I’m sorry!”

“What for?” whispered Holland.

“I should watch but I can’t watch!”

“I understand. It’s all too close. If I were you, I probably couldn’t either.”

“No, you don’t understand! Mo said he killed David, but of course he didn’t.
But I meant to, I really wanted to kill him! I was wrong, but I tried with all
the expertise in my bones to kill him! And now I’ve done it again. I sent him
to Paris. ... It’s not Mo, it’s me!”

“Put him against the wall, miss. Let him sink to the floor and leave us alone.”

“Yes, sir!” The nurse did as she was ordered and fled, leaving Holland and Alex
alone in the antiseptic maze.

“Now, you listen to me, Field Man,” whispered the gray-haired director of the
Central Intelligence Agency, kneeling in front of Conklin. “This fucking
merry-go-round of guilt had better stop—has got to stop—or nobody’s going to be
any good to anybody. I don’t give a good goddamn what you or Panov did thirteen
years ago, or five years ago, or now! We’re all reasonably bright people, and
we did what each of us did because we thought they were the right moves at the
time. ... Guess what, Saint Alex? Yes, I’ve heard the term. We make mistakes.
Fucking inconvenient, isn’t it? Maybe we’re not so brilliant after all. Maybe
Panov isn’t the greatest behavioral whatever-the-hell-it-is; maybe you’re not
the shrewdest son of a bitch in the field, the one who got canonized, and maybe
I’m not the superjock behind-the-lines strategist they’ve made me out to be. So
what? We take our baggage and go where we have to go.”

“Oh, for Christ’s sake, shut up!” yelled Conklin, struggling against the wall.

“Shhh!”

“Oh, shit! The last thing I need is a sermon from you! If I had a foot, I’d
take you.”

“Now we’re physical?”

“I was Black Belt. First class, Admiral.”

“Golly, gee. I don’t even know how to wrestle.”

Their eyes met and Alex was the first to laugh quietly. “You’re too much,
Peter. I got your message. Help me up, will you? I’ll go back to the lounge and
wait for you. Come on, give me a hand.”

“The hell I will,” said Holland, getting to his feet and standing over Conklin.
“Help yourself. Someone told me that the Saint made it back through a hundred
and forty miles in enemy territory, through rivers and streams and jungle, and
arrived at the Foxtrot base camp asking if anybody had a bottle of bourbon.”

“Yeah, well, that was different. I was a hell of a lot younger and I had
another foot.”

“Pretend you got one now, Saint Alex.” Holland winked. “I’m going back inside.
One of us has to be there.”

“Bastard!”

For an hour and forty-seven minutes Conklin sat in the lounge. His attachable
footless foot never throbbed, but it was throbbing now. He did not know what
the impossible feeling meant, but he could not dismiss the beat that surged
through his leg. If nothing else, it was something to think about, and he
thought wistfully of the younger days, when he had both feet, and before. Oh,
how he had wanted to change the world! And how he had felt so right in a
destiny that forced him to become the youngest valedictorian in his high
school’s history, the youngest freshman ever accepted at Georgetown, a bright,
bright light that shimmered at the end of the tunnels of academe. His decline
started when someone, somewhere, found out that his name at birth was not
Alexander Conklin but Aleksei Nikolae Konsolikov. That now faceless man had
casually asked him a question, the answer to which had changed Conklin’s life.

“Do you by any chance speak Russian?”

“Of course,” he had replied, amused that his visitor would even think he might
not. “As you obviously know, my parents were immigrants. I grew up not only in
a Russian home but in a Russian neighborhood—at least in the early years. You
couldn’t buy a loaf of bread at the ovoshchnoi otdel if you didn’t. And at
church school the older priests and nuns, like the Poles, held ferociously on
to the language. ... I’m sure it contributed to my leaving the faith.”

“Those were the early years, however, as I believe you mentioned.”

“Yes.”

“What changed?”

“I’m sure it’s in your government report somewhere and will hardly satisfy.
your iniquitous Senator McCarthy.”

The face came back to Alex with the memory of those words. It was a middle-aged
face and it had suddenly become expressionless, the eyes clouded but with
suppressed anger in them. “I assure you, Mr. Conklin, I am in no way associated
with the senator. You call him iniquitous, I have other terms, but they’re not
pertinent here. ... What changed?”

“Quite late in his life my father became what he had been in Russia, a highly
successful merchant, a capitalist. At last count he owned seven supermarkets in
upscale malls. They’re called Conklin’s Corners. He’s over eighty now, and
although I love him dearly, I regret to say he’s an ardent supporter of the
senator. I simply consider his years, his struggles, his hatred of the Soviets,
and avoid the subject.”

“You’re very bright and very diplomatic.”

“Bright and diplomatic,” Alex had agreed.

“I’ve shopped at a couple of Conklin’s Corners. Kind of expensive.”

“Oh, yes.”

“Where did the ‘Conklin’ come from?”

“My father. My mother says he saw it on a billboard advertising motor oil, she
thinks, about four or five years after they got here. And, of course, the
Konsolikov had to go. As my considerably bigoted father once said, ‘Only the
Jews with Russian names can make money over here.’ Again, I avoid the subject.”

“Very diplomatic.”

“It’s not difficult. He has his share of good points as well.”

“Even if he didn’t, I’m sure you could be convincing in your diplomacy, in the
concealment of your feelings.”

“Why do I think that’s a leading statement?”

“Because it is, Mr. Conklin. I represent a government agency that’s extremely
interested in you, and one in which your future would be as unlimited as that
of any potential recruit I’ve spoken to in a decade. ...”

That conversation had taken place nearly thirty years ago, mused Alex, his eyes
drifting up once again to the inner door of Sterile Five’s waiting lounge in
its own private medical center. And how crazy the intervening years had been.
In a stress-defying bid for unrealistic expansion, his father had overextended
himself, committing enormous sums of money that existed only in his imagination
and in the minds of avaricious bankers. He lost six of his seven supermarkets,
the smallest and last supporting a life-style that he found unacceptable, so he
conveniently had a massive stroke and died as Alex’s own adult life was about
to begin.

Berlin—East and West. Moscow, Leningrad, Tashkent and Kamchatka. Vienna, Paris,
Lisbon and Istanbul. Then back across the world to stations in Tokyo, Hong
Kong, Seoul, Cambodia, Laos, and finally Saigon and the tragedy that was
Vietnam. Over the years, with his facile mastery of languages and the expertise
that came with survival, he had become the Agency’s point man in clandestine
operations, its primary scout and often the on-scene strategist for covert
activities. Then one morning with the mists hanging over the Mekong Delta, a
land mine shattered his life as well as his foot. There was little left for a
field man who depended on mobility in his chosen work; the rest was downhill
and out of the field. His excessive drinking he accepted, and excused as
genetic. The Russian’s winter of depression carried over into spring, summer
and autumn. The skeletal, trembling wreck of a man who was about to go under
was given a reprieve. David Webb—Jason Bourne—came back into his life.

The door opened, mercifully cutting short his reverie, and Peter Holland walked
slowly into the lounge. His face was pale and drawn, his eyes glazed, and in
his left hand were two small plastic containers, each presumably holding a
cassette tape.

“As long as I live,” said Peter, his voice low and hollow, barely above a
whisper, “I hope to Christ I never go through anything like this again, never
witness anything like this again.”

“How’s Mo?”

“I didn’t think he’d live. ... I thought he’d kill himself. Every now and then
Walsh would stop. Let me tell you, he was one frightened doctor.”

“Why didn’t he call it off, for God’s sake?”

“I asked him that. He said Panov’s instructions were not only explicit but that
he’d written them out and signed them and expected them to be followed to the
letter. Maybe there’s some kind of unwritten code of ethics between doctors, I
don’t know, but I do know Walsh hooked him up to an EKG, which he rarely took
his eyes off. Neither did I; it was easier than looking at Mo. Jesus, let’s get
out of here!”

“Wait a minute. What about Panov?”

“He’s not ready for a welcome-home party. He’ll stay here for a couple of days
under observation. Walsh will call me in the morning.”

“I’d like to see him. I want to see him.”

“There’s nothing to see but a human dishrag. Believe me, you don’t and he
wouldn’t want you to. Let’s go.”

“Where?”

“Your place in Vienna—our place in Vienna. I assume you’ve got a cassette
machine.”

“I’ve got everything but a moon rocket, most of which I can’t operate.”

“I want to stop and get a bottle of whisky.”

“There’s whatever you want at the apartment.”

“It doesn’t bother you?” asked Holland, studying Alex.

“Would it matter if it did?”

“Not a bit. ... If I remember, there’s an extra bedroom, isn’t there?”

“Yes.”

“Good. We may be up most of the night listening to these.” The director held up
the cassettes. “The first couple of times won’t mean anything. All we’ll hear
is the pain, not the information.”

It was shortly past five o’clock in the afternoon when they left the estate
known within the Agency as Sterile House Five. The days were growing shorter,
September on the cusp, the descending sun announcing the forthcoming change
with an intensity of color that was the death of one season and the birth of
another.

“The light’s always brightest before we die,” said Conklin, leaning back in the
seat beside Holland in the limousine, staring out the window.

“I find that not only inappropriate but quite possibly sophomoric,” declared
Peter wearily. “I won’t commit to the latter until I know who said it. Who was
it?”

“Jesus, I think.”

“The Scriptures were never edited. Too many campfires, no on-scene
confirmation.”

Alex laughed softly, reflectively. “Did you ever actually read them? The
Scriptures, I mean.”

“Most of it—most of them.”

“Because you had to?”

“Hell, no. My father and mother were as agnostic as any two people could be
without being branded godless pariahs. They shut up about it and sent me and my
two sisters to a Protestant service one week, a Catholic mass on another, and a
synagogue after that. Never with any regularity, but I guess they figured we
should catch the whole scene. That’s what makes kids want to read. Natural
curiosity wrapped in mysticism.”

“Irresistible,” agreed Conklin. “I lost my faith, and now after years of
proclaiming my spiritual independence, I wonder if I’m missing something.”

“Like what?”

“Comfort, Peter. I have no comfort.”

“For what?”

“I don’t know. Things I can’t control, maybe.”

“You mean you don’t have the comfort of an excuse, a metaphysical excuse.
Sorry, Alex, we part company. We’re accountable for what we do, and no
confessional absolution can change that.”

Conklin turned his head, his eyes wide open, and looked at Holland. “Thank
you,” he said.

“For what?”

“For sounding like me, even using a variation of the words I’ve used. ... I
came back from Hong Kong five years ago with the banner of Accountability on my
lance.”

“You’ve lost me.”

“Forget it. I’m back on track. ... ‘Beware the pitfalls of ecclesiastical
presumption and self-absorbed thought.’ ”

“Who the hell said that?”

“Either Savonarola or Salvador Dalí, I can’t remember who.”

“Oh, for Christ’s sake, cut the crap!” laughed Holland.

“Why should I? It’s the first chuckle we’ve had. And what about your two
sisters? What happened to them?”

“It’s a better joke,” replied Peter, his head angled down into his chin, a
mischievous smile on his lips. “One’s a nun in New Delhi, and the other’s
president of her own public relations firm in New York and uses better Yiddish
than most of her colleagues in the profession. A couple of years ago she told
me they stopped calling her shiksa. She loves her life; so does my other sister
in India.”

“Yet you chose the military.”

“Not ‘yet,’ Alex. ... And I chose it. I was an angry young man who really
believed this country was being dumped on. I came from a privileged
family—money, influence, an expensive prep school—that guaranteed me—me, not
the black kid on the streets of Philadelphia or Harlem—automatic admittance to
Annapolis. I simply figured I had to somehow earn that privilege. I had to show
that people like me didn’t just use our advantages to avoid, but instead to
extend, our responsibilities.”

“Aristocracy reborn,” said Conklin. “Noblesse oblige—nobility imposes
obligations.”

“That’s not fair,” protested Holland.

“Yes, it is, in a very real sense. In Greek, aristo means the ‘best,’ and
kratia is the word for ‘rule.’ In ancient Athens such young men led armies,
their swords up front, not behind, if only to prove to the troops that they
would sacrifice with the lowliest of them, for the lowliest were under their
commands, the commands of the finest.”

Peter Holland’s head arched back into the top of the velvet seat, his eyes half
closed. “Maybe that was part of it, I’m not sure—I’m not sure at all. We were
asking so much ... for what? Pork Chop Hill? Unidentifiable, useless terrain in
the Mekong? Why? For Christ’s sake, why? Men shot, their stomachs and chests
blown away by an enemy two feet in front of them, by a ’Cong who knew jungles
they didn’t know? What kind of war was that? ... If guys like me didn’t go up
with the kids and say, ‘Look, here I am, I’m with you,’ how the hell do you
think we could have lasted as long as we did? There might have been mass
revolts and maybe there should have been. Those kids were what some people call
niggers, and spics and the foul-ups who couldn’t read or write beyond a
third-grade level. The privileged had deferments—deferments from getting
soiled—or service that damn near guaranteed no combat. The others didn’t. And
if my being with them—this privileged son of a bitch—meant anything, it was the
best gig I ever did in my life.” Holland suddenly stopped talking and shut his
eyes.

“I’m sorry, Peter. I didn’t mean to rough up past roads, I really didn’t.
Actually, I started with my guilt, not yours. ... It’s crazy how it all
dovetails and feeds upon itself, isn’t it? What did you call it? The
merry-go-round of guilt. Where does it stop?”

“Now,” said Holland, sitting up in the seat, straightening his back and
shoulders. He picked up the limousine telephone, punched two numbers and spoke.
“Drop us off in Vienna, please. And when you’ve done that, go find a Chinese
restaurant and bring us back the best they’ve got. ... Frankly, I’m partial to
spare ribs and lemon chicken.”



Holland proved to be half right. The first hearing of Panov’s session under the
serum was agonizing to listen to, the voice devastating, the emotional content
blurring the information, especially for anyone who knew the psychiatrist. The
second hearing, however, produced instantaneous concentration, engendered
without question by the very pain they heard. There was no time to indulge in
personal feelings; the information was suddenly everything. Both men began
taking copious notes on legal pads, frequently stopping and replaying numerous
sections for clarity and understanding. The third hearing refined the salient
points further; by the end of the fourth, both Alex and Peter Holland had
thirty to forty pages of notes apiece. They spent an additional hour in
silence, each going over his own analysis.

“Are you ready?” asked the CIA’s director from the couch, a pencil in his hand.

“Sure,” said Conklin, seated at the desk with his various electronic equipment,
the tape machine at his elbow.

“Any opening remarks?”

“Yes,” replied Alex. “Ninety-nine point forty-four percent of what we listened
to gives us nothing, except to tell us what a terrific prober this Walsh is. He
hopscotched around picking up cues faster than I could find them, and I wasn’t
exactly an amateur when it came to interrogations.”

“Agreed,” said Holland. “I wasn’t so bad either, especially with a blunt
instrument. Walsh is good.”

“Better than that, but that doesn’t concern us. What he pulled out of Mo
does—again with a ‘but.’ It’s not in Panov’s recapturing what he revealed
because we have to assume he revealed almost everything I told him. Instead,
it’s in what he repeated having heard.” Conklin separated several pages.
“Here’s an example. ‘The family will be pleased ... our supreme will give us
his blessing.’ He’s repeating someone else’s words, not his own. Now, Mo isn’t
familiar with criminal jargon, certainly not to the point where he would
automatically make a connection, but the connection’s there. Take the word
‘supreme’ and change it by removing one vowel and inserting another.
‘Supremo’—capo supremo, hardly a heavenly supreme being. Suddenly, ‘the family’
is light years away from Norman Rockwell, and ‘blessing’ is interchangeable
with a reward or a bonus.”

“Mafia,” said Peter, his eyes steady and clear despite a number of drinks that
had obviously been burned out of his system. “I hadn’t thought that one
through, but I marked it instinctively. ... Okay, here’s something else along
the same lines, the same lines because I also picked up on the unlike-Panov
phrases.” Holland flipped through his legal pad and stopped at a specific page.
“Here. ‘New York wants it all.’ ” Peter continued slapping over the pages.
“Again here. ‘That Wall Street is something.’ ” Once more the DCI progressed
through his legal pad. “And this one. ‘Blondie fruits’—the rest is garbled.”

“I missed that. I heard it, but it didn’t make any sense to me.

“Why should it, Mr. Aleksei Konsolikov?” Holland smiled. “Underneath that
Anglo-Saxon exterior, education and all, beats the heart of a Russian. You’re
not sensitive to what some of us have to endure.”

“Huh?”

“I’m a WASP, and ‘blondie fruits’ is but one more pejorative description given
us by, I must admit, other trampled-upon minorities. Think about it.
Armbruster, Swayne, Atkinson, Burton, Teagarten—‘blondies’ all. And Wall
Street, certain firms in that originally WASP financial bastion, at any rate.”

“Medusa,” said Alex, nodding. “Medusa and the Mafia. ... Holy Christ.”

“We’ve got a telephone number!” Peter leaned forward on the couch. “It was in
the ledger Bourne brought out of Swayne’s house.”

“I’ve tried it, remember? It’s an answering machine, that’s all it is.”

“And that’s enough. We can get a location.”

“To what end? Whoever picks up the messages does it by remote, and if he or she
has half a brain, it’s done from a public phone. The relay is not only
untraceable but capable of erasing all other messages, so we can’t tap in.”

“You’re not very into high tech, are you, Field Man?”

“Let’s put it this way,” replied Conklin. “I bought one of those VCRs so I
could watch old movies, and I can’t figure out how to turn off the goddamn
blinking clock. I called the dealer and he said, ‘Read the instructions on the
interior panel.’ I can’t find the interior panel.”

“Then let me explain what we can do to an answering machine. ... We can jam it
externally.”

“Gee willikers, Sandy, what’s next for Orphan Annie? What the hell is that
going to do? Other than kill the source.”

“You’re forgetting. We have the location from the numbers.”

“Oh?”

“Someone has to come and repair the machine.”

“Oh.”

“We take him and find out who sent him there.”

“You know, Peter, you’ve got possibilities. For a neophyte, you understand,
your current outrageously undeserved position notwithstanding.”

“Sorry I can’t offer you a drink.”



Bryce Ogilvie, of the law firm Ogilvie, Spofford, Crawford and Cohen, was
dictating a highly complex reply to the Justice Department’s antitrust division
when his very private telephone line rang; it rang only at his desk. He picked
up the phone, pressed the green button and spoke rapidly. “Hold on,” he
ordered, looking up at his secretary. “Would you excuse me, please?”

“Certainly, sir.” The secretary got out of her chair, walked across the large
impressive office and disappeared beyond the door.

“Yes, what is it?” asked Ogilvie, returning to the phone.

“The machine isn’t working,” said the voice on the sacrosanct line.

“What happened?”

“I don’t know. All I get is a busy signal.”

“That’s the best equipment available. Perhaps someone was calling in when you
called.”

“I’ve been trying for the past two hours. There’s a glitch. Even the best
machines break down.”

“All right, send someone up to check it out. Use one of the niggers.”

“Naturally. No white man would go up there.”

