# 26
[Metadata]: # {27}
[Descriptor]: # {27}
[Author]: # {original}
# 26
Twice Bourne had passed the dark, quiet row of old stone houses on the
boulevard Lefebvre in the concrete backwater of the fifteenth arrondissement.
He then doubled back to the rue d’Alésia and found a sidewalk café. The outdoor
tables, their candles flickering under glass, were peopled mostly by gesturing,
argumentative students from the nearby Sorbonne and Montparnasse. It was
nearing ten o’clock and the aproned waiters were growing irritable; the
majority of customers were not full of largess, either in their hearts or in
their pockets. Jason wanted only a strong espresso, but the perpetual scowl on
the face of the approaching garçon convinced him he would get mud if he ordered
only the coffee, so he added the most expensive brandy he could recall by name.

As the waiter returned to the service bar, Jason pulled out his small notebook
and ballpoint pen, shutting his eyes for a moment, then opening them and
sketching out everything he could envision from the row of houses on his inner
screen. There were three structures of two attached houses each, separated by
two narrow alleyways. Each double complex was three stories high, each front
entrance reached by climbing a steep flight of brick steps, and at either end
of the row were vacant lots covered with rubble, the remains of demolished
adjacent buildings. The address of the Jackal’s buried telephone number—the
address was available in the underground tunnels solely for repair purposes—was
the final structure on the right, and it took no imagination to know he
occupied the entire building, if not the entire row.

Carlos was the consummate self-protector, so one had to assume that his Paris
command post would be a fortress, employing every human and electronic security
device that loyalty and high technology could provide. And the seemingly
isolated, all but deserted, section of the outlying fifteenth arrondissement
served his purposes far better than any crowded section of the city. For that
reason, Bourne had first paid a drunken tramp to walk with him during his
initial foray past the houses, he himself limping unsteadily in the shadows
beside his companion; and for his second appraisal, he had hired a middle-aged
whore as his cover, with no limp or stagger in his gait. He knew the terrain
now, for all the good it did him, but it was the beginning of the end. He swore
himself to that!

The waiter arrived with his espresso and the cognac, and only when Jason placed
a hundred-franc note on the table, accompanied by a wave of his hand, did the
man’s hostile countenance move to neutral ground. “Merci,” he mumbled.

“Is there a pay phone nearby?” asked Bourne, removing an additional ten-franc
note.

“Down the street, fifty, sixty meters,” replied the waiter, his eyes on the new
money.

“Nothing closer?” Jason peeled off another note, twenty francs. “I’m calling
right here within a few blocks.”

“Come with me,” said the aproned garçon, gingerly picking up the franc notes
and leading Bourne through the open doors of the café to a cashier seated on
high at the far end of the restaurant. The gaunt, sallow-faced woman looked
annoyed; obviously she assumed that Bourne was a discontented customer.

“Let him use your telephone,” said the waiter.

“Why?” spat out the harridan. “So he can call China?”

“He calls up the street. He will pay.”

Jason proffered a ten-franc note, his innocent eyes looking blankly at the
highly suspicious woman. “Augh, take it,” she said, removing a phone from under
her cash-register stand and grasping the money. “It has an extension so you can
move to the wall, as they all do. Men! Business and the bed, it’s all you think
about!”

He dialed the Pont-Royal and asked for his room, expecting Bernardine to pick
up on the first or second ring. By the fourth, he was concerned; by the eighth,
he was profoundly disturbed. Bernardine was not there! Had Santos ... ? No, the
Deuxième veteran was armed and knew how to use his “deterrence”—there would
have been at the least loud gunfire, at the last a room blown apart by a
grenade. Bernardine had left under his own control. Why?

There could be any one of several reasons, thought Bourne, handing back the
telephone and returning to his table outside. The first and most wished for was
news of Marie; the old intelligence officer would not raise false hopes by
detailing the nets he had spread throughout the city, but they were there,
Jason was sure of it. ... Bourne could not think of another reason, so it was
best not to think about Bernardine. He had other pressing considerations, the
most intensely pressing of his life. He returned to the strong coffee and his
notebook; every detail had to be exact.

An hour later he finished his espresso, taking a sip of the cognac and spilling
the rest on the pavement under the usual soiled red tablecloth. He left the
café and the rue d’Alésia, turning right and walking slowly, as a far older man
might walk, toward the boulevard Lefebvre. The closer he came to the last
corner, the more he became aware of the undulating, erratic sounds from
apparently different directions. Sirens! The two-note sirens of the Paris
police! What had happened? What was happening? Jason abandoned his elderly gait
and ran to the edge of the building fronting the Lefebvre and the row of old
stone houses. Instantly, he was in shock, fury and astonishment joining
together in panic. What were they doing?

Five patrol cars converged on the row of stone houses, each successively
screeching to a halt in front of the structure on the right. Then a large black
police van appeared, swinging directly around to face the two entrances of the
building, its searchlight shooting out as a squad of black-uniformed men with
automatic weapons leaped into the street and took up crouching attack positions
only partially concealed by the patrol cars—an assault was in the making!

Fools. Goddamned fools! To give Carlos a warning was to lose the Jackal!
Killing was his profession; escape, his obsession. Thirteen years ago Bourne
had been told that Carlos’s huge retreat in the village hills of
Vitry-sur-Seine outside Paris had more false walls and concealed staircases
than a nobleman’s Loire château in the time of Louis XIV. The fact that no one
had ever determined which estate it was, or whom it was assigned to, did not
vitiate the all too acceptable rumors. And with three supposedly separated
structures on the boulevard Lefebvre, it was also all too acceptable to
presuppose hidden underground tunnels linking each to the others.

For Christ’s sake, who had done this? Had a terrible error been made? Had he
and Bernardine been so obtuse as to think the Deuxième or Peter Holland’s Paris
station of the CIA had overlooked tapping into his Pont-Royal telephone or
bribed or enlisted the various relays of operators on the hotel’s switchboard?
If so, that obtuseness was rooted in an absolute: it was next to impossible to
tap a phone on short notice in a relatively small hotel without being detected.
Technology required a stranger on the premises, and bribe money spread around
was countered with larger bribes by the subject under surveillance. Santos?
Bugs placed in the room by a chambermaid or a bellman? Not likely. The huge
conduit to the Jackal, especially if he had reneged on their contract, would
not expose the Jackal. Who? How? The questions burned into Jason’s imagination
as he watched in horror and dismay the scene taking place on the boulevard
Lefebvre.

“On police authority, all residents will evacuate the building.” The orders
over the loudspeaker metallically echoed throughout the street. “You have one
minute before we take aggressive procedures.”

What aggressive procedures? screamed Bourne into the silent void of his mind.
You’ve lost him. I’ve lost him. Insanity! Who? Why?

The door at the top of the brick steps on the left side of the building opened
first. A petrified man, short, obese, in an undershirt, his trousers held up by
suspenders, cautiously walked out into the flood of the searchlight, spreading
his hands in front of his face and turning his head away from the blinding
beam. “What is it, messieurs?” he cried, his voice tremulous. “I am merely a
baker—a good baker—but I know nothing about this street except that the rent is
cheap! Is that a crime to the police?”

“Our concerns are not with you, monsieur,” continued the amplified voice.

“Not with me, you say? You arrive here like an army, frightening my wife and
children into thinking it is their last minutes on earth, and yet you say we
don’t concern you? What kind of reasoning is that? We live among fascists?”

Hurry up! thought Jason. For God’s sake, hurry! Every second is a minute in
escape time, an hour for the Jackal!

The door above the flight of brick steps on the right now opened, and a nun in
the full flowing black robe of a religious habit appeared. She stood defiantly
in the frame, no fear whatsoever in her almost operatic voice. “How dare you?”
she roared. “These are the hours of vespers and you intrude. Better you should
be asking forgiveness for your sins than interrupting those who plead with God
for theirs!”

“Nicely said, Sister,” intoned the unimpressed police officer over the
loudspeaker. “But we have other information and we respectfully insist on
searching your house. If you refuse, we shall disrespectfully carry out our
orders.”

“We are the Magdalen Sisters of Charity!” exclaimed the nun. “These are the
sacrosanct quarters of women devoted to Christ!”

“We respect your position, Sister, but we are still coming inside. If what you
say is so, I’m sure the authorities will make a generous contribution to your
cause.”

You’re wasting time! screamed Bourne to himself. He’s getting away!

“Then may your souls be damned for transgression, but come ahead and invade
this holy ground!”

“Really, Sister?” asked another official over the loudspeaker. “I don’t believe
there’s anything in the canons that gives you the right to condemn souls to
hell on such a flimsy excuse. ... Go ahead, Monsieur Inspector. Under the
habit, you may find lingerie more suited to the Faubourg.”

He knew that voice! It was Bernardine! What had happened? Was Bernardine no
friend after all? Was it all an act, the smooth talk of a traitor? If so, there
would be another death that night!

The black-uniformed squad of antiterrorists, their automatic weapons bolted
into firing mode, raced to the base of the brick steps as the gendarmes blocked
off the boulevard Lefebvre, north and south, while the red and blue lights of
the patrol cars incessantly blinked their bright warnings to all beyond the
area: Stay away.

“May I go inside?” screamed the baker. No one replied, so the obese man ran
through his door clutching his trousers.

An official in civilian clothes, the obvious leader of the assault, joined his
invading unit on the pavement below the steps. With a nod of his head, he and
his men raced up the brick staircase through the door held open by the defiant
nun.

Jason held his place at the edge of the building, his body pressed against the
stone, the sweat pouring from his hairline and his neck, his eyes on the
incomprehensible scene being played out on the Lefebvre. He knew the who now,
but why? Was it true? Was the man most trusted by Alex Conklin and himself in
reality another pair of eyes and ears for the Jackal? Christ, he did not want
to believe it!

Twelve minutes passed, and with the reemergence of Paris’s version of a SWAT
team and its leader, several members bowing and kissing the hand of the real or
would-be abbess, Bourne understood that his and Conklin’s instincts had been on
true course.

“Bernardine!” screamed the official approaching the first patrol car. “You are
finished! Out! Never are you to talk to the lowest recruit in the Deuxième,
even the man who cleans the toilets! You are ostracized! ... If I had my way,
you’d be shot! ... International murder in the boulevard Lefebvre! A friend of
the Bureau! An agent we must protect! ... A fucking nunnery, you miserable son
of a bitch! Shit! A nunnery! ... Get out of my car, you smelly pig. Get out
before a weapon goes off by mistake and your stomach’s on the street, where it
belongs!”

Bernardine lurched out of the patrol car, his old unsteady legs barely able to
maintain balance, twice falling into the street. Jason waited, wanting to rush
to his friend, but knowing he had to wait. The patrol cars and the van raced
away; still Bourne had to wait, his eyes alternately watching Bernardine and
the front entrance of the Jackal’s house. And it was the Jackal’s house, the
nun proved it. Carlos could never let go of his lost faith; he consistently
used it as a viable cover, but it was much more than that. Much more.

Bernardine staggered into the shadows of a long-abandoned storefront across
from the house on the boulevard Lefebvre. Jason breached the corner and ran
down the pavement, racing into the recess and grabbing the Deuxième veteran as
he leaned against a long glass window, breathing heavily.

“For God’s sake, what happened?” cried Bourne, supporting Bernardine by both
shoulders.

“Easy, mon ami,” choked Bernardine. “The pig I sat next to—a politician, no
doubt, looking for an issue—punched me in the chest before he threw me out of
the car. ... I told you, I don’t know all the new people who attach themselves
to the Bureau these days. You have the same problems in America, so, please, do
not give me a lecture.”

“It’s the last thing I’m about to do. ... This is the house, Bernardine. Right
here, right in front of us!”

“This is also a trap.”

“What?”

“Alex and I confirmed it. The telephone numbers were different. I gather you
did not make your call to Carlos, as he instructed you to.”

“No. I had the address and I wanted him stretched. What’s the difference? This
is the house!”

“Oh, this is where your Mr. Simon was to go, and if he was truly Mr. Simon, he
would be taken to another rendezvous. But if he was not Monsieur Simon but
someone else, then he would be shot—proof—another corpse in search of the
Jackal.”

“You’re wrong!” insisted Jason, shaking his head and speaking quietly, rapidly.
“This may be a detour, but Carlos is still on the switch. He’s not going to
allow anyone to waste me but himself. That’s his commandment.”

“As yours is regarding him?”

“Yes. I have a family; he has a borderline legend. Mine is complete for me, but
his is a vacuum—without any real meaning for him any longer. He’s gone as far
as he can go. The only way he can go further is to move into my territory—David
Webb’s territory—and eliminate Jason Bourne.”

“Webb? David Webb? Who in the name of almighty God is that?”

“Me,” replied Bourne, smiling forlornly and leaning beside Bernardine against
the window. “It’s nuts, isn’t it?”

“Nuts!” cried the former Deuxième. “It is fou! Insane, not to be believed!”

“Believe it.”

“You are a family man with children and you do this work?”

“Alex never told you?”

“If he did so, I passed it off as a cover—one goes along with anything.”
Shaking his head, the older man looked up at his taller companion. “You really
have a family whom you do not wish to escape from?”

“On the contrary, I want to get back to them as soon as I can. They’re the only
people on earth I really care about.”

“But you are Jason Bourne, the killer Chameleon! The deepest recesses of the
criminal world tremble at your name!”

“Oh, come on, that’s a bit much, even from you.”

“Not for an instant! You are Bourne, second only to the Jackal—”

“No!” shouted the suddenly forgotten David Webb. “He’s no match for me! I’ll
take him! I’ll kill him!”

“Very well, very well, mon ami,” said Bernardine calmly, reassuringly, staring
at the man he could not understand. “What do you want me to do?”

Jason Bourne turned and breathed heavily against the glass window for several
moments—and then through the mists of indecision the Chameleon’s strategy
became clear. He swung around and looked across the dark street at the stone
building on the right. “The police are gone,” he said quietly.

“Of course, I realize that.”

“Did you also realize that no one from the other two buildings came outside?
Yet there are lights on in a number of the windows.”

“I was preoccupied, what can I say? I did not notice.” Bernardine raised his
eyebrows in sudden recollection. “But there were faces at the windows, several
faces, I saw them.”

“Yet no one came outside.”

“Very understandable. The police ... men with weapons racing around. Best to
barricade oneself, no?”

“Even after the police and the weapons and the patrol cars have left? They all
just go back to their television sets as if nothing had happened? No one comes
out to check with the neighbors? That’s not natural, François; it’s not even
unnaturally natural. It’s been orchestrated.”

“What do you mean? How?”

“One man walks out on the porch and shouts into a searchlight. Attention is
drawn to him and precious seconds of a minute’s warning evaporate. Then a nun
emerges on the other side draping herself in holy indignation—more seconds
lost, more hours for Carlos. The assault’s mounted and the Deuxième comes up
with zero. ... And when it’s all over, everything’s back to normal—an abnormal
normalcy. A job was done according to a predesigned plan, so there’s no call
for really normal curiosity—no gathering in the street, no excitement, not even
a collective postcrisis indignation. Simply people inside undoubtedly checking
with one another. Doesn’t it all tell you something?”

Bernardine nodded. “A prearranged strategy carried out by professionals,” said
the veteran field officer.

“That’s what I think, too.”

“It’s what you saw and I did not,” countered Bernardine. “Stop being kind,
Jason. I’ve been too long away from the cold. Too soft, too old, too
unimaginative.”

“So have I,” said Bourne. “It’s just that the stakes are so high for me that I
have to force myself into thinking like a man I wanted to forget.”

“This is Monsieur Webb speaking?”

“I guess it is.”

“So where does that leave us?”

“With an irate baker and an angry nun, and if they prove to be ciphers, several
faces in various windows. At this juncture the pickings are ours but that won’t
last long, I doubt through the morning.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Carlos will close up shop here and he’ll do it quickly. He hasn’t got a choice
now. Someone in his Praetorian guard gave someone else the locatio

