# 22
[Metadata]: # {23}
[Descriptor]: # {23}
[Author]: # {original}
# 22
Bourne walked for nearly an hour through the streets of Paris trying to clear
his head, ending up at the Seine, on the Pont de Solferino, the bridge that led
to the Quai des Tuileries and the gardens. As he leaned against the railing
absently watching the boats lazily plowing the waters below, the question kept
assaulting him: Why, why, why? What did Marie think she was doing? Flying over
to Paris! It wasn’t just foolish, it was stupid—yet his wife was neither a fool
nor an idiot. She was a very bright lady with reserves of control and a quick,
analytical mind. That was what made her decision so untenable; what could she
possibly hope to accomplish? She had to know he was far safer working alone
rather than worrying about her while tracking the Jackal. Even if she found
him, the risk was doubled for both of them, and that she had to understand
completely. Figures and projections were her profession. So why?

There was only one conceivable answer, and it infuriated him. She thought he
might slip back over the edge as he had done in Hong Kong, where she alone had
brought him to his senses, to the reality that was uniquely his own, a reality
of frightening half truths and only partial remembrances, episodic moments she
lived with every day of their lives together. God, how he adored her; he loved
her so! And the fact that she had made this foolish, stupid, untenable decision
only fueled that love because it was so—so giving, so outrageously unselfish.
There were moments in the Far East when he had craved his own death, if only to
expunge the guilt he felt at putting her in such
dangerous—untenable?—positions. The guilt was still there, always there, but
the aging man in him recognized another reality. Their children. The cancer of
the Jackal had to be ripped out of all their lives. Couldn’t she realize that
and leave him alone?

No. For she was not flying to Paris to save his life—she had too much
confidence in Jason Bourne for that. She was coming to Paris to save his mind.
I’ll handle it, Marie. I can and will handle it!

Bernardine. He could do it. The Deuxième could find her at Orly or De Gaulle.
Find her and take her, put her under guard at a hotel and claim no one knew
where he was. Jason ran from the Pont de Solferino to the Quai des Tuileries
and to the first telephone he could find.

“Can you do it?” asked Bourne. “She’s only got one updated passport and it’s
American, not Canadian.”

“I can try on my own,” answered Bernardine, “but not with any help from the
Deuxième. I don’t know how much Saint Alex told you, but at the moment my
consultant status has been canceled and I think my desk has been thrown out the
window.”

“Shit!”

“Merde to the triple, mon ami. The Quai d’Orsay wants my underwear burned with
me in it, and were it not for certain information I possess regarding several
members of the Assembly, they would no doubt revive the guillotine.”

“Can you pass around some money at immigration?”

“It would be better if I acted in my former official capacity on the assumption
that the Deuxième does not so swiftly advertise its embarrassments. Her full
name, please.”

“Marie Elise St. Jacques Webb—”

“Ah, yes, I recall now, at least the St. Jacques,” broke in Bernardine. “The
celebrated Canadian economist. The newspapers were filled with her photograph.
La belle mademoiselle.”

“It was exposure she could have done without.”

“I’m certain it was.”

“Did Alex say anything about Mo Panov?”

“Your doctor friend?”

“Yes.”

“I’m afraid not.”

“Goddamn it!”

“If I may suggest, you must think of yourself now.”

“I understand.”

“Will you pick up the car?”

“Should I?”

“Frankly, I wouldn’t if I were you. It’s unlikely, but the invoice might be
traced back to me. There’s risk, however minor.”

“That’s what I thought. I bought a métro map. I’ll use the trains. ... When can
I call you?”

“Give me four, perhaps five hours to get back here from the airports. As our
saint explained, your wife could be leaving from several different points of
embarkation. To get all those passenger manifests will take time.”

“Concentrate on the flights arriving early tomorrow morning. She can’t fake a
passport, she wouldn’t know how to do it.”

“According to Alex, one does not underestimate Marie Elise St. Jacques. He even
spoke French. He said she was formidable.”

“She can come at you from the outer limits, I’ll tell you that.”

“Qu’est-ce que c’est?”

“She’s an original, let’s leave it there.”

“And you?”

“I’m taking the subway. It’s getting dark. I’ll call you after midnight.”

“Bonne chance.”

“Merci.”

Bourne left the booth knowing his next move as he limped down the Quai, the
bandage around his knee forcing him to assume a damaged leg. There was a métro
station by the Tuileries where he would catch a train to Havre-Caumartin and
switch to the Regional Express north line past St.-Denis-Basilique to
Argenteuil. Argenteuil, a town of the Dark Ages founded by Charlemagne in honor
of a nunnery fourteen centuries ago, now fifteen hundred years later a city
that housed the message center of a killer as brutal as any man who roamed the
bloody fields with a broadsword in Charlemagne’s barbaric days, then as now
celebrating and sanctifying brutality in the shadows of religiosity.

Le Coeur du Soldat was not on a street or a boulevard or an avenue. Instead, it
was in a dead-end alleyway around the corner and across from a
long-since-closed factory whose faded signs indicated a once flourishing
metallurgical refining plant in what had to be the ugliest part of the city.
Nor was the Soldat listed in the telephone directory; it was found by
innocently asking strangers where it was, as the inquirer was to meet une
grosse secousse at this undiscoverable pissoir. The more dilapidated the
buildings and the filthier the streets, the more cogent were the directions.

Bourne stood in the dark narrow alley leaning against the aged rough brick of
the opposing structure across from the bistro’s entrance. Above the thick
massive door in square block letters, several missing, was a dull red sign: L C
eur d Soldat. As the door was sporadically opened for entering or departing
clientele, metallic martial music blared forth into the alley; and the
clientele were not candidates for an haute couture cotillion. His appearance
was in keeping, thought Jason, as he struck a wooden match against the brick,
lighting a thin black cigar as he limped toward the door.

Except for the language and the deafening music, it might have been a
waterfront bar in Sicily’s Palermo, reflected Bourne as he made his way to the
crowded bar, his squinting eyes roam ing, absorbing everything he could
observe—briefly confused, wondering when he had been in Palermo, Sicily.

A heavyset man in a tank shirt got off a stool; Jason slid on top of it. The
clawlike hand gripped his shoulder; Bourne slapped his right hand up, grabbing
the wrist and twisting it clockwise, pushing the barstool away and rising to
his full height. “What’s your problem?” he asked calmly in French but loud
enough to be heard.

“That’s my seat, pig! I’m just taking a piss!”

“So maybe when you’re finished, I’ll take one,” said Jason, his gaze boring
into the man’s eyes, the strength of his grip unmistakable—emphasized by
pressing a nerve with his thumb, which had nothing to do with strength.

“Ah, you’re a fucking cripple ... !” cried the man, trying not to wince. “I
don’t pick on invalids.”

“I’ll tell you what,” said Bourne, releasing his thumb. “You come back, we’ll
take turns, and I’ll buy you a drink each time you let me get off this bum leg
of mine, okay?”

Looking up at Jason, the heavyset man slowly grinned. “Hey, you’re all right.”

“I’m not all right, but I’m certainly not looking for a fight,’ either. Shit,
you’d hammer me to the floor.” Bourne released the muscular Tank Shirt’s arm.

“I’m not so sure of that,” said the man, now laughing and holding his wrist.
“Sit, sit! I’ll take a piss and come back and buy you a drink. You don’t look
like you’re loaded with francs.”

“Well, like they say, appearances are deceiving,” replied Jason, sitting down.
“I’ve got different, better clothes and an old friend told me to meet him here
but not to wear them. ... I just got back from good money in Africa. You know,
training the savages—”

Cymbals crashed in the metallic, deafening martial music as Tank Shirt’s eyes
widened. “Africa?” interrupted the stranger. “I knew it! That grip—LPN.”

What remained of the Chameleon’s memory data banks expanded into the code.
LPN—Legion Patria Nostra. France’s Foreign Legion, the mercenaries of the
world. It was not what he had in mind, but it would certainly do. “Christ, you
too?” he asked, again coarsely but innocently.

“La Légion étrangère! ‘The Legion is our Fatherland’!”

“This is crazy!”

“We don’t announce ourselves, of course. There’s great jealousy, naturally,
because we were the best and we were paid for it, but still these are our
people. Soldiers!”

“When did you leave the Legion?” asked Bourne, sensing a cloud that could be
troublesome.

“Ah, nine years ago! They threw me out before my second conscription for
overweight. They were right and they probably saved my life. I’m from Belgique,
a corporal.”

“I was discharged a month ago, before my first term was over. Wounds during our
incursion into Angola and the fact that they figured I was older than my papers
said. They don’t pay for extended recoveries.” How easily the words came.

“Angola? We did that? What was the Quai d’Orsay thinking about.”

“I don’t know. I’m a soldier, I follow orders and don’t question those I can’t
understand.”

“Sit! My kidneys are bursting. I’ll be right back. Maybe we know friends. ... I
never heard of any Angola operation.”

Jason leaned forward over the bulging bar and ordered une bière, grateful that
the bartender was too busy and the music too loud for the man to have overheard
the conversation. However, he was infinitely more grateful to Saint Alex of
Conklin, whose primary advice to a field agent was to “get in bad with a mark
first before you get in good,” the theory being that the reversal from
hostility to amiability was far stronger for the change. Bourne swallowed the
beer in relief. He had made a friend at Le Coeur du Soldat. It was an inroad,
minor but vital, and perhaps not so minor.

Tank Shirt returned, his thick arm around the shoulders of a younger man in his
early twenties, of medium height and with the physique of a large safe; he was
wearing an American field jacket. Jason started to get off the barstool. “Sit,
sit!” cried his new friend, leaning forward to be heard through the crowds and
the music. “I brought us a virgin.”

“What?”

“You forgot so quickly? He’s on his way to becoming a Legion recruit.”

“Oh, that,” laughed Bourne, covering his gaffe. “I wondered in a place like
this—”

“In a place like this,” broke in Tank Shirt, “half will take it or give it
either way as long as it’s rough. But that’s neither here nor there. I thought
he should talk to you. He’s American and his French is grotesque, but if you
speak slow, he’ll catch on.

“No need to,” said Jason in faintly accented English. “I grew up in Neufchâtel,
but I spent several years in the States.”

“That’s nice to heah.” The American’s speech was distinctly Deep South, his
smile genuine, his eyes wary but unafraid.

“Then let us start again,” said the Belgian in heavily accented English. “My
name is ... Maurice, it’s as good a name as any. My young friend here is Ralph,
at least he says it is. What’s yours, my wounded hero?”

“Francois,” replied Jason, thinking of Bernardine and wondering briefly how he
was doing at the airports. “And I’m no hero; they died too quickly. ... Order
your drinks, I’m paying.” They did and Bourne did, his mind racing, trying to
recall the little he knew about the French Foreign Legion. “A lot has changed
in nine years, Maurice.” How very easily the words came, thought the Chameleon.
“Why are you enlisting, Ralph?”

“Ah figure it’s the wisest thing I can do—kinda disappear for a few years, and
I understand five is the minimum.”

“If you last the first, mon ami,” interjected the Belgian.

“Maurice is right. Listen to him. The officers are tough and difficult—”

“All French!” added the Belgian. “Ninety percent, at least. Only one foreigner
in perhaps three hundred reach the officer corps. Have no illusions.”

“But Ah’m a college man. An engineer.”

“So you’ll build fine latrines for the camps and design perfect shit holes in
the field,” laughed Maurice. “Tell him, François. Explain how the savants are
treated.”

“The educated ones must first know how to fight,” said Jason, hoping he was
right.

“Always first!” exclaimed the Belgian. “For their schooling is suspicious. Will
they doubt? Will they think when they are paid only to follow orders? ... Oh,
no, mon ami, I would not emphasize your érudition.”

“Let it come out gradually,” added Bourne. “When they need it, not when you
want to offer it.”

“Bien!” cried Maurice. “He knows what he’s talking about. A true légionnaire!”

“Can you fight?” asked Jason. “Could you go after someone to kill him?”

“Ah killed mah feeancee and her two brothers and a cousin, all with a knife and
my bare hands. She was fuckin’ a big banker in Nashville and they were coverin’
for her because he was payin’ all of ’em a lot of money. ... Yeah, I can kill,
Mr. François.”

Manhunt for Crazed Killer in Nashville

Young engineer with promising future escapes dragnet. ...

Bourne remembered the newspaper headlines of only weeks ago, as he stared at
the face of the young American. “Go for the Legion,” he said.

“If push comes to shove, Mr. François, could I use you as a reference?”

“It wouldn’t help you, young man, it might only hurt. If you’re pressed, just
tell the truth. It’s your credentials.”

“Aussi bien! He knows the Legion. They will not take maniacs if they can help
it, but they—how do you say it, François?”

“Look the other way, I think.”

“Oui. They look the other way when there are—encore, Francois?”

“When there are extenuating circumstances.”

“See? My friend Francois also has brains. I wonder how he survived.”

“By not showing them, Maurice.”

A waiter wearing about the filthiest apron Jason had ever seen clapped the
Belgian on the neck. “Votre table, René.”

“So?” shrugged Tank Shirt. “Just another name. Quelle différence? We eat and
with good fortune we will not be poisoned.”

Two hours later, with four bottles of rough vin ordinaire consumed by Maurice
and Ralph, along with suspicious fish, Le Coeur du Soldat settled in for its
nightly endurance ritual. Fights occurred episodically, broken up by muscular
waiters. The blaring music marshaled memories of battles won and lost,
engendering arguments between old soldiers who had basically been the assault
troops, cannon fodder, at once resentful and filled with the pride of survival
because they had survived the blood and horror their gold-braided superiors
knew nothing about. It was the collective roar of the underprivileged foot
soldiers heard from the time of the Pharaoh’s legions to the grunts of Korea
and Vietnam. The properly uniformed officers decreed from far behind the lines,
and the foot soldiers died to preserve their superiors’ wisdom. Bourne
remembered Saigon and could not fault the existence of Le Coeur du Soldat.

The head bartender, a massive bald man with steel-rimmed glasses, picked up a
telephone concealed below the far end of the bar and brought it to his ear.
Jason watched him between the roving figures. The man’s eyes spun around the
crowded room—what he heard appeared to be important; what he saw, dismissible.
He spoke briefly, plunged his hand below the bar and kept it there for several
moments; he had dialed. Again, he spoke quickly, then calmly replaced the phone
out of sight. It was the kind of sequence described by old Fontaine on
Tranquility Isle. Message received, message relayed. And at the end of that
receiving line was the Jackal.

It was all he wanted to see that evening; there were things to consider,
perhaps men to hire, as he had hired men in the past. Expendable men who meant
nothing to him, people who could be paid or bribed, blackmailed or threatened
into doing what he wanted them to do without explanation.

“I just spotted the man I was to meet here,” he said to the barely conscious
Maurice and Ralph. “He wants me to go outside.”

“You’re leaving us?” whined the Belgian.

“Hey, man, you shouldn’t do thay-at,” added the young American from the South.

“Only for tonight.” Bourne leaned over the table. “I’m working with another
légionnaire, someone who’s on to something that involves a lot of money. I
don’t know you, but you seem like decent men.” Bourne pulled out his roll of
bills and peeled off a thousand francs, five hundred for each of his
companions. “Take this, both of you—shove it in your pockets, quickly!”

“Holy shee-itt!”

“Merde!”

“It’s no guarantee, but maybe we can use you. Keep your mouths shut and get out
of here ten or fifteen minutes after I leave. Also, no more wine. I want you
sober tomorrow. ... When does this place open, Maurice?”

“I’m not sure it closes. I myself have been here at eight o’clock in the
morning. Naturally, it is not so crowded—”

“Be here around noon. But with clear heads, all right?”

“I shall be le caporal extraordinaire of La Légion. The man that I once was!
Should I wear my uniform?” Maurice belched.

“Hell, no.”

“Ah’ll wear a suit and a tie. I got a suit and a tie, honest!” The American
hiccupped.

“No. Both of you be like you are now, but with your heads straight. Do you
understand me?”

“You sound très américain, mon ami.”

“He sure do.”

“I’m not, but then the truth’s not a commodity here, is it?”

“Ah know what he means. I learned it real well. You kinda fib with a tie on.”

“No tie, Ralph. See you tomorrow.” Bourne slid out of the booth, and suddenly a
thought struck him. Instead of heading for the door, he cautiously made his way
to the far end of the bar and the huge bald bartender. No seats were available,
so, again cautiously, politely, he squeezed sideways between two customers,
ordered a Pemod and asked for a napkin on which to write a message, ostensibly
personal, to no one who might concern the establishment. On the back of the
napkin’s crude coat of arms, he wrote the following with his ballpoint pen in
French:

The nest of a blackbird is worth a million francs. Object: confidential
business advice. If interested, be at the old factory around the corner in
thirty minutes. Where is the harm? An additional 5000 F for being there alone.

Bourne palmed the napkin along with a hundred-franc note and signaled the
bartender, who adjusted his steel-rimmed glasses as if the unknown patron’s
gesture were an impertinence. Slowly he moved his large body forward, and
leaned his thick tattooed arms on the bar. “What is it?” he asked gruffly.

“I have written out a message for you,” replied the Chameleon, his eyes steady,
focused on the bartender’s glasses. “I am by myself and hope you will consider
the request. I am a man who carries wounds but I am not a poor man.” Bourne
quickly but gently—very gently—reached for the bartender’s hand, passing the
napkin and the franc note. With a final imploring look at the astonished man,
Jason turned and headed for the door, his limp pronounced.

Outside, Bourne hurried up the cracked pavement toward the alley’s entrance. He
judged that his interlude at the bar had taken between eight and twelve
minutes. Knowing the bartender was watching him, he had purposely not tried to
see if his two companions were still at the table, but he assumed they were.
Tank Shirt and Field Jacket were not at their sharpest, and in their condition
minutes did not count; he could only hope five hundred francs apiece might
bring about a degree of responsibility and that they would leave soon as
instructed. Oddly enough, he had more faith in Maurice-René than in the young
American who called himself Ralph. A former corporal in the Foreign Legion was
imbued with an automatic reflex where orders were concerned; he followed them
blind drunk or blind sober. Jason hoped so; it was not mandatory, but he could
use their assistance—if, if, the bartender at Le Coeur du Soldat had been
sufficiently intrigued by the excessive sums of money, as well as by a solitary
conversation with a cripple he could obviously kill with one tattooed arm.

Bourne waited in the street, the wash of the streetlights diminishing in the
alley, fewer and fewer people going in or coming out, those arriving in better
shape than those departing, all passing Jason without a glance at the derelict
weaving against the brick.

Instinct prevailed. Tank Shirt pulled the much younger Field Jacket through the
heavy door, and at one point after the door had swung shut, slapped the
American across the face, telling him in unclear words to follow orders, for
they were rich and could become much richer.

“It is better than being shot in Angola!” cried the former légionnaire, loud
enough for Bourne to hear. “Why did they do that?”

Jason stopped them at the entrance to the alley, pulling both men around the
edge of the brick building. “It’s me,” he said, his voice commanding.

“Sacrebleu ... !”

“What the Gawdamn hell ... !”

“Be quiet! You can make another five hundred francs tonight, if you want to. If
not, there are twenty other men who will.”

“We are comrades!” protested Maurice-René.

“And Ah could bust your ass for scarin’ us like thay-at. ... But mah buddy’s
right, we’re comrades—that ain’t Commie stuff, is it, Maurice?”

“Taisez-vous!”

“That means shut up,” explained Bourne.

“Ah know thay-at. I hear it a lot—”

“Listen to me. Within the next few minutes the bartender in there may come out
looking for me. He may, he also may not, I simply don’t know. He’s the large
bald man wearing glasses. Do either of you know him?”

The American shrugged, but the Belgian nodded his floating head, his lips flat
until he spoke. “His name is Santos and he is espagnol.”

“Spanish?”

“Or latino-américain. No one knows.”

Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, thought Jason. Carlos the Jackal, Venezuelan by birth,
rejected terrorist, whom even the Soviets could not handle. Of course he would
return to his own. “How well do you know him?”

It was the Belgian’s turn to shrug. “He is the complete authority where Le
Coeur du Soldat is concerned. He has been known to crush men’s heads if they
behave too badly. He always takes off his glasses first, and that is the first
sign that something will happen that even proven soldiers do not care to
witness. ... If he is coming out here to see you, I would advise you to leave.”

“He may come because he wants to see me, not because he wants to harm me.”

“That is not Santos—”

“You don’t have to know the particulars, they don’t concern you. But if he does
come out that door, I want you to engage him in conversation, can you do that?”

“Mais certainement. On several occasions I have slept on his couch upstairs,
personally carried there by Santos himself when the cleaning women came in.”

“Upstairs?”

“He lives above the café on the second floor. It is said that he never leaves,
never goes into the streets, even to the markets. Other people purchase all the
supplies, or they are simply delivered.”

“I see.” Jason pulled out his money and distributed another five hundred francs
to each weaving man. “Go back into the alley, and if Santos comes out, stop him
and behave like you’ve had too much to drink. Ask him for money, a bottle,
whatever.”

Like children, Maurice-René and Ralph clutched the franc notes, glancing at
each other both as conspirators and as victors. François, the crazy
légionnaire, was passing out money as if he printed it himself! Their
collective enthusiasm grew.

“How long do you want us to hassle this turkey?” asked the American from the
Deep South.

“I will talk the ears off his bald head!” added the Belgian. “No, just long
enough for me to see that he’s alone,” said Bourne, “that no one else is with
him or comes out after him.”

“Piece a’ cake, man.”

“We shall earn not only your francs but your respect. You have the word of a
Légion corporal!”

“I’m touched. Now, get back in there.” The two inebriated men lurched down the
alley, Field Jacket slapping Tank Shirt triumphantly across the shoulders.
Jason pressed his back against the street-side brick inches from the edge of
the building and waited. Six minutes passed, and then he heard the words he so
desperately wanted to hear.

“Santos! My great and good friend Santos!”

“What are you doing here, René?”

“My young American friend was sick to his stomach but it has gone—he vomited.”

“American ... ?”

“Let me introduce you, Santos. He’s about to become a great soldier.”

“There is a Children’s Crusade somewhere?” Bourne peered around the corner as
the bald bartender looked at Ralph. “Good luck, baby face. Go find your war in
a playground.”

“You talk French awful fast, mistuh, but I caught some of that. You’re a big
mother, but I can be a mean son of a bitch!”

The bartender laughed and switched effortlessly to English. “Then you’d better
be mean someplace else, baby face. We only permit peaceable gentlemen in Le
Coeur du Soldat. ... Now I must go.”

“Santos!” cried Maurice-René. “Lend me ten francs. I left my billfold back at
my flat.”

“If you ever had a billfold, you left it back in North Africa. You know my
policy. Not a sou for any of you.”

“What money I had went for your lousy fish! It made my friend vomit!”

“For your next meal, go down to Paris and dine at the Ritz. ... Ah, yes! You
did have a meal—but you did not pay for it.” Jason pulled quickly back as the
bartender snapped his head around and looked up the alley. “Good night, René.
You too, baby warrior. I have business.”

Bourne ran down the pavement toward the gates of the old factory. Santos was
coming to meet him. Alone. Crossing the street into the shadows of the
shut-down refinery, he stood still, moving only his hand so as to feel the hard
steel and the security of his automatic. With every step Santos took the Jackal
was closer! Moments later, the immense figure emerged from the alley, crossed
the dimly lit street and approached the rusted gates.

“I am here, monsieur,” said Santos.

“And I am grateful.”

“I’d rather you’d keep your word first. I believe you mentioned five thousand
francs in your note.”

“It’s here.” Jason reached into his pocket, removed the money, and held it out
for the manager of Le Coeur du Soldat.

“Thank you,” said Santos, walking forward and accepting the bills. “Take him!”
he added.

Suddenly, from behind Bourne, the old gates of the factory burst open. Two men
rushed out, and before Jason could reach his weapon, a heavy blunt instrument
crashed down on his skull.

