# 2 - Revolutionary Life
[Metadata]: # {03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
Revolutionary Life
# Revolutionary Life
The revolutionary model of adaptation—again, considered akin to Kuhn's
revolutionary science41—is more complex. Let us presume that you return from
your meeting. You made it on time and, as far as you could tell, everything
proceeded according to plan. You noticed that your colleagues appeared a little
irritated and confused by your behavior as you attempted to control the
situation, but you put this down to jealousy on their part—to their inability
to comprehend the majesty of your conceptualizations. You are satisfied, in
consequence—satisfied temporarily—so you start thinking about tomorrow, as you
walk back to work. You return to your office. There is a message on your
answering machine. The boss wants to see you. You did not expect this. Your
heart rate speeds up a little: good or bad, this news demands preparation for
action.42 What does she want? Fantasies of potential future spring up. Maybe
she heard about your behavior at the meeting and wants to congratulate you on
your excellent work. You walk to her office, apprehensive but hopeful.

You knock and stroll in jauntily. The boss looks at you and glances away
somewhat unhappily. Your sense of apprehension increases. She motions for you
to sit, so you do. What is going on? She says, “I have some bad news for you.”
This is not good. This is not what you wanted. Your heart rate is rising
unpleasantly. You focus all of your attention on your boss. “Look,” she says,
“I have received a number of very unfavorable reports regarding your behavior
at meetings. All of your colleagues seem to regard you as a rigid and
overbearing negotiator. Furthermore, it has become increasingly evident that
you are unable to respond positively to feedback about your shortcomings.
Finally, you do not appear to properly understand the purpose of your job or
the function of this corporation.”

You are shocked beyond belief, paralyzed into immobility. Your vision of the
future with this company vanishes, replaced by apprehensions of unemployment,
social disgrace and failure. You find it difficult to breathe. You flush and
perspire profusely; your face is a mask of barely suppressed horror. You cannot
believe that your boss is such a bitch. “You have been with us for five years,”
she continues, “and it is obvious that your performance is not likely to
improve. You are definitely not suited for this sort of career, and you are
interfering with the progress of the many competent others around you. In
consequence, we have decided to terminate your contract with us, effective
immediately. If I were you, I would take a good look at myself.”

You have just received unexpected information, but of a different order of
magnitude than the petty anomalies, irritations, threats and frustrations that
disturbed your equilibrium in the morning. You have just been presented with
incontrovertible evidence that your characterizations of the present and of the
ideal future are seriously, perhaps irreparably, flawed. Your presumptions
about the nature of the world are in error. The world you know has just
crumbled around you. Nothing is what it seemed; everything is unexpected and
new again. You leave the office in shock. In the hallway, other employees avert
their gaze from you, in embarrassment. Why did you not see this coming? How
could you have been so mistaken in your judgment?

Maybe everyone is out to get you.

Better not think that.

You stumble home, in a daze, and collapse on the couch. You can't move. You are
hurt and terrified. You feel like you might go insane. Now what? How will you
face people? The comfortable, predictable, rewarding present has vanished. The
future has opened up in front of you like a pit, and you have fallen in. For
the next month, you find yourself unable to act. Your spirit has been
extinguished. You sleep and wake at odd hours; your appetite is disturbed. You
are anxious, hopeless and aggressive, at unpredictable intervals. You snap at
your family and torture yourself. Suicidal thoughts enter the theater of your
imagination. You do not know what to think or what to do: you are the victim of
an internal war of emotion.

Your encounter with the terrible unknown has shaken the foundations of your
worldview. You have been exposed, involuntarily, to the unexpected and
revolutionary. Chaos has eaten your soul. This means that your long-term goals
have to be reconstructed, and the motivational significance of events in your
current environment reevaluated—literally revalued. This capacity for complete
revaluation, in the light of new information, is even more particularly human
than the aforementioned capability for exploration of the unknown and
generation of new information. Sometimes, in the course of our actions, we
elicit phenomena

Figure 4: Revolutionary Adaptation





whose very existence is impossible, according to our standard methods of
construal (which are at base a mode of attributing motivational significance to
events). Exploration of these new phenomena, and integration of our findings
into our knowledge, occasionally means reconceptualization ofthat knowledge43
(and consequent re-exposure to the unknown, no longer inhibited by our mode of
classification).44 This means that simple movement from present to future is
occasionally interrupted by a complete breakdown and reformulation, a
reconstitution of what the present is and what the future should be. The ascent
of the individual, so to speak, is punctuated by periods of dissolution and
rebirth.45 The more general model of human adaptation—conceptualized most
simply as steady state, breach, crisis, redress46—therefore ends up looking
like Figure 4: Revolutionary Adaptation. The processes of revolutionary
adaptation, enacted and represented, underlie diverse cultural phenomena
ranging from the rites of “primitive” initiation47 to the conceptions of
sophisticated religious systems.48 Indeed, our very cultures are erected upon
the foundation of a single great story: paradise, encounter with chaos, fall
and redemption.

A month after you were fired, a new idea finds its way into your head. Although
you never let yourself admit it, you didn't really like your job. You only took
it because you felt that it was expected of you. You never put your full effort
into it, because you really wanted to do something else—something other people
thought was risky or foolish. You made a bad decision, a long time ago. Maybe
you needed this blow, to put you back on the path. You start imagining a new
future—one where you are not so “secure,” maybe, but where you are doing what
you actually want to do. The possibility of undisturbed sleep returns, and you
start eating properly again. You are quieter, less arrogant, more
accepting—except in your weaker moments. Others make remarks, some admiring,
some envious, about the change they perceive in you. You are a man recovering
from a long illness—a man reborn.

