# 4 - The Strange
[Metadata]: # {05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {05.04}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
The Strange
# The Strange
Transformation of “environmental” circumstances, as the consequence of purely
natural causes, constitutes the single most immediately evident cause for the
deterioration of cultural stability. Prolonged drought, floods, earthquakes,
plagues—nature's most horrifying and arbitrary occurrences—are capable of
rendering the most carefully adapted societies impotent at a single blow.

Natural disasters of this sort might merely be considered rapid transformation—
situations where previously noted affectively relevant environmental
relationships alter faster than adaptive movement keeps pace. This means that
the insufficiency of cultural adaptation cannot easily be distinguished from
natural catastrophe. A society light on its feet, so to speak, is constantly in
a position to adapt to the unexpected—even the catastrophic—and to transform
such change into something beneficial (consider, for example, the postwar
Japanese). The relationship “natural disaster/cultural adaptation” therefore
constitutes the social analogue to that obtaining between “emotion” and
“cognition”: affect generated, in large part, as a consequence of novelty,
always emerges where something is not known (and is therefore always dependent
on what is known); is always experienced in relationship to some
conceptualization of the present, the future and the means to get from one to
the other. What constitutes “novelty,” then, is dependent on what is not novel
in a particular circumstance. What constitutes “trauma” depends, likewise, on
the behavioral repertoire and value schema available for use at the time of a
given event or transformation. A blizzard that would incapacitate Washington
for a month barely makes the residents of Montreal blink.

Mythic representations of the rapid mutation of environmental contingency
(portrayed as the reappearance of the Great Mother or the Dragon of Chaos) are
in consequence necessarily “contaminated” with images of the sterile, senescent
or tyrannical king, whose inflexibility renders all inevitable environmental
transformation deadly. When is a disaster not a disaster? When the community is
prepared to respond appropriately. Conversely, any minor change in the natural
world might be regarded as terminal, catastrophic—and actually be so—when the
adaptive structure designed to fit that world has become so authoritarian that
any change whatsoever is reflexively deemed forbidden, heretical.383 A society
with this attitude—such as the former Soviet Union—is an accident waiting to
happen. An interesting example of the consequences of such inflexibility, on
the personal scale, is offered by Kuhn:

In a psychological experiment that deserves to be far better known outside the
trade, Bruner and Postman384 asked experimental subjects to identify on short
and controlled exposure a series of playing cards. Many of the cards were
normal, but some were made anomalous, e.g., a red six of spades and a black
four of hearts. Each experimental run was constituted by the display of a
single card to a single subject in a series of gradually increased exposures.
After each exposure the subject was asked what he had seen, and the run was
terminated by two successive correct identifications.

Even on the shortest exposures many subjects identified most of the cards, and
after a small increase all the subjects identified them all. For the normal
cards these identifications were usually correct, but the anomalous cards were
almost always identified, without apparent hesitation or puzzlement, as normal.
The black four of hearts might, for example, be identified as the four of
either spades or hearts. Without any awareness of trouble, it was immediately
fitted to one of the conceptual categories prepared by prior experience. One
would not even like to say that the subjects had seen something different from
what they identified. With a further increase of exposure to the anomalous
cards, subjects did begin to hesitate and to display awareness of anomaly.
Exposed, for example, to the red six of spades, some would say: “That's the six
of spades, but there's something wrong with it—the black has a red border.”
Further increase of exposure resulted in still more hesitation and confusion
until finally, and sometimes quite suddenly, most subjects would produce the
correct identification without hesitation. Moreover, after doing this with two
or three of the anomalous cards, they would have little further difficulty with
the others. A few subjects, however, were never able to make the requisite
adjustment of their categories. Even at forty times the average exposure
required to recognize normal cards for what they were, more than 10 per cent of
the anomalous cards were not correctly identified. And the subjects who then
failed often experienced acute personal distress. One of them exclaimed: “I
can't make the suit out, whatever it is. It didn't even look like a card that
time. I don't know what color it is now or whether it's a spade or a heart. I'm
not even sure now what a spade looks like. My God!”385



Myth and literature constantly represent the “parched kingdom,” the society
victimized (most frequently) by drought—which is the absence of water,
concretely, and the “water of life” or spirit, symbolically—brought on by the
over-prolonged dominance of the (once great) ruling idea. This idea, in the
narrative (and frequently, in actuality), is the king, the ancestral spirit,
representative of his people, made tyrannical by age, pride, or unbearable
disappointment, withering under the influence of some willfully misunderstood
malevolent advising force. The development of such an unpleasant and dangerous
situations calls, of course, for the entrance of the hero: the “lost son” of
the true king, raised in secrecy by alternative parents; the rightful ruler of
the kingdom, whose authority was undermined or who was supposedly killed during
vulnerable youth; the proper heir to the throne, who had been journeying in
far-off lands and was presumed dead. The hero overturns the tyrant and regains
his proper place; the gods, pleased by the re-establishment of proper order,
allow the rain once more to fall (or stop it from falling in dangerous excess).
In a story of this type, the creative aspect of the unknown (nature) is “locked
away,” metaphorically, by the totalitarian opinion of the current culture. Such
a state of affairs might be represented, for example, by the sleeping princess,
in the kingdom brought to a standstill (or by some alternative variant of the
existence of the “treasure hard to attain”386). Paralyzed by patriarchal
despotism387 (or, frequently, by fear of the Terrible Mother), the kingdom
remains stagnant, while the princess—nature, in her benevolent guise—waits for
the kiss of the hero to wake. Her awakened and revitalized beauty subsequently
reanimates her people.

Rituals of the death and renewal of the king act out this transformation of
cultural adaptation long before the concept of rebirth can be rendered
abstractly comprehensible. Frye states:

The hypothetical ritual studied in Frazer's Golden Bough may be vulnerable
enough in various anthropological contexts, but as a mythical structure it is
as solid as the pyramids. Here a king regarded as divine is put to death at the
height of his powers, for fear that his physical weakening will bring a
corresponding impotence to the fertility of the land he rules…. When
sacrificed, the divine king is immediately replaced by a successor, and his
body is then eaten and his blood drunk in a ritual ceremony. We have to make a
rather violent effort of visualization to see that there are now two bodies of
the divine king, one incarnate in the successor, the other concealed in the
bellies of his worshippers. The latter causes the society to become, through
eating and drinking the same person, integrated into a single body, which is
both their own and his.388



The extensive and universal corpus of dying-and-resurrecting-god myths389
(acted in sacrificial ritual) dramatize two notions. The first is that the
actual ideas/patterns of behavior governing adaptation must die and be reborn
to ensure constant update of the techniques of survival. The second, more
fundamental, is that the hero—the active agent of adaptation—must eternally
upset the protective structure of tradition and enter into “sacrificial union”
with the re-emergent unknown. Cosmological phenomena themselves “act out” (are
utilized as descriptive tools for, more accurately) this eternal drama: the sun
(god), born in the east, “dies” in the west, and passes into the underworld of
night (into the lair of the dragon of chaos). Nightly, the sun hero battles the
terrible forces of chaos, cuts himself out of the belly of the beast and is
reborn triumphant in the morning.

The master of the strange in its “natural form” is the hero in his
technological guise (more particularly, say, than in his role as social
revolutionary). Marduk, who faced Tiamat in single combat, is a very focused
representative of man's “mastery” over nature. The pattern of action signified
by this god—that is, courageous and creative approach in the face of
uncertainty—was regarded “unconsciously” by the Mesopotamians as necessary, as
stated previously, to the “creation of ingenious things” from the “conflict
with Tiamat.”390 The hero fashions defenses out of nature to use against
nature. This idea, which underlies man's cultural adaptation, manifests itself
“naturally” in the human psyche:

Spontaneous fantasy manifested August 10, 1997, by my daughter, Mikhaila (age
five years, eight months) while playing “prince and princess” with Julian (her
three-year-old brother): Dad, if we killed a dragon, we could use his skin as
armor, couldn 't we? Wouldn 't that be a good idea?



The hero uses the positive aspect of the Great Mother as protection from her
negative counterpart. In this manner, the “natural disaster” is kept at bay or,
better yet, transformed from a crisis into an opportunity.

