# 2 - The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored Territory
[Metadata]: # {03.14}
[Descriptor]: # {03.14}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored Territory
# The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored Territory
All particular adaptive behaviors (and interpretive schemas—schemas of value)
are generated over the course of time by the eternal pattern of behavior
described in mythic language as characteristic of the archetypal hero, the sun
god. These behaviors and schemas accumulate over the centuries (as a
consequence of imitation and other forms of memory communication), but do not
necessarily agree, are not necessarily commensurate. Our hard-won adaptive
methods struggle for predominance, often violently, within a given individual,
between individuals within societies, and between societies. The problem of
organization therefore arises. How do you arrange your possibilities, once you
have originated them or copied them from someone else? How is it possible to
make sense of the historical accretion of knowledge and wisdom? After all,
multiple opportunities for behavioral output exist, in any given situation;
furthermore, the possibility of interpretation makes even the “situation”
mutable. How can competing possibilities—the multiplicity of potential
choices—be amalgamated into some sort of unity; the kind of unity that makes
mutual coexistence (and mutually beneficial coexistence) possible? How, in
brief, is it possible to construct and maintain a society?

Procedural knowledge, generated in the course of heroic behavior, is not
organized and integrated within the group and the individual as a consequence
of simple accumulation. Procedure “a,” appropriate in situation one, and
procedure “b,” appropriate in situation two, may clash in mutual violent
opposition in situation three. Under such conditions intrapsychic or
interpersonal conflict necessarily emerges. When such antagonism arises, moral
revaluation becomes necessary. As a consequence of such revaluation, behavioral
options are brutally rank-ordered, or, less frequently, entire moral systems
are devastated, reorganized and replaced. This organization and reorganization
occurs as a consequence of “war,” in its concrete, abstract, intrapsychic and
interpersonal variants. In the most basic case, an individual is rendered
subject to an intolerable conflict, as a consequence of the perceived
(affective) incompatibility of two or more apprehended outcomes of a given
behavioral procedure. In the purely intrapsychic sphere, such conflict often
emerges when attainment of what is desired presently necessarily interferes
with attainment of what is desired (or avoidance of what is feared) in the
future. Permanent satisfactory resolution of such conflict (between temptation
and “moral purity,” for example) requires the construction of an abstract moral
system, powerful enough to allow what an occurrence signifies for the future to
govern reaction to what it signifies now. Even that construction, however, is
necessarily incomplete when considered only as an “intrapsychic” phenomena. The
individual, once capable of coherently integrating competing motivational
demands in the private sphere, nonetheless remains destined for conflict with
the other, in the course of the inevitable transformations of personal
experience. This means that the person who has come to terms with him- or
herself—at least in principle—is still subject to the affective dysregulation
inevitably produced by interpersonal interaction. It is also the case that such
subjugation is actually indicative of insufficient “intrapsychic” organization,
as many basic “needs” can only be satisfied through the cooperation of others.

The problems posed by the “future self,” whose still-potential existence has to
be taken into account and used to govern action in the present, are very
similar to those posed by the existence of others, whose affective responses
are equally hypothetical (as they cannot be experienced directly, but only
inferred). The properly socialized individual has been trained to grant this
“abstract other” (future self and other person) ontological status equivalent
to the experienced self, however—has been trained to use the existence ofthat
other as a guide to “proper action and interpretation” in the present. This
means that for the social being all individual actions come to be evaluated
with regard to their likely current and future consequences, for the self and
for the others likely affected. Such evaluation may take place directly—that
is, as a matter of “conscious deliberation”; alternatively, the well-socialized
individual may act “as if” he or she thought the matter through, by remaining
in well-trodden moral pathways (which have been established under the
cumulative historical pressure produced by the necessity of maintaining
intrapsychic and social order). The more implicit information extant in the
latter case is “placed there” as a consequence of the exchange of emotional
information, attendant upon given action patterns, in the potential absence of
explicit rationale: someone is informed by subtle scornful gesture, for
example, that a given (theoretically pleasurable and even evidently harmless)
behavior is “just not done,” which means that it is regarded by custom as
harmful, to the self and others, in some manner not easily observed but still
important. It is such arbitrary rules that constitute the implicit information
coded in societal structure—information not necessarily placed there by
rational means, not necessarily “comprehended” in any declarative sense; but
information that is nonetheless transmissible and representable as a
consequence of extended-term pattern recognition and analysis.

The “stories” by which individuals live (which comprise their schemas of
interpretation, which guide their actions, which regulate their emotions) are
therefore emergent structures shaped by the necessity of organizing competing
internal biological demands, over variable spans of time, in the presence of
others, faced with the same fate. This similarity of demand (constrained by
physiological structure) and context (constrained by social reality) produces
similarity of response. It is this similarity of response, in turn, that is at
the base of the emergent “shared moral viewpoint” that accounts for
cross-cultural similarity in myth. This means, by the way, that such “shared
viewpoints” refer to something real, at least insofar as emergent properties
are granted reality (and most of the things that we regard without question as
real are precisely such emergent properties).

The reactions of a hypothetical firstborn child to his or her newborn sibling
may serve as concrete illustration of the interactions between the individual,
the interpersonal and the social. The elder sibling may be drawn positively to
the newborn by natural affiliative tendencies and curiosity. At the same time,
however, the new arrival may be receiving a substantial amount of parental
attention, sometimes in preference to the older child. This shift of parental
care often produces frustration, manifested in aggressive behavior, on the part
of the supplanted sibling. The older child will therefore become conflicted,
internally, in consequence of his affection for the new family member,
curiosity about its nature, and irritation at the creature's existence, demands
and influence on the (once) predictable interactions of the familial social
unit. The protective attitude of the parents, who restrict aggression on the
part of the elder child, further complicates things—draws the additional
requirements of the social unit into the already difficult situation.

How is the child to resolve his conflicts? He must build himself a personality
to deal with his new sibling (must become a proper big brother). This means
that he might subordinate his aggression to the fear, guilt and shame produced
by parental adjudication on behalf of the baby. This will mean that he will at
least “act like a human being” around the baby, in the direct presence of his
parents. He might also learn to act as if the aggressive reaction motivated by
his shift in status is less desirable, in total, than the affiliative response.
His as if stance may easily be bolstered by intelligent shift in
interpretation: he may reasonably gain from his younger sibling some of the
attention he is no longer paid by parents—if he is diligent and genuine in his
attempts to be friendly. He might also develop some more independent interests,
suitable to his new position as relatively mature family member. In the former,
simplest case (when he subordinates his aggression to fear), the child
rank-orders his motivational states, as manifested in behavior. In the latter,
revolutionary situation, the child restructures the implicit presumptions that
originally gave rise to the conflict. Either way, the situation is resolved
(restoried) in the course of what might reasonably be described as an internal
war— accompanied, inevitably, by intense outbursts of pain, fear and rage. The
personality that emerges as a consequence of such a war is, at least in the
revolutionary case, something “more like the hero” than the personality that
existed prior to the change in environmental circumstances.

The situation of marriage provides an additional illustrative example, relevant
to the adult situation. In marriage, the desire for individual self-expression
is necessarily limited by the desire for maintenance of the intimate
interpersonal relationship, and for adoption of the “respectable” social role
that constitutes such maintenance. The male, bachelor no more, may attempt to
carry on his premarital mode of activity, more purely dependent on personal
desire and whim, limited by whatever minimal necessary social obligations he
may have acquired previously. Soon he will discover, if he has taken an
appropriately assertive partner, that his (heretofore individualistic) wishes
and desires produce conflict in his married life, manifested in interpersonal
strife and consequent emotional dysregulation.

The clashes that commonly accompany establishment of a permanent affiliative
relationship arise as a result of the incompatibility of (implicit and
explicit) individual moral presumptions and propositions, in the interpersonal
sphere (arise as a result of an interpersonal “war of implicit gods”). Such
clashes may be resolved in a variety of manners. One partner may, through
judicious application of physical or psychological punishment, render the other
impotent, so to speak, and subordinate—permanently frustrated, miserable,
anxious and hostile. The marriage may thus lose much of its value or may
dissolve altogether. This does not constitute a “solution”—merely regression,
in the face of emergent anomaly, to the preexistent “single personality.”
Alternatively, each partner may determine to take “the other” into serious
consideration, and rearrange personal behavior (and emergent value)
accordingly. This process will not occur without capacity to engage in open
conflict (to exchange often distressing information, realistically speaking) or
without the courage to voluntarily submit to the experience of negative emotion
[including anxiety, guilt and shame, as previously “unconscious” (implicit)
faults and insufficiencies come to light]. The mythic subjugation of the
partners in a marriage to the higher authority of Christ, the culture hero,
ritually represented in the Christian marriage ceremony, constitutes symbolic
aid to this process.334

Voluntary subordination of the personal wishes of both individuals to the
higher moral order embodied in the action patterns of the Christian savior, for
example, means implicit agreement about the nature of transcendent principles
that can be referred to when mediation between incompatible desires and
presuppositions becomes necessary. This means that the “personality”
constituted by the “mystical union” of both partners in the marriage is
supposed to approximate Christ—to stand as an entity superordinate to the “less
complete” individuals who compose the “married couple.” This process of
voluntary subordination “to a higher deity” parallels the extended
transpersonal historical process described in the Enuma elish, with regard to
the ascendance of Marduk. Through conflict (and cooperation), within the
“container” of the marriage, new moralities are created—new patterns of
behavior (and assumption and expectation) manifested and internally
represented. This process may be guided to a healthy outcome through mutual
participation in community-sponsored religious ritual. Alternatively,
individuals may succeed, or fail, in isolation.

Motivational states compete for predominance in the present, in the purely
subjective and interpersonal spheres, and also compete across time. What is
fear-provoking now may be tolerated because it means less punishment (or less
fear, or more pleasure, or more hope) in the future, insofar as intelligence or
custom can make that judgment; similarly, the social group and the additional
pressure it produces is tolerated because the group constitutes the most
effective currently imaginable solution to the problem of adaptation. This
group, the current embodiment of human custom, is the consequence of a battle
between various ways of being fought across generations.

Although the “battle for predominance” that characterizes exchange of morally
relevant information can easily be imagined as a war (and is often fought out
in the guise of genuine war), it is more frequently the case that it manifests
itself as a struggle between “beliefs.” In the latter case, it loss of faith,
rather than life, that determines the outcome of the battle. Human beings can
substitute loss of faith for death partly because they are capable of
abstractly constructing their “territories” (making beliefs out of them) and of
abstractly abandoning those territories once they are no longer tenable.
Animals, less capable of abstraction, are also able to lose face, rather than
life, although they “act out” this loss, in behavioral routines, rather than in
verbal or imagistic battles (rather than through argument). It is the capacity
to “symbolically capitulate” and to “symbolically destroy” that in large part
underlies the ability of individual animals to organize themselves into social
groups (which require a hierarchical organization) and to maintain and update
those groups once established. Much the same can be said for human beings (who
also engage in abstract war, at the procedural level, as well as in real war
and argumentation).

Strong ideas produce profound displays of faith, or, alternatively put:
unshakeable displays of faith are indicative of the strength of an idea. The
strength of an integrative idea, or its preabstract procedural equivalent,
might be considered reasonably measured by its capacity to inhibit competing
impulses—especially those motivated by fear. Dominance displays in groups of
primates and other complex higher-order social animals provide a useful example
of this. Most dominance disputes are settled before escalation into physical
aggression. It is the animal most capable of holding its ground in the face of
challenge—despite threat, regardless of fear—that is the likely victor in the
case of such a dispute. The capacity to maintain territorial position when
challenged is therefore indicative of the degree to which intrapsychic state is
integrated with regard to current motivation (which means, indicative of how
“convinced” a given animal is that it can [should] hold its ground). This
integration constitutes power—charisma, in the human realm—made most evident in
behavioral display. The certainty with which a position is held (whether it is
a territorial position, dominance hierarchy niche, or abstract notion)— insofar
as this can be inferred from observable behavior, such as absence of fear—
constitutes a valid indication of the potential integrative potency of that
position; constitutes an indication of how much the creature who is holding the
position believes in the rightness (justice, goodness) of his or her stance.
The integrative strength of beliefs of this type can be determined, accurately,
through challenge (since the capacity to withstand challenge is dependent upon
that strength). This means that the ability of those who hold an idea to
withstand challenge without wavering constitutes one [nonempirical (?)]
affective criterion for determination of the truth of that idea—or at least of
its intrapsychic utility. Hence the power of the martyr, and the unwillingness
of even modern totalitarian to allow their enemies to make public sacrifices of
themselves.

Rank-ordering of behavior in terms of comparative utility is (procedural,
episodic or semantic) judgment rendered upon value. Such judgment constitutes a
decision about the “nature of good and evil,” from the mythic or narrative
viewpoint. Such determinations of value are decisions whose function is
organization of future-oriented present individual behavior, manifested in the
(inevitably) social context, in accordance with the wisdom of past experience.
The content of mythically transmitted behavioral schemas and their
value-predicated arrangements generally remains implicit, outside the domain of
descriptive comprehensibility, because of their exceedingly complex structure,
which evolved through the action of primarily nondeclarative evolutionary
processes. The emotional upheaval caused by simultaneous application of
noncommensurate behavioral or interpretive strategies provides the impetus for
the organization of those strategies. Such organization emerges as a result of
the “struggle for dominion,” intrapsychically or interpersonally—emerges in
consequence of a quasi-Darwinian struggle for survival.

Over the course of centuries, the actions of ancestral heroes, imitated
directly and then represented in myth, become transformed, simplified,
streamlined and quickened— reduced as it were ever more precisely to their
“Platonic” forms. Culture is therefore the sum total of surviving historically
determined hierarchically arranged behaviors and second- and third-order
abstract representations, and more: it is the integration of these, in the
course of endless social and intrapsychic conflict, into a single pattern of
behavior—a single system of morality, simultaneously governing personal
conduct, interpersonal interaction and imagistic/semantic description of such.
This pattern is the “corporeal ideal” of the culture, its mode of transforming
the unbearable present into the desired future, its guiding force, its central
personality. This personality, expressed in behavior, is first embodied in the
king or emperor, socially (where it forms the basis for “sovereignty”).
Abstractly represented—imitated, played, ritualized, and storied—it becomes
something ever more psychological. This embodied and represented “cultural
character” is transmitted through the generations, transmuting in form, but not
in essence—transmitted by direct instruction, through imitation, and as a
consequence of the human ability to incorporate personality features
temporarily disembodied in narrative.

The “integrative conflict” of complex ideas, giving rise to the “central
character of culture,” appears as a process extending over untold centuries.
This process represents itself, in mythology, as the “battle of the gods in
heaven,” which Eliade has described as the “conflict between divine
generations.”335 Eliade discusses Hittite/Hurrian and Canaanite mythology
(circa 1740–1200 B.C.) and its relationship to similar myths in ancient
Phoenicia and elsewhere. In the Hittite theogony, the relative sovereignty of
the gods was determined by war between them:

The initial episode, “Kingship in Heaven,” explains the succession of the first
gods. In the beginning, Alalu was king, and Anu, the most important of the
gods, bowed before him and served him. But after nine years Anu attacked and
vanquished him. Then Alalu took refuge in the subterranean world, and Kumarbi
became the new sovereign's servant. Nine years passed, and Kumarbi in his turn
attacked Anu. The latter fled, flying into the sky, but Kumarbi pursued him,
caught him by the feet, and threw him to the ground, after biting his “loins.”
Since he was laughing and rejoicing over his exploit, Anu told him that he had
been impregnated. Kumarbi spat out what was still in his mouth, but a part of
Anu's virility entered his body, and he became big with three gods. The rest of
the text is badly mutilated, but it is presumed that Anu's “children,” with
Teshub, the storm god leading them, make war on Kumarbi and dethrone him.336



Eliade continues, drawing upon Philo of Byblos' archaic Phoenician History:

The first sovereign [Phoenician] god was Elioun (in Greek, Hypistos, “The Most
High”), corresponding in the Hurrian/Hittite mythology to Alalu. From his union
with Bruth there came into the world Uranus (corresponding to Anu) and Ge
(Gaea). In their turn, these two engendered four sons, the first of whom, El
(or Kronos), corresponds to Kumarbi. As the result of a quarrel with his wife,
Uranus tries to destroy his progeny, but El forges a saw (or lance?) for
himself, drives out his father, and becomes the sovereign. Finally, Baal
(representing the fourth generation and corresponding to Teshub and Zeus)
obtains the sovereignty; exceptionally, he obtains it without combat.

It is important to emphasize at once the “specialized” and at the same time
syncretistic character of this myth, and not only in its Hurrian/Hittite
version (in which, besides, there are a number of Sumero-Akkadian elements).
The Enuma elish337 likewise presents (1) a series of divine generations, (2)
the battle of the young gods against the old gods, and (3) the victory of
Marduk, who thus assumes the sovereignty.

To sum up: all the myths that recount the conflicts between successive
generations of gods for the conquest of universal sovereignty justify, on the
one hand, the exalted position of the last conquering god and, on the other
hand, explain the present structure of the world and the actual condition of
humanity.338



The “gods” are transpersonal forces, “instinctive” and socially modified,
comprising universal elements of human experience. The organization of these
gods, as a consequence of combat, is an abstracted and poetic description of
the manner in which emergent behavioral patterns and interpretive schemas—moral
positions, so to speak— fight for predominance, and therefore organize
themselves, over the course of time.

The manner in which a given society has come to organize its behavioral
hierarchies is implicit in its mode of attributing to, or perceiving value in,
“objects” (which is to say, implicit in its mode of restricting the meaning
manifested by objects to an acceptable range and magnitude). The brutally
organized consequence of “the battle of the gods” constitutes the tradition
that structures the intrapsychic hierarchy of values, regulates interpersonal
interaction, and keeps individual emotion in check (as the consequences of
individual and social behavior, when guided by tradition, remain predictable).
A given behavior, manifested in the absence of another being, does not
necessarily produce the same outcome when it plays itself out in the presence
of others. Two children and one toy is not the same situation as one child and
one toy (because, in a sense, the toy is not the same—not from the
phenomenological perspective). The behavioral tendencies of individuals undergo
constant modification in the social situation, because the fact of the society
in the situation changes the motivational relevance of all the objects in the
situation. Two children with one toy have to come to an agreement, which is
mutual modification of behavior, before the toy can be what it is when
encountered alone— which is fun, rather than trouble.

The behavioral tendencies of individuals are mimicked action patterns which
were originally established as a consequence of heroic behavior. The mutual
interplay of action pat-terns in the social world, however, results in their
inevitable modification. Patterns of behavior—those motivated by aggression,
for example, or love or fear—have a transpersonal basis, which accounts, in
part, for their personification as gods (or, for their existence as gods, from
a more liberal interpretive perspective). It is the constant clash of these
gods that allows for their mutual coexistence and their social organization. A
number of “gods” might operate simultaneously in the domain of a disputed toy,
for example (in the unknown territory brought about by the fact of something
desirable but singular in a social environment). The “god of war” (Ares, say,
for the sake of argument) might emerge “within” one child, or both—in which
case a fight will ensue. The winner, assuming there is one, may then be more
likely to be warlike, in the future, in a social situation characterized by
ambiguity. The loser might have other thoughts [may come, for example, to be
dominated by Pan(ic) when faced with emergent toy-conflict with a stranger (may
come to cry and withdraw)]. Alternatively, in the optimistic case, one or both
children may negotiate a fair settlement, so both are satisfied, and neither
hurt. The “negotiation” of a “fair settlement” presupposes that each child
treats the other as an “object of value”—that is, as one who must be taken into
account in the course of behavioral decisions. This taking into account of
others is recognition of their implicit worth—their “basic human rights”—as
(mythologically equivalent) community members. Such recognition, acted out
before it is understood, provides the basis for the organization of societies,
on a foundation other than that of force. Despite the lack of explicit
understanding, however, the fact of negotiation is indicative of identity with
the hero (the eternal “means to peace”) as the hero is divine peacemaker, in
one of his many guises. The emergence of negotiation, during time of dispute,
is therefore both “spontaneous incarnation of the savior,” and source of
information for the derivation of stories about the nature of the hero (which
are useful for future reference).

In the case of children engaged in a dispute over toys: a parent who allows the
stronger child preferential access to the desired object is making the moral
claim that the thing—and the aggressive desire for the thing, which may well be
conflated with the thing—is something of higher value than the emotional state
or physical well-being of the defeatable other. Alternatively, the parent may
require the children to mediate between their competing demands without
reverting to “might makes right,” and to construct for themselves a hierarchy
of value governing behavior in the chaotic situation defined by the mutually
desirable but singular toy. It is the sum total of such interactions, conducted
in once unexplored territory, hierarchically organized, that come to compose
culture.

In the case of broader society: the “meaning” of an object—that is, the
significance of that object for emotional regulation and behavioral output—is
determined by the social consequences of behaviors undertaken and inferences
drawn in its presence. Thus internal motivational forces vie for predominance
under the influence of social control. The valence of erotic advances made by a
given woman, for example—which is to say, whether her behavior invokes the
“goddess of love” or the “god of fear”—will depend on her current position in a
given social hierarchy. If she is single and acting in context, she may be
considered desirable; if she is the intoxicated wife of a large and dangerous
man, by contrast, she may be placed in the category of “something best run away
from quickly.”

When exploration culminates in punishment, to take another example, the
exploratory tendency matched to that situation will come under the inhibitory
control of fear. When this subordination occurs as a consequence of the
investigation of a natural object, the interpretation would be that something
has been learned about the nature of the world (about that part of it which is
dangerous, at any rate). The process is extended complexly in the social
sphere. A motivated pattern of action (even the motivated state itself) may
come under the inhibitory control of fear, because its behavioral expression
within the social community results in social rejection (or other
interpersonally mediated punishment). Thus it could be said that the structure
of the internal motivational state reflects the consequences of behavior
undertaken in the nature and social worlds—or, more particularly, that there is
an isomorphic relationship between the state of the internal representation of
motivational states and the external, social world. It is for this reason that
a political state and a psychological state can be in some sense regarded as
identical (and why individuals come so easily to identify with their social
groupings).

The culturally determined meaning of an object—apprehended, originally, as an
aspect of the object—is in fact in large part implicit information about the
nature of the current dominance hierarchy, which has been partially transformed
into an abstract hypothesis about the relative value of things (including the
self and others). Who owns what, for example, determines what things signify,
and who owns what is dominance-hierarchy dependent. What an object signifies is
determined by the value placed upon it, manifested in terms of the (socially
determined) system of promises, rewards, threats and punishments associated
with exposure to, contact with, and use or misuse ofthat object. This is in
turn determined by the affective significance of the object (its relevance, or
lack thereof, to the attainment of a particular goal), in combination with its
scarcity or prevalence, and the power (or lack thereof) of those who judge its
nature. In keeping with this observation, the existentialist psychotherapist
Ludwig Binswanger states:

All “metamorphoses of the egoistic in social instincts” and thus, properly
said, all metamorphoses of evil into good drives and dispositions, occur,
according to Freud, under compulsion. “Originally, i.e., in human history [such
transformations occurred] only under external compulsion, but they [occurred]
through the bringing into the world of hereditary dispositions for such
transformations and also through their perpetuation and reinforcement ‘during
the life of the individual himself.’” Indeed, this whole “development” takes
the direction in which external compulsion is introjected, and which, in the
case of the human Super-ego, is completely absorbed. This transformation
occurs, as we know, “by the admixture of erotic components”: “we learn to value
being loved as an advantage by virtue of which we may do without other
advantages.” Culture is thus “attained through the renunciation of instinctual
gratifications and furthered by every new development which serves the purposes
of renunciation.”

In all this, we stand before the pure specimen of homo natura: bodily instinct,
the gaining of pleasure (sacrificing a lesser for a greater gain), inhibition
because of compulsion or pressures from society (the prototype being the
family), a developmental history in the sense of ontogenetic and phylogenetic
transformations of outer into inner compulsions, and the inheritance of these
transformations.339



Whether a particular behavioral strategy (planned or exploratory) produces a
positive or negative outcome in a particular situation depends, for social
animals, on the nature of the social environment in which it is manifested. Any
given “object” capable of eliciting behavior is necessarily part of a social
context, among social animals; that social context plays an important role in
determining the value of the object. It is social determination of value that
helps make an object neutral, dangerous, promising or satisfying—in large part,
independently of the “objective” properties of the item in question. The
socially determined affective significance of the object is “naturally”
experienced as an aspect of the object—which is to say that the charisma
radiating from an Elvis Presley guitar is “part” of the guitar. This means that
the meaning of objects in a social context is actually information about the
structure ofthat social context [as well as “part” of the object (its “magic”)
from the mythological or narrative perspective].

Identification of the context-dependent meaning of objects in the social
environment, which is determination of the behavioral patterns whose
manifestation is appropriate in that situation, means encounter with cultural
structure designed to bring predictability to the ongoing flow of events.
Participation in the processes and representations comprising that structure
(that is, adoption of social identity) means heightened capacity to predict
behavior of self and other—and, therefore, capacity to regulate emotion through
the ebb and flow of life. Much potential unpredictability remains “constrained”
by the shared identity constituting culture. This social identity, which is a
story about how things are and how they should be—“things” including the self
and the other—provides the framework that constrains the otherwise unbearable a
priori motivational significance of the ultimately unknowable experiential
object. The unknown surrounds the individual, like the ocean surrounds an
island, and produces affect, compels behavior, whenever it shows its terrible
but promising face. Culture is constructed in spite of (in cooperation with, in
deference to) this omnipresent force, and serves as a barrier, quelling
emotion, providing protection against exposure to the unbearable face of God.

It is the conservative aspect of society that ensures that the past, as
presently reincarnated and remembered, continues to serve as ultimate source of
moral virtue and emotional protection. This remembered past is the mythical
Father, echoed more abstractly in one “person” of the Christian Trinity. The
power of the past is given due recognition in the ritual of ancestor worship,
for example, which is motivated by desire to remain “in communication” with the
dead (to retain the wisdom, protective power and guiding hand of the dead).
Such motivation comprised a force sufficient to give impetus to the
construction of megaliths—massive stone “testaments to the past”—in a
geographical zone stretching from western and northern Europe, through the
Middle East, into Tibet and Korea, from 4000 B.C. to the present day.340 The
megaliths, like the modern necropolises or cemeteries, are sites of the dead,
monuments and aid to memory and the continuity of culture. Eliade states:

Megaliths have a relation to certain ideas concerning existence after death.
The majority of them are built in the course of ceremonies intended to defend
the soul during its journey into the beyond; but they also insure an internal
postexistence, both to those who raise them during their own lifetime and to
those for whom they are built after death. In addition, megaliths constitute
the unrivaled connection between the living and the dead; they are believed to
perpetuate the magical virtues of those who constructed them or for whom they
were constructed, thus insuring the fertility of men, cattle, and harvests.341



also

By virtue of the megalithic constructions, the dead enjoy an exceptional power;
however, since communication with the ancestors is ritually assured, this power
can be shared by the living…. What characterizes the megalithic religions is
the fact that the ideas of perenniality and of continuity between life and
death are apprehended through the exaltation of the ancestors as identified, or
associated, with the stones.342



What is cast in stone, so to speak, is remembered, and what is remembered (in
the absence of permanent literate means of communication) is the value of
culture, the significance of the discoveries of all those whose exisence
preceded the present time. The past, made metaphorically present in the form of
stone, is the mythical ancestor-hero—is Osiris, the founder of the community.
In traditional communities, awe-inspired imitation of the actions ofthat
primary personage, modified by time and abstracted representation, retains
primary and potent force (even in revolutionary cultures such as our own). The
action of the preexperimental man consists of ritual duplication and
simultaneous observation of taboo—action bounded by custom. When such a man
endeavors to produce a particular end, he follows an exemplary pattern. This
pattern was established by his ancestral progenitors in a time subsuming all
time, and in a “divine” (actually, communitarian-intrapsychic) space. His
tradition, after all, is not merely the force of the past—it is that force, as
it is exists and is represented in the present. What is remembered takes on
representation as a pattern—as that pattern of behavior characteristic of the
culture-creating “supernatural beings” who lived prior to living recollection.
This pattern is traditional behavior, as established and organized by those who
were capable of originating adaptation—or, it could be said, as established and
organized by the immortal and central human spirit who constantly battles the
fear of death and creates the conditions that promote life:

For the man of traditional societies everything significant—that is, everything
creative and powerful—that has ever happened took place in the beginning, in
the Time of myths.

In one sense it could almost be said that for the man of archaic societies
history is “closed”; that it exhausted itself in the few stupendous events of
the beginning. By revealing the different modes of deep-sea fishing to the
Polynesians at the beginning of Time, the mythical Hero exhausted all the
possible forms of that activity at a single stroke; since then, whenever they
go fishing, the Polynesians repeat the exemplary gesture of the mythical Hero,
that is, they imitate a transhuman model.

But, properly considered, this history preserved in the myths is closed only in
appearance. If the man of primitive societies had contented himself with
forever imitating the few exemplary gestures revealed by the myths, there would
be no explaining the countless innovations he has accepted during the course of
Time. No such thing as an absolutely closed primitive society exists. We know
of none that has not borrowed some cultural elements from outside; none that,
as the result of these borrowings, has not changed at least some aspects of its
institutions; none that, in short, has had no history. But, in contrast to
modern society, primitive societies have accepted all innovations as so many
“revelations,” hence as having a superhuman origin. The objects or weapons that
were borrowed, the behavior patterns and institutions that were imitated, the
myths or beliefs that were assimilated, were believed to be charged with
magico-religious power; indeed, it was for this reason that they had been
noticed and the effort made to acquire them. Nor is this all. These elements
were adopted because it was believed that the Ancestors had received the first
cultural revelations from Supernatural Beings. And since traditional societies
have no historical memory in the strict sense, it took only a few generations,
sometimes even less, for a recent innovation to be invested with all the
prestige of the primordial revelations.

In the last analysis we could say that, though they are “open” to history,
traditional societies tend to project every new acquisition into the primordial
Time, to telescope all events in the same atemporal horizon of the mythical
beginning.343



The social structure that emerges, over time, as a consequence of the “battle
of the gods,” might be most accurately likened to a personality (to the
personality adopted by all who share the same culture). It is in fact the
personality of “the dead heroes of the past” (the “hero as previously
realized”) and is most frequently symbolized by the figure of the Great Father,
simultaneous personification of order and tyranny. Culture binds nature. The
archetypal Great Father protects his children from chaos; holds back the
precosmogonic water from which everything was derived, to which everything will
return; and serves as progenitor of the hero. The protective capacity of
benevolent tradition, embodied in the form of political order, constitutes a
common mythological/narrative theme. This may be illustrated for our purposes
through consideration and analysis of a Polish folktale: The Jolly Tailor Who
Became King.344 Nitechka, the hero of the story, is a simple tailor. He
courageously aids a wounded gypsy—that is, acts humanely toward an outsider, a
stranger, a personified “emissary of chaos.” In return, the gypsy provides him
with “redemptive” information—informs him that if he walks westward, he will
become king. He acquires a scarecrow—“the Count”— as a companion, and has a
number of adventures with him. Finally, the two travelers arrive at the town of
Pacanow and observe the proceedings there—in great astonishment:

All around the town it was sunshiny and pleasant; but over Pacanow the rain
poured from the sky as from a bucket.

“I won't go in there,” said the Scarecrow, “because my hat will get wet.”

“And even I do not wish to become King of such a wet kingdom,” said the Tailor.

Just then the townspeople spied them and rushed toward them, led by the
Burgomaster riding on a shod goat.

“Dear Sirs,” they said, “perhaps you can help us.”

“And what has happened to you?” asked Nitechka.

“Deluge and destruction threaten us. Our King died a week ago, and since that
time a terrible rain has come down upon our gorgeous town. We can't even make
fires in our houses, because so much water runs through the chimneys. We will
perish, honorable Sirs!”

“It is too bad,” said Nitechka very wisely.

“Oh, very bad! And we are most sorry for the late King's daughter, as the poor
thing can't stop crying and this causes even more water.”

“That makes it still worse,” replied Nitechka, still more wisely.

“Help us, help us!” continued the Burgomaster. “Do you know the immeasurable
reward the Princess promised to the one who stops the rain? She promised to
marry him and then he will become King.”



The basic plot is established. The tailor—he who clothes, mends and ties—is the
hero. Although simple (poor in outward appearance, humble, willing to take
risks, helpful and kind), he has the capacity to become King. He journeys to a
town threatened by a deluge (by chaos, in the guise of “return of the
primordial waters”). This deluge began after the recent death of the King. The
kings daughter—benevolent (young, beautiful, good) counterpart to the forces of
the negative feminine (the unstoppable rain)—appears willing to unite with
whomever saves the kingdom. She represents the potential embedded in
voluntarily confronted chaos (yet is assimilated to her primordial partner, the
Great Mother, by her “rainlike” tears).

Nitechka realizes that he must bring back “pleasant weather.” He ponders the
situation for three long days. Finally, he is granted a revelation:

“I know where the rain comes from!”

“Where from?”

“From the sky” [that is, from “heaven”].

“Eh!” grumbled the Scarecrow. “I know that too. Surely it doesn't fall from the
bottom to the top, but the other way around.”

“Yes,” said Nitechka, “but why does it fall over the town only, and not
elsewhere?”

“Because elsewhere is nice weather.”

“You're stupid, Mr. Count,” said the Tailor. “But tell me, how long has it
rained?”

“They say since the King died.”

“So you see! Now I know everything! The King was so great and mighty that when
he died and went to Heaven he made a huge hole in the sky.”

“Oh, oh, true!”



The death of the King—who is the ritual model for emulation, the figure who
brings order or predictability to interpersonal interaction undertaken among
his subjects—means potential dissolution of security and protection. The King's
death (his “return to heaven,” or to the kingdom of the dead) is equivalent to
the fracturing of a protective wall. The unknown, from which his subjects were
protected, pours through the breached wall. The kingdom risks inundation:

“Through the hole the rain poured and it will pour until the end of the world
[emphasis added] if the hole isn't sewed up!”

Count Scarecrow looked at him in amazement.

“In all my life I have never seen such a wise Tailor,” he said.



Nitechka orders the townspeople to bring “all the ladders in the town,” to “tie
them together,” and to “lean them against the sky.” He ascends the ladder, with
a hundred needles, threading one:

Count Scarecrow stayed at the bottom and unwound the spool on which there was a
hundred miles of thread.

When Nitechka got to the very top he saw that there was a huge hole in the sky,
a hole as big as the town. A torn piece of the sky hung down, and through this
hole the water poured.



This narrative fragment is particularly interesting, as it is apparent that the
water is coming, somehow, from “behind” the sky. The sky is utilized in
mythology, in general, as a “masculine” symbol (at least the day sky) and tends
to be assimilated to the same natural category as “the king.” It appears to be
damage to the general structure of the “masculine” sky, produced by the death
of a specific king, that constitutes the breach through which precosmogonic
material (in the form of water) is able to pour through. The “death of the
king” and the “breach in the sky” is equivalent in meaning to the death of
Apsu, in the Enuma elish—the death that heralded the reappearance of Tiamat. In
this tale, however, Nitechka “repairs the structure of the sky” (an act
equivalent to the reconstitution of Osiris) instead of directly battling the
“dragon of chaos”:

So he went to work and sewed and sewed for two days. His fingers grew stiff and
he became very tired but he did not stop. When he had finished sewing he
pressed out the sky with the iron and then, exhausted, went down the ladders.

Once more the sun shone over Pacanow. Count Scarecrow almost went mad with joy,
as did all the other inhabitants of the town. The Princess wiped her eyes that
were almost cried out, and throwing herself on Nitechka's neck, kissed him
affectionately.



The “creative union” of the hero with the “benevolent aspect of the unknown” is
evidently approaching.

Nitechka was very happy. He looked around, and there were the Burgomaster and
Councilmen bringing him a golden scepter and a gorgeous crown and shouting:

“Long live King Nitechka! Long live he! Long live he! And let him be the
Princess' husband and let him reign happily!”

So the merry little Tailor reigned happily for a long time, and the rain never
fell in his kingdom.



This fairy tale constitutes a specific example of a more general type of story:
that is, the story of the “god who binds.”345 The god who binds might be
Marduk, who encloses Tiamat in a net given to him by his father, Anu—in which
case the binding is clearly benevolent (even “world-engendering”). Binding may
also be conceptualized as the prerogative of the sovereign, who binds his
“enemies”—that is, those who threaten the stability of the kingdom—with cords,
ropes and legal strictures. Binding brings order, in short, but too much order
can be dangerous. The closing line of The Jolly Tailor informs us that rain
never falls in the newly established kingdom. While this might sound like a
happy ending to those who have been recently inundated with water, it isn't so
suitable a trick if it engenders a drought. We may turn to another literary
example, to illustrate this point.

In the famous children's novel A Wrinkle in Time, a small boy with magical
powers becomes inhabited by a powerful patriarchal extraterrestrial spirit,
while trying to rescue his father from “dark powers” threatening the universe.
While possessed, this boy, Charles Wallace, remarks to his sister:

“You've got to stop fighting and relax. Relax and be happy. Oh, Meg, if you'd
just relax you'd realize that all our troubles are over. You don't understand
what a wonderful place we've come to. You see, on this planet everything is in
perfect order because everybody has learned to relax, to give in, to submit.
All you have to do is look quietly and steadily into the eyes of our good
friend, here, for he is our friend, dear sister, and he will take you in as he
has taken me.”346



Everyone who inhabits the state dominated by “the good friend” behaves in a
programmatic and identical manner. Anyone who differs is “adjusted,” painfully,
or eliminated. There is no space for disorder of any type:

Charles Wallace's strange, monotonous voice ground against her ears. “Meg,
you're supposed to have some mind. Why do you think we have wars at home? Why
do you think people get confused and unhappy? Because they all live their own,
separate, individual lives. I've been trying to explain to you in the simplest
possible way that [in this state] individuals have been done away with…. [here
there is] ONE mind. It's IT. And that's why everybody is so happy and
efficient….”

“Nobody suffers here,” Charles intoned. “Nobody is ever unhappy.”347



The (necessary) meaning-constraint typical of a given culture is a consequence
of uniformity of behavior, imposed by that culture, toward objects and
situations. The push toward uniformity is a primary characteristic of the
“patriarchal” state (as everyone who acts in the same situation-specific manner
has been rendered comfortably “predictable”). The state becomes increasingly
tyrannical, however, as the pressure for uniformity increases. As the drive
toward similarity becomes extreme, everyone becomes the “same” person—that is,
imitation of the past becomes total. All behavioral and conceptual variability
is thereby forced from the body politic. The state then becomes truly static:
paralyzed or deadened, turned to stone, in mythological language. Lack of
variability in action and ideation renders society and the individuals who
compose it increasingly vulnerable to precipitous “environmental”
transformation (that is, to an involuntary influx of “chaotic” changes). It is
possible to engender a complete social collapse by constantly resisting
incremental change. It is in this manner that the gods become displeased with
their creation, man—and his willful stupidity—and wash away the world. The
necessity for interchange of information between “known” and “unknown” means
that the state risks its own death by requiring an excess of uniformity. This
risk is commonly given narrative representation as “the senescence and frailty
of the old King,” or as “the King's mortal illness, brought on by lack of
‘water’ (which is “precosmogonic chaos,” in its positive aspect).” Such “ideas”
are well illustrated in the Brothers Grimm fairy tale The Water of Life:348

There once was a king who was so ill that it was thought impossible his life
could be saved. He had three sons, and they were all in great distress on his
account, and they went into the castle gardens and wept at the thought that he
must die. An old man came up to them and asked the cause of their grief. They
told him that their father was dying, and nothing could save him.

The old man said, “There is only one remedy which I know. It is the Water of
Life. If he drinks of it he will recover, but it is very difficult to find.”



The two eldest sons determine to seek out the Water of Life, one after the
other, after gaining their father's reluctant permission. They both encounter a
dwarf, at the beginning of their journeys, and speak rudely to him. The dwarf
places a curse on them, and they each end up stuck fast in a mountain gorge.

The “youngest son” then sets out. He is humble and has the “right attitude”
toward what he does not understand. When he encounters the dwarf, therefore—who
plays out the same role as the gypsy woman in The Jolly Tailor—he receives some
valuable information:

“As you have spoken pleasantly to me, and not been haughty like your false
brothers, I will help you and tell you how to find the Water of Life. It flows
from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted castle.349 But you will never
get in unless I give you an iron rod and two loaves of bread. With the rod
strike three times on the iron gate of the castle and it will spring open.
Inside you will find two lions with wide-open jaws, but if you throw a loaf to
each they will be quiet. Then you must make haste to fetch the Water of Life
before it strikes twelve, or the gates of the castle will close, and you will
be shut in.”



The story is making a point: when you don't know where you are going, it is
counterproductive to assume that you know how to get there. This point is a
specific example of a more general moral: Arrogant (“prideful”) individuals
presume they know who and what is important. This makes them too haughty to pay
attention when they are in trouble—too haughty, in particular, to attend to
those things or people whom they habitually hold in contempt. The “drying up of
the environment” or the “senescence of the king” is a consequence of a too
rigid, too arrogant value hierarchy. (“What or who can reasonably be ignored”
is as much a part of such a hierarchy as “who or what must be attended too.”)
When trouble arrives, the traditional value hierarchy must be revised. This
means that the formerly humble and despised may suddenly hold the secret to
continued life350—and that those who refuse to admit to their error, like the
“elder brothers,” will inevitably encounter trouble. The story continues:

The Prince thanked him, took the rod and the loaves, and set off. When he
reached the castle all was just as the dwarf had said. At the third knock the
gates flew open, and when he had pacified the lions with their loaves, he
walked into the castle. In the great hall he found several enchanted princes,
and he took the rings from their fingers. He also took a sword and a loaf which
were lying by them.



The enchanted princes might be regarded as equivalent, in an important sense,
to Osiris, the “ancestral hero” whose potential lay unutilized in the
underworld after his dismemberment by Seth. The enchanted princes are ancestral
forces with magical powers (like the “dead kings” in the churchyard dream we
discussed earlier). The young prince's voyage into the “enchanted castle” is
equivalent to a voluntary descent into the dangerous kingdom of the dead. His
“encounter with the dead ancestors” allows him access to some of their power
(in the guise of their tools and other belongings). The young prince also
encounters the “benevolent aspect of the unknown” in the underworld, as might
well be expected, in her typical personification:

On passing into the next room he found a beautiful maiden, who rejoiced at his
coming. She embraced him and said that he had saved her, and if he would come
back in a year she would marry him. She also told him where to find the
fountain with the enchanted water, but she said he must make haste to get out
of the castle before the clock struck twelve.

Then he went on and came to a room where there was a beautiful bed freshly
made, and as he was very tired he thought he would take a little rest. So he
lay down and fell asleep. When he woke it was a quarter to twelve. He sprang up
in a fright, and ran to the fountain and took some of the water in a cup which
was lying nearby, and then hurried away. The clock struck just as he reached
the iron gate, and it banged so quickly that it took off a bit of his heel.

He rejoiced at having got some of the Water of Life, and hastened on his
homeward journey. He again passed the dwarf, who said when he saw the sword and
the loaf, “Those things will be of much service to you. You will be able to
strike down whole armies with the sword, and the loaf will never come to an
end.”



The sword and the loaf are the concrete forms taken by the “possibility”
released during the prince's heroic journey into the terrible unknown. The
sword is a tool which might find its use in the battle with negative forces.
The loaf is magical, in the same manner as the loaves and fishes in the story
of Christ's miraculous provendor:

In those days, when again a great crowd had gathered, and they had nothing to
eat, he called his disciples to him, and said to them,

“I have compassion on the crowd, because they have been with me now three days,
and have nothing to eat;

and if I send them away hungry to their homes, they will faint on the way; and
some of them have come a long way.”

And his disciples answered him, “How can one feed these men with bread here in
the desert?”

And he asked them, “How many loaves have you?” They said, “Seven.”

And he commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground; and he took the seven
loaves, and having given thanks he broke them and gave them to his disciples to
set before the people; and they set them before the crowd.

And they had a few small fish; and having blessed them, he commanded that these
also should be set before them.

And they ate, and were satisfied; and they took up the broken pieces left over,
seven baskets full.

And there were about four thousand people.

And he sent them away; and immediately he got into the boat with his disciples,
and went to the district of Dalmanu'tha.

The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, seeking from him a sign from
heaven, to test him.

And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, “Why does this generation seek a
sign? Truly, I say to you, no sign shall be given to this generation.”

And he left them, and getting into the boat again he departed to the other
side.

Now they had forgotten to bring bread; and they had only one loaf with them in
the boat.

And he cautioned them, saying, “Take heed, beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”

And they discussed it with one another, saying, “We have no bread.”

And being aware of it, Jesus said to them, “Why do you discuss the fact that
you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Are your hearts
hardened?

Having eyes do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? And do you not
remember?

When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of
broken pieces did you take up?” They said to him, “Twelve.”

“And the seven for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces
did you take up?” And they said to him, “Seven.”

And he said to them, “Do you not yet understand?” (Mark 8:1–21, RSV)



The hero provides “food that never ends.”

Back to the story: the dwarf tells the prince where his brothers can be
found—warning him that they have bad hearts and should be left to their fate.
The young prince seeks them out, nevertheless, rescues them, and tells them
everything that has happened.

Then they rode away together and came to a land where famine and war were
raging. The King thought he would be utterly ruined, so great was the
destitution.

The Prince went to him and gave him the loaf, and with it he fed and satisfied
his whole kingdom. The Prince also gave him his sword, and he smote the whole
army of his enemies with it, and then he was able to live in peace and quiet.
Then the Prince took back his sword and his loaf, and the three brothers rode
on.

But later they had to pass through two more countries where war and famine were
raging, and each time the Prince gave his sword and his loaf to the King and in
this way he saved three kingdoms.



The tale takes this diversion to help drive home the general utility of what
has been rescued from the “enchanted kingdom, where the princess dwells.” The
treasures released from that kingdom have a powerful, protective, revitalizing
capacity, no matter where they are applied.

The brothers continue homeward, but the older two deceive the younger on the
voyage, exchanging the true Water of Life for salt sea water (the “arrogant
elder brothers” replace the “benevolent aspect of the Great Mother” with her
“destructive counterpart”). When he arrives at home, the younger son
unwittingly gives this poisonous water to his father, making him sicker. The
older brothers then heal the poisoned king with the genuine but stolen water,
masking their evil souls with the appearance of benevolence, and arrange to
have their unfortunate sibling banished and killed. The huntsman assigned to do
the killing cannot bring himself to do it, however, and allows the young prince
to escape. Then the tide starts to turn. The previous generous exploits of the
young prince are revealed, and the old king repents:

After a time three wagonloads of gold and precious stones came to the King for
his youngest son. They were sent by the kings who had been saved by the
Prince's sword and miraculous loaf, and who now wished to show their gratitude.

Then the old King thought, “What if my son really was innocent?” And he said to
his people, “If only he were still alive! How sorry I am that I ordered him to
be killed.”

“He is still alive,” said the huntsman. “I could not find it in my heart to
carry out your commands.” And he told the King what had taken place.

A load fell from the King's heart on hearing the good news, and he sent out a
great proclamation to all parts of his kingdom that his son was to come home,
where he would be received with great favor.



In the meantime, the princess is preparing for the return of the prince. She

had caused a road to be made of pure shining gold leading straight to her
castle, and told her people that whoever came riding straight along it would be
her true bridegroom, and they were to admit him. But anyone who came either on
one side of the road or the other would not be the right one, and he was not to
be let in.

When the year had almost passed, the eldest Prince thought that he would hurry
to the Princess, and by giving himself out as her deliverer would gain a wife
and a kingdom as well. So he rode away, and when he saw the beautiful golden
road he thought it would be a thousand pities to ride upon it, so he turned
aside and rode to the right of it. But when he reached the gate the people told
him that he was not the right bridegroom, and he had to go away.

Soon after the second Prince came, and when he saw the golden road he thought
it would be a thousand pities for his horse to tread upon it, so he turned and
rode up on the left of it. But when he reached the gate he also was told that
he was not the true bridegroom, and like his brother was turned away.



The two elder princes are too bound up in their traditional thoughts of power,
wealth and glory to concentrate on what is of true importance. Because of their
“great respect” for the gold that makes up the road, they miss a great
opportunity. Their overarching admiration for material goods blinds them to the
possibility of establishing a relationship with the source of all good
things—in the guise of the princess (playing a “part” similar to that of the
Wisdom of Solomon). The youngest son makes no such mistake:

When the year had quite come to an end, the third Prince came out of the wood
to ride to his beloved, and through her to forget all his past sorrows. So on
he went, thinking only of her and wishing to be with her, and he never even saw
the golden road. His horse cantered right along the middle of it, and when he
reached the gate it was flung open and the Princess received him joyfully, and
called him her deliverer and the lord of her kingdom. Their marriage was
celebrated without delay and with much rejoicing. When it was over, she told
him that his father had called him back and forgiven him. So he went to him and
told him everything: how his brothers had deceived him, and how they had forced
him to keep silence. The old King wanted to punish them, but they had taken a
ship and sailed away over the sea, and never came back as long as they lived.



The old king is dying for lack of water. He has two elder sons, who could
rescue him, but they are narrow-minded, traditional, materialistic, selfish and
rigid. They lack proper “spirit” for the quest. The youngest son, a proper
hero, pays attention to what the “sensible” ignore, makes a voyage into the
unknown, and brings back what is needed. It is the journey of the hero that
revitalizes the king. Osiris languishes in the underworld— regardless of past
greatness—without Horus.

It was the emergence of the heroic stance, mythically represented by man as
equal in divinity to the unknown or Nature, that provided the precondition for
the generation of concrete behavioral adaptations to the world of experience.
Emergence of heroism meant construction of culture: historically determined
procedural knowledge and communicable description thereof. Construction of
culture is creation of the mythic Great and Terrible Father, tyrant and wise
king, as intermediary between the vulnerable individual and the overwhelming
natural world. This Father is the consequence of voluntary heroic action—
temporally summed and integrated effect of creative exploratory behavior—as
well as progenitor of those who take heroic action. This paradoxical child and
father of the hero is primarily “personality” (procedure) and only secondarily
abstracted first- and second-order representation thereof (and is most
certainly not cumulative description of the “objective” world). That this is so
can be seen, even today, when the members of totalitarian cultures such as the
modern North Korean collapse into genuine hysteria as a consequence of the
death of their leader, who is embodiment of order and determinate meaning. Such
tendencies are not restricted to those dominated by the totalitarian, either.
Frye states:

The function of the king is primarily to represent, for his subjects, the unity
of their society in an individual form. Even yet Elizabeth II can draw crowds
wherever she appears, not because there is anything remarkable about her
appearance, but because she dramatizes the metaphor of society as a single
“body.” Other societies have other figures, but there seems to be a special
symbolic eloquence, even a pathos, about the de jure monarch, whose position
has been acquired by the pure accident of birth, and who has no executive
power. At the same time most societies have done away with monarchical figures;
“charismatic” leaders, dictators, and the like are almost invariably sinister
and regressive; the mystique of royalty that Shakespeare's plays take for
granted means little to us now; and theologians talking about the “sovereignty”
of God risk alienating their readers by trying to assimilate the religious life
to the metaphors of a barbaric and outmoded form of social organization. It is
natural that our news media should employ the royal metaphor so incessantly in
telling us about what France or Japan or Mexico “is” doing, as though they were
individual beings. But the same figure was used in my younger days, to my own
great annoyance, to boost the prestige of dictators: “Hitler is building roads
across Germany,” “Mussolini is draining the marshes in Italy,” and the like.
Those who employed this figure were often democratic people who simply could
not stop themselves from using the royal metaphor. It seems as though the
sovereign may be either the most attractive of icons or the most dangerous of
idols.351



The Great Father is a product of history—or, is history itself, insofar as it
is acted out and spontaneously remembered—intrapsychically instantiated during
the course of socialization, and embedded in the social interactions and
specific object-meanings that make up a given culture. This culturally
determined structure—this inhibitory network, this intrapsychic representative
of the social unit—provides experiential phenomena with determinate
significance. This determinate significance is restricted meaning—reduced from
the general meaning of the unknown, per se, to the particular—and not relevance
or import added to a neutral background. The unknown manifests itself in an
intrinsically meaningful manner: a manner composed of threat and promise. The
specific meaning of objects discriminated from the unknown consists of
restrictions of that general significance (often, of restrictions to zero—to
irrelevance). Such restriction is, however, purely conditional, and remains
intact only as long as the culturally determined model of meaning itself
maintains its functional utility (including credibility). “Maintains its
functional utility” means insofar as the culture posits a reasonable current
description, a believable end goal, and a workable mode of transforming the
former into the latter (workable for the individual, and for the maintenance
and expansion of the culture itself).

Figure 41: Order, the Great Father, as Son of the Uroboros352 schematically
portrays the Great Father as masculine offspring of precosmogonic chaos; as
embodiment of the known, the predictable, the familiar; as security and tyranny
simultaneously. The Great Father is

Figure 41: Order, the Great Father, as Son of the Uroboros





patriarchal society, tradition, pomp and circumstance, military-industrial
complex, and superego: demanding, rigid, unjust, dangerous and necessary. He is
ambivalent in precisely the same manner as the Great Mother, his “wife.” In the
guise of literal father, he is protection for children, who are too immature
and vulnerable to deal with the unknown. More abstractly, he is the pattern of
behavior the father represents, that becomes “internalized” during maturation.
The Great Father takes the infinite possibility of spirit that the infant
represents and forges it into something limited but actual. He is manner
incarnate, ruling all social interactions.

Figure 42: Explored Territory as Orderly, Protective Father353 presents the
Great Father as wise king, security. The wise king maintains stability, not
because he is afraid of the unknown, but because nothing new can be built
without a strong foundation. He is the adaptive routine, developed by the
heroes of the past, whose adoption by those in the present allows for control
and safety. He is a house with doors; a structure that shelters, but does not
stifle; a master who teaches and disciplines but does not indoctrinate or
crush. He represents the tradition fostering cooperation among people whose
shared culture makes trust possible,

Figure 42: Explored Territory as Orderly, Protective Father





even easy. The Great Father as Wise King keeps one foot on the Terrible Mother;
the monsters of chaos are locked up in his dungeon or banished to the nether
regions of the kingdom. He is the personality of dead heroes (that is, the
action patterns and hierarchies of value established through exploration in the
past) organized according to the principle of “respect for the intrinsic value
of the living.” This makes him the king who takes advice from his subjects—who
is willing to enter into creative interchange with those he “dominates”
legally—and to benefit from this advice from the “unworthy.”

Knowledge of the necessity for such interplay between strong and weak emerged
into explicit Western consciousness not least through the actions of the
ancient Hebrew prophets. The philosopher of religion Huston Smith draws two
examples from the Bible to illustrate this point:

One is the story of Naboth who, because he refused to turn over his family
vineyard to King Ahab, was framed on false charges of blasphemy and subversion
and then stoned; as blasphemy was a capital crime, his property then reverted
to the throne. When news of this travesty reached Elijah, the word of the Lord
came to him, saying,

[“Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Sama'ria; behold, he is
in the vineyard of Naboth, where he has gone to take possession.

And you shall say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Have you killed, and also taken
possession?”’ and you shall say to him, Thus says the LORD: “In the place where
dogs licked up the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick your own blood.”” (1 Kings
21:18,19 RSV)]

The story carries revolutionary significance for human history, for it is the
story of how someone without official position took the side of a wronged man
and denounced a king to his face on grounds of injustice. One will search the
annals of history in vain for its parallel. Elijah was not a priest. He had no
formal authority for the terrible judgment he delivered. The normal pattern of
the day would have called for him to be struck down by bodyguards on the spot.
But the fact that he was “speaking for” an authority not his own was so
transparent that the king accepted Elijah's pronouncement as just.

The same striking sequence recurred in the incident of David and Bathsheba.
From the top of his roof David glimpsed Bathsheba bathing and wanted her. There
was an obstacle, however: she was married. To the royalty of those days this
was a small matter; David simply moved to get rid of her husband. Uriah was
ordered to the front lines, carrying instructions that he be placed in the
thick of the fighting and support withdrawn so he would be killed. Everything
went as planned; indeed, the procedure seemed routine until Nathan the prophet
got wind of it. Sensing immediately that “the thing that David had done
displeased the Lord,” he went straight to the king, who had absolute power over
his life, and said to him:

[Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, “I anointed you king over Israel, and I
delivered you out of the hand of Saul;

and I gave you your master's house, and your master's wives into your bosom,
and gave you the house of Israel and of Judah; and if this were too little, I
would add to you as much more.

Why have you despised the word of the LORD, to do what is evil in his sight?
You have smitten Uri'ah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to
be your wife, and have slain him with the sword of the Ammonites.

Now therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have
despised me, and have taken the wife of Uri'ah the Hittite to be your wife.”

Thus says the LORD, “Behold, I will raise up evil against you out of your own
house; and I will take your wives before your eyes, and give them to your
neighbor, and he shall lie with your wives in the sight of this sun.

For you did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before
the sun.”

David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the LORD.” And Nathan said to
David, “The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die.

Nevertheless, because by this deed you have utterly scorned the LORD, the child
that is born to you shall die.” (2 Samuel 12:7–14)]

The surprising point in each of these accounts is not what the kings do, for
they were merely exer-cising the universally accepted prerogatives of royalty
in their day. The revolutionary and unprecedented fact is the way the prophets
challenged their actions.354



Smith concludes:

Stated abstractly, the Prophetic Principle can be put as follows: The
prerequisite of political stability is social justice, for it is in the nature
of things that injustice will not endure. Stated theologically, this point
reads: God has high standards. Divinity will not put up forever with
exploitation, corruption and mediocrity.355



The initially “undeclarable” constraint of “respect for the weaker” provides
the precondition for the emergence of abstract and statable principles of
social justice. Societies that lack such constraint or that come, over time, to
forget the necessity of such constraint risk the “vengeance of God”:

Thus says the LORD: “For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not
revoke the punishment; because he burned to lime the bones of the king of Edom.

So I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the strongholds of
Ker'ioth, and Moab shall die amid uproar, amid shouting and the sound of the
trumpet;

I will cut off the ruler from its midst, and will slay all its princes with
him,” says the LORD.

Thus says the LORD: “For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will
not revoke the punishment; because they have rejected the law of the LORD, and
have not kept his statutes, but their lies have led them astray, after which
their fathers walked.

So I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the strongholds of
Jerusalem.”

Thus says the LORD: “For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will
not revoke the punishment; because they sell the righteous for silver, and the
needy for a pair of shoes—

they that trample the head of the poor into the dust of the earth, and turn
aside the way of the afflicted; a man and his father go in to the same maiden,
so that my holy name is profaned;

they lay themselves down beside every altar upon garments taken in pledge; and
in the house of their God they drink the wine of those who have been fined.

“Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of
the cedars, and who was as strong as the oaks; I destroyed his fruit above, and
his roots beneath.

Also I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty years in the
wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.

And I raised up some of your sons for prophets, and some of your young men for
Nazirites. Is it not indeed so, O people of Israel?” says the LORD.

“But you made the Nazirites drink wine, and commanded the prophets, saying,
‘You shall not prophesy.’

“Behold, I will press you down in your place, as a cart full of sheaves presses
down.

Flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not retain his
strength, nor shall the mighty save his life;



Figure 43: Explored Territory as Tyrannical Father





he who handles the bow shall not stand, and he who is swift of foot shall not
save himself, nor shall he who rides the horse save his life; and he who is
stout of heart among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day,” says the
LORD. (Amos 2:1–16 RSV)



Such societies are tyrannical. Tyrannical societies violate the implicit
principles upon which society itself is founded. This renders them inevitably
self-defeating.356

Figure 44: The “Heavenly Genealogy” of the Tyrannical and Protective Fathers





Figure 43: Explored Territory as Tyrannical Father357 presents the forces of
tradition as “son-devouring king.” The conservative tendency of any culture,
striving to maintain itself, can easily transform into the deadening weight of
absolute authority. The Great Father as tyrant destroys what he once was and
undermines what he still depends upon. The tyrant is the force of everything
that has been, including everything that once was good, against everything that
could be. This is the aspect of the Great Father that motivates adolescent
rebellion and gives rise to ideological narratives attributing to society
everything that produces the negative in man. It is the Tyrannical Father who
consumes his own children, and who walls up the virgin princess in an
inaccessible place. The Tyrannical Father rules absolutely, while the kingdom
withers or becomes paralyzed; his decrepitude and age are matched only by his
arrogance, inflexibility and blindness to evil. He is the personification of
the authoritarian or totalitarian state, whose “goal” is reduction of all who
are currently living to manifestation of a single dead “past” personality. When
everyone is the same, everything is predictable; all things are of strictly
determinable value, and everything unknown (and fear-provoking) is hidden

Figure 45: The Exploratory Hero as Son of the Great Father





from view. Unfortunately, of course, every unpredictable and fear-provoking
thing is also informative, and new information is vital to continued successful
adjustment.

The Great Father in his dual guise is the taboo, the barrier set up against the
intrusion of the dangerously unpredictable, the floodgate that controls the
ocean behind. He is protection for fools, and impediment to genius, and
precondition for genius, and punishment for fools. His ambivalence is
unavoidable, and should be recognized, for such recognition serves as effective
antidote to naive ideologically-motivated utopian thought. Anything that
protects and fosters (and that is therefore predictable and powerful)
necessarily has the capacity to smother and oppress (and may manifest those
capacities, unpredictably, in any given situation). No static political utopia
is therefore possible—and the kingdom of God remains spiritual, not worldly.
Recognition of the essentially ambivalent nature of the predictable—stultifying
but secure—means discarding simplistic theories which attribute the existence
of human suffering and evil purely to the state, or which presume that the
state is all that is good, and that the individual should exist merely as
subordinate or slave. The king is a wall. Walls provide a barrier to the sudden
influx of the unknown, and block progress forward. One function presupposes the
other (although either may certainly come to dominate). Figure 44: The
“Heavenly Genealogy” of the Tyrannical and Protective Fathers portrays the
relationship between the two discriminable aspects of the known, their
derivation from the unified but ambivalent known, and their original “descent”
from the “dragon of chaos.”

The Great Father is order, vs. chaos; the past, vs. the present; the old, vs.
the young. He is the ancestral spirit whose force extends beyond the grave, who
must be kept at bay with potent and humble ritual. He is the single personality
composed of the consequences of the eternal war between all the great heroes of
the past, and he stands over the developing individual, in the guise of the
actual father, like a god. The Great Father is the old emperor, dangerously out
of date—a powerful warrior in his youth, now under the spell of a hostile
force. He is the eternal impediment to the virgin bride, the tyrannical father
who wishes to keep his fruitful daughter firmly under his control. He is the
authoritarian who rules the land ravaged by drought; keeper of the castle in
which everything has been brought to a standstill.

The Great Father is protection and necessary aid to growth, but absolute
identification with his personality and force ultimately destroys the spirit.
Culture, career and role do not sufficiently exhaust the possibilities of the
individual. Figure 45 therefore portrays The Exploratory Hero—scion of chaos
and order—as Son of the Great Father.358

