# 5 - The Alchemical Procedure and the Philosopher's Stone - Part One
[Metadata]: # {06.07.01}
[Descriptor]: # {06.07.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Alchemical Procedure and the Philosopher's Stone
Part One
# Part One
The western alchemists followed the scenario, known already in the Hellenistic
period, of the four phases of the process of transmutation: that is, of the
procurement of the Philosopher's Stone. The first phase (the nigredo)—the
regression to the fluid state of matter—corresponds to the death of the
alchemist. According to Paracelsus, “he who would enter the Kingdom of God must
first enter with his body into his mother and there die.” The “mother” is the
prima materia, the massa confusa, the abyssus.574 Certain texts emphasize the
synchronism between the opus alchymicum and the intimate experience of the
adept. “Things are rendered perfect by their similars and that is why the
operator must take part in the operation.”575 “Transform yourself from dead
stones into living philosopher's stones,” writes Dorn. According to Gichtel,
“we not only receive a new soul with this regeneration but also a new Body. The
Body is extracted from the divine word or from the heavenly Sophia.” That it is
not solely a question of laboratory operations is proven by the insistence on
the virtues and qualities of the alchemist: the latter must be healthy, humble,
patient, chaste; he must be of free spirit and in harmony with his work; he
must both work and meditate.

For our purposes, it will be unnecessary to summarize the other phases of the
opus. Let us note, however, the paradoxical character of the materia prima and
of the Philosopher's Stone. According to the alchemists, they both are to be
found everywhere, and under all forms; and they are designated by hundreds of
terms. To cite only a text of 1526, the Stone “is familiar to all men, both
young and old; it is found in the country, in the village, and in the town, in
all things created by God; yet it is despised by all. Rich and poor handle it
every day. It is thrown into the street by servant maids. Children play with
it. Yet no one prizes it, though, next to the human soul, it is the most
beautiful and most precious thing upon earth [and has power to pull down kings
and princes. Nevertheless, it is esteemed the vilest and meanest of earthly
things….]”576 It is truly a question of a “secret language” that is at once
both the expression of experiences otherwise intransmissible by the medium of
ordinary language, and the cryptic communication of the hidden meaning of
symbols.

The Stone makes possible the identification of opposites.577 It purifies and
“perfects” the metals. It is the Arabic alchemists who imparted therapeutic
virtues to the Stone, and it is through the intermediary of Arabic alchemy that
the concept of the Elixir vitae arrived in the West.578 Roger Bacon speaks of a
“medicine which makes the impurities and all the corruptions of the most base
metal disappear,” and which can prolong human life for several centuries.
According to Arnold of Villanova, the Stone cures all ills and makes the old
young.

As regards the process for the transmutation of metals into gold, attested
already in Chinese alchemy, it accelerates the temporal rhythm and thus
contributes to the work of nature. As is written in the Summa Perfectionis, an
alchemical work of the sixteenth century, “what Nature cannot perfect in a vast
space of time we can achieve in a short space of time by our art.” The same
idea is expounded by Ben Jonson in his play The Alchemist (Act 2, Scene 2). The
alchemist affirms that “lead and other metals… would be gold if they had time”;
and another character adds: “And that our art doth further.”579 In other words,
the alchemist substitutes himself for Time.580

The principles of traditional alchemy—that is, the growth of minerals, the
transmutation of metals, the Elixir, and the obligation to secrecy—were not
contested in the period of the Renaissance and the Reformation.581 However, the
horizon of medieval alchemy was modified under the impact of Neoplatonism and
Hermeticism. The certitude that alchemy can second the work of Nature received
a christological significance. The alchemists now affirmed that just as Christ
had redeemed humanity by his death and resurrection, so the opus alchymicum
could assure the redemption of Nature. Heinrich Khunrath, a celebrated
Hermeticist of the sixteenth century, identified the Philosopher's Stone with
Jesus Christ, the “Son of the Macrocosm”; he thought besides that the discovery
of the Stone would unveil the true nature of the macrocosm, in the same way
that Christ had brought spiritual plenitude to man—that is, to the microcosm.
The conviction that the opus alchymicum could save both man and Nature
prolonged the nostalgia for a radical renovatio, a nostalgia which had haunted
western Christianity since Joachim of Floris.582



Carl Jung devoted a tremendous amount of attention to the writings of the
alchemists in the latter part of his life. These efforts merely added fuel to
the fire of those who had branded him eccentric, because of his interest in the
psychology of religion (which is, after all, a fundamental aspect of human
psychology and culture). Even the Pulitzer Prize-winning sociologist Ernest
Becker, who was favorably (and critically) predisposed to the claims of
psychoanalytic thought, stated, “I can't see that all [Jung's] tomes on alchemy
added one bit to the weight of his psychoanalytic insight.”583

Many people—some with an outstanding academic reputation—have cautioned me
against discussing Jung, warned me about even mentioning his name in the
academic context. This warning was presented, no doubt, with my best
professional interests in mind. I once read a story about Paul Ricoeur, the
French philosopher and literary critic, which may be apocryphal. Someone
mentioned the specific relevance of Jung's work to Ricoeur's field of inquiry.
Ricoeur replied, “I haven't read Jung. He's on the Index in France.” This
ironical response was, of course, made in reference to the Catholic Index of
books—a listing of readings forbidden to devout followers ofthat creed.

I have never met someone, however, who actually understood what Jung was
talking about and who was simultaneously able to provide valid criticism of his
ideas. Often, Jung's notions are confused with Freud's—insofar as Freud's are
understood. Freud himself certainly did not make this error. It was in fact
Freud's apprehension of Jung's profound and irreconcilable differences in
thought that led to their professional and private alienation.584 Jung's ideas
are not primarily Freudian. He places little emphasis on sexuality or on the
role of past trauma in determining present mental state. He rejected the idea
of the Oedipus complex (actually, he reinterpreted that complex in a much more
compelling and complete manner). He viewed religion not as mere neurotic
defense against anxiety, but as a profoundly important means of adaptation. It
is much more accurate to view him as an intellectual descendant of Goethe and
Nietzsche—influenced in his development, to be sure, by the idea of the
unconscious—than as a Freudian “disciple.”585 Jung in fact spent much of his
life answering, and attempting to answer, Nietzsche's questions about morality.

Furthermore, Jung was not a “mystic.” He merely delved into areas that were
forbidden, because of their religious association, to devout scientists, and
was possessed of sufficient intellect and education to do so. It is incorrect,
and evidence of one-sided thinking, to label him pejoratively. It is incorrect
because Jung was, in fact, an experimental scientist of no small ability,
particularly at the beginning of his career. Many of the word-association tests
he helped pioneer are still used extensively, with some technical modifications
(and little recognition of original source), in the fields of cognitive
neuroscience and social psychology. The boxing and filing away of Jung is
one-sided because experimental procedure constitutes, at best, one pole of the
bipolar scientific process. A well-designed experiment allows for the testing
of ideas, when it is undertaken properly. However, ideas to test must be
generated—a truism often overlooked in the course of modern academic education.
It was at this endeavor that Jung excelled. Some might object: his ideas cannot
be tested. But they have been: the card-classification experiment by Jerome
Bruner, described previously,384 provides a classic and striking example
(although the results of that experiment have not generally been interpreted
from the perspective of Jung's thought). Furthermore, one axis of the
personality dichotomy he proposed—that of introversion-extroversion—has stood
up well, appears robust, in the face of repeated experimental inquiry.586 In
addition, the “unconscious” is clearly full of “complexes”—although now they go
by different names.587 Perhaps we will become sophisticated enough in the
future, in our ability to experiment, and in our understanding of Jung's ideas,
to test more of them.

Jung was primarily a physician, which meant that he was concerned with the
promotion of mental health. He believed that such promotion was
impossible—perhaps even counterproductive—in the absence of comprehension of
value, and of the processes by which value is generated. His investigation into
the nature of value led him to consideration of fantasy and myth. The world of
value is a world in imagination, the internalized result of the historically
determined social contract that provides fixed determination of affective and
motivational significance. Apprehension of this fact led Jung to analysis of
the fantasies generated by his seriously disturbed psychiatric patients, and
comparison of these fantasies—which he was unwilling to define, a priori, as
meaningless—with ideas generated by religious mystics from a variety of
“primitive” and sophisticated cultures, with a vast body of literary
productions in the Eastern and Western traditions, with imagery generated in
dreams (more than 25,000 dreams, by his own estimate) and by diligent
investigation into alchemical symbolism. This cross-cultural and
multidisciplinary approach to the problem of value seems at least empirical, if
not experimental—and remains eminently reasonable, in the absence of more
appropriate methodology. (In fact, the prominent sociobiologist E.O.Wilson has
recently recommended adoption of such a “cross-level” analytical procedure in
the guise of “consilience”—to unite the natural sciences, the social sciences
and the humanities.588)

Jung's ideas—particularly his “alchemical” ideas—have been inappropriately,
unfairly and dangerously ignored. They have been ignored because his students
were outside the academic mainstream (and, perhaps, because they were
frequently women). They have been ignored because they present a serious
challenge—an absolutely fatal challenge, in my estimation—to Freudian
psychoanalytic preconceptions. They have been overlooked because Jung took the
frightening and mysterious statements of religion seriously. He presumed that
such statements, which guided human adaptation successfully for thousands of
years, had some significance, some meaning. Jung's ideas have remained
unexamined because psychology, the youngest, most rational, and most
deterministic of sciences, is most afraid of religion. They have been ignored,
additionally, because they are difficult to understand, from the conceptual and
affective points of view. What the ideas are is hard to specify, initially;
what they signify, once understood, is emotionally challenging. Jung
essentially described the nature of the “language” of imagination, that ancient
process—of narrative, of the episodic memory system—which he thought of,
fundamentally, as the collective unconscious. Comprehension of this language is
perhaps more difficult than development of fluency in an foreign language,
because such comprehension necessarily and inevitably alters modern moral
presumption. It is this latter point that constitutes the core rationale for
dismissal of Jung's ideas. Jung was no less revolutionary, from the moral
perspective, than Martin Luther; he may reasonably be considered a figure in
the tradition of Luther. Furthermore, moral revolution is the most dreadfully
uncomfortable of all intrapsychic and social processes. It is the frightening
content of Jung's thought that has led most fundamentally to its rejection.

Jung essentially discovered, in the course of his analysis of alchemy, the
nature of the general human pattern of adaptation, and the characteristic
expression of that pattern, in fantasy, and affect. Specific representation of
this pattern, in the narrower domain of scientific endeavor, was outlined much
later—to much wider comprehension and academic acclaim—by Thomas Kuhn. Jung's
student Marie-Louise von Franz—who provided a cogent summary of Jung's complex
alchemical ideas—states:

If you read the history of the development of chemistry and particularly of
physics, you will see that even…exact natural sciences [such as chemistry and
physics] could not, and still cannot, avoid basing their thought systems on
certain hypotheses. In classical physics, up to the end of the 18th century,
one of the working hypotheses, arrived at either unconsciously, or
half-consciously, was that space had three dimensions, an idea which was never
questioned. The fact was always accepted, and perspective drawings of physical
events, diagrams, or experiments, were always in accordance with that theory.
Only when this theory is abandoned does one wonder how such a thing could have
ever been believed. How did one come by such an idea? Why were we so caught
that nobody ever doubted or even discussed the matter? It was accepted as a
self-evident fact, but what was at the root of it? Johannes Kepler, one of the
fathers of modern or classical physics, said that naturally space must have
three dimensions because of the Trinity! So our readiness to believe that space
has three dimensions is a more recent offspring of the Christian trinitarian
idea.

Further, until now the European scientific mind has been possessed by the idea
of causality, an idea hitherto accepted without question: everything was
causal, and the scientific attitude was that investigations should be made with
that premise in mind, for there must be a rational cause for everything. If
something appeared to be irrational, it was believed that its cause was not yet
known. Why were we so dominated by that idea? One of the chief fathers of
natural sciences—and a great protagonist of the absoluteness of the idea of
causality—was the French philosopher Descartes, and he based his belief on the
immutability of God. The doctrine of this immutability of God is one of the
Christian tenets: the Divinity is unchanging, there must be no internal
contradictions in God, or new ideas or conceptions. That is the basis of the
idea of causality! From the time of Descartes onwards this seemed so
self-evident to all physicists that there was no question about it. Science had
merely to investigate the causes, and we still believe this. If something falls
down then one must find out why—the wind must have blown it, or something like
that, and if no reason is discovered I am sure that half of you will say that
we do not yet know the cause, but that there must be one! Our archetypal
prejudices are so strong that one cannot defend oneself against them, they just
catch us.

The late physicist, Professor Wolfgang Pauli, frequently demonstrated the
extent to which modern physical sciences are in a way rooted in archetypal
ideas. For instance, the idea of causality as formulated by Descartes is
responsible for enormous progress in the investigation of light, of biological
phenomena, and so on, but that thing which promotes knowledge becomes its
prison. Great discoveries in natural sciences are generally due to the
appearance of a new archetypal model by which reality can be described; that
usually precedes big developments, for there is now a model which enables a
much fuller explanation than was hitherto possible.

So science has progressed, but still, any model becomes a cage, for if one
comes across phenomena difficult to explain, then instead of being adaptable
and saying that the phenomena do not conform to the model and that a new
hypothesis must be found, one clings to one's hypotheses with a kind of
emotional conviction, and cannot be objective. Why shouldn't there be more than
three dimensions, why not investigate and see where we get? But that people
could not do.

I remember a very good illustration given by one of Pauli's pupils. You know
that the theory of ether played a great role in the 17th and 18th
centuries—namely, that there was a kind of great air-like pneuma in the cosmos
in which light existed, etc. One day when a physicist at a Congress proved that
the theory of ether was quite unnecessary, an old man with a white beard got up
and in a quavering voice said: “If ether does not exist, then everything is
gone”! This old man had unconsciously projected his idea of God into ether.
Ether was his god, and if he did not have that then there was nothing left. The
man was naive enough to speak of his ideas, but all natural scientists have
ultimate models of reality in which they believe, just like the Holy Ghost.

It is a question of belief, not of science, and therefore something which
cannot be discussed, and people get excited and fanatical if you present them
with a fact which does not fit the frame.589



Also:

So the archetype is the promoter of ideas and is also responsible for the
emotional restrictions which prevent the renunciation of earlier theories. It
is really only a detail or specific aspect of what happens everywhere in life,
for we could not recognize anything without projection; but it is also the main
obstacle to the truth. If one meets an unknown woman, it is not possible to
make contact without projecting something; you must make a hypothesis, which of
course is done quite unconsciously: the woman is elderly and is probably a kind
of mother figure, and a normal human being, etc. You make assumptions and then
you have a bridge. When you know the person better, then many earlier
assumptions must be discarded and you must admit that your conclusions were
incorrect. Unless this is done, then you are hampered in your contact.

At first, one has to project, or there is no contact; but then one should be
able to correct the projection, and it is the same not only as regards human
beings, but everything else also. The projection apparatus must of necessity
work in us. Nothing can even be seen without the unconscious projection factor.
That is why, according to Indian philosophy, the whole of reality is a
projection—which it is, in a subjective matter of speaking.590



The idea of projection—that is, the idea that systems of thought have
“unconscious” axioms—is clearly related to the notion of “paradigmatic
thinking,” as outlined by Kuhn, to wide general acclaim. Jung described the
psychological consequences of paradigmatic thinking in great detail as well. He
first posed the question—“What happens to the (paradigmatic) representational
structure in someone's mind (in the human psyche, in human society) when
anomalous information, of revolutionary import, is finally accepted as
valid?”—and then answered it (my summary): “What happens has a pattern; the
pattern has a biological, even genetic, basis, which finds its expression in
fantasy; such fantasy provides subject material for myth and religion. The
propositions of myth and religion, in turn, help guide and stabilize
revolutionary human adaptation.” These answers have been rejected prematurely
and without sufficient consideration.

