# 4 - THE APPEARANCE OF ANOMALY
[Metadata]: # {05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {05.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
THE APPEARANCE OF ANOMALY
# THE APPEARANCE OF ANOMALY
Challenge to the Shared Map

Moral theories necessarily share common features with other theories. One of
the most fundamental shared features of theories, in general, is their reliance
on “extra-theoretical” presuppositions. The “extra-theoretical” presuppositions
of explicit moral theorems appear to take implicit form in image and, more
fundamentally, in action. Moral behaviors and schemas of valuation arise as a
consequence of behavioral interaction undertaken in the social world: every
individual, motivated to regulate his emotions through action, modifies the
behavior of others, operating in the same environment. The consequence of this
mutual modification, operating over time, is the emergence of a stable pattern
of behavior, “designed” to match individual and social needs, simultaneously.
Eventually, this behavioral pattern comes to be coded in image, heralded in
narrative, and explicitly represented in words. In the integrated individual—or
the integrated state—action, imagination and explicit verbal thought are
isomorphic: explicit and image-mediated beliefs and actual behaviors form a
coherent unit. Verbal theories of morality (explicit rules) match traditional
images of moral behavior, and action undertaken remains in concordance with
both. This integrated morality lends predictability to behavior, constitutes
the basis for the stable state, and helps ensure that emotion remains under
control.

The emergence of anomaly constitutes a threat to the integrity of the moral
tradition governing behavior and evaluation. Strange things or situations can
pose a challenge to the structure of a given system of action and related
beliefs; can pose such a challenge at comparatively restricted (“normal”) or
broader (“revolutionary”) levels of organization. A prolonged drought, for
example, destructive at the social level—or the occurrence of a serious illness
or disability, destructive at the personal—can force the reconstruction of
behavior and the reanalysis of the beliefs that accompany, follow, or underlie
such behavior. The appearance of a stranger—or, more commonly, a group of
strangers—may produce a similar effect. The stranger acts out and holds
different beliefs, using different implements and concepts. The mere existence
of these anomalous beliefs, actions and tools—generally the consequence of
prolonged, complex and powerful social-evolutionary processes—may be sufficient
to totally transform or even destroy the culture which encounters them,
unprepared. Cultures may be upset internally, as well, as a consequence of the
“strange idea”—or, similarly, by the actions of the revolutionary.

The capacity to abstract, to code morality in image and word, has facilitated
the communication, comprehension and development of behavior and behavioral
interaction. However, the capacity to abstract has also undermined the
stability of moral tradition. Once a procedure has been encapsulated in
image—and, particularly, in word—it becomes easier to modify, “experimentally”;
but also easier to casually criticize and discard. This capacity for easy
modification is very dangerous, in that the explicit and statable moral rules
that characterize a given culture tend to exist for reasons that are still
implicit and fundamental. The capacity to abstract, which has facilitated the
communication of very complex and only partially understood ideas, is therefore
also the capacity to undermine the very structure that lends predictability to
action, and which constrains the a priori meaning of things and situations. Our
capacity for abstraction is capable of disrupting our “unconscious”—that is,
imagistic and procedural—social identity, upsetting our emotional stability,
and undermining our integrity (that is, the isomorphism between our actions,
imaginings, and explicit moral theories or codes). Such disruption leaves us
vulnerable to possession by simplistic ideologies, and susceptible to cynicism,
existential despair, and weakness in the face of threat.

The ever-expanding human capacity for abstraction—central to human
“consciousness”—has enabled us to produce self-models sufficiently complex and
extended to take into account the temporal boundaries of individual life. Myths
of the “knowledge of good and evil” and the “fall from paradise” represent
emergence of this representational capacity, in the guise of a “historical
event.” The consequence of this “event”—that is, the development of
“self-consciousness”—is capacity to represent death, and to understand that the
possibility of death is “part” of the unknown. This “contamination of anomaly
with the possibility of death” has dramatically heightened the emotional power
and motivational significance of the unknown, and led to the production of
complex systems of action and belief designed to take that terrible possibility
into account.

These complex systems of action and belief are religious. They are the
traditional means of dealing with the shadow cast on life by knowledge of
mortality. Our inability to understand our religious traditions—and our
consequent conscious denigration of their perspectives—dramatically decrease
the utility of what they have to offer.

We are conscious enough to destabilize our beliefs and our traditional patterns
of action, but not conscious enough to understand them. If the reasons for the
existence of our traditions were rendered more explicit, however, perhaps we
could develop greater intrapsychic and social integrity. The capacity to
develop such understanding might help us use our capacity for reason to
support, rather than destroy, the moral systems that discipline and protect us.

