# 5 - The King of Order
[Metadata]: # {06.11}
[Descriptor]: # {06.11}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The King of Order
# The King of Order
In the absence of formal empirical methodology, the alchemical adept could only
investigate the transformations of matter with the preconceptions of his
imagination. The products of alchemy were therefore necessarily structured
according to the myth of the way, the primary archetypal manifestation of
imaginative fantasy. The alchemist worked alone, concentrating on his procedure
for months and years at a time, and in this solitary pursuit his fantasy had
free reign. Once he had the courage to admit to his own ignorance, his own
insufficiency, his investigations into “matter” took the form of contact with
the unknown. Admission of personal ignorance presents a challenge to the
cultural canon (to the degree that the ignorant one is identified with that
canon) and sets the stage for moral transformation, which manifests itself in
symbolic form. The alchemist was searching for comprehension of the nature of
material corruption and for a method whereby it could be perfected. Christian
dogma stated that the world had been finally redeemed by the Passion of Christ;
but it appeared evident to the alchemist that material substances, including
himself, remained “morally” corrupt and incomplete. Admission of imperfection
was therefore tantamount to admission that Christian dogma, as presented by the
authoritarian church—and, in consequence, as represented intrapsychically—was
incomplete. This incompleteness, manifested as absolute authority, served a
tyrannical function, which had to be eliminated, prior to the creation of new
knowledge. The aspect of the prima materia, which was first in need of
redemption, was therefore its patriarchal/tyrannical aspect, which appeared in
imagination as the Great Father—as the King, or his symbolic equivalent. Jung
states:

The conscious mind often knows little or nothing about its own transformation,
and does not want to know anything. The more autocratic it is, and the more
convinced of the eternal validity of its truths, the more it identifies with
them. Thus the kingship of Sol, which is a natural phenomenon, passes to the
human king who personifies the prevailing dominant idea and must therefore
share its fate. In the phenomenal world the Heraclitean law of everlasting
change, panta ret, prevails; and it seems that all the true things must change
and that only that which changes remains true…

In this alchemical procedure we can easily recognize the projection of the
transformation process: the aging of a psychic dominant is apparent from the
fact that it expresses the psychic totality in an ever-diminishing degree. One
can also say that the psyche no longer feels wholly contained in the dominant,
whereupon the dominant loses its fascination and no longer grips the psyche so
completely as before. On the other hand its content and meaning are no longer
properly understood, or what is understood fails to touch the heart. A
“sentiment d'incompletude” of this kind produces a compensato-ry reaction which
attracts other regions of the psyche and their contents, so as to fill up the
gap. As a rule this is an unconscious process that always sets in when the
attitude and orientation of the conscious mind have proved inadequate. I stress
this point because the conscious mind is a bad judge of its own situation and
often persists in the illusion that its attitude is just the right one and is
only prevented from working because of some external annoyance. If the dreams
were observed it would soon become clear why the conscious assumptions have
become unworkable. And if, finally, neurotic symptoms appear, then the attitude
of consciousness, its ruling idea, is contradicted, and in the unconscious
there is a stirring up of those archetypes that were the most suppressed by the
conscious attitude. The therapist then has no other course than to confront the
ego with its adversary and thus initiate the melting and recasting process. The
confrontation is expressed, in the alchemical myth of the king, as the
collision of the masculine, spiritual father ruled over by king Sol with the
feminine, chthonic mother-world symbolized by the aqua permanens or by the
chaos.618

The process represented symbolically as “disintegration of the king” found its
analogical material equivalent in the chemical process of dissolution—in the
immersion of a solid substance or compound (the prima materia) in a solvent, or
in its decay, its return to earth (hence the still extant metaphor for the
wastrel: the dissolute personality). The “solid substance,” the king,
represented the mythic core of the historically determined hierarchy of
behavioral pattern and representation with which the adept had been previously
identified and which had to be abandoned or challenged, before the
investigation of matter/unknown could begin in earnest. Destruction of the
culturally determined patriarchal system is typically represented in fantasy,
symbolically, as the death of the old (sterile, sick) king, which becomes
necessary when the land is no longer fruitful. Such a sacrifice—which was once
a ritual—means rejection of reliance on a particular pattern of behavioral
adaptation and representational presumption; means potential for reintroduction
of new ideas (or even a new pattern of ideas), when adaptation is threatened by
anomaly.619 The idea of the king—the central representative of culture— was
expressed in a multitude of symbolic images during the centuries alchemy
flourished. The eagle, the sun, the lion, heaven, fire, height, and spirit all
symbolized different aspects of the patriarchal system, which served to
represent the initial condition of the prima materia, prior to its dissolution.
Such symbolic representations emerge as a matter of course, if the conditions
which originally elicited them re-emerge. Encounter with the unknown
constitutes one such condition.

