# 5 - INTRODUCTION: THE HERO AND THE ADVERSARY
[Metadata]: # {06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {06.02}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
INTRODUCTION: THE HERO AND THE ADVERSARY
# INTRODUCTION: THE HERO AND THE ADVERSARY
The culture bequeathed to us by our forebears degenerates of its own accord, as
the flux of the present invalidates the static presuppositions of the past. We
may speed this process of degeneration by our “sins”—by voluntary refusal to
attend to our errors, when they manifest themselves, and by failure to adjust
behaviors and attitudes, in consequence. Through such refusal and failure, we
transform the irritations of the present into the catastrophes of the future,
and invite a wrathful God to drown us beneath the waves.



As has been well known since the compilations made by R.Andree, H.Usener, and
J.G.Frazer, the deluge myth is almost universally dis seminated; it is
documented in all the continents (although very rarely in Africa) and on
various cultural levels. A certain number of variants seem to be the result of
dissemination, first from Mesopo tamia and then from India. It is equally
possible that one or several diluvial catastrophes gave rise to fabulous
narratives. But it would be risky to explain so widespread a myth by phenomena
of which no geological traces have been found. The majority of the flood myths
seem in some sense to form part of the cosmic rhythm: the old world, peopled by
a fallen humanity, is submerged under the waters, and some time later a new
world emerges from the aquatic “chaos.”

In a large number of variants, the flood is the result of the sins (or ritual
faults) of human beings: sometimes it results simply from the wish of a divine
being to put an end to mankind…. the chief causes lie at once in the sins of
men and the decrepitude of the world. By the mere fact that it exists—that is,
that it lives and produces—the cosmos gradually deteriorates and ends by
falling into decay. This is the rea son why it has to be recreated. In other
words, the flood realizes, on the macrocosmic scale, what is symbolically
effected during the New Year festival: the “end of the world” and the end of a
sinful humanity in order to make a new creation possible.462



No discussion of the architecture of belief can possibly be considered
complete, in the absence of reference to evil. Evil is no longer a popular
word, so to speak—the term is generally considered old-fashioned, not
applicable in a society that has theoretically dispensed with its religious
preoccupations. Acts once defined as evil are now merely considered the
consequence of unjust familial, social or economic structures (although this
view is not as widespread as it once was). Alternatively, the commission of
incomprehensible acts of cruelty and destruction are viewed as symptomatic of
some physiological weakness or disease. Seldom are acts of evil considered
voluntary or purposeful—committed by someone possessed by an aesthetic that
makes art of terror and pain.

In the Egyptian cosmology, Osiris, the king, mythic image of the known, the
Great Father, has an eternal evil twin and opposite, Seth, who eventually leads
Osiris to his death. Four thousand years later, the moral of this great story
has not yet been grasped: failure to understand the nature of evil leads to its
eventual victory. At the end of this, the most cruel and bloodthirsty of
centuries, we are in danger not only of failing to understand evil, but of
denying its very existence. Invisibility, however, is what the devil craves
most.

I have spent a substantial amount of time, up to this point, describing the
nature of culture, and the manner in which it is generated. Culture, the Great
Father, protects us from the terrors of the unknown; defines around us a sacred
space into which nothing unbearably foreign is allowed. Culture is generated by
the process whose essential features have been captured in the pervasive and
recurrent myths of the hero. This hero is the individual who voluntarily faces
the dragon of the unknown, cuts it up, and creates the world from its pieces;
the individual who overcomes the too-long-senescent tyrant and frees the virgin
mother from his grasp. Such myths present a world starkly ambivalent in its
nature: the “natural” world is endlessly creative, and equally destructive; the
inextricably associated social “environment” is simultaneously tyrannical and
protective. So far in our discussion, however, the hero has stood alone. This
means that our story is far from over. The essential ambivalence characterizing
the “constituent elements of experience” extends to the individual as well, who
is capable of thoughts and actions as dark and destructive as anything in
society or nature.

Mythology envelops the transpersonal capacity for evil characterizing the
individual, as such, in the guise of a personality, duplicating its
encapsulation of chaos and order. The dark side of the individual is the
absolute adversary of the hero; the personality who shrinks from contact with
the unknown, or who denies that it exists, instead of actively approaching and
exploring; the personality whose “advice” speeds the decline of society rather
than its renewal. The image of this personality—like the phenomenon itself—has
developed and become elaborated in complexity and sophistication over the
course of centuries: proper understanding of its nature is terrifying, in a
salutary sort of way. This informative terror is the “purpose” of encapsulation
in narrative, in transpersonal memory: the image of the Christian devil, for
example, is the best “bad example” available. His implicit or explicit
imitation leads to disaster; the stories that portray his central features
exist as object lessons in the consequences of resentment, hatred, totalitarian
arrogance and jealousy.

Evil, like good, is not something static: it does not merely mean breaking the
rules, for example, and is not simply aggression, anger, force, pain,
disappointment, anxiety or horror. Life is of course endlessly complicated by
the fact that what is bad in one circumstance is positively necessary in the
next. I noted previously463 that the answer to the question “what is the good?”
must in fact be sought in the meta-domain, so to speak: the more fundamental
mystery—given the context-dependent nature of “the good”—is “how are answers to
the question ‘what is the good?’ endlessly and appropriately generated?” The
“good,” then, becomes the set of circumstances that allow the process of moral
construction to flourish or becomes the process of moral construction itself.
The problem “what then is evil?” must be addressed similarly.

Evil is rejection of and sworn opposition to the process of creative
exploration. Evil is proud repudiation of the unknown, and willful failure to
understand, transcend and transform the social world. Evil is, in addition—and
in consequence—hatred of the virtuous and courageous, precisely on account of
their virtue and courage. Evil is the desire to disseminate darkness, for the
love of darkness, where there could be light. The spirit of evil underlies all
actions that speed along the decrepitude of the world, that foster God's desire
to inundate and destroy everything that exists.

Great evils are easily identifiable, at least in retrospect, and are usually
the result (at least in interpretation) of the act of another. We build endless
memorials to the Holocaust, for example, and swear never to forget. But what is
it that we are remembering? What is the lesson we are supposed to have learned?
We don't know how the Holocaust came about—don't know what it is that the
people involved did, or failed to do, step by step, that made them behave in
such an appalling manner; don't know what or who made German society take such
a terrible turn. How could Hitler fail to believe that he was correct, when
everyone around him bowed to his orders? Would it not take character of
exceptional magnitude to resist the temptation of absolute power, freely
offered, democratically granted—even insisted upon? How would it be possible
for anyone to remain properly humble under such conditions? Most of us have
personal frailties that remain constrained by our social environments. Our
neurotic tendencies are checked by the people around us, who care for us, who
complain and protest when we lose our self-control and take things, in our
weakness, one step too far. If everyone around thinks you are the savior, who
is left to point out your defects and keep you conscious of them? This is not
an apology for Hitler, merely recognition that he was all too human. And what
does that statement mean? Hitler was human; Stalin, too; Idi Amin, too. What
does that say about being human?

Our tyrannical tendencies and moral decadences generally find their expression
limited by our narrow domains of personal power. We cannot doom millions to
death, at a whim, because we do not have the resources to do so. We satisfy
ourselves, in the absence of such power, with riding roughshod over those near
to us—and congratulate ourselves on our moral virtue. We use aggression and
strength to bend dependent others to our will—or, in the absence of strength,
use sickness and weakness to harness the force of empathy, and deceive our way
to dominance, underground. Granted the opportunity, how many of us would not be
Hitlers? Assuming we had the ambition, dedication and power of
organization—which is highly unlikely. Paucity of skill, however, does not
constitute moral virtue.

Many kings are tyrants, or moral decadents, because they are people—and many
people are tyrants, or moral decadents. We cannot say “never again” as a
consequence of the memory of the Holocaust, because we do not understand the
Holocaust, and it is impossible to remember what has not been understood. We do
not understand the Holocaust because we do not comprehend ourselves. Human
beings, very much like ourselves, produced the moral catastrophes of the Second
World War (and of Stalin's Soviet Union, and of Pol Pot's Cambodia…). “Never
forget” means “know thyself”: recognize and understand that evil twin, that
mortal enemy, who is part and parcel of every individual.

The heroic tendency—the archetypal savior—is an eternal spirit, which is to
say, a central and permanent aspect of human being. The same is true,
precisely, of the “adversarial” tendency: the capacity for endless denial, and
the desire to make everything suffer for the outrage of its existence, is an
ineradicable intrapsychic element of the individual. The great dramatists and
religious thinkers of the world have been able to grasp this fact, at least
implicitly, and to transmit it in story and image; modern analytic thinkers and
existential theorists have attempted to abstract these ideas upward into
“higher consciousness,” and to present them in logical and purely semantic
form. Sufficient material has been gathered to present a compelling portrait of
evil.

