# 2 - MYTHOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION: THE CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS OF EXPERIENCE
[Metadata]: # {03.08}
[Descriptor]: # {03.08}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
MYTHOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION: THE CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS OF EXPERIENCE
# MYTHOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION: THE CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS OF EXPERIENCE
Myth represents the world as forum for action. The world as forum for action
comprises three eternally extant constituent elements of experience and a
fourth that precedes them. The unknown, the knower, and the known make up the
world as place of drama; the indeterminate “precosmogonic chaos” preceding
their emergence serves as the ultimate source of all things (including the
three constituent elements of experience).

The precosmogonic chaos tends to take metaphorical form as the uroboros, the
self-consuming serpent who represents the union of matter and spirit, and the
possibility of transformation. The uroboros serves as “primal source” of the
mythological world parents (the Great Mother, nature, deity of the unknown,
creative and destructive; the Great Father, culture, deity of the familiar,
tyrannical and protective) and of their “Divine Son” (the Knower, the
generative Word, the process of exploration).

The ancient Mesopotamian creation myth—the Enuma elish— provides a concrete
example of the interplay of these personalities. This myth features four main
characters or sets of characters; Tiamat, the feminine dragon of chaos,
primordial goddess of creation (the uroboros and the Great Mother are
conflated, as is frequently the case, in this myth); Apsu, Tiamat's husband and
consort; the elder gods, children of Tiamat and Apsu; and Marduk, sun deity and
mythic hero. Tiamat symbolizes the great unknown, the matrix of the world; Apsu
the known, the pattern that makes regulated existence possible. The elder gods
symbolize the common psychological attributes of humanity (the fragments or
constituent elements of consciousness), and constitute a more thorough
representation of the constituent elements of the patriarchal known; Marduk,
greatest of the secondary deities, represents the process that eternally
mediates between matrix and regulated existence.

The original union of Tiamat and Apsu brings the elder gods into being. These
gods carelessly kill Apsu, upon whom they unconsciously depend. Tiamat
reappears, with a vengeance, and decides to destroy everything she has created.
Her “children” send one volunteer after another out to overpower her. All fail.
Finally, Marduk offers to do battle. He is elected as king—the greatest of
gods, the “determiner of destinies”—and voluntarily confronts Tiamat. He cuts
her apart, and creates the cosmos from her pieces. The Mesopotamian emperor,
who ritually embodies Marduk, acts out this battle during the festival of the
New Year, when the “old world” is renewed.

The Enuma elish expresses in image and narrative the idea that the
psychological function giving order to chaos (1) creates the cosmos and (2)
should occupy a superordinate position, in the intrapsychic and social domains.
The ideas contained in this myth are given more elaborated expression in later
Egyptian works of metaphysical speculation, which more directly address the
idea of the heroic renewal of culture.

The three constituent elements of experience and the fourth who precedes them
can be viewed, at a higher level of resolution, as seven universal characters
(who may take on any of a variety of culture-specific identities). Myth
describes the interactions of these characters. The great dragon of chaos—the
uroboros, the self-devouring serpent—might be conceptualized as pure (latent)
information, before it is parsed into the world of the familiar, the
unfamiliar, and the experiencing subject. The uroboros is the stuff of which
categorical knowledge is composed, before being that knowledge; it is the
primary “element” of the world, which is decomposed into cosmos, surrounding
chaos, and the exploratory process which “separates” the two.

The bivalent Great Mother (second and third characters) is creation and
destruction, simultaneously—the source of all new things, the benevolent bearer
and lover of the hero; the destructive forces of the unknown, the source of
fear itself, constantly conspiring to destroy life. The bivalent divine son
(fourth and fifth) is the sun god, the hero who journeys to the underworld to
rescue his incapacitated ancestors, the messianic son of the virgin mother,
savior of the world—and, simultaneously, his sworn adversary, arrogant and
deceitful. The bivalent Great Father (sixth and seventh) is the wise king and
the tyrant, cultural protection from the terrible forces of nature, security
for the weak, and wisdom for the foolish. Simultaneously, however, he is the
force who devours his own offspring, who rules the kingdom with a cruel and
unjust hand, and who actively suppresses any sign of dissent or difference.

Terrible, chaotic forces lurk behind the facade of the normal world. These
forces are kept at bay by maintenance of social order. The reign of order is
insufficient, however, because order itself becomes overbearing and deadly, if
allowed unregulated or permanent expression. The actions of the hero constitute
an antidote to the deadly forces of chaos, and to the tyranny of order. The
hero creates order from chaos and reconstructs that order when necessary. His
actions simultaneously ensure that novelty remains tolerable and that security
remains flexible.



Mephistopheles: Congratulations, before you part from me!

You know the devil, that is plain to see.

Here, take this key.

Faust: That little thing? But why?

Mephistopheles: First grasp it; it is nothing to decry.

Faust: It glows, it shines, increases in my hand!

Mephistopheles: How great its worth, you soon shall understand.

The key will smell the right place from all others:

Follow it down, it leads you to the Mothers!198

