# 5 - The Alchemical Procedure and the Philosopher's Stone - Part Two
[Metadata]: # {06.07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {06.07.02}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Alchemical Procedure and the Philosopher's Stone
Part Two
# Part Two
Where is what you most want to be found?

Where you are least likely to look.

“In sterquiliniis invenitur”591



King Arthur's knights sit at a round table, because they are all equal. They
set off to look for the Holy Grail—which is a symbol of salvation, container of
the “nourishing” blood of Christ, keeper of redemption. Each knight leaves on
his quest, individually. Each knight enters the forest, to begin his search, at
the point that looks darkest to him.

When I was about halfway through writing this manuscript, I went to visit my
sister-in-law and her family. She had a son—my nephew—who was about five years
old, very verbal and intelligent. He was deeply immersed in a pretend world and
liked to dress up as a knight, with a plastic helmet and sword.

He was happy during the day, to all appearances, but did not sleep well, and
had been having nightmares for some time. He would regularly scream for his mom
in the middle of the night, and appeared quite agitated by whatever was going
on in his imagination.

I asked him one morning after he had woken up what he had dreamed about. He
told me, in the presence of his family, that dwarflike, beaked creatures who
came up to his knees had been jumping up at him and biting him. Each creature
was covered with hair and grease, and had a cross shaved in the hair on the top
of its head. The dream also featured a dragon, who breathed fire. After the
dragon exhaled, the fire turned into the dwarves, who multiplied endlessly,
with each breath. He told the dream in a very serious voice to his parents and
to my wife and me, and we were shocked by its graphic imagery and horror.

The dream occurred at a transition point in my nephew's life. He was leaving
his mother to go to kindergarten, and was joining the social world. The dragon,
of course, served as symbol for the source of fear itself—the unknown, the
uroboros—while the dwarves were individual things to be afraid of, particular
manifestations of the general unknown.

I asked him, “What could you do about this dragon?”

He said, without hesitation, and with considerable excitement, “I would take my
dad, and we would go after the dragon. I would jump on its head, and poke out
its eyes with my sword. Then I would go down its throat, to where the fire came
out. I would cut out the box the fire came from, and make a shield from it.”

I thought this was a remarkable answer. He had reproduced an archaic hero myth,
in perfect form. The idea of making a shield from the firebox was nothing short
of brilliant. This gave him the power of the dragon to use against the dragon.

His nightmares ended then and did not return, even though he had been suffering
from them almost every night for a number of months. I asked his mother about
his dreams, more than a year later, and she reported no further disturbance.

The little boy, guided by his imagination, adopted identification with the
hero, and faced his worst nightmare. If we are to thrive, individually and
socially, each of us must do the same. Our great technological power makes the
consequences of our individual errors and weaknesses increasingly serious; if
we wish to continually expand our power, we must also continually expand our
wisdom. This is, unfortunately, a terrible thing to ask.

“In sterquiliniis invenitur”—in filth it will be found. This is perhaps the
prime “alchemical” dictum. What you need most is always to be found where you
least wish to look. This is really a matter of definition. The more profound
the error, the more difficult the revolution—the more fear and uncertaintly
released as a consequence of restructuring. The things that are most
informative are also frequently most painful. Under such circumstances, it is
easy to run away. The act of running away, however, transforms the ambivalent
unknown into that which is too terrifying to face. Acceptance of anomalous
information brings terror and pos-sibility, revolution and transformation.
Rejection of unbearable fact stifles adaptation and strangles life. We choose
one path or another at every decision point in our lives, and emerge as the sum
total of our choices. In rejecting our errors, we gain short-term security—but
throw away our identity with the process that allows us to transcend our
weaknesses and tolerate our painfully limited lives:

There was a good man who owned a vineyard. He leased it to tenant farmers so
that they might work it and he might collect the produce from them. He sent his
servant so that the tenants might give him the produce of the vineyard. They
seized his servant and beat him, all but killing him. The servant went back and
told his master. The master said, “Perhaps they did not recognize him.” He sent
another servant. The tenants beat this one as well. Then the owner sent his son
and said, “Perhaps they will show respect to my son.” Because the tenants knew
that it was he who was heir to the vineyard, they seized him and killed him.
Let him who has ears hear.

Jesus said, “Show me the stone which the builders have rejected. That one is
the cornerstone.”592



Face what you reject, accept what you refuse to acknowledge, and you will find
the treasure that the dragon guards.

