# 4 - THE RISE OF SELF-REFERENCE, AND THE PERMANENT CONTAMINATION OF ANOMALY WITH DEATH
[Metadata]: # {05.08}
[Descriptor]: # {05.08}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
THE RISE OF SELF-REFERENCE, AND THE PERMANENT CONTAMINATION OF ANOMALY WITH DEATH
# THE RISE OF SELF-REFERENCE, AND THE PERMANENT CONTAMINATION OF ANOMALY WITH DEATH
The appearance of anomaly can be less or more upsetting. Small “manifestations
of the unknown” disrupt relatively small tracts of “explored territory.” Larger
manifestations may disrupt all things previously taken for granted, even things
invisible.

Upsetting manifestations of the unknown may occur as a consequence of “outside
forces,” geological, meteorological, even cosmological. Similarly, social
transformations may upset the stable and familiar. Wars, revolutions and
migrations make the conditional nature of everything taken for granted evident
once more.

Internal transformations are just as likely to introduce instability. The
process of maturation, in and of itself, is sufficient to disrupt the
previously stable and well-adapted personality and the little society of the
family. Crises in adaptation may be brought about in childhood at the onset of
schooling and first independent contact with the unmediated social world. The
hormonal changes and new social demands of youth may likewise transform the
happy and reasonable child into the depressed and hostile adolescent.

Some internal transformations are also natural and social events. The
ever-expanding human capacity for abstract thinking, for example, appears to be
a consequence of biological and social forces, working synergistically. The
human brain has evolved exceptionally quickly, from the phylogenetic
perspective. The language-mediated interpersonal interaction characteristic of
ever-larger human societies has provided that rapidly developing biological
capacity with information whose sophistication and breadth is increasing
exponentially. This means that the human mind increasingly manifests the
capacity to upset itself, to produce revelations, so to speak, that knock
gaping holes in the previously sufficient adaptive and protective social and
intrapsychic structures.

The human capacity for abstraction has enabled us as a species and as
individuals to produce self-models that include the temporal boundaries of
existence. We have become able to imagine our own deaths, and the deaths of
those we love, and to make a link between mortal fragility and every risk we
encounter. Emergence of such capacity-which reoccurs with the maturation of
every new human being-introduces the most intractable anomaly imaginable into
the developmental course of every life.

Myth represents the ever-recurring appearance of this representational
ability-this emergent “self-consciousness,” the heritable sin of Adam-as
incorporation of the “forbidden fruit,” development of knowledge of good and
evil, and consequent expulsion from paradise. This appearance is an event of
“cosmic significance,” driving the separation of heaven and earth, making human
experience something “eternally fallen,” something ever in need of redemption.

The unknown has become permanently contaminated with death, for Homo sapiens.
This contamination has tremendously heightened our general motivation-our fear
and curiosity-as we are able to perceive the potential that lurks behind every
anomalous event. Our cultural creations-our great societies and the beliefs
that accompany them—can be profitably viewed as driven by our knowledge of
mortality, and by the energy (the heightened alertness and penetrating
consciousness) such knowledge inspires.

Our great transpersonal cognitive power, however, has not yet rescued us from
the valley of the shadow of death.

What man is found such an idiot as to suppose that God planted trees in
Paradise, in Eden, like a husbandman, and planted therein the tree of Life,
perceptible to the eyes and sense, which gave life to the eater thereof; and
another tree which gave to the eater thereof a knowledge of good and evil? I
believe that every man must hold these things for images, under which the
hidden sense lies concealed.432



The meta-mythology of the Way portrays the manner in which specific ideas about
the present, the future, and the mode of transforming one into the other are
initially constructed, and then reconstructed in their entirety, when such
transformation becomes necessary. This meta-myth provides the deep structure
linking other classes of myths, including those describing the current or
pre-existence stable state, those that portray the emergence of something
unexpected into that state, those that represent the dissolution of paradise,
in consequence, and those that describe the regeneration of stability. This
cyclic pattern is essentially characteristic of the development of
consciousness, of the capacity to act and represent—which is regarded from the
mythic perspective as akin to the creation of the world.

The “previous place of stability,” destroyed as a consequence of emergent
anomaly, may be apprehended either as “the paradise that once reigned,” from
the perspective of the chaos engendered by its collapse, or as “the rigid and
tyrannical past,” from the perspective of revitalized and renewed order. Myths
of paradise and the fall typically describe the first dynamic elements of the
way from the perspective of “the chaos presently reigning”—that is, from the
position of the uncertainty and fear that characterizes profane and worldly
life. From this standpoint, human life is existence in the “valley of the
shadow of death,” contaminated by the unbearable and unreturnable gift of the
knowledge of good and evil. Myths of redemption—that is, of the ascent from
chaos, of the return to paradise, or of the “flight” to heaven—are tales
“designed” to describe the process of remediation for the “prehistoric” fall.
Such myths lay out a morality whose incorporation or incarnation constitutes
cure for the spiritual paralysis engendered by emergent knowledge of death.

The idea of primeval paradise, then paradise lost—of the origin of experience,
the rise of (self)consciousness, then permanent, heritable fall, descent from
grace—appears as a constant predicate of human culture, distributed throughout
the world. Even the most technologically primitive of people, whose styles of
existence were often mistaken for paradisal by the Europeans who first
encountered them, generally considered themselves fallen from an earlier
condition of perfection. For them, like us, the noble savage was an ancestral
Adamic figure, who could communicate directly with God:

When Heaven had been abruptly separated from the earth, that is, when it had
become remote, as in our days; when the tree or liana connecting Earth to
Heaven had been cut; or the mountain which used to touch the sky had been
flattened out—then the paradisiac stage was over, and man entered into his
present condition. In effect, all [myths of paradise] show us primordial man
enjoying a beatitude, a spontaneity and freedom, which he has unfortunately
lost in consequence of the fall—that is, of what followed upon the mythical
event that caused the rupture between Heaven and Earth.433



The idea of paradise encompasses somewhat more than the “previous place of
stability.” It is actually all previous places of stability, concatenated into
a single representation. Every previous place of stability becomes in this
manner order, as such, balanced perfectly with potential—becomes existence
without suffering, in Eden or Paradise, in the “walled garden of delight”
(“Eden, signifies in Hebrew ‘delight, a place of delight’…our own English word
Paradise, which is from the Persian, pairi—“around,” daeza—“a wall,” means
properly a walled enclosure. Apparently, then, Eden is a walled garden of
delight.”434). Paradise is the place where the perfect harmony of order and
chaos eliminates suffering, while bringing forth the necessities and pleasures
of life without work or effort. Chaos and order are integrated, perfectly, in
the paradisal state.

Paradise therefore also partakes of the state of the “cosmos” before its
division into the ever-warring constituent elements of experience. This
uroboric condition or state, conceptualized as a mode of being that is free
from or beyond opposition, is also by necessity that place or state of being
where suffering—a consequence of limitation and opposition—does not exist. This
form of symbolic representation seems somewhat paradoxical, as it is the
“dragon of chaos” that generates dread anxiety, when it manifests itself
unexpectedly. However, context determines salience—determines meaning—in
mythology as elsewhere. The conditions of existence—that is, the balance
obtained by the forces of order, chaos and consciousness—not infrequently
appear as intolerable, in and of themselves (in the state of anxiety and pain
characterized by severe grief or depression, for example). From this
perspective, the state of nonbeing (equivalent to identity with precosmogonic
chaos) is the absence of all possibility of suffering. In the state of ideation
characterizing suicide, for example, the Great Mother beckons. A student of
mine, who had undergone a relatively severe crisis of identity, told me the
following story:

I took a trip to the ocean. There were cliffs behind the beach. I was standing
on one of the cliffs, looking out over the water. I was in a depressed state of
mind. I looked out to the horizon. I could see the figure of a beautiful woman
in the clouds. She gestured for me to come forward. I almost went over the
edge, before I came out of my fantasy.



My wife told me a very similar tale. When she was in late adolescence, feeling
somewhat unsettled, she took a camping trip on the sides of a deep river bank
near her hometown. She stayed overnight on a bluff overlooking a steep drop. In
the morning, the fog came off the river and filled the valley. She walked to
the edge.

I saw the clouds below me. They looked like big, soft pillows. I imagined
diving in, where it was warm and comfortable. But part of me knew better.



The state of non-existence—the state before the opening of Pandora's box—can
under many conditions appear a state worth (re)attaining.

The common metaphor of Paradise as geographic place serves to concretize a
complex state of affairs, whose intrinsic nature would otherwise remain
entirely beyond grasp. It brings down to earth the a priori conditions of the
spirit and renders them initially comprehensible, at least in the symbolic
sense. Paradise as place or state is perfected interpersonal interaction—the
harmony of the lion and the lamb—as well as spiritual harmony (is the “internal
kingdom” and the “external kingdom” simultaneously united as the “kingdom of
God”). Paradise is also the world before it became profane—before innocence was
lost.

Myths of “the paradise of childhood” use the circumstances applying at the dawn
of each individual life—prior to separation of mother and child—as metaphor for
the “place of beginnings.” The symbiotic mother-child relationship is a union
of elements that will in time become separate. The intimate union of two
individuals at the beginning of a life comprises a state that is one thing, and
more than one thing, simultaneously. This concrete example of a unity that is
at the same time a plurality can be used in abstraction, to represent the
hypothetical pretemporal state itself, where everything that would be more than
one thing still “existed” in inseparable identity. This unity—the unviolated
original state—tends to take on the affective evaluation of perfection (since
it is the place where there is no conflict, no “separation of opposites”).

Widespread iconic representations of the Holy Virgin Mother and Child, for
example—Christian and non-Christian—might be regarded as crystallized fantasies
about the affective nature of the origin. In the ideal mother-infant union,
every desire remains absolutely bounded by love. The state of early childhood,
more generally, symbolizes freedom from conflict; symbolizes honest, innocent,
idyllic human existence, immersion in love, life before the necessary
corruption of social contact, life preceding exposure to the harshly punitive
conditions of physical existence. Childhood represents (perhaps, is) existence
prior to the discovery of mortality. This lack of contamination by knowledge of
death lends childhood experience an ideal quality, which easily comes to serve
the mythic imagination as model for the state of being that transcends the
existential anxiety of adulthood. The child, father to the man, represents the
past of man; additionally, represents human potential, and man's eternal hope
for the future. The Hasidim believe, for example, that “the Zaddik [the
perfect, righteous man] finds that which has been lost since birth, and
restores it to man.”435 In the Christian tradition, likewise, it is held that
“except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven” (Matthew 3:3). Maturation means expansion of ability,
differentiation of self and world, transformation of possibility into
actuality, but loss of potential as well, as anything developed develops in one
direction, and not in any of the innumerable alternatives. Growth therefore
also means decline, as each step toward adulthood is one step closer to death.

The initial paradisal state is typically disrupted, in mythological
representation, by some fateful act undertaken by man—by some act that places
him in opposition to his heavenly source. Such opposition is painful, and is
often portrayed as a dreadful mistake or sin. It is nonetheless the case that
the origin of experience and history—that is, the origin of being
itself—appears inextricably bound up with such opposition, with differentiation
from the origin. The initial paradisal state, although characterized by
absolute totality, nonetheless seems paradoxically flawed; it suffers from an
indeterminate form of non-existence—lacks reality itself:

There was something formless, yet complete, that existed before Heaven and
Earth;

Without sound, without substance, dependent on nothing, unchanging,
all-pervading, unfailing.

One may think of it as the Mother of all things under Heaven.436



Such non-existence appears as an inevitable consequence of the absence of
limitation, or of opposition. This absence deprives whatever constitutes the
origin of a point of reference, distinguishable from itself—and, therefore,
deprives it of existence. As aplace (as the “previous state of innocent
being”), paradise retains a patina of carefree existence. This is diminished by
the comparative unreality of that existence. Things have not yet fallen apart
in the Garden of Eden—have not yet separated (completely) into their
constituent elements. Two things that cannot be discerned from one another are
not two things, however, and one thing with no discernible features whatsoever
may not even be.

Paradise is the world, before it has become realized. In such a state, nothing
suffers, and nothing dies, because there is no defined one to suffer—no one
aware of either the nature of subjective being, or the meaning of such being,
once it has become “detached” from the whole. The “primordial ancestor,”
simultaneously male and female, dwells in this unrealized place, prior to
division into husband and wife;437 exists, unselfconsciously, even after that
division:

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. (Genesis
2:25)



To “know” nakedness and to be shamed by it is to understand exposure, weakness
and vulnerability. To be exposed before a crowd and the world is to have the
essential frailty of individual being dramatically and incontrovertibly
demonstrated. To be unaware of nakedness—to lack “self-consciousness”—is to be
much less troubled, but also to be much less. The “paradisal” world of the
child is much less—much less manifest, that is— than the world of the adult.
The child has fewer responsibilities, and fewer defined concerns, than the
adult. This lends childhood a glamour that mature existence lacks, at least
from a certain adult perspective. But it is also the case that the child has a
terrible vulnerability that the adult has transcended. The child does not
explicitly perceive his vulnerability, and therefore does not suffer, until
that vulnerability tragically manifests itself. The adult, by contrast, knows
he can be hurt, and suffers constantly for that knowledge. His “heightened
consciousness”—self-consciousness, really—means that he can take steps to
ensure his healthy survival, however (even though he must in consequence worry
for the future). The world of the child is circumscribed, incompletely
realized, but nonetheless vulnerable. The paradisal world is incomplete, yet
threatened, in the same manner.

It is primordial separation of light from darkness—engendered by Logos, the
Word, equivalent to the process of consciousness—that initiates human
experience and historical activity (which is reality itself, for all intents
and purposes). This initial division provides the prototypic structure, and the
fundamental precondition, for the elaboration and description of more
differentiated attracting and repulsing pairs of opposites:

In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the
deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

And God said, Let there be light; and there was light.

And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the
darkness. (Genesis 1:1–4)



Light and darkness constitute mythic totality; order and chaos, in paradoxical
union, provide primordial elements of the entire experiential universe. Light
is illumination, inspiration; darkness, ignorance and degeneration. Light is
the newly risen sun, the eternal victor of the endless cyclical battle with the
serpent of the night; it is the savior, the mythic hero, the deliverer of
humanity. Light is gold, the king of metals, pure and incorruptible, a symbol
for civilized value itself. Light is Apollo, the sun king, god of
enlightenment, clarity and focus; spirit, opposed to black matter; bright
“masculinity,” opposed to the dark and unconscious “feminine.” Light is Marduk,
the Babylonian hero, god of the morning and spring day, who struggles against
Tiamat, monstrous goddess of death and the night. Light is Horus, who fights
against evil and redeems the father. Light is Christ, who transcends the past,
and extends to all individuals identity with the divine Logos. To exist in the
light means to be born, to live, to be redeemed. To depart from the light means
to choose the path of evil—spiritual death—or to perish bodily altogether.

Myth equates the origin of the universe of experience with the partition of
light from darkness because of the analogical or metaphorical identity between
that separation and the mysterious differentiation of conscious experience from
unconscious nonawareness. Awareness and daytime experience are inextricably
united, like oblivion and the night. Darkness places severe, uncontrollable
external transpersonal limitations upon waking human awareness, by eliminating
or dramatically restricting visually dependent temporal and spatial sensory
extension. The blackness of the night brings with it the re-emergence of the
unknown, and the eternal human sense of subjugation to those terrors still
incomprehensibly embedded in experience:

When sacred Night sweeps heavenward, she takes

the glad, the winsome day, and folding it

rolls up its golden carpet that had been

spread over an abysmal pit.

Gone vision-like is the external world,

and man, a homeless orphan, has to face,

in utter helplessness, naked, alone,

the blackness of immeasurable space.

Upon himself he has to lean; with mind

abolished, thought unfathered, in the dim

depths of his soul he sinks, for nothing comes

from outside to support or limit him.

All life and brightness seem an ancient dream—

while in the substance of the night,

unravelled, alien, he now perceives

a fateful something that is his by right.438



External “cosmic” forces veil the day with the night. Similarly, and as a
consequence of equally uncontrollable and impersonal “internal” forces,
consciousness vanishes, into sleep, in the night:439

The central metaphor underlying “beginning” is not really birth at all. It is
rather the moment of waking from sleep, when one world disappears and another
comes into being. This is still contained within a cycle: we know that at the
end of the day we shall return to the world of sleep, but in the meantime there
is a sense of self-transcendence, of a consciousness getting 'up' from an
unreal into a real, or at least more real, world. This sense of awakening into
a greater degree of reality is expressed by Heraclitus…as a passing from a
world where everyone has his own “logos” into a world where there is a common
“logos.” Genesis presents the Creation as a sudden coming into being of a world
through articulate speech (another aspect of logos), conscious perception,
light and stability. Something like this metaphor of awakening may be the real
reason for the emphasis on “days,” and such recurring phrases as “And the
evening and the morning were the first day,” even before the day as we know it
was established with the creating of the sun.440



The temporary nocturnal state of nonexistence appears similar to the more
permanent situation theoretically prevailing prior (?) to the dawn of awareness
as such, where there was no subject, no object, and no experience at all—but
where the possibility of such things somehow lay dormant.

There is no suffering in the Garden of Eden. In such a state, however, things
do not really exist. In consequence, myth appears to have equated the
establishment of the opposition necessary to being with the appearance and
evolution of the limited subject, who serves creation as the mirror of God. In
the mythic world, the very existence of experience—past, present and
future—appears dependent upon experience of the spatially and temporally
limited observer. Restricted in their manifestation in this manner—that is,
manifest in the domain of individual experience—things attain a brief,
differentiated existence, before they crash into their opposites and vanish
forever. An ancient midrash states, in this vein, that “God and man are in a
sense twins.”441 The modern physicist John Wheeler states, analogously:

In every elementary quantum process the act of observation, or the act of
registration, or the act of observer-participancy, or whatever we choose to
call it, plays an essential part in giving “tangible reality” to that which we
say is happening. [Paradoxically:] The universe exists “out there” independent
of acts of registration, but the universe does not exist out there independent
of acts of registration.442



From the standard perspective, objective things exist, in and of themselves.
But this viewpoint eliminates the necessity of the observer, who gives to all
things a necessary vantage point, reducing indefinable virtuality to extant
actuality. Myth makes no such mistake, equating the very presence of being and
becoming with the emergence of consciousness and self-consciousness.443 It is
this equation that allows the mythic imagination to place man at the center of
the universe, and to draw an analogy between the principle that makes order out
of chaos, and the individual himself.

The mythic world—the world, as it is experienced—might in fact be considered an
emergent property of first-order self-reference; might be regarded as the
interaction between the universe as subject and the universe as object. Myth
equates the origin with the dawning of light, with the emergence of
consciousness: equates the universe with the world of experience; assumes that
the subjective is a precondition of the real. This idea seems exceedingly
foreign to modern sensibility, which is predicated upon the historically novel
proposition that the objective material in and of itself constitutes the real,
and that subjective experience, which in fact provides source material for the
concept of the object, is merely an epiphenomenal appendage. However, it is the
case that self-referential systems (like that consisting of being as subject
and object, simultaneously) are characterized by the emergence of unexpect-ed
and qualitatively unique properties. The world as subject (that is, the
individual) is an exceedingly complex phenomenon—more complex, by far, than
anything else (excepting other subjects). The world as object is hardly less
mysterious. It is reasonable to regard the interaction of the two as something
even more remarkable. We think: matter first, then subject—and presume that
matter, as we understand it, is that which exists in the absence of our
understanding. But the “primal matter” of mythology (a more comprehensive
“substance” than the matter of the modern world) is much more than mere
substance: it is the source of everything, objective and subjective (is matter
and spirit, united in essence). From this perspective, consciousness is
fundamental to the world of experience—as fundamental as “things” themselves.
The matter of mythology therefore seems more than “superstition, that must be
transcended”—seems more than the dead stuff of the modern viewpoint.

Furthermore, the world of experience appears generated by the actions of
consciousness—by dawning awareness—in more than one “stage.” The “purely
conscious awareness” which hypothetically exists prior to the generation of
active representations of the self—that is, which accompanied the mere division
of “object” and “subject”—still retains essential unity and associated
“paradisal” elements. Adam and Eve exist as independent beings prior to their
“fall,” but still commune with the animals and walk with God. Sheltered in an
eternally productive garden, blissfully ignorant of their essential nakedness
and vulnerability, they exist without anxious care or toil. It is the emergence
of second-order self-reference—awareness of the self; self-consciousness—which
finally disrupts this static state of perfection, and irreversibly alters the
nature of experience. (The development of consciousness—the apprehension of the
system by “itself”—adds one form of self-reference to the universal structure,
Self-consciousness—the apprehension of the subject by himself—appears to have
added another.) The modern mind would consider nothing fundamental altered by
such internal transformation (as it considers consciousness epiphenomenal to
reality). The mythological mind adopts another stance, entirely, presuming as
it does that consciousness is allied with the very creator of things. From this
viewpoint, cognitive transformations alter the structure of existence—change
the very relationship between heaven and earth, creator and created;
permanently restructure the cosmos itself. The modern materialist would
consider such a theory arrogant and presumptious, to say the least.
Nonetheless, the great societies of East and West are predicated precisely upon
such a viewpoint—upon myths of origin and fall, characterized by uncanny
structural parallel:

The father of Prince Gautama, the Buddha, savior of the Orient, determined to
protect his son from desperate knowledge and tragic awareness, built for him an
enclosed pavilion, a walled garden of earthly delights. Only the healthy, the
young, and the happy were allowed access to this earthly paradise. All signs of
decay and degeneration were thus kept hidden from the prince. Immersed in the
immediate pleasures of the senses, in physical love, in dance, and music, in
beauty, and pleasure, Gautama grew to maturity, protected absolutely from the
limitations of mortal being. However, he grew curious, despite his father's
most particular attention and will, and resolved to leave his seductive prison.

Preparations were made, to gild his chosen route, to cover the adventurer's
path with flowers, and to display for his admiration and preoccupation the
fairest women of the kingdom. The prince set out, with full retinue, in the
shielded comfort of a chaperoned chariot, and delighted in the panorama
previously prepared for him. The gods, however, decided to disrupt these most
carefully laid plans, and sent an aged man to hobble, in full view, alongside
the road. The prince's fascinated gaze fell upon the ancient interloper.
Compelled by curiosity, he asked his attendant:

“What is that creature stumbling, shabby, bent and broken, beside my retinue?”
and the attendant answered:

“That is a man, like other men, who was born an infant, became a child, a
youth, a husband, a father, a father of fathers. He has become old, subject to
destruction of his beauty, his will, and the possibilities of life.”

“Like other men, you say?” hesitantly inquired the prince. “That means…. this
will happen to me?” and the attendant answered:

“Inevitably, with the passage of time.”

The world collapsed in upon Gautama, and he asked to be returned to the safety
of home. In time, his anxiety lessened, his curiosity grew, and he ventured
outside again. This time the gods sent a sick man into view.

“This creature,” he asked his attendant, “shaking and palsied, horribly
afflicted, unbearable to behold, a source of pity and contempt: what is he?”
and the attendant answered:

“That is a man, like other men, who was born whole, but who became ill and
sick, unable to cope, a burden to himself and others, suffering and incurable.”

“Like other men, you say?” inquired the prince. “This could happen to me?” and
the attendant answered:

“No man is exempt from the ravages of disease.”

Once again the world collapsed, and Gautama returned to his home. But the
delights of his previous life were ashes in his mouth, and he ventured forth a
third time. The gods, in their mercy, sent him a dead man, in funeral
procession.

“This creature,” he asked his attendant, “laying so still, appearing so
fearsome, surrounded by grief and by sorrow, lost and forlorn: what is he?” and
the attendant answered:

“That is a man, like other men, born of woman, beloved and hated, who once was
like you, and now is the earth.”

“Like other men, you say?” inquired the Prince. “Then…this could happen to me?”

“This is your end,” said the attendant, “and the end of all men.”

The world collapsed, a final time, and Gautama asked to be returned home. But
the attendant had orders from the prince's father, and took him instead to a
festival of women, occurring nearby in a grove in the woods. The prince was met
by a beautiful assemblage, who offered themselves freely to him, without
restraint, in song, and in dance, in play, in the spirit of sensual love. But
Gautama could think only of death, and the inevitable decomposition of beauty,
and took no pleasure in the display.



The myth of the Buddha is the story of individual development, considered in
the ideal. The

Figure 53: The (Voluntary) Descent of the Buddha





story opens with Gautama's father, shielding his child from the dangers of the
world, much as any child in a healthy family is shielded. As the young prince
matures, however, and becomes increasingly curious, he starts to wonder about
the “world beyond.” Children who develop within a safe and secure family grow
into individuals who can no longer be contained by that family. It is the “good
parent” who “fails,” necessarily, by fostering a child who rapidly becomes so
independent that parenting no longer suffices. Each foray out into the world
produces an increase in knowledge, and a commensurate decrease in the ability
of the childhood family constellation and personality to “map the world”—to
provide acceptable patterns of action and representation, for existence as a
true individual. The future Buddha's encounter with his intrinsic mortal
limitations destroyed his childhood paradise, tragically—but propelled him out
into the world as an independent being. This story can be portrayed, in the
familiar manner, as in Figure 53: The (Voluntary) Descent of the Buddha. The
story of Gautama's maturation details the consequential contamination of
existence with unbearable anxiety; describes the association, in potential,
even of beauty and the most fundamental and necessary of biological pleasures
with the inevitability of decay and of death, the ulti-mate punishment. The
Buddha's struggle with and eventual victory over his emergent tragic
self-consciousness comprises the rest of the great tale: first, Gautama
incorporated the knowledge of his ancestors; then, he transcended and
restructured that knowledge.

After leaving the “walled garden” of his childhood, Gautama became a master of
tradition, in his attempt to make sense of the world of experience as it now
presented itself to him. He developed extensive knowledge of various
philosophies, including Samkhya and Yoga, leaving each in turn as insufficient,
and then took asceticism— worldly renunciation—to an extreme: “reduced almost
to the state of a skeleton, he finally came to resemble a heap of dust.”444
That approach, too, proved insufficient. Finally, having tasted everything life
had to offer, and having developed the discipline of a dedicated adherent, he
prepared himself for his final battle. He entered a vast forest (the spiritual
home of the unknown), placed himself at the foot of a pipal tree, and resolved
to remain immobile in that place until he attained awakening.

Gautama experienced a true initiatory ordeal in that position, undergoing all
the terrors of death (as well as renewed assault by the temptations of profane
life). The discipline he had acquired in his previous journeys served him well,
however, and he was able to remain single-mindedly devoted to his task—to the
discovery of a truth that would serve life, that would redeem human experience.
His final temptation is perhaps the most interesting. The Buddha attains
nirvana, perfection, as a consequence of his ordeal, and is offered the option
of remaining in that state by the God of Death. The offer is rejected: Buddha
returns to the world, accepting his mortal condition, so that he can
disseminate the knowledge he has acquired. It is this latter action that truly
marks him as a revolutionary hero. Acquisition of wisdom—the consequence of the
creative endeavor— is insufficient. The circle of redemptive action is not
closed until information hard won on the battleground of the individual psyche
has been integrated into the larger community. There can be no salvation for
one in the presence of the continued suffering of all. It is Buddha's return
from the heaven that is in his grasp that makes him truly great.

The story of the Buddha is perhaps the greatest “literary” production of the
East. It is of great interest to note, therefore, that its theme also informs
the most fundamental levels of Western sensibility. The Judeo-Christian tale of
redemption is predicated upon representation of the individual subject, marred
with Original Sin, fallen from grace, conscious of life and the borders of
life, irretrievably blessed and cursed with knowledge of good and evil. The
ability to develop such knowledge appears in the stories of Genesis as a
“heritable characteristic of the race,” as the precondition for generation of
knowledge of the objective boundaries of subjective existence, as the
fundamental precondition of tragic self-awareness:

And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God
had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of
every tree of the garden?

And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of
the garden:

But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath
said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

For God doth know that in the day you eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he
did eat. (Genesis 3:1–6)



Myths dream ideas long before ideas take on recognizable, familiar and verbally
comprehensible form. The myth, like the dream, may be regarded as the
birthplace of conscious abstract knowledge, as the matrix from which formed
ideas spring. Every concept, no matter how new or modern it appears, emerges
from ground prepared by centuries of previous intellectual activity. Myth
“prepares the ground” for explicit understanding by using what is presently
comprehended—what has been partially explored, what has been adapted to in
action—to represent that which remains unknown. Objects of experience which
have been investigated can therefore come to serve as symbols of representation
for description of the subject of experience, comparatively difficult to
comprehend. It is in this manner that the self, which is essentially
incomprehensible, unknown, gathers metaphoric representations.

Things that are in themselves complex and mysterious in their attributes serve
this metaphoric function most usefully, since their potential for symbolic
application is virtually infinite in scope. The tree and the serpent, for
example—complex objects of apprehension—can be understood in part through
direct and active observation, and can therefore provide productive grist for
the metaphorical mill. Tree and serpent, coupled and singly, have an extensive,
pervasive, and detailed history as representational agents. They serve similar
functions in a multitude of myths describing the loss of paradise, and must
therefore serve as apt representatives of some process or structure playing a
central part in that loss. It appears likely—despite the initial strangeness of
the presumption— that this structure is the nervous system,445 as such (rather
than any individual nervous system), as it manifests itself in intrapsychic
representation.446

The tree is the axis mundi, world-tree, grounded immovably in the maternal (or,
not infrequently, “material”) world of chaos, with branches reaching to the sky
(to heaven, to the realm of the ancestral spirits). According to the adepts of
Hatha Yoga:

The feet, firmly placed on the ground, correspond to the roots of the tree, its
foundation and source of nourishment. This might indicate that in daily life
you stand firmly on the ground to meet life's demands. Your head is in space,
or heaven [accented in the original]. The word “heaven” in this instance means
in contact with life's energy, with a wisdom beyond the intellect…. The spine
is like the trunk of the tree, along which are located the various Cakras. The
top of the head is the crowning blossom of this flowering tree, the
thousand-petalled Lotus of the Sharasrara Cakra.447



The axis mundi stands at the “center of the cosmos,” uniting three separate but
intertwined “eternal” realms. The lower kingdom is the domain of the unknown,
subterranean, oceanic, hellish—land of reptilian power, blind force, and
eternal darkness. The ancient Scandinavians believed, for example—in keeping
with this general conceptualization—that a great serpent lived underneath
Yggdrasil, the world-tree, and gnawed at its roots, trying forever to destroy
it. (Yggdrasil was constantly revivified, however, by the springs of “magical
water” that also lay underneath it). The great serpent is the dragon of chaos,
in his destructive aspect—the source of all things (including the
“world-tree”), as well as the power that reduces created objects to the
conditions of their origin. (The “magical water” is the positive aspect of the
unknown, with its procreative and rejuvenating power.) The dyad of tree and
serpent is an exceedingly widespread motif of mythology and a common literary
theme. Frye's comments on Melville's Moby Dick are relevant here. Moby Dick is
a great white whale who lives in the depths of the sea. Ahab is the captain of
a whaling boat, passionately and unreasonably dedicated to finally conquering
that leviathan:

In Moby Dick, Ahab's quest for the whale may be mad or “monomaniacal,” as it is
frequently called, or even evil so far as he sacrifices his crew and ship to
it, but evil or revenge are not the point of the quest. The whale itself may be
only a “dumb brute,” as the mate says, and even if it were malignantly
determined to kill Ahab, such an attitude, in a whale hunted to the death,
would certainly be understandable if it were there. What obsesses Ahab is in a
dimension of reality much further down than any whale, in an amoral and
alienating world that nothing normal in the human psyche can directly confront.

The professed quest is to kill Moby Dick, but as the portents of disaster pile
up it becomes clear that a will to identify with (not adjust to) what Conrad
calls the destructive element is what is really driving Ahab. Ahab has,
Melville says, become a “Prometheus,” with a vulture feeding on him. The axis
image appears in the maelstrom or descending spiral (“vortex”) of the last few
pages, and perhaps in a remark by one of Ahab's crew: “The skewer seems
loosening out of the middle of the world.” But the descent is not purely
demonic, or simply destructive: like other creative descents, it is partly a
quest for wisdom, however fatal the attaining of such wisdom may be. A relation
reminiscent of Lear and the fool develops at the end between Ahab and the
little black cabin boy Pip, who has been left so long to swim in the sea that
he has gone insane. Of him it is said that he has been “carried down alive to
wondrous depths, where strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to
and fro…. and the misermerman, Wisdom, revealed his hoarded heaps.”

Moby Dick is as profound a treatment as modern literature affords of the
leviathan symbolism of the Bible, the titanic-demonic force that raises Egypt
and Babylon to greatness and then hurls them into nothingness; that is both an
enemy of God outside the creation and, as notably in Job, a creature within it
of whom God is rather proud. The leviathan is revealed to Job as the ultimate
mystery of God's ways, the “king over all the children of pride” (Job 41:34),
of whom Satan himself is merely an instrument. What this power looks like
depends on how it is approached. Approached by Conrad's Kurtz through his
Antichrist psychosis, it is an unimaginable horror: but it may also be a source
of energy that man can put to his own use. There are naturally considerable
risks to doing so: risks that Rimbaud spoke of in his celebrated lettre du
voyant as a “dereglement de tous les sens.” The phrase indicates the close
connection between the titanic and the demonic that Verlaine expressed in his
phrase poete maudit, the attitude of poets who feel, like Ahab, that the right
worship of the powers they invoke is defiance.448



Above the lower kingdom is earth, the middle kingdom, mundane conscious
existence, domain of man, trapped uncomfortably between the titanic and the
heavenly—trapped in the realm where “spirit and matter” or “heaven and hell” or
“order and chaos” eternally interact and transform. The upper kingdom, finally,
is heaven, the intrapsychic ideal, abstract symbolic construction and utopian
state, creation of generations of autonomous fantasy, following its own rules,
governed by its own denizens, with its own non-individual transcendent
existence. The fact that the axis mundi unites earth and heaven means that it
may serve ritual purpose as a bridge between the profane individual domain and
the “realm of the gods”:

The symbolism of the ascension into heaven by means of a tree is…. clearly
illustrated by the ceremony of initiation of the Buriat shamans. The candidate
climbs up a post in the middle of the yourt, reaches the summit and goes out by
the smoke-hole. But we know that this opening, made to let out the smoke, is
likened to the “hole” made by the Pole Star in the vault of Heaven. (Among
other peoples, the tent-pole is called the Pillar of the Sky and is compared to
the Pole-Star, which is also the hub of the celestial pavilion, and is named,
elsewhere, the Nail of the Sky.) Thus, the ritual post set up in the middle of
the yourt is an image of the Cosmic Tree which is found at the Center of the
World, with the Pole Star shining directly above it. By ascending it, the
candidate enters into Heaven; that is why, as soon as he comes out of the
smoke-hole of the tent he gives a loud cry, invoking the help of the gods: up
there, he finds himself in their presence.449



Figure 54: The World-Tree as Bridge Between “Heaven” and “Hell”;450 offers a
visual interpretation of the cosmic tree, connecting “heaven, earth and hell.”
The cosmic tree— Yggdrasil, in this representation—is grounded in the domain of
the dragon of chaos (the “serpent” who “gnaws at its roots”), passes through
“earth,” and reaches up into “heaven,” the realm of the ancestor/gods. It was
unconscious apprehension of this tripartite structure that led Freud, for
example, to his model of the psyche: id (the “natural” world of dark
instinctive “drive”), ego (the world of the individual), and superego (the gods
of tradition). It is Freud's inclusion of all the elements of the world-tree
(negative and positive) that has given his mythology its remarkable strength,
influence and power.

Figure 55: The World-Tree and the Constituent Elements of Experience offers
another interpretation and explanation of this tree, relating its “place” in
the cosmos to the “constituent elements of experience.” This diagram suffers
somewhat from its precise symbolic equation of the tree and the “archetypal
son.” Christ and Satan, for example— Christian exemplars of the ambivalent
son—may also be viewed as products of the tree (as well as particular
incarnations or forms of the tree, or as phenomena otherwise inextricably
associated with the tree). The world-tree as “forbidden tree of knowledge of
good and evil” is, for example, the cross upon which Christ, the archetypal
individual, crucified, suspended and tormented, manifests for all eternity his
identity with God; the tree upon which Odin, Norse savior, is likewise
suspended:

I ween that I hung

on the windy tree



Figure 54: The World-Tree as Bridge Between “Heaven” and “Hell”





Hung there for nights full nine

With the spear I was wounded

and offered I was

To Odin, myself to myself

On the tree that none

may never know

What root beneath it runs.451



The tree is to Christ, therefore, as Christ is to the individual (“I am the
vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same
bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.” John 15:5).
Satan, by contrast, is something that lurks in the forbidden tree. The
(devastating) wisdom he promises—the knowledge of the gods— isthat

Figure 55: The World-Tree and the Constituent Elements of Experience





tree's “first fruit.” This makes the world-tree the source of the revelation
that destroys— the source of the anomalous “idea,” for example, that disrupts
the static past and plunges it into chaos—as well as the eventual source of the
revelation that redeems.

In the book of Genesis, the fruits of the tree of knowledge are ingested in
mythic action by the free (though sorely tempted) act of the individual. The
myth uses a particular act, the incorporation of food, as metaphor for the
assimilation of knowledge and ability. Erich Neumann states:

Wherever liquor, fruit, herbs, etc., appear as the vehicles of life and
immortality, including the “water” and “bread” of life, the sacrament of the
Host, and every form of food cult down to the present day, we have [an] ancient
mode of human expression before us. The materialization of psychic contents, by
which contents that we would call “psychic”—like life, immortality, and
death—take on material form in myth and ritual and appear as water, bread,
fruit, etc., is a characteristic of the primitive mind.

Conscious realization is “acted out” in the elementary scheme of nutritive
assimilation, and the ritual act of concrete eating is the first form of
assimilation known to man….

The assimilation and ingestion of the “content,” the eaten food, produces an
inner change. Transformation of the body cells through food intake is the most
elementary of animal changes experienced by man. How a weary, enfeebled, and
famished man can turn into an alert, strong, and satisfied being, or a man
perishing of thirst can be refreshed or even transformed by an intoxicating
drink: this is, and must remain, a fundamental experience so long as man shall
exist.452



The act of defiant incorporation, initiating alienation from paradise and God,
is instigated by the serpent, an ancient and dangerous creature of base matter,
who can shed his skin, and be renewed, reborn.

The snake serves mythology in a dual role, as agent and symbol of
transformation, and as prime representative of fundamental, undifferentiated
uroboric power. The Edenic serpent provides the individual with the knowledge
of the gods, without their compensatory power and immortality. His
“enlightenment” of man engenders an unparalleled catastrophe—a catastrophe
sufficiently complete to engender not only the “final division of heaven and
earth,” but, on that earth, a more or less permanent (and unfortunate)
association between the promise of knowledge and the appearance of evil. The
Edenic serpent occupies the same categorical space in the Christian psyche as
Lucifer, “bringer of light,” spirit of “unbridled rationality”—in large part
because the anomalous idea (the “product of rationality”) has the same
potential for destruction as any other natural disaster. This identification is
somewhat onesided, however, as the anomaly-inspired descent into chaos is only
half the mythological story, and can also be viewed as a necessary precondition
for emergence into a “higher state” of consciousness (even for the incarnation
of Christ, the “second fruit of the tree of knowledge”). The medieval
alchemists tended to adopt a gnostic interpretation of the Edenic story, for
this reason, as Jung states:

Hence we get the parallel of the dragon's head with Christ, corresponding to
the Gnostic view that the son of the highest divinity took on the form of the
serpent in paradise in order to teach our first parents the faculty of
discrimination, so that they should see that the work of the demiurge [the god
who created the world in the first place] was imperfect.453



The Edenic serpent is, above all, the unknown (power) still lurking “inside”
the nervous system, inside the “world-tree.” It is the innate capacity of the
mind, its ability to generate revelatory thought, its capacity to disrupt the
stable cosmos and to extend the domain of consciousness. It was “unconscious”
(imagistic) apprehension of this idea that led medieval alchemy to treat the
serpent as the “arcane substance” that transformed itself inside the tree, and
to regard the serpent as the tree's “life.”454

It is curiosity that kills the cat but, equally, curiosity that guides the
discovery. The forbidden or unknown object exists, shrouded in mystery,
“outside” the mundane, familiar and explored world. The command “you can't
explore that” inevitably contaminates the forbidden object or situation with
mystery: what could possibly be so dangerous (powerful, interesting) that it
must be treated as if it was not there? To explicitly forbid something
contaminates it with the “dragon of chaos”—places a serpent inside it, so to
speak. To explicitly forbid something virtually ensures that it will attract
attention, at least (as the unknown inevitably compels approach, as well as
fear). The serpent/dragon-chaos/forbidden object connection can therefore be
profitably viewed from a more “physiological” perspective, as well. The snake
is regarded as the regulator of conscious intensity, by the adepts of Kundalini
Yoga. This snake is a creature of the spine, a storehouse of intrapsychic
energy, whose activation leads to ecstasy and enlightenment. The goal of
Kundalini Yoga is to “awaken” this serpent, and to thereby reach enlightenment.

The snake shares obvious—and subtle—features with the spine. First is the
shape; second is shared evolutionary history. The human nervous system is
composed in part of structures as phylogenetically ancient as the reptile, in
whose recesses lurk tremendous excitatory power. The deep structures of the
brainstem—the “head” of the spinal snake— perform activities upon which
maintenance of consciousness absolutely depends.455 An individual, lost in
sleep (in “unconsciousness”) can be brought instantaneously awake and alert by
stimulated operation of these structures, in a situation (for example) where
something unexpected and potentially dangerous occurs. A sleeping mother can be
brought instantly awake and motivated for exploration by the unexpected cry of
her baby, for example. The process of contrast between desire and current
status (between ideal future and present) does not disappear even in sleep. The
unknown brings wakefulness to the sleeping. Threat—more generally, the
appearance of the unknown—propels active exploration, designed to expand
adaptive competence (or, terrified cessation of activity) and produces dramatic
heightening of interest and consciousness. This means that consciousness as a
phenomena depends in large part on activation of the ancient circuitry designed
for response to the unknown. As the human brain evolved, much more “territory
for activation” developed; nonetheless, alertness still depends on very archaic
nervous system substructures. Knowledge of this dependence echoes through myth
and literature. Goethe's Mephistopheles is therefore able to state, for
example:

Follow the adage of my cousin Snake

From dreams of god-like knowledge you will wake

To fear, in which your very soul shall quake.456



The most “conscious” animal is the most motivated animal. The most motivated
animal lives in apprehension of the ever-present possibility of the greatest
possible threat (that of its own demise) and in eternal desire for
rectification of this threat—in hope, in consideration of the possibilities of
the dangerous unknown for generation of “redemptive” information. It is clear
apprehension of the mortal danger and infinite possibility lurking everywhere
that has boosted human consciousness far beyond that of its nearest kin, in a
process that extended over eons. We can see the unknown in everything, as a
consequence of our elaborate cognitive systems: worse (better)—we can see
mortal danger in everything unknown. This makes us anxious, certainly—but also
(if we don't run away) awake. The “serpent” of the “external unknown” works in
concert, therefore, with the “serpent” of the internal unknown: apprehension of
the mystery which transcends the current realm of adaptation (that is, the
permanent mystery of mortal limitation) products permanent consciousness, at
least in principle. It is for this reason that the Buddha is the “awakened
one.” Our expanding brain, “designed” to produce adaptation, instead sees risk
and opportunity everywhere. The circuitry “designed” to explore anomaly, and
then to cease its actions, once exploration has produced its desired
consequences, is instead always operating—as it can never reach its
ever-receding goal. And so we are forever unsettled, unhappy, unsatisfied,
terrified, hopeful—and awake.

Individual incorporation of socially predicated knowledge—expanded
exponentially in scope during the course of centuries of human cultural
endeavor, culminating in development of an elaborated self-model—produced
within the individual clear apprehension of mortality as a defining feature of
human existence. This act of self-definition inextricably associated every
aspect of human experience with threat— eternally contaminated all human
experience with the intimation of mortality, with the hint of death, with the
absolutely inexplicable unknown. This act of self-definition drove us to
consider the world we had built as forever insufficient, forever lacking in
security; drove us to regard the unknown “place of death,” in addition, as
simultaneous eternal source of new redemptive information. This contamination
rendered every object, every facet of experience, permanently mysterious, and
sufficiently motivating to maintain heightened consciousness, as an
interminable, awful and beneficial feature of human existence.

The myth of the Fall, Christian or Buddhist, describes the development of
self-consciousness as voluntary, though pre-arranged, in a sense, by the gods,
whose power remains outside human control. Lucifer, in the guise of the
serpent, offers Eve the apple, with truly irresistible promise of expanded
knowledge. Fate arranges the future Buddha's introduction to old age, sickness,
and death—but Gautama chose, voluntarily, to leave the confines of the paradise
his father endeavored to render perfect. It is the expansive exploratory
tendency of man, his innate curiosity, that is simultaneously saving grace and
mortal error. For this reason, the stories of Genesis and of the Buddha are
predicated on the implicit assumption that contact with the unbearable, in the
course of maturation, is predetermined, inevitable—and desired, catastrophic
but desired. Voltaire tells a story, of the Good Brahmin—an admirable, tragic
figure—which clarifies the role of voluntarism (and pride) in the reach for
heightened human awareness:

“I wish I had never been born!”

“Why so?” said I.

“Because,” he replied, “I have been studying these forty years, and I find that
it has been so much time lost…. I believe that I am composed of matter, but I
have never been able to satisfy myself what it is that produces thought. I am
even ignorant whether my understanding is a simple faculty like that of walking
or digesting, or if I think with my head in the same manner as I take hold of a
thing with my hands…. I talk a great deal, and when I have done speaking I
remain confounded and ashamed of what I have said.”

The same day I had a conversation with an old woman, his neighbour. I asked her
if she had ever been unhappy for not understanding how her soul was made? She
did not even comprehend my question. She had not, for the briefest moment in
her life, had a thought about these subjects with which the good Brahmin had so
tormented himself. She believed in the bottom of her heart in the metamorphoses
of Vishnu, and provided she could get get some of the sacred water of the
Ganges in which to make her ablutions, she thought herself the happiest of
women. Struck with the happiness of this poor creature, I returned to my
philosopher, whom I thus addressed:

“Are you not ashamed to be thus miserable when, not fifty yards from you, there
is an old automaton who thinks of nothing and lives contented?”

“You are right,” he replied. “I have said to myself a thousand times that I
should be happy if I were but as ignorant as my old neighbour; and yet it is a
happiness which I do not desire.”

This reply of the Brahmin made a greater impression on me than anything that
had passed.457



The shame the Brahmin feels at his own words is a consequence of his
realization of their insufficiency, of his self-comprehended inability to
address the problems of life in some manner that he regards as final and
complete. His shame and unhappiness is, paradoxically, a consequence of the
activities of the same process that enables him to seek redress—a process that
is troublesome in the extreme, but so valuable that it will not be abandoned,
once attained. The questing spirit undermines its own stability, but will not
give up that destabilizing capacity for return to the “unconscious” source.
This is, I suppose, part of the “pride” of man, that serves as predestiny for
the fall—but is, as well, part of another “unconscious” apprehension: something
that destroys, initially, may still save, in its later development, and the
process that undermines may also be the same process that rebuilds, out of
wreckage, something stronger.

The birth of tragedy and the evolution of shame might be considered inevitable
consequences of voluntarism itself, of the heroic exploratory tendency,
diabolically predetermined in its unfolding, leading inexorably to development
of unbearable but potentially redemptive (self)consciousness. Extension of
objective knowledge to the self means permanent establishment of a conceptual
connection between individual existence and certain mortality. Development of
this connection means existence in endless conflict, as all human activity
henceforth takes place in the valley of the shadow of death. Fate compels all
members of the human race to comprehend their isolation, their individuality,
their abject subjugation to the harsh conditions of mortal existence.458
Recognition of the naked self, exposed indignantly459 to the ravages of time
and the world, unbearable and highly motivating, condemns man and woman to toil
and suffer for life and for death:

And the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked,
and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. (Genesis 3:7)



Acquisition of this unbearable knowledge renders unquestioning acceptance of
biological necessity impossible, and destroys all possibility of simple
adherence to the paradisal way. Adam and Eve immediately cover themselves
up—erect a protective barrier, symbolic of culture itself, between their
vulnerable bodies and the terrible world of experience. This emergent fear of
vulnerability—a direct consequence of the development of self-consciousness
(no, an intrinsic aspect of self-consciousness)— permanently undermines
capacity for faith in blind instinctual action:

And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of
the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God
amongst the trees of the garden.

And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was
naked; and I hid myself. (Genesis 3:8–10)



Paradise is the place where heaven, earth and nature still touch—the place
where man, who lives in harmony with the animals, is still unrebellious and
still “walks with God.” The conscious (?), but unselfconscious animal lives
within the undisputed sway of natural processes. It cannot develop referential
perspective regarding its own perceptions, impulses, and behaviors, because it
lacks access to the experience of others. The self-aware individual human
being, by contrast, lives in history, in an experiential field whose every
aspect has been shaped and modified by experience communicated from extant
personage and ancestral figure. This socially predicated historical construct
appears to provide the basis for sophisticated self-consciousness, which is
(innate) capacity for self-reference, provided with content through action of
culture. Construction of self-consciousness requires elaboration of a
self-model; extension of the notion of the independent other to the self;
internalization of a socially determined conceptual representation of the self.
The capacity for such objective description arose as a consequence of the
communication of disembodied or abstracted thought from person to person,
through processes ranging in complexity from concrete imitation to generalized
philosophical discourse.

The ability to communicate skill and representation makes it possible for the
individual to internalize and formulate a complex self-representation, to
conceive of him or herself in terms of the experience of others—that is, in
terms of the experience of specific others, offering (and embodying) their
defining opinion, and the general other, historical humanity. This process
apparently occurs (occurred) as each person becomes subject not only to those
unique experiences that constitute his or her own being, but to the experience
of every other individual, transmitted imitatively, dramatically,
linguistically. This spatially and temporally summed wealth of culturally
predicated experience, whose cumulative breadth and depth far exceeds the
productive capability of a single individual lifetime, must acquire tremendous
intrapsychic power once transmitted and cortically represented, must become
capable of fundamentally altering— restricting and extending—innate personal
experience. One inevitable consequence of this shared perception is
self-definition, development of individual self-awareness, under the pressure
of immediate transient experience, individual past and historical opinion
regarding the nature of one's own experience and human experience in general.
The expansion of detailed communication allows the individual to become at
least partly aware of his or her own “objective” nature.

Individual intrapsychic representation of cumulative historically predicated
human experience makes the one into the many, so to speak; makes the individual
into the embodiment of group experience, to date. Development of moral sense,
and moral choice, constitutes an emergent property of such incorporation of
knowledge. Knowledge of morality, of good and evil, presupposes the presence of
alternative possibilities for action in a given situation—means capacity for
conceptualization of alternative ideals, toward which behavior can be devoted.
The animal, guided purely by its individual, biologically determined perceptual
and motivational structures, essentially unaltered in function as a consequence
of summed and stored communication, develops no possibility for self-criticism,
has no platform upon which to stand, to criticize from—has no basis for
comparison, no expanded repertoire of adaptive behavior, no capacity for
fantasizing about what could be and no cultural experience to flesh out that
capacity. Animal perception and action—animal experience—has not been made
subject to historically predicated self-conscious analysis.

The animal, in its natural and constant environment, remains beyond (or before)
good and evil, gripped by its biologically determined destiny, which is the
will of God, from the mythic perspective. The human being, by contrast, with a
head full of alternative opinions (the abstracted residue of individual
ancestral choice), can use the internalized or freely offered opinion of the
group to criticize spontaneous manifestations of subjective perception and
motivation—to judge, alter, or inhibit pure subjectivity itself. This ability
allows the human being tremendous interpretive and behavioral possibility,
freedom, but lays subjective experience, untarnished instinct, bare to insult.
This separation of man from immersion in the natural way constitutes a
remarkable achievement, with eternally unsettling consequences.

The birth of tragedy and the evolution of shame might be considered emergent
properties of self-consciousness. The idea of redemption, which compensates for
self-conscious existential anxiety, might be considered another, higher-order
emergent property. The tradition of the “fall from paradise” is predicated on
the idea that the appearance of self-consciousness dramatically altered the
structure of reality. The explicitly religious accept the notion that man and
God have been tragically estranged— that human actions have shattered the
divine order. This idea is so central to our worldview that it crops up
everywhere—in the ease with which we can all be made to feel guilty, in the
(often explicitly areligious) view that human existence is “foreign” to the
“natural order” (that human activity is detrimental to the environment, that
the planet would somehow be “better off” with no people on it), that our
species is somehow innately disturbed or even insane. Our constantly emerging
self-reference (our constantly developing self-consciousness) has turned the
world of experience into a tragic play:

Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception;
in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children;460 and thy desire shall be to thy
husband, and he shall rule over thee.

And unto Adam he said, Because thou has hearkened unto the voice of thy wife,
and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not
eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it
for all the days of thy life;

Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth for thee; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field;

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground; for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” (Genesis 3:16– 19)



Figure 56: Genesis and Descent





Foreknowledge of destiny seals fate, and paradise is forever lost to man:

And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and
evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life,
and eat, and live forever:

Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the
ground from whence he was taken.

So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the Garden of Eden
Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life. (Genesis 3:22–24)



Why hide from God? Because knowledge of vulnerability makes us shrink from our
own potential. To live, fully, is to risk—to risk everything, to risk death.
Why hide from God? How, under such conditions, could we not hide? Survival has
become terror and endless toil—necessitating discipline, compelled by
burdensome wisdom, rife with intrapsychic conflict, motivated by
anxiety—instead of spontaneous natural activity. We remain eternally hung on
the cross of our own vulnerability. The creation and fall of man is portrayed
schematically in Figure 56: Genesis and Descent461

