# 5 - The Prima Materia
[Metadata]: # {06.10}
[Descriptor]: # {06.10}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Prima Materia
# The Prima Materia
“It offers itself in lowly form. From it there springs our eternal water.”614



The prima materia (alternatively: the “round chaos” or the alchemical uroboros)
is the unknown as matter and, simultaneously, as effect upon imagination and
behavior (inseparable pre-experimentally): is God as substance and effect of
substance. The prima materia is the “precosmogonic egg,” the dragon of
chaos—the eternal source from which spirit and knowledge and matter and world
arise. It is the unknown that simultaneously generates new phenomena, when
explored; the unknown that serves as the source of the “information” that comes
to constitute the determinate experiencing subject. The alchemists therefore
granted the prima materia a “half-chemical, half-mythological” definition: For
one alchemist, it was quicksilver, for others it was ore, iron, gold, lead,
salt, sulphur, vinegar, water, air, fire, earth, blood, water of life, lapis,
poison, spirit, cloud, dew, sky, shadow, sea, mother, moon, serpent…. Jung
states:

Figure: 63: The Alchemical Opus as “Revolutionary Story”





The autonomy and everlastingness of the prima materia in Paracelsus [for
example] suggest a principle equal to the Deity, corresponding to a dea mater….
The following texts, for example, are applied to the prima materia: “and his
going forth is from the beginning, from the days of eternity” (Micah 5:2) and
“before Abraham was made, I am” (John 8:58). This is supposed to show that the
stone is without beginning and has its [primary existence] from all eternity,
and that it too is without end and will exist in all eternity… .

And in the same way, continues the author, that the stone together with its
material has a thousand names and is therefore called “miraculous,” all these
names can in eminent degree be predicated of God, and the author thereupon
proceeds to this application. A Christian can hardly believe his ears…. “That
from which things arise is the invisible and immovable God.”615



The alchemists understood the prima materia to be as of yet “unredeemed,”
however, and “base.” The notion of corrupted matter was a moral notion, and the
“imperfection” of matter therefore a moral imperfection. The alchemists'
reflections on the nature of this imperfect matter inevitably took the form of
reflections upon the moral problem of imperfection and material corruption as
such. Since the alchemist thought analogically and symbolically, in the absence
of the empirical method, he fantasized or imagined that the corrupt prima
materia shared the characteristics of other corrupt and imperfect creations,
including physical man, contaminated by Original Sin and his own
transgressions.

It is virtually impossible for us, as moderns, to realize the degree to which
the universe of our forebears was a moral universe. Every aspect ofthat archaic
world was engaged in moral endeavor, participating in corruption, striving
toward perfection. Every ore wanted to be pure metal, every pure metal, gold.
All smiths, miners and alchemists were therefore serving the role of midwife,
striving to help the Earth bring forth the “perfect” substances it evidently
desired to produce. Eliade states, with regard to the attitude characterizing
the primitive metalworker:

Mineral substances shared in the sacredness attaching to the Earth-Mother. Very
early on we are confronted with the notion that ores “grow” in the belly of the
earth, after the manner of embryos. Metallurgy thus takes on the character of
obstetrics. Miner and metal-worker intervene in the unfolding of subterranean
embryology: they accelerate the rhythm of the growth of ores, they collaborate
in the work of Nature and assist it to give birth more rapidly. In a word, man,
with his various techniques, gradually takes the place of Time: his labours
replace the work of Time.

To collaborate in the work of Nature, to help her to produce at an
ever-increasing tempo, to change the modalities of matter—here, in our view,
lies one of the key sources of alchemical ideology. We do not, of couse, claim
that there is an unbroken continuity between the mental world of the alchemist
and that of the miner, metal-worker and smith (although, indeed, the initiation
rites and mysteries of the Chinese smiths form an integral part of the
traditions later inherited by Chinese Taoism and alchemy). But what the
smelter, smith and alchemist have in common is that all three lay claim to a
particular magico-religious experience in their relations with matter; this
experience is their monopoly, and its secret is transmitted through the
initiatory rites of their trades. All three work on a Matter which they hold to
be at once alive and sacred, and in their labours they pursue the
transformation of matter, its perfection and its transmutation.616



In the unredeemed prima materia the alchemist understood matter to be trapped
in an imperfect state; just as man himself was trapped in a corrupt and
perishable state by his sinful, demonic physical material nature. The
transformation of this prima materia into gold or into the philosopher's stone
therefore signified a moral transformation, which could be brought about
through moral means. The alchemists were searching for a method to redeem
corruption. They applied their fantastical reasoning to redemption of corrupt
matter, which seems absurd from the modern viewpoint. However, experience of
the physical world had been formally damned by the church—for reasons which had
their own logic—and the lost value this experience represented stood therefore
in dire need of redemption. The search for lost value led the alchemists deep
into consideration of the nature of corruption, or limitation, and past that,
into its transformation, and redemption. Their devoted concentration upon the
nature of this problem set in motion fantasies associated with the archetype of
the way, which always emerges of its own accord, when individuals face their
limitations and come into contact with the unknown. And it must be understood:
although the alchemists conflated “the psyche” and “objective reality,” their
conflation was meaningful. The alchemist did “redeem” himself by studying the
“redemptive” transformations of matter—most simply, because exploration
“releases” information that can be used to construct personality; more
complexly, because the act of voluntary exploration, outside the domain allowed
by tradition, constitutes identification with the creative hero.

The first alchemical transformation took the form of disintegration: chemical
solution or putrefaction of the prima materia, in its “solid” form—in its
patriarchal incarnation, in its manifestation as “ordered” or “stable” or
“rigid” substance. The archetypal first stage in any moral transformation
(which the alchemist was striving to produce) constitutes tragic disruption of
the previous state of being. The disintegration of the prima materia was
analogically equivalent to the degeneration of the alchemist's previous
socially determined intrapsychic state, consequential to his decision to pursue
the unknown:

The chemical putrefaction is compared to the study of the philosophers, because
as the philosophers are disposed to knowledge by study, so natural things are
disposed by putrefaction to solution. To this is compared philosophical
knowledge.617



The nature of the previous state of the alchemist, its symbolic equivalent in
the prima materia, and the consequences of its disintegration, can be placed in
context by examination of the medieval worldview.

The investigation of matter was absolutely heretical, for medieval Homo
sapiens. Mere suggestion that the unknown still existed, and therefore required
investigation, threatened the absolute authority of the Christian dogma, as
historically formulated by the fathers of the church. Questioning this
authority meant that the alchemist placed himself outside the protection of his
cultural canon, in the psychological sense, and at the mercy of the
ecclesiastical authorities in the practical world. Investigation of matter and
its transformations was therefore an exceptionally dangerous undertaking, both
from the intrapsychic and social viewpoints. The standard punishment for
heretical undertakings was exceedingly horrible—torture and excommunication—and
the potential psychic consequences scarcely less dangerous.

The alchemist, in beginning his pursuit, placed himself outside the protective
enclave of conformity, and risked the investigation of an aspect of experience
which, according to the worldview of his time, was characterized by absolute
demonism. The apprehension such an undertaking must have engendered in the
minds of those who adopted it is scarcely imaginable (although such
apprehension re-emerges in the mind of the modern, threatened by revolutionary
ideas). The alchemical search of the unknown, for the ideal, had as its
prerequisite or its immediate consequence abandonment or disorganization of the
reigning individual and social worldview. To investigate matter, for the ideal,
meant to investigate corruption, evil itself, in the pursuit of value. The
alchemist who undertook this investigation already believed he was in need of
redemption, that he was incomplete, or he would have never dared step outside
the boundaries drawn by the church. His need of redemption, of completion,
paralleled that of the corrupt prima materia and further strengthened the
“unconscious” analogous identity between the adept and his material.

