# 2 - The Enuma elish: A Comprehensive Exemplar of Narrative Categorization
[Metadata]: # {03.10}
[Descriptor]: # {03.10}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
The Enuma elish: A Comprehensive Exemplar of Narrative Categorization
# The Enuma elish: A Comprehensive Exemplar of Narrative Categorization
Creation myths are generally considered primitive or superstitious attempts to
perform the magic of modern science. We assume that our ancestors were trying
to do the same thing we do when we construct our cosmological theories and
describe the generation of the objective world. This presumption is wrong. Our
ancestors were not as simpleminded as we think they were, and their theories of
the generation of the cosmos were not merely primitive science. Archaic
theories of creation attempted to account for the existence of the world, as
experienced in totality (which means, including meaning), and not for the
isolated fact of the material world. The world as experienced in totality is
made up of the material things we are familiar with, and the valences we
consider epiphenomenal; of the objects of experience, and the fact of the
subject, who does the experiencing. The world brought into being in archaic
myths of creation is phenomenological, rather than material—it includes all
aspects of experience, including those things we now regard as purely
subjective. The archaic mind had not yet learned how to forget what was
important. Ancient stories of the generation of the world therefore focus on
all of reality, rather than on those distant and abstracted aspects we regard
as purely objective.

Science might be considered “description of the world with regard to those
aspects that are consensually apprehensible” or “specification of the most
effective mode of reaching an end (given a defined end).” Narrative—myth, most
fundamentally—can be more accurately regarded as description of the world as it
signifies (for action). The mythic universe is a place to act, not a place to
perceive. Myth therefore describes things in terms of their unique or shared
affective valence, their value, their motivational significance. If we can tell
(or act out) a story about something, we can be said to have mapped that thing,
at least in part. We tell stories about the unknown, and the knower, and the
known, and can therefore be said, somewhat paradoxically, to have adapted to
the unpredictable, to the fact that we can adapt to the unpredictable, and to
explored territory itself, where everything has been rendered secure. Although
the unknown is truly unknown, it can be regarded as possessed of stable
characteristics, in a broad sense. These characteristics are revealed in the
actions we undertake in response to the appearance of unexpected things.

The world as experienced is composed of all the things we are familiar with and
have classified in accordance with their relevance, and all the things we are
unfamiliar with, which have a relevance all of their own, and of the process
that mediates between the two, which turns the unfamiliar into the familiar
and, sometimes, makes the predictable strange. The domain of the unfamiliar
might be considered the ultimate source of all things, since we generate all of
our determinate knowledge as a consequence of exploring what we do not
understand. Equally, however, the process of exploration must be regarded as
seminal, since nothing familiar can be generated from the unpredictable in the
absence of exploratory action and conception. The domain of the known—created
in the process of exploration—is the familiar world, firm ground, separated
from the maternal sea of chaos. These three domains comprise the fundamental
building blocks of the archaic world of myth. We briefly discussed an archaic
Sumerian creation myth, previously, describing the “world” as the consequence
of the separation of the cosmic parents, An (Sky) from Ki (Earth) by En-lil,
their son and god of the atmosphere. The ancient Egyptians regarded the
situation similarly:

Like so many other traditions, the Egyptian cosmogony begins with the emergence
of a mound in the primordial waters. The appearance of this “First Place” above
the aquatic immensity signifies the emergence of the earth, but also the
beginning of light, life, and consciousness. At Heliopolis, the place named the
“Hill of Sand,” which formed part of the temple of the sun, was identified with
the primordial hill. Hermopolis was famous for its lake, from which the
cosmogonic lotus emerged. But other localities took advantage of the same
privilege. Indeed, each city, each sanctuary, was considered to be a “center of
the world,” the place where the Creation had begun. The initial mound sometimes
became the cosmic mountain up which the pharaoh climbed to meet the sun god.

Other versions tell of the primordial egg, which contained the “Bird of
Light”…, or of the original lotus that bore the Child Sun, or, finally, of the
primitive serpent, first and last image of the god Atum. (And in fact chapter
175 of the Book of the Dead prophesies that when the world returns to the state
of chaos, Atum will become the new serpent. In Atum we may recognize the
supreme and hidden God, whereas Re, the Sun, is above all the manifest God….)
The stages of creation—cosmogony, theogony, creation of living beings, etc.—are
variously presented. According to the solar theology of Heliopolis, a city
situated at the apex of the Delta, the god Re-Atum-Khepri [three forms of the
sun, noontime, setting, and rising, respectively] created a first divine
couple, Shu (the Atmosphere) and Tefnut, who became parents of the god Geb (the
Earth) and of the goddess Nut (the Sky). The demiurge performed the act of
creation by masturbating himself or by spitting. The expressions are naively
coarse, but their meaning is clear: the divinities are born from the very
substance of the supreme god. Just as in the Sumerian tradition, Sky and Earth
were united in an uninterrupted hieros gamos until the moment when they were
separated by Shu, the god of the atmosphere [in other similar traditions,
Ptah]. From their union were born Osiris and Isis, Seth and Nephthys [who will
be discussed later].218



Primordial myths of creation tend to portray the origin of things as the
consequence of at least one of two related events. The universe was
symbolically born into being, for example, as a result of the action of a
primeval hermaphroditic deity. Alternatively, it arose from the interaction of
somewhat more differentiated masculine and feminine spirits or principles
(often the offspring of the most primordial god)—emerged, for example, from the
interplay of the sky, associated (most frequently) with the father, and the
earth (generally but not invariably granted a female character). Imagery of the
latter sort remains latently embedded in the oldest (Jahwist) creation myth in
the familiar Old Testament book of Genesis. The Jahwist story begins in the
fourth stanza of the second chapter of Genesis and describes the masculine God
breathing life (spirit) into the adamah, mother earth, thereby creating the
original (hermaphroditic) man, Adam.219 In alternative, more actively dramatic
accounts—such as that of the Enuma elish, the Babylonian creation myth—the
creative demiurge slays a dragon, or a serpent, and constructs the universe out
of the body parts. The two forms of story, very different on the surface, share
deep grammatical structure, so to speak; utilize metaphors that are closely
associated, psychologically and historically, to drive their fundamental
message home:

In the Babylonian creation hymn Enuma elish [(“when above”220), circa 650 B.C.,
in its only extant form; derived from a tradition at least two thousand years
older] the god of the fresh-water sea, Apsu, was killed and his widow Tiamat,
goddess of the “bitter” or salt waters, threatened the gods with destruction.
Marduk, the champion of the gods, killed her and split her in two, creating
heaven out of one half and earth out of the other. Similarly, the creation in
Genesis begins with a “firmament” separating the waters above from the waters
below, but succeeding a world that was waste (tohu) and void, with darkness on
the face of the deep (tehom). The Hebrew words are said to be etymologically
cognate with Tiamat, and there are many other allusions in the Old Testament to
the creation as a killing of a dragon or monster.221



It is easy, or, at least appears easy, to understand why the pre-experimental
mind might frequently have associated the creation of everything with
femininity—with the source of new life through birth (most evidently, the cause
and concrete origin of all living things). The role of the male in the original
creation—the part played by the “masculine principle,” more precisely—is
comparatively difficult to comprehend, just as the male role in procreation is
less obvious. Nonetheless, the most widely disseminated of creation myths—and,
arguably, the most potent and influential—essentially reverses the standard
pattern of mythic origin, and places particular emphasis on the masculine
element. In the Judeo-Christian tradition, creation depends on the existence
and action of Logos, mythically masculine discriminant consciousness or
exploratory spirit, associated inextricably with linguistic ability—with the
Word, as St. John states (in what was perhaps designed to form the opening
statement of the New Testament, structurally paralleled with the beginning of
Genesis222):

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in
darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. (John 1:1–4)



The explicit stress placed by the Judeo-Christian tradition on the primacy of
the word and its metaphorical equivalents makes it somewhat unique in the
pantheon of creation myths. The early Jews were perhaps the first to clearly
posit that activity in the mythically masculine domain of spirit was linked in
some integral manner to the construction and establishment of experience as
such. It is impossible to understand why the Judeo-Christian tradition has had
such immense power—or to comprehend the nature of the relationship between the
psyche and the world—without analyzing the network of meaning that makes up the
doctrine of the Word.

There exists clear psychological precedent for the philosophy of the early Jews
(and the later Christians) in the Mesopotamian and Egyptian schools of
metaphysical speculation—in their rituals, images and acts of abstract verbal
representation. The Mesopotamian creation myth, which we will consider
first—the Enuma elish—portrays the emergence of the earliest world as the
consequence of the (sexual, generative, creative) union of the primal deities
Apsu and Tiamat. Apsu, masculine, served as the begetter of heaven and earth,
prior to their identification as such (before they were named). Tiamat, “she
who gave birth to them all,”223 was his consort. Initially, Apsu and Tiamat
existed (?) indistinguishably from one another, “still mingled their waters
together”224 when “no pasture land had been formed, and not even a reed marsh
was to be seen; when none of the other gods had been brought into being, when
they had not yet been called by their name, and their destinies had not yet
been fixed.”225 Their uroboric union served as the source from which more
differentiated but still fundamental structures and processes or spirits
issued: “at that time, were the gods created

Figure 19: The Birth of the World of Gods





with them.”226 The “precosmogonic egg” “inhabited” by Tiamat and Apsu gave rise
to the initial “world of gods.” This process is portrayed schematically in
Figure 19: The Birth of the World of Gods.

The Mesopotamian gods—like deities everywhere—present somewhat of a mystery to
the modern mind. Archaic cultures are rife with deities. We seem unable to
locate them now. They do not seem part of the objective external world. It is
tempting, therefore, to regard such beings as imaginative constructions, as
personifications of subjective affective or emotional states or drives, the
incarnated form of subjective experience. The term “personification,” however,
implies a voluntary act—connotes the conscious use of metaphor, on the part of
the individual driven to represent and knowing that he is representing. There
is no indication, however, that it is an act of conscious creation that gives
rise to the pre-experimental deity; in fact, the opposite appears more true: it
is the “action of the deity” that gives rise to creative endeavor, as such, on
the part of the creating subject. The god must therefore be more than the
subject; more than the subject's original narrative conception of himself.

The phenomena that we would now describe as emotions or motive forces, from the
per-spective of our modern, comparatively differentiated and acute
self-consciousness, do not appear to have been experienced precisely as
“internal” in their original form. Rather, they made their appearance as part
and parcel of the experience (the event, or sequence of events) that gave rise
to them, and adopted initial representational form in imaginative embodiment.
The modern idea of the “stimulus” might be regarded as a vestigial remnant of
this form of thinking—a form that grants the power of affective and behavioral
control to the object (or which cannot distinguish between that which elicits a
response, and the response itself). We no longer think “animistically” as
adults, except in our weaker or more playful moments, because we attribute
motivation and emotion to our own agency, and not (generally) to the stimulus
that gives proximal rise to them. We can separate the thing from the
implication of the thing, because we are students and beneficiaries of
empirical thinking and experimental method. We can remove attribution of motive
and affective power from the “object,” and leave it standing in its purely
sensory and consensual aspect; can distinguish between what is us and what is
world. The pre-experimental mind could not (cannot) do this, at least not
consistently; could not reliably discriminate between the object and its effect
on behavior. It is that object and effect which, in totality, constitute a god
(more accurately, it is a class of objects and their effects that constitute a
god).

A god, so considered—more specifically, a potent and powerful god, one with a
history—constitutes the manner in which a group or family of stimuli of
isomorphic motivational significance reveals itself to or grips the collective
(communicated) imagination of a given culture. Such a representation is a
peculiar mix (from the later, empirical viewpoint) of psychological and
sociological phenomena and objective “fact”—an undifferentiated mix of subject
and object (of emotion and sensory experience), transpersonal in nature (as it
is historically elaborated “construction” and shared imaginative experience).
The primitive deity nonetheless serves as accurate representation of the ground
of being, however, because it is affect and subjectivity as well as pure object
(before the two are properly distilled or separated)—because it is primordial
experience, rather than the mere primordial thing.

The original “children of Tiamat and Apsu”—the “elder gods”—should therefore be
regarded as embodiments of the archaic transpersonal intrapsychic phenomena
that give rise to human motivation, as well as those aspects of the objective
world that activate those intrapsychic systems. The Sumerians considered
themselves destined to “clothe and feed” such gods, because they viewed
themselves as the servants, in a sense, of what we would call instinctive
forces, “elicited” by the “environment.” Such forces can be reasonably regarded
as the Sumerians regarded them—as deities inhabiting a “supracelestial place,”
extant prior to the dawn of humanity. Erotic attraction, for example—a powerful
god—has a developmental history that predates the emergence of humanity, is
associated with relatively “innate” releasing “stimuli” (those that
characterize erotic beauty), is of terrible power, and has an existence
“transcending” that of any individual who is currently “possessed.” Pan, the
Greek god of nature, produced/represented fear (produced “panic”); Ares or the
Roman Mars, warlike fury and aggression. We no longer personify such
“instincts,” except for the purposes of literary embellishment, so we don't
think of them “existing” in a “place” (like heaven, for example). But the idea
that such instincts inhabit a space—and that wars occur in that space—is a
metaphor of exceeding power and explanatory utility. Transpersonal motive
forces do wage war with one another over vast spans of time; are each forced to
come to terms with their powerful “opponents” in the intrapsychic hierarchy.
The battles between the different “ways of life” (or different philosophies)
that eternally characterize human societies can usefully be visualized as
combat undertaken by different standards of value (and, therefore, by different
hierarchies of motivation). The “forces” involved in such wars do not die, as
they are “immortal”: the human beings acting as “pawns of the gods” during such
times are not so fortunate.

Back to the Enuma elish: The secondary/patriarchal deities of the Mesopotamian
celestial pantheon—including the couples Lahmu and Lahamu and Kishar and
Anshar— arose as a direct consequence of the interactions of the original
sexualized “unity” of Tiamat and Apsu, the most primal of couples. This
undifferentiated precosmogonic egg (a common metaphor in other creation myths)
“contains” an alloy of “order” (the “masculine” principle”) and “chaos” (the
“feminine” principle). This alloy is the “world parents,” locked in “creative
embrace” (is spirit and matter, conceived alternatively, still “one thing”).
Tiamat and Apsu's union gives rise to children—the primordial instincts or
forces of life who, in turn, engender more individualized beings. The Enuma
elish itself does not spend much time fleshing out the specific characteristics
of these forces of life, as it is concerned with more general issues. Lahmu and
Lahamu and Kishar and Anshar are incidental characters, serving only as
intermediaries between the real protagonists of the drama—Marduk, a late-born
individual-like god, and Tiamat, his turncoat mother. Kishar and Anshar
therefore serve only as progenitors of Anu, who in turn “begot Ea,227 his
likeness,” “the master of his fathers,”228 “broad of understanding, wise,
mighty in strength, much stronger than his grandfather, Anshar,”229 without
“rival among the gods his brothers.”230

The elder gods serve merely to reproduce and to noisily act. Their incessant
racket and movement upsets the divine parents; disturbs “the inner parts of
Tiamat.”231 So Tiamat and Apsu conspire to “devour” their children. This is a
common mythological occurrence; one echoed later in the story of Yahweh, Noah
and the Flood. The gods give birth to the cosmos, but ceaselessly attempt to
destroy it.

Ea catches wind of his parents' plot, however, however, and slays Apsu—adding
insult to injury by building a house on his remains (and by naming that house
Apsu, in mockery or remembrance). Into this house he brings his bride, Damkina,
who soon gives birth to Marduk, the hero of the story, “the wisest of the wise,
the wisest of the gods,”232 filled with “awe-inspiring majesty.”233 When Ea saw
his son:

He rejoiced, he beamed, his heart was filled with joy.

He distinguished him and conferred upon him double equality with the gods,

So that he was highly exalted and surpassed them in everything.

Artfully arranged beyond comprehension were his members,

Not fit for human understanding, hard to look upon.

Four were his eyes, four were his ears.

When his lips moved, fire blazed forth.

Each of his four ears grew large,

And likewise his eyes, to see everything.

He was exalted among the gods, surpassing was his form;

His members were gigantic, he was surpassing in height.

Mariyutu, Mariyutu:

Son of the sun-god, the sun-god of the gods!234



Marduk is characterized by the metaphoric associates of consciousness. He has
exaggerated sensory capacities; his very words are characterized by creative
and destructive power (by the transformative capacity of fire). He is the
“sun-god,” above all, which means that he is assimilated to (or, more
accurately, occupies the same “categorical space”) as “sight,” “vision,”
“illumination,” “enlightenment,” “dawn,” the “elimination of darkness” and the
“death of the night.”

In the midst of all this action—war plans, death, birth—Anu (Marduk's
grandfather, Ea's father) busies himself with the generation of the four winds.
His work raises waves upon the surface of the waters occupied by Tiamat, and
the (previously unidentified) primary/matriarchal subdeities that (apparently)
accompany her there. This new intrusion troubles her beyond tolerance, upset as
she was already at the noise of her offspring and death of her husband. She
decides to rid the universe of the (secondary/patriarchal) elder gods, once and
for all, and begins to produce horrible “soldiers” to aid her in battle:

…bearing monster serpents

Sharp of tooth and not sparing the fang.

With poison instead of blood she filled their bodies.

Ferocious dragons she clothed with terror,

She crowned them with fear-inspiring glory and made them like gods,

So that he who would look upon them should perish from terror.235



The angry Tiamat—the unknown, chaos, in its terrible or destructive
aspect—produces eleven species of monsters to aid her in her battle, including
the viper, the dragon, the great lion, the rabid dog, the scorpion-man and the
storm-demon. She elects the firstborn, Kingu by name, to reign over them all,
giving him “the tablet of destinies”236 to signify his ascension and dominion.
The story continues:

After Tiamat had made strong preparations,

She made ready to join battle with the gods her offspring.

To avenge Apsu, Tiamat did this evil.

How she got ready for the attack was revealed to Ea.

When Ea heard of this matter,

He became benumbed with fear and sat in silent gloom.



Figure 20: The “Death” of Apsu, and the (Re)Emergence of Tiamat as Threat





After he had reflected on the matter and his wrath had subsided,

He went to Anshar, his [great-]grandfather.

And when he had come into the presence of Anshar, his [great-]grandfather.

He communicated to him all that Tiamat had planned.237



Now, although Apsu isn't well described in the Enuma elish, it is clear that he
is the masculine consort of Tiamat. The “masculine” consort of the “goddess of
the unknown” is inevitably the “god of the known” (or his “progenitor” and
dependent, the knower). It is the “known” that serves as protection from the
unknown, whether this is understood or not. Ea kills Apsu, which means that he
unconsciously strips himself of protection.

Ea might therefore be reasonably regarded as representative of that part of
humanity eternally (and ignorantly) contemptuous of tradition and willing to
undermine or destroy the past without understanding its necessity or nature.
Those “unconsciously” protected from the outside world by the walls of culture
may become irritated by the limitations such walls represent, and incautiously
pull them down. This act of destruction, disguised as a blow for freedom, lets
the terrible unknown flood back in. The Great Mother is a terrible force, in
the absence of patriarchal protection. The Enuma elish makes this vital point,
implicitly. This state of affairs is represented schematically in Figure 20:
The “Death” of Apsu, and the (Re) Emergence of Tiamat as Threat.

Anshar is terribly upset by the news of Tiamat's anger. He asks Ea to stand
against Tiamat. Ea fails, deservedly, and Anshar sends Anu in his stead. He is
routed as well, and returns, overcome by terror. In desperation and final hope,
Anshar and Ea call on Marduk, the young sun-god:

Ea called Marduk to his private room;

He advised him, telling him the plan of his heart:

“Marduk, consider my idea, hearken to thy father.

Thou art he, my son, who relieves his heart;

Draw nigh into the presence of Anshar, ready for battle;

Speak and stand forth; when he sees thee, he will be at rest.”

[Marduk] was glad at the word of his father;

He drew nigh and stood before Anshar.

When Anshar saw him, his heart was filled with joy;

He kissed his lips, his fear was removed.

“Anshar, be not silent, but open thy lips;

I will go and accomplish all that is in thy heart!

What man is it who has brought battle against thee?

Tiamat, who is a woman, is coming against thee with arms!

My father, creator, be glad and rejoice;

Soon thou shalt trample upon the neck ofTiamat!

Yea, my father, creator, be glad and rejoice;

Soon thou shalt trample upon the neck ofTiamat!”



Anshar answers:

“My son, who knowest all wisdom,

Quiet Tiamat with thy holy incantation.”238



Marduk's “magic words” (remember, he speaks fire) are clearly and reasonably
portrayed as one of the most powerful weapons in the battle against the forces
of chaos. Anshar continues:

“On the storm chariot quickly pursue the way!

[…]…turn her back!”

The lord was glad at the word of his father;

His heart exulted, and he said to his father:

“Lord of the gods, destiny of the great gods,

If I am indeed to be your avenger,

To vanquish Tiamat and to keep you alive,

Convene the assembly and proclaim my lot supreme [emphasis added].

When ye are joyfully seated together in the Court of Assembly,

May I through the utterance of my mouth determine the destinies, instead of
you.

Whatever I create shall remain unaltered,

The command of my lips shall not return,…. it shall not be changed.”239



Alexander Heidel, who provided the translation of the Enuma elish cited here,
comments:

Marduk demands supreme and undisputed authority as the price for risking his
life in combat with Tiamat. When therefore the gods, at the New Year's festival
[see discussion below], convened in the Court of Assembly, “they reverently
waited” on Marduk, the “king of the gods of heaven and earth,” and in that
spirit they decided the destinies. The gods, indeed, “continue to determine
destinies long after Marduk has received the powers he here desires”;240 but
the final decision rested with Marduk, so that in the last analysis it was he
who decided the fates.241



This is an example of the “hierarchical organization of the gods,” a concept
frequently encapsulated in mythology, and one we shall return to later. All the
original children of Tiamat are potent and impersonal elder gods,
“psychological forces”—the “deities” that eternally rule or constitute human
motivation and affect. The question of the proper ordering of those forces
(“who, or what, should rule?”) is the central problem of morality, and the
primary problem facing human individuals and social organizations. The Sumerian
“solution” to this problem was the elevation of Marduk—the sun-god who
voluntarily faces chaos—to the position of “king” (and the subjugation of the
other gods to that “king”):

Anshar opened his mouth

And addressed these words to Kaka, his vizier:

“Kaka, my vizier, who gladdenest my heart,

Unto Lahmu and Lahamu I will send thee;

Thou knowest how to discern and art able to relate.

Cause the gods my fathers to be brought before me.

Let them bring all the gods to me!

Let them converse and sit down to banquet.

Let them eat bread and prepare wine.

For Marduk, their avenger, let them decree the destiny.

Set out, O Kaka, go, and stand thou before them.

What I am about to tell thee repeat unto them.

Anshar, your son, has sent me.

The command of his heart he has charged me to convey,

Saying: Tiamat, our bearer, hates us.

She held a meeting and raged furiously.

All the gods went over to her;

Even those who ye have created march at her side.

They separated themselves and went over to the side of Tiamat;

They were angry, they plotted, not resting day or night;

They took up the fight, fuming and raging;

They held a meeting and planned the conflict.

Mother Hubur [Tiamat], who fashions all things,

Added thereto irresistible weapons, bearing monster serpents

Sharp of tooth and not sparing the fang.

With poison instead of blood she filled their bodies.

Ferocious dragons she clothed with terror,

She crowned them with fear-inspiring glory and made them like gods.

So that they might cause him who would look upon them to perish from terror,

So that their bodies might leap forward and none turn back their breasts.

She set up the viper, the dragon, and the lahumum

The great lion, the mad dog, and the scorpion-man,

Driving storm demons, the dragonfly, and the bison,

Bearing unsparing weapons, unafraid of battle.

Powerful are her decrees, irresistible are they.

Altogether eleven kinds of monsters of this sort she brought into being.

Of those among the gods, her first-born, who formed her assembly,

She exalted Kingu; in their midst she made him great.

To march at the head of the army, to direct the forces,

To raise the weapons for the engagement, to launch the attack,

The high command of the battle,

She intrusted to his hand; she caused him to sit in the assembly, saying: I
have cast the spell for thee, I have made thee great in the assembly of the
gods.

The dominion over all the gods I have given into thy hand.

Mayest thou be highly exalted, thou my unique spouse!

May thy names become greater than those of the Anunnaki!

She gave him the tablet of destinies, she fastened it upon his breast, saying
“As for thee, thy command shall not be changed, the word of thy mouth shall be
dependable!”

Now when Kingu had been exalted and had received supreme dominion,

They decreed the destinies of the gods, her sons, saying:

“May the opening of our mouths quiet the fire-god!

May thy overpowering poison vanquish the opposing night!”

I sent Anu, but he could not face her.

Ea also was afraid and turned back.

Then Marduk, the wisest of the gods, your son, came forward.



Figure 21: “World” of Gods: Hierarchical Organization





His heart prompted him to face Tiamat.

He opened his mouth and said to me:

“If I am indeed to be your avenger,

To vanquish Tiamat and to keep you alive,

Convene the assembly and proclaim my lot supreme.

When ye are joyfully seated together in the Court of Assembly,

May I through the utterance of my mouth determine the destinies, instead of
you.

Whatever I create shall remain unaltered,

The command of my lips shall not return void, it shall not be changed.”

Hasten to me then and speedily fix for him your destiny,

That he may go to meet your powerful enemy!”242



The “hierarchical organization of the gods” is represented schematically in
Figure 21: “World” of Gods: Hierarchical Organization, which portrays Marduk as
the superordinate personality or pattern of action, “designed” to transform the
unbearable present into the desired future. The Enuma elish states,
essentially: “When things are normal, any god might rule. However, in the case
of a true crisis, everyone turns to the sun-god (the embodiment of
“consciousness”). Perhaps it is reasonable to presume, therefore, that he
should always reign supreme.” The “formulation” of this “hypothesis” was a work
of unsurpassed genius, and a decisive move in the history of the Western mind.

The vizier Kaka goes on his way, as commanded, and spreads the word among the
(secondary/patriarchal) elder deities, who assemble to contemplate the upcoming
battle:

They entered into the presence of Anshar and filled the Court of Assembly;

They kissed one another as they came together in the assembly;

They conversed and sat down to a banquet.

They ate bread and prepared wine.

The sweet wine dispelled their fears;

Their bodies swelled as they drank the strong drink.

Exceedingly carefree were they, their spirit was exalted;

For Marduk, their avenger, they decreed the destiny.

They erected for him a lordly throne-dais,

And he took his place before his fathers to receive sovereignty.

“Thou art the most important among the great gods,

Thy destiny is unequaled, thy command is like that of Anu.

Marduk, thou art the most important among the great gods.

Thy destiny is unequaled, thy command is like that of Anu.

From this day onward thy command shall not be changed.

To exalt and abase—this shall be thy power!

Dependable shall be the utterance of thy mouth, thy command shall not prove
vain.

None among the gods shall infringe upon thy prerogative.”243



The gods place “the starry garment of the night sky”244 in their midst. At the
command of Marduk's mouth—on his word—it appears; at his command, it
disappears, “as the night sky on the passage of the sun.”245 Marduk is clearly
part of the pantheon who eternally vanquish the dragon of the night. The story
continues:

When the gods his fathers beheld the power of his word,

They were glad and did homage, saying: “Marduk is king!”

They bestowed upon him the scepter, the throne, and the royal robe;

They gave him an irresistible weapon smiting the enemy, saying:

“Go and cut off the life of Tiamat.

May the winds carry her blood to out-of-the-way places.”

After the gods his fathers had determined the destiny of [Marduk],

They set him on the road—the way to success and attainment.246



Marduk gathers his armaments—bow, club and lightning—sets himself ablaze, and
fashions a net to enclose Tiamat. He is a master of fire and armaments—which is
to say, a master of the technology that serves most fundamentally to transform
the unknown and terrifying world into the comforting, productive and familiar.
He is able to bind the unknown; to limit its sphere of action, and to bring it
under control. He raises the winds, and the storm to aid him, using the forces
of nature against nature itself. He dresses himself in a terrifying coat of
mail, and wears “terror-inspiring splendor” on his head. Prepared carefully in
this manner, and fortified against poison, he takes the “direct route” to
Tiamat. He confronts (re-emergent) novelty voluntarily, at a time of his
choosing, after careful preparation, and without avoidance. His mere appearance
strikes terror into the heart of Kingu and his legion of monsters (just as
Christ, much later, terrifies the Devil and his minions). Marduk confronts
Tiamat, accuses her of treachery, and challenges her to battle.

When Tiamat heard this,

She became like one in a frenzy and lost her reason.

Tiamat cried out loud and furiously,

To the very roots her two legs shook back and forth.

She recites an incantation, repeatedly casting her spell;

As for the gods of battle, they sharpen their weapons.

Tiamat and Marduk, the wisest of the gods, advanced against one another;

They pressed on to single combat, they approached for battle.247



Marduk fills Tiamat with “an evil wind,” which distends her belly. When she
opens her mouth to devour him, he lets an arrow fly, which tears her interior,
and splits her heart. He subdues her, completely, casts down her carcass, and
stands upon it. His voluntarily encounter with the forces of the unknown
produces a decisive victory. He rounds up her subordinates—including Kingu,
whom he deprives of the tablet of destinies—and encapsulates them with netting.
Then he returns to Tiamat:

The lord trod upon the hinder part of Tiamat,

And with his unsparing club he split her skull.

He cut the arteries of her blood

And caused the north wind to carry it to out-of-the-way places….

He split her open like a mussel into two parts;

Half of her he set in place and formed the sky (therewith) as a roof.

He fixed the crossbar and posted guards;

He commanded them not to let her waters escape.

He crossed the heavens and examined the regions.

He placed himself opposite the Apsu, the dwelling of Ea.

The lord measured the dimensions of the Apsu,

And a great structure, he established, namely Esharra [Earth].”248



Marduk then constructs the heavenly order, fashioning the year, defining the
twelve-sign zodiac, determining the movement of the stars, the planets and the
moon.249 Finally, he deigns to create man (out ofKingu, the greatest and most
guilty of Tiamat's allies), so that “upon him shall the services of the gods be
imposed that they may be at rest”;250 then he returns the gods allied with him
to their appropriate celestial abodes. Grateful, they deliver him a present:

Now, O Lord, who hast established our freedom from compulsory service, What
shall be the sign of our gratitude before thee? Come, let us make something
whose name shall be called “Sanctuary.” It shall be a dwelling for our rest at
night; come, let us repose therein!251



The dwelling is Babylon, center of civilization, mythic sacred space, dedicated
in perpetuity to Marduk.

The mythic tale of the Enuma elish describes the nature of the eternal
relationship between the (unknowable) source of all things, the “gods” who rule
human life, and the subject or process who constructs determinate experience,
through voluntary encounter with the unknown. The “full story” presented in the
Sumerian creation myth is presented, schematically, in Figure 22: The Enuma
elish in Schematic Representation. Tiamat is portrayed, simultaneously, as the
thing that breeds everything (as the mother of all the gods); as the thing that
destroys all things; as the consort of a patriarchal spiritual principle, upon
who creation also depends (Apsu); and, finally, as the thing that is cut into
pieces by the hero who constructs the world. Marduk, the last-born “child” of
instinct, is the hero who voluntarily faces the creative/destructive power that
constitutes the “place” from which all things emerge. He is the martial deity,
role model for the culture of the West, who violently carves the unknown into
pieces, and makes the predictable world from those pieces.

This tale contains within it a complex and sophisticated notion of causality.
None of its elements exists in contradiction with any other, even though each
lays stress on different aspects of the same process. Something must exist,
prior to the construction of identifiable things (something that cannot be
imagined, in the absence of a subject). That thing might usefully be portrayed
as the “all-devouring mother of everything.” The particular, discriminable,
familiar elements of human experience exist as they do, however, because the
conscious subject can detect, construct and transform them. The “son-hero's”
role in the “birth” of things is therefore as primal as the mother's, although
this part is somewhat more difficult to comprehend. Nonetheless, the Sumerians
manage the representation, in narrative form. It is a relatively small step
from this dramatic/imagistic portrayal of the hero to the most explicit
Christian doctrine of Logos—the creative Word (and from there to our notion of
“consciousness”).

The mythic tale of Marduk and Tiamat refers to the capacity of the individual
to explore, voluntarily, and to bring things into being as a consequence. The
hero cuts the world of the unpredictable—unexplored territory, signified by
Tiamat—into its distinguishable elements;

Figure 22: The Enuma elish in Schematic Representation





weaves a net of determinate meaning, capable of encompassing the vast unknown;
embodies the divine “masculine” essence, which has as its most significant
feature the capacity to transform chaos into order. The killing of an
all-embracing monster and the construction of the universe from its body parts
is symbolic (metaphorical) representation of the central, adaptive process of
heroic encounter with the undifferentiated unknown, and the construction or
generation of differentiated order as a consequence. It is this process,
emulated by the emperor of Mesopotamia (who ritually embodied Marduk), that
served as the basis for his authority—and, indeed, that serves to undergird the
idea of lawful authority to the present day. The Mesopotamian emperor's
identification with the most divine of all the deities (according to the
judgment and election of those selfsame powers) lent him power, and served to
maintain social and psychological order among his people. Furthermore, the
Mesopotamian emperor stood in the same relationship to his people as Marduk
stood to him: as ritual model for emulation, as the personality whose actions
served as pattern for all actions undertaken in the kingdom—as the personality
that was the state, insofar as the state defined and brought order to
interpersonal interactions (which, after all, was and is its primary function).
Babylon was therefore conceptualized as “the kingdom of god on earth”—that is,
as a profane imitation of heaven. The emperor served this “imitated heaven” as
the “imitator of Marduk,” at least insofar as he was conservative, just,
courageous and creative. Eliade comments on the sacrality of the Mesopotamian
sovereign, and describes the rituals designed to maintain that sacrality:

At Babylon the Enuma elish was recited in the temple on the fourth day of the
New Year festival. This festival, named zagmuk (“beginning of the year”) in
Sumerian and akitu in Akkadian [note: the Sumerians and Akkadians united to
form Babylon], took place during the first twelve days of the month of Nisan.
It comprised several sequences, of which we will mention the most important:
(1) a day of expiation for the king, corresponding to Marduk's “captivity”; (2)
the freeing of Marduk; (3) ritual combats and a triumphal procession, led by
the king, to the Bit Akitu (the house of the New Year festival), where a
banquet was held; (4) the hieros gamos [mystical marriage] of the king with a
hierodule [ritual slave/prostitute] personifying the goddess; and (5) the
determination of destinies by the gods.252



The meaning of some terminology, and the nature of the latter two sequences,
must be clarified here:

First [with regard to (4)], it should be noted that hieros gamos means mystical
marriage—the marriage of the king, and the queen or goddess. This marriage
provides dramatic representation of the union of the exploratory tendency
(incarnated by the king) with the positive aspect of the unknown, incarnated by
the hierodule. Marduk (the king) is originally “shut up,” signifying his
temporary disappearance (see the description of Osiris, below) during the
normal or routinized operations of the state. He is freed, to meet Tiamat; he
does so, in sexual union. This sexual (read: creative) union—the juxtaposition
of the process of knowing, embodied by the king (Marduk), with the unknown,
embodied by Tiamat (incarnated by the hierodule)—is what gives rise to the
generation of new information and patterns of adaptation. The process of
generating knowledge is therefore assimilated to the domain of sexual union, as
the primordial creative process. The deity of chaos, or the unknown, appears
most generally as feminine (and as half-negative, and half-positive) once the
initial division between order and chaos has been established. The attribution
of femininity to this deity, so to speak, occurs most fundamentally because the
unknown serves as the matrix from which determinate forms are borne. The
negative attribution (Tiamat serves as example) exists because the unknown has
a destructive aspect; the positive (the hierodule here, Isis in the Egyptian
myth of Osiris, Mary in Christianity) because the unknown is also creative or
generative.

Second [with regard to (5)], it should be noted that the king (in his
incarnation as god) served to “determine destinies” because he was both
hero—ritual model for emulation— and absolute ruler. As such, he literally
controlled individual destinies, serving as he did, practically and in
representation, as the most powerful individual in society, and the most
dominant “strategy” in the hierarchy of behavioral adaptation. What he could
not determine, by law, however, he was to provide by creative example (since
the “body of laws,” as embodiment of past wisdom, is insufficient to deal with
the challenges of the present). This idea is developed much more explicitly by
the Egyptians, as we shall see. Back to Eliade's story:

The first sequence of this mythico-ritual scenario—the king's humiliation and
Marduk's captivity—indicates the regression of the world to the precosmogonic
chaos. In the sanctuary of Marduk the high priest stripped the king of his
emblems (scepter, ring, scimitar and crown) and struck him in the face. Then,
on his knees, the king uttered a declaration of innocence: “I have not sinned,
O lord of the lands, I have not been negligent regarding thy divinity.” The
high priest, speaking in Marduk's name, replied: “Do not fear…. Marduk will
hear thy prayer. He will increase thy dominion.”

During this time the people sought for Marduk, supposed to be “shut up in the
mountain” (a formula indicating the “death” of a divinity)…[in consequence of a
descent] “far from the sun and light.”…



[When the world “regresses” to “precosmogonic chaos,” it is always the case
that the hero is missing. The hero is, after all, incarnation of the process by
which chaos is transformed into order. If chaos has the upper hand, it is by
definition because of a current paucity of heroism. It can be said, therefore,
that the reappearance of the Great Mother, in her terrible guise, the death of
the Great Father (who serves as protection from his creative and destructive
wife), and the absence of the hero (who turns chaos into order) all represent
different ways of telling the same story—the story which describes a
life-threatening imbalance in the powers of the constituent elements of
experience. Eliade continues, describing the “rediscovery” or “reemergence” of
Marduk.]

… Finally, he was delivered, and the gods assembled (that is, their statues
were brought together) to determine the destinies. (This episode corresponds,
in the Enuma elish, to Marduk's advancement to the rank of supreme god.) The
king led the procession to the Bit Akitu, a building situated outside of the
city [outside the domain of civilization, or order]. The procession represented
the army of the gods advancing against Tiamat. According to an inscription of
Sennacherib, we may suppose that the primordial battle was mimed, the king
personifying Assur (the god who had replaced Marduk). The hieros gamos took
place after the return from the banquet at the Bit Akitu. The last act
consisted in the determination of the destinies for each month of the year. By
“determining” it, the year was ritually created, that is, the good fortune,
fertility, and richness of the new world that had just been born were insured….
The role of the king in the akitu is inadequately known. His “humiliation”
corresponds to the regression of the world to chaos and to Marduk's captivity
in the mountain. The king personifies the god in the battle against Tiamat and
in the hieros gamos with a hierodule. But identification with the god is not
always indicated; as we have seen, during his humiliation the king addresses
Marduk. Nevertheless, the sacrality of the Mesopotamian sovereign is amply
documented….

Though the king recognized his earthly begetting, he was considered a “son of
god.”…This twofold descent made him supremely the intermediary between gods and
men. The sovereign represented the people before the gods, and it was he who
expiated the sins of his subjects. Sometimes he had to suffer death for his
people's crimes; this is why the Assyrians had a “substitute for the king.” The
texts pro-claim that the king had lived in fellowship with the gods in the
fabulous garden that contains the Tree of Life and the Water of Life…. The king
is the “envoy” of the gods, the “shepherd of the people,” named by god to
establish justice and peace on earth….

It could be said that the king shared in the divine modality, but without
becoming a god. He represented the god, and this, on the archaic levels of
culture, also implied that he was, in a way, he whom he personified. In any
case, as mediator between the world of men and the world of the gods, the
Mesopotamian king effected, in his own person, a ritual union between the two
modalities of existence, the divine and the human. It was by virtue of this
twofold nature that the king was considered, at least metaphorically, to be the
creator of life and fertility.253



Marduk, in his manifestation as Namtillaku, was also “the god who restores to
life,”254 who can restore all “ruined gods, as though they were his own
creation; The lord who by holy incantation restore[s] the dead gods to
life.”255 This idea echoes through ancient Egyptian theology, as described
below. Marduk was Namshub, as well, “the bright god who brightens our
way”256—which once again assimilates him to the sun—and Asaru, the god of
resurrection, who “causes the green herb to spring up.”257 Whatever Marduk
represents was also considered central to creation of rich abundance,258 to
mercy,259 and justice,260 to familial love,261 and, most interestingly, to the
“creation of ingenious things” from the “conflict with Tiamat.”262 [!!!] He was
in fact addressed by fifty names by the Mesopotamians. Each name signified an
independent valuable attribute or property (likely at one time separate gods),
now regarded as clearly dependent for its existence upon him. It seems evident
that the attribution of these fifty names to Marduk parallels the movement
toward monotheism described in the Enuma elish itself (with all the gods
organizing themselves voluntarily under Marduk's dominion) and occurring in
Mesopotamian society, at the human and historical level. It might be said that
the Mesopotamians “came to realize” (in ritual and image, at least) that all
the life-sustaining processes that they worshiped in representation were
secondary aspects of the exploratory/creative/rejuvenating process embodied by
Marduk.

A similar pattern of ritual and secondary conceptualization characterized
ancient Egyptian society. In the earliest Egyptian cosmology (circa 2700 B.C.),
the god Ptah, a spiritualized manifestation of Atum, the all-encircling
serpent, creates “by his mind (his ‘heart’) and his word (his ‘tongue’).”263
Eliade states:

Ptah is proclaimed the greatest god, Atum being considered only the author of
the first divine couple. It is Ptah “who made the gods exist.”….

In short, the theogony and the cosmogony are effected by the creative power of
the thought and word of a single god. We here certainly have the highest
expression of Egyptian metaphysical speculation. As John Wilson observes,264 it
is at the beginning of Egyptian history that we find a doctrine that can be
compared with the Christian theology of the Logos [or Word].265



The Egyptians “realized” that consciousness and linguistic ability were vital
to the existence of things—precisely as vital as the unknowable matrix of their
being. This idea still has not fully permeated our explicit understanding
(since we attribute the existence of things purely to their material
“substrate”), despite its centrality to Christian thinking. The Egyptians
viewed Ptah—the spermatic word—as the original, or primordial (read “heavenly”
king). As in Mesopotamia, essentially, he ceded this power, in the earthly
domain, to his successor, the pharaoh [his “actual” or “literal” son, from the
Egyptian viewpoint (as the Pharaoh was viewed as god)]. The creative power thus
transferred was literally defined by the Egyptians as the ability to put order
(mac at) “in the place of Chaos.”266 Eliade comments:

It is these same terms that are used of Tut-ankh-Amon when he restored order
after the “heresy” of Akh-en-Aton, or of Pepi II: “He put mac at in the place
of falsehood (of disorder).” Similarly, the verb khay, “to shine,” is used
indifferently to depict the emergence of the sun at the moment of creation or
at each dawn and the appearance of the pharaoh at the coronation ceremony, at
festivals, or at the privy council.

The pharaoh is the incarnation of mac at, a term translated by “truth” but
whose general meaning is “good order” and hence “right,” “justice.” Mac at
belongs to the original creation; hence it reflects the perfection of the
Golden Age. Since it constitutes the very foundation of the cosmos and life,
mac at can be known by each individual separately. In texts of different
origins and periods, there are such declarations as these: “Incite your heart
to know mac at”; “I make thee to know the thing of mac at in thy heart; mayest
thou do what is right for thee!” Or: “I was a man who loved mac at and hated
sin. For I knew that (sin) is an abomination to God.” And in fact it is God who
bestows the necessary knowledge. A prince is defined as “one who knows truth
(mac at) and whom God teaches.” The author of a prayer to Re cries: “Mayest
Thou give me mac at in my heart!”

As incarnating mac at, the pharaoh constitutes the paradigmatic example for all
his subjects. As the vizier Rekh-mi-Re expresses it: “He is a god who makes us
live by his acts.” The work of the pharaoh insures the stability of the cosmos
and the state and hence the continuity of life. And indeed the cosmogony is
repeated every morning, when the solar god “repels” the serpent Apophis, though
without being able to destroy him; for chaos (=the original darkness)
represents virtuality; hence it is indestructible. The pharaoh's political
activity repeats Re's exploit: he too “repels” Apophis, in other words he sees
to it that the world does not return to chaos. When enemies appear at the
frontiers, they will be assimilated to Apophis [the god of primordial chaos],
and the pharaoh's victory will reproduce Re's triumph [emphasis added].267



The ideas of kingship, creativity and renewal are given a different and more
sophisticated slant in the central myth of Osiris, which served as an alternate
basis for Egyptian theology.

The story of Osiris and his son Horus is much more complex, in some ways, than
the Mesopotamian creation myth, or the story of Re, and describes the
interactions between the “constituent elements of experience” in exceedingly
compressed form. Osiris was a primeval king, a legendary ancestral figure, who
ruled Egypt wisely and fairly. His evil brother, Seth—whom he did not
understand268—rose up against him. Figure 23: The Battle Between Osiris and
Seth in the Domain of Order portrays this conflict as a “war” in the
“(heavenly) domain of order.” Seth kills Osiris (that is, sends him to the
underworld) and dismembers his body, so

Figure 23: The Battle Between Osiris and Seth in the Domain of Order





that it can never be “found.” Figure 24: The Involuntary Descent and
Disintegration of Osiris portrays Osiris' “involuntary descent and
disintegration,” and his quasi- “existence” in the underworld of chaos.

The death of Osiris signifies two important things: (1) the tendency of a
(static) ruling idea, system of valuation, or particular story—no matter how
initially magnificent or appropriate—to become increasingly irrelevant with
time; and (2) the dangers that necessarily accrue to a state that “forgets” or
refuses to admit to the existence of the immortal deity of evil. Seth, the
king's brother and opposite, represents the mythic “hostile twin” or
“adversary” who eternally opposes the process of creative encounter with the
unknown; signifies, alternatively speaking, a pattern of adaptation
characterized by absolute opposition to establishment of divine order. When
this principle gains control—that is, usurps the throne—the “rightful king” and
his kingdom are necessarily doomed. Seth, and figures like him—often
represented in narrative by the corrupt “righthand man” or “adviser to the
once-great king”—view human existence itself with contempt. Such figures are
motivated only to protect or advance their position in the power hierarchy,
even when the prevailing order is clearly

Figure 24: The Involuntary Descent and Disintegration of Osiris





counterproductive. Their actions necessarily speed the process of decay,
endemic to all structures. Osiris, although great, was naïve in some profound
sense—blind, at least, to the existence of “immortal” evil. This blindness, and
its resultant incaution, brings about (or at least hastens) Osiris' demise.

Osiris has a wife, as befits the “king of order.” Isis, as Osiris' mythic
counterpart, is representative of the positive aspect of the unknown (like the
hierodule in the Mesopotamian New Year's ritual). She is possessed of great
magical powers, as might be expected, given her status. She gathers up Osiris'
scattered pieces and makes herself pregnant with the use of his dismembered
phallus. This story makes a profound point: the degeneration of the state or
domain of order and its descent into chaos serves merely to fructify that
domain and to make it “pregnant.” In chaos lurks great potential. When a great
organization disintegrates, falls into pieces, the pieces might still usefully
be fashioned into, or give rise to, something else (perhaps something more
vital, and still greater). Isis therefore gives birth to a son, Horus, who
returns to his rightful kingdom to confront his evil uncle. This process is
schematically represented in Figure 25: The Birth and Return of Horus, Divine
Son of Order and Chaos.

Horus fights a difficult battle with Seth—as the forces of evil are difficult
to overcome—

Figure 25: The Birth and Return of Horus, Divine Son of Order and Chaos





and loses an eye in the process. Seth is overcome, nonetheless; Horus recovers
his eye. The story could stop there, narrative integrity intact, with the
now-whole and victorious Horus' well-deserved ascension to the throne. However,
Horus does the unexpected, descending voluntarily to the underworld to find his
father (as portrayed schematically in Figure 26: Voluntary Encounter with the
Underworld). It is representation of this move—reminiscent of Marduk's
voluntary journey to the “underworld” of Tiamat—that constitutes the brilliant
and original contribution of Egyptian theology.

Horus discovers Osiris, extant in a state of torpor. He offers his recovered
eye to his father—so that Osiris can “see,” once again. They return, united and
victorious, and establish a revivified kingdom. The kingdom of the “son and
father” is an improvement over that of the father or the son alone, as it
unites the hard-won wisdom of the past (that is, of the dead) with the adaptive
capacity of the present (that is, of the living). The (re)establishment and
improvement of the domain of order is schematically represented in Figure 27:
Ascent, and Reintegration of the Father.

In the story of Osiris, the senescence/death of the father (presented as a
consequence of

Figure 26: Voluntary Encounter with the Underworld





the treachery of Seth) is overcome by the mythic son, the hero who
(temporarily) defeats the power of evil, and who rejuvenates the father.
Marduk, the Mesopotamian supreme god, is by comparison a straightforward hero:
he carves the familiar world from the unfamiliar. Horus, equally brave, is more
complete, and more sophisticated. He cannot remain content with his own
ascension, feeling himself incomplete without his father. He therefore journeys
voluntarily into the underworld, releases the disintegrated forces of tradition
trapped there, and makes them part of himself. This pattern of behavior
constitutes an elaboration of that represented by Marduk—or of Re, the Egyptian
sun-god.

Marduk creates order from chaos. That capacity, which is theoretically embodied
in the form of the Mesopotamian emperor, lends temporal authority its rightful
power. The same idea, elaborated substantially, applies in Egypt. Osiris
constitutes the old state, once great, but dangerously anachronistic. Horus
partakes of the essence of tradition (he is the son of his father), but is
vivified by an infusion of “new information” (his mother, after all, is “the
positive aspect of the unknown”). As an updated version of his father, he is
capable of dealing with the problems of the present (that is, with the emergent
evil represented by his uncle). Victorious over his uncle, he is nonetheless
incomplete, as his youthful spirit lacks the

Figure 27: Ascent, and Reintegration of the Father





wisdom of the past. So he journeys into the unknown, where his father rests,
“lifeless”— that is, uncomprehended; without embodiment or incarnation (in
action) in the present. Horus unites himself with his father and becomes the
ideal ruler—the consciousness of present youthful life, conjoined with the
wisdom of tradition.

The “dead” Egyptian pharaoh—that is, the ruler whose death preceded the
ascension of the current pharaoh—was assimilated to (occupied the same
categorical space as) Osiris. That meant he was regarded as equivalent to “the
spirit that founded the state”— the archetypal creator-god or legendary
ancestor whose courageous actions had cosmogonic significance. The current
ruler (who depended for much of his power on the traditions of his
predecessors, modified when necessary) was regarded as equivalent to Horus and
to Re, the sun-god. The ruling pharaoh was therefore the power that generated
order from chaos (as Re), and the power that rejuvenated order, once it had
degenerated into unthinking authoritarianism or too-rigid (and blind)
tradition. Furthermore, however, he was the rejuvenated Osiris (who was the
“dead pharaoh”)—so he was tradition, given sight. The sophistication of this
idea of reputable leadership—creative power, regenerative power and revivified
tradi-tion—can hardly be regarded as anything but remarkable. It is also of
overwhelming historical interest and modern relevance that the Egyptians
increasingly came to regard Osiris-Horus as an examplar, not just of the
pharaoh, but of every individual in the kingdom. Eliade states, with regard to
later Egyptian burial practice:

The texts formerly inscribed on the walls of the hidden chambers in the
pyramids erected for the pharaohs are now reproduced inside the coffins of the
nobility and even of totally unprivileged people. Osiris becomes the model for
all those who hope to conquer death. A Coffin Text proclaims: “Thou art now the
son of a king, a prince, as long as thy heart (i.e., spirit) shall be with
thee.” Following Osiris' example, and with his help, the dead are able to
transform themselves into “souls,” that is, into perfectly integrated and hence
indestructible spiritual beings. Murdered and dismembered, Osiris was
“reconstituted” by Isis and reanimated by Horus. In this way he inaugurated a
new mode of existence: from a powerless shade, he became a “person” who
“knows,” a duly initiated spiritual being.269



This development might also be regarded as an illustration of the increasing
psychologization, abstraction and internalization of religious ideation: in the
earliest stages of representation, deities are viewed as pluralistic, and as
individualistic and fractious members of a supracelestial (that is,
transpersonal and immortal) community. Later, they are integrated into a
hierarchy, as the culture becomes more integrated, more sure about relative
valuation and moral virtue—and a single god, with a multitude of related
features, comes to dominate. Development of monotheism thus parallels
intrapsychic and intracultural moral integration. As the average citizen
identifies more and more clearly with this monotheistic, integrated pattern,
its external nature, as an attribute of the gods, recedes. It becomes more
clearly an attribute of the individual human being, and more like what we would
conceive of as a psychological trait. The god's subjective aspect—his or her
intrapsychic quality—becomes more evident, at least to the most sophisticated
of intuitions, and the possibility of “personal relationship” with the deity
emerges as a prospect at the conceptual level of analysis. The process is just
begining, in abstraction, in Mesopotamia and Egypt; the ancient Israelites
bring it most clearly to fruition, with potent and lasting effect. It does not
seem unreasonable to regard this development as a precursor to the Christian
revolution—which granted every individual the status of “son of god”—and as
implicitly akin to our modern notion of the intrinsic “human right.”

The Egyptian pharaoh, like the Mesopotamian king, served as material
incarnation of the process that separates order from chaos; simultaneously, the
pharaoh/king literally embodied the state. Finally, the pharoah/king was the
rejuvenator of his own “father.” The “ideal” pharaoh/king was therefore the
exploratory process that gave rise to the state, the state itself, and the
revivifying (exploratory) process that updated the state when it was in danger
of too-conservative ossification. This massively complex and sophisticated
conceptualization is given added breadth and depth by consideration of its
psychological element. The state is not merely cultural; it is also
“spiritual.” As custom and tradition is established, it is inculcated into each
individual, and becomes part of their intrapsychic structure. The state is
therefore personality and social organization, simultaneously— personality and
social order conjoined in the effort to keep the terror of chaos at bay (or,
better still, united in the effort to make something positively useful of it).
This means that the hero/king who establishes, embodies and updates the social
world is also the same force that establishes, embodies and updates the
intrapsychic world, the personality—and that one act of update cannot
necessarily or reasonably be distinguished from the other. In “improving” the
world, the hero improves himself; in improving himself, he sets an example for
the world.

Initially, the “personality of state” was in fact a ritual human model (a hero)
to observe and imitate (an entity represented in behavioral pattern); then a
story about such ritual models (an entity represented in imagination), and,
finally—and only much later—an abstract construction of rules describing the
explicit rights and responsibilities of the citizenry—(an entity of words, the
“body” of law). This increasingly abstract and detailed construction develops
from imitation to abstract representation, and comprises rules and schemas of
interpretations useful for maintaining stability of interpersonal interaction.
The establishment of these rules and schemas gives determinate meaning to human
experience, by bringing predictability to all social situations (to all things
encountered interpersonally). The same thing might be said from the
psychological perspective. It is incorporation of the “personality of state,”
dominated by the figure of the hero, that brings order to the inner community
of necessity and desire, to the generative chaos of the soul.

The Mesopotamian culture-hero/deity Marduk represents the capacity of the
process of exploration to generate the world of experience; the Egyptian gods
Horus-Osiris represent the extended version of that capacity, which means not
only generation of the world from the unknown, but transformation of the
pattern of adaptation which constitutes the known, when such transformation
becomes necessary.

Sometimes “adaptation” is merely a matter of the adjustment of the means to an
end. More rarely, but equally necessarily, adaptation is reconceptualization of
“what is known” (unbearable present, desirable future and means to attain such)
because what is is known is out of date, and therefore deadly. It is the sum of
these processes that manifests itself in the Judeo-Christian tradition as the
mythic Word of God (and which is embodied in Christ, the Christian
culture-hero). This is the force that generates subject and object from the
primordial chaos (and, therefore, which “predates” the existence of both); the
force that engenders the tradition that makes vulnerable existence possible, in
the face of constant mortal threat; and the force that updates protective
tradition when it has become untenable and tyrannical on account of its age.

The Sumerian and Egyptian myths portray ideas of exceeding complexity, in
ritual, drama, and imagistic form. This form is not purposeful mystification,
but the manner in which ideas emerge, before they are sufficiently developed to
be explicitly comprehensible. We acted out and provisionally formulated
complete, “impressionistic” models of the world of experience (which was the
world we always had to understand) long before the “contents” of such models
could be understood in the way we currently conceive of understanding.

Brief analysis of the Sumerian and Egyptian theologies, and of the relationship
of those

Figure 28: The Constituent Elements of Experience as Personality, Territory and
Process





theologies to political action, shed substantial light on the manner in which
many of our most important modern ideas developed (and on what those ideas
actually mean). This understanding, derived from two or three specific
examples, can be further enhanced through more general discussion. We therefore
turn our attention from analysis of complete stories—which have as their
advantage a more compelling nature—to detailed description of the mythological
characters whose essence and interactions constitute the world. The totality of
the world, which includes the significance of experienced things, as well as
the things themselves, is composed of what has been explored and rendered
familiar; what has yet to be encountered, and is therefore unpredictable; and
the process that mediates between the two. One final element must be
additionally considered: the state of being that includes or precedes the
division of everything into these three constituent elements. This state might
be regarded as the true source of all things, subjects and objects—the single
ancestor and final destination of all. The complete mythological “world of
experience” is portrayed schematically in Figure 28: The Constituent Elements
of Experience as Personality, Territory and Process. Our discussion turns first
to the diverse nature of representations of the original, undifferentiated
state (the condition of primordial chaos) and then to a more elaborated
description of its “children”—the divine parents, nature and culture, and the
divine son, simultaneously child, primal creator and eternal adversary.

