# 5 - The Creative Illness and the Hero
[Metadata]: # {06.06}
[Descriptor]: # {06.06}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Creative Illness and the Hero
# The Creative Illness and the Hero
“I.N.R.I.”—“Igni Natura Renovatur Integra”531



The “third mode” of adaptation—alternative to decadence and fascism—is heroic.
Heroism is comparatively rare, because it requires voluntary sacrifice of
group-fostered certainty, and indefinite acceptance of consequent psychological
chaos, attendant upon (re)exposure to the unknown. This is nonetheless the
creative path, leading to new discovery or reconfiguration, comprising the
living element of culture. The creative actor adopts the role of hero, and
places himself beyond (even in opposition to) the protective enclave of
history. In consequence, he suffers re-exposure to the terrible unknown. Such
re-exposure engenders mortal terror, but allows for union with
possibility—allows for inspiration, reconstruction and advancement. It is the
disintegration and disinhibition of meaning (preceding its
reintegration)—occurrences necessarily attendant upon the heroic process—that
produce the phenomena linking genius, in the popular imagination, with
insanity. The genius and the lunatic are separated, however, by their relative
position with regard to the unknown: the genius is the fortunate hero who faces
the unexpected consequences of his insufficiently adaptive behavior
voluntarily, on ground that he has chosen. The unfortunate madman, by
constrast, has run away from something carnivorous, something that thrives on
neglect and grows larger—something that will finally devour him. The genius
dissolves, is flooded with indeterminate meaning, and is then
reconstituted—then dissolves, floods and reconfigures the social world. The
psychotic dissolves, and drowns in the flood.

It is capacity to voluntarily face the unknown, and to reconfigure accordingly
the propositions that guided past adaptation, that constitutes the eternal
spirit of man, the world-creating Word. The existence and nature of that spirit
has been granted due recognition in Western (and Eastern) philosophy and
religion since time immemorial. The eminent theologist Reinhold Niebuhr states:

In both Plato and Aristotle “mind” is sharply distinguished from the body. It
is the unifying and ordering principle, the organ of logos, which brings
harmony into the life of the soul, as logos is the creative and forming
principle of the world. Greek metaphysical presuppositions are naturally
determinative for the doctrine of man; and since Parmenides Greek philosophy
had assumed an identity between being and reason on the one hand and on the
other presupposed that reason works upon some formless or unformed stuff which
is never completely tractable. In the thought of Aristotle matter is “a
remnant, the non-existent in itself unknowable and alien to reason, that
remains after the process of clarifying the thing into form and conception.
This non-existent neither is nor is not; it is not yet, that is to say it
attains reality only insofar as it becomes the vehicle of some conceptual
determination.532”533



The notion of the spirit's intrinsic kinship with the creator was abstractly
elaborated, in much more detail, in the eventual course of development of
Judeo-Christian thought. From this viewpoint, man is understood most profoundly
in terms of his relationship to God—as made in the “image of God”—rather than
in light of his cognitive abilities or his place in nature. The essence of this
“spirit identified with God” is the eternal capacity to create and to
transform. Niebuhr observes that

The human spirit has the special capacity of standing continually outside
itself in terms of indefinite regression…. The self knows the world, insofar as
it knows the world, because it stands outside both itself and the world, which
means that it cannot understand itself except as it is understood from beyond
itself and the world.534



This capacity for infinite transcendence, which is the ability to abstract, and
then represent the abstraction, and then abstract from the representation, and
so on, without end, does not come without a cost, as we have previously
observed. We can tumble down the deck of cards, as easily as erect it;
furthermore, our capacity for evil is integrally linked with our ability to
overcome boundaries.

Abstract thinking in general, and abstract moral thinking in particular, is
play: the game, “what if?” Games are played by first establishing, then
identifying, then altering, basic presuppositions. Before any game can be
played, the rules have to be established; before the game can be altered, the
rules have to be made manifest. A game (at least in its final stages) is played
by constructing an image of “the world” in imagination, in accordance with
certain presuppositions—which are the rules (the “environment”) of the game—and
then by acting in that imaginary world. This game construction, playing and
modifying is a form of practice, for real-world activity. As games increase in
complexity, in fact, it becomes increasingly difficult to distinguish them from
real-world activity.

The game itself, at its first stages, is played at the procedural level; the
rules remain implicit. Once a representation of the game has been established,
then the game can be shared; later, the rules themselves can be altered. Piaget
discusses the formulation of the rules of children's games:

From the point of view of the practice or application of rules four successive
stages can be distinguished.

A first stage of a purely motor and individual character, during which the
child handles the marbles at the dictation of his desires and motor habits.
This leads to the formation of more or less ritualized schemas, but since play
is still purely individual, one can only talk of motor rules and not of truly
collective rules.

The second may be called egocentric for the following reasons. This stage
begins at the moment when the child receives from outside the example of
codified rules, that is to say, some time between the ages of 2 and 5. But
though the child imitates this example, he continues to play either by himself
without bothering to find play-fellows, or with others, but without trying to
win, and therefore without attempting to unify the different ways of playing.
In other words, children of this stage, even when they are playing together,
play each one “on his own” (everyone can win at once) and without regard for
any codification of rules. This dual character, combining imitation of others
with a purely individual use of the examples received, we have designated by
the term Egocentrism.

A third stage appears between 7 and 8, which we shall call the stage of
incipient cooperation. Each player now tries to win, and all, therefore, begin
to concern themselves with the question of mutual control and of unification of
the rules. But while a certain agreement may be reached in the course of one
game, ideas about the rules in general are still rather vague. In other words,
children of 7–8, who belong to the same class at school and are therefore
constantly playing with each other, give, when they are questioned separately,
disparate and often entirely contradictory accounts of the rules observed in
playing marbles.

Finally, between the years of 11 and 12, appears a fourth stage, which is that
of the codification of rules. Not only is every detail of procedure in the game
fixed, but the actual code of rules to be observed is known to the whole
society. There is remarkable concordance in the information given by children
of 10–12 belonging to the same class at school, when they are questioned on the
rules of the game and their possible variations… .

If, now, we turn to the consciousness of rules we shall find a progression that
is even more elusive in detail, but no less clearly marked if taken on a big
scale. We may express this by saying that the progression runs through three
stages, of which the second begins during the egocentric stage and ends towards
the middle of the stage of cooperation (9–10), and of which the third covers
the remainder of this co-operating stage and the whole of the stage marked by
the codification of rules.

During the first stage rules are not yet coercive in character, either because
they are purely motor, or else (at the beginning of the egocentric stage)
because they are received, as it were, unconsciously, and as interesting
examples rather than as obligatory realities.

During the second stage (apogee of egocentric and first half of cooperating
stage) rules are regarded as sacred and untouchable, emanating from adults and
lasting forever. Every suggested alteration strikes the child as a
transgression.

Finally, during the third stage, a rule is looked upon as a law due to mutual
consent, which you must respect if you want to be loyal but which it is
permissible to alter on the condition of enlisting general opinion on your
side.

The correlation between the three stages in the development of the
consciousness of rules and the four stages relating to their practical
observance is of course only a statistical correlation and therefore very
crude. But broadly speaking the relation seems to us indisputable. The
collective rule is at first something external to the individual and
consequently sacred to him; then, as he gradually makes it his own, it comes to
that extent to be felt as the free product of mutual agreement and an
autonomous conscience. And with regard to practical use, it is only natural
that a mystical respect for laws should be accompanied by a rudimentary
knowledge and application of their contents, while a rational and well-founded
respect is accompanied by an effective application of each rule in detail.535



The “second-stage” child, who accepts the presuppositions of his cultural
subtradition as “sacred and untouchable,” thinks in a manner similar to the
classic, partially hypothetical, pre-experimental or “primitive” man, who
worships the past, in representation, as absolute truth. The child and the
primitive are both concerned primarily with how to behave—how to organize
behavior, contra nature, in the social community, to simultaneously and
continuously meet ends deemed desirable. It is only much later, after these
most fundamental of issues have been resolved, that the means of resolution
themselves can be questioned. This act of higher-order conceptualization means
emergence of ability to play games, with the rules of games—and belief in the
justifiability of such activity (this rebuff to traditional order). This more
abstract ability allows for answer to the meta-problem of morality, posed
(much) earlier: not “how to behave?” but “how can (or is or was) how to behave
be determined?”536 Paradoxically, perhaps, the answer to this meta-problem also
provides the final answer to the (apparently) less abstract question “how to
behave?” or “what is the good?”

Some examples from Western religious tradition may aid in comprehending (1) the
nature of the distinction between morality's central problem (“what is the
good?”) and meta-problem (“how are answers to the question ‘what is the good?’
determined?”); (2) the structure of their attendant resolutions; and (3) the
manner in which the meta-problem and its solution follow in the course of
historical development from the problem and its solution—attended by (cyclical)
development of increasingly sophisticated and powerful (self)consciousness. Let
us begin with the problem of (self)consciousness, which appears in part as
enhanced ability of the declarative memory system to accurately encode the
nature of human behavior, self and other. This encoding first takes the form of
the narrative, or myth, which, as stated previously, is semantic use of
episodic representation of procedural wisdom.

Semantic analysis of narrative—criticism537—allows for derivation of abstracted
moral principles. First-order pure semantic codification of the morality
implicit in behavior, and then in episodic/semantic (narrative or mythic)
representation, appears to take the form of the list. A list of laws—moral
rules—straightforwardly and simply defines what constitutes acceptable behavior
and what does not. An explicit list serves as an admirable guide for the
adolescent, emerging from the maternal world. Such a list might be regarded as
the most basic form of explicit moral philosophy.

The list emerges into the narrative of Judeo-Christian consciousness as a
consequence of the actions of the figure of Moses, who serves as lawgiver for
the Jewish people. Moses has many of the attributes of the (typical) mythical
hero, and constitutes a figure analogous to that of the supernatural ancestor
of the primitive. He is characterized by endangered birth, for example, and by
dual parentage (one set humble, one exalted or divine):

And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the
one was Shiprah, and the name of the other Puah:

And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see
them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him538: but if it be a
daughter, then she shall live.

But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt comanded them,
but saved the men children alive.

And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye
done this thing, and saved the men children alive?

And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the
Egyptian women: for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in
unto them.

Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people mutiplied, and waxed
very mighty.

And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.

And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall
cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.

And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter ofLevi.

And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a
goodly child, she hid him three months.

And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes,
and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she
laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her
maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the
flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And
she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.

Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse
of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?

And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the
child's mother. And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and
nurse it for me, and I will give thee wages. And the woman took the child, and
nursed it.

And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaohs daughter, and he became
her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of
the water. (Exodus 1:15-22; 2:1–10)



After Moses reaches adulthood, he rejects his secondary Egyptian heritage and
rejoins the Hebrews—in time becoming their leader and leading them away from
Egypt and Egyptian servitude (from slavery under tyranny). He takes them on a
heroic journey, from the unbearable and fallen present condition, through the
(purgatorial) desert—where they act in accordance with procedures he
establishes—to (earthly) paradise itself, the Promised Land of milk and honey.
Frye comments:

The Biblical pattern for the purgatorial vision is the Exodus narrative, which
is in three major parts. First is the sojourn in Egypt, the “furnace of iron,”
a world visited by plagues, where the Egyptian desire to exterminate the
Hebrews goes into reverse with the slaughter of the Egyptian firstborn sons.
This episode concludes with the crossing of the Red Sea, the separation of
Israel from Egypt, and the drowning of the Egyptian host. The second episode is
the wandering in the wilderness, a labyrinthine period of lost direction, where
one generation has to die off before a new one can enter the Promised Land
(Psalm 95:11). This is one of several features indicating that we are in a
world transcending history, and that it is in the more poetic language of the
prophets that the true or symbolic meaning of Egypt, wilderness and Promised
Land emerges more clearly.

The third stage is the entry into the Promised Land, where Moses, personifying
the older generation, dies just outside it. In Christian typology…. this means
that the law, which Moses symbolizes, cannot redeem mankind: only his successor
Joshua, who bears the same name as Jesus, can invade and conquer Canaan.539,540



Moses is a revolutionary; he teaches his people a new mode of being. This means
he revalues their goals as well as their means. This process of revolutionary
readaptation is necessarily preceded by a period of intense suffering, as the
affects released by the new situation fight among themselves, so to speak,
until subdued. The biblical story portrays this process dramatically,
presenting it in terms of the lengthy and trying desert sojourn. The provision
of “heavenly” food541 during this time is a hint to the meaning, so to speak,
of the story—the interregnum of pain and confusion that precedes the
re-establishment or improvement of stability can be tolerated only by those fed
on “spiritual bread”; can be tolerated only by those who have incorporated
sufficient meaning and have therefore developed wisdom, patience and faith.

In the course of the exodus, Moses begins to serve as judge for his people. He
is spontaneously chosen by them, perhaps on the basis of perceived strength or
integration of character, as mediator between conflicting claims of value. In
this role, he is forced to determine what was right, or what should be—and what
was wrong, or comparatively wrong:

And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the
people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.

And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What
is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone,
and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?

And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to
inquire of God:

When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and
another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws. (Exodus
18:13–16)



Adoption of this responsibility entails voluntary acceptance of tremendous
intrapsychic strain—strain associated with necessity of constant, demanding
moral judgment (establishment of hierarchical order, resultant of intrapsychic
quasi-Darwinian struggle of abstracted values)—and, when the ability is there,
consequent generation of compensatory adaptive activity. In the mythic case of
Moses, such activity took the form of translation—translation of moral
principles from procedure, and narrative representation thereof, into an
abstract semantic code. This act of translation constituted a tremendous leap
forward, a qualitative shift in human cognition—regardless of whether it was
actually undertaken by Moses, or by any number of individuals, over hundreds of
years (a flash in time, nonetheless, from the evolutionary perspective), and
conflated into a “single event” by the socially mediated process of
mythological memory. The emergence of moral knowledge in explicit semantic form
(as opposed to its implicit representation in narrative) appears represented in
mythology as “brought about” by revelation. This revelation is reception of
knowledge “from a higher source“—in this case, from the episodic to the
semantic memory systems (from the mysterious domain of imagination to the
concrete word).

Generation (disinhibition, more accurately) of overwhelming affect will
necessarily characterize transitions in cognitive ability of this magnitude;
generation akin to that accompanying the “insight” phenomena typical of
creative or psychotherapeutic endeavor. This might be considered a consequence
of initial temporary establishment of intrapsychic integration—establishment of
isormorphism or concordance between the procedural, episodic and semantic
memory systems—and recognition of the manifold possibilities (the hitherto
unforeseeen redemptive opportunities) thereby released. The “first discovery”
of a new categorization system means immediate apprehension of the broad
“potential utility” of those things newly comprehended (means understanding of
their refreshed promise). This “first discovery”—Eureka!—is the positive aspect
of the voluntary renovelization of experience. This process is dramatically
represented in Exodus by the transformation of Moses' appearance as a
consequence of his protracted encounter with God:

And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat
bread, nor drink water.

And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables
of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist
not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.

And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of
his face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh him.

And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation
returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.

And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in
commandment all that the Lord had spoken with him in Mount Sinai. (Exodus
34:28–32)



This “shining face” is mythic (semantic/episodic) equation of the individual
with solar power; symbolic of illumination, enlightenment, momentary
transfiguration into eternal representative of the gods. This “great leap
forward” places Moses temporarily into the company of God.

Moses transforms what had previously been custom, embedded in behavior,
represented in myth, into an explicit semantic code. The Decalogue is the
single most fundamental subset of the “new” code:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God
am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work:

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shalt not do
any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, nor thy castle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them
is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and
hallowed it.542

Honour thy father and thy mother.

Thou shalt not kill.

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

Thou shalt not steal.

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy
neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. (Exodus 20:3–17)



Codification of tradition is necessarily dependent upon existence of tradition—
established adaptive behavior, and secondary representation thereof. The
knowledge embodied in such tradition exists as a consequence of evolutionary
pressure, so to speak, operating primarily (in the literal sense) at the level
of interpersonal action, and is only secondarily, lately, translated up the
hierarchy of consciousness to representation. This means that evolution
proceeds at least as often (and, generally, more profoundly) from behavior to
representation (episodic and semantic)—from adaptive action and mythic
portrayal thereof (all true art included) to abstract verbal knowledge—as from
representation to behavior.543,544,545

Translation of tradition into law makes verbally abstract what had previously
been, at best, encoded in image—makes the morality of the culture and the moral
individual “conscious” for the first time. This act of transformation,
culminating in a qualitative shift of cognitive sophistication in the
intrapsychic activity of a mythologized culture hero, constitutes the
consequence of centuries of abstract adaptive endeavor. The actions of the hero
are identified with heavenly attributes “by the story,” to signify the import
(and intrapsychic locale and source546) of the revolutionary occurrence.
Nietzsche states:

Great men, like great epochs, are explosive material in whom tremendous energy
has been accumulated; their prerequisite has always been, historically and
physiologically, that a protracted assembling, accumulating, economizing and
preserving has preceded them—that there has been no explosion for a long time.
If the tension in the mass has grown too great the merest accidental stimulus
suffices to call the “genius,” the “deed,” the great destiny, into the
world.547



The moral presumptions of a society emerge first in procedural form, as a
consequence of individual exploratory activity, which is the process that
generates novel behavioral patterns. These behavioral patterns are then
hierarchically structured as a consequence of quasi-Darwinian competition, in
accordance with the constraints noted previously (appeal to imagination,
self-sustenance, etc.). The episodic memory systems map procedure, and outcome
thereof, and thereby come to contain similar paradigmatic structure—
imagistically, and then more purely semantically. Over time, the unknown,
nature, thereby comes to be represented mythically as the affectively bivalent
Great Mother, simultaneously creative and destructive. The known, culture,
becomes the Great Father, tyrant and wise king, authoritarian and protective
personality, adapted to the unknown. The knower, man, becomes the hostile
mythic brothers, sons of convention, hero and antihero, Christ and
Satan—eternal generator and destroyer of history and tradition. Semantic
cognition, feeding on narrative—the bridge between the episode and the pure
verbal abstraction—derives “rules” from behavior. Application of the rules
alters the environment, including procedural and episodic representations
thereof. Thus the cycle continues.

Culture protects the individual against the consequences of his or her
vulnerability (at least in its positive aspect); but the price paid for
absolute security is freedom and individuality, and therefore, creativity.
Sacrifice of individual creativity, by choice, eventually deprives life of
pleasure, of meaning—but not of anxiety or pain—and therefore renders life
unbearable. Civilized or historical Homo sapiens grows up within a structured
canon of principles implicitly and explicitly posited and held as absolute by
the majority of individuals within his or her civilization. In return for this
legacy, which is in fact the sum total of the efforts of mankind over thousands
of years, the individual is molded and shaped, and can therefore survive
independently; but all this shaping is not purely beneficial. It is an unhappy
fact that the intrinsically rewarding, implicitly interesting activities
associated with individual heroism often come to pose a threat to the
established structure of the group.

The Great Father, positive aspect of history, protects man from the Terrible
Mother. He is civilized order, education and wisdom embodied and represented,
the abstracted and integrated personification of all those heroes who have come
before and left their mark on the (cultural) behavior of the species. He is
ritual model for emulation—Good King, Wise Judge, Man of Courage, of Action, of
Art, of Thought. Insofar as he represents particular, specific patterns of
action, however, he is the enemy of possibility, of life in the present itself,
of the hero—and is therefore, necessarily, captor of the spirit, embodiment of
the Tyrant, the Bureaucrat. This is history as the Terrible Father, dead weight
of the past, crushing mass of narrow, bigoted, ill-informed opinion and popular
prejudice. This is the force that oppresses the Good Mother, the creative
aspect of life itself. The Terrible Father opposes anything new, anything that
threatens his integral structure and absolute dominance. Identification of the
well-adapted man with his culture means that as history becomes established, in
counterposition to the force that nature represents, the creative hero has to
battle public opinion [composed, when ideological, of contemporary slogans
(sluagh-ghairms: battle cries of the dead)] as well as the forces of the
“natural” unknown. The hero is an enemy of the historically determined
structure of values and assumptions, because he may have to reorder that
structure and not merely add to or maintain it, to deal with what still remains
unknown. In that process of reordering, unfortunately, he risks exposing
himself and all those well-adapted men who identify with and maintain that
culture to the terrible forces of the unknown—to mortal anxiety and dread, to
fear of the void, to terror of insanity, physical destruction, and
annihilation.

These ideas are dramatically presented in Dostoevsky's The Grand Inquisitor.
Ivan, tormented atheist, tells a story he has invented to his religiously
minded younger brother, Alyosha, a novice at the local monastery. Christ
returns to earth, to Seville, during the time of the Spanish Inquisition:

He came unobserved and moved about silently but, strangely enough, those who
saw Him recognized Him at once. This might, perhaps, be the best part of my
poem if I could explain what made them recognize Him…. People are drawn to Him
by an irresistible force, they gather around Him, follow Him, and soon there is
a crowd. He walks among them in silence, a gentle smile of infinite compassion
on His lips. The sun of love burns in His heart; light, understanding, and
spiritual power flow from His eyes and set people's hearts vibrating with love
for Him. He holds His hands out to them, blesses them, and just from touching
Him, or even His clothes, comes a healing power. An old man who has been blind
from childhood suddenly cries out to Him: “Cure me, oh Lord, so that I may see
You too!” And it is as if scales had fallen from his eyes, and the blind man
sees Him. People weep and kiss the ground on which He walks. Children scatter
flowers in His path and cry out to Him, “Hosannah!” “It is He, He Himself!”
people keep saying. “Who else could it be!” He stops on the steps of the
cathedral of Seville at a moment when a small white coffin is carried into the
church by weeping bearers. In it lies a girl of seven, the only daughter of a
prominent man. She lies there amidst flowers. “He will raise your child from
the dead!” people shout to the weeping mother. The priest, who has come out of
the cathedral to meet the procession, looks perplexed and frowns. But now the
mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet, wailing, “If it is truly
You, give me back my child!” and she stretches out her hands to Him. The
procession stops. They put the coffin down at His feet. He looks down with
compassion, His lips form the words “Talitha cumi”—arise, maiden— and the
maiden arises. The little girl sits up in her coffin, opens her little eyes,
looks around in surprise, and smiles. She holds the white roses that had been
placed in her hand when they had laid her in the coffin. There is confusion
among the people, shouting and weeping.

Just at that moment, the Cardinal, the Grand Inquisitor himself, crosses the
cathedral square. He is a man of almost ninety, tall and erect. His face is
drawn, his eyes are sunken, but they still glow as though a spark smoldered in
them. Oh, now he is not wearing his magnificent cardinal's robes in which he
paraded before the crowds the day before, when they were burning the enemies of
the Roman Church; no, today he is wearing just the coarse cassock of an
ordinary monk. He is followed by his grisly assistants, his slaves, his “holy
guard.” He sees the crowd gathered, stops, and watches from a distance. He sees
everything: the placing of the coffin at His feet and the girl rising from it.
His face darkens. He knits his thick white brows; his eyes flash with an
ominous fire. He points his finger and orders his guards to seize Him.

The Grand Inquisitor's power is so great and the people are so submissive and
tremblingly obedient to him that they immediately open up a passage for the
guards. A death-like silence descends upon the square and in that silence the
guards lay hands on Him and lead Him away.

Then everyone in the crowd, to a man, prostrates himself before the Grand
Inquisitor. The old man blesses them in silence and passes on.

The guards take their prisoner to an old building of the Holy Inquisition and
lock Him up there in a dark, narrow, vaulted prison cell. The day declines and
is replaced by the stifling, black Southern night of Seville. The air is
fragrant with laurel and lemon.

Suddenly, in the complete darkness, the iron gate of the cell opens and there
stands the Grand Inquisitor himself, holding a light in his hand. The old man
enters the cell alone and, when he is inside, the door closes behind him. He
stops and for a long time—one or even two minutes—he looks at Him. At last he
sets the light down on the table and says: “You? Is it really You?” Receiving
no answer, he continues in great haste:

“You need not answer me. Say nothing. I know only too well what You could tell
me now. Besides, You have no right to add anything to what You said before. Why
did You come here, to interfere and make things difficult for us? For You came
to interfere—You know it. But shall I tell You what will happen tomorrow? Well,
I do not know who You really are, nor do I want to know whether You are really
He or just a likeness of Him, but no later than tomorrow I shall pronounce You
the wickedest of all heretics and sentence You to be burned at the stake, and
the very people who today were kissing Your feet will tomorrow, at a sign of my
hand, hasten to Your stake to rake the coals. Don't You know it? Oh yes, I
suppose You do,” he added, deeply immersed in thought, his eyes fixed for a
moment on his prisoner.548



Despite his tyrannical actions, the Inquisitor feels compelled to justify his
actions before Christ:

“Your great prophet had a vision and told us in an allegory that he had seen
all those who were in the first resurrection and that there were twelve
thousand of them from each tribe. But if there were so many, they must have
been gods rather than men. They bore Your cross, they endured years and years
of hunger in a barren wilderness, living on roots and locusts—and of course,
You can point proudly at these children of freedom, at their freely given love,
and at their magnificent suffering for Your sake. Remember, though, there were
only a few thousand of them, and even these were gods rather than men. But what
about the rest? Why should the rest of mankind, the weak ones, suffer because
they are unable to stand what the strong ones can? Why is it the fault of a
weak soul if it he cannot live up to such terri-fying gifts? Can it really be
true that You came only for the chosen few? If that is so, it is a mystery that
we cannot understand; and if it is a mystery, we have the right to preach to
man that what matters is not freedom of choice or love, but a mystery that he
must worship blindly, even at the expense of his con-science. And that is
exactly what we have done. We have corrected your Work and have now founded it
on miracle, mystery and authority. And men rejoice at being led like cattle
again, with the terrible gift of freedom that brought them so much suffering
removed from them. Tell me, were we right in preaching and acting as we did?
Was it not our love for men that made us resign ourselves to the idea of their
impotence and lovingly try to lighten the burden of their responsibility, even
allowing their weak nature to sin, but with our permission? Why have You come
to interfere with our work?”549



The old priest explains what historical role the institution of the church has
played, and why—and provides rationale for the necessity of the impending
recrucifixion:

“And we, who have taken their sins upon us to give them happiness, will stand
up and say to You: ‘Judge us if You can and if You dare!’ Know that I am not
afraid of You; know that I, too, lived in the wilderness, fed upon roots and
locusts, that I, too, blessed the freedom which You bestowed upon men, and that
I, too, was prepared to take my place among the strong chosen ones, aspiring to
be counted among them. But I came to my senses and refused to serve a mad
cause. I turned away and joined those who were endeavoring to correct Your
work. I left the proud and turned to the meek, for the hap-piness of the meek.
What I have told You will happen and our kingdom will come. I repeat, tomorrow
You will see obedient herds, at the first sign from me, hurry to heap coals on
the fire beneath the stake at which I shall have You burned, because, by coming
here, You have made our task more difficult. For if anyone has ever deserved
our fire, it is You, and I shall have You burned tomorrow. Dixi!”550



The story takes an unexpected twist just prior to its conclusion—a twist that
illustrates Dostoyevsky's genius, and his capacity to leap beyond the
ideologically and easily obvious. Ivan says:

The Grand Inquisitor falls silent and waits for some time for the prisoner to
answer. The prisoner's silence has weighed on him. He has watched Him; He
listened to him intently, looking gently into his eyes, and apparently
unwilling to speak. The old man longs for Him to say something, however painful
and terrifying. But instead, He suddenly goes over to the old man and kisses
him gently on his old, bloodless lips. And that is his only answer. The old man
is startled and shudders. The corners of his lips seem to quiver slightly. He
walks to the door, opens it, and says to Him, “Go now, and do not come
back…ever. You must never, never, come again!” And he lets the prisoner out
into the dark streets of the city. The prisoner leaves.551



As William James said: “The community stagnates without the impulse of the
individual. The impulse dies away without the sympathy of the community.”552

The myths of a culture are its central stories. These stories provide a
dramatic record of the historically predicated transformation of human intent,
and appear to exist as the episodic/semantic embodiment of history's cumulative
effect on action. The mythical narratives that accompany retention of
historically determined behavior constitute nonempirical episodic
representation of that behavior and its method of establishment. Myth is
purpose, coded in episodic memory. Mythic truth is information, derived from
past experience—derived from past observation of behavior—relevant from the
perspective of fundamental motivation and affect. Myth simultaneously provides
a record of historical essential, in terms of behavior, and programs those
historical essentials. Narrative provides semantic description of action in
image, back-translatable into imaginary episodic events, capable of eliciting
imitative behavior. Mythic narrative offers dramatic presentation of morality,
which is the study of what should be. Such narrative concerns itself with the
meaning of the past, with the implications of past existence for current and
future activity. This meaning constitutes the ground for the organization of
behavior.

Mythic drama, which plays out the exploits of exceptional individuals, appears
devoted toward explication of a generally applicable pattern of adaptation.
This archetypal model serves to aid in the generation of all situation-specific
individual behaviors. Myth evolves toward declarable description of a
procedural schema capable of underlying construction of all complex culturally
determined hierarchies of specific behavior. This schematic pattern matches the
innate, instinctual, neuropsychologically predicated individual potential for
creative exploratory behavior—indeed, has been constructed in the course of
historical observation of that potential in action. The expression of this
potential throughout history provides for the creation of specific
environmentally appropriate social contexts, procedural and episodic, which
promote development of the innate capacities of the individual, protect from
danger, offer hope, and inhibit existential fear.

A ring of ancestral spirits, invisible and unknown, surrounds the modern
individual, and protects him or her magically from darkness and chaos. When
this ring is broken— when the principles these spirits represent become subject
to critical evaluation, to the onslaught of other forms of heroism, to other
ideologies, or to the weight of individual experience—knowledge itself loses
context, and the known reverts to the unknown. This does not mean that the
Terrible Mother herself sleeps under human consciousness; it means rather that
the reasons for her “existence ” thousands of years ago are still sufficient
reasons today. It is not a ques-tion of racial memory, transmitted by
Lamarckian means, but of the proclivity to experience similarly under similar
conditions. These conditions arise eternally when the protective veil of
culture is pierced.

History protects man against overwhelming material and spiritual onslaught. It
performs this function by providing a framework of meaning for those enmeshed
within it. History, conceived of in this manner, comprises those a priori
assumptions all cultures base themselves on, which guide the action of
individuals, enraptured by “the spirit of the times.” This framework of meaning
is by necessity predicated upon various articles of faith and can be described
in its totality as a myth (although it also precedes myth). The “highest
levels” of myth provide man with the capacity to attribute meaning to or to
discover meaning within the tragedy of each individual human life, forever
blessed and cursed by society, forever threatened and redeemed by the unknown.
To live, at this mythic level—rather than to hide—means the possibility of
reaching and perhaps exceeding the highest stage of consciousness yet attained
or conceptualized by a particular culture. This mythic life is symbolically
represented by the savior—the individual who embodies the essential aspects of
the mythological drama. In the Western tradition, for better or worse, like it
or not, that individual is Christ. Frye states:

The significance of the life of Jesus is often thought of as a legal
significance, consisting in a life of perfect morality, or total conformity to
a code of right action. But if we think of his significance as prophetic rather
than legal, his real significance is that of being the one figure in history
whom no organized human society could possibly put up with. The society that
rejected him represented all societies: those responsible for his death were
not the Romans or the Jews or whoever happened to be around at the time, but
the whole of mankind down to ourselves and doubtless far beyond. “It is
expedient that one man die for the people,” said Caiphas (John 18:14), and
there has never been a human society that has not agreed with him.

What primarily distinguishes Christianity (and Judaism) from most Oriental
religions, it seems to me, is this revolutionary and prophetic element of
confrontation with society. This element gives meaning and shape to history by
presenting it with a dialectical meaning. From this point of view, the root of
evil in human life cannot be adequately described as ignorance, or the cure for
it correctly described as enlightenment. The record of human cruelty and folly
is too hideous for anything but the sense of a corrupted will to come near a
diagnosis. Hence Jesus was not simply the compassionate Jesus as Buddha was the
compassionate Buddha. His work, though it includes teaching the ways of
enlightenment, does not stop there, but goes through a martyrdom and a descent
into death. Two implications here are of especial importance for our present
purpose. One, a specifically historical situation is latent in any
“enlightenment”: man has to fight his way out of history and not simply awaken
from it. Two, the ability to absorb a complete individual is, so far, beyond
the capacity of any society, including those that call themselves Christian.553



Myth has come to encapsulate and express the essential nature of the
exploratory, creative, communicative psyche, as manifested in behavior, as a
consequence of observation and rerepresentation ofthat behavior, in the
temporally summed, historically determined manner beginning with imitation and
ending with verbal abstraction. To what end are all behaviors (and
representations of those behaviors) archetypally subjugated? Toward
establishment of a state—a spiritual kingdom—that allows the behavioral
processes that transform and establish morality to flourish. Historical
cultures, after all— at least those expressly open to change—organize behavior
such that the self and the other are treated, in the ideal (implicit or
explicit) with the respect due to the mediator of order and chaos. Moral action
toward other and self therefore constitutes an “as if” statement, from the
perspective of the semantic system: the moral individual treats himself and
others “as if” recognizing, respecting and paying homage to the ultimate source
of creative adaptation (the ultimate source of “the world”). Such behavior
“unconsciously” presupposes identity between the individual and the savior—the
archetypal redeemer, the culture-bearer, the divine hero. This is organization
of incorporated behavior in accordance with recognition of the source of
incorporated behavior. Establishment of such organization, however, poses
threat to morality predicated strictly upon adherence to tradition.

Heroic behavior compels imitation—a hero, by definition, serves as a model for
emulation. The behavior of the culture-bearer, the archetypal hero, constitutes
embodiment of an elaborate procedural code. This code is the end result of an
evolutionary process, consisting of the establishment of creative behaviors, in
the course of heroic endeavor, their subsequent communication in imitation and
its abstract forms, and their integration, over time, into a consistent pattern
of behavior, whose nature and expression constitutes the cultural character.
This cultural character is the central “personality” of the healthy individual,
embodied in procedure, secondarily represented in episodic and semantic memory.
Ideally, this character tends toward harmonious balance between tradition and
adaptation, and the needs of self and other. It is the constant attempt to
accurately represent such character that constitutes the “aim” of the stories
of humanity.

As history progresses, becomes more “conscious” and differentiated—or, more
accurately, as the presuppositions underlying adaptive social behavior become
more and more accurately abstractly formulated (more declarative)—society moves
from conceptualization of the consequences or productions of heroism as the
ideal toward which behavior is to be devoted toward conceptualization of the
act of heroism itself as such an ideal. This is movement from product to
process. This transformation in conceptualization is presented in dramatic form
in the Western tradition in the New Testament's description of the passion of
Christ, which portrays the process and consequences of revolutionary
restructuring of the axioms of Western morality.

Christ has long been considered implicitly “contained” in the Old Testament.
Frye comments:

For Paul, Christ was mainly the concealed hero of the Old Testament story and
the post-Easter Christ of the resurrection. The Gospels present Christ in a
form that fits this pre-Gospel conception of him: not in a biographical form
but as a discontinuous sequence of appearances in which Jesus comments on the
Old Testament as a series of past events, laws and images coming permanently
alive in the Messianic context, and body, which he supplies.554



What this means, at the most fundamental level of analysis, is that the pattern
of action, imagination and thought that Christ represents is necessarily
“there” in any narrative or mythology, sufficiently compelling to embed itself
in memory. The reasons for this implicit existence are clear, in a sense:
Christ embodies the hero, grounded in tradition, who is narrative depiction of
the basis for successful individual and social adaptation. As the Word “made
flesh” (John 1:14) there “in the beginning” (John 1:1), he represents,
simultaneously, the power that divides order from chaos, and tradition rendered
spiritual, abstract, declarative, semantic. His manner of being is that which
moves morality itself from rule of law to rule of spirit—which means process.
Spirit is process, simultaneously opposed to and responsible for generating
static being. Frye states:

We are told in the New Testament itself that the mysteries of faith have to be
“spiritually discerned” (I Corinthians 2:14). This is in a passage where Paul
is contrasting the letter, which he says “killeth,” with the spirit that
“giveth life.”555



This idea is represented schematically in Figure 60: The Emergence of Christ
from Group Identity and Chaos, which also portrays the Christian “story of
man.”

For Christ, “God is not the God of the dead, but of the living” (Matthew
22:32). Christ pushes morality beyond strict reliance on codified tradition—the
explicit Law of Moses—not because such tradition was unnecessary, but because
it was (and is) necessarily and eternally insufficient. He states:

For I say unto you, That except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the scribes and the Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
heaven. (Matthew 5:20)



but also

Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfil. (Matthew 5:17)



This means that identification with tradition is insufficient; that tradition
cannot thereby be regarded as useless, but more in the light of a developmental
precursor; and, finally, that the process that regenerates tradition is somehow
implicitly contained and promoted in tradition itself.

The role of Christ, who redeems culture from enslavement to the law, is
prefigured at the end of Exodus, in the sequence including and continuing after
the death of Moses (as discussed previously). Christ, in fact, appears as a
second Moses, who offers a spiritual (intrapsychic) kingdom as the final
version of the land promised to the Israelites by God.556

Figure 60: The Emergence of Christ from Group Identity and Chaos





He is apparently granted the authority to make such an offer with the explicit
collaboration of Moses—granted such power, like Moses, on high (as befits a
“solar deity”):

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and
bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his
raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here:
if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a
voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye him.

And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.
(Matthew 17:1–9)



Like Moses, as well, Christ delivers his most famous address (which Frye
interprets as a long commentary on the Decalogue) on a mountaintop. Frye notes
that the Law of Moses is based upon prohibition, description of what is
forbidden: “Thou shalt not.” By contrast, Christ's message is more in the
manner of exhortation, description of active good: “Thou shalt….”557 This
transformation is predicated upon development of heightened moral
consciousness. In the beginning, for a soul steeped in sin, so to speak, it is
an easier matter to identify what is evidently morally suspect, what should
obviously be brought under personal control. Once a certain clarity of spirit
is attained, as a consequence of conscientious, disciplined adherence to
tradition, it becomes possible to determine what the good is, what should be
done—rather than merely what should not. This contrast also serves as analogue
to the relationship between adolescent and adult morality: strict group
identity appropriately socializes the no longer properly dependent child, and
allows him or her to make the leap from infancy to adulthood. The capacity to
act in a disciplined manner—to follow the rules—is a necessary precondition to
adult flexibility, but should not be confused with truly adult morality, which
is the capacity to produce new sets of rules, with updated adaptive utility.
This is also not to say, idiotically, that “Jewish” morality is adolescent, and
“Christian” adult. Examples of prophetic “antagonism to tyrannical order”
abound in the Old Testament, as we have seen.558 The contrast is rather between
the dogmatic and rigid and the creative and responsible within creeds, and not
between the adherents of different creeds.

Development of the list of law—the moral wisdom of the past, cast in
stone—makes the extant procedural and episodic cultural structure explicitly
“conscious” for the first time. The simplicity of the list makes it easily
memorable, and accessible as a “shared point of reference.” The benefits of its
abstraction—communicability and potential for rapid generalization—make it a
potent force for the establishment and continuation of order. The list is
nonetheless characterized by the presence of profound intrinsic structural
limitations. It is of insufficient complexity to truly represent the nature of
procedural morality (which is hierarchically organized, in a mutable and
context-dependent fashion). It is unable to address suffering produced by
conflict of duty—to define acceptable behavior when the situation compels
conflicting behavioral response (when one listed moral prerequisite conflicts
with another). The establishment of fixed law also limits capacity for judgment
and choice, restricting adaptive flexibility, often dangerously, when
“environmental alteration” makes such flexibility necessary:

Beware that no one lead you astray, saying, “Lo here!” or “Lo there!” For the
Son of Man is within you. Follow after him.

Those who seek him will find him.

Go then and preach the gospel of the kingdom.

Do not lay down any rules beyond what I appointed for you, and do not give a
law like the lawgiver lest you be constrained by it.559 560



As a consequence of its intrinsic limitations, the list, which states what must
not be, must give way, once fulfilled, to establishment of a more abstract form
of moral order, predicated upon more flexible principles—which suggests what
should be.

Descriptions of Christ's attempts to transcend the dangerous yet necessary
limitations upon behavior imposed by adherence to the letter of the law take
the form of narrative about paradox. It might be said that Christ presents (or
is presented with) a series of Gordian knots—moral dilemmas—which emerge as an
inevitable consequence of the structure of the list of laws. He plays a deadly
serious game with the temporal representatives of then-traditional order,
represented in the New Testament in the form of “Pharisees and scribes,”
teasing them into koanlike conundrums, which emerge as a consequence of their
own beliefs:

And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through
the corn fields; and his disciples did eat, rubbing them in their hands.

And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful
to do on the sabbath days?561

And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David
did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him;

How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave
also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the
priests alone?562

And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue
and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered.

And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath
day; that they might find an accusation against him.

But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand,
Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.

Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing: Is it lawful on the
sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?

And looking round upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand.
And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other.

And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they
might do to Jesus. (Luke 6:1–11)



Similarly:

And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to
eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him.

And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.

And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful
to heal on the sabbath day?

And they held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go;

And answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into
a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?

And they could not answer him these things. (Luke 14:1–6)



Also:

And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his
parents, that he was born blind?

Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him.

I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh,
when no man can work.

As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle,
and he annointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay.

And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation
Sent). He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing.

The neighbours therefore, and they which had seen him that he was blind, said,
Is not this he that sat and begged?

Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he.

Therefore they said unto him, How were thine eyes opened? He answered and said,
A man that is called Jesus made clay, and annointed mine eyes, and said unto
me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received
sight.

Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.

And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.

Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said
unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.

Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he
keepeth not the Sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do
such miracles? And there was a division among them.

They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened
thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet.

But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and
received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his
sight.

And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how
then doth he now see?

His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he
was born blind.

But by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we
know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for himself.

These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had
agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be
put out of the synagogue.

Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him.

Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the
praise: we know that this man is a sinner.

He answered and said, Whether he is a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I
know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.

Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?

He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would
ye hear it again? will ye also be his disciples?

Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses'
disciples.

We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence
he is. (John 9:1–29)



Also:

Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which
came from Jerusalem,

And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say,
with unwashen, hands, they found fault.

For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not,
holding the tradition of the elders.

And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many
other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of
cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.

Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according
to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?

He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esias prophecied of you hypocrites,
as it is written, This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me.

Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. (Mark 7:5–7)



Piaget—in what might be considered a veritable commentary on these stories—
differentiates “morality of constraint” from “morality of cooperation,”563
describing the former as a “system of rules”564 that affective life makes use
of to control behavior:565

Since he takes rules literally and things of good only in terms of obedience,
the child will at first evaluate acts not in accordance with the motive that
has prompted them but in terms of their exact conformity with established
rules.566



Piaget associates morality of constraint with an earlier level of cognitive
development—a level that nonetheless serves as a necessary precondition for
further development. Piaget states: “For very young children, a rule is a
sacred reality because it is traditional; for the older ones it depends upon
mutual agreement.”567 Joseph Rychlak comments:

Younger children also are much harsher in assigning punishment to those who
break the rules. They seem to want to emphasize the punishment for its own
sake, whereas older children use punishment more to show the transgressor that
a bond has been broken between people when a wrongdoing takes place. Piaget's
value system considers rule by cooperation a more satisfactory equilibration in
human relations than rule by authority. In order for a rule to work without
authority pressures, there must be feelings of mutual respect among the persons
who subscribe to the rule.568 This necessarily brings affectivity into
considerations of morality. Authoritarian constraint rules through feelings of
anxiety and fear, but when mutual respect exists among people, a morality of
cooperation can occur.569



Morality of tradition is not predicated upon the same presumptions as morality
of cooperation. Rigid traditionalists assume that the answer to the question
“what is the good?” can be—has been—answered permanently, and concretely, with
the list of laws. Such a list is always insufficient, however, for the purposes
of complete adaptation. Lao-Tzu can therefore say, with sufficient
justification:

The man who is truly wise and kind

leaves nothing to be done,

but he who only acts

according to his nation's law

leaves many things undone.570



Adherents of tradition rely on the attribution of superhuman value to ancestral
figures and, equally to their current temporal and spiritual representatives.
Those who embrace the morality of cooperation, by contrast, value the notion of
“mutual respect”—which means simultaneous appreciation of equality and mutual
value among individuals within (and, much more radically, between) social
groups.

The behavior of any given social group—and, therefore, the value attributed to
phenomena that constitute the shared territory of the group—emerges as a
consequence of the necessity of maintaining balance between opportunity for
expression of individual desire and restriction of inter-individual conflict.
Such balance, vital to maintenance of group stability, is established long
before the “rules” governing such establishment can be modeled in episodic or
semantic memory, from the phylo- and onto-genetic perspectives. Even the
simplest social animals erect a dominance hierarchy, and behave “as if”
according to principle. It is an error to presuppose, however, that simpler
animals can abstractly represent either their behaviors—which is to say, form
an imagistic model of them in imagination—or understand the “principles” that
govern them. Likewise, socialized children, in complex human societies, embody
the morality of their culture in their behavior long before they are able to
abstractly represent or semantically describe rationale for that morality, and
before they can consciously (episodically or semantically) remember learning
how to behave. The same can be said for adults: the existence of morality—that
intrinsic aspect of social behavior—long precedes representation of morality
and rational description of grounds for its existence. Morality, at its most
fundamental level, is an emergent property of social interaction, embodied in
individual behavior, implicit in the value attributed to objects and
situations, grounded (unconsciously) in procedural knowledge.

Two questions arise naturally from such a discussion: “is it possible to
abstract out from observation of social interaction the ‘rules’ or patterns
that characterize such interactions?” and, if so, “what might those ‘rules’
be?” Primeval group culture determines the nature of social interaction among
the members of the group, and brings general expectation, predictability, to
encounters between differentially desirable, powerful and dangerous individuals
in that group. The mere fact of a stable hierarchy implies the existence of a
complex procedural morality (and an implicit system of values). The behavior of
social animals, within a hierarchy, constitutes de facto recognition of complex
moral “principles,” which might be regarded as the inevitable emergent
properties of constant social interaction. It is very dangerous for the entire
group if any of its members engage, routinely, in strenuous physical
competition. Exhaustion—or outright elimination—of the power of the constituent
members of the group means increased risk of attack from outside. Physical
competition among social animals, necessary for dominance establishment,
therefore generally has a ritualistic nature, and ends well before serious
injury or death. Social animals have developed signals of submission, for
example, which indicate their willingness to end the struggle for power. These
signals are usually respected by the victor. The most powerful member of a
given social group may come to dominate that group—at least in some
circumstances—but the domination takes limited form. Even the most dominant of
animals must act “as if”—as if their expression of power is constrained by
recognition of the necessity for maintenance of the group and the individuals
who constitute and sustain it. This constraint, partially manifested in social
affection, provides the precondition for the emergence of complex abstract
morality, which originates in innate and socialized procedural knowledge, which
is “unconscious” in essence—that is, nonrepresentational, or undeclarable. It
is not too difficult to recognize in this constraint the moral imperative
“treat the weak as if they too are valuable”—as the Old Testament prophets
insisted—or even—“love thy neighbour (even thy enemy) as thyself.” Consider
Christ's first sermon:

And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was,
he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.

And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esasias. And when he
had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath annointed me to preach the
gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised,

To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And
the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.

And he said unto them, This day is the scripture fulfilled in your ears.

And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded
out of his mouth, And they said, Is not this Joseph's son?

And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal
thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy
country.

And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.

But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias,
when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was
throughout all the land;

But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto
a woman that was a widow.

And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of
them was cleansed, saving Namaan the Syrian.

And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with
wrath,

And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the
hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.

But he passing through the midst of them went his way,

And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath
days.

And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power. (Luke
4:14–32)



also

Then Jesus went hence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.

And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously
vexed with a devil.

But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.

But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.

But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to
cast it to dogs.

And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their
masters' table.

Then Jesus answered and said unto here, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto
thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that hour.
(Matthew 15:21–28)



The kingdom of heaven, as conceived of by Christ, was not only populated by the
foreigner—an inclusion sufficiently unacceptable—but by all who were deemed
superfluous or sinful according to the terms of prevailing morality: by the
prostitute, the tax collector, the diseased, the insane and, most radically, by
the enemy. This of course did not mean the end of morality—did not mean
establishment of an anarchic “community” where everything was equal, and
therefore equally valueless (where the practising and unrepentant torturer and
the authentic saint share would be worthy of equal distinction)—but the
portrayal of a state where the life of the past or the conditions of birth, no
matter how wretched, did not finally determine the value of the present, or the
possibilities of the future.

The extremely radical nature of this viewpoint profoundly disturbed the
traditionalists in Christ's community. His example served as reproach to their
actions; his philosophy, as threat to the integrity of their most dearly held
positions. In consequence, they constantly attempted to trap him into making an
irrevocably criminal or heretic statement. This strategy tended to backfire
badly:

Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in his
talk.

And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master,
we know that thou are true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither
carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men.

Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto
Caesar, or not?

But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt me, ye hypocrites?

Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.

And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?

They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.

When they heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.
(Matthew 22:157#x2013;22)



also

And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he went
in, and sat down to meat.

And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before
dinner.

And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the
cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness.

Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within
also?

But rather give alms of such things as ye have: and, behold, all things are
clean unto you.

But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs,
and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and
not to leave the other undone.

Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and
greetings in the markets.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as graves which
appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them.

Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou
reproachest us also.

And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens
grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your
fingers.

Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers
killed them.

Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed
killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.

Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles,
and some of them they shall slay and persecute:

That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the
world, may be required of this generation;

From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the
alter and the temple: verily, I say unto you, it shall be required of this
generation.

Woe unto you lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered
not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.

And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to
urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things:

Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they
might accuse him. (Luke 11:33–54)



Christ's ability to weave his way through verbal traps continually inflamed the
Pharisees, who attempted, with ever more sophistry, to corner him:

Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and
saying,

Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (Matthew 22:35–40)



However, the power of Christ's unexpected answers—in conjunction with his
evident mastery of traditional knowledge (Matthew 22:42–45)—temporarily
silenced his critics:

And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day
forth ask him any more questions. (Matthew 22:46)



Christ's replies signified transition of morality from reliance on tradition to
reliance on individual conscience—from rule of law to rule of spirit—from
prohibition to exhortation. To love God means to listen to the voice of
truth571 and to act in accordance with its messages; to love thy neighbour, as
thy self. This means, not merely to be pleasant, polite and friendly, but to
attribute to the other a value equivalent to the value of the self—which,
despite outward appearances, is a representative of God—and to act in
consequence of this valuation. This transition means establishment of an active
dynamic balance of competing subjectively based motivational demands, while
maintaining and creatively modifying the social and natural environment. It
means fulfillment of personal and interpersonal needs in accordance with
meta-moral principles, rather than in accordance with the demands of power or
dogmatic tradition. Thus, the process by which tradition is generated in
brought into inevitable contrast with tradition itself:

Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather
division:

For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against
two, and two against three.

The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father:
the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the
mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her
mother in law. (Luke 12:51–53)



This is most truly death of unthinking adherence to authority—for as in the
archaic society, the past rules:

In normal times, when culture is stable and the paternal canon remains in force
for generations, the father-son relationship consists in handing down these
values to the son and impressing them upon him, after he has passed the tests
of initiation in puberty. Such times, and the psychology that goes with them,
are distinguished by the fact that there is no father-son problem, or only the
barest suggestion of one. We must not be deceived by the different experience
of our own “extraordinary” age. The monotonous sameness of fathers and sons is
the rule in a stable culture. This sameness only means that the paternal canon
of rites and institutions which make the youth an adult and the father an elder
holds indisputed sway, so that the young man undergoes his prescribed
transition to adulthood just as naturally as the father undergoes his to old
age.

There is, however, one exception to this, and the exception is the creative
individual—the hero. As Barlach says, the hero has to “awaken the sleeping
images of the future which can come forth from the night, in order to give the
world a new and better face.” This necessarily makes him a breaker of the old
law. He is the enemy of the old ruling system, of the old cultural values, and
the existing court of conscience, and so he necessarily comes into conflict
with the fathers. In this conflict the “inner voice,” the command of the
transpersonal father or father archetype who wants the world to change,
collides with the personal father who speaks for the old law. We know this
conflict best from the Bible story of Jehovah's command to Abraham: “Get thee
out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a
land that I will show thee (Genesis 12:1), which the midrash (Bin Gorion, Sagen
der Juden, Vol. II, “Die Erzvater,” XI) interprets as meaning that Abraham is
to destory the gods of his father. The message of Jesus is only an extension of
the same conflict, and it repeats itself in every revolution. Whether the new
picture of God and the world conflicts with an old picture, or with the
personal father, is unimportant, for the father always represents the old order
and hence also the old picture current in his cultural canon.572



What principle is rule of spirit, rather than law, predicated upon? Respect for
the innately heroic nature of man. The “unconscious” archaic man mimics
particular adaptive behaviors—integrated, however, into a procedural structure
containing all other adaptive behaviors, capable of compelling imitation, and
accompanied by episodic/semantic representation, in myth. Pre-experimental
cultures regard the act of initial establishment of adaptive behavior as divine
first because it follows an archetypal and therefore transpersonal pattern—that
governing creative exploration—and second because it compels imitation, and
therefore appears possessed of power. All behaviors that change history, and
compel imitation, follow the same pattern—that of the divine hero, the
embodiment of creative human potential. For the primitive individual, it is the
consequences of such heroism and the particular acts themselves that constitute
the essence of the past. The process of imitation and abstracted variants
thereof, however, allow for the nature of this essence to be continually
clarified—until, finally, representation of abstracted but specific heroic
actions give way to representation of the process of heroism, per se. At this
point, it becomes possible for the creative individual to mimic, consciously
incarnate, the process of world-redemption itself.

Law is a necessary precondition to salvation, so to speak; necessary, but
insufficient. Law provides the borders that limit chaos, and allows for the
protected maturation of the individual. Law disciplines possibility, and allows
the disciplined individual to bring his or her potentialities—those
intrapsychic spirits—under voluntary control. The law allows for the
application of such potentiality to the task of creative and courageous
existence— allows spiritual water controlled flow into the valley of the shadow
of death. Law held as absolute, however, puts man in the position of the
eternal adolescent, dependent upon the father for every vital decision; removes
the responsibility for action from the individual, and therefore prevents him
or her from discovering the potential grandeur of the soul. Life without law
remains chaotic, affectively intolerable. Life that is pure law becomes
sterile, equally unbearable. The domination of chaos or sterility equally
breeds murderous resentment and hatred.

Christ presented the kingdom of heaven (the archetypal goal) as a spiritual
kingdom, which is to say, a psychological, then interpersonal, state. This
state differed from the hypothetical promised land described in the Old
Testament, in a number of vitally important manners. First, its construction
was a matter of voluntarily chosen alteration in personal attitude and outlook,
rather than a culmination of material labor and natural resource. Second, it
was predicated upon revolutionary and paradoxical reconceptualization of the
nature of the goal—of paradise itself. Christ's life and words— as archetypal
exemplars of the heroic manner of being—place explicit stress on the process of
life, rather than upon its products. The point of a symphony is not its final
note, although it proceeds inexorably to that end. Likewise, the purpose of
human existence is not the establishment of some static, perfect manner of
being—man would find such perfection intolerable, as Dostoyevsky was at pains
to illustrate. Rather, human purpose is generation of the ability to
concentrate on the innately interesting and affectively significant events of
the present, with sufficient consciousness and clarity, to render concern about
the past and future unnecessary. “Consider the lilies of the valley” says
Christ,

how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:

And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these.

Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
faith?

Therefore take not thought, saying What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink?
or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

for your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.

But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.

Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for
the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. (Matthew
6:28–34)



“Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof” does not mean “live the life of
the grasshopper instead of the ant, sing in the summer and starve in the
winter,” but concentrate on the task at hand. Respond to error, when committed.
Pay attention, and when your behavior produces a consequence you find
intolerable, modify it—no matter what it takes to produce such a modification.
Allow consciousness of your present insufficiency to maintain a constant
presence, so that you do not commit the error of pride, and become unbending,
rigid, and dead in spirit. Live in full recognition of your capacity for
error—and your capacity to rectify such error. Advance in confidence and faith;
do not shrink back, avoiding inevitable contact with the terrible unknown, to
live in a hole that grows smaller and darker.

The significance of the Christian passion is the transformation of the process
by which the goal is to be attained into the goal itself: the making of the
“imitation of Christ”—the duty of every Christian citizen—into the embodiment
of courageous, truthful, individually unique existence:

Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake shall find it.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? (Matthew 16:24–26)



Christ said, put truth and regard for the divine in humanity above all else,
and everything you need will follow—not everything you think you need, as such
thought is fallible, and cannot serve as an accurate guide, but everything
actually necessary to render acutely (self) conscious life bearable, without
protection of delusion and necessary recourse to deceit, avoidance or
suppression, and violence. This idea is presented in imagistic form in Figure
61: World-Tree of Death and Redemption,573 which portrays the “host” as the
second fruit of the world-tree. Ingestion of the first fruit produced the fall;
ingestion of the second redeems those who have fallen. The negative feminine,
in the form of Eve, hands out the apple, in the form of a skull; the positive
feminine, in the form of the church, distributes the wheaten wafers that
characterize the redeemer. The incorporation of “Christ's mystic body,” during
the ritual of the mass, is dramatic representation of the idea that the hero
must be incorporated into each individual—that everyone must partake of the
essence of the savior.

Existence characterized by such essence takes place, from the Oriental
viewpoint, on the path of meaning, in Tao, balanced on the razor's edge between
mythic masculine and mythic feminine—balanced between the potentially
stultifying safety of order, and the inherently

Figure 61: World-Tree of Death and Redemption





destructive possibility of chaos. Such existence allows for introduction of
sufficiently bearable meaning into blessed security; makes every individual a
stalwart guardian of tradition and an intrepid explorer of the unknown; ensures
simultaneous advancement and maintenance of stable, dynamic social existence;
and places the individual firmly on the path to intrapsychic integrity and
spiritual peace:

Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken
him to a wise man, which built his house upon a rock;

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. (Matthew 7:24–25)

