# 2 - Introduction
[Metadata]: # {03.09}
[Descriptor]: # {03.09}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
Introduction
# Introduction
Reasonable and informed observers—at least since the time of Frazier199—have
established the widespread spatial and temporal dispersion of cosmogonic
stories, tales of heroism and deceit, rituals of initiation, and standard
imagistic representations, such as the virgin and child. These stories, tales,
rituals and images often differ in detail, and temporal ordering; sometimes,
however, they are simply the same. It is possible that this similarity might be
the consequence of dissemination, from a single source, hundreds of centuries
ago. This hypothesis, however, does not explain why standard stories are
remembered, once disseminated, and transmitted down the generations, with
little structural alteration. It is reasonable to presume that, over the long
run, our species “forgets” most things that are useless: we do not forget our
myths, however. Indeed, much of the activity broadly deemed “cultural” is in
fact the effort to ensure that such myths are constantly represented and
communicated.

Carl Jung attempted to account for the apparent universality of world
interpretation with the hypothesis of the “collective unconscious.” Jung
believed that religious or mythological symbols sprung from a universal source,
whose final point of origin was biological (and heritable). His “collective
unconscious” was composed of “complexes,” which he defined as heritable
propensities for behavior or for classification. The Jungian position, which is
almost never understood properly, has attracted more than its share of
derision. Jung was not privy to our knowledge of the mechanisms of inheritance
(a limitation necessarily shared by all members of his generation); the idea of
“collective memories” appears impossible—Lamarckian—from the modern
perspective. Jung did not really believe that individual memories themselves
could be transmitted, however— although his writings, which are very difficult,
do not always make this clear. When he speaks formally of the collective
unconscious, he is at pains to point out that it is the possibility of
categorization that is inherited, and not the contents of memory itself.
However, he frequently writes as if the contents, as well, might be inherited.

The general irritation over Jung's “heritable memory” hypothesis has blinded
psychologists and others to the remarkable fact that narratives do appear
patterned, across diverse cultures. The fact that all cultures use what are
clearly and rapidly identifiable as “narratives” (or at least as “rites,” which
are clearly dramatic in nature) in itself strongly points to an underlying
commonality of structure and purpose. It might still be objected: attempts to
attribute comprehensible patterning to such narratives cannot be demonstrated,
without a theory of interpretation, and that theory may be merely “reading in”
patterns, where none actually “exist.” The same objection can, of course, be
applied—and applied validly—to literary interpretation, the study of history,
dream analysis and anthropology. Cultural phenomena cannot be understood except
from a cultural perspective. This fundamental problem (among others) makes
verification of theories in the “domain of value” difficult.

Nonetheless, to live, it is necessary to act. Action presupposes belief and
interpretation (implicit, if not explicit). Belief has to be grounded in faith,
in the final analysis (as the criteria by which a moral theory might be
evaluated have to be chosen, as well). There is no reason, however, why such
faith cannot be informed, and critically assessed. It seems reasonable to
presume that cross-cultural analysis of systems of belief, and their comparison
with the essentially literary productions of the humanities, might constitute a
means to attain such information. This was Jung's approach. The “causal
mechanism” he constructed to account for what he found—that is, the “collective
unconscious”—appears insufficiently elaborated, from the modern empirical
perspective (although the idea is much more complex, and much less easily
dismissable, than generally conceded). This does not mean that we should
dismiss Jung's methodology or deride his otherwise valuable insights. Great
modern minds, working in areas outside of psychology, have also concluded that
stories have universal structures.

How can the fact of patterned stories—archetypal stories, if you will—be
reconciled with the apparent impossibility of inherited memory content? We
might turn our attention to the phenomenon of language, and the processes of
its “storage” and transmission, to find an answer. The human linguistic ability
appears to have a relatively specific biological basis. Other animals do not
have language, in their natural states, and cannot be taught language at any
sophisticated level. Human children, by contrast—even when severely
intellectually impaired—pick up language easily and use it fluently, naturally
and creatively. Language use is an intrinsic characteristic of Homo sapiens,
and the structure of language itself appears biologically grounded.
Nonetheless, human languages differ. A native Japanese speaker cannot
understand a native French speaker, although it might be evident to both that
the other is using language. It is possible for two phenomena to be different
at one level of analysis and similar at another.

The question might be asked: upon what databank, so to speak, does a child
draw, when he or she learns to talk (read, write)? The child listens to those
around her. She is not explicitly “taught” how to talk, although some explicit
teaching takes place. Her biological propensity encounters a cultural reality:
the existence of language, in the culture. Her parents serve as primary
intermediaries of culture: they embody language in their behavior and transmit
it to her during their day-to-day activities. Nonetheless, they cannot be said
to be the “creators” of language, although they may use it
idiosyncratically—even creatively. It is the capability for human linguistic
activity— whatever that is—that is the “creator.” The cumulative consequences
of this capability, expressed over centuries, have modified the behavior of all
the individuals who compose a given linguistic “culture.” Identifiable
individuals serve as the temporary agents of embodied memory for the entire
culture, at any given locale and time; nonetheless, the loss of a given
individual poses no threat to the “knowledge” of the culture. This is because
language is “remembered”—that is, embodied—in the behavior of all those who
speak. Children pick up language by interacting with adults, who embody
language. Thus, they learn to speak, and learn to know they have language, and
even to observe and study the fact that they have language.

The same holds true of moral behavior and of the belief that “underlies” it.
Adults embody the behavioral wisdom of their culture for their children.
Children interact with adults, who serve as “cultural emissaries.” Obviously, a
given adult may be a better or worse representative, just as a parent may be
more or less literate. However, a bad example can be as exemplary as a good
example; furthermore, children are rarely limited, in their exposure, to a
single “hero.” If there are no other adults around in fact, they are inevitably
present by proxy, in “entertainment”: in ritual, drama, literature and myth.
The behavioral patterns that make up our stories might therefore be regarded as
“stored” in our (social) behavior. This implies that such patterns may be
abstracted from that behavior, at any time. The “collective unconscious” is,
from this perspective, embodied behavioral wisdom, in its most fundamental
form—is the cumulative transmitted consequences of the fact of exploration and
culture on action.

Our capacity for abstraction allows us to derive the constituent elements of
successful “adaptation” itself from observation of behavioral patterns that are
constantly played out in the world as it actually exists. The behavioral
patterns that constitute adult interaction, for example, are exceedingly
sophisticated and are conditioned to the last gesture by centuries of cultural
work. We can extract “images” of these patterns; such images, just as
sophisticated as the behaviors they represent, constitute the building blocks
for our stories, and for our self-understanding. (The admirable adult, an
identifiable individual, keeps her house tidy and neat, reconciles her warring
brothers and learns hard moral lessons when such learning is necessary. The
archetypal hero makes order out of chaos, brings peace to the world, and
restructures society when it has become rigid and anachronistic.) The
“collective unconscious” that constitutes the basis for shared religious
mythology is in fact the behavior, the procedures, that have been generated,
transmitted, imitated, and modified by everyone who has ever lived, everywhere.
Images of these behaviors and of the transcendent “place” where they occur (the
universe of chaos and order) constitute metaphors, symbolic images. Metaphors
mediate between our procedural wisdom and our explicit knowledge; they
constitute the imagistic declarative point of transition between the act and
the word.

We have spent hundreds of thousands of years watching ourselves act and telling
stories about how we act. A good story has a universal quality, which means
that it speaks a language we all understand. Any universally comprehensible
language must have universal referents, and this means that a good story must
speak to us about those aspects of experience that we all share. But what is it
that every human being shares, regardless of place and time of birth? Is it
reasonable to posit that anything might remain constant, for example, across
the centuries that separate us from our Stone Age ancestors; across the
ideological and religious barriers that divide the inhabitants of our modern
nations? Our distant predecessors lived much closer to nature, and the problems
that beset them seem far removed from our current daily struggles. The great
difference between us and them seems analagous in distance, if not precisely in
kind, to that obtaining between the varied cultural worlds of today—to the
great gap that still separates the Hindu religious mystic, for example, from
the Manhattan investment banker. It is not surprising that a world
characterized by such different human lives remains rife with constant
intergroup conflict, nor is it surprising that we might seem to have outgrown
our traditional wisdom. But are there fundamental presuppositions we might
agree upon and share despite our differences?

Most objects of experience have some properties in common, while varying with
regard to others. Generally, the similarities and the differences are both
significant. So it is with individuals, and with cultures. We seem peculiarly
aware of our differences, however, and not of our similarities. Even groups of
people who share much in common, at least from the perspective of more distant
outsiders—the Irish Catholics and Protestants spring to mind—appear
sufficiently conscious of those factors that make them unique in their social
affiliation. I think this is in part because we are not built to focus on the
predictable and familiar. Our attention gravitates naturally toward those
aspects of our environments, natural and social, that contain information. The
similarities of the Serb and the Croat are hidden from each other, so to speak,
by a wall of habituation, but the differences stand out profoundly.

To ask the question “What is it that two or more discriminable beings or things
or situations might share?” is really to ask “At what levels of analysis might
two or more things be considered the same? And at what levels different?” It is
the particulars of our individuality—our specific time and place—that
differentiate us from one another. What unites us is the fact of those
particulars, however: the fact that we each have a specific time and place, and
the implications ofthat fact for the nature of our existence. Our lives are
open to possibility, but remain eternally bounded by disease, death and
subjugation to social structure. As mutable, limited social beings, we are all
engaged in a massive, cooperative and competitive endeavor. We do not
understand the rules that govern this endeavor, in the final analysis; we
cannot state explicitly why it is that we do what we do. Our democratic
constitutions, for example—which contain the most fundamental axioms of the
“body of law” that we imitate (that governs our behavior)—are inextricably
embedded in the conception of natural rights (which is to say, in a statement
of faith: “We hold these truths to be self-evident”). We are all, in
consequence, imitating a story that we don't understand. This story covers the
broadest possible expanse of time and space (at least that expanse relevant to
us), and is still implicitly “contained” in our behavior (although represented,
in part, in episodic imagery and semantic description). This partially implicit
containment constitutes our mythology, and our ritual, and provides the
“upper-level,” “unconscious” frames of reference within which our conditional
and expressible individual stories retain their validity.

It is impossible to properly appreciate the nature of the categories of the
mythological imagination without some understanding of the process of
categorization. The act of categorization enables us to treat the mysterious
and complex world we inhabit as if it were simpler—as if it were, in fact,
comprehensible. We perform this act of simplification by treating objects or
situations that share some aspect of structure, function or implication as if
they were identical. People are very good at categorizing— so good, in fact,
that the ability is taken for granted and appears simple. It is not so simple,
however. Neither the “rules” that underly categorization, nor the act itself,
have proved easy to describe. Roger Brown, the eminent psycholinguist, states:

Until about 1973, psychological experiments on category formation conceived of
human categories on the model of a “proper set.” Triangles are a proper set,
which means that members of the triangle class are precisely definable in terms
of a conjunction of attributes true of all members of the set, and of no
nonmembers. A triangle is a closed three-sided figure. From the fact that a
clear definition exists, it follows that membership in the set is not a matter
of degree; one triangle is no more essentially triangular than any other. An
entity either is or is not a triangle.

In retrospect, it is amazing that psychology was for so long able to think of
real-life categories as proper sets. We ought to have worred more over the
extreme difficulty everyone has in defining anything “natural,” and natural, as
used here, includes not only dogs and carrots but also artifacts like chairs,
cars, and pencils. I know you can tell one when you see one, but just try
listing the attributes that are true of all dogs and of no cats or wolves or
hyenas, or of all the carrots and no radishes or turnips, or of all chairs and
no small tables, hassocks, benches or slings.200



In the natural state, so to speak, human beings do not think like logicians or
even like empiricists. It takes training to think like that. In the absence of
such training, we still think, however; but more subjectively—like
“unreasonable,” idiosyncratically emotional beings, who inhabit bodies of
particular size, with particular and constrained properties. Our natural
categories, which are the groupings we generate spontaneously, do not consist
solely of the consensually apprehensible properties shared by the things and
situations we encounter. Neither are natural categories tightly bounded; their
borders are fuzzy, and they overlap. The construction of proper sets is
possible—obviously, since they exist—and the ability to construct and use such
sets has proved useful, in a broad variety of manners. Nonetheless, the
capability that underlies such construction appears relatively new,
phylogenetically speaking, and seems dependent at least in part on the ability
to think empirically and to regard things objectively. In the absence of such
ability—which requires specialized training (or, at least, immersion in a
culture like ours where such thinking has become commonplace) people naturally
incline toward the development of what has been described (recently) as the
“cognitive model.” Cognitive models are characterized by a number of
distinctive properties (as paraphrased, in part, from George Lakoff201):

1) They are embodied with regard to their content, which essentially means that
they can be used, without necessarily being defined; are implicit in action,
without necessarily being explicit in description. Two things classified within
the same cognitive model are two things that evoke the same behavior, and can
therefore be regarded, at least from the perspective of action, as one thing.
If you are utilizing a cognitive model, and someone asks you to describe its
content (“What makes a dog?”), you might say, “I can't say, but I know when one
is around.” You know that a dog is, for example, something friendly, something
to be petted, and something to play with—although such knowledge does not
constitute everything that makes up what you regard as dog. Most of the
concepts you use are in fact embodied, at the most basic of levels—are
habitual, procedural, motoric, behavioral. You can use them without thinking.
Those that are not can only be applied slowly, with full conscious attention,
and with effort.

2) They are characterized by basic-level categorization and basic-level
primacy. These terms mean, respectively, that the phenomena most “naturally”
apprehensible to the human mind—perceptible as a whole, or gestalt; nameable,
communicable, manipulable, memorable—serve as the material for initial
categorization, and that those initial categories provide the basis for the
development of more abstract concepts (even for the comparison point for
determining what we consider abstract). “Most naturally apprehensible” means
learned and named first (generally with short names) and conceptualized at the
level of distinctive action, (in association with such characteristic behaviors
as petting for the category “cat” and smelling for the category “flower”). Our
basic-level categories reflect our structure, as much as the structure of the
external world: we most accurately conceive of those things that most simply
present themselves to us. The “higher” and “lower” levels of category that
surround these naturally apprehensible basic-level phenomena might be regarded,
in contrast, as “achievements of the imagination,” to use Roger Brown's
phrase.202 We perceive the “cat,” for example, and infer the species that
contains the cat or the subtype that makes it Siamese. Our basic-level
categories generally occupy the middle of our conceptual hierarchies: we
generalize when we move “up,” and specialize when we move “down.”

3) They may be used in metonymic or reference-point reasoning. Metonymic
reasoning is symbolic, in the psychoanalytic or literary sense. Metonymic means
interchangeable and more. The fact that objects in a cognitive model have
metonymic properties means that any or all of those objects can stand for any
or all of the others. This capacity makes sense, since all of the objects in a
given category are by definition regarded as equivalent, in some nontrivial
sense (most generally, in terms of implication for action). The human capacity
for metaphor, aesthetic appreciation and allusion seems integrally related to
the capacity for metonymic reasoning and the use of richly meaningful cognitive
models.

4) They are characterized by membership and centrality gradience. Membership
gradience implies degree of membership, which is to say that an ostrich, for
example, is a bird, but perhaps not so much of a bird as a robin—because the
robin has more properties that are central to the category bird. A thing can be
a better or worse exemplar of its category; if it is worse, it can still be
placed within that category.

5) They contain phenomena associated as a consequence of familial resemblance,
a term used first in this context by Ludwig Wittgenstein.203 Things with
familial resemblance all share similarities with a potentially hypothetical
object. The prototypical Smith brother, to use a famous example,204 may have a
dark mustache, beady eyes, balding pate, thick hornrimmed glasses, dark beard,
skinny neck, large ears and weak chin. Perhaps there are six Smith brothers, in
total, none of whom has all the properties of the prototypical Smith. Morgan
Smith has a weak chin, large ears, balding pate and skinny neck—but no glasses,
mustache, or beard. Terry, by contrast, has the glasses, mustache and beard—but
a full head of hair, small ears and a normal neck. Nelson has a receding
hairline, beady eyes, and a dark beard and mustache—and so on for Lance, Randy
and Lyle. None of the brothers precisely resembles another, but if you saw them
in a group, you would say, “those men are all related.”

6) They give rise to the phenomenon of polysemy, a defining characteristic of
myth. A polysemic story is written and can be read validly on many levels. The
phenomenon of polysemy, discussed in some detail later in this book, arises
when the relationship of objects within a particular cognitive model is
analogous in some sense to the relationship that obtains between cognitive
models. Great works of literature are always polysemic, in this manner: the
characters within the story stand in the same relationship to one another as
things of more general significance stand to one another, in the broader world.
The struggle of Moses against the Egyptian pharaoh, for example, to take a
story we will consider later, can also be read as an allegory of the struggle
of the oppressed against the oppressor or, even more generally, as the
rebellion of the [world-destroying (flooding)] savior against society.

To say that two separable things belong to the same category is a tricky
business. We presume, without thinking, that we group things as a consequence
of something about them, rather than as a consequence of something about us.
What do all chairs share in common, then? Any given chair may lack some of the
most common chair attributes, such as legs, backs or armrests. Is a tree-stump
a chair? Yes, if you can sit on it. It isn't really something about an object,
considered as an independent thing, that makes it a chair: it is, rather,
something about its potential for interaction with us. The category “chair”
contains objects that serve a function we value. Chairs may be efficiently sat
upon—at least potentially. Our action in the face of an object constitutes an
elementary but fundamental form of classification (constitutes, in fact, the
most fundamental of all classifications; the classification from which all
abstracted divisions are derived). The category of “all things that make you
want to run away when you look at them” might be considered, for example, a
very basic form of construct. Closely related to this category, although
slightly higher in the hierarchy of abstraction, might be the category of “all
objects to be feared,” or “all objects that are dangerous when approached in
one fashion but beneficial when approached in another.”

It is a meaningful but “irrational” classification scheme of this sort that
Jung described as a complex—one of the constituent elements of the “collective
unconscious.” A complex is, in part, a group of phenomena, linked together
because of shared significance [which is (essentially) implication for action,
or emotional equivalence]. Jung believed that many complexes had an archetypal
(or universal) basis, rooted in biology, and that this rooting had something
specifically to do with memory. It appears that the truth is somewhat more
complicated. We classify things according to the way they appear, the way they
act, and in accordance with their significance to us, which is an indication of
how to act in their presence—and may mix any or all of these attributes,
irrationally (but meaningfully), in a single scheme. We categorize diverse
things in similar manners, across cultures, because we share perceptual
apparatus, motivational drive and emotional state, as well as structure of
memory and physical form, manifested in observable behavior. The imagination
has its natural categories, dependent for their existence on the interaction
between our embodied minds and the world of shared experience; into these
categories fall particular phenomena in a more or less predictable manner.
Stories describe the interactions of the contents of the categories of the
imagination, which take embodied form, in the shape of dramatic characters. The
characters have a predictable nature, and play out their relationships in an
eternally fascinating patterned fashion, time and time again, everywhere in the
world.

So now we have the observation of commonality of structure, and a plausible
theory to account for the presence of that commonality. Perhaps it would be
reasonable, then, to describe the nature of the universal patterns in
narrative—while placing a variety of additional and stringent constraints on
that description, for the sake of caution (given the difficulty of verifying
“interpretive theories”). First, let us make the description rationally
acceptable, and internally consistent—that is, let us find a way of making
sense of myth that does not conflict with the tenets of empiricism and
experimental science, and that appears applicable to stories derived from many
different places, and many different times. Let us further make the description
simple, as a good theory should be simple—so that remembering the interpretive
framework will be much easier than remembering the stories themselves. Let us
make it compelling, as well, from the emotional perspective. Good theories have
an affective component, sometimes described as “beauty.” This beauty appears
simultaneously as efficiency—the same sort of efficiency that characterizes a
well-crafted tool—and as what might be described as a “window into
possibility.” A good theory lets you use things—things that once appeared
useless—for desirable ends. In consequence, such a theory has a general sense
of excitement and hope about it. A good theory about the structure of myth
should let you see how a story you couldn't even understand previously might
shed new and useful light on the meaning of your life. Finally, let us
constrain the description by making it fit with what is known about the manner
in which the brain actually operates (and which was described previously); let
us ensure that the world of myth, as interpreted, is the same world apperceived
by the mind.

Operation within this set of constraints allows for generation of the following
straightfor-ward hypothesis: the “partially implicit” mythic stories or
fantasies that guide our adaptation, in general, appear to describe or portray
or embody three permanent constituent elements of human experience: the
unknown, or unexplored territory; the known, or explored territory; and the
process—the knower—that mediates between them. These three elements constitute
the cosmos—that is, the world of experience—from the narrative or mythological
perspective.

No matter where an individual lives—and no matter when—he faces the same set of
problems or, perhaps, the same set of metaproblems, since the details differ
endlessly. He is a cultural creature, and must come to terms with the existence
ofthat culture. He must master the domain of the known—explored territory—which
is the set of interpretations and behavioral schemas he shares with his
societal compatriots. He must understand his role within that culture—a role
defined by the necessity of preservation, maintenance and transmission of
tradition, as well as by capacity for revolution and radical update of that
tradition, when such update becomes necessary. He must also be able to tolerate
and even benefit from the existence of the transcendental unknown—unexplored
territory—which is the aspect of experience that cannot be addressed with mere
application of memorized and habitual procedures. Finally, he must adapt to the
presence of himself—must face the endlessly tragic problem of the knower, the
exploratory process, the limited, mortal subject; must serve as eternal
mediator between the creative and destructive “underworld” of the unknown and
the secure, oppressive patriarchal kingdom of human culture.

We cannot see the unknown, because we are protected from it by everything
familiar and unquestioned. We are in addition habituated to what is familiar
and known—by definition—and are therefore often unable to apprehend its
structure (often even unable to perceive that it is there). Finally, we remain
ignorant of our own true nature, because of its intrinsic complexity, and
because we act toward others and ourselves in a socialized manner, which is to
say a predictable manner—and thereby shield ourselves from our own mystery. The
figures of myth, however, embody the world—“visible” and “invisible.” Though
the analysis of such figures, we can come to see just what meaning means, and
how it reveals itself, in relationship to our actions. It is through such
analysis that we can come to realize the potential breadth and depth of our own
emotions, and the nature of our true being; to understand our capacity for
great acts of evil—and great acts of good—and our motivations for participating
in them.

Consider once again this archaic creation myth from Sumer:

So far, no cosmogonic text properly speaking has been discovered, but some
allusions permit us to reconstruct the decisive moments of creation, as the
Sumerians conceived it. The goddess Nammu (whose name is written with the
pictograph representing the primordial sea) is presented as “the mother who
gave birth to the Sky and the Earth” and the “ancestress who brought forth all
the gods.” The theme of the primordial waters, imagined as a totality at once
cosmic and divine, is quite frequent in archaic cosmogonies. In this case too,
the watery mass is identified with the original Mother, who, by
parthenogenesis, gave birth to the first couple, the Sky (An) and the Earth
(Ki), incarnating the male and female principles. This first couple was united,
to the point of merging, in the hieros gamos [mystical marriage]. From their
union was born En-lil, the god of the atmosphere. Another fragment informs us
that the latter separated his parents…. The cosmogonic theme of the separation
of sky and earth is also widely disseminated.205



The “sky” and “earth” of the Sumerians are categories of apprehension,
characteristic of the Sumerian culture, and must not be confused with the sky
and earth of modern empirical thinking. “An” and “Ki” are, instead, the
dramatically represented Great Father and Great Mother of all things (including
the son who “gives birth” to them). This somewhat paradoxical narrative is
prototypical; mythologies of creation tend to manifest themselves in this
pattern. In the Enuma elish, for example—the oldest written creation myth we
possess—the Mesopotamian hero/deity Marduk faces the aquatic female dragon
Tiamat (mother of all things, including Marduk himself), cuts her up, and
creates the world from her pieces.206 The god Marduk serves explicitly as
exemplar for the Mesopotamian emperor,207 whose job is to ensure that the
cosmos exist and remain stable, as a consequence of his proper “moral”
behavior, defined by his imitation of Marduk. In the Judeo-Christian tradition,
it is the Logos208—the word of God—that creates order from chaos, and it is in
the image of the Logos that man [“Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness” (Genesis 1:26)] is created. This idea has clear additional precedents
in early and late Egyptian cosmology (as we shall see). In the Far East,
similarly, the cosmos is imagined as composed of the interplay between yang and
yin, chaos and order209—that is to say, unknown or unexplored territory and
known or explored territory. Tao, from the Eastern perspective, is the pattern
of behavior that mediates between them (analogous to En-lil, Marduk and the
Logos) constantly generating, destroying, and regenerating the universe. For
the Eastern individual, life in Tao is the highest good, the “way” and
“meaning”; the goal toward which all other goals must remain subordinate.

Our narratives describe the world as it possesses broad but classifiable
implication for motor output—as it signifies. We gather information about the
nature of the world, as it signifies for behavior, by watching ourselves and
the others who compose our social groups act in the world. We derive
conclusions about the fundamental meanings of things by observing how we
respond to them. The unknown becomes classifiable, in this manner, because we
respond to its manifestation predictably. It compels our actions, and “makes”
us feel. It frightens us into paralysis and entices us forward, simultaneously;
it ignites our curiosity, and heightens our senses. It offers us new
information and greater well-being, at the potential cost of our lives. We
observe our responses, which are biologically predetermined, and draw the
appropriate conclusions. The unknown is intrinsically interesting, in a manner
that poses an endless dilemma. It promises and threatens simultaneously. It
appears as the hypothetical ultimate “source” of all determinate information,
and as the ultimate unity of all currently discriminable things. It surrounds
all things, eternally; engenders all things and takes all things back. It can
therefore be said, paradoxically, that we know specific things about the domain
of the unknown, that we understand something about it, can act toward and
represent it, even though it has not yet been explored. This paradoxical
ability is a nontrivial capacity. Since the unknown constitutes an ineradicable
component of the “environment,” so to speak, we have to know what it is, what
it signifies; we must understand its implication for behavior and its affective
valence.

Explored territory is something altogether different. Habitual and familiar
actions are useful there, instead of the frightened, tentative or exploratory
behaviors that serve where nothing is certain. Habits and familiar actions
exist, as a general rule, because they have been successful, because their
implementation suffices to transform what would otherwise be unexplored
territory into a safe and fruitful haven. As we have been at pains to
demonstrate, the unknown does not lose its a priori motivational significance—
promise and threat—because of the passive process of “habituation.” Adaptation
is active. “Habituation,” except in the most trivial of senses, is the
consequence of successful creative exploration, which means generation of
behavioral patterns that turn the indeterminate meaning of something newly
encountered into something positive, at best—neutral, at worst. Is fire
dangerous, or beneficial? It depends on how it is approached—which is to say,
fire has context-dependent potential for harm and for benefit. Which of its
many “potentials” fire actually manifests depends on what behavioral strategy
is undertaken in its presence. Fire heats our homes. Now and then— when we are
insufficiently cautious—it burns one of them down. What fire does—which is to
say, what it is, from the perspective of motivational significance—depends on
how we treat it.

We have lost our fear of fire, not because we have habituated to it, but
because we have learned how to control it. We have learned to specify and limit
its “intrinsically” ambivalent affective valence, through modification of our
own behavior, in its presence. Fire, insofar as we can control it, has been
rendered predictable, nonthreatening—even familiar and comforting. All things
we can control (which means, can bend to our own ends) have been likewise
rendered predictable—by definition. The “territory” of “explored territory” is
defined, at least in general, by security. Secure territory is that place where
we know how to act. “Knowing how to act” means “being sure that our current
actions will produce the results desired in the future.” The affective
significance of the phenomena that comprise “explored territory” have been
mapped. This map takes the form of the story, which describes the valence of
present occurrences, the form of the desired future, and the means that might
serve usefully to transform the former into the latter. Any territories our
stories serve to render beneficial constitute “home ground.”

Home ground—explored territory—is that place where unfamiliar things do not
exist. Many of the things we encounter, however, are other people. This means
that “explored territory” is also that place where unfamiliar behaviors are not
encountered. On familiar ground, we engage in those activities that are
habitual, alongside others, who are doing the same thing (who are pursuing the
same goals, whose emotions can be understood, whose beliefs are the same as
ours, whose actions are predictable). Much of what we know how to do is
behavior matched to society—individual action matched to, adapted to, modified
by, the cumulative behavior of the others who surround us. “Explored”
necessarily means, therefore, “where human activity has been rendered
predictable,” as well as “where the course of ‘natural’ events can be
accurately determined.” The maps that make territory familiar consequently
consist in large part of representations of behavior—personal behavior, which
we manifest, and the behavior of others, which we constantly encounter, and to
which we have adjusted our personal actions. So, we map our own behaviors and
those of others, because such behaviors constitute a large part of the world.
We do not always understand what we do, however—our actions cannot be said to
be explicitly comprehended. Our behavioral patterns are exceedingly complex,
and psychology is a young science. The scope of our behavioral wisdom exceeds
the breadth of our explicit interpretation. We act, even instruct, and yet do
not understand. How can we do what we cannot explain?

We have already seen that we can represent what we do not understand—that we
derive knowledge about the nature of the unknown (about the fact that it is
eternally frightening and promising), by watching how we behave in its
presence. We do something similar with regard to the social world and the
behaviors that compose it. We watch how others act—and imitate, and learn to
act, in consequence. Furthermore, we learn to represent the social
world—explored territory, in large part—by watching the actions that take place
in it; by exploring the social world itself. These representations are first
patterns of actions, then stories—once the nature of the behavioral patterns
have been identified, and represented in a declarative manner. A good story
portrays a behavioral pattern with a large “expanse” of valid territory. It
follows, therefore, that the greatest of all stories portrays the pattern of
behavior with the widest conceivable territory.

We imitate and map adaptive behaviors—behaviors that efficiently reach a
desired end—so that we can transform the mysterious unknown into the desirable
and predictable; so that the social and nonsocial aspects of our experience
remain under our control. The particular behaviors we imitate and represent,
organized into a coherent unit, shared with others, constitute our cultures;
constitute the manner in which we bring order to our existence. Our maps of
adaptive behavior contain descriptions of the world in which that behavior is
manifested—contains descriptions of explored and unexplored territory—as well
as representations of the behaviors themselves. The stories mankind tells about
the personal and historical past constitute expressions of the content of the
declarative memory system, which is the system that knows what. Stories are
generally told about animate objects, motivated, emotional beings, and might be
regarded as descriptions of behavior, including antecedents, consequences and
contexts. Stories contain portrayals of the outputs of the procedural
system—which is the system that knows how—and inferences (explicit and
implicit) about the existence and nature of factors (implicit, nonverbal,
nondeclarative “presuppositions”), motivational and emotional, that guide and
govern such output. The knowing what system therefore contains a complex
sociohistorically constructed (but still somewhat “unconscious”) verbal and
imaginative description of the actions of the knowing how system. This
description takes narrative form. Capacity for such representation emerges as
the consequence of a complex and lengthy process of development, originating in
action, culminating in the production of capacity for abstract cognition.

The episodic system, which generates representations of the experiential world,
contains an elaborate model of the phenomenological world, composed in large
part of encountered human behaviors generated by the other and the self, the
most complex and affectively relevant phenomena in the human field of
experience. This representation takes imaginative, dramatic, then narrative,
mythic form as the model is constructed in fantasy, then described by the
semantic system. Narrative/mythic “reality” is the world, conceived of in
imagination, comprising imagistic representation of the behavioral pattern
central to “morality,” played out in an environment permanently characterized
by the interplay of the known and the unknown. This “reality” is the world as
place of action, and not as “place of objective things.”

All the world's a stage,

And all the men and women merely players:

They have their exits and their entrances;

And one man in his time plays many parts.210



Before the emergence of empirical methodology, which allowed for methodical
separation of subject and object in description, the world-model contained
abstracted inferences about the nature of existence, derived primarily from
observations of human behavior. This means, in essence, that pre-experimental
man observed “morality” in his behavior and inferred (through the process
described previously) the existence of a source or rationale for that morality
in the structure of the “universe” itself. Of course, this “universe” is the
experiential field—affect, imagination and all—and not the “objective” world
constructed by the post-empirical mind. This prescientific “model of reality”
primarily consisted of narrative representations of behavioral patterns (and of
the contexts that surround them), and was concerned primarily with the
motivational significance of events and processes. As this model became more
abstract—as the semantic system analyzed the information presented in narrative
format, but not understood—man generated imaginative hypotheses about the
nature of the ideal human behavior, in the archetypal environment. This
archetypal environment was (is) composed of three domains, which easily become
three “characters”:

The unknown is unexplored territory, nature, the unconscious, dionysian force,
the id, the Great Mother goddess, the queen, the matrix, the matriarch, the
container, the object to be fertilized, the source of all things, the strange,
the unconscious, the sensual, the foreigner, the place of return and rest, the
maw of the earth, the belly of the beast, the dragon, the evil stepmother, the
deep, the fecund, the pregnant, the valley, the cleft, the cave, hell, death
and the grave, the moon (ruler of the night and the myterious dark),
uncontrollable emotion, matter and the earth.211 Any story that makes allusion
to any of these phenomena instantly involves all of them. The grave and the
cave, for example, connote the destructive aspect of the maternal—pain, grief
and loss, deep water, and the dark woods; the fountain in the forest (water and
woods in their alternative aspect), by contrast, brings to mind sanctuary,
peace, rebirth and replenishment.

The knower is the creative explorer, the ego, the I, the eye, the phallus, the
plow, the subject, consciousness, the illuminated or enlightened one, the
trickster, the fool, the hero, the coward; spirit (as opposed to matter, as
opposed to dogma); the sun, son of the unknown and the known (son of the Great
Mother and the Great Father).212 The central character in a story must play the
role of hero or deceiver; must represent the sun (or, alternatively, the
adversary—the power that eternally opposes the “dominion of the light”).

The known is explored territory, culture, Apollinian control, superego, the
conscience, the rational, the king, the patriarch, the wise old man and the
tyrant, the giant, the ogre, the cyclops, order and authority and the crushing
weight of tradition, dogma, the day sky, the countryman, the island, the
heights, the ancestral spirits and the activity of the dead.213 Authority and
its danger play central roles in interesting tales, because human society is
hierarchical, and because the organized social world is omnipresent. Authority
and power manifest themselves, implicitly or explicitly, in all human
relationships; we have never lived—cannot live—without others. The fact of
power relationships and authority constitutes an eternally challenging and
necessary constant of the human domain of experience.

The unknown is yang, cold, dark and feminine; the known, yin, warm, bright and
masculine; the knower is the man living in Tao, on the razor's edge, on the
straight and narrow path, on the proper road, in meaning, in the kingdom of
heaven, on the mountaintop, crucified on the branches of the world-tree—is the
individual who voluntarily carves out the space between nature and culture. The
interpretation of words in relationship to these prototypes (unknown, knower,
known) is complicated by the fact of shifting meaning: earth, for example, is
unknown (feminine) in relationship to sky, but known (masculine) in
relationship to water; dragon is feminine, masculine and subject
simultaneously. This capacity for meanings to shift is not illogical, it is
just not “proper.”214 Meaning transforms itself endlessly with shift in
interpretive context—is determined in part by that context (that frame of
reference, that story). The same word in two sentences—one ironical, for
example, the other straightforward—can have two entirely different, even
opposite, meanings. Likewise, the sentence taken out of the context of the
paragraph may be interpreted in some fashion entirely foreign to the intent of
the author. Admission of the property of context-dependent meaning is neither
illogical nor indicative of sloppy reasoning, nor primitive—it is merely
recognition that context determines significance. The fact of
context-dependence, however, makes interpretation of a given symbol
difficult—particularly when it has been removed from its culturally constructed
surroundings or milieu.

The unknown, the known and the knower share tremendous affective bivalence: the
domain of nature, the Great Mother, contains everything creative and
destructive, because creation and destruction are integrally linked. The old
must be destroyed to give way to the new; the mysterious source of all things
(that is, the unknown) is also their final destination. Likewise, the domain of
culture, the Great Father, is simultaneously and unceasingly tyranny and order,
because security of person and property is always obtained at the cost of
absolute freedom. The eternal subject, man, the knower, is equally at odds: the
little god of earth is also mortal worm, courageous and craven, heroic and
deceitful, possessed of great and dangerous potential, knowing good and evil.
The unknown cannot be described, by definition. The known is too complicated to
be understood. The knower—the conscious individual human being—likewise defies
his own capacity for comprehension. The interplay between these ultimately
unfathomable “forces” nonetheless constitutes the world in which we act, to
which we must adapt. We have configured our behavior, accordingly; the natural
categories215 we use to apprehend the world reflect that configuration.

The Tao existed before its name,

and from its name, the opposites evolved,

giving rise to three divisions,

and then to names abundant.

These things embrace receptively,

achieving inner harmony,

and by their unity create

the inner world of man.216



The mythological world—which is the world as drama, story, forum for
action—appears to be composed of three constituent elements and a “fourth” that
precedes, follows and surrounds those three. These elements, in what is perhaps
their most fundamental pattern of inter-relationship, are portrayed in Figure
17: The Constituent Elements of Experience. This figure might be conceptualized
as three disks, stacked one on top of another, “resting” on an amorphous
background. That background—chaos, the ultimate source and destination of all
things—envelops the “world” and comprises everything that is now separate and
identifiable: subject and object; past, present and future; “conscious” and
“unconscious”; matter and spirit. The Great Mother and Father—the world parents
(unexplored and explored territory, respectively; nature and culture)—can be
usefully regarded as the primordial “offspring” of primeval chaos. The Great
Mother—the unknown, as it manifests itself in experience—is the feminine deity
who gives birth to and devours all. She is the unpredictable as it is
encountered, and is therefore characterized, simultaneously, by extreme
positive and extreme negative valence. The Great Father is order, placed
against chaos; civilization erected against nature, with nature's aid. He is
the benevolent force that protects individuals from catastrophic encounter with
what is not yet understood; is the walls that surrounded the maturing Buddha
and that encapsulated the Hebrew Eden. Conversely, however, the Great Father is
the tyrant who forbids the emergence (or even the hypothetical existence) of
anything new. The Archetypal Son is the child of order and chaos—culture and
nature—and is therefore clearly their product. Paradoxically, however, as the
deity who separates the earth (mother) from the sky (father), he is also the
process that gives rise to his parents. This paradoxical situation arises
because the existence of defined order and the unexplored territory defined in
opposition to that order can come into being only in the light of
consciousness, which is the faculty that knows (and does not know). The
Archetypal Son, like his parents, has a positive aspect and a negative aspect.
The positive aspect continually reconstructs defined territory as a consequence
of the “assimilation” of the unknown [as a consequence of “incestuous” (that
is, “sexual”—read creative) union with the Great Mother]. The negative aspect
rejects or destroys anything it does not or will not understand.

Figure 17: The Constituent Elements of Experience





Figure 18: The Positive Constituent Elements of Experience, Personified217
portrays the “Vierge Ouvrante,” a fifteenth century French sculpture, which
represents the “constituent elements of the world” in personified, and solely
positive form. Personification of this sort is the rule; categorical exclusion
or inclusion in accordance with valence (all “bad” elements; all “good”
elements) is almost equally common. All positive things are, after all,
reasonably apprehended as similar, or identical—likewise, all negative things.
It is for this reason, in part, that the terror of the unknown, the tyranny of
the state, and the evil aspect of man are “contaminated” with one another—for
this reason that the devil and the stranger are easily perceived as one. The
“Vierge Ouvrante” is a strange work, from the standard Christian perspective,
as it portrays Mary, the “mother of God,” as superordinate to God the Father
and

Figure 18: The Positive Constituent Elements of Experience, Personified





Christ the son. That superordinate position is perfectly valid, however, from
the more general mythological perspective (although not exclusively valid).
Each “constituent element of experience” can be regarded as progenitor, or as
offspring, with regard to any other (as the world parents give birth to the
divine son; as the divine son separates the world parents; as order is a
derivative of chaos; as chaos is defined by order). So the most familiar
Christian “sequence of generation” (which might be God□ Mary□ Christ) is only
one of many “valid” configurations (and is not even the only one that
characterizes Christianity).

The world of experience is composed of the known—explored territory—in
paradoxical juxtaposition with the unknown—unexplored territory. Archaic
notions of “reality” presuppose that the familiar world is a sacred space,
surrounded by chaos (populated, variously, by demons, reptiles, spirits and
barbarians—none of whom is really distinguishable). The world of order and
chaos might be regarded as the stage, for man—for the twin aspects of man, more
accurately: for the aspect that inquires, explores and transforms (which
voluntarily expands the domain and structure of order, culture) and for the
aspect that opposes that inquiry, exploration and transformation. The great
story is, therefore, good vs. evil, played out against the endless flux of
being, as it signifies. The forces of “good” have an eternal character (in the
same way that Platonic objects are represented, eternally, in supracelestial
space); unfortunately, so do the forces of evil. This eternality exists because
all members of the species Homo sapiens are essentially equivalent, equal
before God: we find ourselves vulnerable, mortal creatures, thrown into a
universe bent on our creation and protection—and our transformation and
destruction. Our “attitude” toward this ambivalent universe can only take one
of two prototypical forms: positive or negative. The precise nature of these
two forms (which can only be regarded as complex “personalities”) and of the
background against which they work constitutes the central subject matter of
myth (and, dare it be said, the proper subject matter of the humanities and
fine arts).

Analysis of a series of myths—the series which, I would argue, underlies
Western civilization itself—should make these points painfully self-evident. We
will begin with a discussion of the Enuma elish. This Mesopotamian creation
story, which was elaborated in detail and complexity over the course of
numerous centuries, is the most ancient complete cosmogonic myth at our
disposal. We turn from the Sumerians to ancient Egyptian cosmology; then, from
these specific examples to a more general discussion of mythological
representation.

