# 3 - APPRENTICESHIP AND ENCULTURATION
[Metadata]: # {04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
3
APPRENTICESHIP AND ENCULTURATION
# APPRENTICESHIP AND ENCULTURATION
Adoption of a Shared Map

Ideologies may be regarded as incomplete myths—as partial stories, whose
compelling nature is a consequence of the appropriation of mythological ideas.
The philosophy attributing individual evil to the pathology of social force
constitutes one such partial story. Although society, the Great Father, has a
tyrannical aspect, he also shelters, protects, trains and disciplines the
developing individual—and places necessary constraints on his thought, emotion
and behavior.

Subjugation to lawful authority might more reasonably be considered in light of
the metaphor of the apprenticeship. Childhood dependency must be replaced by
group membership, prior to the development of full maturity. Such membership
provides society with another individual to utilize as a “tool,” and provides
the maturing but still vulnerable individual with necessary protection (with a
group-fostered “identity”). The capacity to abide by social rules, regardless
of the specifics of the discipline, can therefore be regarded as a necessary
transitional stage in the movement from childhood to adulthood.

Discipline should therefore be regarded as a skill that may be developed
through adherence to strict ritual, or by immersion within a strict belief
system or hierarchy of values. Once such discipline has been attained, it may
escape the bounds of its developmental precursor. It is in this manner that
true freedom is attained. It is at this level of analysis that all genuine
religious and cultural traditions and dogmas are equivalent, regardless of
content: they are all masters whose service may culminate in the development of
self-mastery, and consequent transcendence of tradition and dogma.

Apprenticeship is necessary, but should not on that account be glamorized.
Dogmatic systems make harsh and unreasonable masters. Systems of belief and
moral action—and those people who are identified with them—are concerned above
all with self-maintenance and preservation of predictability and order. The
(necessarily) conservative tendencies of great systems makes them tyrannical,
and more than willing to crush the spirit of those they “serve.” Apprenticeship
is a precursor to freedom, however, and nothing necessary and worthwhile is
without danger.

Adoption of this analytic standpoint allows for a certain moral relativism,
conjoined with an absolutist higher-order morality. The particulars of a
disciplinary system may be somewhat unimportant. The fact that adherence to
such a system is necessary, however, cannot be disregarded.



We are all familiar with the story of benevolent nature, threatened by the
rapacious forces of the corrupt individual and the society of the machine. The
plot is solid, the characters believable, but Mother Nature is also malarial
mosquitoes, parasitical worms, cancer and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. The
story of peaceful and orderly tradition, undermined by the incautious and
decadent (with the ever-present threat of chaos lurking in the background) is
also familiar, and compelling, and true—except that the forces of tradition,
however protective, tend to be blind, and to concern themselves more with their
own stability than with the well-being of those subject to them. We have all
heard and identified with the story of the brave pioneer, additionally—plough
in hand, determined to wrest the good life and the stable state from the
intransigent forces of nature—although we may be sporadically aware that the
“intransigent forces” shaped so heroically included the decimated original
inhabitants of our once-foreign landscape. We all know, finally, the story of
the benevolent individual, genuine and innocent, denied access to the
nourishing forces of the true and natural world, corrupted by the unreasonable
strictures of society. This tale has its adherents, as well—not least because
it is reassuring to believe that everything “bad” stems from without, rather
than within.

These stories are all ideologies (and there are many more of them). Ideologies
are attractive, not least to the educated modern mind—credulous, despite its
skepticism— particularly if those who embody or otherwise promote them allow
the listener every opportunity to identify with the creative and positive
characters of the story, and to deny their association with the negative.
Ideologies are powerful and dangerous. Their power stems from their incomplete
but effective appropriation of mythological ideas. Their danger stems from
their attractiveness, in combination with their incompleteness. Ideologies tell
only part of the story, but tell that part as if it were complete. This means
that they do not take into account vast domains of the world. It is incautious
to act in the world as if only a set of its constituent elements exist. The
ignored elements conspire, so to speak, as a consequence of their repression,
and make their existence known, inevitably, in some undesirable manner.

Knowledge of the grammar of mythology might well constitute an antidote to
ideological gullibility. Genuine myths are capable of representing the totality
of conflicting forces, operating in any given situation. Every positive force
has its omnipresent and eternal “enemy.” The beneficial aspect of the “natural
environment” is therefore properly viewed in light of its capacity to
arbitrarily inflict suffering and death. The protective and sheltering capacity
of society is therefore understood in light of its potent tendency to tyranny
and the elimination of necessary diversity. The heroic aspect of the individual
is regarded in light of the ever-lurking figure of the adversary: arrogant,
cowardly and cruel. A story accounting for all of these “constituent elements
of reality” is balanced and stable, in contrast to an ideology—and far less
likely to produce an outburst of social psychopathology. But the forces that
make up the world as a forum for action constantly war in opposition. How is it
possible to lay a path between them, so to speak— to configure a mode of being
that takes “all things” into account, without being destroyed in the process? A
developmental account of the relationship between “the forces of the
individual, society and chaos” might aid in the comprehension of their proper
interplay.

I counseled an immature thirty-something-year-old man at one point during my
service as a psychological intern. He was always working at cross-purposes to
himself, placing obstacles in his path and then tripping over them. (This was
the literal truth, upon occasion. He was living with his mother, after the
failure of his marriage. I suggested that he start cleaning up his life by
cleaning up his room—which is a more difficult step than might be casually
presupposed for someone habitually and philosophically undisciplined. He placed
a vacuum cleaner in the doorway of his bedroom, after getting about half-way
through the task. For a week he had to step over it, but he didn't move it, and
he didn't finish the job. That situation could reasonably be regarded as a
polysemic sample of his life.) This person had sought help because his
disintegrated marriage had produced a son, whom he loved (or at least wanted to
love). He came to therapy because he didn't want his child to grow up badly, as
he had. I tried to scare him into behaving properly, because I believed (and
believe) that terror is a great and underutilized motivator. (Anxiety— which is
ineradicable—can work against you, or for you). We spent a long time outlining,
in great detail, the consequences of his undisciplined behavior, to that point
in his life (no successful career, no intimate relationship, an infant son
thrust into a broken family) and the likely long-term future results
(increasing self-disgust, cynicism about life, increased cruelty and
revenge-seeking, hopelessness and despair). We also discussed the necessity for
discipline—that is, for adherence to a coherent and difficult moral code—for
himself and for his son.

Of course, he worried that any attempt on his part to shape the behavior of his
son would interfere with the natural development and flowering of the child's
innate potential. So it might be said, using Jung's terminology, that he was an
“unconscious exponent”359 of the philosophy of Rousseau:

With what simplicity I should have demonstrated that man is by nature good, and
that only our institutions have made him bad!360



That is—the Rousseau who repeatedly placed his own children in foundling
asylums because their existence was inconvenient to him (and, we must
presuppose, detrimental to the flowering of his intrinsic goodness). Anyway,
the fervent hope of every undisciplined person (even an undisciplined genius)
is that his current worthlessness and stupidity is someone else's fault. If—in
the best of cases—it is society's fault, then society can be made to pay. This
sleight-of-hand maneuver transforms the undisciplined into the admirable rebel,
at least in his own eyes, and allows him to seek unjustified revenge in the
disguise of the revolutionary hero. A more absurd parody of heroic behavior can
hardly be imagined.

One time my client came to me with a dream:

My son was asleep in his crib inside a small house. Lightning came in through
his window, and bounced around inside the house. The lightning was powerful,
and beautiful, but I was afraid it would burn the house down.



Dream interpretation is a difficult and uncertain business, but I believed that
this image was interpretable within the context of our ongoing discussions. The
lightning represented the potential implicit in the infant. This potential was
an exceedingly strong and useful force—like electricity. But electricity is
only useful when harnessed. Otherwise it burns down houses.

I can't say much about the outcome of this particular case, as internship
contact with those seeking psychological help tends to be restricted in time.
My client seemed, at least, more negatively affected by his immature behavior,
which struck me as a reasonable start; furthermore, he understood (at least
explicitly, although not yet procedurally) that discipline could be the father
of the hero, and not just his enemy. The dawning of such understanding meant
the beginnings of a mature and healthy philosophy of life, on his part. Such a
philosophy was outlined in explicit detail by Friedrich Nietzsche, despite his
theoretically “antidogmatic” stance.

Nietzsche has been casually regarded as a great enemy of Christianity. I
believe, however, that he was consciously salutary in that role. When the
structure of an institution has become corrupt—particularly according to its
own principles—it is the act of a friend to criticize it. Nietzsche is also
viewed as fervid individualist and social revolutionary—as the prophet of the
superman, and the ultimate destroyer of tradition. He was, however, much more
sophisticated and complex than that. He viewed the “intolerable discipline” of
the Christian church, which he “despised,” as a necessary and admirable
precondition to the freedom of the European spirit, which he regarded as not
yet fully realized:

Every morality is, as opposed to laisser aller, a bit of tyranny against
“nature”; also against “reason”; but this in itself is no objection, as long as
we do not have some other morality which permits us to decree that every kind
of tyranny and unreason is impermissible. What is essential and inestimable in
every morality is that it constitutes a long compulsion: to understand Stoicism
or Port-Royal or Puritanism, one should recall the compulsion under which every
language so far has achieved strength and freedom—the metrical compulsion of
rhyme and rhythm.

How much trouble the poets and orators of all peoples have taken—not excepting
a few prose writers today in whose ear there dwells an inexorable
conscience—“for the sake of some foolishness,” as utilitarian dolts say,
feeling smart—“submitting abjectly to capricious laws,” as anarchists say,
feeling “free,” even “free-spirited.” But the curious fact is that all there is
or has been on earth of freedom, subtlety, boldness, dance, and masterly
sureness, whether in thought itself or in government, or in rhetoric and
persuasion, in the arts just as in ethics, has developed only owing to the
“tyranny of such capricious laws”; and in all seriousness, the probability is
by no means small that precisely this is “nature” and “natural”—and not that
laisser alter.

Every artist knows how far from any feeling of letting himself go his “most
natural” state is—the free ordering, placing, disposing, giving form in the
moment of “inspiration”—and how strictly and subtly he obeys thousandfold laws
precisely then, laws that precisely on account of their hardness and
determination defy all formulation through concepts (even the firmest concept
is, compared with them, not free of fluctuation, multiplicity and ambiguity).

What is essential “in heaven and on earth” seems to be, to say it once more,
that there should be obedience over a long period of time and in a single
direction: given that, something always develops, and has developed, for whose
sake it is worthwhile to live on earth; for example, virtue, art, music, dance,
reason, spirituality—something transfiguring, subtle, mad, and divine. The long
unfreedom of the spirit, the mistrustful constraint in the communicability of
thoughts, the discipline thinkers imposed on themselves to think within the
directions laid down by a church or court, or under Aristotelian
presuppositions, the long spiritual will to interpret all events under a
Christian schema and to rediscover and justify the Christian god in every
accident—all this, however forced, capricious, hard, gruesome, and
antirational, has shown itself to be the means through which the European
spirit has been trained to strength, ruthless curiosity, and subtle mobility,
though admittedly in the process an irreplaceable amount of strength and spirit
had to be crushed, stifled, and ruined (for here, as everywhere, “nature”
manifests herself as she is, in all her prodigal and indifferent magnificence,
which is outrageous but noble).

That for thousands of years European thinkers thought merely in order to prove
something—today, conversely, we suspect every thinker who “wants to prove
something”—that the conclusions that ought to be the result of their most
rigorous reflection were always settled from the start, just as it used to be
with Asiatic astrology, and still is today with the innocuous Christian-moral
interpretation of our most intimate personal experiences “for the glory of God”
and “for the salvation of the soul”— this tyranny, this caprice, this rigorous
and grandiose stupidity has educated the spirit. Slavery is, as it seems, both
in the cruder and in the more subtle sense, the indispensable means of
spiritual discipline and cultivation, too. Consider any morality with this in
mind: what there is in it of “nature” teaches hatred of the laisser aller, of
any all-too-great freedom, and implants the need for limited horizons and the
nearest tasks—teaching the narrowing of our perspective, and thus in a certain
sense stupidity, as a condition of life and growth.

“You shall obey—someone and for a long time: else you will perish and lose the
last respect for yourself”—this appears to me to be the categorical imperative
of nature which, to be sure, is neither “categorical” as the old Kant would
have it (hence the “else”) nor addressed to the individual (what do individuals
matter to her?), but to peoples, races, ages, classes—but above all to the
whole human animal, to man.361



This is the philosophy of apprenticeship—useful for conceptualizing the
necessary relationship between subordination to a potent historically
constructed social institution and the eventual development of true freedom.

A child cannot live on its own. Alone, it drowns in possibility. The unknown
supersedes individual adaptive capacity, in the beginning. It is only the
transmission of historically determined behavioral patterns—and, secondarily,
their concomitant descriptions—that enables survival in youth. These patterns
of behavior and hierarchies of value—which children mimic and then learn
expressly—give secure structure to uncertain being. It is the group, initially
in parental guise, that stands between the child and certain psychological
catastrophe. The depression, anxiety and physical breakdown that is
characteristic of too early childhood separation from parents is the result of
exposure to “too much unknown” and incorporation of “too little cultural
structure.” The long period of human dependency must be met with the provision
of a stable social environment—with predictable social interactions, which meet
individual motivational demands; with the provision of behavioral patterns and
schemas of value capable of transforming the unpredictable and frightening
unknown into its beneficial equivalent. This means that transformation of
childhood dependency entails adoption of ritual behavior (even regular
meal-and-bed-times are rituals) and incorporation of a morality (a framework of
reference) with an inevitably metaphysical foundation.

Successful transition from childhood to adolescence means identification with
the group, rather than continued dependency upon the parents. Identification
with the group provides the individual with an alternative, generalized,
nonparental source of protection from the unknown, and provides the group with
the resources of another soul. The group constitutes a historically validated
pattern of adaptation (specific behaviors, descriptions of behavior and general
descriptions). The individual's identification with this pattern strengthens
him when he needs to separate from his parents and take a step toward
adulthood, and it strengthens the group, insofar as it now has access to his
individual abilities. The individual's identification with this pattern
bolsters his still-maturing ability to stand on his own two feet—supports his
determination to move away from the all-encompassing and too secure
maternal-dependent world. Identity with the group therefore comes to replace
recourse to parental authority as “way of being in the face of the unknown.” It
provides structure for social relationships (with self and others), determines
the meaning of objects, provides desirable end as ideal, and establishes
acceptable procedure (acceptable mode for the “attainment of earthly
paradise”).

Personal identification with the group means socialization, individual
embodiment of the valuations of the group—primarily, as expressed in behavior.
Group values constitute cumulative historical judgment rendered on the relative
importance of particular states of motivation, with due regard for intensity,
as expressed in individual action, in the social context. All societies are
composed of individuals whose actions constitute embodiment of the creative
past. That creative past can be conceptualized as the synthesis of all
culture-creating exploratory communicative activity, including the act of
synthesis itself.

Myth comprises description of procedural knowledge; constitutes
episodic/semantic representation of cumulative behavioral wisdom, in
increasingly abstracted form. Introduction of the previously dependent
individual at adolescence to the world of ancestral behavior and myth
constitutes transmission of culture—inculcation of the Great Father,
historically determined personality and representation of such—as adaptation
to, explanation of and protection against the unknown, the Great and Terrible
Mother. This introduction reaches its culmination with initiation, the primary
ritual signifying cultural transmission—the event which destroys the
“unconscious” union between child and biological mother.

The child is born in a state of abject dependence. The caring mother is
simultaneously individual force and embodiment of impersonal biological
beneficience—the eternal mythic virgin mother, material consort of God. The
infant comes equipped with the ability to respond to this innately nurturing
presence, to develop a symbiotic relationship with his or her caregiver, and to
grow increasingly strong. The maturation of creative exploratory capacity,
which constitutes the basis for mature self-reliance, appears dependent for its
proper genesis upon the manifestation of maternal solicitude: upon love,
balanced promotion of individual ability and protection from harm. Tender touch
and care seduce the infant to life, to expansion of independence, to potential
for individual strength and ability.362 The absence of such regard means
failure to thrive, depression and intrapsychic damage, even death.363

The maturing individual necessarily (tragically, heroically) expands past the
domain of paradisal maternal protection, in the course of development;
necessarily attains an apprehension whose desire for danger and need for life
exceeds the capability of maternal shelter. This means that the growing child
eventually comes to face problems—how to get along with peers in peer-only play
groups; how to select a mate from among a myriad of potential mates—that cannot
be solved (indeed, may be made more difficult) by involvement of the beneficial
maternal. Such problems might be regarded as emergent consequences of the
process of maturation itself; of the increased possibility for action and
comprehension necessarily attendant upon maturation. A four-year-old, making
the transition to kindergarten, cannot use a three-year-old's habits and
schemas of representation to make his way in the novel social world. A
thirteen-year-old cannot use a seven-year-old's personality—no matter how
healthy—to solve the problems endemic to adolescence. The group steps in—most
evidently, at the point of adolescence—and provides “permeable” protective
shelter to the child too old for the mother but not old enough to stand alone.
The universally disseminated rituals of initiation—induced “spiritual” death
and subsequent rebirth—catalyzes the development of adult personality; follows
the fundamental pattern of the cyclic, circular cosmogonic myth of the way. The
culturally determined rites and biological processes associated with initiation
constitute absolute destruction of childhood personality, of childhood
dependence—initial unselfconscious “paradisal” stability—for necessary
catalysis of group identification. Such rituals tend to be more complex and
far-reaching for males than for females. This is perhaps in part because male
development seems more easily led astray, in a socially harmful manner, than
female (adolescent males are more delinquent and aggressive364 ) and in part
because female transition to adulthood is catalyzed “by nature” in the form of
comparatively rapid maturation and the naturally dramatic onset of
menstruation.

The group to which the initiate is introduced consists of a complex
interweaving of behavioral patterns established and subsequently organized in
the past, as a consequence of voluntary creative communicative exploration. The
group is the current expression of a pattern of behavior developed over the
course of hundreds of thousands of years. This pattern is constructed of
behaviors established initially by creative heroes—by individuals who were able
and willing to do and to think something that no one had been able to do or to
think before. Integration of these behaviors into a stable hierarchy, and
abstract representation of them, in the course of a process beginning with
imitation and ending in semantic description, produces a procedural and
declarable structure whose incorporation dramatically increases the
individual's behavioral repertoire and his or her descriptive, predictive and
representational ability. This incorporation—which is primarily implicit, and
therefore invis-ible—is identification with the group. Identification with the
group means the provision of determinate meaning, as the antidote to
excruciating ignorance and exposure to chaos.

A multitude of (specific) rituals have evolved to catalyze such identification.
Catalysis often appears necessary, as the movement to adolescence is vitally
important but psychologically challenging, involving as it does “voluntary”
sacrifice of childhood dependency (which is a valid form of adaptation, but
predicated upon [nondeclarative] assumptions suitable only to the childhood
state). Such transitional rituals are generally predicated upon enaction of the
fundamental narrative structure—the Way—previously presented. Ritual
initiation, for example—a ubiquitous formal feature of pre-experimental
culture365—takes place at or about the onset of puberty, when it is critical
for further psychological development and continued tribal security that boys
transcend their dependency upon their mothers. This separation often takes
place under purposefully frightening and violent conditions. In the general
initation pattern, the men, acting as a unit (as the embodiment of social
history366), separate the initiates from their mothers, who offer a certain
amount of more or less dramatized resistance and some genuine sorrow (at the
“death” of their children).

The boys know that they are to be introduced to some monstrous power who exists
in the night, in the forest or cave, in the depths of the unknown. This power,
capable of devouring them, serves as the mysterious deity of the initiation.
Once removed from their mothers, the boys begin their ritual. This generally
involves some mixture of induced regression of personality—reduction to the
state of “precosmogonic chaos,” extant prior even to earliest childhood—and
induction of overwhelming fear, accompanied by severe physical or spiritual
hardship or torture. The initiates are often forbidden to talk, and may be fed
by the men. They may be circumcised, mutilated or interred alive—required to
undergo intense punishment, subjected to intense dread. They symbolically pass
into the maw of the Terrible Mother and are reborn as men, as adult members of
the “tribe,” which is the historical cumulation of the consequences of adaptive
behavior. (Initiates often actually pass, literally, through the body of some
constructed beast, aided by the elders of the tribe, who serve as the agents of
this deity.367) When the rite is successfully completed, the initiated are no
longer children, dependent upon the arbitrary beneficience of nature—in the
guise of their mothers—but are members of the tribe of men, active
standard-bearers of their particular culture, who have had their previously
personality destroyed, so to speak, by fire. They have successfully faced the
worst trial they are likely ever to encounter in their lives.

The terror induced by ritual exposure to the forces of the unknown appears to
put the brain into a state characterized by enhanced suggestibility—or, at
least, by dramatically heightened need for order, by need for coherent and
meaningful narrative. The person who is in a “state” where he no longer knows
what to do or what to expect is highly motivated to escape that state, by
whatever means necessary. The stripping away of a former mode of adaptation,
engendered by dramatic shift of social locale (of “context”), produces within
the psyche of those so treated a state of acute apprehension, and intense
desire for the re-establishment of predictability and sense. This acute
apprehension is, as we have seen, the consequence of the “renovelization” of
the environment: sufficient challenge posed to the integrity

Figure 46: The “Death” and “Rebirth” of the Adolescent Initiate





of a previous personality disrupts its structure, “freeing” phenomena
previously adapted to from the grasp of familiar action and valuation. The
phenomena, thus “free,” then once again “possess” sufficient “energy” to
motivate their reconceptualization (that is, to make ofthat process of
reconceptualization something sufficiently vital and important to stamp itself
into memory—into permanent incarnation as “personality”).

The ritually “reduced” and terrified initiates, unable to rely on the adaptive
strategies utilized during their childhoods, desperately need new explanations
and new patterns of behavior to survive in what is, after all, a new
environment. That new environment is the society of men, where women are sexual
partners and equals instead of sources of dependent comfort; where the
provision of food and shelter is a responsibility, and not a given; where
security—final authority, in the form of parent—no longer exists. As the
childhood “personality” is destroyed, the adult personality—a manifestation of
transmitted culture—is inculcated. The general initiatory “narrative” or ritual
is presented schematically in Figure 46: The “Death ” and “Rebirth ” of the
Adolescent Initiate.

The comparatively more abstracted rite of baptism is predicated upon similar
principles. Baptism is the dramatic or episodic representation of the act or
ritual of initiation—or, at least, stands midway between the entirely
“unconscious” or procedural forms of initiation and their semantically
abstracted symbolic equivalents. Baptism is spiritual birth (rebirth), as
opposed to birth of the flesh. The font of the church, which contains the
baptismal water, is a symbolic analog of the uterus368 (the uterus
ecclesiastiae), which is the “original” place that transforms precosmogonic
chaos into spirit-embodied matter (into “personality”). When the initiate is
plunged into (now sprinkled with) baptismal water, he or she is symbolically
reduced, from insufficient stability to chaos; is drowned as a profane being,
and then resurrected; is reunited (incestuously, mythically speaking) with the
Great Mother, then reborn formally into the community of the spirit.369 Such
abstracted reductions to “death” and symbolic reconstructions constitute
ritualization and representation of the processes endlessly necessary to
revitalization of the individual personality and the social group. Eliade
states:

The majority of initiatory ordeals more or less clearly imply a ritual death
followed by resurrection or a new birth. The central moment of every initiation
is represented by the ceremony symbolizing the death of the novice and his
return to the fellowship of the living. But he returns to life a new man,
assuming another mode of being. Initiatory death signifies the end at once of
childhood, of ignorance, and of the profane condition….

All the rites of rebirth or resurrection, and the symbols that they imply,
indicate that the novice has attained to another mode of existence,
inaccessible to those who have not undergone the initiatory ordeals, who have
not tasted death. We must note this characteristic of the archaic mentality:
the belief that a state cannot be changed without first being annihilated—in
the present instance, without the child's dying to childhood. It is impossible
to exaggerate the importance of this obsession with beginnings, which, in sum,
is the obsession with the absolute beginning, the cosmogony. For a thing to be
well done, it must be done as it was the first time. But the first time, the
thing—this class of objects, this animal, this particular behavior—did not
exist: when, in the beginning, this object, this animal, this institution, came
into existence, it was as if, through the power of the Gods, being arose from
nonbeing.

Initiatory death is indispensable for the beginning of spiritual life. Its
function must be understood in relation to what it prepares: birth to a higher
mode of being…. [I]nitiatory death is often symbolized, for example, by
darkness, by cosmic night, by the telluric womb, the hut, the belly of a
monster. All these images express regression to a preformal state, to a latent
mode of being (complementary to the precos-mogonic Chaos), rather than total
annihilation (in the sense in which, for example, a member of the modern
societies conceives death). These images and symbols of ritual death are
inextricably connected with germination, with embryology; they already indicate
a new life in course of preparation….

For archaic thought, then, man is made—he does not make himself all by himself.
It is the old initiates, the spiritual masters, who make him. But these masters
apply what was revealed to them at the beginning of Time by Supernatural
Beings. They are only the representatives of these Beings; indeed, in many
cases, they incarnate them. This is as much as to say that in order to become a
man, it is necessary to resemble a mythical model.370



Groups are individuals, uniform in their acceptance of a collective
historically determined behavioral pattern and schema of value. Internalization
of this pattern, and the description thereof (the myths—and philosophies, in
more abstracted cultures—which accompany it), simultaneously produces ability
to act in a given (social) environment, to predict the outcomes of such action,
and to determine the meaning of general events (meaning inextricably associated
with behavioral outcome). Such internalization culminates in the erection of
implicit procedural and explicit declarable structures of “personality,” which
are more or less isomorphic in nature, which simultaneously constitute habit
and moral knowledge. Habit is a way of being, a general strategy for
“redemption” in the “natural” and “cultural” spheres, shaped by the social
exchange of affect-laden information, mastered to the point of “unconscious”
automaticity. Moral knowledge is fixed representation of the (previously)
“unknown”; is generation of capacity to predict the behavior of objects, other
people and the self. The sum total of accurate behaviorally linked
representation of the world as forum for action constitutes the structure which
reduces the manifold meaning of the experiential plenum to a restricted and
therefore manageable domain. The manifold meaning is anxiety, on first contact
(or under uncontrolled, overwhelming or involuntary conditions of
exposure)—anxiety, which would otherwise be generated in response to
everything. Interference with adolescent initiation-catalyzed group incarnation
is therefore disruption of or failure to (re)generate the structure providing
for respite from unbearable existential anxiety.

A society “works” to the degree that it provides its members with the capacity
to predict and control the events in their experiential field—to the degree
that it provides a barrier, protection from the unknown or unexpected. Culture
provides a ritual model for behavioral emulation, and heuristics for desire and
prediction—active procedures for behavior in the social and nonsocial worlds,
plus description of processes in the social and nonsocial worlds, including
behavioral processes. Incorporation of culture therefore means fixed adaptation
to the unknown; means, simultaneously, inhibition of novelty-induced fear,
regulation of interpersonal behavior, and provision of redemptive mode of
being. The group is the historical structure that humanity has erected between
the individual and the terrible unknown. Intrapsychic representation of
culture— establishment of group identity—protects individuals from overwhelming
fear of their own experience; from contact with the a priori meaning of things
and situations. This is the intercession of the mythic Great Father against the
terrible world of the Great Mother. This intercession is provision of a
specific goal schema, allowing for the transformation of the vagaries of
individual experience into positive events, within a social context, in the
presence of protection against the unbearable unknown.

This historically determined cultural structure is constructed of courageously
engineered and creatively integrated responses to situations that arise
typically in the course of human experience, arranged in terms of their
relative importance, organized simultaneously to minimize intrapsychic
motivational and external interpersonal conflict, and to allow for contin-ued
adaptation. This (primarily nonverbal) socially transmitted structure of
assumption, expectation and behavior is very stable, under most circumstances.
It has seen everything, and done everything, so to speak, and cannot be easily
undermined. In most situations, it efficiently governs social interaction,
general expectation, and organization of goal-directed behavior. In its
implicit imitative, dramatic, narrative form, it is exceptionally durable, and
highly resistant to naïve social revolution.371 However, such stability is
advantageous only in stable times. Under exceptional circumstances—when the
environment shifts rapidly, for reasons independent of or dependent upon human
activity—the historical “personality” must be altered or even qualitatively
reconfigured to allow equally rapid adaptation to take place. This process of
rearrangement is necessarily predicated upon disruption (death) of the old
order. Dissolution of the old order means (potential) return of the determinate
meaning of experiential objects to their preclassified state of
chaos—simultaneously unbearably threatening and, secondarily, infinitely
promising. Apprehension of the inevitability of such dissolution, however
vague, constitutes one potent barrier to the process of creative readaptation.

The historical structure “protects itself” and its structure in two related
manners. First, it inhibits intrinsically rewarding but “antisocial” behaviors
(those which might upset the stability of the group culture) by associating
them with certain punishment (or at least with the threat thereof). This
punishment might include actual application of undesirable penalties or, more
“subtly”—removal of “right to serve as recognized representative of the social
structure.” This means, in the latter case, forced individual forfeit of
identification with (imitation of, internalization of) said social structure
(at least for the once-socialized), and induction of overwhelming guilt or
anxiety, as a consequence of goal loss, value dissolution, and subsequent
re-exposure to the novelty of decontextualized experience. It is the potential
for such an affectively unbearable state that constitutes the power of
banishment—which can be used “consciously” by societies to punish wrongdoers—or
that can be experienced as a self-induced state, by individuals careless,
arrogant or ignorant enough to “kill” what supports them.372

The culturally-determined historical structure protects and maintains itself
secondly by actively promoting individual participation in behavioral
strategies that satisfy individual demand, and that simultaneously increase the
stability of the group. The socially constructed way of a profession, for
example, allows the individual who incarnates that profession opportunity for
meaningful activity in a manner that supports or at least does not undermine
the stability of the historically determined structure which regulates the
function of his or her threat-response system. Adoption of a socially
sanctioned “professional personality” therefore provides the initiated and
identified individual with peer-approved opportunity for intrinsic goal-derived
pleasure, and with relative freedom from punishment, shame and guilt.
Potentially upsetting competition between socially sanctified ways of being,
within a given social group, is also subject to cultural minimization. Each of
the many professions whose union comprises a functioning complex society is the
consequence of the heroic past activities which established the profession,
modified by the equally heroic activities that allowed for its maintenance and
“update” (in the presence of other competing activities and ever-changing
“environmental” demand). “Lawyer” and “physician,” for example, are two
embodied ideologies, nested within more complex overarching narrative schemas,
whose domains of activity, knowledge and competence have been delimited, one
against the other, until both can occupy the same “territory” without emergence
of destructive and counterproductive conflict. This is the “organization of
dead kings,” so to speak, under the dominion of the “hero”: doctors and lawyers
are both subject to “higher-order (legal) principles” which govern their
behavior such that one group can tolerate—at least within reason—the presence
of the other.

The properly structured patriarchal system fulfills the needs of the present
while “taking into account” those of the future; simultaneously, it balances
the demands of the self with those of the other. The suitability of the
“cultural solution” is judged by individual affective response. This grounding
of verification in universally constant affect, in combination with the
additional constraints of stability and adaptability, means inevitable
construction of human groups and human moral systems with centrally
identifiable features and processes of generation. The construction of a
successful group, the most difficult of feats, means establishment of a society
composed of individuals who act in their own interest (at least enough to
render their life bearable) and who, in doing so, simultaneously maintain and
advance their culture. The “demand to satisfy, protect and adapt, individually
and socially”—and to do so over vast and variable stretches of time—places
severe intrinsic constraints on the manner in which successful human societies
can operate. It might be said that such constraints provide universal
boundaries for acceptable human morality. The nature of what constitutes such
acceptability fosters direct conflict or debate, in terms of the details, but
the broad picture is necessarily clear. That picture is presented and
represented in ritual, mythology and narrative, which eternally depict
intrinsically meaningful themes, playing themselves out, in eternally
fascinating fashion. Nietzsche states:

That individual philosophical concepts are not anything capricious or
autonomously evolving, but grow up in connection and relationship with each
other; that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear in the
history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to a system as all
the members of the fauna of a continent—is betrayed in the end also by the fact
that the most diverse philosophers keep filling in a definite fundamental
scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always revolve
once more in the same orbit; however independent of each other they may feel
themselves with their critical or systematic wills, something within them leads
them, something impels them in a definite order, one after the other—to wit,
the innate systematic structure and relationship of their concepts. Their
thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a recognition, a remembering, a
return and a homecoming to a remote, primordial, and inclusive household of the
soul, out of which those concepts grew originally: philosophizing is to this
extent a kind of atavism of the highest order.373



Adoption of a particular way of being allows, concurrently, for determination
of the meaning of objects, and the morality of behaviors. Objects attain
significance according to their perceived utility—with regard to their capacity
to further movement away from the unbear-able present toward the ideal future;
likewise, moral behavior is seen as furthering and immoral behavior as impeding
or undermining such movement. Of course, identification of what constitutes the
basis for establishing the nature of morality or the comparative value of
objects is no simple matter. In fact, such judgment comprises the constant
central demand of adaptation. No fixed answer solution to this problem can be
offered—this question, “the nature of the highest ideal” or “the nature of the
highest good”—because the environment posing the query, so to speak, constantly
shifts, as time progresses (that shift constitutes, in fact, time's
progression). The constant fact of eternal change does not eliminate the
utility of all “moral” answers, however, as such answers must be formulated,
before any action or interpretation can take place. Time merely makes eternal
nonsense of the offer of fixed structure as solution—fixed structure, that is,
as opposed to process (in this case, the patterned creative communicative
process of generating adaptive structure).

Conflict, on the individual and social planes, constitutes dispute about the
comparative value of experiences, objects and behaviors. Nondeclarative
presumption “a,” upon which behavior “a” is (hypothetically) predicated,
becomes subjugated to presumption “b,” “b” to “c,” and so on, in accordance
with some implicit scheme or notion of ultimate value which firsts manifests
itself in behavior, and in behavioral conflict, long before it can be
represented episodically or semantically. It might be said that the emergence
of a scheme of ultimate value is an inevitable consequence of the social and
exploratory evolution of man. Cultural structure, incarnated intrapsychically,
originates in creative action, imitation of such action, integration of action
and imitated action—constitutes adaptive action and representation of
integrated pattern of action. Procedures may be mapped in episodic memory and
abstracted in essence by the semantic system. This process results in
construction of a story, or narrative. Any narrative contains, implicit in it,
a set of moral assumptions. Representation of this (primarily social) moral
code in form of episodic memory constitutes the basis for myth; provides the
ground and material for eventual linguistically mediated development of
religious dogma or codified morality. Advantages of such codification are the
advantages granted by abstraction per se—ease of communication, facilitation of
transformation—and formal declaration of (historically sanctified) principles
useful in mediation of emergent value-centered dispute. Disadvantages—more
subtle, and more easily unrecognized—include premature closure of creative
endeavor, and dogmatic reliance on wisdom of the (dead) past.

Human beings, as social animals, act “as if” motivated by a (limited) system of
more or less internally consistent and integrated set of moral virtues, even in
the absence of the explicit (declarative) representation of this system. The
nature of these virtues, embodied in behavior, in their origin, have become
more and more conscious (more represented in declarative thinking and
remembering) over the course of socially mediated human cognitive evolution.
Nonetheless it is very difficult to determine and explicitly state just what
virtuous behavior consists of; to describe, with accuracy, how it is that
people should (and do) act—to identify those ends toward which behavior should
be devoted, and to provide explicit and rigorous justification for such claims.
A culture is, to a large degree, a shared moral code, and deviations from that
code are generally easily identified, at least post-hoc. It is still the case,
however, that description of the domain of morality tends to exceed the
capability of declarative thought, and that the nature of much of what we think
of as moral behavior is still, therefore, embedded in unconscious procedure. As
a consequence, it is easy for us to become confused about the nature of
morality, and to draw inappropriate, untimely and dangerous “fixed”
conclusions.

The conservative worships his culture, appropriately, as the creation of that
which deserves primary allegiance, remembrance and respect. This creation is
the concrete solution to the problem of adaptation: “how to behave?” (and how
can that be represented and communicated?). It is very easy, in consequence, to
err in attribution of value, and to worship the specific solution itself,
rather than the source of that solution. Hence the biblical injunction:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God
am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. (Exodus 20:3–5)



This “arbitrary” injunction exists in large part because much less explicit
attention is generally paid (can be paid, in the initial stages of abstract
representation) to the more fundamental, but more abstract and difficult,
meta-problem of adaptation: “how is (or was) how to behave determined?” or
“what is the nature of the behavioral procedure that leads to the establishment
of and rank-ordering of valid forms of how to behave? (that leads to successful
adaptation, as such?)” and “how can that be represented and communicated?” The
answer to the question “what constitutes the highest value?” or “what is the
highest good?” is in fact the solution to the meta-problem, not the problem,
although solutions to the latter have been and are at present constantly
confused with solutions to the former—to the constant (often mortal) detriment
of those attempting to address the former.

The precise nature of that which constitutes morality still eludes declarative
exposition. The moral structure, encoded in behavior, is too complex to
completely consciously formulate. Nevertheless, that structure remains an
integrated system (essentially, a historically determined personality, and
representation thereof), a product of determined efforts (procedural and
declarative) devoted toward integrated adaptation, and not a merely random or
otherwise incomprehensible compilation of rituals and beliefs. Culture is a
structure aimed toward the attainment of certain (affectively-grounded) ends,
in the immediate present and over the longer course of time. As such, a given
cultural structure necessarily must meet a number of stringent and severely
constrained requirements: (1) it must be self-maintaining (in that it promotes
activities that allow it to retain its central form); (2) it must be
sufficiently flexible to allow for constant adaptation to constantly shifting
environmental circumstances; and (3) it must acquire the allegiance of the
individuals who compose it.

The first requirement is so fundamental, even in the short term, that it
appears self-evident. A culture must promote activities that allow for its own
maintenance, or it will devour itself. The second requirement—flexibility—is
more difficult to fulfill, particularly in combination with the first
(self-maintenance). A culture must promote activity that supports itself, but
must simultaneously allow for enough innovation so that essentially
unpredictable alteration in “environmental” circumstance can be met with
appropriate change in behavioral activity. Cultures that attempt to maintain
themselves through promotion of absolute adherence to traditional principles
tend rapidly to fail the second requirement, and to collapse precipitously.
Cultures that allow for unrestricted change, by contrast, tend to fail the
first, and collapse equally rapidly. The third requirement (allegiance of the
populace) might be considered a prerequisite for the first two. A culture that
lasts must be supported (voluntarily) by those who compose it. This means, in
the final analysis, that its mode of operation must remain verified by the sum
total of individual affect; means that those who constitute the group must
remain satisfied by its operation—must derive sufficient reward, protection
from punishment, provision of hope, and alleviation of threat to render the
demands of group maintenance bearable. Furthermore, the group solution must
appear ideal—in comparison to any or all actual or imaginable alternatives. The
compelling attractiveness of simplistic utopian ideologies, even in the
“skeptical” twentieth century, is evidence for the stringent difficulty of this
final requirement.

In suboptimal circumstances, the problem of “protection for the developing
individual” and “maintenance of the protective, uniform social structure” is
solved by the permanent sacrifice of individual diversity to the stability and
identity of the group. This solution banishes fear effectively, in the short
term, but also eliminates necessary potential and the capacity for “adaptive”
transformation. The suboptimal solution to the problem of authoritarian or
totalitarian danger, in turn, is denigration of the role of society,
attribution of evil to its effects, and degeneration of traditional skills and
learning. This is sacrifice of the Terrible Father, without recognition of the
need for his resuscitation—and is, therefore, an invitation to the intrusion of
chaos. The solution to the problem of the necessity for group identification
is, by contrast, to be found in the philosophy of the apprenticeship: each
individual must voluntarily subjugate him- or herself to a master—a “wise
king”—whose goal is not so much maintenance and protection of his own identity
and status as it is construction of an individual (a “son”) capable of
transcending the restrictions of the group.

The optimal “wise king” to whom subordination might be regarded as necessary
must therefore either be an individual whose “identity” is nested within a
hierarchy whose outermost territory is occupied by the exploratory hero, or a
group about which the same might be said. So the ideal “group” or master might
be conceptualized, once again, as Osiris (the traditions of the past) nested
within Horus/Re (the process that originally created those traditions, and
which presently updates them). This means that the “meta-problem” of
adaptation— “what is the nature of the behavioral procedure that leads to the
establishment of and rank-ordering of valid forms of how to behave? (that leads
to successful adaptation, as such?)”—has been answered by groups who ensure
that their traditions, admired and imitated, are nonetheless subordinate to the
final authority of the creative hero. So the “highest good” becomes “imitation
(worship) of the process represented by the hero,” who, as the ancient
Sumerians stated, restores all “ruined gods, as though they were his own
creation.”374

Human morality is exploratory activity (and allowance for such), undertaken in
a sufficiently stable social context, operating within stringent limitations,
embodied in action, secondarily represented, communicated and abstractly
elaborated in episodic and semantic memory. Such morality—act and thought—is
nonarbitrary in structure and specifically goal-directed. It is predicated upon
conceptualization of the highest good (which, in its highest form, is stable
social organization allowing for manifestation of the process of creative
adaptation), imagined in comparison to the represented present. Such conceptual
activity allows for determination of acceptable behavior, and for constraint
placed upon the meaning of objects (considered, always, in terms of their
functional utility as tools, in a sense, for the attainment of a desired end).

The pathological state takes imitation of the “body of the laws” to an extreme,
and attempts to govern every detail of individual life. This “total imitation”
reduces the behavioral flexibility of the state, and renders society
increasingly vulnerable to devastation through environmental transformation
(through the influx of “chaotic change”). Thus the state suffers, for lack of
“the water of life,” until it is suddenly flooded, and swept away. The healthy
state, by contrast, compels imitation more in the form of voluntary affiliation
(until the establishment of individual competence and discipline). Following
the successful “apprenticeship,” the individual is competent to serve as his
own master—to serve as an autonomous incarnation of the hero. This means that
the individual's capacity for “cultural imitation”—that is, his capacity for
subservience to traditional order—has been rendered subordinate to his capacity
to function as the process that mediates between order and chaos. Each
“properly socialized” individual therefore comes to serve as Horus (the sun
king, the son of the Great Father), after painstakingly acquiring the wisdom of
Osiris.

The adoption of group identity—the apprenticeship of the adolescent—disciplines
the individual, and brings necessary predictability to his or her actions
within the social group. Group identity, however, is a construct of the past,
fashioned to deal with events characteristic of the past. Although it is
reasonable to view such identity as a necessary developmental stage, it is
pathological to view it as the end point of human development. The present
consists in large part of new problems, and reliance on the wisdom of the dead,
no matter how heroic, eventually compromises the integrity of the living. The
well-trained apprentice, however, has the skills of the dead, and the dynamic
intelligence of the living. This means that he can benefit from—even
welcome—inevitable contact with anomaly, in its many guises. The highest level
of morality therefore governs behavior in those spaces where tradition does not
rule. The exploratory hero is at home in unexplored territory—is friend of the
stranger, welcoming ear for the new idea, and cautious, disciplined social
revolutionary.

