# 5 - The Queen of Chaos
[Metadata]: # {06.12}
[Descriptor]: # {06.12}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Queen of Chaos
# The Queen of Chaos
The solvent in which the prima materia as king dissolves, or the earth to which
it returns, is imaginatively represented in the alchemical process by symbols
characteristic of the matriarchal system. The prima materia dissolves in water,
salt water, tears, or blood, as the old king dissolves in the matriarchal
system—dissolves in (previously confined) sensuality, affect and imagination,
which threaten and transcend knowledge in its concrete form, and serve
simultaneously as the matrix from which it is borne. The matriarchal system is
the intrapsychic representative of the queen, the Great and Terrible Mother,
who is sea, toad, fish or dragon, lioness, earth, depth, the cross, death and
matter:

It is the moon, the mother of all things, the vessel, it consists of opposites,
has a thousand names, is an old woman and a whore, as Mater Alchimia it is
wisdom and teaches wisdom, it contains the elixir of life in potentia and is
the mother of the Savior and of the filius Macrocosma, it is the earth and the
serpent hidden in the earth, the blackness and the dew and the miraculous water
which brings together all that is divided.620



The prima materia as king dissolves in the prima materia as salt water, or as
sea, which represent the matrix and emotion, as bitter salt water constitutes
tears and tragic affect (the consequence of desire's failure). The heat which
promotes chemical solution is the symbolic equivalent of passion, emotion or
sensuality—aspects of the intrapsychic world, outside the domain of rational
thought. The dissolution of the king in the matriarchal system thematically
recreates the heroic/sacrificial motif of incest, creative (sexual) reunion
with the mother. This creative reunion manifests itself first of all as
psychological chaos, depression and anxiety, and only then as re-creation. The
king is the son of God, in previously incarnated form, who loses his
effectiveness in the course of time. Ritualistic primitive regicide is
predicated upon the belief that the magic power of the king, his ability to
renew his subjects and the land, decreases with age. Subjection to
(intrapsychic and/or social) tyranny inevitably promotes stagnation and
depression, dissolution. Nonetheless, challenge presented to the prevailing
spirit of the times means the removal of knowledge from the context within
which it has relevance, and the subsequent return of what is conditionally
known to the domain of the terrible and promising unknown:

In order to enter into God's Kingdom the king must transform himself into the
prima materia in the body of his mother, and return to the dark initial state
which the alchemists called the “chaos.” In this massa confusa the elements are
in conflict and repel one another; all connections are dissolved. Dissolution
is the prerequisite for redemption. The celebrant of the mysteries had to
suffer a figurative death in order to attain transformation.621



The matriarchal “realm,” which Jung personified in imagistic representation as
the anima, is the source of new knowledge, as the unknown. This makes the
matriarchal realm “mother/wisdom,” matrix of the revelation that renews. Such
revelation necessarily threatens the stability of previous knowledge, however,
and “releases” previously “inhibited” affect (in consequence of the dissolution
of predictability and certainty). Jung states:

The anima becomes creative when the king renews himself in her. Psychologically
the king stands first of all for Sol, whom we have interpreted as
consciousness. But over and above that he represents a dominant of
consciousness, such as a generally accepted principle or a collective
conviction or a tradition. These systems and ruling ideas “age” and thereby
forcibly bring about a “metamorphosis of the gods.”… [This] seldom occurs as a
definite collective phenomenon. Mostly it is a change in the individual which
may, under certain conditions, affect society “when the time is fulfilled.” In
the individual it only means that the ruling idea is in need of renewal and
alteration if it is to deal adequately with the changed outer or inner
conditions.622



The king's original state of sickness is the certain eventual fate of concrete
knowledge, posited as absolute. Since the unknown always transcends the limits
of the known, no final statement about the nature of existence is possible.
Attempts to limit knowledge to what is presently known must therefore
necessarily result in eventual social and psychological stagnation. It is an
unfortunate fact that attempts to overcome such stagnation must first result in
the production of affective, motivational and ideational chaos. Dissolution of
the patriarchal in the matriarchal system, even in the voluntary pursuit of an
ideal, culminates in the creation of a psychically chaotic state, symbolized in
alchemy as the sickbed of the king, as the pregnancy of the queen, or as some
analogical equivalent thereof. The chaotic state engendered consequent to
decision to pursue the unknown is accompanied by emergence of various
constitutive psychological factors in fantasy, embodied, personified, as
opposing forces, lacking mediating principle. This is precisely equivalent to
an “internal” return to a state of polytheism, where the “gods who rule
humanity” war without subjection to a higher-order “power.” The alchemists
described this stage of their opus as the nigredo, or blackness—a condition we
would associate with depression, psychological chaos, uncertainty, impulsivity
and anxiety.

Blackness descends when the motivational significance of events and processes,
previously held in check through adherence to a central, paradigmatically
structured set of beliefs, implicit and explicit, becomes once again
indeterminate and novel. The dissolution of their previously held beliefs
allowed the fundamental constituent structures of the alchemists' psyche to
become actively personified in fantasy. Elements of individual, patriarchal,
and matriarchal systems vie in competition, lacking uniting principle,
abandoned in the pursuit of the unknown. Jung states:

This [initial] battle is the separatio, divisio, putrefactio, mortificatio, and
solutio, which all represent the original chaotic state of conflict….623 Dorn
describes this vicious, warlike [state] allegorically as the four-horned
serpent, which the devil, after his fall from heaven, sought to “infix” in the
mind of man. Dorn puts the motif of war on a moral plane and thereby
approximates it to the modern concept of psychic dissociation, which, as we
know, lies at the root of the psychogenic psychoses and neuroses. In the
“furnace of the cross” and in the fire, says the “Aquarium sapientum,” “man,
like the earthly gold, attains to the true black Raven's head; that is, he is
utterly disfigured and is held in derision by the world, and this not only for
forty days and nights, or years, but often for the whole duration of his life;
so much so that he experiences more heartache in his life than comfort and joy,
and more sadness than pleasure…. Through this spiritual death his soul is
entirely freed.” Evidently the nigredo brought about a deformation and a
psychic suffering which the author compared to the plight of the unfortunate
Job. Job's unmerited misfortune, visited upon him by God, is the suffering of
God's servant and a prefiguration of Christ's passion.624



Identification with the pre-existent cultural canon—or pretence of such
identification— provides protection against the unknown, and context for
knowledge, but promotes tyranny. The final cost of this identification is the
lie—denial of deviance and the unknown. When such identification is abandoned
voluntarily or rendered impossible by circumstantial change, the affects “held
in check” by the integrity of the previous classification system are free once
again to manifest themselves. The “dissolution of the king” means that much of
what was previously understood reverts to the unknown. This might be regarded
as the reversal of the historical process that made of all gods one supreme god
or, speaking more psychologically, as the war of conflicting drives, desires
and “subpersonalities” that ensues when an overarching hierarchy of values has
collapsed. Such a “reversion” places the individual in a state characterized by
great uncertainty, frustration, depression and turmoil.

