# 2 - The Divine Son: Images of the Knower, the Exploratory Process
[Metadata]: # {03.13}
[Descriptor]: # {03.13}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
The Divine Son: Images of the Knower, the Exploratory Process
# The Divine Son: Images of the Knower, the Exploratory Process
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the ancient
days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and
wounded the dragon? (Isaiah 51:9)



The great androgynous dragon of chaos is also the mythic figure who guards a
great treasure, hidden in the depths of a mountain, or who conceals a virgin
princess in his lair. He is the fire-breathing winged serpent of
transformation—the undescribable union of everything now discriminated, who
constantly schemes to take back what he produced. The Great and Terrible
Mother, daughter of chaos, destroys those who approach her accidentally,
incautiously, or with the inappropriate attitude, but showers upon those who
love her (and who act appropriately) all good things. The Great and Terrible
Father, son of chaos, gives rise to sons of his own, but then attempts to
crush, or even to devour them: he is precondition for existence, but impediment
to its successful elaboration. What might possibly constitute “the appropriate
pattern of action” in the face of such permanent and multifarious
contradiction?

The fundamental act of creativity in the human realm, in the concrete case, is
the construction of a pattern of behavior which produces emotionally desirable
results in a situation that previously reeked of unpredictability, danger and
promise. Creative acts, despite their unique particulars, have an eternally
identifiable structure, because they always takes place under the same
conditions: what is known is “extracted,” eternally, from the unknown. In
consequence, it is perpetually possible to derive and re-derive the central
features of the metapattern of behavior which always and necessarily means
human advancement. Human beings are curious about the structure and function of
everything, not least themselves; our capacity to tell stories reflects our
ability to describe ourselves. It has been said that Freud merely recapitulated
Shakespeare. But it was Freud's genius, despite his manifold errors, to bring
what Shakespeare portrayed dramatically up one level of abstraction, toward the
philosophical (or even the empirical). Freud moved information about behavior
from the implicit narrative to the explicit theory (or, at least, to the more
explicit theory). Shakespeare performed a similar maneuver, like all
storytellers, at a more “basic” level—he abstracted from what was still
behavioral, from what had not even yet been captured effectively in drama.

During exploration, behavior and representational schema are modified in an
experimental fashion, in the hopes of bringing about by ingenious means
whatever outcome is currently envisioned. Such exploration also produces
alteration of the sensory world—since that world changes with shift in motor
output and physical locale. Exploration produces transformation in assumption
guiding behavior, and in expectation of behavioral outcome: produces learning
in knowing how and knowing what mode. Most generally, new learning means the
application of a new means to the same end, which means that the pattern of
presumptions underlying the internal model of the present and the desired
future remain essentially intact. This form of readaptation might be described
as normal creativity, and constitutes the bulk of human thought. However, on
rare occasions, ongoing activity (specifically goal-directed or exploratory)
produces more profound and unsettling mismatch. This is more stressful (and
more promising), and necessitates more radical update of modeling—necessitates
exploration-guided reprogramming of fundamental behavioral assumption and
associated episodic or semantic representation. Such reprogramming also
constitutes creativity, but of the revolutionary type, generally associated
with genius. Exploration is therefore creation and re-creation of the world.
The generation of new information from contact with the unknown means the
construction of experience itself; the destruction of previous modes of
adaptation and representation (previous “worlds”) means return of “explored
territory” to the unexplored condition that preceded it, and then its
restructuring, in more comprehensive form. This is encounter with the Great and
Terrible Mother, and death and resurrection of the Son and the Father.

A new manner of dealing with (that is, behaving with regard to or classifying)
an emergent unknown is the gift of the hero. This gift demands to be given;
compels communication—either directly (say, in the form of immediate
imitation), or indirectly (in the form of abstract description, or narrative).
There is no real qualitative distinction between transformation of means and
transformation of ends (as we have seen): what constitutes “ends” at a lower
level of analysis becomes “means” at a higher level. It follows that the “gift
of the hero” constitutes normal and revolutionary adaptation,
simultaneously—normal adaptation, as schemas of action and representation are
extended, such that the unknown is rendered beneficial; revolution, as the old
is restructured, to allow place for the new. This restructuring is equivalent
to the establishment of peace—the peace characterizing the mythic paradise
where the lion lays down with the lamb. Such peace emerges as a consequence of
the hierarchical organization of the “gods of tradition” under the dominion of
the hero. This means that the creative exploratory hero is also peacemaker, in
his complete manifestation:

I dreamed that I was standing in the grassy yard of a stone cathedral, on a
bright sunny day. The yard was unblemished, a large, well-kept green expanse.
As I stood there, I saw a slab of grass pull back under the earth, like a
sliding door. Underneath the “door” was a rectangular hole that was clearly a
grave. I was standing on an ancient graveyard, whose existence had been
forgotten. A medieval king, dressed in solid armor, rose out of the grave, and
stood at attention at the head of his burial site. Similar slabs slid back, one
after another, in numerous places. Out of each rose a king, each from a
different period of time.

The kings were all powerful, in their own right. Now, however, they occupied
the same territory. They became concerned that they would fight, and they asked
me how this might be prevented. I told them the meaning of the Christian
wedding ceremony—a ritual designed to subjugate the two central participants to
the superordinate authority of Christ, the Christian hero, and said that this
was the way to peace.

If all the great kings would bow, voluntarily, to the figure of the hero, there
would be no more reason for war



Every unmapped territory—that is, every place where what to do has not been
specified—also constitutes the battleground for ancestral kings. The learned
patterns of action and interpretation that vie for application when a new
situation arises can be usefully regarded, metaphorically, as the current
embodiments of adaptive strategies formulated as a consequence of past
exploratory behavior—as adaptive strategies invented and constructed by the
heroes of the past, “unconsciously” mimicked and duplicated by those currently
alive.

Adaptation to new territory—that is, to the unexpected—therefore also means
successful mediation of archaic or habitual strategies competing, in the new
situation, for dominance over behavioral output. Rank-ordering of these
“warring” strategies— construction of a context-specific behavioral “dominance
hierarchy” (which corresponds to the nested narrative model proposed
earlier)—therefore constitutes adaptation, just as much as creation of new
situation-specific behaviors or modes of interpretation (which are inevitably
composed, anyway, of bits and pieces of the past). The process of exploration,
including its assimilative and accommodative aspects, is therefore inevitably
entangled with the process of peacemaking. Exploration, in a given situation,
can hardly be regarded as complete until the tendencies and theories that
struggle for predominance in that situation have been organized to make
internal (or externalized) conflict and emotional upheaval cease.

The exploratory hero, mankind's savior, cuts the primordial chaos into pieces
and makes the world; rescues his dead father from the underworld, and
revivifies him; and organizes the “nobles” occupying his kingdom into an
effective, flexible and dynamic hierarchy. There is no categorical difference
between the individual who explores and the individual who reconstructs
“society,” as a consequence of that exploration. Accomodation to new
information is an integral part of the exploratory process: an anomaly has not
been processed until the preexistent interpretive schemas extant prior to its
emergence have been reconfigured to take its presence into account. Every
explorer is therefore, by necessity, a revolutionary—and every successful
revolutionary is a peacemaker.

We act appropriately before we understand how we act—just as children learn to
behave before they can describe the reasons for their behavior. It is only
through the observation of our actions, accumulated and distilled over
centuries, that we come to understand our own motivations, and the patterns of
behavior that characterize our cultures (and these are changing as we model
them). Active adaptation precedes abstracted comprehension of the basis for
such adaptation. This is necessarily the case, because we are more complex than
we can understand, as is the world to which we must adjust ourselves.

First we act. Afterward, we envision the pattern that constitutes our actions.
Then we use that pattern to guide our actions. It is establishment of conscious
(declarative) connection between behavior and consequences of that behavior
(which means establishment of a new feedback process) that enables us to
abstractly posit a desired future, to act in such a way as to bring that future
about, and to judge the relevance of emergent phenomena themselves on the basis
of their apparent relevance to that future. This ability appears to be
predicated on some developmental leap—at least insofar as the “guiding story”
has become conscious (or represented in episodic or semantic memory, as opposed
to remaining implicitly embedded in behavior)—and appears unlikely to
characterize very young children (or animals, for that matter). Jean Piaget
solved the problem of the “goal-like” behavior in creatures not yet capable of
abstract conceptualization by presuming that “goals” are initially embedded in
sensori-motor reflex operations, which are instinctive. This essentially means
that what is later story is at first pattern—the pattern of socially modified
behavior that constitutes human being. It is only later, as “higher-order”
(episodic or semantic) cognitive systems become activated, that goals become
explicitly imagined (and that they can be considered, abstractly, before their
enaction). So this means that it is possible to act in a manner that looks as
if it were goal-directed, before goals as such have manifested themselves.
Rychlak describes Piaget's observation: “Children do not appear to be logicians
at birth, conceptually interacting by constructing schema from the outset. The
initial constructions are being done biologically, and only at some time later
does the child schematize the reflexive patterns already underway….”325

First comes the action pattern, guided by instinct, shaped without conscious
realization by the consequences of socially mediated “rewards” and
“punishments” (determined in their “structure and locale” by the current social
mores, products of historical forces). Then comes the capacity to imagine the
end toward which behavior “should” be directed. Information generated from the
observation of behavior provides the basis for constructing fantasies about
such ends. Actions that satisfy emotions have a pattern; abstraction allows us
to represent and duplicate that pattern, as an end. The highest-level
abstractions therefore allow us to represent the most universally applicable
behavioral pattern: that characterizing the hero, who eternally turns the
unknown into something secure and beneficial; who eternally reconstructs the
secure and beneficial, when it has degenerated into tyranny.

The myth of the hero has come to represent the essential nature of human
possibility, as manifested in adaptive behavior, as a consequence of
observation and rerepresentation of such behavior, conducted cumulatively over
the course of thousands of years. The hero myth provides the structure that
governs, but does not determine, the general course of history; expresses one
fundamental preconception in a thousand different ways. This idea (analogous in
structure to the modern hypothesis, although not explicitly formulated, nor
rationally constructed in the same manner) renders individual creativity
socially acceptable and provides the precondition for change. The most
fundamental presumption of the myth of the hero is that the nature of human
experience can be (should be) improved by voluntary alteration in individual
human attitude and action. This statement—the historical hypothesis—is an
expression of faith in human possibility itself and constitutes the truly
revolutionary idea of historical man.

All specific adaptive behaviors (which are acts that restrict the destructive
or enhance the beneficial potential of the unknown) follow a general pattern.
This “pattern”—which at least produces the results intended (and therefore
desired)—inevitably attracts social interest. “Interesting” or “admirable”
behaviors engender imitation and description. Such imitation and description
might first be of an interesting or admirable behavior, but is later of the
class of interesting and admirable behaviors. The class is then imitated as a
general guide to specific actions; is redescribed, redistilled and imitated
once again. The image of the hero, step by step, becomes ever clearer, and ever
more broadly applicable. The pattern of behavior characteristic of the
hero—that is, voluntary advance in the face of the dangerous and promising
unknown, generation of something of value as a consequence and, simultaneously,
dissolution and reconstruction of current knowledge, of current morality—comes
to form the kernel for the good story, cross-culturally. That story—which is
what to do, when you no longer know what to do—defines the central pattern of
behavior embedded in all genuinely religious systems (furthermore, provides the
basis for the “respect due the individual” undergirding our conception of
natural rights). Representations of the uroboros, the dragon of chaos, and his
daughter, the Great Mother, are symbolic portrayals of the unknown.
Mythological representation of the hero and his cultural construction are, by
contrast, examination and portrayal of who or what it is that knows, and of
what it is that is known. The creative and destructive feminine is the
personality manifested in mythology by everything unknown, threatening and
promising, about and within existence. Myth tends to portray the generative
individual consciousness eternally willing to face this unknown power as
masculine, in essence—in contradistinction to unconscious, impersonal, and
unpredictable femininity, and in light of its “seminal,” active, “fructifying”
nature.

The earliest “stages” of the development of the figure of the hero take the
form of mythic representations of the infant or adolescent, fully or partially
dominated by potent maternal force.326 This infant or adolescent is the
specific individual, under the sway of the particular mother—and Homo sapiens,
the species, subject to nature. “Generative individual consciousness” as
“eternal son of the virginal mother” is represented in Figure 37: The
Exploratory Hero as Son of the Heavenly Mother. 327 In his more mature form,
the hero—formerly “son of the heavenly mother”—can be portrayed as “lover of
the Great Mother” [the mother whose body he “enters” into, in creative (sexual)
union, to die and reincarnate (to fertilize and impregnate)]. The Great Mother
is the holy prostitute, the whore of Babylon, as well as the Virgin Mother, a
maiden forever renewed, forever young, belonging to all men, but to no one man.
Myth commonly utilizes the (symbolically sexual) motif of heavenly incest—the
image of devouring or engulfing encounter, rife with creative potential—to
represent union with the primordial feminine, to portray act of creative (or
destructive) encounter between the hero and the possibilities of life itself.
This is “knowledge” as sexual, creative act: the “voluntary generative union”
of consciousness and chaos produces—or revives—order and cosmos.

The mythology of the hero, in toto, depicts the development and establishment
of a personality capable effacing the most extreme conditions of existence. The
hero's quest or journey has been represented in mythology and ritual in
numerous ways, but the manifold representations appear in accordance with the
myth of the way, as previously described: a harmonious community or way of
life, predictable and stable in structure and function, is unexpectedly
threatened by the emergence of (previously harnessed) unknown and dangerous
forces. An individual of humble and princely origins rises, by free choice, to
counter this threat. This individual is exposed to great personal trials and
risks or experiences physical and psychological dissolution. Nonetheless, he
overcomes the threat, is magically restored (frequently improved) and receives
a great reward, in consequence. He returns to his community with the reward,
and (re)establishes social order (sometimes after a crisis engendered by his
return).

This most fundamental of stories is portrayed schematically in Figure 38: The
Meta-mythology of the Way, Revisited. 328 Chaos breeds novelty, promising and
threatening; the hero leaves his community, voluntarily, to face this chaos.
His exploratory/creative act quells the

Figure 37: The Exploratory Hero as Son of the Heavenly Mother





threat embedded in chaos, and frees what is promising from its grip.
Incorporation of this freed promise (this “redemptive” information)—symbolized
by union with the virgin, or discovery of the treasure—transforms the hero. His
transformed (enriched) behavior then serves his community as model. The group
is therefore transformed and restabilized in turn.

The ultimate or archetypal representation of the original “threatened” state is
the unselfconscious (but “incomplete”) paradise that existed prior to the
“fall” of humanity. More prosaically, that state is the innocence and potential
of childhood, the glory of the past, the strength of the well-ruled kingdom,
the power of the city, the stability, wealth and happiness of the family. The
most primordial threat is the sudden (re)appearance or discovery of one of the
manifestations of the Terrible Mother: a flood, an earthquake, a war, a monster
(some type of dragon), a fish, a whale—anything unpredictable or unexpected
that destroys,

Figure 38: The Metamythology of the Way, Revisited





devours, traps, engulfs, dismembers, tortures, terrifies, weakens, mystifies,
entrances, smothers or poisons (this is a partial list). The hero, product of
divine parentage and miraculous birth, survivor of a dangerous childhood, faces
the Terrible Mother in single combat and is devoured. He is swallowed by a
great fish, or snake, or whale, and spends time underground, in the dark, in
the winter, in the kingdom of the dead, or in hell; faces a dragon, a gorgon, a
witch or temptress; is inundated by water, by fire, by storm, by dangerous
animals; is tormented, buried alive, mesmerized, dismembered, disemboweled and
deluded. He defeats the monster, freeing those who had been previously
defeated, and gains or regains a lost or previously undiscovered object of
value, a (virginal) woman or a treasure. Much older, much wiser, he returns
home, transformed in character, bearing what he has gained, and reunites
himself triumphantly with his community, which is much enriched—or even utterly
transformed—by his fortune.329

The battle of the hero is a frequent motif in mythologically inspired
sculpture, drawing and painting. A representative example is presented in
Figure 39: Castle, Hero, Serpent and Virgin: St. George and the Dragon. 330 All
of the elements of the “meta-myth” are portrayed in

Figure 39: Castle, Hero, Serpent and Virgin: St. George and the Dragon





this drawing: the threatened community, represented by the walled city or
castle; the winged dragon, who has emerged from the underworld (and whose lair
is surrounded by the bones of the dead); the hero, armed with the sword, who
“cuts” the leviathan into pieces, and makes the world; and the virgin, freed
from the dragon's clutches, who represents the benevolent, creative and
fruitful aspect of the unknown. (The city is commonly portrayed on a mountain,
in such representations—the serpent in a valley, or across a river. The battle
takes place at sundown [when the sun deity encounters the dragon of the
night].331)

Solar myths portray the journey of the hero, utilizing simultaneously the
motifs of the dragon fight and the “night sea journey.” In the typical solar
myth, the hero is identified with the sun, bearer of the light of
consciousness, who is devoured nightly by the water serpent of the West. In the
night, he battles terribly with this monster, and emerges victorious in the
morning, rising renewed in the East:

In this sequence of danger, battle, and victory, the light—whose significance
for consciousness we have repeatedly stressed—is the central symbol of the
hero's reality. The hero is always a light-bringer and emissary of the light.
At the nethermost point of the night sea journey, when the sun hero journeys
through the underworld and must survive the fight with the dragon, the new sun
is kindled at midnight and the hero conquers the darkness. At this same lowest
point of the year Christ is born as the shining Redeemer, as the light of the
year and light of the world, and is worshipped with the Christmas tree at the
winter solstice. The new light and the victory are symbolized by the
illumination of the head, crowned and decked with an aureole.332



The Mesopotamian emperors and the pharaohs of Egypt were solar gods,
representatives of the incarnated sun deity, eternal victor of the unending
battle between order and chaos, light and darkness, known and unknown. In an
allegorical sense, they might be considered the first true individuals—at least
from the perspective of the Western historical tradition. The Egyptian people
devoted their entire cultural endeavor to glorification of their
rulers—motivated, unconsciously, by their participation in (their imitative
identification with) the essential god-stature of the pharaoh. This idea was
developed (abstracted and generalized) further by the Greeks, who attributed to
each male Greek a soul, and taken to its logical conclusion by the Jews and the
Christians, who granted every person absolute and inviolable individual worth
before (or [potential] identity with) God.

The Great Mother is embodiment of the unknown, of the novel. The hero—her son
and lover, offspring of the mystical marriage—is dramatic (first concrete
behavioral, then imitative/imagistic, then verbal) representation of the
pattern of action capable of making creative use of that unknown. The potential
for expression of (and admiration for; or representation of) that pattern
constitutes a heritable characteristic of the human psyche, expressed
constantly in behavior during the course of human cultural activity.
Containment of this pattern in dynamic image, in myth, follows centuries of
observation, and generation of hypotheses, regarding the core nature of Homo
sapiens, the historical animal. The development of such containment followed a
complex path of increasingly abstracted description and redescription of self
and other.

The hero is a pattern of action, designed to make sense of the unknown; he
emerges, necessarily, wherever human beings are successful. Adherence to this
central pattern ensures that respect for the process of exploration (and the
necessary reconfiguration of belief, attendant upon that process) always
remains superordinate to all other considerations, including that of the
maintenance of stable belief. This is why Christ, the defining hero of the
Western ethical tradition, is able to say, “I am the way, the truth, and the
life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me” (John 14:6); why adherence to
the Eastern way (Tao)—extant on the border between chaos (yin) and order
(yang)—ensures that the “cosmos” will continue to endure. Figure 40: The
Process of Exploration and Update, as the Meta-Goal of Existence schematically
presents the “highest goal” of life, conceptualized from such a perspective:
identification with the process of constructing and updating contingent and
environment-specific goals is in this schema given necessary precedence over
identification with any particular, concretized goal. Spirit is thus elevated
over dogma.

We use stories to regulate our emotions and govern our behavior. They provide
the present we inhabit with a determinate point of reference—the desired
future. The optimal “desired

Figure 40: The Process of Exploration and Update, as the Meta-Goal of Existence





future” is not a state, however, but a process: the (intrinsically compelling)
process of mediating between order and chaos; the process of the incarnation of
Logos—the Word— which is the world-creating principle.333 Identification with
this process, rather than with any of its determinate outcomes (that is, with
any “idols” or fixed frames of reference or ideologies) ensures that emotion
will stay optimally regulated and action remain possible no matter how the
environment shifts, and no matter when. In consequence of such identification,
respect for belief comes to take second place to respect for the process by
which belief is generated.

The hero is narrative representation of the individual eternally willing to
take creative action, endlessly capable of originating new behavioral patterns,
eternally specialized to render harmless or positively beneficial something
previously threatening or unknown. It is declarative representation of the
pattern of behavior characteristic of the hero that eventually comes to
approximate the story of the savior. Behind every particular (that is,
historical) adventurer, explorer, creator, revolutionary and peacemaker lurks
the image of the “son of god,” who sets his impeccable character against
tyranny and the unknown. The arche-typic or ultimate example of the savior is
the world redeemer, the Messiah— world-creating and -redeeming hero, social
revolutionary and great reconciliator. It is the sum total of the activity of
the Messiah, accumulated over the course of time, that constitutes culture, the
Great Father, order itself—explored territory, the domain of the known. In the
“meta-stable” society, however, the Father, though healthy, is subordinate to
the Son: all fixed values necessarily remain subject to the pattern of being
represented by the hero. In the “City of God”—that is, the archetypal human
kingdom—the Messiah eternally rules:

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people,
nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed. (Daniel 7:13–14)

