# CONCLUSION: THE DIVINITY OF INTEREST - The Divinity of Interest
[Metadata]: # {07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {07.02}
[Author]: # {peterson}
CONCLUSION: THE DIVINITY OF INTEREST
The Divinity of Interest
# The Divinity of Interest
The central ideas of Christianity are rooted in Gnostic philosophy, which, in
accordance with psychological laws, simply had to grow up at a time when the
classical religions had become obsolete. It was founded on the perception of
symbols thrown up by the unconscious individuation process which always sets in
when the collective dominants of human life fall into decay. At such a time
there is bound to be a considerable number of individuals who are possesed by
archetypes of a numinous nature that force their way to the surface in order to
form new dominants.

This state of possession shows itself almost without exception in the fact that
the possessed identify themselves with the archetypal contents of their
unconscious, and, because they do not realize that the role which is being
thrust upon them is the effect of new contents still to be understood, they
exemplify these concretely in their own lives, thus becoming prophets and
reformers.

In so far as the archetypal content of the Christian drama was able to give
satisfying expression to the uneasy and clamorous unconscious of the many, the
consensus omnium raised this drama to a universally binding truth—not of course
by an act of judgment, but by the irrational fact of possession, which is far
more effective.

Thus Jesus became the tutelary image or amulet against the archetypal powers
that threatened to possess everyone. The glad tidings announced: “It has
happened, but it will not happen to you inasmuch as you believe in Jesus
Christ, the Son of God!”

Yet it could and it can and it will happen to everyone in whom the Christian
dominant has decayed. For this reason there have always been people who, not
satisfied with the dominants of conscious life, set forth— under cover and by
devious paths, to their destruction or salvation—to seek direct experience of
the eternal roots and, following the lure of the restless unconscious psyche,
find themselves in the wilderness where, like Jesus, they come up against the
son of darkness… .

Thus an old alchemist—and he a cleric!—prays…“Purge the horrible darknesses of
our minds, light a light for our senses!” The author of this sentence must have
been undergoing the experience of the nigredo, the first stage of the work,
which was felt as melancholia in alchemy and corresponds to the encounter with
the shadow in psychology.

When, therefore, modern psychotherapy once more meets with the activated
archetypes of the collective unconscious, it is merely the repetition of a
phenomenon that has often been observed in moments of great religious crisis,
although it can also occur in individuals for whom the ruling ideas have lost
their meaning. An example of this is the descensus ad inferos in Faust which,
consciously or unconsciously, is an opus alchymicum.

The problem of opposites called up by the shadow plays a great— indeed, the
decisive—role in alchemy, since it leads in the ultimate phase of the work to
the union of opposites in the archetypal form of the hierosgamos or “chymical
wedding.” Here the supreme opposites, male and female (as in the Chinese ying
and yang), are melted into a unity purified of all opposition and therefore
incorruptible.658



November, 1986



Dear Dad

I promised you that one day I would tell you what the book I am trying to write
is supposed to be about. I haven't been working on it much in the last month,
although in some regards it is always on my mind and everything I learn, in my
other work, has some bearing upon it. Because I have abandoned it, temporarily,
I thought perhaps I could tell you about it, and that would help me organize my
thoughts.

I don't completely understand the driving force behind what I have been working
on, although I understand it better now than I used to, three or four years
ago, when it was literally driving me crazy. I had been obsessed with the idea
of war for three or four years prior to that, often dreaming extremely violent
dreams, centered around the theme of destruction. I believe now that my concern
with death on a mass scale was intimately tied into my personal life, and that
concerns with the meaning of life on a personal level (which arise with the
contemplation of death) took a general form for me, which had to do with the
value of humanity, and the purpose of life in general.

Carl Jung has suggested that all personal problems are relevant to society,
because we are all so much alike, and that any sufficiently profound solution
to a personal problem may, if communicated, reduce the likelihood of that
problem existing in anyone's experience in the future.659 This is in fact how
society and the individual support one another. It was in this way that my
concern with war, which is the application of death on the general level, led
me into concepts and ideas concerning the meaning of life on the personal
level, which I could never have imagined as relevant, or believable, prior to
learning about them—and which I still believe border on what might normally be
considered insanity.

The reasons for war, many believe, are rooted in politics. Since it is groups
of men that fight, and since groups indulge in politics, this belief seems
well-founded and in fact contains some truth. It is just as true, however, that
it is a good thing to look for something you don't want to find in a place
where you know it won't be—and the modern concern with global politics, and the
necessity to be involved in a “good cause, ” rather than to live responsibly,
seems to me to be evidence that the desire not to find often overpowers the
real search for truth. You see, it is true that people don't want the truth,
because the truth destroys what lack of faith erects, and the false comfort it
contains. It is not possible to live in the world that you wish could be, and
in the real world at the same time, and it often seems a bad bargain to destroy
fantasy for reality. It is desire for lack of responsibility that underlies
this evasion, in part—but it is also fear of possibility. At least this is how
it seems to me.

Because everyone is a product of their times, and because that applies to me as
well, I looked for what I wanted to find where it was obvious to everyone it
would be—in politics, in political science, in the study of group behavior.
This took up the years I spent involved with the NDP, and in studying political
science, until I learned that the application of a system of thought, like
socialism (or any other ism, for that matter) to a problem, and solving that
problem, were not the same thing. In the former case, you have someone (who is
not you) to blame—the rich, the Americans, the white people, the government,
the system—whatever, as long as it is someone else.

I came to realize, slowly, that a problem of global proportions existed as a
problem because everyone on the globe thought and acted to maintain that
problem. Now what that means is that if the problem has a solution, then what
everyone thinks is wrong—and that meant, too, that what I thought had to be
fundamentally wrong. Now the problem with this line of reasoning is simple. It
leads inexorably to the following conclusion: the more fundamental the problem,
the more fundamental the error—in my own viewpoint.

I came to believe that survival itself, and more, depended upon a solution to
the problem of war. This made me consider that perhaps everything I believed
was wrong. This consideration was not particularly pleasant, and was severely
complicated by the fact that I had also come to realize that, although I
definitely believed a variety of things, I did not always know what I
believed—and when I knew what, I did not know why.

You see, history itself conditioned everything I believed, even when I did not
know it, and it was sheer unconscious arrogance that made me posit to begin
with that I had half a notion of who or what I was, or what the process of
history had created, and how I was affected by that creation.

It is one thing to be unconscious of the answers, and quite another to be
unable to even consider the question.

I had a notion that confronting what terrified me—what turned my dreams against
me—could help me withstand that terrible thing. This idea—granted me by the
grace of God—allowed me to believe that I could find what I most wanted (if I
could tolerate the truth; if I was willing to follow wherever it led me; if I
was willing to devote my life to acting upon what I had discovered, whatever
that might be, without reservation— knowing somehow that once started, an
aborted attempt would destroy at least my self-respect, at most my sanity and
desire to live).

I believe now that everyone has this choice in front of them, even when they do
not know or refuse to admit it; that everyone makes this choice, with every
decision and action they take.

I mentioned earlier that history conditioned what I think and acted. Pursuit of
this realization—which is rather self-evident, once realized—has led me to the
study of history, as a psychological phenomenon. You see, if what I think and
am is a product of history, that means that history must take form inside me,
so to speak, and from inside me determine who I am. This is easier to
understand if you consider that I carry around inside me an image of
you—composed of memories of how you act, and what you expected, and depictions
of your behavior. This image has had profound impact on howI behaved, as a
child—when, even in your absence, I was compelled to follow the rules which you
followed (and which I learned through imitation, and which you instilled into
me, through praise and punishment). Sometimes that image of you, in me, even
takes the form of a personality, when I dream about you.

So it is a straightforward matter to believe, from the psychological point of
view, that each individual carries around an image of his parents, and that
this image governs his behavior, at least in part.

But you see it is the case that the rules that you followed—and which I learned
from you—were not rules that you yourself created, but rather those that you
handed to me just as you had been handed them while still a child.

And it is more than likely true that the majority of what I learned from you
was never verbalized—that the rules which governed the way you acted (and that
I learned while watching you) were implicit in your behavior, and are now
implicit in mine. It was exactly in this manner that I learned language—mostly
from watching and listening, partly from explicit instruction. And just as it
is certainly possible (and most commonly so) to speak correctly and yet to be
unable to describe the rules of grammar that “underlie” the production of
language, it is possible to act upon the world and make assumptions about its
nature without knowing much about the values and beliefs that necessarily
underlie those actions and assumptions.

The structure of our language has been created in a historical process, and is
in a sense an embodiment of that process. The structure ofthat which governs
our actions and perceptions has also been created during the course of history,
and is the embodiment of history.

The implications of this idea overwhelmed me. I have been attempting to
consider history itself as a unitary phenomenon—as a single thing, in a
sense—in order to understand what it is, and how it affects what I think and
do. If you realize that history is in some sense in your head, and you also
realize that you know nothing of the significance of history, of its
meaning—which is almost certainly true—then you must realize that you know
nothing of the significance of yourself, and of y our own meaning.

I am writing my book in an attempt to explain the psychological significance of
history—to explain the meaning of history. In doing so, I have “discovered” a
number of interesting things:

1. All cultures, excepting the Western, do not possess a history based on
“objective events.” The history of alternative cultures—even those as highly
developed as the Indian, Chinese, and ancient Greco-Roman—is mythological,
which means that it describes what an event meant, in psychological terms,
instead of how it happened, in empirical terms.

2. All cultures, even those most disparate in nature, develop among broadly
predictable lines, and have, within their mythological history, certain
constant features (just as all languages share grammatical structure, given a
sufficiently abstract analysis). The lines among which culture develops are
determined biologically, and the rules which govern that development are the
consequence ofthepyschological expression of neurophysiological structures.
(This thesis will be the most difficult for me to prove, but I have some solid
evidence in its favor, and as I study more neuroanatomy and neuropsychology,
the evidence becomes clearer).

3. Mythological renditions of history, like those in the Bible, are just as
“true” as the standard Western empirical renditions, just as literally true,
but how they are true is different. Western historians describe (or think they
describe) “what” happened. The traditions of mythology and religion describe
the significance of what happened (and it must be noted that if what happens is
without significance, it is irrelevant).

Anyway—I can't explain in one letter the full scope of what I am planning to
do. In this book, I hope to describe a number of historical tendencies, and how
they affect individual behavior—in the manner I have attempted in this letter.
More importantly, perhaps, I hope to describe not only what the problem is (in
historical terms), but where a possible solution might lie, and what that
solution conceivably could be—and I hope to describe it in a manner that makes
its application possible.

If you 're interested in me telling you more (I can't always tell if someone is
interested) then I will, later. I don't know, Dad, but I think I have
discovered something that no one else has any idea about, and I'm not sure I
can do it justice. Its scope is so broad that I can see only parts of it
clearly at one time, and it is exceedingly difficult to set down comprehensibly
in writing. You see, most of the kind of knowledge that I am trying to transmit
verbally and logically has always been passed down from one person to another
by means of art and music and religion and tradition, and not by rational
explanation, and it is like translating from one language to another. It's not
just a different language, though—it is an entirely different mode of
experience.

Anyways

I'm glad that you and Mom are doing well. Thank you for doing my income tax
returns.

Jordan



It has been almost twelve years since I first grasped the essence of the
paradox that lies at the bottom of human motivation for evil: People need their
group identification, because that identification protects them, literally,
from the terrible forces of the unknown. It is for this reason that every
individual who is not decadent will strive to protect his territory, actual and
psychological. But the tendency to protect means hatred of the other, and the
inevitability of war—and we are now too technologically powerful to engage in
war. To allow victory to the other, however—or even continued existence, on his
terms—means subjugation, dissolution of protective structure, and exposure to
that which is most feared. For me, this meant “damned if you do, damned if you
don't”: belief systems regulate affect, but conflict between belief systems is
inevitable.

Formulation and understanding of this terrible paradox devastated me. I had
always been convinced that sufficient understanding of a problem—any
problem—would lead to its resolution. Here I was, however, possessed of
understanding that seemed not only sufficient but complete, caught nonetheless
between the devil and the deep blue sea. I could not see how there could be any
alternative to either having a belief system or to not having a belief
system—and could see little but the disadvantage of both positions. This truly
shook my faith.

I turned, in consequence, to my dreams—acting on a tip from Jung, who had
proposed that the dream might contain information, when no other source could
suffice. But my dreams dried up, just when I needed them most, and no
information was forthcoming. I was in a kind of stasis, at a standstill. This
was very painful for me. I had spent several years intensely working and
thinking—trying to understand individual human motivation for the worst
possible human actions. I was doing what I truly believed was best, to the best
of my ability, and doing it despite its substantial interference with my
personal and professional lives. I had decided to devote my life to the problem
of evil—to the development of a true understanding of evil, in the hopes of
finding some means of combating it—yet my search had come to a stop, a dead
end. This did not seem reasonable. I truly believed I deserved better.

Then, one night, my dreams came back, with a vengeance. I had the following
nightmare, as terrible and potent as the dreams of destruction that had started
my quest several years before:

I dreamed I was living in a two-story house. After a bout of heavy drinking, I
went to the attic and fell asleep. After I fell asleep, I had the following
dream—nested within a dream:

I was trapped in a huge chandelier, which was hanging directly beneath the dome
of an immense darkened cathedral The chandelier hung hundreds of feet below its
point of connection on the dome, and was still so high off the ground that the
people below, on the floor, looked like ants. These people were in charge of
the cathedral, and I could tell that they were angry at me for being where I
was. I did not feel guilty, because I was not there by choice—I just happened
to have arrived there, and I wanted to leave.

I realized I was dreaming, and shook myself “awake,” as a means of removing
myself from my uncomfortable position. But when I “awoke,” I still found myself
suspended in the same place. I tried to deny this, by falling back
asleep—reasoning that it was better to be dreaming about this circumstance than
to actually be trapped in it. However, I could not return to my previous
unconscious state, and stayed painfully awake.

Then I found myself on the ground, as a consequence of some process whose
nature I cannot recall. The people of the cathedral protested my presence—but
that didn't really bother me. All I wanted to do was get home, where it was
familiar, and go back to sleep.

When I returned home, I went into a small, windowless room—I think it was the
furnace room—in the middle of the ground floor of my house. This room was
surrounded by other rooms; it had no contact point with the outside. There was
a small single bed there, that was actually much like my real bed. I crawled
into it, and tried to fall asleep, but a strange wind descended on me. Under
its influence, I started to dissolve. I knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that it
was going to transport me back to the chandelier, in the center of the
cathedral. I attempted to fight the wind, but found that I was virtually
paralyzed, and in some sort of convulsion. I tried desperately to yell for
help, and actually awakened, at least partially.

The windows behind my bed in my real room were wide open, and a wind was
blowing through them. I frantically closed them, and then turned around. I was
awake, but in front of me appeared a huge double door, like that on a gothic
cathedral, between my bedroom and the adjacent room, which were only partially
separated. I shook myself, and the apparition disappeared. The terror I was
experiencing vanished much more slowly.



I had read much of the Gospels earlier that day—which might account for the
initial reference to the drinking bout (the imbibing of spirit, so to speak). I
formulated an interpretation of the dream—an essentially unacceptable
formulation—immediately upon awakening. I knew that the word “spirit” had been
derived from the Greek pneuma— which meant wind: the wind, for example, that
moved upon the water, in Genesis; the wind or breath that God blew into the
adamah, the matter, to make man.

I found myself at the central point of a cathedral, in my dream—and I could not
escape. A cathedral is “sacred space,” designed to keep the forces of chaos at
bay; it has the same layout as the cross. The central point of a cathedral is,
symbolically, the place where Christ was crucified, and the center of the
universe, simultaneously. All the forces embodied in my dream were conspiring
to put me there, awake, despite my best efforts to the contrary. I could not,
at that time, accept the implications of that dream (could not believe the
implications), and it has taken me a long time to assimilate its meaning:

“He that believeth on Me, the works that I do he shall do also, and greater
works than these shall he do” (John 14:12).

The quotation from John is taken from the fourteenth chapter, where Christ
teaches that whoever sees him sees the Father. He is in the Father and the
Father is in him. The disciples are in him and he in them; moreover they will
be sent the Holy Ghost as Paraclete and will do works that are greater

Figure 67: The Restitution of [Christ] the Mystic Apple to the Tree of
Knowledge





than his own. This fourteenth chapter broaches a question that was to have
great repercussions for the future: the problem of the Holy Ghost who will
remain when Christ has gone, and who intensifies the interpenetration of the
divine and the human to such a degree that we can properly speak of a
“Christification” of the disciples….

It is easy to see what happens when the logical conclusion is drawn from the
fourteenth chapter of John: the opus Christi is transferred to the individual.
He then becomes the bearer of the mystery, and this development was
unconsciously prefigured and anticipated in alchemy, which showed clear signs
of becoming a religion of the Holy Ghost and of the Sapientia Dei.660



Myths of the origin commonly portray the condition of paradise as the source of
all things. The paradisal initial condition, disrupted by the events of the
Fall, also serves as the goal toward which history proceeds. Stories of the
Fall describe the introduction of uncontrollable anxiety into human experience,
as the consequence of traumatically heightened consciousness (as the result of
irrevocably attained knowledge of human vulnerability and mortality).
Re-establishment of paradise, in the aftermath of such attainment, becomes
dependent upon manifestation of an exemplary way of behaving, directed toward a
meaningful end—becomes dependent upon establishment of a particular mode of
redemption:

An old English legend reports what Seth saw in the Garden of Eden. In the midst
of paradise there rose a shining fountain, from which four streams flowed,
watering the whole world. Over the fountain stood a great tree with many
branches and twigs, but it looked like an old tree, for it had no bark and no
leaves. Seth knew that this was the tree of whose fruit his parents had eaten,
for which reason it now stood bare. Looking more closely, Seth saw that a naked
snake without a skin had coiled itself round the tree. It was the serpent by
whom Eve had been persuaded to eat of the forbidden fruit. When Seth took a
second look at paradise he saw that the tree had undergone a great change. It
was now covered with bark and leaves, and in its crown lay a little new-born
babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, that wailed because of Adam's sin. This was
Christ, the second Adam. He is found in the top of the tree that grows out of
Adam's body in representations of Christ's genealogy.661



The tree, the axis mundi, is without bark and leaves because has been mortally
affected, as a consequence of the fall. Production of its first
fruit—self-reference—placed it in shock, exhausted its resources. Its second
fruit, associated with re-emergence into lush life and health, is the savior,
the hero who redeems mankind from the consequences of the Fall,662 the divine
individual whose path of being leads back to paradise.663 This notion is
represented imagistically (it has never really proceeded much past the image)
in Figure 67: The Restitution of [Christ] the Mystic Apple to the Tree of
Knowledge.664 A similar pattern of redemptive ideation informs the East. For
Gautama, suffering and disenchantment are the (necessary) preconditions of
adult enlightenment (the name of the Buddha—Siddhartha—literally means “goal
attained”665). The “enlightened one,” whose mode of being in the world
transcends the suffering in that world, is an eternal spirit (that is, an
eternally recurrent spirit), despite “historical” incarnation in the figure of
the Buddha. Figure 68: The Eternal



Figure 68: The Eternal Return of the Boddhisatva





Return of the Boddhisatva666 portrays this spirit, forever dominant over the
mass of mankind and the Great and Terrible Mother. The boddhisatva, the central
“character” in this figure, is an Oriental Christ-equivalent (or, perhaps, an
image of the paraclete or Holy Ghost). The creator of this work has
superimposed the bodhisattva on a “tunnel” in the sky, ringed by transformative
fire. This tunnel adds a temporal dimension to the spatial dimensions
represented in the image, and allows for the portrayal of the constant
recurrence, throughout time, of the heroic spirit. This is a reflection of the
same idea that drove Christian thinkers to attribute prehistorical (and
eternal) reality to Christ, despite his “historical” nature; as well, that
drove speculation about the “spirit of truth” Christ left behind, after his
death.

Myths of the fall and redemption portray the emergence of human dissatisfaction
with present conditions—no matter how comfortable—and the tendency or desire
for movement toward “a better future.” Such myths describe, in narrative
format, how human beings think and will always think—regardless of time or
place. The most profound of such cyclical myths portray heightening of
consciousness as cause for emergent unrest. Simultaneously, such myths portray
qualitatively transformed consciousness as cure for that unrest (more
profoundly, portray participation in the act of qualitative transformation of
consciousness as cure for that unrest).

Proclivity to posit an ideal, implicitly or explicitly, to work toward its
attainment, to become dissatisfied with its establishment, as new “matter”
makes itself manifest, and to thereby re-enter the cycle—this constitutes the
centrally defining pattern of human abstraction and behavior. The simplest and
most basic day-to-day human activities, invariably goal-directed, are
necessarily predicated upon conscious or tradition-bound acceptance of a value
hierarchy, defining the desired future in positive contrast to the insufficient
present. To live, from the human perspective, is to act in light of what is
valued, what is desired, what should be—and to maintain sufficient ignorance,
in a sense, to allow belief in such value to flourish. Collapse of faith in the
value hierarchy—or, more dangerously, collapse of faith in the idea of such
hierarchies—brings about severe depression, intrapsychic chaos and re-emergence
of existential anxiety.

The myth of the Fall describes the development of human self-consciousness as a
great tragedy, the greatest conceivable anomaly, an event that permanently
altered the structure of the universe and doomed humanity to suffering and
death. But it was this same Fall that enabled the individual to adopt the
redemptive role of the hero, the creator of culture; the same Fall that lifted
the curtain on the drama of human history. Whether or not it would have been
better for humanity to have remained unconscious is no longer a point that can
be usefully considered—although that path does not seem particularly productive
for those who take it now. Original Sin has tainted everyone; there is no way
back.

For much of human history—after the Fall, so to speak—the individual remained
firmly ensconced within the confines of a religious dream: a dream that gave
meaning to the tragedy of existence. Many modern thinkers, including Freud,
viewed that dream in retrospect as defensive, as a barrier of fantasy erected
against the existential anxiety generated by knowledge of mortality. However,
the dividing line between fantasy and reality is not so easily drawn. It is
certainly possible to disappear voluntarily into the mists of delusion; to
withdraw into the comforts of denial from a world terrible beyond what can be
borne. Imagination is not always insanity, however; its use does not always
imply regression. Imagination and fantasy allow each of us to deal with the
unknown, which must be met before it is comprehended. Fantasy applied to
consideration of the unknown is therefore not delusory. It is, instead, the
first stage in the process of understanding—which eventually results in the
evolution of detailed, empirical, communicable knowledge. Fantasy can be used
to create the real world, as well as the world of illusion. It all depends on
who is doing the imagining, and to what end.

When pre-experimental man conceived of the unknown as an ambivalent mother, he
was not indulging in childish fantasy. He was applying what he knew to what was
unfamiliar but could not be ignored. Man's first attempts to describe the
unknown cannot be faulted because they lacked empirical validity. Man was not
originally an empirical thinker. This does not mean he was self-deluded, a
liar. Likewise, when the individual worships the hero, he is not necessarily
hiding from reality. It may also be that he is ready and willing to face the
unknown, as an individual; that he is prepared to adopt the pattern of heroic
endeavour in his own life, and to further creation in that manner.

The great myths of Christianity—the great myths of the past, in general—no
longer speak to the majority of Westerners, who regard themselves as educated.
The mythic view of history cannot be credited with reality, from the material,
empirical point of view. It is nonetheless the case that all of Western ethics,
including those explicitly formalized in Western law, are predicated upon a
mythological worldview, which specifically attributes divine status to the
individual. The modern individual is therefore in a unique position: he no
longer believes that the principles upon which all his behaviors are predicated
are valid. This might be considered a second fall, in that the destruction of
the Western mythological barrier has re-exposed the essential tragedy of
individual existence to view.

It is not the pursuit of empirical truth, however, that has wreaked havoc upon
the Christian worldview. It is confusion of empirical fact with moral truth
that has proved of great detriment to the latter. This has produced what might
be described as a secondary gain, which has played an important role in
maintaining the confusion. That gain is abdication of the absolute personal
responsibility imposed in consequence of recognition of the divine in man. This
responsibility means acceptance of the trials and tribulations associated with
expression of unique individuality, as well as respect for such expression in
others. Such acceptance, expression and respect requires courage in the absence
of certainty, and discipline in the smallest matters.

Rejection of moral truth allows for rationalization of cowardly, destructive,
degenerate self-indulgence. This is one of the most potent attractions of such
rejection, and constitutes primary motivation for the lie. The lie, above all
else, threatens the individual—and the interpersonal. The lie is predicated
upon the presupposition that the tragedy of individuality is unbearable—that
human experience itself is evil. The individual lies because he is afraid—and
it is not the lies he tells another that present the clearest danger, but the
lies he tells himself. The root of social and individual psychopathology, the
“denial,” the “repression” is the lie. The most dangerous lie of all is devoted
to denial of individual responsibility—denial of individual divinity.

The idea of the divine individual took thousands of years to fully develop, and
is still constantly threatened by direct attack and insidious counter-movement.
It is based upon realization that the individual is the locus of experience.
All that we can know about reality we know through experience. It is therefore
simplest to assume that all there is of reality is experience—its being and
progressive unfolding. Furthermore, it is the subjective aspect of
individuality—of experience—that is divine, not the objective. Man is an
animal, from the objective viewpoint, worthy of no more consideration than the
opinion and opportunities of the moment dictate. From the mythic viewpoint,
however, every individual is unique—is a new set of experiences, a new
universe; has been granted the ability to bring something new into being; is
capable of participating in the act of creation itself. It is the expression of
this capacity for creative action that makes the tragic conditions of life
tolerable, bearable—remarkable, miraculous.

The paradise of childhood is absolute meaningful immersion. That immersion is a
genuine manifestation of subjective interest. Interest accompanies the honest
pursuit of the unknown, in a direction and at a rate subjectively determined.
The unknown, in its beneficial guise, is the ground of interest, the source of
what matters. Culture, in its supportive role, extends the power with which the
unknown can be met, by disciplining the individual and expanding his range of
ability. In childhood, the parent serves as cultural surrogate, and the child
explores under the umbrella of protection provided by his parents. The parental
mechanism has its limits, however, and must be superseded by the
internalization of culture—by the intrapsychic incorporation of belief,
security, and goal. Adoption of this secondary protective structure
dramatically extends and shapes individual capability.

The great dragon of chaos limits the pursuit of individual interest. The
struggle with the dragon—against the forces that devour will and
hope—constitutes the heroic battle in the mythological world. Faithful
adherence to the reality of personal experience ensures contact with the
dragon, and it is during such contact that the great force of the individual
spirit makes itself manifest, if it is allowed to. The hero voluntarily places
himself in opposition to the dragon. The liar pretends that the great danger
does not exist, to his peril and to that of others, or abdicates his
relationship with his essential interest, and abandons all chance at further
development.

Interest is meaning. Meaning is manifestation of the divine individual adaptive
path. The lie is abandonment of individual interest—hence meaning, hence
divinity—for safety and security; is sacrifice of the individual to appease the
Great Mother and Great Father.

The lie is fear's statement, in the face of genuine experience: “That could not
really be the case; that did not really happen.” The lie weakens the
individual—who no longer extends the range of his competence by testing his
subjectivity against the world—and drains his life of meaning. Life without
meaning is mortal limitation, subjection to pain and suffering without
recourse. Life without meaning is tragedy, without hope of redemption.

The abandonment of meaning ensures the adoption of a demonic mode of
adaptation, because the individual hates pointless pain and frustration and
will work toward its destruction. This work constitutes revenge against
existence, rendered unbearable by pride.

Rebirth is re-establishment of interest, after adoption of culturally
determined competence. The rebirth of interest moves the individual to the
border between the known and the unknown and thereby expands the social world.
In this manner, God acts through the individual, in the modern world, and
extends the domain of history.

Self-consciousness means knowledge of individual vulnerability. The process by
which this knowledge comes to be can destroy faith in individual worth. This
means, in concrete terms, that an individual may come to sacrifice his own
experience, in the course of development, because its pursuit creates social
conflict or exposes individual inadequacy. However, it is only through such
conflict that change takes place, and weakness must be recognized, before it
can be transformed into strength. This means that the sacrifice of
individuality eliminates any possibility that individual strength can be
discovered or developed, and that the world itself might progress.

Individuals whose life is without meaning hate themselves for their weakness
and hate life for making them weak. This hatred manifests itself in absolute
identification with destructive power, in its mythological, historical and
biological manifestations; manifests itself in the desire for the absolute
extinction of existence. Such identification leads man to poison whatever he
touches, to generate unnecessary misery in the face of inevitable suffering, to
turn his fellows against themselves, to intermingle earth with hell—merely to
attain vengeance upon God and his creation.

The human purpose, if such a thing can be considered, is to pursue meaning—to
extend the domain of light, of consciousness—despite limitation. A meaningful
event exists on the boundary between order and chaos. The pursuit of meaning
exposes the individual to the unknown in gradual fashion, allowing him to
develop strength and adaptive ability in proportion to the seriousness of his
pursuit. It is during contact with the unknown that human power grows,
individually and then historically. Meaning is the subjective experience
associated with that contact, in sufficient proportion. The great religious
myths state that continued pursuit of meaning, adopted voluntarily and without
self-deception, will lead the individual to discover his identity with God.
This “revealed identity” will make him capable of withstanding the tragedy of
life. Abandonment of meaning, by contrast, reduces man to his mortal
weaknesses.

Meaning is the most profound manifestation of instinct. Man is a creature
attracted by the unknown; a creature adapted for its conquest. The subjective
sense of meaning is the instinct governing rate of contact with the unknown.
Too much exposure turns change to chaos; too little promotes stagnation and
degeneration. The appropriate balance produces a powerful individual, confident
in the ability to withstand life, ever more able to deal with nature and
society, ever closer to the heroic ideal. Each individual, constitutionally
unique, finds meaning in different pursuits, if he has the courage to maintain
his difference. Manifestation of individual diversity, transformed into
knowledge that can be transferred socially, changes the face of history itself,
and moves each generation of man farther into the unknown.

Social and biological conditions define the boundaries of individual existence.
The unfailing pursuit of interest provides the subjective means by which these
conditions can be met, and their boundaries transcended. Meaning is the
instinct that makes life possible. When it is abandoned, individuality loses
its redeeming power. The great lie is that meaning does not exist, or that it
is not important. When meaning is denied, hatred for life and the wish for its
destruction inevitably rules:

If you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth will save you.

If you do not bring forth what is within you, what you do not bring forth will
destroy you.667



The wisdom of the group can serve as the force that mediates between the
dependency of childhood and the responsibility of the adult. Under such
circumstances, the past serves the present. A society predicated upon belief in
the paramount divinity of the individual allows personal interest to flourish
and to serve as the power that opposes the tyranny of culture and the terror of
nature. The denial of meaning, by contrast, ensures absolute identification
with the group—or intrapsychic degeneration and decadence. The denial of
meaning makes the absolutist or degenerate individual desperate and weak, when
the great maternal sea of chaos threatens. This desperation and weakness makes
him hate life, and to work for its devastation—in him, as well as in those
around him. The lie is the central act in this drama of corruption:

These are the secret sayings which the living Jesus spoke and which Didymos
Judas Thomas wrote down.

And he said, “Whoever finds the interpretation of these sayings will not
experience death.”

Jesus said, “Let him who seeks continue seeking until he finds. When he becomes
troubled, he will be astonished, and he will rule over the all.”

Jesus said, “If those who lead you say to you, ‘see, the kingdom is in the
sky,’ then the birds of the sky will precede you. If they say to you, ‘It is in
the sea,’ then the fish will precede you. Rather, the kingdom is inside of you,
and it is outside of you. When you come to know yourselves, then you will
become known, and you will realize that it is you who are the sons of the
living father. But if you will not know yourselves, you dwell in poverty and it
is you who are that poverty.”

Jesus said, “The man old in days will not hesitate to ask a small child seven
days old about the place of life, and he will live. For many who are first will
become last, and they will become one and the same.”

Jesus said, “Recognize what is in your sight, and that which is hidden from you
will become plain to you. For there is nothing hidden which will not become
manifest.”

His disciples questioned him and said to him, “Do you want us to fast? How
shall we pray? Shall we give alms? What diet shall we observe?”

Jesus said, “Do not tell lies, and do not do what you hate, for all things are
plain in the sight of heaven. For nothing hidden will not become manifest, and
nothing covered will remain without being uncovered.”668

