# 2 - Unexplored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
[Metadata]: # {03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
Unexplored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
# Unexplored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
The dilemma of contradictory simultaneous meanings can be solved in only two
related ways (although it can be avoided in many others). We can alter our
behaviors, in the difficult situation, so that those behaviors no longer
produce consequences we do not desire or cannot interpret. Alternatively, we
can reframe our contexts of evaluation (our goals and our interpretations of
the present), so that they no longer produce paradoxical implications, with
regard to the significance of a given situation. These processes of behavioral
modification and reframing constitute acts of effortful revaluation, which
means thorough, exploratory reconsideration of what has been judged previously
to be appropriate or important.

Things or situations with indeterminate meanings therefore challenge our
adaptive competence; force us to revaluate our present circumstances and alter
our ongoing behaviors. Such circumstances arise when something we have under
control, from one perspective, is troublesome or otherwise out of control from
another. Out of control means, most basically, unpredictable: something is
beyond us when our interactions with it produce phenomena whose properties
could not be determined, beforehand. Unexpected or novel occurrences, which
emerge when our plans do not turn out the way we hope they would, therefore
constitute an important—perhaps the most important— subset of the broader class
of stimuli of indeterminate meaning. Something unexpected, or novel,
necessarily occurs in relationship to what is known; is always identified and
evaluated with respect to our currently operative plan [which is to say that a
familiar thing in an unexpected place (or at an unexpected time) is actually
something unfamiliar]. The wife of an adulterous husband, for example, is
well-known to him, perhaps, when she is at home. The fact of her, and her
behavior, constitutes explored territory. She is an entirely different sort of
phenomenon, however, from the perspective of affect (and implication for
behavioral output) if she makes an unexpected appearance at his favorite motel
room, in the midst of a tryst. What will the husband do, in his wife's
presence, when she surprises him? First, he will be taken aback, in all
likelihood—then he will concoct a story that makes sense of his behavior (if he
can manage it, on such short notice). He has to think up something new, do
something he has never done before. He has to manage his wife, who he thinks he
has fooled—his wife, whose mere unexpected presence at the motel is proof of
her endless residual mystery. Our habitual patterns of action only suffice for
things and situations of determinate significance—by definition: we only know
how to act in the presence of the familiar. The appearance of the unexpected
pops us out of unconscious, axiomatic complacency and forces us (painfully) to
think.

The implications of novel or unpredictable occurrences are unknown, by
definition. This observation carries within it the seeds of a difficult and
useful question: what is the significance of the unknown? It might seem logical
to assume that the answer is none— something unexplored cannot have meaning,
because none has yet been attributed to it. The truth, however, is precisely
opposite. Those things we do not understand nonetheless signify. If you can't
tell what something means, because you don't know what it is, what then does it
mean? It is not nothing—we are in fact frequently and predictably upset by the
unexpected. Rather, it could be anything, and that is precisely the crux of the
problem. Unpredictable things are not irrelevant, prior to the determination of
their specific meaning. Things we have not yet explored have significance,
prior to our adaptation to them, prior to our classification of their
relevance, prior to our determination of their implication for behavior. Things
not predicted, not desired, that occur while we are carrying out our carefully
designed plans—such things come loaded, a priori, with meaning, both positive
and negative. The appearance of unexpected things or situations indicates, at
least, that our plans are in error, at some stage of their design— in some
trivial way, if we are lucky; in some manner that might be devastating to our
hopes and wishes, to our self-regard, if we are not.

Unexpected or unpredictable things—novel things, more exactly (the class of
novel things, most particularly)—have a potentially infinite, unbounded range
of significance. What does something that might be anything mean? In the
extremes, it means, the worst that could be (or, at least, the worst you can
imagine) and, conversely, the best that could be (or the best you can conceive
of). Something new might present the possibility for unbearable suffering,
followed by meaningless death—a threat virtually unbounded in significance.
That new and apparently minor but nonetheless strange and worrisome ache you
noticed this morning, for example, while you were exercising, might just
signify the onset of the cancer that will slowly and painfully kill you.
Alternatively, something unexpected might signify inconceivable opportunity for
expansion of general competence and well-being. Your old, boring but secure job
unexpectedly disappears. A year later, you are doing what you really want to
do, and your life is incomparably better.

An unexpected thing or situation appearing in the course of goal-directed
behavior constitutes a stimulus that is intrinsically problematic: novel
occurrences are, simultaneously, cues for punishment (threats) and cues for
satisfaction (promises).81 This paradoxical a priori status is represented
schematically in Figure 5: The Ambivalent Nature of Novelty. Unpredictable
things, which have a paradoxical character, accordingly activate two
antithetical emotional systems, whose mutually inhibitory activities provide
basic motivation for abstract cognition, whose cooperative endeavor is critical
to the establishment of permanent memory, and whose physical substrates
constitute universal elements of the human nervous system. The most rapidly
activated82 of these two systems governs inhibition of ongoing behavior,
cessation of currently goaldirected activity;83 the second, equally powerful
but somewhat more conservative,84 underlies exploration, general behavioral
activation85 and forward locomotion.86 Operation of the former appears
associated with anxiety, with fear and apprehension, with negative
affect—universal subjective reactions to the threatening and unexpected.87
Operation of the latter, by contrast, appears associated with hope, with
curiosity and interest, with positive affect—subjective responses to the
promising and unexpected.88 The process of exploring the emergent unknown is
therefore guided by the interplay between the emotions of
curiosity/hope/excitement on the one hand and anxiety on the other—or, to
describe the phenomena from another viewpoint, between the different motor
systems responsible for approach (forward locomotion) and inhibition of ongoing
behavior.

The “ambivalent unknown” comes in two “forms,” so to speak (as alluded to
earlier). “Normal” novelty emerges within the “territory” circumscribed by the
choice of a particular end-point or goal (which is to say, after getting to
specific point “b” has been deemed the most important possible activity at this
time and in this place). Something “normally” novel constitutes an occurrence
which leaves the current departure point and goal intact, but

Figure 5: The Ambivalent Nature of Novelty





indicates that the means of achieving that goal have to be modified. Let us
say, for example, that you are in your office. You are accustomed to walking
down an unobstructed hallway to get to the elevator. You are so used to
performing this activity that you can do it “automatically”—so you often read
while walking. One day, while reading, you stumble over a chair someone left in
the middle of the hallway. This is normal novelty. You don't have to alter your
current goal, except in a temporary and trivial manner; you are not likely to
get too upset by the unexpected obstacle. Getting to the elevator is still a
real possibility, even within the desired time frame; all you have to do is
walk around the chair (or move it somewhere else, if you are feeling
particularly altruistic). Figure 6: Emergence of “Normal Novelty” in the Course
of Goal-Directed Behavior provides an abstracted representation of this process
of trivial adaptation.

Revolutionary novelty is something altogether different. Sometimes the sudden
appearance of the unexpected means taking path “b” to grandma's house, instead
of path “a.” Sometimes that appearance means emergent doubt about the very
existence of grandma (think “wolf” and “Red Riding Hood”). Here is an example:
I am sitting alone in my office,

Figure 6: Emergence of “Normal Novelty” in the Course of Goal-Directed Behavior





in a high-rise building, alone at night. I suddenly fantasize: “I am going to
take the elevator down three floors and get something to eat” (more accurately,
hunger suddenly grips my imagination, and uses it for its own purposes). This
fantasy constitutes a spatially and temporally bounded image of the ideal
future—an “actual” possible future, carved out as a discriminable (and thus
usable) object, from the infinite domain of potential possible futures. I use
this definite image to evaluate the events and processes that constitute the
interpreted present, as it unfolds around me, as I walk toward the elevator (on
my way to the cafeteria). I want to make reality match my fantasy—to subdue my
motivation (to please the gods, so to speak). If the unexpected occurs—say, the
elevator is not operating—the mismatch temporarily stops me. I replace my
current plan with an alternative behavioral strategy, designed to obtain the
same end. This means that I do not reconfigure the temporally and spatially
bounded map that I am using to evaluate my circumstances—that I am using to
regulate my emotions. All I have to do is change strategy.

I decide to take the stairs to the cafeteria. If the stairs are blocked by
construction, I am in more serious trouble. My original fantasy—“go down to the
cafeteria and eat”—was predicated on an implicit presumption: I can get
downstairs. This presumption, which I wasn't really even aware of (which might
be regarded as axiomatic, for the purposes of the current operation), has been
violated. The story “go downstairs to eat” retained its function only in an
environment characterized by valid means of between-floor transportation. The
existence of these means constituted a given—I had used the elevator or the
stairs so often that their very presence took on the aspect of a justifiably
ignored constant. Once I had mastered the stairs or the elevator—once I had
learned their location, position and mechanisms—I could take them for granted
and presume their irrelevance. Predictable phenomena (read “thoroughly
explored, and therefore adapted to”) do not attract attention; they do not
require “consciousness.” No new behavioral strategies or frameworks of
reference must be generated, in their presence.

Anyway: the elevators are broken; the stairs are blocked. The map I was using
to evaluate my environment has been invalidated: my ends are no longer tenable.
In consequence, necessarily, the means to those ends (my plans to go to the
cafeteria) have been rendered utterly irrelevant. I no longer know what to do.
This means, in a nontrivial sense, that I no longer know where I am. I presumed
I was in a place I was familiar with—indeed, many familiar things (the fact of
the floor, for example) have not changed. Nonetheless, something fundamental
has been altered—and I don't know how fundamental. I am now in a place I cannot
easily leave. I am faced with a number of new problems, in addition to my
unresolved hunger—at least in potential (Will I get home tonight? Do I have to
get someone to “rescue” me? Who could rescue me? Who do I telephone to ask for
help? What if there was a fire?). My old plan, my old “story” (“I am going
downstairs to get something to eat”) has vanished, and I do not know how to
evaluate my current circumstances. My emotions, previously constrained by the
existence of a temporarily valid plan, re-emerge in a confused jumble. I am
anxious (“what will I do? What if there was a fire?”), frustrated (“I'm
certainly not going to get any more work done tonight, under these
conditions!”) angry (“who could have been stupid enough to block all the
exits?”), and curious (“just what the hell is going on around here, anyway?”).
Something unknown has occurred and blown all my plans. An emissary of chaos, to
speak metaphorically, has disrupted my emotional stability. Figure 7: Emergence
of “Revolutionary Novelty” in the Course of Goal-Directed Behavior graphically
presents this state of affairs.

The plans we formulate are mechanisms designed to bring the envisioned perfect
future into being. Once formulated, plans govern our behavior—until we make a
mistake. A mistake, which is the appearance of a thing or situation not
envisioned, provides evidence for the incomplete nature of our plans—indicates
that those plans and the presumptions upon which they are erected are in error
and must be updated (or, heaven forbid, abandoned). As long as everything is
proceeding according to plan, we remain on familiar ground—but when we err, we
enter unexplored territory.

What is known and what unknown is always relative because what is unexpected
depends entirely upon what we expect (desire)—on what we had previously planned
and presumed. The unexpected constantly occurs because it is impossible, in the
absence of omniscience, to formulate an entirely accurate model of what
actually is happening or of what should happen;

Figure 7: Emergence of “Revolutionary Novelty” in the Course of Goal-Directed
Behavior





it is impossible to determine what results ongoing behavior will finally
produce. Errors in representation of the unbearable present and the ideal,
desired future are inevitable, in consequence, as are errors in implementation
and representation of the means by which the former can be transformed into the
latter. The infinite human capacity for error means that encounter with the
unknown is inevitable, in the course of human experience; means that the
likelihood of such encounter is as certain, regardless of place and time of
individual existence, as death and taxation. The (variable) existence of the
unknown, paradoxically enough, can therefore be regarded as an environmental
constant. Adaptation to the “existence” of this domain must occur, therefore,
in every culture, and in every historical period—regardless of the particulars
of any given social or biological circumstance.

Deviations from desired outcome constitute (relatively) novel events,
indicative of errors in presumption, either at the level of analysis of current
state, process or ideal future. Such mismatches—unpredictable, nonredundant or
novel occurrences—constantly comprise the most intrinsically meaningful,
interesting elements of the human experiential field. This interest and meaning
signifies the presence of new information and constitutes a prepotent stimulus
for human (and animal) action.89 It is where the unpredictable emerges that the
possibility for all new and useful information exists. It is during the process
of exploration of the unpredictable or unexpected that all knowledge and wisdom
is generated, all boundaries of adaptive competence extended, all foreign
territory explored, mapped and mastered. The eternally extant domain of the
unknown therefore constitutes the matrix from which all conditional knowledge
emerges. Everything presently known to each, everything rendered predictable,
was at one time unknown to all, and had to be rendered predictable—beneficial
at best, irrelevant at worst—as a consequence of active exploration-driven
adaptation. The matrix is of indeterminable breadth: despite our great
storehouse of culture, despite the wisdom bequeathed to us by our ancestors, we
are still fundamentally ignorant, and will remain so, no matter how much we
learn. The domain of the unknown surrounds us like an ocean surrounds an
island. We can increase the area of the island, but we never take away much
from the sea.

