# 4 - The Revolutionary Hero
[Metadata]: # {05.07}
[Descriptor]: # {05.07}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
The Revolutionary Hero
# The Revolutionary Hero
The revolutionary hero reorders the protective structure of society, when the
emergence of an anomaly makes such reordering necessary. He is therefore the
agent of change, upon whose actions all stability is predicated. This
capacity—which should make him a welcome figure in every community—is
exceedingly threatening to those completely encapsulated by the status quo, and
who are unable or unwilling to see where the present state of adaptation is
incomplete and where residual danger lies. The archetypal revolutionary hero
therefore faces the anger and rejection of his peers, as well as the terrors of
the absolutely unknown. He is nonetheless the “best friend” of the state.

Analysis of the archaic ecstatic practice of shamanism—prevalent throughout
“the immense area comprising Central and North Asia”423—sheds further light on
the nature of the actions and typical experiences of the revolutionary hero.
Europeans who made initial contact with these tribal healers frequently deemed
them insane. The reverse was in fact true: the genuine shaman was the most sane
man of the tribe (that is, the man whose extent of adaptation was greatest).
Furthermore, he served as primordial “unified ancestor” of the lately
differentiated or specialized creative agent: explorer, mystic, artist,
scientist and physician. The Asian shaman was master of religious life,
embodiment and keeper of the sacred doctrine, dominant authority and creator of
culture.

The widespread practices and viewpoints of shamanism constitute a cohesive
philosophy, so to speak, embedded “unconsciously” in behavior and image. This
ritual philosophy comprises a set of observations about the nature of radical
personality transformation, and a set of practices designed to bring such
alteration about. Shamanism is devoted to furtherance of the possibility of
qualitative improvements in “consciousness” or general adaptive ability; it has
captured the essence of such possibility in image, to minimize the accompanying
terror. Shamanism is prototypical of those religious practices designed to
modify human behavior and interpretation—to induce and regulate the processes
of spiritual reconfiguration. These practices are not merely cultural in
nature. They originate in the observation of spontaneous psychological
transmutation, a psychobiologically grounded human capacity. Shamanic rituals
are therefore not merely anachronistic, without modern relevance, except as
curiosity dictates—but prime exemplars of a process we must come to understand.

The shaman is not simply an archaic figure, an interesting anomaly from the
dead past—he is the embodiment, in cultures we do not comprehend, of those
people we admire most in the past. The phenomenon of the “creative illness,”
described in detail by Henri Ellenberger, in his massive study of the history
of the unconscious, is alive and well in our own culture. Ellenberger described
its characteristic elements:

A creative illness succeeds a period of intense preoccupation with an idea and
search for a certain truth. It is a polymorphous condition that can take the
shape of depression, neurosis, psychosomatic ailments, or even psychosis.
Whatever the symptoms, they are felt as painful, if not agonizing, by the
subject, with alternating periods of alleviation and worsening. Throughout the
illness the subject never loses the thread of his dominating preoccupation. It
is often compatible with normal, professional activity and family life. But
even if he keeps to his social activities, he is almost entirely absorbed with
himself. He suffers from feelings of utter isolation, even when he has a mentor
who guides him through the ordeal (like the shaman apprentice with his master).
The termination is often rapid and marked by a phase of exhilaration. The
subject emerges from his ordeal with a permanent transformation in his
personality and the conviction that he has discovered a great truth or a new
spiritual world.424



Many of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century figures recognized unquestionably
as “great”—Nietzsche, Darwin, Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Freud, Jung, Piaget—were
additionally characterized by lengthy periods of profound psychological unrest
and uncertainty. Their “psychopathology,” a term ridiculous in this context,
was generated as a consequence of the revolutionary nature of their personal
experience (their action, fantasy and thought). It is no great leap of
comparative psychology to see their role in our society as analogous to that of
the archaic religious leader and healer.

For the average “tribal” individual, socially imposed initiation signifies the
death of childhood and reintegration on the level of social maturity. For the
future shaman, voluntarily undertaken initiation signifies the disintegration
of socially determined adult personality and

Figure 50: The “Dual Death” of the Revolutionary Hero





reintegration at the level of unique individuality. This process is illustrated
in Figure 50: The “Dual Death” of the Revolutionary Hero. Those who undergo a
second initiation suffer more deeply and profoundly from life than their peers;
they are, in Jung's phrase, the most “complex and differentiated minds of their
age.”425 These creative individuals detect emergent anomaly, and begin the
process of adaptation to it, long before the average person notices any change
whatsoever in circumstance. In his ecstasy the shaman lives the potential
future life of his society. This dangerous individual can play a healing role
in his community because he has suffered more through experience than his
peers. If someone in the community (or the community itself) becomes ill,
breaks down—begins the journey, so speak, to the land of the dead, the terrible
unknown—the shaman is there to serve as guide, to provide rationale for current
experience, to reunite the suffering individual with his community or to renew
the community—to restabilize the paradigmatic context of expectation and desire
within which individual and social experience remains tolerable. The truly
creative individual has “been there and done that,” and can therefore serve as
a guide to others voluntarily beginning—or roughly thrown into—similar voyages.

The archaic shamanic initiate was commonly someone uniquely marked by fate, by
the “will of the gods”—by particular heredity, “magical” (novel) occurrence in
early childhood or later in life (birth in a caul; survival of lightning
strike), or by intrapsychic idiosyncrasy (epileptic susceptibility, visionary
proclivity).426 His unique personality or experiential history, in combination
with presently extant social conditions, doomed him to experience so anomalous
that it could not simultaneously be accepted as actually occurring—as real—and
as possible within the confines determined by ruling social presumption. The
existence of this experience, if “admitted” and “processed,” therefore
presented a potentially fatal challenge to the perceived validity of the axioms
currently underlying the maintenance of normal “sanity”—the sociohistorically
determined stability of mutually determined behavioral adaptation and
experiential significance. The existence of this distinct experience served as
a gateway to the unknown, or as a floodgate, a portal, through which the
unexpected could pour, with inevitably destructive and potentially creative
consequences. The shaman is the individual who chooses to meet such a flood
head on.

The shaman, the ecstatic in general—equally, the revolutionary philosopher or
scientist, true to himself—is characterized by stubborn adherence to his own
idiosyncratic field of experience, in which occurrences emerge, procedural,
episodic or semantic in structure, that are foreign to the predictably
socialized man and his prosaic moral expectation. The experiential range of the
creative agent transcends the domain of the current adaptive sufficiency of his
culture, as it is extant socially and embodied and represented
intrapsychically. Rather than ignoring or failing to process such occurrences
(which exist in contradiction to or completely outside his conditional,
socially determined expectations), and acting as though they do not exist, the
creative individual (voluntarily) admits their reality, and submits himself to
the dissolution of his current (moral) worldview and pattern of action. This
dissolution of personality, equivalent in episodic representation to death,
temporarily “renovelizes” experience; furthermore, it provides the precondition
for more inclusive resurrection of order, personal and social.

The future shaman is in fact tormented by the incomplete or self-contradictory
state of his cultural structure, as it is intrapsychically represented; is
undergoing a breakdown induced by some aspect of personal experience, some
existential anomaly, that cannot be easily integrated into that structure. This
breakdown re-exposes him to the unknown— previously covered, so to speak, by
his culture. His comportment during the period of incubation preceding his
emergence as shaman is generally marked by commission of acts considered
characteristic, in modern and archaic culture alike, of serious mental
breakdown. He behaves idiosyncratically, seeking solitude, flying into fits of
rage, losing consciousness, living in the mountains or woods alone, and
suffering from visions and periods of absentmindedness. His peers explain his
odd behavior as possession. This experience of dissolution and re-exposure to
chaos accompanies intrapsychic subjugation to the operation of innate,
involuntary [episodic, limbic, right-hemisphere-governed (?)] mechanisms
responsible for the deconstruction and renewal of conditional knowledge. This
operation manifests itself subjectively in structured mythic experience—in
spontaneous personal experience, which adheres to the pattern associated with
ritualized social initiation, and which may also have served, originally, as
its source.

The soul of the shaman is “carried away by spirits,” habituants of the episodic
realm, and returned to “the place of the gods.” This place exists outside of
time and space itself, on the same plane of pleromatic reality as the
prehistoric and postapocalyptic Paradise. Entry into this domain is preceded by
complete psychic disintegration, accompanied by horrifying visions of torture,
dismemberment and death. The shamanic initiate descends into the matriarchal
hell that preceded and coexists with creation, passing through clashing rocks,
or gates in the shape of jaws; he is reduced to a skeleton, while his
disembodied head observes the procedure; he has his internal organs removed or
restructured; his bones are broken, his eyes gouged out. He is devoured by a
serpent or a giantess; is boiled, roasted or otherwise reduced to his essential
and fundamental structure—to his very bones. Eliade states:

The total crisis of the future shaman, sometimes leading to complete
disintegration of the personality and to madness, can be valuated not only as
an initiatory death but also as a symbolic return to the pre-cosmogonic Chaos,
to the amorphous and indescribable state that precedes any cosmogony. Now, as
we know, for archaic and traditional cultures, a symbolic return to Chaos is
equivalent to preparing a new Creation. It follows that we may interpret the
psychic Chaos of the future shaman as a sign that the profane man is being
“dissolved” and a new personality being prepared for birth.427



This disintegration is the removal of experience—objects and processes—from
their socially determined state of provisional paradigm-governed significance,
and their return to the affectively numinous unknown, infinitely threatening
and promising. Exposure to consequently renovelized experience constitutes the
affective and motivational core of the ecstatic experience, the basis for the
religious experience (and the experience of meaning) as such—prior to its
entrapment and canalization in dogma. Dissolution is experienced in imaginal or
episodic representation, as death—an accurate conceptualization, death of
socialized personality : dissolution of the presently constituted intrapsychic
representation and procedural embodiment of action patterns historically
constructed and currently deemed morally acceptable. The justifiable terror
consideration of the consequences of such decomposition induces constitutes a
major impediment to the pursuit of redemptive change, a formidable barrier to
intrapsychic integration.

The shamanic “process of transformation” appears as the means by which
cognitive systems are updated, when necessary; the affect that is released,
during the process, is necessarily part of the experience. Every major “step
forward” therefore has some of the aspect of the revolutionary “descent into
madness”; change shades gradually from the normal to the radical. The structure
of this process formulates itself easily into imagistic representation—even
among children far too young to develop any “explicitly statable” knowledge
about such occurrences.

The following dream was described by my daughter, Mikhaila (then three years,
nine months old), about my son, Julian (one year, eleven months old) on October
5, 1995. Julian was in a time of toilet training and rapid speech development,
and was having some trouble controlling his emotions. Mikhaila liked to call
him “baby.” We had several discussions about the fact that he really wasn't a
baby anymore. She told me this story, while I was at the computer, so I was
able to get it verbatim:

Mikhaila: Julian's eyes failed out and then he falled into pieces

Dad: (what sort of pieces?)

Mikhaila: Julian pieces and the bones failed out too then a hole got him and
there was water in it and when he came out he was big

Mom: (Julian isn't a baby anymore?)

Mikhaila: No he's a big boy and a bug with legs got him out 'cause bugs can
swim and the hole was in the park and it moved into the back yard and he failed
in it a tree burned and left the hole.

It was the partial “dissolution” of Julian's previous infantile personality
that was causing his emotional distress. Mikhaila, upset by his trouble (and
curious about the disappearance of her “baby”) was trying to understand what
her brother was going through. Her dream represented his transformation as a
“death” and rebirth: First his eyes fell out, then he fell into pieces, then
his bones came out. Everything went into a “hole,” which originally inhabited
the nearby park. (The park by our house was forty wooded acres; the children
and I had gone there at night several times. They found it spooky, but
exciting. For them, it was the nearest manifestation of the unknown, outside
explored and familiar territory—prime locale for metaphoric application as
source of the “hole,” in which transformation takes place.) The hole was full
of water, whose symbolism we have partially discussed (as the rejuvenating/
destroying “water of life”). The “bug with legs” that could “swim” was, I
think, a theriomorphized representation of the very archaic intrapsychic
systems that guide or underlie the transformation of more sophisticated
cortical or personality “contents.” The notion that a “tree” burned and left
the hole is very complex. A tree, at minimum, is a sophisticated structure that
emerges from basic material (from the “ground”). It is also commonly used as a
metaphoric representative of the essence of the individual human—even of the
nervous sys-tem itself428—as we shall see. The tree in this case was therefore
also representative of Julian, but in a more impersonal way. It stood for,
among other things, the personality that was currently undergoing
transformation.

Adaptive ability remains necessarily limited to the domain encompassed by a
single set of principles—a single pattern of action, a single mode of
apprehension—in the absence of capacity to reconfigure present
conceptualizations of morality (morality: description of unbearable present,
ideal future and means of transformation). Such limitation—which is the
inability to play games with the rules of the games—means dangerous restriction
of behavioral and representational flexibility, and increased susceptibility to
the dangers posed by inevitable “environmental” shift (that is, by inevitable
re-emergence of the dragon of the unknown). Biologically determined capacity
for such dissolution—and for its satisfactory resolution—provides the necessary
precondition for the existence of human capacity for qualitative alteration in
adaptation. Resolution of crisis—symbolic rebirth—follows, attendant upon
initiatory dissolution, dismemberment and death. Eliade states:

The initiatory operations proper always include the renewal of the organs and
viscera, the cleaning of the bones, and the insertion of magical
substances—quartz crystals, or pearl shell, or “spirit snakes.” Quartz is
connected with the “sky world and with the rainbow”; pearl shell is similarly
connected with the “rainbow serpent,” that is, in sum, still with the sky. This
sky symbolism goes along with ecstatic ascents to Heaven; for in many regions
the candidate is believed to visit the sky, whether by his own power (for
example, by climbing a rope) or carried by a snake. In the sky he converses
with the Supernatural Beings and mythical Heroes. Other initiations involve a
descent to the realm of the dead; for example, the future medicine man goes to
sleep by the burying ground, or enters a cave, or is transported underground or
to the bottom of a lake. Among some tribes, the initiation also includes the
novice's being “roasted” in or at a fire. Finally, the candidate is
resuscitated by the same Supernatural Beings who had killed him, and he is now
“a man of Power.” During and after his initiation he meets with spirits, Heroes
of the mythical Times, and souls of the dead—and in a certain sense they all
instruct him in the secrets of the medicine man's profession. Naturally, the
training proper is concluded under the direction of the older masters. In
short, the candidate becomes a medicine man through a ritual of initiatory
death, followed by a resurrection to a new and superhuman condition.429



The shaman travels up and down the axis mundi, the central pole of the world,
the tree of life connecting the lower, chthonic reptilian and the upper,
celestial avian worlds with the central domain of man. This is the “constituent
elements of experience” conceived in an alternative but familiar arrangement,
as heaven above (father above), underworld/matter/ earth below (mother
below)—conceived in the configuration arranged originally by the
cosmos-creating hero. The shaman's success at completing the journey “from
earth to the domain of the gods” allows him to serve the role of psychopomp,
intermediary between man and god; to aid the members of his community in
adjusting to what remains outside of conditional adaptation, when such
adaptation fails. The shaman therefore serves his society as active
intermediary with the unknown; as the conduit, so to speak, through which the
unknown speaks to man; as the agent through which the information which compels
adaptive change flows. It is important to note that the shaman's journey into
“unknown lands” must be bounded by return to the community for the voyage to be
of value. Otherwise, the prototypal ecstatic experience—central to the shamanic
vocation (and to creative thought and action in general)—is mere insanity; will
be regarded socially and experienced intrapsychically as such. Resolution is
psychological reconstruction, reincorporation, rebirth “on a higher level”—with
redemptive personal experience intact, but reintegrated in the corpus of
current sociocultural myth and history.

The ineradicable anomaly that comprises an eternal aspect of existence
periodically undermines the stability of a subset of unfortunate but gifted
individuals. Those who maintain their heads during the “journey into the
underworld” return, contaminated by that underworld, from the perspective of
their compatriots, but rife with possibility for reordering the world. Such
recovery is in essence the transformation of assumption and value—individual,
then cultural. History is an invaluable storehouse of the creative experience
and wisdom of the past. Past wisdom is not always sufficient to render present
potentiality habitable. If the structure of experience itself was static and
finite, like the past, all things would have been conquered long ago, and the
lives of the ancestors and their children would differ little in kind. But the
structure of experience is dynamic and infinite in possibility. The nature of
experience itself varies with time. New challenges and dangers appear out of
the future, into the present, where none existed before. History, as
description of the past, is incomplete, as well as static. It must therefore
exist in constant conflict with new experiences. The spirit underlying the
transmutation of culture resolves unbearable intrapsychic conflict with
shattering revelation, first to the individual, then to society at large. The
creative individual “dies”—metaphysically and, too often, literally—for those
who follow him, instead of sharing the common destiny of his peers. Those who
bear the initial burden for the forward movement of history are capable of
transforming personal idiosyncrasy and revelation into collective reality,
without breaking down under the weight of isolation and fear. Such creativity
is feared and hated and desired and worshiped by every human individual and by
human society in general. Creative individuals destroy old values and threaten
with chaos, but they also bear light and the promise of better things. It is in
this manner that the “sacrifice of the revolutionary savior” redeems and
rekindles the cosmos.

The revolutionary hero is the individual who decides voluntarily, courageously,
to face some aspect of the unknown and threatening. He may also be the only
person who is presently capable of perceiving that social adaptation is
incompletely or improperly structured in a particular way; only he understands
that there still remain unconquered evil spirits, dangerous unknowns and
threatening possibilities. In taking creative action, he (re)encounters chaos,
generates new myth-predicated behavioral strategies, and extends the boundaries
(or transforms the paradigmatic structure) of cultural competence. The
well-adapted man identifies with what has been, conserves past wisdom, and is
therefore protected from the unknown. The hero, by contrast, author and editor
of history, masters the known, exceeds its bounds, and then subjects it to
restructuring—exposing chaos once more to view in the process—or pushes back
unknown frontiers, establishing defined territory where nothing but fear and
hope existed before. The hero overcomes nature, the Great Mother, entering into
creative union with her; reorganizing culture, the Great Father, in
consequence. Such reintegration and resurrection is in essence the
metamorphosis of individual, and then cultural, moral presumption. Cumulative
socially mediated transmission of the past consequences of such creation and
intrapsychic reorganization constitutes group identity, culture itself—the
canon of assumptions and values that underlie behavior, the eternal shield
against the terrible unknown.

The hero is the first person to have his “internal structure” (that is, his
hierarchy of values and his behaviors) reorganized as a consequence of contact
with an emergent anomaly. His “descent into the underworld” and subsequent
reorganization make him a savior—but his contact with the dragon of chaos also
contaminates him with the forces that disrupt tradition and stability. The
reigning status-quo stability may be only apparent—that is, the culture in its
present form may already be doomed by as-of-yet not fully manifested change.
The hero detects the dragon, or at least admits to its presence, before anyone
else, and leads the charge. His return to the kingdom of threatened order may
hardly be accompanied by praise, however, since the information he now carries
(or perhaps is) will appear disruptive and destructive long before it proves
redemptive. It is very easy to view the hero as the most profound danger to the
state, in consequence—and this would in fact be true if the absolute stasis of
the state did not constitute a more fundamental danger. Figure 51: The
Crucified Redeemer as Dragon of Chaos and Transformation430 presents the savior
as serpent, in keeping with his “contamination” by the unknown.431

Figure 52: The Socially Destructive and Redemptive “Journey” of the
Revolutionary Hero schematically presents the “way of the savior.” The
individual troubled by anomalous and anxiety-provoking experience is suffering
equally from the disintegration, rigidity or senility of the society within.
The decision to “mine” such experience for significance—and to destabilize the
socially constructed intrapsychic hierarchy of behavior and values, is in
consequence equivalent, mythologically speaking, to the “descent to the
underworld.” If this descent is successful—that is, if the exploring individual
does not retreat to his previous personality structure, and wall himself in,
and if he does not fall prey to hopelessness, anxiety and despair—then he may
“return” to the community, treasure in hand, with information whose
incorporation would benefit society. It is very likely, however, that he will
be viewed with fear and even hatred, as a consequence of his “contamination
with the unknown,” particularly if those left behind are unconscious of the
threat that motivated his original journey. His contamination is nothing to be
taken lightly, besides. If the exploratory figure has in fact derived a new
mode of adaptation or representation, necessary for the continued success and
survival of the group, substantial social change is inevitable. This process of
change will throw those completely identified with the group into the realm of
chaos, against their will. Such an involuntary descent into the underworld is a
very dangerous undertaking, as we have seen, particularly in the absence of
identification with the hero. This means that it is primarily those persons who
have sold their soul to the group who cannot distinguish

Figure 51: The Crucified Redeemer as Dragon of Chaos and Transformation





between the hero and the dragon of chaos (between the hero and the
environmental disaster, the death of the king, the dangerous stranger or the
heretical idea).

The more tyrannical the attitude, the more those who hold it hate and fear the
hero, victim and beneficiary of the creative illness:

Let us lie in wait for the righteous man, because he is inconvenient to us and
opposes our actions; he reproaches us for sins against the law, and accuses us
of sins against our training.

He professes to have knowledge of God, and calls himself a child of the Lord.

Let us see if his words are true, and let us test what will happen at the end
of his life; for if the righteous man is God's son, he will help him, and will
deliver him from the hand of his adversaries.

Let us test him with insult and torture, that we may find out how gentle he is,
and make trial of his forbearance.



Figure 52: The Socially Destructive and Redemptive “Journey” of the
Revolutionary Hero





Let us condemn him to a shameful death, for, according to what he says, he will
be protected.

(Wisdom 2:12–13, 16–20 RSV)



The tyrannical attitude maintains society in homogeneity and rigid
predictability, but dooms it to eventual collapse. This arrogant
traditionalism, masquerading as moral virtue, is merely unexpressed fear of
leaving the beaten path, of forging the new trail—the entirely comprehensible
but nonetheless unforgivable shrinking from destiny, as a consequence of lack
of faith in personal ability and precisely equivalent fear of the unknown. The
inevitable result of such failure is restriction of meaning—by definition, as
meaning exists on the border between the known and the unknown. Repression of
personal experience, which is failure to update action and representation in
the face of an anomalous occurrence, means damming up the river of life; means
existence on the barren plain, in the paralyzed kingdom, in the eternal
drought. It is personal experience— anathema to the fascist; eternally
superseding group categorization and the interpretations of the dead—that is
novel and endlessly refreshing.

The security of predictable society provides an antidote to fear, but a
too-rigid society ensures its own eventual destruction. The future brings with
it the unknown; inflexibility and unwillingness to change therefore bring the
certainty of extinction. Adaptive behavior is created and/or transformed by
those driven to resolve the tension inevitably existing between dynamic
personal experience and society—driven to resolve the tension between what they
know to be true and what history claims. Readaptation, during times of crisis,
does not necessarily constitute simple addition to the body of historical
knowledge, although that is heroic endeavor as well. Full readaptation may
necessitate revolutionary measures, partial or complete
reincarnation—dissolution to constituent elements, and systemic reorganization.
Such reorganization alters the meaning of experience, and therefore, the
mythology of history and being. If resolution is not reached in time of crisis,
mental illness (for the individual) or cultural degeneration (for the society)
threatens. This “mental illness” (failure of culture, failure of heroism) is
return to domination by the unknown—in mythological terms, expressed as
involuntary incest (destructive union) with the Terrible Mother.

The revolutionary hero opens himself up to the possibility of advancement—to
furtherance of his culture's central myth—by placing himself beyond the
protective enclave of history and by exposing his vulnerability to the terrible
nature of reality. In psychological terms, the hero discovers the limitations
of history; discovers the nakedness of the father (Genesis 9:20–25). He must,
therefore, challenge history, and face what it had previously protected him
from. Subsequent contact with the Terrible Mother means exposure to absolute
mortal vulnerability—to the existence and consequence of ignorance, insanity,
cruelty, disease and death. The revolutionary hero faces the reality of his
vulnerability and fights a battle with terror.

The constant transcendence of the future serves to destroy the absolute
sufficiency of all previous historically determined systems, and ensures that
the path defined by the revolutionary hero remains the one constant route to
redemption. The “revolutionary hero” is embodiment and narrative representation
of the action of consciousness itself. This mythically masculine principle
emerges from its identity with chaos and culture, and stands as an
independently divine phenomenon, equivalent in potential strength to the
destructive, generative, protective and tyrannical forces that make up human
experience. The hero is the individual who has found the “third solution” to
his existential problems, the alternative to decadence and authoritarianism.
When faced with a paradox whose solution is impossible in terms of the
historical canon (that established axiomatically predicated hierarchy of values
and assumptions) he takes inspired action and transcends his culturally
determined limitations. Instead of denying the existence of the problem— and,
therefore, tormenting those who cannot help but posit it—the revolutionary hero
accepts the apparently impossible task of solution, and of reuniting the
warring opposites. He admits the possibility of successful solution not because
the problem can be minimized, but because he believes human nature can expand
to meet it. Such belief— faith—provides the precondition for courage. His act
of voluntary transcendence re-exposes him to the brute force of the unknown
(and to the anger of the social group) but enables creative action. The hero's
ability to risk standing alone—neither rejecting his culture because he is
ignorant of its value, nor running away from it in panic because of fear—offers
him the possibility of attaining true stature, although not necessarily acclaim
or popularity.

The true absolute in the individual, which can meet the absolute unknown, is
the heroic aspect, which cannot be made finally subject to tyranny and is not
ruled by the past. This is the spirit that created civilization, which must not
be bound, within the individual, by abject subjugation to what has already
been. The man who stands outside of culture necessarily places himself against
nature and the world. This seems a hopeless position. But man knows little of
his true potential, and in that ignorance lies his hope:

This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the
head of the corner. (Acts 4:11)

