# 2 - Explored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
[Metadata]: # {03.07}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
Explored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
# Explored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
When we explore, we transform the indeterminate status and meaning of the
unknown thing that we are exploring into something determinate—in the worst
case, rendering it nonthreatening, nonpunishing; in the best, manipulating
and/or categorizing it so that it is useful. Animals perform this
transformation in the course of actual action, which is to say that they
construct their worlds by shifting their positions and changing their actions
in the face of the unknown, and by mapping the consequences of those shifts and
changes in terms of their affective or motivational valence. When an animal
encounters an unexpected situation, such as a new object placed in its cage, it
first freezes, watching the object. If nothing terrible happens while it is
immobile, it moves, slowly and at a distance, monitoring the thing for its
reactions to these cautious exploratory activities. Perhaps the animal sniffs
at the thing, or scratches at it—trying to determine what it might be good (or
bad) for. It maps the utility and valence of the object, conceived in
relationship to its ongoing activity (and, perhaps, to possible patterns of
activity in the future). The animal builds its world of significances from the
information generated in the course of—as a consequence of—ongoing exploratory
behavior. The application of experimental search programs, drawn primarily from
the reservoir of learned (imitated) and instinctual behavior, or manifested as
trial and error, involves behavioral alteration (exploration, play) and
subsequent transformation of sensory and affective input. When an animal
actively explores something new, it changes the sensory quality and
motivational significance of that aspect of its experience as a consequence of
its exploratory strategy. This means that the animal exhibits a variety of
behaviors in a given mysterious situation and monitors the results. It is the
organized interpretation of these results and the behaviors that produce them
that constitute the world, past, present and future, of the animal (in
conjunction with the unknown, of course—which constantly supersedes the
capacity for representation).

It is not too much to say that the animal elicits the properties of the object,
sensory and affective, (or even brings them into being) through its capacity
for creative investigation.132 Animals that are relatively simple—compared,
say, to higher-order primates, including man—are limited in the behaviors they
manifest by the structure of their physiology. A rat cannot pick anything up,
for example, to examine it in detail—and does not in addition have the visual
capacity to focus intensely on the kinds of tiny features we can perceive.
Higher-order nonhuman primates have a more developed grip, however, which
enables more detailed exploration, and, in addition, have a relatively
sophisticated prefrontal cortex. This means that such primates can evoke more
features from the world, directly, and that they are increasingly capable of
modeling and acting. The prefrontal cortex is the newest part of the motor
unit, and “grew” out of the direct motor control centers, in the course of
cortical evolution.133 More sophistication in development of the prefrontal
centers means, in part, heightened capability for abstract exploration, which
means investigation in the absence of actual movement, which means the capacity
to learn from the observation of others and through consideration of potential
actions before they emerge in behavior. This means increasing capability for
thought, considered as abstracted action and representation.134 Action and
thought produce phenomena. Novel acts and thoughts necessarily produce new
phenomena. Creative exploration, concrete and abstract, is therefore linked in
a direct sense to being. Increased capacity for exploration means existence in
a qualitatively different—even new—world. This entire argument implies, of
course, that more complex and behaviorally flexible animals inhabit
(“construct,” if you will135) a more complex universe.

Humans possess cortical development—prefrontal and otherwise—that is unique in
its great mass and, more importantly, in its structure. Various indices of
development have been used to signify the nature of the relationship between
the brain and intelligence. Sheer mass is one measure, degree of surface
convolution another. The former measure is contaminated by size of animal.
Larger animals tend to have more absolutely massive brains. This does not
necessarily make them smarter. Brain mass corrected for body size constitutes
the encephalization quotient, a common rough measure of animal intelligence.136
Degree of surface convolution constitutes an additionally useful measure. The
gray matter of the brain, which theoretically does much of the work associated
with intelligence, occupies the brain's surface, which has been dramatically
increased in area by folding. Some representatives of the cetacean family
(dolphins and whales) have encephalization quotients similar to and brain
surfaces more convoluted than man's,137 although the thickness of the cetacean
neocortex is about half that of the human.138 Consideration of this high level
of nervous development has led to speculation about the potential superhuman
range of cetacean ability.139 However, it is structure and organization of
cortex, not simply mass, or even relative mass or surface area, that most
clearly defines the nature and reach of a species' experience and competence.
More particularly, it is embodiment of the brain that matters. Brain structure
necessarily reflects

Figure 10: The Motor Homunculus





embodiment, despite the archaic presumption of the independence of spirit and
matter (or soul and body, or mind and body), because the body is, in a primary
sense, the environment to which the brain has adapted.

The body is specifically represented in the neocortex. This representation is
often given schematic form as the homunculus, or “little man.” The homunculus
was “discovered” by Wilder Penfield,140 who mapped the surface of the cortices
of his neurosurgical patients by stimulating them electrically, painstakingly,
point after point. He did this to find out what different sections of the brain
were doing, so that he could do the least damage possible when attempting to
surgically treat epilepsy or cancer or other forms of brain abnormality. He
would probe the surface of the brain of one of his (awake) patients with an
electrode (patients undergoing neurosurgery are frequently awake, as the brain
feels no pain) and monitor the results, either directly or by asking the
patient what he or she experienced. Sometimes such stimulation would produce
visions, sometimes elicit memories; other times, it produced movements or
sensations. Penfield determined, in this manner, how the body was mapped onto
the central nervous system—how it was incarnated, so to speak, in intrapsychic
representation. He established, for example, that homunculi come in two forms,
motor and sensory—the former associated with the primary zone of the motor
unit, the latter associated with the primary zone of the sensory area of the
sensory unit. The motor form—represented schematically in Figure 10: The Motor
Homunculus—is of most interest to us, because our discussion centers on motor
output. The motor homunculus is a very odd little “creature.” Its face
(particularly mouth and tongue) and hands (particularly thumbs) are grossly
disproportionate to the rest of its “body.” This is because comparatively large
areas of the motor cortex are given over to control of the face and hands,
which are capable of an immense number of complex and sophisticated operations.
The motor homunculus is an interesting figure. It might be regarded as the
body, insofar as the body has anything to do with the brain. It is useful to
consider the structure of the homunculus, because it is in some profound way
representative of our essential nature, as it finds expression in emotion and
behavior.

The most outstanding characteristic of the motor homunculus, for example—the
hand, with its opposable thumb—is the defining feature of the human being. The
ability to manipulate and explore characteristics of objects large and
small—restricted as a general capacity to the highest primates—sets the stage
for elicitation of an increased range of their properties, for their
utilization as tools (for more comprehensive transformation of their infinite
potential into definable actuality). The hand, used additionally to duplicate
the action and function of objects, also allows first for imitation (and
pointing), and then for full-blown linguistic representation.141 Used for
written language, the hand additionally enables long-distance (temporal and
spatial) transfer of its ability to another (and for the elaboration and
extension of exploration, during the process of writing, which is hand-mediated
thinking). Even development of spoken language, the ultimate analytic motor
skill, might reasonably be considered an abstract extension of the human
ability to take things apart and reassemble them, in an original manner.
Interplay between hand and brain has literally enabled the individual to change
the structure of the world. Consideration of the structure and function of the
brain must take this primary fact into account. A dolphin or whale has a large,
complex brain—a highly developed nervous system—but it cannot shape its world.
It is trapped, so to speak, in its streamlined testtube-like form, specialized
for oceanic life. It cannot directly alter the shape of its material
environment in any complex manner. Its brain, therefore, is not likely prepared
to perform any traditionally “creative” function (indeed, as one would suspect,
lacks the sophisticated structuring characteristic of primate brains142).

It is not just the hand, however, that makes the crucial human difference,
although it is the most obvious, and perhaps the most important, single factor.
It is more a style or melody of adaptation that characterizes the individual
human being. This style is adaptation for exploration of the unknown, within a
social context. This adaptation is capacity for (speech-mediated) creation,
elaboration, remembrance, description and subsequent communication of new
behavior patterns, and for representation of the (frequently novel)
consequences of those patterns. The hand itself was rendered more useful by the
development of vertical stance, which extended visual range and freed the upper
body from the demands of locomo-tion. The fine musculature of the face, lips
and tongue—over-represented, once again, in the motor homunculus—helped render
subtle communication possible. Development of explicit language extended the
power of such communication immensely. Increasingly detailed exchange of
information enabled the resources of all to become the resources of each, and
vice versa. That process of feedback greatly extended the reach and utility of
the hand, providing every hand with the ability, at least in potential, of
every other hand, extant currently or previously. Evolution of the restricted
central field of the eye, which has input expanded 10,000 times in the primary
visual area, and is additionally represented, interhemispherically, at several
higher-order cortical sites,143 was of vital importance to development of
visual language and enabled close observation, which made gathering of detailed
information simpler. Combination of hand and eye enabled Homo sapiens to
manipulate things in ways qualitatively different from those of any other
animal. The individual can discover what things are like under various,
voluntarily produced or accidentally encountered (yet considered) conditions—
upside down, flying through the air, hit against other things, broken into
pieces, heated in fire, and so on. The combination of hand and eye allowed
human beings to experience and analyze the (emergent) nature of things. This
ability, revolutionary as it was, was dramatically extended by application of
hand-mediated, spoken (and written) language.

The human style of adaptation extends from the evidently physical to the more
subtly psychological, as well. The phenomenon of consciousness, for
example—arguably the defining feature of man—appears related in some unknown
fashion to breadth of cellular activation in the neocortex. Bodily features
with large areas of cortical representation are also therefore more thoroughly
represented in consciousness (at least in potential). This can be made
immediately evident to subjective awareness merely by contrasting the capacity
for control and monitoring of the hand, for example, with the much less
represented expanse of the back. Consciousness also evidently expands or
sharpens during the course of activities designed to enhance or increase
adaptive competence— during the course of creative exploration. Processing of
novel or otherwise interesting sensory information, associated with the
orienting complex, heightened awareness and focused concentration, activates
large areas of neocortex. Similarly, increased cortical mobilization takes
place during the practice phase of skill acquisition, when awareness appears
required for development of control. The area of such engagement or
mobilization shrinks in size as movement becomes habitual and unconscious, or
when sensory information loses interest or novelty.144 Finally, as we have
noted before, intrinsic pleasure of an intense nature appears to accompany
activation of the cortical systems activated during psychomotor exploratory
activity, undertaken in the face of the unknown. The operation of these systems
appears mediated in part by the neurotransmitter dopamine145—involved in
producing subjective and behavioral response to cues of reward, in the form of
hope, curiosity and active approach.

Human beings enjoy capacity for investigation, classification and consequent
communication, which is qualitatively different from that characterizing any
other animal. The material structure of Homo sapiens is ideal for exploration,
and for the dissemination of the results thereof;
spiritually—psychologically—man is characterized by the innate capacity to take
true pleasure in such activity. Our physical attributes (the abilities of the
hand, in combination with the other physiological specializations of man)
define who we are and enable us to endlessly elicit new properties from
previously stable and predictable elements of experience. The object—any
object—serves us as a source of limitless possibility (or, at least,
possibility limited only by the capacity for exploratory genius exhibited at
any particular moment). Simple animals perform simple operations and inhabit a
world whose properties are equally constrained (a world where most
“information” remains “latent”). Human beings can manipulate—take apart and put
together—with far more facility than any other creature. Furthermore, our
capacity for communication, both verbal and nonverbal, has meant almost
unbelievable facilitation of exploration, and subsequent diversity of
adaptation.

Thinking might in many cases be regarded as the abstracted form of
exploration—as the capacity to investigate, without the necessity of direct
motoric action. Abstract analysis (verbal and nonverbal) of the unexpected or
novel plays a much greater role for humans than for animals146—a role that
generally takes primacy over action. It is only when this capacity fails
partially or completely in humans—or when it plays a paradoxical role
(amplifying the significance or potential danger of the unknown through
definitive but “false” negative labeling)—that active exploration (or active
avoidance), with its limitations and dangers, becomes necessary. Replacement of
potentially dangerous exploratory action with increasingly flexible and
abstracted thought means the possibility for growth of knowledge without direct
exposure to danger, and constitutes one major advantage of the development of
intelligence. The abstract intelligence characteristic of the human being
developed in parallel with rapid evolution of the brain. We can communicate the
results and interpretations of our manipulations (and the nature of the
procedures that constitute that manipulation) to each other, across immense
spatial and temporal barriers. This capacity for exploration, verbal
elaboration and communication of such in turn dramatically heightens our
capacity for exploration (as we have access to all communicated strategies and
interpretive schemas, accumulated over time, generated in the course of the
creative activity of others). In normal parlance, this would mean merely that
we have been able to “discover” more aspects of the world. It seems to me more
accurate, however, to recognize the limitations of this perspective, and to
make room for the realization that new procedures and modes of interpretation
literally produce new phenomena. The word enables differentiated thought and
dramatically heightens the capacity for exploratory maneuvering. The world of
human experience is constantly transformed and renewed as a consequence of such
exploration. In this manner, the word constantly engenders new creation.

The capacity to create novel behaviors and categories of interpretation in
response to the emergence of the unknown might be regarded as the primary
hallmark of human consciousness—indeed, of human being. Our engagement in this
process literally allows us to carve the world out of the undifferentiated mass
of unobserved and unencountered “existence” (a form of existence that exists
only hypothetically, as a necessary fiction; a form about which nothing can be
experienced, and less accurately stated). We carve out the world as a
consequence of our direct interactions with the unknown—most notably, with our
hands, which enable us to manipulate things, to change their sensory aspects
and, most importantly, to change their importance to us, to give them new, more
desirable value. The capacity for dextrous manipulation is particularly human,
and has enabled us to radically alter the nature of our experience. Equally
particular, however, is our capacity for abstract exploration, which is thought
about action (and its consequences), in the absence of action (and its
consequences). The manner in which we conduct our abstracted exploration
appears as tightly linked to the physiological structures of our brains as the
manner in which we move, while exploring. In novel circumstances, our
behavioral output is mediated by the systems that govern fear, and appropriate
inhibition, and hope, and appropriate activation. The same things happen when
we think abstractly—even when we think about how others think.147

Animal exploration is primarily motor in nature. An animal must move around an
unfamiliar thing or situation to determine its affective relevance and sensory
nature. This process of moving around experimentally appears as a consequence
of the interaction between the mutually regulatory or inhibitory evaluative
systems whose responsibilities are identification of potential danger or threat
and potential satisfaction or promise. In the human case, each of these systems
apparently comes, in the course of normal development, to dominate one of our
twinned cortical hemispheres: the right governs response to threat (and to
punishment), while the left controls response to promise and, perhaps (although
much less clearly), to satisfaction.148 This basically means that the right
hemisphere governs our initial responses to the unknown, while the left is more
suited for actions undertaken while we know what we are doing. This is in part
because everything thoroughly explored has in fact been rendered either
promising or satisfying (or, at least, irrelevant). If threat or punishment
still lurks somewhere—that is, somewhere we must be—our behavioral adaptation
is, by definition, insufficient (and the unexpected has not been vanquished).
We have been unable to modify our actions to elicit from the
environment—really, from the “unknown”—those consequences we wish to produce.

Richard Davidson and his colleagues have been investigating the relationship
between different patterns of cortical electrical activity and mood states in
adults and children. Davidson et al. have concluded that the twin hemispheres
of the human brain are differentially specialized for affect, at least with
regard to their frontal regions. Signs of positive affect (like genuine smiling
in infants) are accompanied by heightened comparative activation of the left
frontal cortex. Negative states of affect (like those occuring in chronic
depression), by contrast, are accompanied by heightened activation of the right
frontal hemisphere.149 Substantial additional evidence exists to support this
general claim. To put it most fundamentally: it appears that the twin
hemispheres of the brain are differentially specialized (1) for operation in
unexplored territory, where the nature and valence of things remains
indeterminate, and (2) for operation in explored territory, where things have
been rendered either irrelevant or positive, as a consequence of previous
exploration. Our brains contain two emotional systems, so to speak. One
functions when we do not know what to do, and initiates the (exploratory)
process that creates secure territory. The other functions when we are in fact
secure. The fact of the presence of these two subsystems, but not their
“locale,” has been

Figure 11: The Twin Cerebral Hemispheres and Their Functions





known for a good while; Maier and Schnierla150 and Schnierla151 hypothesized
many decades ago that mechanisms of “withdrawal” and “approach” (characteristic
of animals at virtually all levels of the evolutionary scale) provided the
foundation for motivation as such. The nature of these two systems can best be
understood by relating emotional state to motor activity, as we have done
previously.

Each hemisphere, right and left, appears to have what might be described as a
family of related functions, portrayed in Figure 11: The Twin Cerebral
Hemispheres and Their Functions. The right hemisphere, less language-fluent
than its generally more dominant twin, appears specialized for the inhibition
and extinction of behavior (and, therefore, for the production of negative
emotion), for generation and manipulation of complex visual (and auditory)
images, for coordination of gross motor actions, and for rapid and global
recognition of patterns.152 The right hemisphere appears to come “on-line” when
a particular situation is rife with uncertainty—appears particularly good at
governing behavior when what is and what to do have not yet been clearly
specified.153 It might be posited, in consequence, that this hemisphere is
still under limbic control, since the limbic system is responsible for
detecting novelty and initiating exploratory behavior. This archaic control
mechanism would then “drive” the processes of imagistic “hypothesis” generation
that constitute the processes of abstract exploration—fantasy— we use to give
determinate (and oft-bizarre) form to the unknown.

The left hemisphere, by contrast, appears particularly skilled at linguistic
processing and communication, at detailed, linear thinking, at fine motor
skill, and at the comprehension of wholes in terms of their constituent
elements.154 The left hemisphere— particularly its frontal or motor
(sub)unit—also governs approach behavior155 in the presence of cues of
sat-isfaction, is integrally involved in the production of positive affect, and
appears particularly good at carrying out practiced activities, applying
familiar modes of apprehension. The left seems at its best when what is and
what should be done are no longer questions; when tradition governs behavior,
and the nature and meaning of things has been relatively fixed. The dual
specialization of the left—for what has been practiced, and for what is
positive—can be understood, in part, in the following manner: positive affect
rules in known territory, by definition. A thing or situation has been explored
most optimally (and is therefore most well known) if it has been transformed by
behavioral adaptations manifested in its presence into something of determinate
use (or satisfaction) or into potential for such (into promise).

The right hemisphere, in contrast to the left, appears to have remained in
direct contact with, and to be specialized for encounter with, the unknown and
its terrors, which are apperceived in the domain of instinct, motivation and
affect, long before they can be classified or comprehended intellectually. The
right hemisphere's capacity for inhibition and extinction of behavior (for
inducing caution during exploration, for governing flight, for producing
negative affect) ensures that due respect is granted the inexplicable (and
therefore dangerous) when it makes its appearance. The right's aptitude for
global pattern recognition (which appears as a consequence of its basic
neurophysiological structure156) helps ensure that a provisional notion (a
fantastic representation) of the unknown event (what it is like, how action
should be conducted in its presence, what other things or situations it brings
to mind) might be rapidly formulated. The right hemisphere appears integrally
involved in the initial stages of analysis of the unexpected or novel—and its a
priori hypothesis is always this: this (unknown) place, this unfamiliar space,
this unexplored territory is dangerous, and therefore partakes in the
properties of all other known dangerous places and territories, and all those
that remain unknown, as well. This form of information processing—“a” is “b”—is
metaphor; generation of metaphor (key to the construction of narratives—dreams,
dramas, stories and myth) might well be regarded as the first stage of
hypothesis construction. As situation-specific adaptive behaviors are generated
as a consequence of exploration, this provisional labeling or hypothesis (or
fantasy) might well undergo modification (assuming nothing actually punishing
or determinately threatening occurs); such modification constitutes further and
more detailed learning. Anxiety recedes, in the absence of punishment or
further threat (including novelty); hope occupies the affective forefront,
accompanied by the desire to move forward, and to explore (under the governance
of the left hemisphere).

The right hemisphere appears capable of dealing with less determinate
information. It can use forms of cognition that are more diffuse, more
global157 and more encompassing to come to terms initially with what cannot yet
be understood but undeniably exists. The right hemisphere uses its capacity for
massive generalization and comprehension of imagery to place the novel stimulus
in an initially meaningful context, which is the a priori manner of appropriate
categorization. This context is defined by the motivational significance of the
novel thing, which is revealed first by the mere fact of novelty (which makes
it both threatening and promising) and then in the course of its detailed
exploration. The right hemisphere remains concerned with the question “what is
this new thing like?” (meaning “what should be done in the presence of this
unexpected occurrence?”) and does not care “what is this thing objectively?”
“What is the new thing like” means “is it dangerous, or threatening (first and
foremost), satisfying or promising?” Categorization according to valence means
that the thing is what it signifies for behavior.

The chaos that constitutes the unknown is rendered predictable—is turned into
the “world”—by the generation of adaptive behaviors and modes of
representation. It is the process of novelty-driven exploration that, in the
individual case, produces such behaviors and strategies of classification.
However, we are not only individuals. We exist in a very complex social
environment, characterized by the constant exchange of information regarding
the means and ends of “proper” adaptation. The human capacity for the
generation of self-regulatory behavior and representation has been expanded
immensely, in some ways beyond our own comprehension, by our capacity for
verbal and nonverbal communication. We can learn through discussion and by
reading—can absorb information directly even from our departed but literate
ancestors. But there is more—we can learn from everyone who acts in the natural
course of things or dramatically, and we can store the behaviors of individuals
we come into contact with (directly, by copying them; or indirectly, through
the intermediation of narrative and dramatic art forms). It is of course our
ability to copy, to mimic,158 that underlies our capacity to do things we do
not necessarily “understand” (that is, cannot describe explicitly). It is for
that reason, in part, that we need a “psychology.”

Patterns of behavioral and representational adaptation are generated in the
course of active exploration and “contact with the unknown.” These patterns do
not necessarily remain stable, however, once generated. They are modified and
shaped, improved and made efficient, as a consequence of their communicative
exchange. Individual “a” produces a new behavior, “b” modifies it, “c” modifies
that, “d” radically changes “c's” modification and so on ad infinitum. The same
process applies to representations (metaphors, say, or explicit concepts). This
means that our exploratory assimilative and accommodative processes actually
extend over vast periods of time and space. Some of this extension—perhaps the
most obvious part—is mediated by literacy. An equally complex and subtle
element, however, is mediated by mimesis.

Patterns of behavioral adaptation and schemas of classification or
representation can be derived from the observation of others (and, for that
matter, from the observation of one-self). How we act in the presence of
things, in their constantly shifting and generally social context, is what
those things mean (or even what they are), before what they mean (or what they
are) can be more abstractly (or “objectively”) categorized. What a thing is,
therefore, might be determined (in the absence of more useful information) by
examination of how action is conducted in its presence, which is to say that if
someone runs from something it is safe to presume that the thing is dangerous
(the action in fact defines that presumption). The observation of action
patterns undertaken by the members of any given social community, including
those of the observing subject, therefore necessarily allows for the derivation
and classification of provisional value schema. If you watch someone (even
yourself) approach something then you can assume that the approached thing is
good, at least in some determinate context, even if you don't know anything
else about it. Knowing what to do, after all, is classification, before it is
abstracted: classification in terms of motivational relevance, with the sensory
aspects of the phenomena serving merely as a cue to recognition ofthat
motivational relevance.159

It is certainly the case that many of our skills and our automatized strategies
of classification are “opaque” to explicit consciousness. The fact of our
multiple memory systems, and their qualitatively different modes of
representation—described later— ensures that such is the case. This opaqueness
means, essentially, that we “understand” more than we “know”; it is for this
reason that psychologists continue to depend on notions of the “unconscious” to
provide explanations for behavior. This unconsciousness—the psychoanalytic
god—is our capacity for the implicit storage of information about the nature
and valence of things. This information is generated in the course of active
exploration, and modified, often unrecognizably, by constant,
multigenerational, interpersonal communication. We live in social groups; most
of our interactions are social in nature. We spend most of our time around
others and, when we are alone, we still wish to understand, predict and control
our personal behaviors. Our maps of the “understood part of the world” are
therefore in large part maps of patterns of actions—of behaviors established as
a consequence of creative exploration, and modified in the course of endless
social interactions. We watch ourselves act; from this action, we draw
inferences about the nature of the world (including those acts that are part of
the world).

We know that the right hemisphere—at least its frontal portion—is specialized
for response to punishment and threat. We also know that damage to the right
hemisphere impairs our ability to detect patterns and to understand the meaning
of stories.160 Is it too much to suggest that the emotional, imagistic and
narrative capabilities of the right hemisphere play a key role in the initial
stages of transforming something novel and complex, such as the behaviors of
others (or ourselves) and the valence of new things, into something thoroughly
understood? When we encounter something new, after all, we generate fantasies
(imagistic, verbal) about its potential nature. This means we attempt to
determine how the unexpected thing might relate to something we have already
mastered—or, at least, to other things that we have not yet mastered. To say
“this unsolved problem appears to be like this other problem we haven't yet
solved” is a step on the way to solution. To say, “here is how these (still
essentially mysterious) phenomena appear to hang together” is an intuition of
the sort that precedes detailed knowledge; is the capacity to see the forest,
though not yet differentiating between the types of trees. Before we truly
master something novel (which means, before we can effectively limit its
indeterminate significance to something predictable, even irrelevant) we
imagine what it might be. Our imaginative representations actually constitute
our initial adaptations. Our fantasies comprise part of the structure that we
use to inhibit our responses to the a priori significance of the unknown (even
as such fantasies facilitate generation of more detailed and concrete
information). There is no reason to presuppose that we have been able to
explicitly comprehend this capacity, in part because it actually seems to serve
as a necessary or axiomatic precondition for the ability to comprehend,
explicitly.

The uniquely specialized capacities of the right hemisphere appear to allow it
to derive from repeated observations of behavior images of action patterns that
the verbal left can arrange, with increasingly logic and detail, into stories.
A story is a map of meaning, a “strategy” for emotional regulation and
behavioral output—a description of how to act in a circumstance, to ensure that
the circumstance retains its positive motivational salience (or at least has
its negative qualities reduced to the greatest possible degree). The story
appears generated, in its initial stages, by the capacity for imagery and
pattern recognition characteristic of the right hemisphere, which is integrally
involved in narrative cognition161 and in processes that aid or are analogous
to such cognition. The right hemisphere has the ability to decode the nonverbal
and melodic aspects of speech, to empathize (or to engage, more generally, in
interpersonal relationships), and the capacity to comprehend imagery, metaphor
and analogy.162 The left-hemisphere “linguistic” systems “finish” the story,
adding logic, proper temporal order, internal consistency, verbal
representation, and possibility for rapid abstract explicit communication. In
this way, our explicit knowledge of value is expanded, through the analysis of
our own “dreams.” Interpretations that “work”—that is, that improve our
capacity to regulate our own emotions (to turn the current world into the
desired world, to say it differently)— qualify as valid. It is in this manner
that we verify the accuracy of our increasingly abstracted presumptions.

The process of creative exploration—the function of the knower, so to speak,
who generates explored territory—has as its apparent purpose an increase in the
breadth of motoric repertoire (skill) and alteration of representational
schema. Each of these two purposes appears served by the construction of a
specific form of knowledge, and its subsequent storage in permanent memory. The
first form has been described as knowing how. The motor unit, charged with
origination of new behavioral strategies when old strategies fail (when they
produce undesired results), produces alternate action patterns, experimentally
applied, to bring about the desired result. Permanent instantiation of the new
behavior, undertaken if the behavior is successful, might be considered
development of new skill. Knowing how is skill. The second type of knowing,
which is representational (an image or model of something, rather than the
thing itself) has been described as knowing that163—I prefer knowing what.
Exploration of a novel circumstance, event or thing produces new sensory and
affective input, during active or abstracted interaction of the exploring
subject and the object in question. This new sensory input constitutes grounds
for the construction, elaboration and update of a permanent but modifiable
four-dimensional (spatial and temporal) representational model of the
experiential field, in its present and potential future manifestations. This
model, I would propose, is a story.

It is the hippocampal system—which, as we have seen, is an integral part of the
regulation of anxiety—that is critically involved in the transfer of
information from observation of ongoing activity to permanent memory,164 and
that provides the physiological basis (in concert with the higher cortical
structures) for the development and elaboration of this mnestic representation.
It is the right hemisphere, which is activated by the unknown, and which can
generate patterns rapidly, that provides the initial imagery—the contents of
fantasy—for the story. It is the left hemisphere that gives these patterns
structure and communicability (as it does, for example, when it interprets a
painting, a novel, a drama or a conversation). The hippocampus notes mismatch;
this disinhibits the amygdala (perhaps not directly). Such disinhibition
“releases” anxiety and curiosity, driving exploration. The right hemisphere,
under these conditions of motivation, derives patterns relevant to
encapsulation of the emergent unknown, from the information at its disposal.
Much of this information can be extracted from the social environment, and the
behavioral interactions and strategies of representation—emergent properties of
exploration and communication—that are “embedded” in the social structure. Much
of this “information” is still implicit—that is, coded in behavioral pattern.
It is still knowing how, before it has been abstracted and made explicit as
knowing what. The left hemisphere gets increasingly involved, as translation
“up the hierarchy of abstraction” occurs.

Knowing-how information, described alternatively as procedural, habitual,
dispositional, or skilled, and knowing-what information, described
alternatively as declarative, episodic, factual, autobiographical, or
representational, appear physiologically distinct in their material basis, and
separable in course of phylo- and ontogenetic development.165 Procedural
knowledge develops long before declarative knowledge, in evolution and
individual development, and appears represented in “unconscious” form,
expressible purely in performance. Declarative knowledge, by contrast—knowledge
of what—simultaneously constitutes consciously accessible and communicable
episodic imagination (the world in fantasy) and subsumes even more recently
developed semantic (linguistically mediated) knowledge, whose operations, in
large part, allow for abstract representation and communication of the contents
of the imagination. Squire and Zola-Morgan166 have represented the relationship
between these memory forms according to the schematic of Figure 12: The
Multiple Structure of Memory.167 The neuroanatomical basis of knowing how
remains relatively unspecified. Skill generation appears in part as the domain
of the cortical pre/motor unit; “storage” appears to involve the cerebellum.
Knowing what, by contrast, appears dependent for its existence on the intact
function of the cortical sensory unit, in interplay with the hippocampal
system.168 Much of our knowing what, however—our description of the world—is
about knowing how, which is behavioral knowledge, wisdom. Much of our
descriptive knowledge—representational knowledge—is representation of what
constitutes wisdom (without being that wisdom, itself). We have gained our
description of wisdom by watching how we act, in our culturally governed social
interactions, and by representing those actions.

We know how, which means how to act to transform the mysterious and
everthreatening world of the present into what we desire, long before we know
how we know how, or why we know how. This is to say, for example, that a child
learns to act appropriately (assuming it does) long before it can provide
abstracted explanations for or descriptions of its behavior.169 A child can be
“good” without being a moral philosopher. This idea echoes the developmental
psychologist Jean Piaget's notion, with regard to child development, that
adaptation at the sensorimotor level occurs prior to—and lays the groundwork
for—the more abstracted forms of adaptation that characterize adulthood. Piaget
regarded imagistic representation as

Figure 12: The Multiple Structure of Memory





an intermediary between sensorimotor intelligence and the (highest or most
abstract) stage of “formal operations”; furthermore, he believed that
imitation—the “acting out” of an object—served as a necessary prerequisite to
such imagistic representation (portrayal in image or word, instead of
behavior). The process of play appears as a higher-order, or more abstract form
of imitation, from this perspective. Piaget presents two main theses:

The first is that in the field of play and imitation it is possible to trace
the transition from sensory-motor assimilation and accommodation to the mental
assimilation and accommodation which characterize the beginnings of
representation…. [The second is that] the various forms of representation
interact. There is representation when an absent model is imitated. There is
representation in symbolic play, in imagination and even in dreams, the systems
of concepts and logical relations, both in their intuitive and operational
forms, implies representation.170



Piaget believed that imitation could be described in terms of accommodation:
“If there is primacy of accommodation (matching of behavior) over assimilation
(altering of schemas) …the activity tends to become imitation.”171 This implies
that the imitating child in fact embodies more information than he
“understands” (represents). He continues: “representation …can be seen to be a
kind of interiorized imitation, and therefore a continuation of
accommodation.”172 [With regard to the three-memory-system model (which Piaget
is of course not directly referring to): “even if there were justification for
relating the various stages of mental development to well-defined neurological
levels, the fact remains that, in spite of the relative discontinuity of the
structures, there is a certain functional continuity, each structure preparing
for its successors while utilizing its predecessors.”173]

What can be said of children appears true, more or less, phylogenetically: our
cultures (which we absorb as children, through the processes of imitation)
consist primarily of patterns of activity, undertaken in a social context. As
parents are to children, cultures are to adults: we do not know how the
patterns we act out (or the concepts we utilize) originated, or what precise
“purposes” (what long-term “goals”) they currently serve. Such patterns are in
fact “emergent properties” of long-term social interactions. Furthermore, we
cannot describe such patterns well, abstractly (explicitly, semantically), even
though we duplicate them accurately (and unconsciously) in our behavior (and
can represent them, episodically, in our literary endeavors). We do not know
why we do what we do, or, to say the same thing, what it is that we are (all
ideological theories to the contrary). We watch ourselves, and wonder; our
wonder takes the shape of the story or, more fundamentally, the myth. Myths
describing the known, explored territory, constitute what we know about our
knowing how, before we can state, explicitly, what it is that we know how. Myth
is, in part, the image of our adaptive action, as formulated by imagination,
before its explicit containment in abstract language; myth is the intermediary
between action and abstract linguistic representation ofthat action. Myth is
the distilled essence of the stories we tell ourselves about the patterns of
our own behavior, as they play themselves out in the social and impersonal
worlds of experience. We learn the story, which we do not understand (which is
to say, cannot make explicit), by watching. We represent the action patterns we
encounter in action (that is ritual), image and word: we act, then represent
our behavior, ever more abstractly, ever more explicitly, “consciously.”

The central features of our (socially determined) behavior thus become key
elements—characters—in our stories. The generation and constant refinement of
these stories, told and retold over centuries, allows us to determine ever more
clearly just what proper (and improper) behavior consists of, in an environment
permanently characterized by the interplay between security and
unpredictability. We are extremely (uncontrollably) imitative, overwhelmingly
social and interminably exploratory. These characteristics allow us to generate
and communicate represented images, and, simultaneously, serve as the focal
point of inquiry for those images. Our capacity for creative action frees us,
constantly, from the ever-shifting demands of the “environment.” The ability to
represent creative action—to duplicate observed creativity in our own actions,
and to represent that creativity in detail and essence—allows everyone to
benefit from the creative action of everyone else (at least everyone with whom
communication might conceivably take place). The fact of our sociability
ensures that our adaptive behaviors are structured with the social community in
mind, at least in the long run, and increases our chances of exposure to
creative intelligence. We observe others acting in a manner we find admirable,
and duplicate their actions. In this manner, we obtain the skills of others.
Our capacity for abstraction allows us to take our facility for imitation one
step further, however: we can learn to imitate not only the precise behaviors
that constitute adaptation, but the process by which those behaviors were
generated. This means—we can learn not only skill, but meta-skill (can learn to
mimic the pattern of behavior that generates new skills). It is the
encapsulation of meta-skill in a story that makes that story great.

Our imitative proclivity, expressed in behavior, appears to find its more
abstracted counterpart in the ability to admire, which is a permanent, innate
or easily acquired constituent element of our intrapsychic state. This
capability for awe, this desire to copy, often serves to impel further
psychological and cognitive development. The worshipful attitude that small
boys adopt toward their heroes, for example, constitutes the outward expression
of the force that propels them toward embodying, or incarnating (or even
inventing) oft ill-defined heroic qualities themselves. The capacity for
imitation surfaces in more abstract guise in the human tendency to act
“as-if”174—to identify with another— to become another, in fantasy (which
means, to ritually identify with or unconsciously adopt the story of another).
(This means—the ability to adopt someone else's goal, as if it were yours.175)
The capacity to act “as if” expresses itself in admiration (ranging in
intensity from the simple respect accorded a competent other, to abject
worship) and, even more abstractly, in ideological possession. No independent
“instinct” necessarily needs to be postulated, to account for this mimetic
ability (although one may well exist): all that may be necessary is the
capacity to observe that another has obtained a goal that is also valued by the
observer (that observation provides the necessary motivation), and the skill to
duplicate the procedures observed to lead to such fulfillment.

Mimetic propensity, expressed in imitative action, provides for tremendous
expansion of behavioral competence176; allows the ability of each to become the
capability of all. Precise duplicative facility, however, still retains
pronounced limitations. Specific behaviors retain their adaptive significance
only within particular, restricted environments (only within bounded frames of
reference). If environmental contingencies shift (for whatever reason), the
utility of strategies designed for the original circumstance (and transmitted
through imitation) may become dramatically restricted or even reversed. The
capacity for abstraction of imitation—which is, in the initial stages,
capability for dramatic play—overcomes the specific restrictions of exact
imitation, elaborating reproduction of particular acts, removing the behavior
to be copied from its initial specific context, establishing its first-level
declarative representation and generalization. Play allows for the permanent
extension of competence and confidence through pretense, which means through
metaphoric and symbolic action (which is semantic use of episodic
representation), and for natural expansion of behavioral range from safe,
predictable, selfdefined contexts, out toward the unknown world of experience.
Play creates a world in “rule-governed” fantasy—in episodic or imagistic
representation—in which behavior can be rehearsed and mastered, prior to its
expression in the real world, with real-world consequences. Play is another
form of “as-if” behavior, that allows for experimentation with fictional
narrative—pretended descriptions of the current and desired future states of
the world, with plans of action appended, designed to change the former into
the latter. To play means to set—or to fictionally transform—“fictional” goals.
Such fictional goals give valence to phenomena that would, in other contexts,
remain meaningless (valence that is informative, with-out being serious). Play
allows us to experiment with means and ends themselves, without subjecting
ourselves to the actual consequences of “real” behavior, and to benefit
emotionally, in the process. The goals of play are not real; the incentive
rewards, however, that accompany movement to a pretended goal—these are real
(although bounded, like game-induced anxieties). The bounded reality of such
affect accounts, at least in part, for the intrinsic interest that motivates
and accompanies play (or immersion in any dramatic activity).

Play transcends imitation in that it is less context-bound; it allows for the
abstraction of essential principles from specific (admirable) instances of
behavior. Play allows for the initial establishment of a more general model of
what constitutes allowable (or ideal) behavior. Elaboration of dramatic play
into formal drama likewise ritualizes play, abstracting its key elements one
level more, and further distills the vitally interesting aspects of
behavior—which are representative (by no mere chance) of that active
exploratory and communicative pattern upon which all adaptation is necessarily
predicated. Theatrical ritual dramatically represents the individual and social
consequences of stylized, distilled behavioral patterns, based in their
expression upon different assumptions of value and expectations of outcome.
Formal drama clothes potent ideas in personality, exploring different paths of
directed or motivated action, playing out conflict, cathartically, offering
ritual models for emulation or rejection. Dramatic personae embody the
behavioral wisdom of history. In an analogous fashion, in a less abstract, less
ritualized manner, the ongoing behavior of parents dramatizes cumulative
mimetic history for children.

Emergence of narrative, which contains much more information than it explicitly
presents, further disembodies the knowledge extant latently in behavioral
pattern. Narrative presents semantic representation of play or drama—offers
essentially abstracted episodic representations of social interaction and
individual endeavor—and allows behavioral patterns contained entirely in
linguistic representation to incarnate themselves in dramatic form on the
private stage of individual imagination. Much of the information derived from a
story is actually already contained in episodic memory. In a sense, it could be
said that the words of the story merely act as a retrieval cue for information
already in the mnestic system (of the listener), although perhaps not yet
transformed into a form capable either of explicit (semantic) communication, or
alteration of procedure.177 178 It is for this reason that Shakespeare might be
viewed as a precursor to Freud (think of Hamlet): Shakespeare “knew” what Freud
later “discovered,” but he knew it more implicitly, more imagistically, more
procedurally. (This is not say that Shakespeare was any less brilliant, just
that his level of abstraction was different.) Ideas, after all, come from
somewhere; they do not arise, spontaneously, from the void. Every complex
psychological theory has a lengthy period of historical development
(development that might not be evidently linked to the final emergence of the
theory).

Interpretation of the reason for dramatic consequences, portrayed in narrative—
generally left to the imagination of the audience—constitutes analysis of the
moral of the story. Transmission of that moral—that rule for behavior, or
representation—is the purpose of narrative, just as fascination, involuntary
seizure of interest, is its (biologically predetermined) means. With
development of the story, mere description of critically important (and
therefore compelling) behavioral/representational patterns becomes able to
promote active imitation. At this point the semantic system, activating images
in episodic memory, sets the stage for the alteration of procedure itself. This
means establishment of a “feedback loop,” wherein information can cycle up and
down “levels of consciousness”—with the social environment as necessary
intermediary— transforming itself and expanding as it moves. Development of
narrative means verbal abstraction of knowledge disembodied in episodic memory
and embodied in behavior. It means capability to disseminate such knowledge
widely and rapidly throughout a communicating population, with minimal
expenditure of time and energy. Finally, it means intact preservation of such
knowledge, simply and accurately, for generations to come. Narrative
description of archetypal behavioral patterns and representational
schemas—myth—appears as an essential precondition for social construction and
subsequent regulation of complexly civilized individual presumption, action and
desire.

It is only after behavioral (procedural) wisdom has become “represented” in
episodic memory and portrayed in drama and narrative that it becomes accessible
to “conscious” verbal formulation and potential modification in abstraction.
Procedural knowledge is not representational, in its basic form. Knowing-how
information, generated in the course of exploratory activity, can nonetheless
be transferred from individual to individual, in the social community, through
means of imitation. Piaget points out, for example, that children first act
upon objects, and determine object “properties” in accordance with these
actions, and then almost immediately imitate themselves, turning their own
initial spontaneous actions into something to be represented and ritualized.179
The same process occurs in interpersonal interaction, where the other persons
action rapidly becomes something to be imitated and ritualized (and then
abstracted and codified further). A shared rite, where each person's behavior
is modified by that of the other, can therefore emerge in the absence of
“consciousness” of the structure of the rite; however, once the social ritual
is established, its structure can rapidly become described and codified
(presuming sufficient cognitive ability and level of maturation). This process
can in fact be observed during the spontaneous construction (and then
codification) of children's games.180 It is the organization of such
“games”—and their elaboration, through repeated communication—that constitutes
the basis for the construction of culture itself.

Behavior is imitated, then abstracted into play, formalized into drama and
story, crystallized into myth and codified into religion—and only then
criticized in philosophy, and provided, post-hoc, with rational underpinnings.
Explicit philosophical statements regarding the grounds for and nature of
ethical behavior, stated in a verbally comprehensible manner, were not
established through rational endeavor. Their framing as such is (clearly) a
secondary endeavor, as Nietzsche recognized:

What the scholars called a “rational foundation for morality” and tried to
supply was, seen in the right light, merely a scholarly expression of the
common faith in the prevalent morality; a new means of expression for this
faith.181



Explicit (moral) philosophy arises from the mythos of culture, grounded in
procedure, rendered progressively more abstract and episodic through ritual
action and observation of that action. The process of increasing abstraction
has allowed the knowing what “system” to generate a representation, in
imagination, of the “implicit predicates” of behavior governed by the knowing
how “system.” Generation of such information was necessary to simultaneously
ensure accurate prediction of the behavior of others (and of the self), and to
program predictable social behavior through exchange of abstracted moral
(procedural) information. Nietzsche states, further:

That individual philosophical concepts are not anything capricious or
autonomously evolving, but grow up in connection and relationship with each
other; that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear in the
history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to a system as all
the members of the fauna of a continent—is betrayed in the end also by the fact
that the most diverse philosophers keep filling in a definite fundamental
scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always revolve
once more in the same orbit; however independent of each other they may feel
themselves with their critical or systematic wills, something within them leads
them, something impels them in a definite order, one after the other—to wit,
the innate systematic structure and relationship of their concepts. Their
thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a recognition, a remembering, a
return and a homecoming to a remote, primordial, and inclusive household of the
soul, out of which those concepts grew originally: philosophizing is to this
extent a kind of atavism of the highest order.182



The knowing-what system, declarative (episodic and semantic), has developed a
description of knowing-how activity, procedure, through a complex, lengthy
process of abstraction. Action and imitation of action developmentally predate
explicit description or discovery of the rules governing action. Adaptation
through play and drama preceded development of linguistic thought, and provided
the ground from which it emerged. Each developmental “stage”—action, imitation,
play, ritual, drama, narrative, myth, religion, philosophy, rationality—offers
an increasingly abstracted, generalized and detailed representation of the
behavioral wisdom embedded in and established during the previous stage. The
introduction of semantic representation to the human realm of behavior allowed
for continuance and ever-increasing extension of the cognitive process
originating in action, imitation, play, and drama. Language turned drama into
mythic narrative, narrative into formal religion, and religion into critical
philosophy, providing for exponential expansion of adaptive ability. Consider
Nietzsche's words once again:

Gradually it has become clear to me what every great philosophy so far has
been: namely, the personal confession of its author and a kind of involuntary
and unconscious memoir; also that the moral (or immoral) intentions in every
philosophy constituted the real germ of life from which the whole plant had
grown.183



Figure 13: Abstraction of Wisdom, and the Relationship of Such Abstraction to
Memory





The procedural system provides (constitutes?) memory for behavior. Such memory
includes imitative representation of behaviors generated spontaneously in the
course of creative individual action, whose precise circumstance of origins
have been lost in the mists of history, but which have been integrated into a
consistent behavioral pattern, over time (integrated into culturally determined
character). Integration means active balance of competing subjectively grounded
motivational demands within the context of the social environment, means
internalization of socially regulated behavioral expression of subjective
desire. Such internalization constitutes construction of a value (dominance)
hierarchy; means determination of the relative contextual propriety (morality)
of imitated or otherwise incorporated patterns of action. Such construction
inevitably “precedes” episodic or semantic representation of the basis of the
construction, although such second-order representation, once established,
becomes capable (indirectly) of modifying procedure itself (as what is imagined
can then be acted out). This is the loop that feeds the development of explicit
“consciousness” itself: procedure is established, then represented, then
altered in abstraction, then practiced; the procedure changes, as a consequence
of the abstracted and practiced modification; this change in turn produces an
alteration in its representation, and so on, and so on, from individual to
individual, down the chain of generations. This process can occur “externally,”
as a consequence of social interaction, or “internally,” as a consequence of
word and image-mediated abstract exploratory activity (“thought”). This
interactive loop and its putative relationship to underlying cognitive/memory
structures are represented schematically in Figure 13: Abstraction of Wisdom,
and the Relationship of Such Abstraction to Memory. (Only a few of the
interactions between the “stages” of knowledge are indicated, for the sake of
schematic simplicity.)

Behavioral knowledge is generated during the process of creative exploration.
The consequences of such exploration—the adaptive behavioral patterns
generated—are imitated, and represented more abstractly. Play allows for the
generalization of imitated knowledge, and for the integration of behaviors
garnered from different sources (one “good thing to do” may conflict in a given
situation with another; “good things to do” therefore have to be ranked in
terms of their context-dependent value, importance or dominance). Each
succeeding stage of abstraction modifies all others, as our ability to speak,
for example, has expanded our capacity to play. As the process of abstraction
continues and information vital for survival is represented more simply and
efficiently, what is represented transforms from the particulars of any given
adaptive actions to the most general and broadly appropriate pattern of
adaptation—that of creative exploration itself. This is to say: individual acts
of voluntary and successful encounter with the unknown might be broadly
imitated; might elicit spontaneous imitation. But some more essential
(“prototypical”184) feature(s) characterize all such acts. With increasing
abstraction and breadth of representation, essential features come to dominate
particular features. As Eliade185 points out, traditional (that is,
nonliterate) cultures have a historical memory that may be only a few
generations long—that is, as long as the oldest surviving individual is old.
Events that occurred previous to this are telescoped into something akin to the
aboriginal Australian's “dreamtime,” the “trans-historical” period when
ancestral giants walked the earth and established the behavioral patterns
comprising the present mode of being. This telescoping, the “mythologization”
of history, is very useful from the perspective of efficient storage. We learn
to imitate (and to remember) not individual heroes, the “objective” historical
figures of the past, but what those heroes represented: the pattern of action
that made them heroes. That pattern is the act of voluntary and successful
encounter with the unknown, the generation of wisdom through exploration. (I am
not trying to imply, either, that the semantic or episodic memory systems can
directly modify procedure; it is more that the operations of the
semantic/episodic systems alter the world, and world alterations alter
procedure. The effect of language and image on behavior is generally
secondary—mediated through the environment—but is no less profound for that.)

The fact that the many “stories” we live by can be coded and transmitted at
different levels of “abstraction,” ranging from the purely motoric or
procedural (transmitted through imitation) to the more purely semantic
(transmitted through the medium of explicit ethical philosophy, say) makes
comprehension of their structure and interrelationships conceptually difficult.
This difficulty is compounded by the fact that different stories have different
spatial-temporal “resolutions”—that is, we may be governed at one moment by
short-term, simple considerations and at the next by longerterm, more complex
considerations. Someone married might think, for example, “I find my friend's
spouse particularly attractive; I would like to make love to him or her”—
evaluating that individual, positively—and then, immediately, correct: “My
friend's spouse flirts too much for his or her own good, and looks like a lot
of trouble.” Perhaps both these viewpoints are valid. It is certainly not
uncommon for the same “stimulus” to possess competing valences. Otherwise, as I
said before, we would never have to think.

Every apprehensible phenomenon has a multitude of potential uses and
significances. It is for this reason that it is possible for each of us to
drown in possibility. Even something as simple as a piece of paper is not
simple at all, except insofar as implicit contextual determinants make it
appear so. Wittgenstein asks:

Point to a piece of paper.—And now point to its shape—now to its colour—now to
its number (that sounds queer).—How did you do it?— You will say that you
“meant” a different thing each time you pointed. And if I ask how that is done,
you will say you concentrated your attention on the colour, the shape, etc. But
I ask again: how is that done?186



A kitchen knife, for example: is it something to cut up vegetables, at dinner?
Something to draw, for a still life? A toy, for mumblety-peg? A screwdriver, to
fix a shelf? An implement of murder? In the first four cases, it “possesses” a
positive valence. In the last case, it is negative—unless you are experiencing
a frenzy of rage. How is its essential functional and affective multiplicity
reduced to something singular and, therefore, useful? You can't fix the shelf
and make dinner at the same time, and in the same place. You may need to do
both, at some point, however, and this means that you must maintain the
multiple uses and valences as possibilities. This means that you must (1)
decide on one course of action, and eliminate all the rest, yet (2) retain the
others for future consideration to ensure that your range of possible actions
remain as broad as possible.

How is this ever-present competition to be ameliorated? How might the process
of amelioration be considered, with regard to the additional complicating fact
of the multilevel embodiment and abstraction of stories? So far we have
considered the “ends” and the “means” of a given framework of reference (a
story) as qualitatively different phenomena, echoing a dilemma that pervades
ethics, as a field of study. The end or goal of a given planned sequence of
behavior constitutes an image of the desired future, which serves as point of
contrast, for the unbearable present. The means by which this end might be
attained comprises the actual behavioral steps that might be undertaken, in
pursuit of such desirable change. This seems a very reasonable perspective, in
that at any given moment means and ends might be usefully distinguished. Where
we are going is evidently different than how we will get there. This conceptual
utility is only provisional, however—and the fact of the “means/end”
distinction actually obscures more detailed and comprehensive description.
Means and ends, plans and goals, are not qualitatively different, in any final
sense, and can be transformed, one into the other, at any moment. Such
transformation occurs, in fact, whenever a problem arises: whenever the unknown
manifests itself, in the course of our ongoing behavior. It is in this manner
that we switch spatial-temporal resolution (change “set” or shift our “frames
of reference”), in order to re-evaluate our actions, and reconsider the
propriety of our wishes.

Our stories—our frames of reference—appear to have a “nested” or hierarchical
structure. At any given moment, our attention occupies only one level of that
structure. This capacity for restricted attention gives us the capability to
make provisional but necessary judgments about the valence and utility of
phenomena. However, we can also shift levels of abstraction—we can voluntarily
focus our attention, when necessary, on stories that map out larger or smaller
areas of space-time (excuse the Einsteinian reference, but it is in fact
accurate in this case, as our stories have a duration, as well as an area).
“When necessary” means depending on the status of our current operations. For
example, say you are in the kitchen, and you want to read a book in your study.
An image of you reading a book in your favorite chair occupies the “ends” or
“desired future” pole of your currently operational story (contrasted with the
still-too-illiterate you of the present time). This “story” might have a
conceived duration of, say, ten minutes; in addition, it “occupies” a universe
defined by the presence of a half-dozen relevant “objects” (a reading lamp, a
chair, the floor you have to walk on to get to your chair, the book itself,
your reading glasses) and the limited space they occupy. You make it to your
chair. Your book is at hand. You reach up to turn on the reading
light—flash!—the bulb burns out. The unknown—the unexpected, in this
context—has just manifested itself. You switch “set.” Now your goal, still
nested within the “reading a book” story, is “fix the reading lamp.” You adjust
your plans, find a new bulb, and place it in the lamp. Flash! It burns out
again. This time you smell burnt wire. This is worrisome. The book is now
forgotten—irrelevant, given the current state of affairs. Is there something
wrong with the lamp (and, therefore, at a slightly more general level, with all
future plans that depend on that lamp)? You explore. The lamp doesn't smell.
It's the electrical outlet, in the wall! The plate covering the outlets is hot!
What does that mean? You shift your apprehension up several levels of
spatial-temporal resolution. Maybe something is wrong with the wiring of the
house itself! The lamp is now forgotten. Ensuring that your house does not burn
down has suddenly taken priority. How does this shift in attention occur?

Figure 14: Conceptual Transformation of the Means/Ends Relationship from Static
to Dynamic presents a tripartite schematic, designed to take us from the state
where we conceptualize means and ends as distinct, to the state where we see
them as isomorphic elements, given distinct status only on a provisional basis.
Subdiagram (1) is familiar and represents the “normal” story, composed of
present state, desired future state, and three of the various means that might
be utilized, in order to transform the former into the latter. This subdiagram
is predicated on the presumption that many means might be used to get from
point “a” to point “b”; in truth, however, only one means (the “most efficient”
or otherwise desirable) will be employed at any one time. (We only have one
motor output system, after all—and, therefore, one “consciousness”?) Subdiagram
(2) is a transformed version of (1), showing that the “plans” of (1) can better
be conceptualized as “stories,” in and of

Figure 14: Conceptual Transformation of the Means/Ends Relationship from Static
to Dynamic





themselves—showing that a “big” story (one that occupies a large
spatial-temporal domain) is actually composed of nested “little” stories.
Subdiagram (2) is still predicated on the presumption that a number of smaller
stories might be used as means for a larger end. If your company is failing,
you might fire half your employees, branch out into a new product line, or cut
the salaries of your upper management. Each of these approaches, all designed
for the same purpose, are clearly different (and complex) in their internal
structure. You might do more than one thing, but if two of these multiple
things conflict, one will have to be made subordinate to the other. Plans (and
ends) are granted comparative importance, and organized accordingly. This state
of affairs, where the relative importance of (potentially competing) plans has
been fixed, is represented in subdiagram (3), which will remain our
representation of choice.187

At any given place and time, we are considering only a fixed number of
“variables” as means and ends. This is absolutely necessary, as action requires
exclusion as much (or more) as inclusion.188 However, those things we consider
as “relevant variables” (and their status as relevant, or not) have to be
mutable. We have to decide, yet retain the capacity to alter our decisions. Our
prefrontal cortex—critical to goal-directed action189— appears to allow us this
freedom: it does so, by “temporally sequencing” events and actions,190 by
considering contextual information and using that consideration to govern
behavior,191 and by shifting set.192 It performs this multiplicity of
operations, I submit, by considering one thing, then another, as the currently
operative “consummatory reward”— as the goal toward which behavior is to be
devoted, as the “desired future” against which the “unbearable present,” in the
form of emergent experience, is to be compared and evaluated. The structure in
Figure 14, subdiagram (3), is a multilevel, nested structure, composed of the
interdependent goals and plans comprising the “life story.” This
conceptualization helps explain the idea of a “step along the way” (a stairway
or ladder to heaven, metaphorically speaking).193

Each step—each substory—has the same structure (but not the same content) as
all those stories “above” and “below.” This means that all the elements of a
“good” story might be expected to mirror, in some profound manner, all the
other elements: that a story, like the world itself, might be read (and read
correctly) at multiple and multiply informative levels of analysis. This gives
good stories their polysemous quality. It is for this reason that Frye can
state:

One of the commonest experiences in reading is the sense of further discoveries
to be made within the same structure of words. The feeling is approximately
“there is more to be got out of this,” or we may say, of something we
particularly admire, that every time we read it we get something new out of
it.194



A phenomenon that constitutes a goal at one level might be regarded as an
incentive reward at the next, since the attainment of subsidiary goals are
preconditions for the attainment of higher-level goals (this implies that most
consummatory rewards will simultaneously possess an incentive aspect). The
cognitive operations dependent upon the intact prefrontal cortex can move up
and down these levels, so to speak, fixating at one, and allowing for
determinate action, when that is deemed most appropriate (making the others
implicit at that place and time); reorganizing and reconstituting the levels
and their respective statuses, when that becomes necessary. Figure 15: Bounded
Revolution sheds light on this process and, simultaneously, on the conundrum of
relative novelty. How can a thing be radically new, somewhat new, somewhat
familiar, or completely familiar? The simple answer is—a given phenomenon (a
“thing” or “situation”) can have its utility and/or meaning transformed at one
level of analysis, but not at another. This means that novelty can be
“bounded”; that something can be new in one manner, but remain familiar at
another. This upper “familiar” level provides “walls” of security. These walls
enclose a bounded territory, within which necessary change can occur, without
fear of catastrophe.

Here is an exemplary “story”: I am an undergraduate. I want to be a doctor. I
am not sure exactly why, but that question has never become relevant (which is
to say, my desire is an implicit presumption, an axiom of my behavior). I did
well in high school. I have good marks in university, as a pre-med student. I
take the MCAT. I fail: twentieth percentile. Suddenly and unexpectedly I
realize that I am not going to be a doctor. The walls come tumbling

Figure 15: Bounded Revolution





down. My emotions, which were held in check by the determinate valences my
ongoing story gave to experiential phenomena, now (re)emerge, viciously—in
chaos. I am a depressed and anxious wreck. As I recover, I re-evaluate my life.
I am disciplined and have good academic skills. I like university; I like
working with people. Many of the predicates of the doctor story are still
intact and do not need modification. I must journey further up the hierarchy,
then!—maybe, for the first time. We do not question a story, when it is
working! If it produces the desired results, it is correct! Why did I want to
be a doctor? For monetary security. Because it was expected of me (for reasons
of tradition— my father was a doctor). For reasons of status. Because I could
appease the suffering of others and be a good person. So—hierarchical
organization [this takes (or even is) thought]: (1) I want to help people; (2)
I need some monetary security; (3) I would like to stay in the health
profession; (4) perhaps status is not as important as I thought (and might
therefore be “sacrificed,” to appease the angry gods and restore order to the
cosmos). I will become a medical technician or maybe even a nurse. I can still
be a “good person” even if I'm not a doctor, and perhaps that is the most
important thing of all. Reorganization completed. Utility of experiential
phenomena re-established. Emotional integrity and stability reattained. Good
thing I didn't do anything rash!

It is interesting and instructive to consider Eastern representations of
reality (that is, of the “cosmos”) in light of this conceptualization. Reality
is made up of nested interpretations, that give determinate form to objects (as
implements) and to the valence of those objects. Every interpretation, however,
is subject to transformation, at every level. This constant (and necessary)
transformation, in conjunction with the fact of at least transient (and
necessary) stability, makes up the “world.” Mircea Eliade describes the Indian
version of the doctrine of the “eternal return”—the endlessly nested, cyclical
nature of the “universe” (conceived of as the totality of experience, and not
as “objective reality”):

A complete cycle, a mahayuga, comprises 12,000 years. It ends with a
dissolution, a pralaya, which is repeated more drastically (mahapralaya, the
Great Dissolution) at the end of the thousandth cycle. For the paradigmatic
schema “creation-destruction-creation-etc.” is reproduced ad infinitum. The
12,000 years of a mahayuga were regarded as divine years, each with a duration
of 360 years, which gives a total of 4,320,000 years for a single cosmic cycle.
A thousand such mahayugas make up a kalpa (form); 14 kalpas make up a
manvantara (so named because each manvantara is supposed to be ruled by Manu,
the mythical Ancestor-King). A kalpa is equivalent to a day in the life of
Brahma; a second kalpa to a night. One hundred of these “years” of Brahma, in
other words 311,000 milliards of human years, constitute the life of Brahma.
But even this duration of the god's life does not exhaust time, for the gods
are not eternal and the cosmic creations and destructions succeed one another
forever.195



Every novelty-inspired, exploration-driven “learning experience” has a
revolutionary element; it is just that those reconstructions that involve
stories with very limited “sizes” (that is, spatial-temporal areas) release
only a proportionate amount of emotion. The “normal/ revolutionary” dichotomy
is, therefore, not valid—it is always a matter of degree. Small-scale
inconveniences require minor life-story modifications. Large-scale
catastrophes, by contrast, undermine everything. The “biggest disasters” occur
when the largest stories that we play out are threatened with dissolution, as a
consequence of radical “environmental” transformation. Such transformation may
occur in the natural course of things, when an earthquake or similar “act of
God” takes place; may be generated internally, as a consequence of heretical
action; or may emerge when the “foreign devils”—emissaries of chaos—threaten
our explored territories (our nested stories, our cultural stability). In the
latter case, we may well turn to war as an alternative deemed emotionally
desirable.

Our stories are nested (one thing leads to another) and hierarchically arranged
[pursuit “a” is superordinate to pursuit “b” (love is more important than
money)]. Within this nested hierarchy, our consciousness—our
apperception—appears to have a “natural” level of resolution, or
categorization. This default resolution is reflected in the fact, as alluded to
previously, of the basic object level. We “see” some things naturally; that is,
in Roger Brown's terminology, at a level that gives us “maximal information
with minimal cognitive effort.”196 I don't know what drives the mechanism that
determines the appropriate level of analysis. Elements of probability and
predictability must play a role. It is, after all, increasingly useless to
speculate over increasingly large spatial-temporal areas, as the number of
variables that must be considered increases rapidly, even exponentially (and
the probability of accurate prediction, therefore, decreases). Perhaps the
answer is something along the lines of “the simplest solution that does not
generate additional evident problems wins,” which I suppose is a variant of
Occam's razor. So the simplest cognitive/exploratory maneuver that renders an
unpredictable occurrence conditionally predictable or familiar is most likely
to be adopted. This is another example of proof through utility—if a solution
“works” (serves to further progress toward a given goal), then it is “right.”
Perhaps it is the frontal cortex that determines what might be the most
parsimonious possible context, within which a given novel occurrence might be
evaluated. So the notion would be that a novel occurrence initiates an
exploratory procedure, part of which is devoted to determining the level of
analysis most appropriate for conducting an evaluation. This would involve the
shifting of stories. Also, a given stimulus is obviously not evaluated at all
possible levels of analysis, simultaneously. This would constitute an
impossible cognitive burden. It seems that the cortex must temporarily fixate
at a chosen level, and then act “as if” that is the only relevant level.
Through this maneuver, the valence of something can appear similarly fixed. It
is only this arbitrary restriction of data that makes understanding—and
action—possible.

Anyway: we are adapted, as biological organisms, to construe our environment as
a domain with particular temporal and spatial borders—that is, as a place of a
certain size, with a fixed duration. Within that “environment,” conceived of as
that certain size and duration, certain phenomena “leap out at us,” and “cry
out to be named.”197 Whenever those “natural categories” of interpretation and
their associated schemas of action fail us, however, we have to look up and
down the scale of spatial-temporal resolution. We do this by looking at the big
picture, when we have to, or by focusing on details that may have previously
escaped us. Both the details and the big picture may be considered as dwindling
or trailing off into, first, the unconscious (where they exist as potential
objects of cognition) and then, the unknown (where they exist as latent
information or as undiscovered facts). The unconscious may then be considered
as the mediator between the unknown, which surrounds us constantly, and the
domain that is so familiar to us that its contents have been rendered explicit.
This mediator, I would suggest, is those metaphoric, imagistic processes,
dependent upon limbic-motivated right-hemispheric activity, that help us
initially formulate our stories. Figure 16: Nested Stories, Processes of
Generation, and Multiple Memory Systems helps explain the idea of this
“unconscious”—the broadest span stories, which are determined by complex social
interactions, are episodic (imagistic) or even procedural (manifested only in
socially modified behavior) in nature. There is a very narrow window of
expressible “frames of reference”—conscious stories. Just ask any young child
or unsophisticated adult to describe the “rationale” for their behaviors.

Every level of analysis—that is, every definable categorization system and
schema for action (every determinate story)—has been constructed,
interpersonally, in the course of exploratory behavior and communication of the
strategies and results thereof. Our natural levels of apprehension, the stories
that most easily or by default occupy our attention, are relatively accessible
to consciousness and amenable to explicit verbal/semantic formulation and

Figure 16: Nested Stories, Processes of Generation, and Multiple Memory Systems





communication. The higher-level stories, which cover a broader expanse of
spatial-temporal territory, are increasingly complex and, therefore, cannot be
as simply formulated. Myth steps in to fill the breach.

