# 5 - The Conjunction
[Metadata]: # {06.14}
[Descriptor]: # {06.14}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Conjunction
# The Conjunction
The process of complete recognition, symbolized or dramatized as the
peregrination, sets the stage for activation of the final alchemical sequence,
which consisted of the (hypothetical) union of all now-manifest “things.” Jung
outlines the “Arisleus vision,” in his text Psychology and Alchemy. This vision
contains all the elements of the alchemical “theory,” portrayed in
episodic/narrative form. Its sequential analysis helps shed dramatic light on
the nature of the “conjunction”:

Arisleus (a Byzantine alchemist of the 8th or 9th century) tells of his
adventures with the Rex Marinus, in whose kingdom nothing prospers and nothing
is begotten. Moreover, there are no philosophers there. Only like mates with
like, consequently there is no procreation. The king must seek the counsel of
the philosophers and mate Thabritius with Beya, his two children whom he has
hatched in his brain.635



Jung comments:

Thabritius is the masculine, spiritual principle of light and Logos which, like
the Gnostic Nous, sinks into the embrace of physical nature.636



This is an elaboration of an idea presented earlier:

Nous seems to be identical with the God Anthropos: he appears alongside the
demiurge and is the adversary of the planetary spheres. He rends the circle of
the spheres and leans down to earth and water (i.e., is about to project
himself into the elements). His shadow falls upon the earth, but his image is
reflected in the water. This kindles the love of the elements, and he himself
is so charmed with the reflected image of divine beauty that he would fain take
up his abode within it. But scarcely has he set foot upon the earth when Physis
locks him in a passionate embrace.637



It is important to understand this commentary, as well, to completely
appreciate the nature of the prima materia. The prima materia—Physis—contains
spirit, the masculine principle, as well as matter, the feminine (Beya, in this
narrative). The prima materia— dragon of chaos—serves simultaneously as the
source of things, the subject to whom things appear, and the representations of
the things characteristic of that subject. This is not a mere material
“source”; it is the absolute unknown itself, in whose embrace spirit “sleeps,”
until it is released (in the course of the exploration that transforms the
self, as well as producing something “real” and new). Jung continues, with an
idea that we are now familiar with:

When we are told that the King is…inanimate, or that his land is unfruitful, it
is equivalent to saying that the hidden state is one of latency and
potentiality. The darkness and depths of the sea [which stand for the unknown]
symbolize the unconscious state of an invisible content that is projected.
Inasmuch as such a content belongs to the total personality, and is only
apparently severed from its context by projection, there is always an
attraction between conscious mind and projected content. Generally it takes the
form of a fascination. This, in the alchemical allegory, is expressed by the
Kings cry for help from the depths of his unconscious, dissociated state. The
conscious mind should respond to this call: one should …. render service to the
King, for this would be not only wisdom, but salvation as well.

Yet this brings with it the necessity of a descent into the dark world of the
unconscious [“the unknown”]… the perilous adventure of the night sea journey,
whose end and aim is the restoration of life, resurrection, and the triumph
over death.638

Despite the risk, Arisleus and his imaginary “companions” brave the quest into
the kingdom of the submerged king. This quest ends terribly, with the death of
Thabritius. His death echoes that of Osiris, and symbolizes the completion of
the spirit's descent into “matter” or the unconscious or the unknown (where it
then lies “implicit” or “unrevealed,” and “calls for rescue,” offering riches
to its redeemer). Jung continues with the story:



The death of the King's son is naturally a delicate and dangerous matter. By
descending into the unconscious, the conscious mind puts itself in a perilous
position, for it is apparently extinguishing itself. It is in the situation of
the primitive hero who is devoured by the dragon… .

The deliberate and indeed wanton provocation of this state is a sacrilege or
breach of taboo attended by the severest punishments. Accordingly, the King
imprisons Arisleus and his companions in a triple glass house together with the
corpse of the King's son. The heroes are held captive in the underworld at the
bottom of the sea, where, exposed to every kind of terror, they languish for
eighty days in an intense heat. At the request of Arisleus, Beya is imprisoned
with them. [The Rosarium version of the “Visio” interprets the prison as Beya's
womb.]

Clearly, they have been overpowered by the unconscious [“the unknown”] and are
helplessly abandoned, which means that they have volunteered to die in order to
beget a new and fruitful life in that region of the psyche which has hitherto
lain fallow in darkest unconsciousness, and under the shadow of death.639



The “purpose” of the story, in describing this descent, is demonstration that
“only in the region of danger (watery abyss, cavern, forest, island, castle,
etc.) can one find the ‘treasure hard to attain’ (jewel, virgin, life-potion,
victory over death).”640 Jung ends his commentary:

The dread and resistance which every natural human being experiences when it
comes to delving too deeply into himself is, at bottom, the fear of the journey
to Hades. If it were only resistance that he felt, it would not be so bad. In
actual fact, however, the psychic substratum, that dark realm of the unknown,
exercises a fascinating attraction that threatens to become the more
overpowering the further he penetrates into it. The psychological danger that
arises here is the disintegration of personality into its functional
components, i.e., the separate functions of consciousness, the complexes,
hereditary units, etc. Disintegration—which may be functional or occasionally a
real schizophrenia—is the fate which overtakes Gabricus (in the Rosarium
version): he is dissolved into atoms in the body of Beya…. So long as
consciousness refrains from acting, the opposites will remain dormant in the
unconscious. Once they have been activated, the regius filius—spirit, Logos,
Nous—is swallowed up by Physis…. In the hero myth this state is known as being
swallowed up in the belly of the whale or dragon.

The heat there is usually so intense [a consequence of the war of affects;
anxiety, anger] that the hero loses his hair, and is reborn as bald as a babe….
The philosopher makes the journey to hell as a “redeemer.”641



The story continues:

Earlier on, we left Arisleus and his companions, together with Beya and the
dead Thabritius, in the triple glass house where they had been imprisoned by
the Rex Marinus. They suffer from the intense heat, like the three whom
Nebuchadnezzar cast into the fiery furnace. King Nebuchadnezzar had a vision of
a fourth, “like the son of God,” as we are told in Daniel 3:25.

This vision is not without bearing on alchemy, since there are numerous
passages in the literature stating that the stone is trinus et unus. It
consists of the four elements, with fire representing the spirit concealed in
matter. This is the fourth, absent and yet present, who always appears in the
fiery agony of the furnace and symbolizes the divine presence— succour and the
completion of the work.

And, in their hour of need, Arisleus and his companions see their master
Pythagoras in a dream and beg him for help. He sends them his disciple
Harforetus, the “author of nourishment.” So the work is completed and
Thabritius comes to life again. We may suppose that Harforetus brought them the
miraculous food [akin to the host], though this only becomes clear through a
discovery of Ruska's, who gave us access to the text of the Codex Berolinensis.
There, in an introduction that is missing from the printed versions of the
“Visio,” we read: “Pythagoras says, ‘Ye write and have written down for
posterity how this most precious tree is planted, and how he that eats of its
fruits shall hunger no more.’”642



The alchemical opus meant, at one level of analysis, the complete integration
of “unknown” and “known,” insofar as that could be attained—but more
profoundly, participation in the process that made “one thing” of unknown and
known. This construct and act of construction typically had twin “final” aims,
insofar as it constituted the pursuit of perfection: The first of these aims
was union of the feminine, maternal background of the “unknown ‘material’
world,” seething with danger, passion and sensuality, into harmony with the
ordering principle of the spirit. [This was represented symbolically as
dissolution of the dead king and his subsequent regeneration, after eating the
miraculous food (which is the beneficial aspect of the unknown, and the hero,
simultaneously)]. The second final aim was re-introduction of the integrated
psychic structure to the physical body—the conscious “incarnation” of the
now-more-complete spirit. So this meant that the union attained by the
(re)incorporation of the “material unknown” was not complete, if it was still a
matter of philosophy or abstract conceptualization: the well-integrated spirit
also had to be realized in behavior. And this was not necessarily yet even the
final stage. The alchemist Dorn states:

We conclude that meditative philosophy consists in the overcoming of the body
by mental union (unio mentalis). This first union does not as yet make the wise
man, but only the mental disciple of wisdom. The second union of the mind with
the body shows forth the wise man, hoping for and expecting that blessed third
union with the first unity [the unus mundus, the latent unity of the world].
May Almighty God grant that all men be made such, and may He be one in All.643



Dorn's ideas refer to a conjunction conceptualized as a three-stage process.
The first stage was “union of the mind” (the “overcoming the body by mental
union”). This stage refers to the integration of “states of motivation”
(drives, emotions) into a single hierarchy, dominated by the figure of the
exploratory hero. The second stage was (re)union of the united mind with the
body. This is analogous to the “second stage” of the hero's journey. After the
treasure is released, consequential to the battle with the dragon, the purely
personal aspect of the hero's journey is completed. After all, he has found the
“treasure hard to attain.” But the hero must return to the community. This is
equivalent to Buddha's determination to retire from the state of Nirvana, until
all who were living could make their home there; is tantamount to the Buddha's
belief that the redemption of the one was impossible, in the presence of the
unredeemed many. The reunion of the united mind with the body is inculcation of
proper attitude in action (and is, therefore, the effect of the hero on the
world).

The third stage is particularly difficult to comprehend. Reconsideration of the
theme of the “tailor who mends”644—and who can therefore sew up the hole in the
sky, made by the dying king—might help with initial comprehension. Things that
are wrong must be set right. This is a psychological process, even if it
undertaken purely as a consequence of actions conducted “in the outside world.”
The union of the united spirit/body with the world means recognition of the
essential equivalence of all experience, or consideration of all aspects of
experience as literally equivalent to the self. We presume the existence of a
final barrier between “subject” and “object,” but a standpoint exists that
gives to all aspects of individual experience—whether “subjective” or
“objective”—equal status, as aspects of experience. Redeeming any aspect of
that experience, then—whether “material” or “psychological”; whether “self” or
“other” is then regarded as the same act—as the act whose purpose is
establishment of the “kingdom of god” (which is simultaneously psychological
and social state). “Spiritual work” may therefore be regarded as
indistinguishable from “work on the external circumstances of existence”:
redeem yourself, redeem the world. Or, alternatively: the attempt to bring
about the perfection of the external world may be regarded as equivalent to the
attempt to perfect oneself. After all, dedication to an ideal necessitates
development of self-discipline. This is voluntary apprenticeship. The world and
the self are not different places; from this perspective, “all is experience.”
The attempt to redeem either necessarily brings about redemption in the other.

All three of these conjunctions may be represented symbolically by the syzygy,
the “divine union of opposites,” most generally considered as male and female:

1. first, “known” (previous knowledge, subsumed under patriarchal/spiritual
category) + “unknown” (anomaly, subsumed under
matriarchal/affective/material/physical category) = “united spirit”;

2. then “united spirit” (in this context, subsumed into the
patriarchal/spiritual category) + “body” (subsumed under matriarchal/material
category)=“united spirit/body”;

3. then “united spirit/body” (in this context, subsumed under the
patriarchal/spiritual category)+“world”(matriarchal/material/category)=“united
spirit/body/world.”

All three of these unions can be considered variants of the “incest motif,”
(brother/sister, son/mother, king/queen pairings). Stage one, the “mental
union,” was construed as necessary, valuable, but incomplete: the attainment of
an ordered subjective state (stage two) was another important step along the
way:

Learn therefore, O Mind, to practise sympathetic love in regard to thine own
body, by restraining its vain appetites, that it may be apt with thee in all
things. To this end I shall labour, that it may drink with thee from the
fountain of strength and, when the two are made one, that ye find peace in
their union. Draw nigh, O Body, to this fountain, that with thy Mind thou
mayest drink to satiety and hereafter thirst no more after vanities. O wondrous
efficacy of this fount, which maketh one of two, and peace between enemies! The
fount of love can make mind out of spirit and soul, but this maketh one man out
of mind and body.645



The third step, however, was critical: philosophical knowledge and ordered
intrapsychic structure—even when embodied—was regarded as insufficient. That
embodied union must be extended to all the world—regarded as “an aspect of
experience” and, therefore, as equivalent (even identical) to the self.

The alchemical procedure was based on the attempt to redeem “matter,” to
transform it into an ideal. This procedure operated on the assumption that
matter was originally corrupted—like man, in the story of Genesis. The study of
the transformations of corruption and limitation activated a mythological
sequence in the mind of the alchemist. This sequence followed the pattern of
the way, upon which all religions have developed. Formal Christianity adopted
the position that the sacrifice of Christ brought history to a close, and that
“belief” in that sacrifice guaranteed redemption. Alchemy rejected that
position, in its pursuit of what remained unknown. In that (heroic) pursuit the
alchemist found himself transformed:

Whereas the Christian belief is that man is freed from sin by the redemptory
act of Christ, the alchemist was evidently of the opinion that the “restitution
to the likeness of original and incorrupt nature” had still to be accomplished
by the art, and this can only mean that Christ's work of redemption was
regarded as incomplete. In view of the wickedness which the “Prince of this
world,” undeterred, goes on perpetrating as liberally as before, one cannot
withhold all sympathy from such an opinion. For an alchemist who professed
allegiance to the Ecclesia spiritualis it was naturally of supreme importance
to make himself an “unspotted vessel” of the Paraclete and thus to realize the
idea “Christ” on a plane far transcending a mere imitation of him.646



This “realization of Christ on a plane transcending imitation” is an
overwhelming idea. It makes of religious “belief” something far more than
belief—something far more terrifying, and far more promising. The sequence of
the alchemical transformation paralleled Christ's Passion, paralleled the myth
of the hero and his redemption. The essential message of alchemy is that
individual rejection of tyranny, voluntary pursuit of the unknown and
terrifying—predicated upon faith in the ideal—may engender an individual
transformation so overwhelming that its equivalent can only be found in the
most profound of religious myths:

The Son of the great World who is Theocosmos, i.e., a divine power and world
(but whom even today, unfortunately, many who teach nature in a pagan spirit
and many builders of medical science reject in the high university schools), is
the exemplar of the stone which is Theanthropos, i.e., God and man (whom, as
Scripture tells us, the builders of the Church have also rejected); and from
the same, in and from the Great World Book of Nature, [there issues] a
continuous and everlasting doctrine for the wise and their children: indeed, it
is a splendid living likeness of our Savior Jesus Christ, in and from the Great
World which by nature is very similar to him (as to miraculous conception,
birth, inexpressible powers, virtues, and effects); so God our Lord, besides
his Son's Biblical histories, has also created a specific image and natural
representation for us in the Book ofNature.647



It was in pursuit of the unknown that the alchemist experienced this
psychological transformation, just as it was originally in contact with the
unknown that the (monotheistic) patriarchal system developed, in the furthest
reaches of history. It is the symbolic expression of the action of instinct,
which manifests itself in some variant of the hero myth, whenever the unknown
is pursued, without avoidance, in the attempt to improve life. The alchemist
experienced what the individual always experiences when he determines to face
every aspect of his existence (individual and collective) without denial or
recourse to sterile preconceptions.

The passion that vibrates in [the alchemical texts] is genuine, but would be
totally incomprehensible if the lapis were nothing but a chemical substance.
Nor does it originate in contemplation of Christ's Passion; it is the real
experience of a man who has got involved in the compensatory contents of the
unconscious by investigating the unknown, seriously and to the point of
self-sacrifice. He could not but see the likeness of his projected contents to
the dogmatic images [which were in fact likely utilized by the instinctual
procedure], and he might have been tempted to assume that his ideas were
nothing else than the familiar religious conceptions, which he was using in
order to explain the chemical procedure. But the texts show clearly that, on
the contrary, a real experience of the opus had an increasing tendency to
assimilate the dogma or to amplify itself with it.648



In Christianity, spirit descends to matter, and the result of the union is the
birth of Christ (and, unfortunately, the formal realization of his opponent).
In alchemy, which compensated for the one-sided view of Christianity, matter
rises to spirit, with analogous result: creation of the lapis or philosophical
stone, which bears an unmistakable resemblance to Christ, embodied in
abstractly material form. This form, the philosopher's stone, the lapis, was
composed of the most paradoxical elements: it was base, cheap, immature and
volatile; perfect, precious, ancient and solid; visible to all yet mysterious;
costly, dark, hidden and evident, having one name and many names. The lapis was
also the renewed king, the wise old man, and the child. The wise old man
posesses the charisma of wisdom, which is the knowledge that transcends the
limits of history. The child represents the creative spirit, the possibility in
man, the Holy Ghost. He is not the child of ignorance, but the innocence of
maturity. He precedes and antedates history in the subjective and collective
sense:

The “child” is all that is abandoned and exposed and at the same time divinely
powerful; the insignificant, dubious beginning, and the triumphal end. The
“eternal child” in man is an indescribable experience, an incongruity, a
handicap, and a divine prerogative; an imponderable that determines the
ultimate worth or worthlessness of a personality.649



This final value, the goal of the pursuit of the alchemists, is discovery and
embodiment of the meaning of life itself: integrated subjective being actively
expressing its nature through manipulation of the possibilities inherent in the
material/unknown world. This final goal is the production of an integrated
intrapsychic condition—identical to that of the mythological hero—“acted out”
in a world regarded as equivalent to the self. Production of this condition—the
lapis philosophorum—constitutes the “antidote” for the “corruption of the
world,” attendant upon the Fall [attendant upon the emergence of (partial)
self-consciousness]. The lapis is “agent of transformation,” equivalent to the
mythological redemptive hero—able to to turn “base metals into gold.” It is, as
such, something more valuable than gold—just as the hero is more valuable than
any of his concrete productions. The “complete” alchemical opus—with production
of the lapis as goal—is presented schematically in Figure 66: The Alchemical
Opus as Myth of Redemption.

Alchemy was a living myth: the myth of the individual man as redeemer.
Organized Christianity had “sterilized itself,” so to speak, by insisting on
the worship of some external truth as the means to salvation. The alchemists
(re)discovered the error of this presumption, and came to realize that
identification with the redeemer was in fact necessary, not his worship; that
myths of redemption had true power when they were incorporated, and acted out,
rather than believed, in some abstract sense. This meant: to say that Christ
was “the greatest man in history”—a combination of the divine and mortal—was
not sufficient expression of

Figure 66: The Alchemical Opus as Myth of Redemption





faith. Sufficient expression meant the attempt to live out the myth of the
hero, within the confines of individual personality—to voluntarily shoulder the
cross of existence, to “unite the opposites” within a single breast, and to
serve as active conscious mediator between the eternal generative forces of
known and unknown.

