# 2 - NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTION: THE NATURE OF THE MIND
[Metadata]: # {03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTION: THE NATURE OF THE MIND
# NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTION: THE NATURE OF THE MIND
It is reasonable to regard the world, as forum for action, as a “place”—a place
made up of the familiar, and the unfamiliar, in eternal juxtaposition. The
brain is actually composed, in large part, of two subsystems, adapted for
action in that place. The right hemisphere, broadly speaking, responds to
novelty with caution, and rapid, global hypothesis formation. The left
hemisphere, by contrast, tends to remain in charge when things—that is,
explicitly categorized things—are unfolding according to plan. The right
hemisphere draws rapid, global, valence-based, metaphorical pictures of novel
things; the left, with its greater capacity for detail, makes such pictures
explicit and verbal. Thus the exploratory capacity of the brain “builds” the
world of the familiar (the known), from the world of the unfamiliar (the
unknown).

When the world remains known and familiar—that is, when our beliefs maintain
their validity—our emotions remain under control. When the world suddenly
transforms itself into something new, however, our emotions are dysregulated,
in keeping with the relative novelty of that transformation, and we are forced
to retreat or to explore once again.





The Valence of Things


“Anyone who considers the basic drives of man…will find that all of them have
done philosophy at some time—and that every one of them would like only too
well to represent just itself as the ultimate purpose of existence and the
legitimate master of all the other drives. For every drive wants to be
master—and it attempts to philosophize in that spirit.”49

“It is true that man was created in order to serve the gods,

who, first of all, needed to be fed and clothed.”50



We can make lists of general goods and bads, which might appear reasonable to
others, because we tend to make judgments of meaning in relatively standard and
predictable ways. Food, to take a simple example, is good, assuming it is
palatably prepared, while a blow on the head is bad in direct proportion to its
force. The list of general goods and bads can be extended with little effort.
Water, shelter, warmth and sexual contact are good; diseases, droughts, famines
and fights are bad. The essential similarities of our judgments of meaning can
easily lead us to conclude that the goodness or badness of things or situations
is something more or less fixed. However, the fact of subjective
interpretation—and its effects on evaluation and behavior—complicate this
simple picture. We will work, expend energy and overcome obstacles to gain a
good (or to avoid something bad). But we won't work for food, at least not very
hard, if we have enough food; we won't work for sex, if we are satisfied with
our present levels of sexual activity; and we might be very pleased to go
hungry, if that means our enemy will starve. Our predictions, expectations and
desires condition our evaluations to a finally unspecifiable degree. Things
have no absolutely fixed significance, despite our ability to generalize about
their value. It is our personal preferences, therefore, that determine the
import of the world (but these preferences have constraints!).

The meaning we attribute to objects or situations is not stable. What is
important to one man is not necessarily important to another; likewise, the
needs and desires of the child differ from those of the adult. The meaning of
things depends to a profound and ultimately undeterminable degree upon the
relationship of those things to the goal we currently have in mind. Meaning
shifts when goals change. Such change necessarily transforms the contingent
expectations and desires that accompany those goals. We experience “things”
personally and idiosyncratically, despite broad interpersonal agreement about
the value of things. The goals we pursue singly—the outcomes we expect and
desire as individuals—determine the meaning of our experience. The existential
psychotherapist Viktor Frankl relates a story from his experiences as a Nazi
death camp inmate that makes this point most strikingly:

Take as an example something that happened on our journey from Auschwitz to the
camp affiliated with Dachau. We became more and more tense as we approached a
certain bridge over the Danube which the train would have to cross to reach
Mauthausen, according to the statement of experienced traveling companions.
Those who have never seen anything similar cannot possibly imagine the dance of
joy performed in the carriage by the prisoners when they saw that our transport
was not crossing the bridge and was instead heading “only” for Dachau.

And again, what happened on our arrival in that camp, after a journey lasting
two days and three nights? There had not been enough room for everybody to
crouch on the floor of the carriage at the same time. The majority of us had to
stand all the way, while a few took turns at squatting on the scanty straw
which was soaked with human urine. When we arrived the first important news
that we heard from older prisoners was that this comparatively small camp (its
population was 2,500) had no “oven,” no crematorium, no gas! That meant that a
person who had become a “Moslem” [no longer fit for work] could not be taken
straight to the gas chamber, but would have to wait until a so-called “sick
convoy” had been arranged to return to Auschwitz. This joyful surprise put us
all in a good mood. The wish of the senior warden of our hut in Auschwitz had
come true: we had come, as quickly as possible, to a camp which did not have a
“chimney”—unlike Auschwitz. We laughed and cracked jokes in spite of, and
during, all we had to go through in the next few hours.

When we new arrivals were counted, one of us was missing. So we had to wait
outside in the rain and cold wind until the missing man was found. He was at
last discovered in a hut, where he had fallen asleep from exhaustion. Then the
roll call was turned into a punishment parade. All through the night and late
into the next morning, we had to stand outside, frozen and soaked to the skin
after the strain of our long journey. And yet we were all very pleased! There
was no chimney in this camp and Auschwitz was a long way off.51



Nothing produces terror and fear like a concentration camp—unless the camp
encountered is better than the camp expected. Our hopes, desires and
wishes—which are always conditional—define the context within which the things
and situations we encounter take on determinate significance; define even the
context within which we understand “thing” or “situation.” We presume that
things have a more or less fixed meaning, because we share a more or less fixed
“condition” with others—at least with those others who are familiar to us, who
share our presumptions and worldviews. Those (culturally determined) things we
take for granted—and which are, therefore, invisible— determine our affective
responses to “environmental stimuli.” We assume that such things are permanent
attributes of the world; but they are not. Our situations—and, therefore, our
“contexts of interpretation”—can change dramatically, at any moment. We are
indeed fortunate (and, generally, oblivious ofthat fortune) when they do not.

It is not possible to finally determine how or whether something is meaningful
by observing the objective features of that thing. Value is not invariant, in
contrast to objective reality; furthermore, it is not possible to derive an
ought from an is (this is the “naturalistic fallacy” of David Hume). It is
possible, however, to determine the conditional meaning of something, by
observing how behavior (one's own behavior, or someone else's) is conducted in
the presence ofthat thing (or in its absence). “Things” (objects, processes)
emerge—into subjective experience, at least—as a consequence of behaviors. Let
us say, for the sake of example, that behavior “a” produces phenomenon “b”
(always remembering that we are talking about behavior in a particular
context). Behavior “a” consequently increases in frequency. It can be deduced,
then, that phenomenon “b” is regarded as positive, by the agent under
observation, in the particular “context” constituting the observed situation.
If behavior “a” decreases in frequency, the opposite conclusion can be
reasonably reached. The observed agent regards “b” as negative.

The behavioral psychologist B.F.Skinner originally defined a reinforcer as a
stimulus which produced a change in the frequency of a given behavior.52 He was
loathe to become concerned with the internal or intrapsychic whys and
wherefores of reinforcement, preferring instead to work by definition. If a
stimulus increased the rate at which a given behavior was manifested, it was
positive. If it decreased the rate of that behavior, it was negative. Of
course, Skinner recognized that the valence of a given stimulus was
context-dependent. An animal had to be “food-deprived” (in normal parlance,
hungry) before food could serve as a positive reinforcer. And as the animal
being fed became less food-deprived, the valence and potency of the reinforcer
food decreased.

Skinner believed that discussions of an animal's (or a human's) internal state
were unnecessary. If you knew an animal's reinforcement history, you could
determine what “stimuli” were likely to have positive or negative valence. The
fundamental problem with this argument is one of parsimony. It is impossible to
know an animal's “reinforcement history”—particularly if that animal is as
complex and long-lived as a human being. This is tantamount to saying, “you
must know everything that has ever happened to that animal”; analogous to the
old determinist claim that “if you knew the present position and momentum of
every particle in the universe, you could determine all future positions and
momenta.” You can't know all present positions and momenta: the measurement
problems are insurmountable, and the uncertainty principle makes it impossible
anyway. Likewise, you don't have access to the “reinforcement history,” and
even if you did, measuring it would alter it. (I am not making an formal
“uncertainty” claim for psychology; just drawing what I hope is a useful
analogy).

Skinner addressed this problem by limiting his concern to experimental
situations so simple that only immediate reinforcement history played a
context-determining role. This “implicit” limit enabled him to sidestep the
fundamental issue, and to make inappropriate generalizations. It didn't matter
how a rat related to his mother six months earlier if you could make him
“food-deprived” enough. The (short-term) fact of the food deprivation, for
example, overrode individual rat differences—at least in the experimental
condition under question—and could therefore usefully be ignored. Similarly, if
you starve human beings, you can be reasonably sure that they will become
concerned with food. However, even in this extreme case, you cannot predict how
this concern will manifest itself, or what (ethical) considerations might play
an intermediate, or even determining, role. Alexander Solzhenitsyn examined
this very problem during the time he spent in the Soviet “Gulag Archipelago”
(the Soviet prison camp system):

At the Samarka Camp in 1946 a group of intellectuals had reached the very brink
of death: They were worn down by hunger, cold, and work beyond their powers.
And they were even deprived of sleep. They had nowhere to lie down. Dugout
barracks had not yet been built. Did they go and steal? Or squeal? Or whimper
about their ruined lives? No! Foreseeing the approach of death in days rather
than weeks, here is how they spent their last sleepless leisure, sitting up
against the wall: Timofeyev-Ressovsky gathered them into a “seminar,” and they
hastened to share with one another what one of them knew and the others did
not— they delivered their last lectures to each other. Father Savely—spoke of
“unshameful death,” a priest academician—about patristics, one of the Uniate
fathers—about something in the area of dogmatics and canonical writings, an
electrical engineer—on the principles of the energetics of the future, and a
Leningrad economist—on how the effort to create principles of Soviet economics
had failed for lack of new ideas. From one session to the next, participants
were missing—they were already in the morgue.

That is the sort of person who can be interested in all this while already
growing numb with approaching death—now that is an intellectual!53



Past experience—learning—does not merely condition; rather, such experience
determines the precise nature of the framework of reference or context that
will be brought to bear on the analysis of a given situation. This cognitive
frame of reference acts as the intermediary between past learning, present
experience and future desire. This intermediary is a valid object of scientific
exploration—a phenomenon as real as anything abstracted is real—and is far more
parsimonious and accessible, as such a phenomenon, than the simple
noninterpreted (and nonmeasurable, in any case) sum total of reinforcement
history. Frameworks of reference, influenced in their structure by learning,
specify the valence of ongoing experience; determine what might be regarded, in
a given time and place, as good, bad or indifferent. Furthermore, inferences
about the nature of the framework of reference governing the behavior of others
(that is, looking at the world through the eyes of another) may produce results
that are more useful, more broadly generalizable (as “insights” into the
“personality” of another), and less demanding of cognitive resources than
attempts to understand the details of a given reinforcement history.

Valence can be positive or negative, as the early behaviorists noted. Positive
and negative are not opposite ends of a continuum, however—not in any
straightforward way.54 The two “states” appear orthogonal, although (perhaps)
mutually inhibitory. Furthermore, positive and negative are not simple: each
can be subdivided, in a more or less satisfactory manner, at least once.
Positively valued things, for example, can be satisfying or promising (can
serve as consummatory or incentive rewards, respectively55). Many satisfying
things are consumable, in the literal sense, as outlined previously. Food, for
example, is a consummatory reward to the hungry—which means that it is valued
under such circumstances as a satisfaction. Likewise, water satisfies the
individual deprived of liquid. Sexual contact is rewarding to the lustful, and
warmth is desirable to those without shelter. Sometimes more complex stimuli
are satisfying or rewarding as well. It all depends on what is presently
desired, and how that desire plays itself out. A mild verbal reprimand might
well foster feelings of relief in the individual who expects a severe physical
beating—which is to say, technically, that the absence of an expected
punishment can serve quite effectively as a reward (it is in fact the form of
reward that the tyrant prefers). Regardless of their form, attained
satisfactions produce satiation, calm and somnolent pleasure, and (temporary)
cessation of the behaviors directed to that particular end—although behaviors
that culminate in a satisfactory conclusion are more likely to be manifested,
in the future, when “instinctive” or “voluntary” desire reemerges.

Promises, which are also positive, might be regarded as more abstractly
meaningful than satisfactions, as they indicate potential rather than
actuality. Promises—cues of consummatory rewards or satisfactions—indicate the
imminent attainment of something desired or potentially desirable. Their more
abstract quality does not make them secondary or necessarily learned, however,
as was once thought; our response to potential satisfaction is often as basic
or primary as our response to satisfaction itself. Promises (cues of
satisfaction) have been regarded, technically, as incentive rewards, because
they induce forward locomotion— which is merely movement toward the place that
the cue indicates satisfaction will occur.56 Curiosity,57 hope58 and excited
pleasure tend to accompany exposure to cues of reward (and are associated with
subsequent forward locomotion).59 Behaviors that produce promises—like those
that result in satisfactions—also increase in frequency, over time.60

Negatively valued things—which have a structure that mirrors that of their
positive counterparts—can either be punishing or threatening.61 Punishments—a
diverse group of stimuli or contexts, as defined immediately below—all appear
to share one feature (at least from the perspective of the theory outlined in
this manuscript): they indicate the temporary or final impossibility of
implementing one or more means or attaining one or more ends. Some stimuli are
almost universally experienced as punishing, because their appearance indicates
reduced likelihood of carrying through virtually any imaginable plan—of
obtaining almost every satisfaction, or potential desirable future. Most things
or situations that produce bodily injury fall into this category. More
generally, punishments might be conceived of as involuntary states of
deprivation (of food, water, optimal temperature,62 or social contact63); as
disappointments64 or frustrations65 (which are absences of expected rewards66),
and as stimuli sufficiently intense to produce damage to the systems
encountering them. Punishments stop action, or induce retreat or escape
(backward locomotion),67 and engender the emotional state commonly known as
pain or hurt. Behaviors, which culminate in punishment and subsequent hurt,
tend to extinguish—to decrease in frequency, over time.68

Threats, which are also negative, indicate potential, like promises—but
potential for punishment, for hurt, for pain. Threats—cues of punishment—are
stimuli that indicate enhanced likelihood of punishment and hurt.69 Threats are
abstract, like promises; however, like promises, they are not necessarily
secondary or learned.70 Unexpected phenomena, for example—which constitute
innately recognizable threats—stop us in our tracks, and make us feel
anxiety.71 So, arguably, do certain innate fear stimuli—like snakes.72
Behaviors that culminate in the production of cues of punishment—that create
situations characterized by anxiety—tend to decrease in frequency over time
(much like those that produce immediate punishment).73

Satisfactions and their cues are good, simply put; punishments and threats are
bad. We tend to move forward74 (to feel hope, curiosity, joy) and then to
consume (to make love, to eat, to drink) in the presence of good things; and to
pause (and feel anxious), then withdraw, move backwards (and feel pain,
disappointment, frustration, loneliness) when faced by things we do not like.
In the most basic of situations—when we know what we are doing, when we are
engaged with the familiar—these fundamental tendencies suffice. Our actual
situations, however, are almost always more complex. If things or situations
were straightforwardly or simply positive or negative, good or bad, we would
not have to make judgments regarding them, would not have to think about our
behavior, and how and when it should be modified—indeed, would not have to
think at all. We are faced, however, with the constant problem of ambivalence
in meaning, which is to say that a thing or situation might be bad and good
simultaneously (or good in two conflicting manners; or bad, in two conflicting
manners).75 A cheesecake, for example, is good when considered from the
perspective of food deprivation or hunger, but bad when considered from the
perspective of social desirability and the svelte figure that such desirability
demands. The newly toilet-trained little boy who has just wet his bed might
well simultaneously feel satisfaction at the attainment of a biologically vital
goal and apprehension as to the likely socially constructed interpersonal
consequence of that satisfaction. Nothing comes without a cost, and the cost
has to be factored in, when the meaning of something is evaluated. Meaning
depends on context; contexts—stories, in a word—constitute goals, desires,
wishes. It is unfortunate, from the perspective of conflict-free adaptation,
that we have many goals—many stories, many visions of the ideal future—and that
the pursuit of one often interferes with our chances (or someone else's
chances) of obtaining another.

We solve the problem of contradictory meanings by interpreting the value of
things from within the confines of our stories—which are adjustable maps of
experience and potential, whose specific contents are influenced by the demands
of our physical being. Our central nervous systems are made up of many
“hard-wired” or automatized subsystems, responsible for biological
regulation—for maintaining homeostasis of temperature, ensuring proper caloric
intake, and monitoring levels of plasma carbon dioxide (for example). Each of
these subsystems has a job to do. If that job is not done within a certain
variable span of time, the whole game comes to a halt, perhaps permanently.
Nothing gets accomplished then. We must therefore perform certain actions if we
are to survive. This does not mean, however, that our behaviors are
determined—at least not in any simplistic manner. The subsystems that make up
our shared structure— responsible, when operative, for our instincts (thirst,
hunger, joy, lust, anger, etc.)—do not appear to directly grip control of our
behavior, do not transform us into driven automatons. Rather, they appear to
influence our fantasies, our plans, and alter and modify the content and
comparative importance of our goals, our ideal futures (conceived of in
comparison to our “unbearable” presents, as they are currently construed).

Each basic subsystem has its own particular, singular image of what constitutes
the ideal—the most valid goal at any given moment. If someone has not eaten in
several days, his vision of the (immediately) desirable future will likely
include the image of eating. Likewise, if someone has been deprived of water,
she is likely to make drinking her goal. We share fundamental biological
structure, as human beings, so we tend to agree, broadly, about what should be
regarded as valuable (at least in a specified context). What this means,
essentially, is that we can make probabilistic estimates about those things
that a given individual (and a given culture) might regard as desirable, at any
moment. Furthermore, we can increase the accuracy of our estimates by
programmed deprivation (because such deprivation specifies interpretive
context). Nonetheless, we can never be sure, in the complex normal course of
events, just what it is that someone will want.

Judgment regarding the significance of things or situations becomes
increasingly complicated when the fulfillment of one biologically predicated
goal interferes with the pursuit or fulfillment of another.76 To what end
should we devote our actions, for example, when we are simultaneously lustful
and guilty, or cold, thirsty and frightened? What if the only way to obtain
food is to steal it, say, from someone equally hungry, weak and dependent? How
is our behavior guided when our desires compete—which is to say, when wanting
one thing makes us likely to lose another or several others? There is no reason
to presume, after all, that each of our particularly specialized subsystems
will agree, at any one time, about what constitutes the most immediately
desirable “good.” This lack of easy agreement makes us intrinsically prone to
intrapsychic conflict and associated affective (emotional) dysregulation. We
manipulate our environments and our beliefs to address this conflict—we change
ourselves, or the things around us, to increase our hope and satisfaction, and
to decrease our fear and pain.

It is up to the “higher” cortical systems—the phylogenetically newer, more
“advanced” executive77 portions of the brain—to render judgment about the
relative value of desired states (and, similarly, to determine the proper order
for the manifestation of means78). These advanced systems must take all states
of desire into account, optimally, and determine the appropriate path for the
expression ofthat desire. We make decisions about what is to be regarded as
valuable, at any given time, but the neurological subsystems that keep us
alive, which are singularly responsible for our maintenance, in different
aspects, all have a voice in those decisions—a vote. Every part of us, kingdom
that we are, depends on the healthy operation of every other part. To ignore
one good, therefore, is to risk all. To ignore the demands of one necessary
subsystem is merely to ensure that it will speak later with the voice of the
unjustly oppressed; is to ensure that it will grip our fantasy, unexpectedly,
and make of the future something unpredictable. Our “optimal paths” therefore,
must be properly inclusive, from the perspective of our internal community, our
basic physiology. The valuations and actions of others, additionally, influence
our personal states of emotion and motivation as we pursue our individual
goals, inevitably, in a social context. The goal, writ large, toward which our
higher systems work must therefore be construction of a state where all our
needs and the needs of others are simultaneously met. This higher goal, to
which we all theoretically aspire, is a complex (and oft-implicit) fantasy—a
vision or map of the promised land. This map, this story—this framework of
reference or context of interpretation—is the (ideal) future, contrasted
necessarily with the (unbearable) present, and includes concrete plans,
designed to turn the latter into the former. The mutable meanings that make up
our lives depend for their nature on the explicit structure of this
interpretive context.

We select what we should value from among those things we must value. Our
selections are therefore predictable, in the broad sense. This must be, as we
must perform certain actions in order to live. But the predictability is
limited. The world is complex enough not only so that a given problem may have
many valid solutions, but so that even the definition of “solution” may vary.
The particular most appropriate or likely choices of people, including
ourselves, cannot (under normal circumstances, at least) be accurately
determined beforehand. Nonetheless, despite our final and ineradicable
ignorance, we act—judging from moment to moment what is to be deemed worthy of
pursuit, determining what can be ignored, at least temporarily, during that
pursuit. We are capable of acting and of producing the results we desire
because we render judgment of value, using every bit of information at our
disposal. We determine that something is worth having, at a given time and
place, and make the possession ofthat thing our goal. And as soon as something
has become our goal—no matter what that something is—it appears to adopt the
significance of satisfaction (of consummatory reward). It appears sufficient
for something to be truly regarded as valuable for it to adopt the emotional
aspect of value. It is in this manner that our higher-order verbal-cognitive
systems serve to regulate our emotions. It is for this reason that we can play
or work toward “merely symbolic” ends, for this reason that drama and
literature79 (and even sporting events) can have such profound vicarious
effects on us. The mere fact that something is desired, however, does not
necessarily mean that its attainment will sustain life (as a “true”
satisfaction might)— or that pure regard will make something into what it is
not. It is therefore necessary (if you wish to exist, that is) to construct
goals—models of the desired future—that are reasonable from the perspective of
previous experience, grounded in biological necessity. Such goals take into
account the necessity of coping with our intrinsic limitations; of satisfying
our inherited biological subsystems; of appeasing those transpersonal “gods,”
who eternally demand to be clothed and fed.

The fact that goals should be reasonable does not mean that they have to be or
will be (at least in the short term)—or that what constitutes “reasonable” can
be easily or finally determined. One man's meat is another man's poison; the
contents of the ideal future (and the interpreted present) may and do vary
dramatically between individuals. An anorexic, for example, makes her goal an
emaciation of figure that may well be incompatible with life. In consequence,
she regards food as something to be avoided—as something punishing or
threatening. This belief will not protect her from starving, although it will
powerfully affect her short-term determination of the valence of chocolate. The
man obsessed with power may sacrifice everything—including his family—to the
attainment of his narrow ambition. The empathic consideration of others, a
time-consuming business, merely impedes his progress with regard to those
things he deems of ultimate value. His faith in the value of his progress
therefore makes threat and frustration even of love. Our beliefs, in short, can
change our reactions to everything— even to those things as primary or
fundamental as food and family. We remain indeterminately constrained, however,
by the fact of our biological limits.

It is particularly difficult to specify the value of an occurrence when it has
one meaning, from one frame of reference (with regard to one particular goal),
and a different or even opposite meaning, from another equally or more
important and relevant frame. Stimuli that exist in this manner constitute
unsolved problems of adaptation. They present us with a mystery, which is what
to do in their presence (whether to pause, consume, stop, or move backwards or
forwards, at the most basic of levels; whether to feel anxious, satisfied, hurt
or hopeful). Some things or situations may be evidently satisfying or
punishing, at least from the currently extant “framework of reference,” and can
therefore be regarded (valued, acted toward) in an uncomplicated manner. Other
things and situations, however, remain rife with contradictory or indeterminate
meanings. (Many things, for example, are satisfying or promising in the short
term but punishing in the medium to long term.) Such circumstances provide
evidence that our systems of valuation are not yet sophisticated enough to
foster complete adaptation—demonstrate to us incontrovertibly that our
processes of evaluation are still incomplete:

A brain in a vat is at the wheel of a runaway trolley, approaching a fork in
the track. The brain is hooked up to the trolley in such a way that the brain
can determine which course the trolley will take. There are only two options:
the right side of the fork, or the left side. There is no way to derail or stop
the trolley, and the brain is aware of this. On the right side of the track
there is a single railroad worker, Jones, who will definitely be killed if the
brain steers the trolley to the right. If Jones lives he will go on to kill
five men for the sake of thirty orphans (one of the five men he will kill is
planning to destroy a bridge that the orphans' bus will be crossing later that
night). One of the orphans who will be killed would have grown up to become a
tyrant who made good, utilitarian men do bad things, another would have become
John Sununu, a third would have invented the pop-top can.

If the brain in the vat chooses the left side of the track, the trolley will
definitely hit and kill another railman, Leftie, and will hit and destroy ten
beating hearts on the track that would have been transplanted into ten patients
at the local hospital who will die without donor hearts. These are the only
hearts available, and the brain is aware of this. If the railman on the left
side of the track lives, he, too, will kill five men—in fact, the same five
that the railman on the right would kill. However, Leftie will kill the five as
an unintended consequence of saving ten men: he will inadvertently kill the
five men as he rushes the ten hearts to the local hospital for transplantation.
A further result of Leftie's act is that the busload of orphans will be spared.
Among the five men killed by Leftie is the man responsible for putting the
brain at the controls of the trolley. If the ten hearts and Leftie are killed
by the trolley, the ten prospective heart-transplant patients will die and
their kidneys will be used to save the lives of twenty kidney transplant
patients, one of whom will grow up to cure cancer and one of whom will grow up
to be Hitler. There are other kidneys and dialysis machines available, but the
brain does not know this.

Assume that the brains choice, whatever it turns out to be, will serve as an
example to other brains in vats, and thus the effects of its decision will be
amplified. Also assume that if the brain chooses the right side of the fork, an
unjust war free of war crimes will ensue, whereas if the brain chooses the left
fork, a just war fraught with war crimes will result. Furthermore, there is an
intermittently active Cartesian demon deceiving the brain in such a way that
the brain is never sure that it is being deceived.

Question: Ethically speaking, what should the brain do?80



We cannot act in two ways at one time—cannot move forwards and backwards,
cannot stop and go, simultaneously. When faced with stimuli whose meaning is
indeterminate we are therefore placed in conflict. Such conflict must be
resolved, before adaptive action may take place. We can actually only do one
thing, at one time, although we may be motivated by confusing, threatening,
dangerous or unpredictable circumstances to attempt many incommensurate things
simultaneously.

