# 5 - Episodic Representation in Medieval Christendom
[Metadata]: # {06.09}
[Descriptor]: # {06.09}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
Episodic Representation in Medieval Christendom
# Episodic Representation in Medieval Christendom
Science is predicated upon the axiomatic presupposition that it is worthwhile
to analyze the material or collectively apprehensible sensory world and its
transformations. This belief, which first manifested itself in (alchemical)
fantasy, is so much a part of the modern world, so much its primary assumption,
that it is difficult to realize what a remarkable achievement its formalization
represented. It took thousands of years of cultural development to formulate
the twin notions that empirical reality existed (independent of the
motivational significance of things) and that it should be systematically
studied (and these ideas only emerged, initially, in the complex societies of
the Orient and Europe). The alchemists were the first to risk this attribution,
or something similar to it; but they still studied “matter” in the absence of
explicit empirical methodology. Jung states:

The concept of the “psychic,” as we understand it today, did not exist in the
Middle Ages, and even the educated modern man finds it difficult to understand
what is meant by “reality of the psyche.” So it is not surprising that it was
incomparably more difficult for medieval man to imagine something between “esse
in re” and “esse in intellectu solo.” The way out lay in “metaphysics.” The
alchemist was therefore compelled to formulate his quasichemical facts
metaphysically too.606



The lack of scientific methodology—the inability to conduct formalized
comparison of behavior-predicated experience, to determine its
generalizability—meant the inextricable admixture of the purely sensory and the
subjective, affective, mythological aspects of experience. The purpose of
scientific methodology is, in large part, to separate the empirical facts from
the motivational presumption. In the absence of such methodology, the
intermingling of the two domains is inevitable:

[The alchemists]…believed that they were studying the unknown phenomenon of
matter…and they just observed what came up and interpreted that, somehow, but
without any specific plan. There would be a lump of some strange matter, but as
they did not know what it was they conjectured something or other, which of
course would be unconscious projection, but there was no definite intention or
tradition. Therefore one could say that in alchemy, projections were made
[hypotheses were generated] most naively and unprogrammatically, and completely
uncorrected.

Imagine an old alchemist's situation. A man in a certain village would build an
isolated hut and cook things which caused explosions. Quite naturally, everyone
calls him a witch doctor! One day someone comes and says he has found a queer
piece of metal and would the alchemist be interested in buying it? The
alchemist does not know the value of the metal, but gives the man some money at
a guess. He then puts what has been brought him in his stove and mixes it with
sulphur, or something similar, to see what happens, and if the metal was lead,
he would be badly poisoned by the vapours. He concludes, therefore, that this
particular matter makes one feel sick if approached, and nearly kills you, and
therefore he says that there is a demon in lead! Afterwards, when he writes his
recipes, he adds a footnote saying: “Beware of lead, for in it is a demon which
will kill people and make them mad,” which would be quite an obvious and
reasonable explanation for someone ofthat time and level. Therefore lead was a
wonderful subject for the projection of destructive factors, since in certain
connections its effects are poisonous. Acid substances were also dangerous,
but, on the other hand, being corrosive and a means of dissolving things, were
highly important for chemical operations. Thus if you wished to melt something
or have it in liquid form it could be melted or dissolved in acid solutions,
and for this reason the projection was that acid was the dangerous substance
which dissolves, but which also makes it possible to handle certain substances.
Or else it is a medium of transformation—you open up, so to speak, a metal with
which you can do nothing and make it accessible to transformation by the use of
certain liquids. The alchemists therefore wrote about it in the naive form
which I am now describing and did not notice that that was not natural science
but contained a lot of projection, if looked at from a modern chemical
standpoint.

Thus there exists in alchemy an astonishing amount of material from the
unconscious, produced in a situation where the conscious mind did not follow a
definite program, but only searched.607



Alchemy flourished for almost two thousand years, and only faded from view in
the late eighteenth century. It developed (at least in the Middle Ages) as a
movement compensating that embodied in absolutist Christianity, which
emphasized the ultimate reality and value of the spirit, dogmatically
concretized; which presumed that everything worth knowing had already been
discovered, and which cast the material world into disrepute.

For the medieval mind, the body, the sensory, physical world—“matter,” in
general— was valued as immoral and as corrupt, as ruled by demonic, unknown
forces. The story of Genesis—serpent and Eve conspiring to bring about the
descent of mankind “into the profane and fallen (material) world”—in part
provided the mythological basis for this union of category. The attractions of
the material world also posed a threat to identification with the church, as
the pull of sensuality, for example, or the desire for material instead of
spiritual wealth. Furthermore, the fact of the fallen material state undermined
faith in church dogma: apprehension of the unresolved suffering of man made it
difficult to attribute to Christ's actions the final state of redemption they
theoretically guaranteed. In consequence, contact with the “matriarchal
underworld of matter” (that is, with the “unknown”) seemed very threatening to
the church authorities— and for very good reason (at least from the
perspectives of conservation and tradition).

Alchemical fascination with “matter” developed antithetically to the early
Christian valuation of the “spiritual” and the “established” (developed as an
antithesis to the domain of the known). The suppression of the sensory material
world by the church and the simultaneous establishment of an absolute body of
knowledge meant rejection or denial of anomalous sensory/emotional experience,
and therefore of the value contained in such experience. Alchemical
preoccupation with matter arose as a consequence of this lost value asserting
itself, in the attraction of the accumulated “rejected and unknown”— in the
inevitable attraction of the “forbidden fruit.”

Observing what he did not understand, the alchemist had recourse only to
speculation, which he used to interpret that unknown. These speculations look
like fantasies to the modern mind—like the fantasies of the medieval Christian
(and pre-Christian, in some cases):

So, in a sense, they are, and for this reason they lend themselves to
decipherment by the method of complex psychology. [The alchemical approach]…is
so patently a spiritual and moral attitude that one cannot doubt its
psychological nature. To our way of thinking, this immediately sets up a
dividing wall between the psychic and the chemical process. For us the two
things are incommensurable, but they were not so for the medieval mind. It knew
nothing of the nature of chemical substances and their combination. It saw only
enigmatic substances which, united with one another, inexplicably brought forth
equally mysterious new substances. In this profound darkness the alchemist's
fantasy had free play and could playfully combine the most inconceivable
things. It could act without restraint and, in so doing, portray itself without
being aware of what was happening.608



The alchemist thought in a medieval or pre-medieval fashion, using archaic
preconceptions and ideas. Analysis of that thought, “projected” upon matter
(just as we interpret “matter” in the light of our own, current and therefore
invisible theories), therefore means interpretation of fantasy, analysis of the
spontaneous productions of the exploring mind. Such analysis means increased
capacity to understand the workings of mind. The entire corpus of alchemy
contains seventeen hundred years of fantasy regarding the nature of (moral)
transformation, assumed to take place in matter (a category that included man)
“striving” as it did “naturally” toward perfection. Central to this movement
toward perfection was the dissolution, transformation and reconstitution of
unredeemed primal matter, the prima materia:

As is indicated by the very name which he chose for it—the “spagyric” art—or by
the oft-repeated saying “solve et coagula” [dissolve and reconstitute], the
alchemist saw the essence of his art in separation and analysis on the one hand
and synthesis and consolidation on the other. For him there was first of all an
initial state in which opposite tendencies or forces were in conflict; secondly
there was the great question of a procedure which would be capable of bringing
the hostile elements and qualities, once they were separated, back to unity
again. The initial state, named the chaos, was not given from the start, but
had to be sought for as the prima materia. And just as the beginning of the
work was not self-evident, so to an even greater degree was its end. There are
countless speculations on the nature of the endstate, all of them reflected in
its designations. The commonest are the ideas of its permanence (prolongation
of life, immortality, uncorruptibility), its androgyny, its spirituality and
corporeality, its human qualities and resemblance to man (homunculus), and its
divinity.609



The alchemists began their work, their opus, by determining to face the
unknown, locked away in the material world, in the pursuit of an ideal. Their
ideal was symbolized by the lapis philosophorum, which was a unitary substance
characterized by its ability to transform base metals into gold, and more—which
could confer upon its bearer complete knowledge, immortal life, and impeccable
mental and physical health. The medieval individual had no idea that the
creation of such a “substance” was not possible, and was aware of many
substances that had transformative properties.

Identification of what motivated such a pursuit appears straightforward. There
were undoubtedly many who tried their hand at alchemy, purely for its potential
economic benefit, just as there are many today who pursue their occupation
solely for material gain. (Even this is a form of desire for redemption,
however—through material means—and may be unexpectedly transformed into a more
purely spiritual pursuit in the course of maturation, or through the
unpredictable actions of fantasy and circumstance.) There were also alchemists
who more clearly embodied the spirit of devout curiosity, and who worked with
the same serious discipline as the later natural scientist. It is naive to
underestimate the power and the mystery of the fantasy of the philosopher's
stone. This idea provided the motive power underlying disciplined investigation
into the secrets of matter—a difficult, painstaking, expensive procedure. The
idea that matter contained locked within it the secret to wisdom, health and
wealth underlies the entire opus of modern science. The fact that such an idea
could arise, and be seriously entertained in spite of grandiosity and conflict
with church dogma, is difficult enough to believe. It becomes truly
incomprehensible when consideration is given to the additional fact that the
procedure extended over seventeen centuries, despite the fact that no alchemist
every reached his goal. Jung states:

In view of the fact that…a miracle never did occur in the retort, despite
repeated assertions that someone had actually succeeded in making gold, and
that neither a panacea nor an elixir has demonstrably prolonged a human life
beyond its due, and that no homunculus has ever flown out of the furnace—in
view of this totally negative result we must ask on what the enthusiasm and
infatuation of the adepts could possibly have been based.

In order to answer this difficult question one must bear in mind that the
alchemists, guided by their keenness for research, were in fact on a hopeful
path since the fruit that alchemy bore after centuries of endeavor was
chemistry and its staggering discoveries. The emotional dynamism of alchemy is
largely explained by a premonition of these then unheard-of possibilities.
However barren of useful or even enlightening results its labours were, these
efforts, notwithstanding their chronic failure, seem to have had a psychic
effect of a positive nature, something akin to satisfaction or even a
perceptible increase in wisdom. Otherwise it would be impossible to explain why
the alchemists did not turn away in disgust from their almost invariably futile
projects.610



The alchemical fantasy provided (and still provides) the motive power for the
empirical endeavor, just as the dream of Judeo-Christianity provided motive
power for the civilization of the West. In this manner, myth, mysterious,
absurd and incomprehensible, stands at the vanguard of the adaptive process.
Eliade states (with specific regard to the origin of science):

Until recently, few were aware of Isaac Newton's role in this general
[alchemical] movement, whose goal was the renovatio of European religion and
culture by means of an audacious synthesis of the occult traditions and the
natural sciences. It is true that Newton never published the results of his
alchemical experiments, although he declared that some of them were crowned
with success. His innumerable alchemical manuscripts, ignored until 1940, have
recently been meticulously analyzed by Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs in her book The
Foundations of Newton's Alchemy (1975). Dobbs affirms that Newton experimented
in his laboratory with the operations described in the immense alchemical
literature, probing the latter “as it has never been probed before or since”
(p. 88). With the aid of alchemy, Newton hoped to discover the structure of the
microuniverse in order to homologize it with his cosmological system. The
discovery of gravity, the force which keeps the planets in their orbits, did
not completely satisfy him. But although he pursued the experiments
indefatigably from 1669 to 1696, he did not succeed in identifying the forces
which govern the corpuscles. Nevertheless, when he began to study the dynamics
of orbital movement in 1679–80, he applied his “chemical” conceptions of
attraction to the universe.

As McGuire and Rattansi have shown, Newton was convinced that in the beginning,
“God had imparted the secrets of natural philosophy and of true religion to a
select few. The knowledge was subsequently lost but partially recovered later,
at which time it was incorporated in fables and mythic formulations where it
would remain hidden from the vulgar. In modern days it could be more fully
recovered from experience.”611 For this reason, Newton examined the most
esoteric sections of the alchemical literature, hoping that they would contain
the true secrets. It is significant that the founder of modern mechanics did
not reject the tradition of a primordial and secret revelation, just as he did
not reject the principle of transmutation. As he wrote in his Optics (1704),
“the change of Bodies into Light and of Light into Bodies is entirely in
conformity with the Laws of Nature, for Nature seems ravished by
Transmutation.” According to Dobbs, “Newton's alchemical thoughts were so
securely established that he never came to deny their general validity, and in
a sense the whole of his career after 1675 may be seen as one long attempt to
integrate alchemy and the mechanical philosophy” (Foundations, p. 230).

After the publication of the Principia, opponents declared that Newton's
“forces” were in reality “occult qualities.” As Dobbs recognizes, in a certain
sense these critics were right: “Newton's forces were very much like the hidden
sympathies and antipathies found in much of the occult literature of the
Renaissance period. But Newton had given forces an ontological status
equivalent to that of matter and motion. By so doing, and by quantifying the
forces, he enabled the mechanical philosophies to rise above the level of
imaginary impact mechanisms” (p. 211). In analyzing the Newtonian conception of
force, Richard Westfall arrives at the conclusion that modern science is the
result of the wedding of the Hermetic tradition with the mechanical
philosophy.612

In its spectacular flight, “modern science” has ignored, or rejected, the
heritage of Hermeticism. Or to put it differently, the triumph of Newtonian
mechanics has ended up by annihilating its own scientific ideal. In effect,
Newton and his contemporaries expected a different type of scientific
revolution. In prolonging and developing the hopes and objectives (the first
among these being the redemption of Nature) of the neo-alchemist of the
Renaissance, minds as different as those of Paracelsus, John Dee, Comenius,
J.V.Andreae, Fludd, and Newton saw in alchemy the model for a no less ambitious
enterprise: the perfection of man by a new method of knowledge. In their
perspective, such a method had to integrate into a nonconfessional Christianity
the Hermetic tradition and the natural sciences of medicine, astronomy, and
mechanics. In fact, this synthesis constituted a new Christian creation,
comparable to the brilliant results obtained by the earlier integrations of
Platonism, Aristotelianism, and Neoplatonism. This type of “knowledge,” dreamed
of and partially elaborated in the eighteenth century, represents the last
enterprise of Christian Europe that was undertaken with the aim of obtaining a
“total knowledge.”613



Not precisely the last.

Formulation of the idea that God might be known in material form meant positing
the possibility that the highest conceivable value might be embodied concretely
in “matter”—rather than in the established, patriarchal, “spiritual” world.
This meant that the “nature of God” was something that could be made subject to
material (and thoughtful) investigation. However, matter remained comparatively
unknown to the medieval mind—and was therefore “contaminated” with everything
else unknown, repressed and rejected. The assignment of value to matter was
therefore attribution of value to unknown experience. This assignment was
heretical, because it implied the fallibility or incomplete nature of church
dogma (the formalized medieval European general model of expectation and
desire), and was therefore dangerous, from the intrapsychic and the social
viewpoints. Such heresy was compounded in severity, because the church
explicitly regarded matter—representative of the inadmissible unknown—as
degraded, corrupt, imperfect and demonic.

The alchemist was an unredeemed, suffering man, in search of an inexpressible
ideal. He formulated that ideal, and its process of generation, using terms
that referred to “the physical world,” at least from the modern perspective.
However, the alchemist made no clear distinction between psychological and
objective. His “search for the ideal” was therefore as much psychological as
chemical (more, actually, since he worked in the absence even of the basic
measurement devices of modern science). The alchemist posited that the answer
lay outside the church, in the unknown. Exploration of the unknown and
forbidden meant generation of redemptive knowledge (then, as it does now).
Incorporation of such knowledge meant movement toward perfection. Broadly
speaking, the alchemist wanted to transform every subordinate element in the
category “matter” (the unknown, fallen, corrupt world, including man as
“material” being) into the category “gold” (the Apollinian, spiritual, sunlike,
incorruptible state). He was searching for a transformative agent to bring
about that change (the lapis philosophorum); but also viewed himself as that
agent (since he was integrally involved in the transformative opus of alchemy).
This relatively straightforward conceptualization of “movement toward the
ideal” is schematically presented in Figure 62: The Alchemical Opus as “Normal
Story.”

The alchemist courageously posited that the work of redemption held up as
absolute by

Figure 62: The Alchemical Opus as “Normal Story”





the church was not yet complete—or at least acted “as if” there was still work
to be done. So he hoped to turn what was still unredeemed into gold. The
problem is, of course, that turning base matter into gold is not possible, as a
“normal” act of movement from point “a”—the unbearable present—to point “b”—the
desirable future. The attempt to produce the “most ideal state possible,”
however—something akin to paradise on earth—is particularly unlikely, without a
revolution. So the alchemical “story” rapidly turned into something more
complex; something that essentially recapitulated the “union of the gods”
(something like a process of initiation or spiritual transformation). The
alchemists soon came to realize that movement toward the ideal did not mean an
unbroken journey uphill; soon came to realize that a large leap forward was
necessarily preceded by a radical descent.

Once the alchemist had decided to look into the unknown for salvation, rather
than to the church (or at least in addition to the church), he placed himself
outside the protective confines of his previous system of classification.
Outside that dogmatic system, things took on new meaning (or at least new
potential meaning). Once you have decided that you don't know absolutely
everything about something, it is possible to learn something new. However,
when an “object” has been placed in a system of classification (within the
constraints of a particular paradigm), its a priori motivational significance
is constrained (entirely, in the case of something deemed irrelevant;
partially, when the phenomenon is assigned a particular use). When the
classification system fails [as a consequence of the transformation of the
environment, natural or social, or, more prosaically, because of the emergence
of incongruent experience (paradigm-threatening information)] the phenomena
previously constrained in their motivational significance regain their original
status. That means that objects of experience are renovelized—that the affect
they were capable of producing, prior to classification, re-emerges. This
process was represented in the alchemical scheme by the death of the “king”
(the previously reigning “system of order”) and the reappearance of the
“queen,” the Great Mother (source of threat and promise, vital for renewal).
The “immersion of the king in the queen” [their “sexual union” (the incest
motif)] symbolized reduction of the “world” to the precosmogonic chaos
preceding creation—to the state of prima materia, primal matter. This also led
to the state of the “warring opposites”—to the re-emergence of conflicting
“substances” once held in harmony by the preceding orderly condition. The
“re-union” (symbolized as a creative or “sexual” union) of king and queen
produced a state characterized by the possibility of something new. This
“something new” might be conceptualized as the “divine son” emerging from that
union, soon to be king again. This divine son was regarded, variously, as the
new king—or even as the philosopher's stone itself, in one of its many
potential forms. This much more complex process of conceptualization—which
accounts for the vast symbolic production of alchemy—is presented schematically
in Figure 63: The Alchemical Opus as “Revolutionary Story. ”

