# Preface - DESCENSUS AD INFEROS
[Metadata]: # {01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
Preface
DESCENSUS AD INFEROS
# DESCENSUS AD INFEROS
Something we cannot see protects us from something we do not understand. The
thing we cannot see is culture, in its intrapsychic or internal manifestation.
The thing we do not understand is the chaos that gave rise to culture. If the
structure of culture is disrupted, unwittingly, chaos returns. We will do
anything-anything-to defend ourselves against that return.



“The very fact that a general problem has gripped and assimilated the whole of
a person is a guarantee that the speaker has really experienced it, and perhaps
gained something from his sufferings. He will then reflect the problem for us
in his personal life and thereby show us a truth.”1



I was raised under the protective auspices, so to speak, of the Christian
church. This does not mean that my family was explicitly religious. I attended
conservative Protestant services during childhood with my mother, but she was
not a dogmatic or authoritarian believer, and we never discussed religious
issues at home. My father appeared essentially agnostic, at least in the
traditional sense. He refused to even set foot in a church, except during
weddings and funerals. Nonetheless, the historical remnants of Christian
morality permeated our household, conditioning our expectations and
interpersonal responses, in the most intimate of manners. When I grew up, after
all, most people still attended church; furthermore, all the rules and
expectations that made up middle-class society were Judeo-Christian in nature.
Even the increasing number of those who could not tolerate formal ritual and
belief still implicitly accepted—still acted out—the rules that made up the
Christian game.

When I was twelve or so my mother enrolled me in confirmation classes, which
served as introduction to adult membership in the church. I did not like
attending. I did not like the attitude of my overtly religious classmates (who
were few in number) and did not desire their lack of social standing. I did not
like the school-like atmosphere of the confirmation classes. More importantly,
however, I could not swallow what I was being taught. I asked the minister, at
one point, how he reconciled the story of Genesis with the creation theories of
modern science. He had not undertaken such a reconciliation; furthermore, he
seemed more convinced, in his heart, of the evolutionary viewpoint. I was
looking for an excuse to leave, anyway, and that was the last straw. Religion
was for the ignorant, weak and superstitious. I stopped attending church and
joined the modern world.

Although I had grown up in a Christian environment—and had a successful and
happy childhood, in at least partial consequence—I was more than willing to
throw aside the structure that had fostered me. No one really opposed my
rebellious efforts, either, in church or at home—in part because those who were
deeply religious (or who might have wanted to be) had no intellectually
acceptable counter-arguments at their disposal. After all, many of the basic
tenets of Christian belief were incomprehensible, if not clearly absurd. The
virgin birth was an impossibility; likewise, the notion that someone could rise
from the dead.

Did my act of rebellion precipitate a familial or a social crisis? No. My
actions were so predictable, in a sense, that they upset no one, with the
exception of my mother (and even she was soon resigned to the inevitable). The
other members of the church—my “community”—had become absolutely habituated to
the increasingly more frequent act of defection, and did not even notice.

Did my act of rebellion upset me, personally? Only in a manner I was not able
to perceive, until many years later. I developed a premature concern with
large-scale political and social issues, at about the same time I quit
attending church. Why were some countries, some people, rich, happy and
successful, while others were doomed to misery? Why were the forces of NATO and
the Soviet Union continually at each other's throats? How was it possible for
people to act the way the Nazis had during World War II? Underlying these
specific considerations was a broader, but at the time illconceptualized
question: how did evil—particularly group-fostered evil—come to play its role
in the world?

I abandoned the traditions that supported me, at about the same time I left
childhood. This meant that I had no broader socially constructed “philosophy”
at hand to aid my understanding as I became aware of the existential problems
that accompany maturity. The final consequences ofthat lack took years to
become fully manifest. In the meantime, however, my nascent concern with
questions of moral justice found immediate resolution. I started working as a
volunteer for a mildly socialist political party, and adopted the party line.

Economic injustice was at the root of all evil, as far as I was concerned. Such
injustice could be rectified, as a consequence of the rearrangement of social
organizations. I could play a part in that admirable revolution, carrying out
my ideological beliefs. Doubt vanished; my role was clear. Looking back, I am
amazed at how stereotypical my actions—reactions—really were. I could not
rationally accept the premises of religion as I understood them. I turned, in
consequence, to dreams of political utopia, and personal power. The same
ideological trap caught millions of others, in recent centuries.

When I was seventeen I left the town I grew up in. I moved nearby and attended
a small college, which offered the first two years of undergraduate education.
I involved myself there in university politics—which were more or less left
wing at that time—and was elected to the college board of governors. The board
was composed of politically and ideologically conservative people: lawyers,
doctors, and businessmen. They were all well (or at least practically)
educated, pragmatic, confident, outspoken; they had all accomplished something
worthwhile and difficult. I could not help but admire them, even though I did
not share their political stance. I found the fact of my admiration unsettling.

I had attended several left-wing party congresses, as a student politician and
active party worker. I hoped to emulate the socialist leaders. The left had a
long and honorable history in Canada, and attracted some truly competent and
caring people. However, I could not generate much respect for the numerous
low-level party activists I encountered at these meetings. They seemed to live
to complain. They had no career, frequently, and no family, no completed
education—nothing but ideology. They were peevish, irritable, and little, in
every sense of the word. I was faced, in consequence, with the mirror image of
the problem I encountered on the college board: I did not admire many of the
individuals who believed the same things I did. This additional complication
furthered my existential confusion.

My college roommate, an insightful cynic, expressed skepticism regarding my
ideological beliefs. He told me that the world could not be completely
encapsulated within the boundaries of socialist philosophy. I had more or less
come to this conclusion on my own, but had not admitted so much in words. Soon
afterward, however, I read George Orwell's Road to Wigan Pier. This book
finally undermined me—not only my socialist ideology, but my faith in
ideological stances themselves. In the famous essay concluding that book
(written for—and much to the dismay of—the British Left Book Club) Orwell
described the great flaw of socialism, and the reason for its frequent failure
to attract and maintain democratic power (at least in Britain). Orwell said,
essentially, that socialists did not really like the poor. They merely hated
the rich.2 His idea struck home instantly. Socialist ideology served to mask
resentment and hatred, bred by failure. Many of the party activists I had
encountered were using the ideals of social justice to rationalize their
pursuit of personal revenge.

Whose fault was it that I was poor or uneducated and unadmired? Obviously, the
fault of the rich, well-schooled and respected. How convenient, then, that the
demands of revenge and abstract justice dovetailed! It was only right to obtain
recompense from those more fortunate than me.

Of course, my socialist colleagues and I weren't out to hurt anyone. Quite the
reverse. We were out to improve things—but we were going to start with other
people. I came to see the temptation in this logic, the obvious flaw, the
danger—but could also see that it did not exclusively characterize socialism.
Anyone who was out to change the world by changing others was to be regarded
with suspicion. The temptations of such a position were too great to be
resisted.

It was not socialist ideology that posed the problem, then, but ideology as
such. Ideology divided the world up simplistically into those who thought and
acted properly, and those who did not. Ideology enabled the believer to hide
from his own unpleasant and inadmissible fantasies and wishes. Such
realizations upset my beliefs (even my faith in beliefs), and the plans I had
formulated as a consequence of these beliefs. I could no longer tell who was
good and who was bad, so to speak—so I no longer knew whom to support, or whom
to fight. This state of affairs proved very troublesome, pragmatically as well
as philosophically. I wanted to become a corporate lawyer—had written the Law
School Admissions Test, had taken two years of appropriate preliminary courses.
I wanted to learn the ways of my enemies, and embark on a political career.
This plan disintegrated. The world obviously did not need another lawyer, and I
no longer believed that I knew enough to masquerade as a leader.

I became simultaneously disenchanted with the study of political science, my
erstwhile major. I had adopted that discipline so I could learn more about the
structure of human beliefs (and for the practical, career-oriented reasons
described previously). It remained very interesting to me when I was at junior
college, where I was introduced to the history of political philosophy. When I
moved to the main campus at the University of Alberta, however, my interest
disappeared. I was taught that people were motivated by rational forces; that
human beliefs and actions were determined by economic pressures. This did not
seem sufficient explanation. I could not believe (and still do not) that
commodities—“natural resources,” for example—had intrinsic and self-evident
value. In the absence of such value, the worth of things had to be socially or
culturally (or even individually) determined. This act of determination
appeared to me moral—appeared to me to be a consequence of the moral philosophy
adopted by the society, culture or person in question. What people valued,
economically, merely reflected what they believed to be important. This meant
that real motivation had to lie in the domain of value, of morality. The
political scientists I studied with did not see this, or did not think it was
relevant.

My religious convictions, ill-formed to begin with, disappeared when I was very
young. My confidence in socialism (that is, in political utopia) vanished when
I realized that the world was not merely a place of economics. My faith in
ideology departed, when I began to see that ideological identification itself
posed a profound and mysterious problem. I could not accept the theoretical
explanations my chosen field of study had to offer, and no longer had any
practical reasons to continue in my original direction. I finished my
three-year bachelor's degree, and left university. All my beliefs—which had
lent order to the chaos of my existence, at least temporarily—had proved
illusory; I could no longer see the sense in things. I was cast adrift; I did
not know what to do or what to think.

But what of others? Was there evidence anywhere that the problems I now faced
had been solved, by anyone, in any acceptable manner? The customary behavior
and attitudes of my friends and family members offered no solution. The people
I knew well were no more resolutely goal-directed or satisfied than I was.
Their beliefs and modes of being seemed merely to disguise frequent doubt and
profound disquietude. More disturbingly, on the more gener-al plane, something
truly insane was taking place. The great societies of the world were feverishly
constructing a nuclear machine, with unimaginably destructive capabilities.
Someone or something was making terrible plans. Why? Theoretically normal and
well-adapted people were going about their business prosaically, as if nothing
were the matter. Why weren't they disturbed? Weren't they paying attention?
Wasn't I?

My concern with the general social and political insanity and evil of the
world— sublimated by temporary infatuation with utopian socialism and political
machination— returned with a vengeance. The mysterious fact of the Cold War
increasingly occupied the forefront of my consciousness. How could things have
come to such a point?

History is just a madhouse

it's turned over all the stones

and its very careful reading

leaves you little that's unknown



I couldn't understand the nuclear race: what could possibly be worth risking
annihilation—not merely of the present, but of the past and the future? What
could possibly justify the threat of total destruction?

Bereft of solutions, I had at least been granted the gift of a problem.

I returned to university and began to study psychology. I visited a maximum
security prison on the outskirts of Edmonton, under the supervision of an
eccentric adjunct professor at the University of Alberta. His primary job was
the psychological care of convicts. The prison was full of murderers, rapists
and armed robbers. I ended up in the gym, near the weight room, on my first
reconnaissance. I was wearing a long wool cape, circa 1890, which I had bought
in Portugal, and a pair of tall leather boots. The psychologist who was
accompanying me disappeared, unexpectedly, and left me alone. Soon I was
surrounded by unfamiliar men, some of whom were extremely large and
tough-looking. One in particular stands out in my memory. He was exceptionally
muscular, and tattooed over his bare chest. He had a vicious scar running from
his collarbone to his midsection. Maybe he had survived open-heart surgery. Or
maybe it was an ax wound. The injury would have killed a lesser man,
anyway—someone like me.

Some of the prisoners, who weren't dressed particularly well, offered to trade
their clothes for mine. This did not strike me as a great bargain, but I wasn't
sure how to refuse. Fate rescued me, in the form of a short, skinny, bearded
man. He said that the psychologist had sent him, and he asked me to accompany
him. He was only one person, and many others (much larger) currently surrounded
me and my cape. So I took him at his word. He led me outside the gym doors, and
into the prison yard, talking quietly but reasonably about something innocuous
(I don't recall what) all the while. I kept glancing back hopefully at the open
doors behind us as we got further and further away. Finally my supervisor
appeared, and motioned me back. We left the bearded prisoner, and went to a
private office. The psychologist told me that the harmless-appearing little man
who had escorted me out of the gym had murdered two policemen after he had
forced them to dig their own graves. One of the policemen had little children
and had begged for his life on their behalf while he was digging—at least
according to the murderer's own testimony.

This really shocked me.

I had read about this sort of event, of course—but it had never been made real
for me. I had never met someone even tangentially affected by something like
this, and had certainly not encountered anyone who had actually done something
so terrible. How could the man I had talked to—who was so apparently normal
(and so seemingly inconsequential)—have done such an awful thing?

Some of the courses I was attending at this time were taught in large lecture
theaters, where the students were seated in descending rows, row after row. In
one of these courses—Introduction to Clinical Psychology, appropriately
enough—I experienced a recurrent compulsion. I would take my seat behind some
unwitting individual and listen to the professor speak. At some point during
the lecture, I would unfailingly feel the urge to stab the point of my pen into
the neck of the person in front of me. This impulse was not
overwhelming—luckily—but it was powerful enough to disturb me. What sort of
terrible person would have an impulse like that? Not me. I had never been
aggressive. I had been smaller and younger than my classmates for most of my
life.

I went back to the prison, a month or so after my first visit. During my
absence, two prisoners had attacked a third, a suspected informer. They held or
tied him down and pulverized one of his legs with a lead pipe. I was taken
aback, once again, but this time I tried something different. I tried to
imagine, really imagine, what I would have to be like to do such a thing. I
concentrated on this task for days and days—and experienced a frightening
revelation. The truly appalling aspect of such atrocity did not lie in its
impossibility or remoteness, as I had naively assumed, but in its ease. I was
not much different from the violent prisoners—not qualitatively different. I
could do what they could do (although I hadn't).

This discovery truly upset me. I was not who I thought I was. Surprisingly,
however, the desire to stab someone with my pen disappeared. In retrospect, I
would say that the behavioral urge had manifested itself in explicit
knowledge—had been translated from emotion and image to concrete
realization—and had no further “reason” to exist. The “impulse” had only
occurred, because of the question I was attempting to answer: “How can men do
terrible things to one another?” I meant other men, of course—bad men—but I had
still asked the question. There was no reason for me to assume that I would
receive a predictable or personally meaningless answer.

At the same time, something odd was happening to my ability to converse. I had
always enjoyed engaging in arguments, regardless of topic. I regarded them as a
sort of game (not that this is in any way unique). Suddenly, however, I
couldn't talk—more accurately, I couldn't stand listening to myself talk. I
started to hear a “voice” inside my head, commenting on my opinions. Every time
I said something, it said something— something critical. The voice employed a
standard refrain, delivered in a somewhat bored and matter-of-fact tone:

You don't believe that.

That isn't true.

You don't believe that.

That isn't true.



The “voice” applied such comments to almost every phrase I spoke.

I couldn't understand what to make of this. I knew the source of the commentary
was part of me, but this knowledge only increased my confusion. Which part,
precisely, was me—the talking part or the criticizing part? If it was the
talking part, then what was the criticizing part? If it was the criticizing
part—well, then: how could virtually everything I said be untrue? In my
ignorance and confusion, I decided to experiment. I tried only to say things
that my internal reviewer would pass unchallenged. This meant that I really had
to listen to what I was saying, that I spoke much less often, and that I would
frequently stop, midway through a sentence, feel embarrassed, and reformulate
my thoughts. I soon noticed that I felt much less agitated and more confident
when I only said things that the “voice” did not object to. This came as a
definite relief. My experiment had been a success; I was the criticizing part.
Nonetheless, it took me a long time to reconcile myself to the idea that almost
all my thoughts weren't real, weren't true—or, at least, weren't mine.

All the things I “believed” were things I thought sounded good, admirable,
respectable, courageous. They weren't my things, however—I had stolen them.
Most of them I had taken from books. Having “understood” them, abstractly, I
presumed I had a right to them—presumed that I could adopt them, as if they
were mine: presumed that they were me. My head was stuffed full of the ideas of
others; stuffed full of arguments I could not logically refute. I did not know
then that an irrefutable argument is not necessarily true, nor that the right
to identify with certain ideas had to be earned.

I read something by Carl Jung, at about this time, that helped me understand
what I was experiencing. It was Jung who formulated the concept of persona: the
mask that “feigned individuality.”3 Adoption of such a mask, according to Jung,
allowed each of us—and those around us—to believe that we were authentic. Jung
said:

When we analyse the persona we strip off the mask, and discover that what
seemed to be individual is at bottom collective; in other words, that the
persona was only a mask of the collective psyche. Fundamentally the persona is
nothing real: it is a compromise between individual and society as to what a
man should appear to be. He takes a name, earns a title, exercises a function,
he is this or that. In a certain sense all this is real, yet in relation to the
essential individuality of the person concerned it is only a secondary reality,
a compromise formation, in making which others often have a greater share than
he. The persona is a semblance, a two-dimensional reality, to give it a
nickname.4



Despite my verbal facility, I was not real. I found this painful to admit.

I began to dream absolutely unbearable dreams. My dream life, up to this point,
had been relatively uneventful, as far as I can remember; furthermore, I have
never had a particularly good visual imagination. Nonetheless, my dreams became
so horrible and so emotionally gripping that I was often afraid to go to sleep.
I dreamt dreams vivid as reality. I could not escape from them or ignore them.
They circulated, in general, around a single theme: that of nuclear war, and
total devastation—around the worst evils that I, or something in me, could
imagine:

My parents lived in a standard ranch-style house, in a middle-class
neighborhood, in a small town in northern Alberta. I was sitting in the
darkened basement of this house, in the family room, watching TV, with my
cousin Diane, who was in truth—in waking life—the most beautiful woman I had
ever seen. A newscaster suddenly interrupted the program. The television
picture and sound distorted, and static filled the screen. My cousin stood up
and went behind the TV to check the electrical cord. She touched it, and
started convulsing and frothing at the mouth, frozen upright by intense
current.

A brilliant flash of light from a small window flooded the basement. I rushed
upstairs. There was nothing left of the ground floor of the house. It had been
completely and cleanly sheared away, leaving only the floor, which now served
the basement as a roof. Red and orange flames filled the sky, from horizon to
horizon. Nothing was left as far as I could see, except skeletal black ruins
sticking up here and there: no houses, no trees, no signs of other human beings
or of any life whatsoever. The entire town and everything that surrounded it on
the flat prairie had been completely obliterated.

It started to rain mud, heavily. The mud blotted out everything, and left the
earth brown, wet, flat and dull, and the sky leaden, even gray. A few
distraught and shell-shocked people started to gather together. They were
carrying unlabeled and dented cans of food, which contained nothing but mush
and vegetables. They stood in the mud looking exhausted and disheveled. Some
dogs emerged, out from under the basement stairs, where they had inexplicably
taken residence. They were standing upright, on their hind legs. They were
thin, like greyhounds, and had pointed noses. They looked like creatures of
ritual—like Anubis, from the Egyptian tombs. They were carrying plates in front
of them, which contained pieces of seared meat. They wanted to trade the meat
for the cans. I took a plate. In the center of it was a circular slab of flesh
four inches in diameter and one inch thick, foully cooked, oily, with a marrow
bone in the center of it. Where did it come from?

I had a terrible thought. I rushed downstairs to my cousin. The dogs had
butchered her, and were offering the meat to the survivors of the disaster.



I dreamed apocalyptic dreams of this intensity two or three times a week for a
year or more, while I attended university classes and worked—as if nothing out
of the ordinary was going on in my mind. Something I had no familiarity with
was happening, however. I was being affected, simultaneously, by events on two
“planes.” On the first plane were the normal, predictable, everyday occurrences
that I shared with everybody else. On the second plane, however (unique to me,
or so I thought) existed dreadful images and unbearably intense emotional
states. This idiosyncratic, subjective world—which everyone normally treated as
illusory—seemed to me at that time to lie somehow behind the world everyone
knew and regarded as real. But what did real mean? The closer I looked, the
less comprehensible things became. Where was the real? What was at the bottom
of it all? I did not feel I could live without knowing.

My interest in the Cold War transformed itself into a true obsession. I thought
about the suicidal and murderous preparation of that war every minute of every
day, from the moment I woke up until the second I went to bed. How could such a
state of affairs come about? Who was responsible?

I dreamed that I was running through a mall parking lot, trying to escape from
something. I was running through the parked cars, opening one door, crawling
across the front seat, opening the other, moving to the next. The doors on one
car suddenly slammed shut. I was in the passenger seat. The car started to move
by itself. A voice said harshly, “there is no way out of here.” I was on a
journey, going somewhere I did not want to go. I was not the driver.



I became very depressed and anxious. I had vaguely suicidal thoughts, but
mostly wished that everything would just go away. I wanted to lie down on my
couch, and sink into it, literally, until only my nose was showing—like the
snorkel of a diver above the surface of the water. I found my awareness of
things unbearable.

I came home late one night from a college drinking party, self-disgusted and
angry. I took a canvas board and some paints. I sketched a harsh, crude picture
of a crucified Christ—glaring and demonic—with a cobra wrapped around his naked
waist, like a belt. The picture disturbed me—struck me, despite my agnosticism,
as sacrilegious. I did not know what it meant, however, or why I had painted
it. Where in the world had it come from?5 I hadn't paid any attention to
religious ideas for years. I hid the painting under some old clothes in my
closet and sat cross-legged on the floor. I put my head down. It became obvious
to me at that moment that I had not developed any real understanding of myself
or of others. Everything I had once believed about the nature of society and
myself had proved false, the world had apparently gone insane, and something
strange and frightening was happening in my head. James Joyce said, “History is
a nightmare from which I am trying to awake.”6 For me, history literally was a
nightmare. I wanted above all else at that moment to wake up and make my
terrible dreams go away.

I have been trying ever since then to make sense of the human capacity, my
capacity, for evil—particularly for those evils associated with belief. I
started by trying to make sense of my dreams. I couldn't ignore them, after
all. Perhaps they were trying to tell me something? I had nothing to lose by
admitting the possibility. I read Freud's Interpretation of Dreams and found it
useful. Freud at least took the topic seriously—but I could not regard my
nightmares as wish-fulfillments. Furthermore, they seemed more religious than
sexual in nature. I knew, vaguely, that Jung had developed specialized
knowledge of myth and religion, so I started through his writings. His thinking
was granted little credence by the academics I knew, but they weren't
particularly concerned with dreams. I couldn't help being concerned by mine.
They were so intense I thought they might derange me. (What was the
alternative? To believe that the terrors and pains they caused me were not
real?)

Much of the time I could not understand what Jung was getting at. He was making
a point I could not grasp, speaking a language I did not comprehend. Now and
then, however, his statements struck home. He offered this observation, for
example:

It must be admitted that the archetypal contents of the collective unconscious
can often assume grotesque and horrible forms in dreams and fantasies, so that
even the most hard-boiled rationalist is not immune from shattering nightmares
and haunting fears.7



The second part of that statement certainly seemed applicable to me, although
the first (“the archetypal contents of the collective unconscious”) remained
mysterious and obscure. Still, this was promising. Jung at least recognized
that the things that were happening to me could happen. Furthermore, he offered
some hints as to their cause. So I kept reading. I soon came across the
following hypothesis. Here was a potential solution to the problems I was
facing—or at least the description of a place to look for such a solution:

The psychological elucidation of…[dream and fantasy] images, which cannot be
passed over in silence or blindly ignored, leads logically into the depths of
religious phenomenology. The history of religion in its widest sense (including
therefore mythology, folklore, and primitive psychology) is a treasure-house of
archetypal forms from which the doctor can draw helpful parallels and
enlightening comparisons for the purpose of calming and clarifying a
consciousness that is all at sea. It is absolutely necessary to supply these
fantastic images that rise up so strange and threatening before the mind's eye
with some kind of context so as to make them more intelligible. Experience has
shown that the best way to do this is by means of comparative mythological
material.8



The study of “comparative mythological material” in fact made my horrible
dreams disappear. The cure wrought by this study, however, was purchased at the
price of complete and often painful transformation: what I believe about the
world, now—and how I act, in consequence—is so much at variance with what I
believed when I was younger that I might as well be a completely different
person.

I discovered that beliefs make the world, in a very real way—that beliefs are
the world, in a more than metaphysical sense. This discovery has not turned me
into a moral relativist, however: quite the contrary. I have become convinced
that the world-that-is-belief is orderly; that there are universal moral
absolutes (although these are structured such that a diverse range of human
opinion remains both possible and beneficial). I believe that individuals and
societies who flout these absolutes—in ignorance or in willful opposition—are
doomed to misery and eventual dissolution.

I learned that the meanings of the most profound substrata of belief systems
can be rendered explicitly comprehensible, even to the skeptical rational
thinker—and that, so rendered, can be experienced as fascinating, profound and
necessary. I learned why people wage war—why the desire to maintain, protect
and expand the domain of belief motivates even the most incomprehensible acts
of group-fostered oppression and cruelty—and what might be done to ameliorate
this tendency, despite its universality. I learned, finally, that the terrible
aspect of life might actually be a necessary precondition for the existence of
life—and that it is possible to regard that precondition, in consequence, as
comprehensible and acceptable. I hope that I can bring those who read this book
to the same conclusions, without demanding any unreasonable “suspension of
critical judgment”—excepting that necessary to initially encounter and consider
the arguments I present. These can be summarized as follows:

The world can be validly construed as a forum for action, as well as a place of
things. We describe the world as a place of things, using the formal methods of
science. The techniques of narrative, however—myth, literature and
drama—portray the world as a forum for action. The two forms of representation
have been unnecessarily set at odds, because we have not yet formed a clear
picture of their respective domains. The domain of the former is the objective
world—what is, from the perspective of intersubjective perception. The domain
of the latter is the world of value—what is and what should be, from the
perspective of emotion and action.

The world as forum for action is composed, essentially, of three constituent
elements, which tend to manifest themselves in typical patterns of metaphoric
representation. First is unexplored territory—the Great Mother, nature,
creative and destructive, source and final resting place of all determinate
things. Second is explored territory—the Great Father, culture, protective and
tyrannical, cumulative ancestral wisdom. Third is the process that mediates
between unexplored and explored territory—the Divine Son, the archetypal
individual, creative exploratory Word and vengeful adversary. We are adapted to
this world of divine characters, much as to the objective world. The fact of
this adaptation implies that the environment is in “reality” a forum for
action, as well as a place of things.

Unprotected exposure to unexplored territory produces fear. The individual is
protected from such fear as a consequence of ritual imitation of the Great
Father—as a consequence of the adoption of group identity, which restricts the
meaning of things, and confers predictability on social interactions. When
identification with the group is made absolute, however—when everything has to
be controlled, when the unknown is no longer allowed to exist—the creative
exploratory process that updates the group can no longer manifest itself. This
restriction of adaptive capacity dramatically increases the probability of
social aggression.

Rejection of the unknown is tantamount to “identification with the devil,” the
mythological counterpart and eternal adversary of the world-creating
exploratory hero. Such rejection and identification is a consequence of
Luciferian pride, which states: all that I know is all that is necessary to
know. This pride is totalitarian assumption of omniscience—is adoption of God's
place by “reason”—is something that inevitably generates a state of personal
and social being indistinguishable from hell. This hell develops because
creative exploration—impossible, without (humble) acknowledgment of the
unknown—constitutes the process that constructs and maintains the protective
adaptive structure that gives life much of its acceptable meaning.

“Identification with the devil” amplifies the dangers inherent in group
identification, which tends of its own accord towards pathological
stultification. Loyalty to personal interest-subjective meaning—can serve as an
antidote to the overwhelming temptation constantly posed by the possibility of
denying anomaly. Personal interest—subjective meaning—reveals itself at the
juncture of explored and unexplored territory, and is indicative of
participation in the process that ensures continued healthy individual and
societal adaptation.

Loyalty to personal interest is equivalent to identification with the
archetypal hero—the “savior”—who upholds his association with the creative Word
in the face of death, and despite group pressure to conform. Identification
with the hero serves to decrease the unbearable motivational valence of the
unknown; furthermore, provides the individual with a standpoint that
simultaneously transcends and maintains the group.



Similar summaries precede each chapter (and subchapter). Read as a unit, they
comprise a complete but compressed picture of the book. These should be read
first, after this preface. In this manner, the whole of the argument I am
offering might come quickly to aid comprehension of the parts.

