# 4 - The Stranger
[Metadata]: # {05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {05.05}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
The Stranger
# The Stranger
Arrival of the stranger, concretely presented in mythology, constitutes a
threat “to the stability of the kingdom,” metaphorically indistinguishable from
that posed by “environmental transformation.” The stable meaning of
experiential events, constrained by the hierarchical structure of group
identity, is easily disrupted by the presence of the “other,” who practically
poses a concrete threat to the stability of the present dominance structure,
and who, more abstractly—as his actions “contain” his moral tradition—exists as
the literal embodiment of challenges to the a priori assumptions guiding
belief. The stranger does not act in the manner expected. His inherent
unpredictability renders him indistinguishable from the unknown, as such, and
easily identified with the force constantly working to undermine order. From a
within-group perspective, so to speak, such identification is not purely
arbitrary, either, as the mere existence of the (successful) stranger poses
serious threat to the perceived utility of the general culture—and, therefore,
to its ability to inhibit existential terror and provide determinate meaning to
action.

When the members of one isolated group come into contact with the members of
another, the stage is therefore set for trouble. Each culture, each group,
evolved to protect its individual members from the unknown—from the abysmal
forces of the Great and Terrible Mother, from unbearable affect itself. Each
evolved to structure social relationships and render them predictable, to
provide a goal and the means to attain it. All cultures provide their
constituent individuals with particular modes of being in the face of terror
and uncertainty. All cultures are stable, integrated, hierarchically arranged
structures predicated upon assumptions held as absolute—but the particular
natures of these assumptions differ (at least at the more comprehensible and
“conscious” levels of analyses). Every culture represents an idiosyncratic
paradigm, a pattern of behaving in the face of the unknown, and the paradigm
cannot be shifted (its basic axioms cannot be modified), without dramatic
consequences—without dissolution, metaphoric death— prior to (potential)
reconstruction.

Every society provides protection from the unknown. The unknown itself is a
dangerous thing, full of unpredictability and threat. Chaotic social
relationships (destructured dominance hierarchies) create severe anxiety and
dramatically heighten the potential for interpersonal conflict. Furthermore,
the dissolution of culturally determined goals renders individual life,
identified with those goals, meaningless and unrewarding in intrinsic essence.
It is neither reasonable nor possible to simply abandon a particular culture,
which is a pattern of general adaptation, just because someone else comes along
who does things a different way, whose actions are predicated on different
assumptions. It is no simple matter to rebuild social relationships in the wake
of new ideas. It is no straightforward process, furthermore, to give up a goal,
a central unifying and motivating idea. Identification of an individual with a
group means that individual psychological stability is staked on maintenance of
group welfare. If the group founders suddenly as a consequence of external
circumstance or internal strife, the individual is laid bare to the world, his
social context disappears, his reason for being vanishes, he is swallowed up by
the unbearable unknown, and he cannot easily survive. Nietzsche states:

In an age of disintegration that mixes races indiscriminately, human beings
have in their bodies the heritage of multiple origins, that is, opposite, and
often not merely opposite, drives and value standards that fight each other and
rarely permit each other any rest. Such human beings of late cultures and
refracted lights will on the average be weaker human beings: their most
profound desire is that the war they are should come to an end.391



Of course, the unstated conclusion to Nietzsche's observation is that the war
typifying the person of “mixed race” (mixed culture, in more modern
terminology) is the affectively unpleasant precursor to the state of mind
characterizing the more thoroughly integrated individual, who has “won” the
war. This “victor”—who has organized the currently warring diverse cultural
standpoints into a hierarchy, integrated once more—will be stronger than his
“unicultural” predecessor, as his behavior and values will be the consequence
of the more diverse and broader ranging union of heretofore separate cultures.
It is reasonable to presuppose that it was the “unconscious” consideration of
the potentially positive outcome of such mixing that led Nietzsche to the
revelation of the dawning future “superman.”392 It is not the mere existence of
various previously separated presuppositions in a single psyche that
constitutes the postcontact victory, however. This means that the simplistic
promotion of “cultural diversity” as panacea is likely to produce anomie,
nihilism and conservative backlash. It is the molding of these diverse beliefs
into a single hierarchy that is precondition for the peaceful admixture of all.
This molding can only be accomplished by war conducted between paradoxical
elements, within the “postcontact” individual psyche. Such a war is so
difficult—so emotionally upsetting and cognitively challenging—that murder of
the anomalous “other” in the morally acceptable guise of traditional war
frequently seems a comforting alternative.

Fundamental threats can be posed very easily between groups of people. Most
concretely, foreign behaviors are threatening, unpredictable in particular,
terrifying in general—because essential beliefs, challenging beliefs, are most
convincingly expressed through actions:

He became to us a reproof of our thoughts;

the very sight of him is a burden to us, because his manner of life is unlike
that of others, and his ways are strange. (Wisdom 2:14–15 RSV)



A foreign man, a stranger, is threatening because he is not firmly fixed within
a social hierarchy, and may therefore behave unpredictably—with unpredictable
consequences for the social hierarchy. Signals of safety and threat vary, or
may vary, between members of different groups. Unpredictable means potentially
dangerous. More abstractly, what the stranger believes, specifically, threatens
the integrated structure of historically determined belief, in general. This
does not present a problem, when his foreign actions or ideas do not produce
fundamental conflict—do not threaten key beliefs. When basic concepts are
threatened, however, the unbearable, terrible unknown once again rises up, and
once-firm ground begins to give way.

