# 5 - The “Material World” as Archaic “Locus of the Unknown”
[Metadata]: # {06.08}
[Descriptor]: # {06.08}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The “Material World” as Archaic “Locus of the Unknown”
# The “Material World” as Archaic “Locus of the Unknown”
All these myth pictures represent a drama of the human psyche on the further
side of consciousness, showing man as both the one to be redeemed and the
redeemer. The first formulation is Christian, the sec ond alchemical. In the
first case man attributes the need of redemption to himself and leaves the work
of redemption…. to the autonomous divine figure; in the latter case man takes
upon himself the redeeming opus, and attributes the state of suffering and
consequent need of redemption to the anima mundi (world spirit) imprisoned in
matter.593



Alchemy can be most simply understood as the attempt to produce the
philosopher's stone—the lapis philosophorum. The lapis philosophorum had the
ability to turn “base” metals into gold; furthermore, it conferred upon its
bearer immortal life, spiritual peace and good health. The alchemical
“procedure” stretched some twenty centuries, in the West, coming to an end with
Newton; it had an equally lengthy and elaborate history in the Orient.

It is impossible to understand the essence of alchemical thought—or its
relevance for modern psychology—without entering into the categorical system of
the alchemist. The “stuff” with which the alchemist worked, although bearing
the same name, was only vaguely akin to our modern matter. There are many ways
to cut the world up, and they are not necessarily commensurate. Much of what
the alchemist considered “thing” we would not think of as characteristic of the
objective world; furthermore, what he considered unitary we would think of as
evidently diverse. There are two major reasons for this difference in opinion.

First: the categorical system used to parse up the world derives its nature in
large part from the nature of the end toward which activity is currently
devoted. The ends pursued by the alchemist were by no means identical to those
considered worthwhile today. In large part, they were much more comprehensive
(the “perfection of nature”); in addition, they were “contaminated” with
psychological formulations (the “redemption” of “corrupt” matter). Insofar as
the alchemical procedure was psychological—that is, driven by apprehension of
an “ideal state”—the categories it produced were evaluative. Phenomena that
emerge in the course of goal-directed behavior are classified most
fundamentally with regard to their relevance, or irrelevance, to that end.
Those that are relevant are further discriminated into those that are useful
and “good,” and those that exist as impediments and are “bad.” Since our
behavior is motivated—since it serves to regulate our emotions—it is very
difficult to construct a classification system whose elements are devoid of
evaluative significance. It is only since the emergence of strict empirical
methodology that such construction has been made possible. This means that
pre-experimental systems of classification such as those employed in the
alchemical procedure include evaluative appraisal, even when they consist of
terms such as “matter” or “gold” that appear familiar to us.

Second: it seems that the more poorly something has been explored, the broader
the category used to “encapsulate” or describe it. As exploration proceeds,
finer discrimination becomes possible. Apparently unitary things fall apart, in
this manner, into their previously implicit constituent elements (as nature is
“carved at her joints”). We no longer consider the traditional four elements of
the world, for example—fire, water, earth and air—either as irreducible
elements or even as categories extant at the same level of analysis. Further
investigation has reconfigured our systems of classification; we have
transformed the comparative simple “material world” of our ancestors into
something much more complex, useful and diverse. We believe, in consequence,
that the primordial elements of the world were not really elements at all
(failing to realize that an element is a tool, and that an incompletely
fashioned tool is still much better than no tool at all).

The overwhelmingly evaluative dimension of pre-experimental classification, in
combination with relatively poor capacity for discrimination, produced archaic
categories of great generality—from the modern perspective. We can identify
many “discriminable phenomena” within each of these categories, as a
consequence of the centuries of increasingly efficient exploration that
separate us from our medieval and pre-medieval forebears. Our viewpoint has in
fact changed to such a degree that our use of the same word is in many cases
only a historical accident. We might therefore make this discussion more
concrete by first examining the “matter” of the alchemist, and by comparing it
to what we think of as matter.

Alchemical matter was the “stuff” of which experience was made—and more: the
stuff of which the experiencing creature was made. This “primal element” was
something much more akin to “information” in the modern sense (or to Tao, from
the Oriental perspective); something like matter in the phrases “that
matters”594 (that makes a difference, that we care about, that cannot be
ignored, that is informative) or “what is the matter?” We derive “information”
as a consequence of our exploratory behavior, undertaken in the “unknown,”
attending to things that matter; from that information, we build ourselves (our
behaviors and schemas of representation) and the “world,” as experienced. As
Piaget states:

Knowledge does not begin in the I, and it does not begin in the object; it
begins in the interactions…. then there is a reciprocal and simultaneous
construction of the subject on the one hand and the object on the other.595



The primal element of alchemy was something embedded or implicit in the world:
something often hidden that could emerge unexpectedly. This unexpected
emergence can be regarded as the “capacity” of the object to “transcend” its
categorical representation (to “become” something new) as a consequence of its
position in a new situation, or its “reaction” to a new exploratory procedure.
This new thing “announces itself” first in terms of the affect it generates:
failure of the previously understood (previously categorized) thing to behave
as predicted elicits emotion from the observer. This is the “spirit of
transformation” making itself manifest. The emotion so generated—fear/hope— may
produce exploratory behavior, designed to specify the “new” properties of the
transforming object. These new properties then become incorporated into the
previous categorization system—become “attributes” now seen as “in the same
class”; alternatively, the newly transformed substance may have to “shift
categories” because it is now seen as so much different from “what it was.”
(The former case constitutes a normal shift, of course; the latter is
revolutionary.)

When a novel thing has been explored, and placed within a certain
sociohistorically determined context, it has been classified in accordance with
its currently evident motivational status: promise, threat, satisfaction,
punishment (or none of the above), as determined, situationally. This is
evidently true with regards to the classification system of the individual
animal, who cannot derive an empirical model of reality, because it cannot
communicate—but equally true with regard to man, whose capacity for abstraction
has blurred the essential nature and purpose of classification. What a thing is
is most fundamentally its motivational significance—its relevance for the
attainment of some affectively significant goal. Classification of the
phenomenon (which means, determination of how to act in its presence) restricts
its motivational significance to a particular domain (most frequently, to
nothing, to irrelevance). Nonetheless, it is a fact that the phenomenon itself
(which is of infinite complexity) is always capable of transcending its
representation. This capacity for transcendence is a property of the “object”
(a property of experience, from the phenomenological viewpoint), but can be
exploited by the activity of man.

The alchemists regarded the “transcendent capacity of the object”—that is, the
capacity of the familiar and explored in one context to become the unfamiliar
and unexplored in another—as a spirit, embedded in matter. Jung cites Basilius
Valentinus, an ancient alchemical authority:

The earth as material is not a dead body, but is inhabited by a spirit that is
its life and soul. All created things, minerals included, draw their strength
from the earth-spirit. This spirit is life, it is nourished by the stars, and
it gives nourishment to all the living things it shelters in its womb. Through
the spirit received from on high, the earth hatches the minerals in her womb as
the mother her unborn child. This invisible spirit is like the reflection in a
mirror, intangible, yet it is at the same time the root of all the substances
necessary to the alchemical process or arising therefrom.596



The “spirit that inhabits the earth” was Mercurius, the shape-shifter (the
reflected image of God in matter,597 from the alchemical viewpoint) who both
“guided” the alchemical process and was “released” by the activities of the
alchemist. Mercurius was the spirit that made the “matter” investigated by the
adept interesting, compelling—and interest is a “spirit” that moves from place
to place, as knowledge changes and grows. Mercurius is the incarnation of
transformation, the uroboros, who existed (and did not exist) as the most
primal deity, before the creation of things (before the division of the world
into subject and object, spirit and matter, known and unknown). The uroboros
is, of course, the tail-eater, the dragon of chaos: an image of the
embeddedness of the totality of things across time, in the particular manifest
phenomenon. The image of the spirit Mercurius was an intimation of the infinite
potential “trapped” in every particular aspect of experience.598 Identification
of this “potential”—that is, its classification—posed a constant problem to the
medieval imagination:

All through the Middle Ages [Mercurius] was the object of much puzzled
speculation on the part of the natural philosophers: sometimes he was a
ministering and helpful spirit, an [assistant, comrade or familiar]; and
sometimes the servus or cervus fugitivus (the fugitive slave or stag), an
elusive, deceptive, teasing goblin who drove the alchemists to despair and had
many of his attributes in common with the devil. For instance he is dragon,
lion, eagle, raven to mention only the most important of them. In the
alchemical hierarchy of gods Mercurius comes lowest as prima materia and
highest as lapis philosophorum. The spiritus mercurialis is the alchemists'
guide (Hermes Psychopompos), and their tempter: he is their good luck and their
ruin.599



The alchemists conflated what we would think of as matter with what we might
regard as the unknown. This is hardly surprising, since “matter” was the
unknown to the pre-scientific mind (and is still something that retains much of
its mystery today). As the unknown, matter possessed an attraction, which was
the affective valence of what had not yet been explored. The ability of the
unknown to “attract” provided impetus for its personification as “spirit”—as
that which motivates or directs. Matter—even in its modern form—can easily
revert to the unknown, even under modern conditions; can then exercise a
similar force (that of a “stimulus”) on the modern psyche. It does so, for
example, when it manifests something anomalous—some unforeseen property, as a
consequence of its placement in a new context, or its subjection to more
creative exploration. The anomalous manifestation—the recurrence of the
unknown—comes inevitably to attract increasing interest (or, conversely,
attracts attempts to avoid, suppress or otherwise conjure it out of existence).
All objects, even “explored objects,” retain their connection with “that from
which all things are made,” even after they have been boxed and filed away
(been categorized), in theory, “once and for all.”

Take a rat, for example, who has habituated to a cage (who has explored the
cage and become comfortable there). Ifa small object—say, an iron block—is
dropped in front of it, it will first freeze, and then cautiously begin to
investigate. The rat will use its capacity for motoric action to interact with
the block—smelling it, looking at it, scratching it, perhaps gnawing it—to
assess the motivational significance of the novel object. For the rat, limited
by its lack of communicative ability to its own experience, limited by its
restricted animal nature to fundamental processes of exploration, the block
soon becomes irrelevant. It signifies no danger, in the course of interaction;
it cannot be eaten; it is useless as nesting material. The block therefore
“becomes” its lack of relevant properties for the no-longer-exploratory rat,
and will henceforth be ignored. The process of exploration-predicated
classification has eliminated the motivational significance of the novel—as is
its function. From the mythic perspective, this is replacement of the “Great
Mother” by the “Great Father”; replacement of ambivalent threat and promise by
determinate valence (including irrelevance).

The sensory properties of the block—which are the relevant features of the
object, as far as the spirit of scientific inquiry extends—have no intrinsic
importance for the rat, except as they signify something of affective import.
This more fundamental mode of thought, concerned with behavioral adaptation to
circumstance, is how man thought, prior to the formalization of scientific
methodology—and how man thinks still, insofar as he values and acts. The
general case is, however, more complex. Homo sapiens is capable of observing a
practically infinite series of novel properties emerge from the particular
object, because he is capable of apprehending an object from a virtually
unlimited number of points of perspective, spatial and temporal—or, it might be
considered, equivalently, that the “object” is something so complex that it can
manifest entirely different properties, merely in consequence of being viewed
from alternative perspectives. The iron block was once, “of its own accord,”
something qualitatively different from what it is now, and will be something
different, once again, in the future. In the earliest stages of its existence,
considered as an independent object, the exemplary block was part of an
undifferentiated totality, prior to the beginning of all things; then, the
interplay of four fundamental forces; then simple hydrogen, coalescing into a
star; then, matter transformed by gravity and nuclear processes; then a stone
on Earth; finally, something transformed by man—with a still uncompleted and
equally extensive developmental history before it. This transformation of the
object is temporality itself— the manifestation of Tao, the flux of being. The
capacity of human beings to apprehend variable spatial-temporal spans “turns”
the object into something more complex than its mere present appearance; this
increase in “complexity” is compounded by the extended active capacity for
exploration also typical of our species.

What is an iron block for man? Shaped, a spear, and therefore food and death
and security; suspended, a pendulum, key to detection of the earth's rotation;
dropped, significant of gravity; reduced to its constituent particles, with
sufficient patience and ingenuity, representative of molecular and atomic
structure—a part like the whole. The question might be more accurately
presented—what is an iron block not, for man? The pre-experimental mind of the
alchemist, pondering the nature of the prima materia—the “fundamental
constituent element of experience”—easily became possessed by intimations of
the infinite possibility of “matter”: of the boundless significance of the
finite object; of the endless utility of the object and its inexhaustible
capacity to reveal (become) the unknown.

When an object is explored, its motivational significance is constrained
[generally, as a consequence of the specific goal-directed nature of the
exploratory process, inevitably predicated upon a specific hypothesis—is this
thing good for (a particular function?—but not any number of other potential
functions)]. The question in mind, implicit or explicitly formulated,
determines in part the answer “given” by the object. The object is always
capable of superseding the constraint, in some unpredictable fashion. This
infinite potential finds its symbolic expression in the self-devouring serpent,
the mercurial spirit of transformation—the spirit that draws interest
inexorably to itself.

While considering these ideas, I dreamed that a small object was traveling
above the surface of the Atlantic Ocean. It moved along in the center of a
procession of four immense hurricanes, configured as a square divided into
quadrants, one hurricane per quadrant, tracked by satellites, monitored
carefully and apprehensively by scientists manning the latest in meteorological
equipment, in stations all over the world.

The dream scene shifted. The object, a sphere of about eight inches in
diameter, was now contained and exhibited in a small glass display case, like
that found in a museum. The case itself was in a small room, with no visible
exit or entry points. The American president, symbol of social order, and the
crippled physicist Stephen Hawking, representative of scientific knowledge (and
of disembodied rationality), were in the room with the object. One of them
described the features of the room. Its walls were seven feet thick and made of
some impervious substance [titanium dioxide (?)]—which sounded impressive in
the context of the dream. These walls were designed to permanently contain the
object. I wasn't in the room, although I was there as an observer, like the
audience in a movie. The object in the display case appeared alive. It was
moving, and distorting its shape, like a chrysalis or a cocoon in its later
stages of development. At one point, it transformed itself into something
resembling a meerschaum pipe. Then it re-formed itself into a sphere, and shot
out through one wall of the case, and the room, leaving two perfectly round,
smooth holes—one in the case, and the other in the wall. It left with no effort
whatsoever, as if the barriers designed to restrain its movement were of no
consequence, once the “decision” had been made.

The object was an image of God, the uroboric serpent, embodied in matter
(powerful enough to require the accompaniment of four hurricanes, as
attendants).600 The room was a classification system, something designed (by
the most powerful representatives of the social and scientific worlds) to
constrain the mysterious phenomenon. The object transformed itself into a pipe
in reference to the famous painting (by Magritte) of a pipe, entitled (in
translation) “This is not a pipe”—the map is not the territory, the
representation not the phenomenon. The capacity of the object to escape, “at
will,” referred to the eternal transcendence of the phenomenal world, of its
infinite capacity to unexpectedly supersede its representation, scientific and
mythic.

I dreamed, much later (perhaps after a year) of a man suspended, equidistant
from the floor, ceiling and walls, in a cubic room—about arms length from each.
The surfaces of the cube curved inward, toward the man (as if the room was
constructed of the intersection of six spheres). All surfaces of the cube
remained at the same distance from the man, regardless of his pattern of
movement. If he walked forward, the cube moved forward with him. If he walked
backward, the cube moved backward, at precisely the same rate, with no
discontinuity whatsoever. The surfaces themselves were covered with circular
patterns, about four inches in diameter, inscribed within squares of about the
same size. Out of the center of each circle dangled the tip of a reptile's
tail. The man could reach in any direction, grasp a tail, and pull it out of
the surface, into the room.

This dream referred to the capacity of man to (voluntarily) pull the future
into the present. The serpent—evident only in the form of his tail—was the
uroboros, embedded implicitly in the phenomenal world.601 The potential for the
emergence of something new was present in every direction the man could look,
inside the cube. He could determine what aspect of being would reveal itself,
as a consequence of his voluntary action.



The act of exploration produces/elicits discriminable phenomena. These
phenomena are mapped by the episodic and semantic “memory” systems. The
exploratory process, however, is guided by the maps produced by the episodic
system—particularly by its maps of the future. A desired end is posited, in
fantasy. The motoric/abstract exploration system endeavors to bring about a
match between emergent phenomena (produced in the course of activity) and that
“map of the desired future.” Mismatches between production and goal elicit
(re)appearance of “the base matter of the world”—the unknown, manifest in
negative affect, and curiosity.

The individual attempts to transform his wishes (rooted, in the final analysis,
in emotion) into reality, suffering—and learning—when that process is
disrupted. Exploration is deemed sufficient and may justly come to an end when
the current affective state is deemed optimal: when knowledge, translated into
action, has adjusted the world such that it is (once again) “paradisal.” In the
absence of such a paradisal state (in the absence of current security,
happiness), exploration is or has been, by definition, incomplete. The
“residual mysteries” that still accompany current being—which manifest
themselves in the intrinsic attractiveness of the thing or situation—must
therefore become the focus of active attention, so that the “information”
embedded in them can be “pulled out,” and transformed into subjective being and
the world. The alchemical “base matter” of the world was, therefore, “the stuff
of which determinate experience (subject and object) was made”; was something,
in addition, capable of endless transformation; was something, finally,
“corrupt”—as the material world was corrupt—incomplete, unrealized, fallen and
suffering.

Analysis of the pre-experimental category of “gold” helps shed light on the
relevance, importance and meaning of this archaic complex of undiscriminated
ideas. Gold, as ultimate contrast to mere base matter, was the ideal, as it
could be perceived in the concrete world. For the pre-experimental man, as well
as for the modern, gold served as a medium of economic exchange. But the value
of the metal did not, and still does not, consist solely in its economic
utility. Gold has always been associated, in episodic representation, with
divinity. Prior to development of the scientific worldview, this association
made perfect sense. Gold, in contrast to “lesser” metals or substances, does
not tarnish, dull or rust. It therefore appears imperishable, “immortal” and
incorruptible. Gold is rare, rather than common. It shines like the sun, the
evident source of life. The “category” of gold therefore tended to subsume
everything Apollonian, sunlike, divine (in the patriarchal/heroic sense we have
become familiar with). Jung describes the characteristic presumptions of the
alchemist Michael Maier:

The sun, by its many millions of revolutions, spins the gold into the earth.
Little by little the sun has imprinted its image on the earth, and that image
is the gold. The sun is the image of God, the heart is the sun's image in man,
just as gold is the sun's image in the earth, and God is known in the gold.602



The light of the sun is a “symbol” of power and the transcendence of clarity
and consciousness, of heroism and permanence, and of victory over the forces of
darkness, disintegration and decay. The earliest patriarchal gods and leaders
of men combined the life-giving attributes of the sun with the heroic ideals of
man, and the coins that bore their likeness were round and golden, in imitation
of the solar disk.

Gold was, furthermore, the ideal end toward which all ores progressed—was the
target of material progression. As it “ripened” in the womb of the earth, lead,
for example, base and promiscuous [willing to “mate” (combine) with many other
substances], aimed at the state characterized by gold, perfect and inviolable.
This made the “gold state” the goal of the Mercurial “spirit of the unknown,”
embedded in matter. Eliade states:

If nothing impedes the process of gestation, all ores will, in time, become
gold. “If there were no exterior obstacles to the execution of her designs,”
wrote a Western alchemist, “Nature would always complete what she wished to
produce….” That is why we have to look upon the births of imperfect metals as
we would on abortions and freaks which come about only because Nature has been,
as it were, misdirected, or because she has encountered some fettering
resistance….

Belief in the natural metamorphosis of metals is of very ancient origin in
China and it is also found in Annam, in India and in the Indian archipelago.
The peasants of Tonkin have a saying: “Black bronze is the mother of gold.”
Gold is engendered naturally by bronze. But this transmutation can materialize
only if the bronze has lain a sufficiently long period in the bosom of the
earth.603



The alchemist viewed himself as midwife to nature—bringing to fruition what
nature endeavored slowly to produce—and therefore as aid to a transformation
aimed at producing something ideal. “Gold” is that ideal. Eliade continues:

The “nobility” of gold is thus the fruit at its most mature; the other metals
are “common” because they are crude; “not ripe.” In other words, Nature's final
goal is the completion of the mineral kingdom, its ultimate “maturation.” The
natural transmutation of metals into gold is inscribed in their destiny. The
tendency of Nature is to perfection. But since gold is the bearer of a highly
spiritual symbolism (“Gold is immortality,” say the Indian texts repeatedly),
it is obvious that a new idea is coming into being: the idea of the part
assumed by the alchemist as the brotherly savior of Nature. He assists Nature
to fulfil her final goal, to attain her “ideal,” which is the perfection of its
progeny—be it mineral, animal or human— to its supreme ripening, which is
absolute immortality and liberty.604



The alchemists lived in a world that had theoretically been redeemed by the
sacrifice of Christ—at least from the Christian perspective. But they did not
feel at all redeemed— they remained unsatisfied with the present
still-too-mortal condition. So they turned their attention to those aspects of
the world that had been defined, in accordance with prevailing morality, as
“unworthy of examination,” as corrupt and contemptible. Presuming—or
hoping—that things might yet be better, they explored (as we explore now,
hoping to extract from the “unknown” new and useful tools). The alchemists
assumed, implicitly, that further exploration might bring redemptive knowledge.
This search was driven by their admission of the “unbearable present,” by their
identification with a “still-fallen world.” The alchemists believed that the
“desirable transmutation of matter” could be brought about by the “release” of
Mercurius from matter. This meant that they implicitly recognized that
(interest-guided) exploration was key to the (redemptive) expansion of being.

In participating in this process, the alchemists identified with the
exploratory hero, and turned themselves unconsciously (that is, in procedure,
if not always in representation) into “that which redeems.” This identification
was complicated by the fact that the alchemist also considered himself as
partaking of the state of matter—as belonging in the “state necessitating
redemption.” This basically meant that the alchemist viewed himself, at least
in part, as occupying the same category as “matter” (as well as being that
which could become “gold,” and which could aid in that transformation). For the
pre-experimental mind, with its more general and conflated categories, there is
no necessary distinction between the “thing being acted on” and the “thing
doing the acting.” Eliade describes, for example, the “sympathetic magic”
necessary to complete a grafting operation between two different species of
plants necessary (to induce “unlike to mate with unlike,” from a broader
perspective):

Ibn Washya—and he is not the only oriental writer to allow himself to be
carried away by such images—speaks of fantastic graftings (“contrary to
Nature”) between differing vegetable species. He says, for instance, that the
grafting of a branch of a lemon tree on to a laurel or olive tree would produce
very small lemons, the size of olives. But he makes it clear that the graft
could succeed only if it was performed in the ritual manner and at a certain
conjunction of the sun and moon. He explains the rite thus: “the branch to be
grafted must be held in the hands of a very beautiful maiden, while a man is
having shameful and unnatural sexual intercourse with her; during coitus the
girl grafts the branch onto the tree.” The significance is clear: in order to
ensure an “unnatural” union in the vegetable world an unnatural sexual union
between human beings was necessary.605



Such ideas are far from rare. Virtually every process undertaken by
pre-experimental individuals—from agriculture to metallurgy—was accompanied by
rituals designed to “bring about the state of mind” or “illustrate the
procedure” necessary to the successful outcome desired. This is because the
action precedes the idea. So ritual sexual unions accompanied sowing of the
earth, and sacrificial rituals and their like abounded among miners, smiths and
potters. Nature had to be “shown what to do”; man led, not least, by example.
The correct procedure could only be brought about by those who had placed
themselves in the correct state of mind. This idea was taken to its logical
conclusion during the alchemical procedure, which had as its fantastical end
state or desired future the most profound and far-reaching notion of
transformation ever conceptualized: the final perfection or “redemption” of
matter.

To induce disparate elements to combine harmoniously in the production of the
lapis philosophorum—that which will transmute base metals into gold—it was
necessary to become unified oneself. To engender perfection from nature,
therefore, man had to become perfect. The necessity for the perfection of the
alchemist—and the relation of the alchemical procedure to his own being—was
further strengthened by the alchemist's identity with the material world (that
is, by his occupation of the same “categorical space” as “matter”). Man—a
fallen, corrupt, material being, yet capable of endless transformation—partook
of the essence of the fallen, corrupt, yet transformable material world. Those
things relevant to the transformation of the being of “objects” were therefore
also, by logical necessity, relevant to the transformation of his own being.
The transformation of base matter into gold, writ large, was the redemption of
the world—its transformation into the “state of gold.” The lapis philosophorum
was means to that end. This extension of the theories of sympathetic magic to
the domain of “chemistry” meant that alchemy became increasingly rife with
(primarily imagistic) speculation regarding the nature of perfection, as it
developed over the centuries.

It is difficult for moderns to realize why any of this might be relevant. Our
psychology and psychiatry—our “sciences of the mind“—are devoted, at least in
theory, to “empirical” evaluation and treatment of mental “disorders.” But this
is mostly smoke and screen. We are aiming, always, at an ideal. We currently
prefer to leave the nature ofthat ideal “implicit,” because that helps us
sidestep any number of issues that would immediately become of overwhelming
difficulty, if they were clearly apprehended. So we “define” health as that
state consisting of an absence of “diseases” or “disorders” and leave it at
that—as if the notion of disease or disorder (or of the absence thereof) is not
by necessity a medieval concatenation of moral philosophy and empirical
description. It is our implicit theory that a state of “non-anxiety” is
possible, however—and desirable— that leads us to define dominance by that
state as “disordered.” The same might be said for depression, for
schizophrenia, for personality “disorders,” and so on. Lurking in the
background is an “implicit” (that is, unconscious) ideal, against which all
“insufficient” present states are necessarily and detrimentally compared. We do
not know how to make that ideal explicit, either methodologically or
practically (that is, without causing immense dissent in the ranks); we know,
however, that we must have a concept of “not ideal” in order to begin and to
justify “necessary” treatment. Sooner or later, however, we will have to come
to terms with the fact that we are in fact attempting to produce the ideal
man—and will have to define explicitly what that means. It would be surprising,
indeed, if the ideal we come to posit bore no relationship to those constructed
painstakingly, over the course of centuries of effort, in the past. Something
very similar happened in the case of alchemy, at least in the West: as the
philosophy developed, through the Christian era, the lapis was increasingly
identified with Christ. There is no reason to presume that this came as
anything but a surprise to the alchemists themselves. We are in for a shock at
least as great.

To perfect nature, it was necessary to harbor the correct attitude—to undertake
the appropriate rituals and processes of spiritual purification; to become pure
as the thing desired. The worker stood as example to nature, in small things
and great. In the case of alchemy, which ambitiously desired to “redeem” the
fallen material world, the alchemist himself had to become great. Thus the
alchemical literature might be regarded, in part, as one long “meditation” on
the nature of the ideal man.

