# 1 - MAPS OF EXPERIENCE
[Metadata]: # {02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
1
MAPS OF EXPERIENCE
# MAPS OF EXPERIENCE
Object and Meaning

The world can be validly construed as forum for action, or as place of things.

The former manner of interpretation-more primordial, and less clearly
understood-finds its expression in the arts or humanities, in ritual, drama,
literature and mythology. The world as forum for action is a place of value, a
place where all things have meaning. This meaning, which is shaped as a
consequence of social interaction, is implication for action, or-at a higher
level of analysisimplication for the configuration of the interpretive schema
that produces or guides action.

The latter manner of interpretation-the world as place of things-finds its
formal expression in the methods and theories of science. Science allows for
increasingly precise determination of the consensually validatable properties
of things, and for efficient utilization of precisely determined things as
tools (once the direction such use is to take has been determined, through
application of more fundamental narrative processes).

No complete world-picture can be generated without use of both modes of
construal. The fact that one mode is generally set at odds with the other means
only that the nature of their respective domains remains insufficiently
discriminated. Adherents of the mythological worldview tend to regard the
statements of their creeds as indistinguishable from empirical “fact,” even
though such statements were generally formulated long before the notion of
objective reality emerged. Those who, by contrast, accept the scientific
perspective—who assume that it is, or might become, complete-forget that an
impassable gulf currently divides what is from what should be.

We need to know four things:

what there is,

what to do about what there is,

that there is a difference between knowing what there is, and know

ing what to do about what there is

and what that difference is.



To explore something, to “discover what it is”—that means most importantly to
discover its significance for motor output, within a particular social context,
and only more particularly to determine its precise objective sensory or
material nature. This is knowledge in the most basic of senses—and often
constitutes sufficient knowledge.

Imagine that a baby girl, toddling around in the course of her initial
tentative investigations, reaches up onto a countertop to touch a fragile and
expensive glass sculpture. She observes its color, sees its shine, feels that
it is smooth and cold and heavy to the touch. Suddenly her mother interferes,
grasps her hand, tells her not to ever touch that object. The child has just
learned a number of specifically consequential things about the sculpture—has
identified its sensory properties, certainly. More importantly, however, she
has determined that approached in the wrong manner, the sculpture is dangerous
(at least in the presence of mother); has discovered as well that the sculpture
is regarded more highly, in its present unaltered configuration, than the
exploratory tendency—at least (once again) by mother. The baby girl has
simultaneously encountered an object, from the empirical perspective, and its
socioculturally determined status. The empirical object might be regarded as
those sensory properties “intrinsic” to the object. The status of the object,
by contrast, consists of its meaning—consists of its implication for behavior.
Everything a child encounters has this dual nature, experienced by the child as
part of a unified totality. Everything is something, and means something—and
the distinction between essence and significance is not necessarily drawn.

The significance of something—specified in actuality as a consequence of
exploratory activity undertaken in its vicinity—tends “naturally” to become
assimilated to the object itself. The object, after all, is the proximal cause
or the stimulus that “gives rise” to action conducted in its presence. For
people operating naturally, like the child, what something signifies is more or
less inextricably part of the thing, part of its magic. The magic is of course
due to apprehension of the specific cultural and intrapsychic significance of
the thing, and not to its objectively determinable sensory qualities. Everyone
understands the child who says, for example, “I saw a scary man”; the child's
description is immediate and concrete, even though he or she has attibuted to
the object of perception a quality that is in fact context-dependent and
subjective. It is difficult, after all, to realize the subjective nature of
fear, and not to feel threat as part of the “real” world.

The automatic attribution of meaning to things—or the failure to distinguish
between them initially—is a characteristic of narrative, of myth, not of
scientific thought. Narrative accurately captures the nature of raw experience.
Things are scary, people are irritating, events are promising, food is
satisfying—at least in terms of our basic experience. The modern mind, which
regards itself as having transcended the domain of the magical, is nonetheless
still endlessly capable of “irrational” (read motivated) reactions. We fall
under the spell of experience whenever we attribute our frustration,
aggression, devotion or lust to the person or situation that exists as the
proximal “cause” of such agitation. We are not yet “objective,” even in our
most clear-headed moments (and thank God for that). We become immediately
immersed in a motion picture or a novel, and willingly suspend disbelief. We
become impressed or terrified, despite ourselves, in the presence of a
sufficiently powerful cultural figurehead (an intellectual idol, a sports
superstar, a movie actor, a political leader, the pope, a famous beauty, even
our superior at work)—in the presence, that is, of anyone who sufficiently
embodies the oft-implicit values and ideals that protect us from disorder and
lead us on. Like the medieval individual, we do not even need the person to
generate such affect. The icon will suffice. We will pay vast sums of money for
articles of clothing worn or personal items used or created by the famous and
infamous of our time.9

The “natural,” pre-experimental, or mythical mind is in fact primarily
concerned with meaning—which is essentially implication for action—and not with
“objective” nature. The formal object, as conceptualized by modern
scientifically oriented consciousness, might appear to those still possessed by
the mythic imagination—if they could “see” it at all—as an irrelevant shell, as
all that was left after everything intrinsically intriguing had been stripped
away. For the pre-experimentalist, the thing is most truly the significance of
its sensory properties, as they are experienced in subjective experience—in
affect, or emotion. And, in truth—in real life—to know what something is still
means to know two things about it: its motivational relevance, and the specific
nature of its sensory qualities. The two forms of knowing are not identical;
furthermore, experience and registration of the former necessarily precedes
development of the latter. Something must have emotional impact before it will
attract enough attention to be explored and mapped in accordance with its
sensory properties. Those sensory properties—of prime import to the
experimentalist or empiricist—are meaningful only insofar as they serve as cues
for determining specific affective relevance or behavioral significance. We
need to know what things are not to know what they are but to keep track of
what they mean—to understand what they signify for our behavior.

It has taken centuries of firm discipline and intellectual training, religious,
protoscientific and scientific, to produce a mind capable of concentrating on
phenomena that are not yet or are no longer immediately intrinsically
gripping—to produce a mind that regards real as something separable from
relevant. Alternatively, it might be suggested that all the myth has not yet
vanished from science, devoted as it is to human progress, and that it is this
nontrivial remainder that enables the scientist to retain undimmed enthusiasm
while endlessly studying his fruitflies.

How, precisely, did people think, not so very long ago, before they were
experimentalists? What were things before they were objective things? These are
very difficult questions. The “things” that existed prior to the development of
experimental science do not appear valid either as things or as the meaning of
things to the modern mind. The question of the nature of the substance of
sol—the sun—(to take a single example) occupied the minds of those who
practiced the pre-experimental “science” of alchemy for many hundreds of years.
We would no longer presume even that the sun has a uniform substance, unique to
it, and would certainly take exception to the properties attributed to this
hypothetical element by the medieval alchemist, if we allowed its existence.
Carl Jung, who spent much of the latter part of his life studying medieval
thought patterns, characterized sol:

The sun signifies first of all gold, whose [alchemical] sign it shares. But
just as the “philosophical” gold is not the “common” gold, so the sun is
neither just the metallic gold nor the heavenly orb. Sometimes the sun is an
active substance hidden in the gold and is extracted [alchemically] as the
tinctura rubea (red tincture). Sometimes, as the heavenly body, it is the
possessor of magically effective and transformative rays. As gold and a
heavenly body it contains an active sulphur of a red colour, hot and dry.
Because of this red sulphur the alchemical sun, like the corresponding gold, is
red. As every alchemist knew, gold owes its red color to the admixture of Cu
(copper), which he interpreted as Kypris (the Cyprian, Venus), mentioned in
Greek alchemy as the transformative substance. Redness, heat, and dryness are
the classical qualities of the Egyptian Set (Greek Typhon), the evil principle
which, like the alchemical sulphur, is closely connected with the devil. And
just as Typhon has his kingdom in the forbidden sea, so the sun, as sol
centralis, has its sea, its “crude perceptible water,” and as sol coelestis its
“subtle imperceptible water.” This sea water (aqua pontica) is extracted from
sun and moon….

The active sun-substance also has favourable effects. As the so-called “balsam”
it drips from the sun and produces lemons, oranges, wine, and, in the mineral
kingdom, gold.10



We can barely understand such a description, contaminated as it is by
imaginative and mythological associations peculiar to the medieval mind. It is
precisely this fantastical contamination, however, that renders the alchemical
description worth examining—not from the perspective of the history of science,
concerned with the examination of outdated objective ideas, but from the
perspective of psychology, focused on the interpretation of subjective frames
of reference.

“In it [the “Indian Ocean,” in this example] are images of heaven and earth, of
summer, autumn, winter, and spring, male and female. If thou callest this
spiritual, what thou doest is probable; if corporeal, thou sayest the truth; if
heavenly, thou liest not; if earthly, thou hast well spoken.”11 The alchemist
could not separate his subjective ideas about the nature of things—that is, his
hypotheses—from the things themselves. His hypotheses, in turn—products of his
imagination—were derived from the unquestioned and unrecognized “explanatory”
presuppositions that made up his culture. The medieval man lived, for example,
in a universe that was moral—where everything, even ores and metals, strived
above all for perfection.12 Things, for the alchemical mind, were therefore
characterized in large part by their moral nature—by their impact on what we
would describe as affect, emotion or motivation; were therefore characterized
by their relevance or value (which is impact on affect). Description of this
relevance took narrative form, mythic form—as in the example drawn from Jung,
where the sulphuric aspect of the sun's substance is attributed negative,
demonic characteristics. It was the great feat of science to strip affect from
perception, so to speak, and to allow for the description of experiences purely
in terms of their consensually apprehensible features. However, it is the case
that the affects generated by experiences are real, as well. The alchemists,
whose conceptualizations intermingled affect with sense, dealt with affect as a
matter of course (although they did not “know” it—not explicitly). We have
removed the affect from the thing, and can therefore brilliantly manipulate the
thing. We are still victims, however, of the uncomprehended emotions generated
by—we would say, in the presence of—the thing. We have lost the mythic universe
of the pre-experimental mind, or have at least ceased to further its
development. That loss has left our increased technological power ever more
dangerously at the mercy of our still unconscious systems of valuation.

Prior to the time of Descartes, Bacon and Newton, man lived in an animated,
spiritual world, saturated with meaning, imbued with moral purpose. The nature
of this purpose was revealed in the stories people told each other—stories
about the structure of the cosmos and the place of man. But now we think
empirically (at least we think we think empirically), and the spirits that once
inhabited the universe have vanished. The forces released by the advent of the
experiment have wreaked havoc within the mythic world. Jung states:

How totally different did the world appear to medieval man! For him the earth
was eternally fixed and at rest in the center of the universe, encircled by the
course of a sun that solicitously bestowed its warmth. Men were all children of
God under the loving care of the Most High, who prepared them for eternal
blessedness; and all knew exactly what they should do and how they should
conduct themselves in order to rise from a corruptible world to an
incorruptible and joyous existence. Such a life no longer seems real to us,
even in our dreams. Natural science has long ago torn this lovely veil to
shreds.13



Even if the medieval individual was not in all cases tenderly and completely
enraptured by his religious beliefs (he was a great believer in hell, for
example), he was certainly not plagued by the plethora of rational doubts and
moral uncertainties that beset his modern counterpart. Religion for the
pre-experimental mind was not so much a matter of faith as a matter of
fact—which means that the prevailing religious viewpoint was not merely one
compelling theory among many.

The capacity to maintain explicit belief in religious “fact,” however, has been
severely undermined in the last few centuries—first in the West, and then
everywhere else. A succession of great scientists and iconoclasts has
demonstrated that the universe does not revolve around man, that our notion of
separate status from and “superiority” to the animal has no empirical basis,
and that there is no God in heaven (nor even a heaven, as far as the eye can
see). In consequence, we no longer believe our own stories—no longer even
believe that those stories served us well in the past. The objects of
revolutionary scientific discovery—Galileo's mountains on the lunar orb;
Kepler's elliptical planetary orbits—manifested themselves in apparent
violation of mythic order, predicated as it was on the presumption of heavenly
perfection. The new phenomena produced by the procedures of experimentalists
could not be, could not exist, from the perspective defined by tradition.
Furthermore—and more importantly—the new theories that arose to make sense of
empirical reality posed a severe threat to the integrity of traditional models
of reality, which had provided the world with determinate meaning. The
mythological cosmos had man at its midpoint; the objective universe was
heliocentric at first, and less than that later. Man no longer occupies center
stage. The world is, in consequence, a completely different place.

The mythological perspective has been overthrown by the empirical; or so it
appears. This should mean that the morality predicated upon such myth should
have disappeared, as well, as belief in comfortable illusion vanished.
Friedrich Nietzsche made this point clearly, more than a hundred years ago:

When one gives up Christian belief [for example] one thereby deprives oneself
of the right to Christian morality…. Christianity is a system, a consistently
thought out and complete view of things. If one breaks out of it a fundamental
idea, the belief in God, one thereby breaks the whole thing to pieces: one has
nothing of any consequence left in one's hands. Christianity presupposes that
man does not know, cannot know what is good for him and what evil: he believes
in God, who alone knows. Christian morality is a command: its origin is
transcendental; it is beyond all criticism, all right to criticize; it
possesses truth only if God is truth—it stands or falls with the belief in God.
If [modern Westerners] really do believe they know, of their own accord,
“intuitively,” what is good and evil; if they consequently think they no longer
have need of Christianity as a guarantee of morality; that is merely the
consequence of the ascendancy of Christian evaluation and an expression of the
strength and depth of this ascendancy: so that the origin of [modern] morality
has been forgotten, so that the highly conditional nature of its right to exist
is no longer felt.14



If the presuppositions of a theory have been invalidated, argues Nietzsche,
then the theory has been invalidated. But in this case the “theory” survives.
The fundamental tenets of the Judeo-Christian moral tradition continue to
govern every aspect of the actual individual behavior and basic values of the
typical Westerner—even if he is atheistic and well-educated, even if his
abstract notions and utterances appear iconoclastic. He neither kills nor
steals (or if he does, he hides his actions, even from his own awareness), and
he tends, in theory, to treat his neighbor as himself. The principles that
govern his society (and, increasingly, all others15) remain predicated on
mythic notions of individual value—intrinsic right and responsibility—despite
scientific evidence of causality and determinism in human motivation. Finally,
in his mind—even when sporadically criminal—the victim of a crime still cries
out to heaven for “justice,” and the conscious lawbreaker still deserves
punishment for his or her actions.

Our systems of post-experimental thought and our systems of motivation and
action therefore co-exist in paradoxical union. One is “up-to-date”; the other,
archaic. One is scientific; the other, traditional, even superstitious. We have
become atheistic in our description, but remain evidently religious—that is,
moral—in our disposition. What we accept as true and how we act are no longer
commensurate. We carry on as if our experience has meaning—as if our activities
have transcendent value—but we are unable to justify this belief
intellectually. We have become trapped by our own capacity for abstraction: it
provides us with accurate descriptive information but also undermines our
belief in the utility and meaning of existence. This problem has frequently
been regarded as tragic (it seems to me, at least, ridiculous)—and has been
thoroughly explored in existential philosophy and literature. Nietzsche
described this modern condition as the (inevitable and necessary) consequence
of the “death of God”:

Have you not heard of that madman who lit a lantern in the bright morning
hours, ran to the market place, and cried incessantly, “I seek God! I seek
God!” As many of those who do not believe in God were standing around just
then, he provoked much laughter.

Why, did he get lost? said one. Did he lose his way like a child? said another.
Or is he hiding? Is he afraid of us? Has he gone on a voyage? or emigrated?
Thus they yelled and laughed.

The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with his glances. “Whither
is God,” he cried. “I shall tell you. We have killed him—you and I. All of us
are his murderers. But how have we done this? How were we able to drink up the
sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What did we do
when we unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither
are we moving now? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging continuously?
Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there any up or down left?
Are we not straying as through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath
of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not night and more night coming on
all the while? Must not lanterns be lit in the morning? Do we not hear anything
yet of the noise of the grave-diggers who are burying God? Do we not smell
anything yet of God's decomposition? Gods too decompose.

“God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him. How shall we, the
murderers of all murderers, comfort ourselves? What was holiest and most
powerful of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our
knives. Who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean
ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to
invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must not we
ourselves become gods simply to seem worthy of it?”16



We find ourselves in an absurd and unfortunate situation—when our thoughts
turn, involuntarily, to consideration of our situation. It seems impossible to
believe that life is intrinsically, religiously meaningful. We continue to act
and think “as if”—as if nothing fundamental has really changed. This does not
change the fact that our integrity has vanished.

The great forces of empiricism and rationality and the great technique of the
experiment have killed myth, and it cannot be resurrected—or so it seems. We
still act out the precepts of our forebears, nonetheless, although we can no
longer justify our actions. Our behavior is shaped (at least in the ideal) by
the same mythic rules—thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not covet—that guided our
ancestors for the thousands of years they lived without benefit of formal
empirical thought. This means that those rules are so powerful—so necessary, at
least—that they maintain their existence (and expand their domain) even in the
presence of explicit theories that undermine their validity. That is a mystery.
And here is another:

How is it that complex and admirable ancient civilizations could have developed
and flourished, initially, if they were predicated upon nonsense? (If a culture
survives, and grows, does that not indicate in some profound way that the ideas
it is based upon are valid? If myths are mere superstitious proto-theories, why
did they work? Why were they remembered? Our great rationalist ideologies,
after all—fascist, say, or communist— demonstrated their essential uselessness
within the space of mere generations, despite their intellectually compelling
nature. Traditional societies, predicated on religious notions, have
survived—essentially unchanged, in some cases, for tens of thousands of years.
How can this longevity be understood?) Is it actually sensible to argue that
persistently successful traditions are based on ideas that are simply wrong,
regardless of their utility?

Is it not more likely that we just do not know how it could be that traditional
notions are right, given their appearance of extreme irrationality?

Is it not likely that this indicates modern philosophical ignorance, rather
than ancestral philosophical error?

We have made the great mistake of assuming that the “world of spirit” described
by those who preceded us was the modern “world of matter,” primitively
conceptualized. This is not true—at least not in the simple manner we generally
believe. The cosmos described by mythology was not the same place known to the
practitioners of modern science—but that does not mean it was not real. We have
not yet found God above, nor the devil below, because we do not yet understand
where “above” and “below” might be found.

We do not know what our ancestors were talking about. This is not surprising,
because they did not “know,” either (and it didn't really matter to them that
they did not know). Consider this archaic creation myth17 from Sumer—the
“birthplace of history”:

So far, no cosmogonic text properly speaking has been discovered, but some
allusions permit us to reconstruct the decisive moments of creation, as the
Sumerians conceived it. The goddess Nammu (whose name is written with the
pictograph representing the primordial sea) is presented as “the mother who
gave birth to the Sky and the Earth” and the “ancestress who brought forth all
the gods.” The theme of the primordial waters, imagined as a totality at once
cosmic and divine, is quite frequent in archaic cosmogonies. In this case too,
the watery mass is identified with the original Mother, who, by
parthenogenesis, gave birth to the first couple, the Sky (An) and the Earth
(Ki), incarnating the male and female principles. This first couple was united,
to the point of merging, in the hieros gamos [mystical marriage]. From their
union was born En-lil, the god of the atmosphere. Another fragment informs us
that the latter separated his parents…. The cosmogonic theme of the separation
of sky and earth is also widely disseminated.18



This myth is typical of archaic descriptions of reality. What does it mean to
say that the Sumerians believed that the world emerged from a “primordial sea,”
which was the mother of all, and that the sky and the earth were separated by
the act of a deity? We do not know. Our abysmal ignorance in this regard has
not been matched, however, by a suitable caution. We appear to have made the
presumption that stories such as these— myths—were equivalent in function and
intent (but were inferior methodologically) to empirical or post-experimental
description. It is this fundamentally absurd insistence that, above all, has
destabilized the effect of religious tradition upon the organization of modern
human moral reasoning and behavior. The “world” of the Sumerians was not
objective reality, as we presently construe it. It was simultaneously more and
less—more, in that this “primitive” world contained phenomena that we do not
consider part of “reality,” such as affect and meaning; less, in that the
Sumerians could not describe (or conceive of) many of those things the
processes of science have revealed to us.

Myth is not primitive proto-science. It is a qualitatively different
phenomenon. Science might be considered “description of the world with regards
to those aspects that are consensually apprehensible” or “specification of the
most effective mode of reaching an end (given a defined end).” Myth can be more
accurately regarded as “description of the world as it signifies (for action).”
The mythic universe is a place to act, not a place to perceive. Myth describes
things in terms of their unique or shared affective valence, their value, their
motivational significance. The Sky (An) and the Earth (Ki) of the Sumerians are
not the sky and earth of modern man, therefore; they are the Great Father and
Mother of all things (including the thing—En-lil, who is actually a
process—that in some sense gave rise to them).

We do not understand pre-experimental thinking, so we try to explain it in
terms that we do understand—which means that we explain it away, define it as
nonsense. After all, we think scientifically—so we believe—and we think we know
what that means (since scientific thinking can in principle be defined). We are
familiar with scientific thinking and value it highly—so we tend to presume
that it is all there is to thinking (presume that all other “forms of thought”
are approximations, at best, to the ideal of scientific thought). But this is
not accurate. Thinking also and more fundamentally is specification of value,
specification of implication for behavior. This means that categorization, with
regards to value—determination (or even perception) of what constitutes a
single thing, or class of things—is the act of grouping together according to
implication for behavior.

The Sumerian category of Sky (An), for example, is a domain of phenomena with
similar implications for behavioral output, or for affect; the same can be said
for the category of Earth (Ki), and all other mythic categories. The fact that
the “domain of the Sky” has implications for action—has motivational
significance—makes it a deity (which is something that controls behavior, or at
least that must be served). Comprehension of the fact that such a
classification system actually has meaning necessitates learning to think
differently (necessitates, as well, learning to think about thinking
differently).

The Sumerians were concerned, above all, with how to act (were concerned with
the value of things). Their descriptions of reality (to which we attribute the
qualities of protoscience) in fact comprised their summary of the world as
phenomenon—as place to act. They did not “know” this—not explicitly—any more
than we do. But it was still true.

The empirical endeavor is devoted to objective description of what is—to
determination of what it is about a given phenomena that can be consensually
validated and described. The objects of this process may be those of the past,
the present, or the future, and may be static or dynamic in nature: a good
scientific theory allows for prediction and control of becoming (of
“transformation”) as well as being. However, the “affect” that an encounter
with an “object” generates is not a part of what that object is, from this
perspective, and therefore must be eliminated from further consideration (along
with anything else subjective)—must be at least eliminated from definition as a
real aspect of the object.

The painstaking empirical process of identification, communication and
comparison has proved to be a strikingly effective means for specifying the
nature of the relatively invariant features of the collectively apprehensible
world. Unfortunately, this useful methodology cannot be applied to
determination of value—to consideration of what should be, to specification of
the direction that things should take (which means, to description of the
future we should construct, as a consequence of our actions). Such acts of
valuation necessarily constitute moral decisions. We can use information
generated in consequence of the application of science to guide those
decisions, but not to tell us if they are correct. We lack a process of
verification, in the moral domain, that is as powerful or as universally
acceptable as the experimental (empirical) method in the realm of description.
This absence does not allow us to sidestep the problem. No functioning society
or individual can avoid rendering moral judgment, regardless of what might be
said or imagined about the necessity of such judgment. Action presupposes
valuation, or its implicit or “unconscious” equivalent. To act is literally to
manifest preference about one set of possibilities, contrasted with an infinite
set of alternatives. If we wish to live, we must act. Acting, we value. Lacking
omniscience, painfully, we must make decisions, in the absence of sufficient
information. It is, traditionally speaking, our knowledge of good and evil, our
moral sensibility, that allows us this ability. It is our mythological
conventions, operating implicitly or explicitly, that guide our choices. But
what are these conventions? How are we to understand the fact of their
existence? How are we to understand them?

It was Nietzsche, once again, who put his finger on the modern problem, central
to issues of valence or meaning: not, as before “how to act, from within the
confines of a particular culture,” but “whether to believe that the question of
how to act could even be reasonably asked, let alone answered”:

Just because our moral philosophers knew the facts of morality only very
approximately in arbitrary extracts or in accidental epitomes—for example, as
the morality of their environment, their class, their church, the spirit of
their time, their climate and part of the world—just because they were poorly
informed and not even very curious about different peoples, times, and past
ages—they never laid eyes on the real problems of morality; for these emerge
only when we compare many moralities. In all “science of morals” so far one
thing was lacking, strange as it may sound: the problem of morality itself;
what was lacking was any suspicion that there was something problematic here.19



This “problem of morality”—is there anything moral, in any realistic general
sense, and if so, how might it be comprehended?—is a question that has now
attained paramount importance. We have the technological power to do anything
we want (certainly, anything destructive; potentially, anything creative);
commingled with that power, however, is an equally profound existential
uncertainty, shallowness and confusion. Our constant cross-cultural
interchanges and our capacity for critical reasoning have undermined our faith
in the traditions of our forebears, perhaps for good reason. However, the
individual cannot live without belief—without action and valuation—and science
cannot provide that belief. We must nonetheless put our faith into something.
Are the myths we have turned to since the rise of science more sophisticated,
less dangerous, and more complete than those we rejected? The ideological
structures that dominated social relations in the twentieth century appear no
less absurd, on the face of it, than the older belief systems they supplanted;
they lacked, in addition, any of the incomprehensible mystery that necessarily
remains part of genuinely artistic and creative production. The fundamental
propositions of fascism and communism were rational, logical, statable,
comprehensible—and terribly wrong. No great ideological struggle presently
tears at the soul of the world, but it is difficult to believe that we have
outgrown our gullibility. The rise of the New Age movement in the West, for
example—as compensation for the decline of traditional spirituality—provides
sufficient evidence for our continued ability to swallow a camel, while
straining at a gnat.

Could we do better? Is it possible to understand what might reasonably, even
admirably, be believed, after understanding that we must believe? Our vast
power makes self-control (and, perhaps, self-comprehension) a necessity—so we
have the motivation, at least in principle. Furthermore, the time is
auspicious. The third Christian millennium is dawning—at the end of an era when
we have demonstrated, to the apparent satisfaction of everyone, that certain
forms of social regulation just do not work (even when judged by their own
criteria for success). We live in the aftermath of the great statist
experiments of the twentieth century, after all, conducted as Nietzsche
prophesied:

In the doctrine of socialism there is hidden, rather badly, a “will to negate
life”; the human beings or races that think up such a doctrine must be bungled.
Indeed, I should wish that a few great experiments might prove that in a
socialist society life negates itself, cuts off its own roots. The earth is
large enough and man still sufficiently unexhausted; hence such a practical
instruction and demonstratio ad absurdum would not strike me as undesirable,
even if it were gained and paid for with a tremendous expenditure of human
lives.20



There appears to exist some “natural” or even—dare it be said?—some “absolute”
constraints on the manner in which human beings may act as individuals and in
society. Some moral presuppositions and theories are wrong; human nature is not
infinitely malleable.

It has become more or less evident, for example, that pure, abstract
rationality, ungrounded in tradition—the rationality that defined Soviet-style
communism from inception to dissolution—appears absolutely unable to determine
and make explicit just what it is that should guide individual and social
behavior. Some systems do not work, even though they make abstract sense (even
more sense than alternative, currently operative, incomprehensible, haphazardly
evolved systems). Some patterns of interpersonal interaction—which constitute
the state, insofar as it exists as a model for social behavior—do not produce
the ends they are supposed to produce, cannot sustain themselves over time, and
may even produce contrary ends, devouring those who profess their value and
enact them. Perhaps this is because planned, logical and intelligible systems
fail to make allowance for the irrational, transcendent, incomprehensible and
often ridiculous aspect of human character, as described by Dostoevsky:

Now I ask you: what can be expected of man since he is a being endowed with
such strange qualities? Shower upon him every earthly blessing, drown him in a
sea of happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of bliss can be seen on the
surface; give him economic prosperity, such that he should have nothing else to
do but sleep, eat cakes and busy himself with the continuation of his species,
and even then out of sheer ingratitude, sheer spite, man would play you some
nasty trick. He would even risk his cakes and would deliberately desire the
most fatal rubbish, the most uneconomical absurdity, simply to introduce into
all this positive good sense his fatal fantastic element. It is just his
fantastic dreams, his vulgar folly that he will desire to retain, simply in
order to prove to himself—as though that were so necessary—that men still are
men and not the keys of a piano, which the laws of nature threaten to control
so completely that soon one will be able to desire nothing but by the calendar.

And that is not all: even if man really were nothing but a piano-key, even if
this were proved to him by natural science and mathematics, even then he would
not become reasonable, but would purposely do something perverse out of simple
ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if he does not find means he will
contrive destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings of all sorts, only to
gain his point! He will launch a curse upon the world, and as only man can
curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction between him and other
animals), maybe by his curse alone he will attain his object—that is, convince
himself that he is a man and not a piano-key! If you say that all this, too,
can be calculated and tabulated, chaos and darkness and curses, so that the
mere possibility of calculating it all beforehand would stop it all, and reason
would reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid of
reason and gain his point! I believe in it, I answer for it, for the whole work
of man really seems to consist in nothing but proving to himself every minute
that he is a man and not a piano-key! It may be at the cost of his skin, it may
be by cannibalism! And this being so, can one help being tempted to rejoice
that it has not yet come off, and that desire still depends on something we
don't know?21



We also presently possess in accessible and complete form the traditional
wisdom of a large part of the human race—possess accurate description of the
myths and rituals that contain and condition the implicit and explicit values
of almost everyone who has ever lived. These myths are centrally and properly
concerned with the nature of successful human existence. Careful comparative
analysis of this great body of religious philosophy might allow us to
provisionally determine the nature of essential human motivation and
morality—if we were willing to admit our ignorance and take the risk. Accurate
specification of underlying mythological commonalities might comprise the first
developmental stage in the conscious evolution of a truly universal system of
morality. The establishment of such a system, acceptable to empirical and
religious minds alike, could prove of incalculable aid in the reduction of
intrapsychic, interindividual and intergroup conflict. The grounding of such a
compara-tive analysis within a psychology (or even a neuropsychology) informed
by strict empirical research might offer us the possibility of a form of
convergent validation, and help us overcome the age-old problem of deriving the
ought from the is; help us see how what we must do might be inextricably
associated with what it is that we are.

Proper analysis of mythology, of the type proposed here, is not mere discussion
of “historical” events enacted upon the world stage (as the traditionally
religious might have it), and it is not mere investigation of primitive belief
(as the traditionally scientific might presume). It is, instead, the
examination, analysis and subsequent incorporation of an edifice of meaning,
which contains within it hierarchical organization of experiential valence. The
mythic imagination is concerned with the world in the manner of the
phenomenologist, who seeks to discover the nature of subjective reality,
instead of concerning himself with description of the objective world. Myth,
and the drama that is part of myth, provide answers in image to the following
question: “how can the current state of experience be conceptualized in
abstraction, with regards to its meaning?” [which means its (subjective,
biologically predicated, socially constructed) emotional relevance or
motivational significance]. Meaning means implication for behavioral output;
logically, therefore, myth presents information relevant to the most
fundamental of moral problems: “what should be? (what should be done?)” The
desirable future (the object of what should be) can be conceptualized only in
relationship to the present, which serves at least as a necessary point of
contrast and comparison. To get somewhere in the future presupposes being
somewhere in the present; furthermore, the desirability of the place traveled
to depends on the valence of the place vacated. The question of “what should
be?” (what line should be traveled?) therefore has contained within it, so to
speak, three subqueries, which might be formulated as follows:

1) What is? What is the nature (meaning, the significance) of the current state
of experience?

2) What should be? To what (desirable, valuable) end should that state be
moving?

3) How should we therefore act? What is the nature of the specific processes by
which the present state might be transformed into that which is desired?

Active apprehension of the goal of behavior, conceptualized in relationship to
the interpreted present, serves to constrain or provide determinate framework
for the evaluation of ongoing events, which emerge as a consequence of current
behavior. The goal is an imaginary state, consisting of “a place” of desirable
motivation or affect—a state that only exists in fantasy, as something
(potentially) preferable to the present. (Construction of the goal therefore
means establishment of a theory about the ideal relative status of motivational
states—about the good.) This imagined future constitutes a vision of
perfection, so to speak, generated in the light of all current knowledge (at
least under optimal conditions), to which specific and general aspects of
ongoing experience are continually compared. This vision of perfection is the
promised land, mythologically speaking—conceptualized as a spiritual domain (a
psychological state), a political utopia (a state, literally speaking), or
both, simultaneously.

We answer the question “what should be?” by formulating an image of the desired
future.

We cannot conceive ofthat future, except in relationship to the (interpreted)
present— and it is our interpretation of the emotional acceptability of the
present that comprises our answer to the question “what is?” [“what is the
nature (meaning, the significance) of the current state of experience?”].

We answer the question “how then should we act?” by determining the most
efficient and self-consistent strategy, all things considered, for bringing the
preferred future into being.

Our answers to these three fundamental questions—modified and constructed in
the course of our social interactions—constitutes our knowledge, insofar as it
has any behavioral relevance; constitutes our knowledge, from the mythological
perspective. The structure of the mythic known—what is, what should be, and how
to get from one to the other—is presented in Figure 1: The Domain and
Constituent Elements of the Known.

The known is explored territory, a place of stability and familiarity; it is
the “city of God,” as profanely realized. It finds metaphorical embodiment in
myths and narratives describing the community, the kingdom or the state. Such
myths and narratives guide our ability to understand the particular, bounded
motivational significance of the present, experienced in relation to some
identifiable desired future, and allow us to construct and interpret
appropriate patterns of action, from within the confines of that schema. We all
produce determinate models of what is, and what should be, and how to transform
one into the other. We produce these models by balancing our own desires, as
they find expression in fantasy and action, with those of the
others—individuals, families and communities—that we habitually encounter. “How
to act,” constitutes the most essential aspect of the social contract; the
domain of the known is, therefore, the “territory” we inhabit with all those
who share our implicit and explicit traditions and beliefs. Myths describe the
existence of this “shared and determinate territory” as a fixed aspect of
existence—which it is, as the fact of culture is an unchanging aspect of the
human environment.

“Narratives of the known”—patriotic rituals, stories of ancestral heroes, myths
and symbols of cultural or racial identity—describe established territory,
weaving for us a web of meaning that, shared with others, eliminates the
necessity of dispute over meaning. All those who know the rules, and accept
them, can play the game—without fighting over the rules of the game. This makes
for peace, stability, and potential prosperity—a good game. The good, however,
is the enemy of the better; a more compelling game might always exist. Myth
portrays what is known, and performs a function that if limited to that, might
be regarded as paramount in importance. But myth also presents information that
is far more profound—almost unutterably so, once (I would argue) properly
understood. We all produce models of what is and what should be, and how to
transform one into the other. We change our behavior, when the consequences
ofthat behavior are not what we would like. But sometimes mere alteration in
behavior is insufficient. We must change not only what we do, but what we think
is important. This means reconsideration of the nature of the motivational
significance of the present, and reconsideration of the ideal nature of the
future. This is a radical, even revolutionary transformation, and it is a very
complex process in its realization—but mythic thinking has represented the
nature of such change in great and remarkable detail.

Figure 1: The Domain and Constituent Elements of the Known





The basic grammatical structure of transformational mythology, so to speak,
appears most clearly revealed in the form of the “way” (as in the “American Way
of Life”). The great literary critic Northrop Frye comments upon the idea of
the way, as it manifests itself in literature and religious writing:

Following a narrative is closely connected with the central literary metaphor
of the journey, where we have a person making the journey and the road, path,
or direction taken, the simplest word for this being ‘way.’ Journey is a word
connected with jour and journee, and metaphorical journeys, deriving as they
mostly do from slower methods of getting around, usually have at their core the
conception of the days journey, the amount of space we can cover under the
cycle of the sun. By a very easy extension of metaphor we get the days cycle as
a symbol for the whole of life. Thus in Housman's poem “Reveille” (“Up, lad:
when the journey's over/There'll be time enough to sleep”) the awakening in the
morning is a metaphor of continuing the journey of life, a journey ending in
death. The prototype for the image is the Book of Ecclesiastes, which urges us
to work while it is day, before the night comes when no man can work….

The word “way” is a good example of the extent to which language is built up on
a series of metaphorical analogies. The most common meaning of “way” in English
is a method or manner of procedure, but method and manner imply some sequential
repetition, and the repetition brings us to the metaphorical kernel of a road
or path…. In the Bible “way” normally translates the Hebrew derek and the Greek
hodos, and throughout the Bible there is a strong emphasis on the contrast
between a straight way that takes us to our destination and a divergent way
that misleads or confuses. This metaphorical contrast haunts the whole of
Christian literature: we start reading Dante's Commedia, and the third line
speaks of a lost or erased way: “Che la diritta via era smarita.” Other
religions have the same metaphor: Buddhism speaks of what is usually called in
English an eightfold path. In Chinese Taoism the Tao is usually also rendered
“way” by Arthur Waley and others, though I understand that the character
representing the word is formed of radicals meaning something like
“head-going.” The sacred book of Taoism, the Tao te Ching, begins by saying
that the Tao that can be talked about is not the real Tao: in other words we
are being warned to beware of the traps in metaphorical language, or, in a
common Oriental phrase, of confusing the moon with the finger pointing at it.
But as we read on we find that the Tao can, after all, be to some extent
characterized: the way is specifically the “way of the valley,” the direction
taken by humility, self-effacement, and the kind of relaxation, or non-action,
that makes all action effective.22



The “way” is the path of life and its purpose.23 More accurately, the content
of the way is the specific path of life. The form of the way, its most
fundamental aspect, is the apparently intrinsic or heritable possibility of
positing or of being guided by a central idea. This apparently intrinsic form
finds its expression in the tendency of each individual, generation after
generation, to first ask and subsequently seek an answer to the question “what
is the meaning of life?”

The central notion of the way underlies manifestation of four more specific
myths, or classes of myths, and provides a more complete answer, in dramatic
form, to the three questions posed previously [what is the nature (meaning, the
significance) of current being?, to what (desirable) end should that state be
moving? and, finally, what are the processes by which the present state might
be transformed into that which is desired?]

The four classes include:

(1) myths describing a current or pre-existent stable state (sometimes a
paradise, sometimes a tyranny);

(2) myths describing the emergence of something anomalous, unexpected,
threatening and promising into this initial state;

(3) myths describing the dissolution of the pre-existent stable state into
chaos, as a consequence of the anomalous or unexpected occurrence;

(4) myths describing the regeneration of stability [paradise regained (or,
tyranny regenerated)], from the chaotic mixture of dissolute previous
experience and anomalous information.

The metamythology of the way, so to speak, describes the manner in which
specific ideas (myths) about the present, the future, and the mode of
transforming one into the other are initially constructed, and then
reconstructed, in their entirety, when that becomes necessary.

Figure 2: The Metamythological Cycle of the Way





The traditional Christian (and not just Christian) notion that man has fallen
from an original “state of grace” into his current morally degenerate and
emotionally unbearable condition—accompanied by a desire for the “return to
Paradise”—constitutes a single example of this “metamyth.” Christian morality
can therefore be reasonably regarded as the “plan of action” whose aim is
re-establishment, or establishment, or attainment (sometimes in the
“hereafter”) of the “kingdom of God,” the ideal future. The idea that man needs
redemption—and that re-establishment of a long-lost Paradise might constitute
such redemption—appear as common themes of mythology, among members of
exceedingly diverse and long-separated human cultures.24 This commonality
appears because man, eternally self-conscious, suffers eternally from his
existence, and constantly longs for respite.

Figure 2: The Metamythological Cycle of the Way schematically portrays the
“circle” of the way, which “begins” and “ends” at the same point—with
establishment of conditional, but determinate moral knowledge (belief). Belief
is disruptible, because finite—which is to say that the infinite mystery
surrounding human understanding may break into our provisional models of how to
act at any time and point, and disrupt their structure. The manner in which we
act as children, for example, may be perfectly appropriate for the conditions
of childhood; the processes of maturation change the conditions of existence,
introducing anomaly where only certainty once stood, making necessary not only
a change of plans, but reconceptualization of where those plans might lead, and
what or who they refer to, in the present.

The known, our current story, protects us from the unknown, from chaos—which is
to say, provides our experience with determinate and predictable structure.
Chaos has a nature all of its own. That nature is experienced as affective
valence, at first exposure, not as objective property. If something unknown or
unpredictable occurs, while we are carrying out our motivated plans, we are
first surprised. That surprise—which is a combination of apprehension and
curiosity—comprises our instinctive emotional response to the occurrence of
something we did not desire. The appearance of something unexpected is proof
that we do not know how to act—by definition, as it is the production of what
we want that we use as evidence for the integrity of our knowledge. If we are
somewhere we don't know how to act, we are (probably) in trouble—we might learn
something new, but we are still in trouble. When we are in trouble, we get
scared. When we are in the domain of the known, so to speak, there is no reason
for fear. Outside that domain, panic reigns. It is for this reason that we
dislike having our plans disrupted, and cling to what we understand. This
conservative strategy does not always work, however, because what we understand
about the present is not necessarily sufficient to deal with the future. This
means that we have to be able to modify what we understand, even though to do
so is to risk our own undoing. The trick, of course, is to modify and yet to
remain secure. This is not so simple. Too much modification brings chaos. Too
little modification brings stagnation (and then, when the future we are
unprepared for appears—chaos).

Involuntary exposure to chaos means accidental encounter with the forces that
undermine the known world. The affective consequences of such encounter can be
literally overwhelming. It is for this reason that individuals are highly
motivated to avoid sudden manifestations of the unknown. And this is why
individuals will go to almost any length to ensure that their protective
cultural “stories” remain intact.

