# 2 - The Dragon of Primordial Chaos
[Metadata]: # {03.11}
[Descriptor]: # {03.11}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
The Dragon of Primordial Chaos
# The Dragon of Primordial Chaos
The source of things is the boundless. From whence they arise, thence they must
also of necessity return. For they do penance and make com pensation to one
another for their injustice in the order of time.270



It might seem futile to speculate about the nature of that which existed prior
to any experience, or that which has not yet been explored. Futile or not, such
speculation has occupied a good portion of man's time, as he attempted to
understand the mystery of his emergence and of the world he found himself
occupying. It seems impossible to determine what it is that was before anything
was; myth attempts that task, despite its impossibility. It does so using the
tool of metaphor. The metaphorical statements of myth work because unknown or
partially known things inevitably share characteristics of importance with
somewhat more thoroughly investigated, comprehended and familiar things. Two or
more objects or situations come to occupy the same mythological or categorical
space, therefore, because they share similar form, function or capacity to
induce affect and compel behavior. A mandrake root, for example, has the nature
of a man, symbolically speaking, because it has the shape of a man; Mars is a
warlike planet because it is red, and red, the color of blood, is associated
indelibly with aggression; the metal mercury (and the “spirit” that inhabits
it) is akin to seawater because both may serve as solvents or agents of
transformation; the dark and the animal of the forest are the same, because
they are both unfamiliar—because they both inhibit ongoing behavior, when they
make their appearance; because they both cause fear. Metaphor links thing to
thing, situation to situation, concentrating on the phenomenological,
affective, functional and motivational features the linked situations share.
Through such linkage, what might otherwise remain entirely mysterious can begin
to become comprehended.

Myths of the origin metaphorically portray the nature of the infinite potential
that characterized being prior to the dawn of experience. This general symbolic
construction takes many particular forms, each of which might be said to
constitute a partial attempt to represent the unrepresentable whole. These
particular forms range in nature from the specific and concrete to the general
and abstract, and are influenced in their development by the environmental and
cultural conditions obtaining at the time of their emergence. The process of
metaphorical representation provides a bridge—and an increasingly communicable
bridge—between what can be directly explored, experienced and “comprehended,”
and what remains eternally unknown.

Mythic symbols of the chaos of the beginning are imaginative pictures, whose
purpose is representation of a paradoxical totality, a “state” (which is
already to say something too determinate) self-contained, uniform and complete,
where everything now distinct resides in union: a state where being and
nonbeing, beginning and end, matter and energy, spirit and body, consciousness
and unconsciousness, femininity and masculinity, night and day remain
compounded, prior to their discrimination into the separable elements of
experience. In this “state,” all conceivable pairs of opposites and
contradictory forces exist together, within the all-encompassing embrace of an
omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent and altogether mysterious God. This
“paradisal” precondition, lacking nothing, characterized by absolute
completion, exists in contradistinction to the profane world, imperfect and
partial, suspended unbearably in time and in space; it surrounds that world
completely, like the night surrounds the day, comprising the beginning of
things, the fountainhead for everything and, similarly, the resting place and
destination point for all. William James turned to poetry in his attempt to
conceptualize this “place”:

No verbiage can give it, because the verbiage is other,

Incoherent, coherent—same.

And it fades! And it's infinite! AND it's infinite!…

Don't you see the difference, don't you see the identity?

Constantly opposites united!

The same me telling you to write and not to write!

Extreme—extreme, extreme!….

Something, and other than that thing!

Intoxication, and otherness than intoxication.

Every attempt at betterment,—every attempt at otherment —is a—

It fades forever and forever as we move.271



This state—“the totality of all things”—might be regarded as the objective
world, in the absence of the subject, although this conceptualization is too
narrow, as primordial chaos also contains that which evolves into the subject,
when it is differentiated. What might be regarded as the standard objective
viewpoint is predicated on the idea that “things” as they are perceived exist
regardless of the perceiver. From a certain perspective, this is true. Things
have a nature that appears independent of subjective will, and follow their own
laws of being and development—despite our wishes. However, the job of
determining what a thing is in the absence of the subject is much more
difficult than might initially be imagined. It is certainly the case—as we have
seen—that the value of an object can shift with shifts in frame of reference.
It appears to be true, however, that what an object is “is and of itself” is
also subject to such shift. Any given object—a table, say—exists as a table
because it is apprehended only in a very limited and restrained manner.
Something is a table at a particular and isolated level of analysis, specified
by the nature of the observer. In the absence of this observer, one might ask,
what is it that is being apprehended? Is the proper level of analysis and
specification subatomic, atomic or molecular (or all three at once)? Should the
table be considered an indistinguishable element of the earth upon which it
rests, or of the solar system, which contains the earth, or of the galaxy
itself? The same problem obtains from the perspective of temporality. What is
now table was once tree; before that, earth—before that, rock; before that,
star. What is now table also has before it an equally complex and lengthy
developmental history waiting in “front” of it; it will be, perhaps, ash, then
earth, then—far enough in the future—part of the sun again (when the sun
finally re-envelops the earth). The table is what it “is” only at a very narrow
span of spatial and temporal resolution (the span that precisely characterizes
our consciousness). So what is the table as an “independent object”—“free,”
that is, of the restrictions that characterize the evidently limited human
viewpoint? What is it that can be conceptualized at all spatial and temporal
levels of analysis simultaneously? Does the “existence” of the thing include
its interactions with everything it influences, and is influenced by,
gravitationally and electromagnetically? Is that “thing” everything it once
was, everything it is, and everything it will be, all at the same time? Where
then are its borders? How can it be distinguished from other things? And
without such distinction, in what manner can it be said to exist?

Question: what is an object, in the absence of a frame of reference? Answer: it
is everything conceivable, at once—is something that constitutes the union of
all currently discriminable opposites (and something that cannot, therefore, be
easily distinguished from nothing).

I am not saying that there are no such things as “things”—that would of course
be patently absurd. It is also fully apparent that the things we apprehend are
rule-governed— the cosmos as we experience it is orderly and rationally
comprehensible. What I am claiming is that “objective” things are in fact the
product of an interaction between whatever constitutes our limited
consciousness and whatever constitutes the unlimited “background” that makes up
the world, in the absence of a subject. This is a stance informed by
mythology—in particular, by myths of the origin.

Archaic myths describing the ultimate origin concern themselves with
representation of the source, not of objects, in the modern sense, but of
subjects and the experience of those subjects (some part of which can be
regarded as objects). Such myths typically describe the genesis of the world of
experience by relating the existence of a primordial god, portraying the
division of this god into the world-parents, and detailing the separation of
those parents by their own “son.” This is the division of the hermaphroditic,
all-encompassing, self-devouring and nourishing serpent of chaos into
earth/matter and sky/spirit, and the subsequent discrimination of those
“primordial opposing forces” into identifiable aspects of being. The
Indo-European myth of Indra and V□tra provides a representative example:

The central myth of Indra, which is, furthermore, the most important myth in
the Rig Veda, narrates his victorious battle against V□tra, the gigantic dragon
who held back the waters in the “hollow of the mountains.” Strengthened by
soma, Indra lays the serpent low with his vajra (“thunderbolt”), the weapon
forged by Tva□□□, splits open his head, and frees the waters, which pour into
the sea “like bellowing cows.” (RV 1.32)

The battle of a god against an ophidian or marine monster is well known to
constitute a widespread mythological theme. We need only remember the struggle
between Re and Apophis, between the Sumerian god Ninurta and Asag, Marduk and
Tiamat, the Hittite storm god and the serpent Illuyankas, Zeus and Typhon, the
Iranian hero Thraētona and the three-headed dragon Azhi-dahâka. In certain
cases (Marduk-Tiamat, for example) the god's victory constitutes the
preliminary condition for the cosmogony. In other cases the stake is the
inauguration of a new era or the establishment of a new sovereignty (cf.
Zeus-Typhon, Baal-Yam). In short, it is by the slaying of an ophidian
monster—symbol of the virtual, of “chaos,” but also of the “autochthonous”—that
a new cosmic or institutional “situation” comes into existence. A
characteristic feature, and one common to all these myths, is the fright, or a
first defeat, of the champion (Marduk and Re hesitate before fighting; at the
onset, the serpent Illyunakas succeeds in mutilating the god; Typhon succeeds
in cutting and carrying off Zeus's tendons). According to the Śatapatha
Brāhma□a (1.6.3–17), Indra, on first seeing V□tra, runs away as far as
possible, and the Mārka□a□eya Purā□a describes him as “sick with fear” and
hoping for peace.272

It would serve no purpose to dwell on the naturalistic interpretations of this
myth; the victory over V□tra has been seen either as rain brought on by a
thunderstorm or as the freeing of the mountain waters (Oldenberg) or as the
triumphs of the sun over the cold that had “imprisoned” the waters by freezing
them (Hillebrandt). Certainly, naturalistic elements are present, since the
myth is multivalent; Indra's victory is equivalent, among other things, to the
triumph of life over the sterility and death resulting from the immobilization
of the waters by V□tra. But the structure of the myth is cosmogonic. In Rig
Veda 1.33.4 it is said that, by his victory, the god created the sun, the sky,
and dawn. According to another hymn (RV 10.113.4–6) Indra, as soon as he was
born, separated the Sky from the Earth, fixed the celestial vault, and hurling
the vajra, tore apart V□tra, who was holding the waters captive in the
darkness. Now, Sky and Earth are the parents of the gods (1.185.6); Indra is
the youngest (3.38.1) and also the last god to be born, because he put an end
to the hierogamy [mystical union] of Sky and Earth: “By his strength, he spread
out these two worlds, Sky and Earth, and caused the sun to shine.” (8.3.6).
After this demiurgic feat, Indra appointed Varu□a cosmocrator and guardian of
□ta (which had remained concealed in the world below; 1.62.1)….

There are other types of Indian cosmogonies that explain the creation of the
world from a materia prima. This is not the case with the myth we have just
summarized, for here a certain type of “world” already existed. For Sky and
Earth were formed and had engendered the gods. Indra only separated the cosmic
parents, and, by hurling the vajra at V□tra, he put an end to the immobility,
or even the “virtuality,” symbolized by the dragon's mode of being. [Indra
comes across V□tra “not divided, not awake, plunged in the deepest sleep,
stretched out” (RV 4.19.3).] According to certain traditions, the “fashioner”
of the gods, Tva□□□, whose role is not clear in the Rig Veda, had built himself
a house and created V□tra as a sort of roof, but also as walls, for his
habitation. Inside this dwelling, encircled by V□tra, Sky, Earth and the Waters
existed. Indra bursts asunder this primordial monad by breaking the
“resistance” and inertia of V□tra. In other words, the world and life could not
come to birth except by the slaying of an amorphous Being. In countless
variants, this myth is quite widespread.273



The primordial theriomorphic serpent-god is endless potential; is whatever
being is prior to the emergence of the capacity for experience. This potential
has been represented as the self-devouring dragon (most commonly) because this
image (portrayed in Figure 29: The Uroboros—Precosmogonic Dragon of Chaos274
aptly symbolizes the union of incommensurate opposites. The uroboros is
simultaneously representative of two antithetical primordial elements.

Figure 29: The Uroboros-Precosmogonic Dragon of Chaos





As a snake, the uroboros is a creature of the ground, of matter; as a bird (a
winged animal), it is a creature of the air, the sky, spirit. The uroboros
symbolizes the union of known (associated with spirit) and unknown (associated
with matter), explored and unexplored; symbolizes the juxtaposition of the
“masculine” principles of security, tyranny and order with the “feminine”
principles of darkness, dissolution, creativity and chaos. Furthermore, as a
snake, the uroboros has the capacity to shed its skin—to be “reborn.” Thus, it
also represents the possibility of transformation, and stands for the knower,
who can transform chaos into order, and order into chaos. The uroboros stands
for, or comprises, everything that is as of yet unencountered, prior to its
differentiation as a consequence of active exploration and classification. It
is the source of all the information that makes up the determinate world of
experience and is, simultaneously, the birthplace of the experiencing subject.

The uroboros is one thing, as everything that has not yet been explored is one
thing; it exists everywhere, and at all times. It is completely self-contained,
completely self-referential: it feeds, fertilizes and engulfs itself. It unites
the beginning and the end, being and becoming, in the endless circle of its
existence. It serves as symbol for the ground of reality itself. It is the “set
of all things that are not yet things,” the primal origin and ultimate point of
return for every discriminable object and every independent subject. It serves
as progenitor of all we know, all that we don't know, and of the spirit that
constitutes our capacity to know and not know. It is the mystery that
constantly emerges when solutions to old problems cause new problems; is the
sea of chaos surrounding man's island of knowledge—and the source of that
knowledge, as well. It is all new experience generated by time, which
incessantly works to transform the temporarily predictable once again into the
unknown. It has served mankind as the most ubiquitous and potent of primordial
gods:

This is the ancient Egyptian symbol of which it is said, “Draco interfecit se
ipsum, maritat se ipsum, impraegnat se ipsum. ” It slays, weds, and impregnates
itself. It is man and woman, begetting and conceiving, devouring and giving
birth, active and passive, above and below, at once.

As the Heavenly Serpent, the uroboros was known in ancient Babylon; in later
times, in the same area, it was often depicted by the Mandaeans; its origin is
ascribed by Macrobius to the Phoenicians. It is the archetype of the εντὀπαν,
the All One, appearing as Leviathan and as Aion, as Oceanus, and also as the
Primal Being that says “I am Alpha and Omega.” As the Kneph of antiquity it is
the Primal Snake, the “most ancient deity of the prehistoric world.” The
uroboros can be traced in the Revelation of St. John and among the Gnostics as
well as among the Roman syncretists; there are pictures of it in the sand
paintings of the Navajo Indians and in Giotto; it is found in Egypt, Africa,
Mexico, and India, among the gypsies as an amulet, and in the alchemical
texts.275



The uroboros is Tiamat, the dragon who inhabits the deep, transformed by Marduk
into the world; Apophis, the serpent who nightly devours the sun; and Rahab,
the leviathan, slain by Yahweh in the course of the creation of the cosmos:

Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which
thou lettest down?

Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?

Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee?

Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever?

Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?

Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the
merchants?

Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?

Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.

Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the
sight of him?

None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me?

Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole
heaven is mine.

I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.

Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his
double bridle?

Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.

His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.

One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.

They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be
sundered.

By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the
morning.

Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.

Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron.

His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.

In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.

The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they
cannot be moved.

His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether
millstone.

When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they
purify themselves.

The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the
habergeon.

He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble.

Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.

He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of
ointment.

He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary.

Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.

He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride. (Job
41:1–34)



The uroboros is that which exists as pure unqualified potential, prior to the
manifestation of such potential, in the experience of the limited subject; is
the infinite possibility for sudden dramatic unpredictability that still
resides in the most thoroughly explored and familiar of objects (things, other
people, ourselves). That unpredictability is not mere material possibility or
potential; it is also meaning. The domain of chaos—which is where what to do
has not yet been specified—is a “place” characterized by the presence of potent
emotions, discouragement, depression, fear, rootlessness, loss and
disorientation. It is the affective aspect of chaos that constitutes what is
most clearly known about chaos. It is “darkness, drought, the suspension of
norms, and death.”276 It is the terror of the dark of night, which fills itself
with demons of the imagination, yet exerts an uncanny fascination; it is the
fire that magically reduces one determinate thing to another; it is the horror
and curiosity engendered by the stranger and foreigner.

The uroboros—the primordial matrix—contains in “embryonic” form everything that
can in principle possibly be experienced, and the thing that does the
experiencing. The great serpent (the matrix) is therefore consciousness—spirit,
before it manifests itself— and matter, before it is separated from spirit.
This great mythological idea finds its echo in certain modern theories of the
development of the subject; most particularly, among those entitled
constructivist. The famous Swiss developmental psychologist Jean Piaget
claimed, for example, that the experiencing subject constructs himself in
infancy, as a consequence of his exploratory activity.277 He acts, and observes
himself acting; then imitates the action, forming a primordial representation
of himself—later, formulates a more abstracted model of his own actions. Thus
the subject is created from the information generated in the course of
exploratory activity. Contemporaneously, the world comes into being:

Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the
people inhabiting the wilderness.

Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.

The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou has prepared the light and the
sun.

Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.
(Psalms 74:14–17).



Actions have consequences. The consequences of actions constitute the world—the
familiar world, when they are predictable; the world of the unexpected, when
they are not.

The state of the origin has been represented most abstractly as a circle, the
most perfect of geometric forms, or as a sphere, without beginning or end,
symmetrical across all axes. Plato, in the Timaeus, described the primary
source as the round, there at the beginning.278 In the Orient, the world and
its meaning springs from the encircled interplay and union of the light,
spiritual, masculine yang and the dark, material, feminine yin.279 According to
the adepts of medieval alchemy, discernible objects of experience (and the
subjects who experienced them) emerged from the round chaos, which was a
spherical container of the primordial element.280 The God of Islam, Judaism and
Christianity, “Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last” (Revelations 22:13), places himself outside of or beyond worldly change,
and unites the temporal opposites within the great circle of his being. The
assimilation of the origin to a circle finds narrative echo in myths describing
heaven as the end to which life is, or should be, devoted (at least from the
perspective of the “immortal soul.”) The Kingdom of God, promised by Christ, is
in fact re-establishment of Paradise (although a Paradise characterized by
reconciliation of opposing forces, and not regressive dissolution into
preconscious unity). Such re-establishment closes the circle of temporal being.

The uroboric initial state is the “place” where all opposite things were (will
be) united; the great self-devouring dragon whose division into constituent
elements constitutes the precondition for experience itself. This initial state
is a “place” free of problems, and has a paradisal aspect, in consequence;
however, the price that must be paid for uroboric paradise is being itself. It
is not until the original unity of all things is broken up—until the most
primordial of gods is murdered—that existence itself springs into being. The
emergence of things, however, brings with it the problem of conflict—a problem
that must be solved, optimally, without eliminating the fact of existence
itself.

The uroboros is the unified parent of the known, the Great Father (explored
territory and the familiar), and of the unknown, the Great Mother (anomalous
information and the

Figure 30: The Birth of the World Parents





unpredictable). It might be regarded, as well, as the single androgynous
grandparent of the hero, son of the night and the day, mediator between the
known and unknown, whose being constitutes a necessary precondition for the
existence of differentiated things (and who can, therefore, also be regarded as
a causa prima). The world parents, Earth and Sky, emerge when the uroboric
dragon undergoes a first division. Figure 30: The Birth of the World Parents
presents the “birth of the world” in schematic form, insofar as it has been
conceptualized by the mythic imagination. The chaos that constitues totality
divides itself into what has been explored, and what has yet to be explored.

From the mythic perspective, this division is equivalent to the emergence of
the cosmos—and, therefore, to creation or genesis itself. One thing is
missing—the fact of the explorer, and the nature of his relationship with what
is known and what has yet to be known. With the “birth” of the explorer—with
his construction from the interplay between culture and nature—the entire
“world” comes into being. This “emergence of experience” is portrayed in Figure
31: The Constituent Elements of the World, in Dynamic Relationship The “knower”
is simultaneously child of nature and culture, creator of culture (as a
consequence of his encounter with nature or the unknown world) and the “person”
for whom the unknown is a reality.

It is almost impossible to overestimate the degree to which the “world parent”
schema of

Figure 31: The Constituent Elements of the World, in Dynamic Relationship





categorization colors (or, alternatively, has been derived from) fundamental
human presumption and activity. The “world” is explored territory, surrounded
by mystery; that mystery is experienced as undifferentiated but oft-menacing
chaos. Everything that “occupies” such chaos is directly perceived as (not
abstractly conceptualized as) identical to it—is directly perceived as unknown
and anxiety-provoking. The foreigner, therefore—the occupant of the “habitation
of dragons” (Isaiah 34:13)—is naturally apprehended as an agent of formless
chaos. Eliade states:

One of the outstanding characteristics of traditional societies is the
opposition that they assume between their inhabited world and the unknown and
indeterminate space that surrounds it. The former is the world (more precisely,
our world), the cosmos; everything outside it is no longer a cosmos but a sort
of “other world,” a foreign, chaotic space, peopled by ghosts, demons,
“foreigners” (who are assimilated to [undistinguished from, more accurately]
the demons and the souls of the dead).281



Everything outside occupies the same categorical space as the dragon of chaos,
or the terrible mother. The early Indo-Europeans equated the destruction of
enemies in battle to the slaying of V□tra by Indra;282 the ancient Egyptians
regarded the Hyksos, “barbarians,” as equivalent to Apophis, the serpent who
nightly devours the sun;283 and the archaic Iranians (Zoroastrians) equated the
mythic struggle of King Faridun against a foreign usurper—the dragon
Azdahak—with the cosmogonic fight of the hero Thraētona against Azhi Dahâka,
the primordial serpent of chaos.284 The enemies of the Old Testament Hebrews
also suffer the same fate: they are regarded as equivalent to Rahab, or
Leviathan, the serpent overcome by Yahweh in his battle to establish the world
[“Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh
king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which
hath said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.” (Ezekiel
29:3); also, “Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath
crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a
dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out.”
(Jeremiah 51:34)]. Eliade continues:

At first sight this cleavage in space appears to be due to the opposition
between an inhabited and organized—hence cosmicized—territory and the unknown
space that extends beyond its frontiers; on one side there is a cosmos, on the
other a chaos. But we shall see that if every inhabited territory is a cosmos,
this is precisely because it was first consecrated, because, in one way or
another, it is the work of the gods or is in communication with the world of
the gods. The world (that is, our world) is a universe within which the sacred
has already manifested itself, in which, consequently, the break-through from
plane to plane has become possible and repeatable. It is not difficult to see
why the religious moment implies the cosmogonic moment. The sacred reveals
absolute reality and at the same time makes orientation possible; hence it
founds the world in the sense that it fixes the limits and establishes the
order of the world.

All this appears very clearly from the Vedic ritual for taking possession of a
territory; possession becomes legally valid through the erection of a fire
altar consecrated to Agni. “One says that one is installed when one has built a
fire altar (garhapatya) and all those who build the fire altar are legally
established.” (Shatapatha Brahmana, VII, 1,1,1–4). By the erection of a fire
altar Agni is made present, and communication with the world of the gods is
ensured; the space of the altar becomes a sacred space. But the meaning of the
ritual is far more complex, and if we consider all of its ramifications, we
shall understand why consecrating a territory is equivalent to making it a
cosmos, to cosmicizing it. For, in fact, the erection of an altar to Agni is
nothing but the reproduction—on the microcosmic scale—of the Creation. The
water in which the clay is mixed is assimilated to the primordial water; the
clay that forms the base of the altar symbolizes the earth; the lateral walls
represent the atmosphere, and so on. And the building of the altar is
accompanied by songs that proclaim which cosmic region has just been created
(Shatapatha Brahmana I, 9, 2, 29, etc.). Hence the erection of a fire
altar—which alone validates taking possession of a new territory—is equivalent
to a cosmogony.

An unknown, foreign and unoccupied territory (which often means “unoccupied by
our people”) still shares in the fluid and larval modality of chaos. By
occupying it and, above all, by settling in it, man symbolically transforms it
into a cosmos through a ritual repetition of the cosmogony. What is to become
“our world” must first be “created,” and every creation has a paradigmatic
model—the creation of the universe by the gods. When the Scandinavian colonists
took possession of Iceland (landnama) and cleared it, they regarded the
enterprise neither as an original undertaking nor as human and profane work.
For them, their labor was only repetition of a primordial act, the
transformation of chaos into cosmos by the divine act of creation. When they
tilled the desert soil, they were in fact repeating the act of the gods who had
organized chaos by giving it a structure, forms, and norms.

Whether it is a case of clearing uncultivated ground or of conquering and
occupying a territory already inhabited by “other” human beings, ritual taking
possession must always repeat the cosmogony. For in the view of archaic
societies everything that is not “our world” is not yet a world. A territory
can be made ours only by creating it anew, that is, by consecrating it. This
religious behavior in respect to unknown lands continued, even in the West,
down to the dawn of modern times [and was reflected recently in the “planting
of the flag” on the moon, by the American astronauts]. The Spanish and
Portuguese conquistadors, discovering and conquering territories, took
possession of them in the name of Jesus Christ [the world-creating Logos].285



A similar form of ritual and ideation dominates processes even as “simple” as
the establishment of a new building. In India,

Before a single stone is laid, “The astrologer shows what spot in the
foundation is exactly above the head of the snake that supports the world. The
mason fashions a little wooden peg from the wood of the Khadira tree, and with
a coconut drives the peg into the ground at this particular spot, in such a way
as to peg the head of the snake securely down…. If this snake should ever shake
its head really violently, it would shake the world to pieces.”286 A foundation
stone is placed above the peg. The cornerstone is thus situated exactly at the
“center of the world.” But the act of foundation at the same time repeats the
cosmogonic act, for to “secure” the snake's head, to drive the peg into it, is
to imitate the primordial gesture of Soma (Rig Veda II, 12,1) or of Indra when
the latter “smote the Serpent in his lair” (Rig Veda, VI, 17, 9), when his
thunderbolt “cut off his head” (Rig Veda I, 52, 10).287



Order—explored territory—is constructed out of chaos and exists,
simultaneously, in opposition to that chaos (to the “new” chaos, more
accurately: to the unknown now defined in opposition to explored territory).
Everything that is not order—that is, not predictable, not usable—is, by
default (by definition) chaos. The foreigner—whose behaviors cannot be
predicted, who is not kin, either by blood or by custom, who is not an
inhabitant of the “cosmos,” whose existence and domain has not been
sacralized—is equivalent to chaos (and not merely metaphorically equated with
chaos). As such, his appearance means threat, as his action patterns and
beliefs have the capacity to upset society itself, to dissolve and flood the
world, and to reinstitute the dominion of the uroboros.

