# 4 - INTRODUCTION: THE PARADIGMATIC STRUCTURE OF THE KNOWN
[Metadata]: # {05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
INTRODUCTION: THE PARADIGMATIC STRUCTURE OF THE KNOWN
# INTRODUCTION: THE PARADIGMATIC STRUCTURE OF THE KNOWN
The “known” is a hierarchical structure, composed of “walls within walls.” The
individual sits at the middle of a series of concentric rings, composed of the
integrated “personalities” of his ancestors, nested (at least in the ideal)
within the figure of the exploratory hero. The inner walls are dependent for
their protection—for their continued existence and validity—on the integrity of
the outer walls. The farther “out” a given wall, the more “implicit” its
structure—that is, the more it is incarnated in behavior and image, rather than
explicit in word. Furthermore, the farther “out” the wall, the older the
“personality,” the broader range of its applicability, and the greater the
magnitude of emotion it holds in check. Groups—and individuals—may share some
levels of the known, but not others. The similarities account for “shared group
identity,” insofar as that exists; the differences, for the identification of
the other with the forces of chaos.

Rituals designed to strengthen group identity hold chaos at bay, but threaten
individual identification with the exploratory hero—an identity upon which
maintenance of the group ultimately depends. For the sake of the group,
therefore, the individual must not be rendered subservient to the group.

The aspects of things that are most important for us are hidden because of
their simplicity and familiarity. (One is unable to notice something—because it
is always before one's eyes.) The real founda tions of his enquiry do not
strike a man at all. Unless that fact has at some time struck him.—And this
means: we fail to be struck by what, once seen, is most striking and
powerful.375



A moral system—a system of culture—necessarily shares features in common with
other systems. The most fundamental of the shared features of systems was
identified by Kurt Godel. Godel's Incompleteness Theorem demonstrated that any
internally consistent and logical system of propositions must necessarily be
predicated upon assumptions that cannot be proved from within the confines of
that system. The philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn, discussing the progress of
science, described similar implicit-presumption-ridden systems as paradigmatic.
Explicitly scientific paradigmatic systems, the focus of Kuhn's attention, are
concerned with the prediction and control of events whose existence can be
verified, in a particular formal manner, and offer “model problems and
solutions to a community of practitioners.”376 Pre-experimental thinking— which
primarily means moral thinking (thinking about the meaning or significance of
events [objects and behaviors])—also appears necessarily characterized by
paradigmatic structure.

A paradigm is a complex cognitive tool, whose use presupposes acceptance of a
limited number of axioms (or definitions of what constitutes reality, for the
purposes of argument and action), whose interactions produce an internally
consistent explanatory and predictive structure. Paradigmatic thinking might be
described as thinking whose domain has been formally limited; thinking that
acts “as if” some questions have been answered in a final manner. The
“limitations of the domain” or the “answers to the questions” make up the
axiomatic statements of the paradigm, which are, according to Kuhn,
“explicitly” formulated—semantically represented, according to the argument set
forth here—or left “implicit”—embedded in (episodic) fantasy or embodied
behavior. The validity of the axioms must either be accepted on faith, or (at
least) demonstrated using an approach which is external to the paradigm in
question (which amounts to the same thing as faith, from a
“within-the-paradigm” perspective).

In some regards, a paradigm is like a game. Play is optional, but, once
undertaken, must be governed by (socially verified) rules. These rules cannot
be questioned, while the game is on (or if they are, that is a different game.
Children arguing about how to play football are not playing football. They are
engaging, instead, in a form of philosophy). Paradigmatic thinking allows for
comprehension of an infinity of “facts,” through application of a finite system
of presuppositions—allows, in the final analysis, for the limited subject to
formulate sufficient provisional understanding of the unlimited experiential
object (including the subject).

Human culture has, by necessity, a paradigmatic structure—devoted not toward
objective description of what is, but to description of the cumulative
affective relevance, or meaning, of what is. The capacity to determine the
motivational relevance of an object or situation is dependent, in turn, upon
representation of a (hypothetically) ideal state (conceived in constrast to
conceptualization of the present), and upon generation of an action sequence
designed to attain that ideal. It is (stated, unstated and unstatable) articles
of faith that underlie this tripartite representation, and that keep the entire
process in operation. These “articles of faith” are axioms of morality, so to
speak—some explicit (represented declaratively, in image and word), most still
implicit—which evolved in the course of human exploration and social
organization, over the course of hundreds of thousands of years. In their
purely implicit states, such axioms are extremely resistant to alteration. Once
made (partially) explicit, however, moral axioms rapidly become subject to
endless careful and thoughtful or casual careless debate. Such debate is
useful, for continuance and extension of adaptation, but also very dangerous,
as it is the continued existence of unchallenged moral axioms that keeps the
otherwise unbearable significance of events constrained, and the possibility
for untrammeled action alive.

A paradigmatic structure provides for determinate organization of (unlimited)
information, according to limited principles. The system of Euclidean geometry
provides a classic example. The individual who wishes to generate a desired
outcome of behavior, as a consequence of the application of Euclidean
principles, is bound by necessity to accept certain axioms “on faith.” These
axioms follow:

1. A straight line segment can be drawn joining any two points.

2. Any straight line segment can be extended indefinitely in a straight line.

3. Given any straight line segment, a circle can be drawn having the segment as
radius and one end point as center.

4. All right angles are congruent.

5. If 2 lines are drawn which intersect a 3rd in such a way that the sum of the
inner angles on one side is less than two right angles, then the 2 lines
inevitably must intersect each other on that side if extended far enough.377

It is the interaction of each of the five initial postulates—which are all that
necessarily have to be remembered, or understood, for geometry to prove
useful—that gives rise to the internally consistent and logical Euclidean
structure we are all familiar with. What constitutes truth, from within the
perspective of this structure, can be established by reference to these initial
postulates. However, the postulates themselves must be accepted. Their validity
cannot be demonstrated, within the confines of the system. They might be
“provable” from within the confines of another system, however—although the
integrity ofthat system will still remain dependent, by necessity, on different
postulates, down to an indeterminate end. The validity of a given structure
appears necessarily predicated on “unconscious” presuppositions—the
presupposition that space has three dimensions, in the case of Euclidean
geometry (a presupposition which is clearly questionable).

It appears, in many cases, that the assumptions of explicit semantic statements
take episodic or imagistic form. The Euclidean postulates, for example, appear
to be based upon “observable facts” (images of “the world of experience” as
interpreted). Euclid grounded his explicit abstract (semantic) system in
observable “absolutes.” It can be concretely demonstrated, for example, that
any two points drawn in the sand can be joined by a given line. Repeated
illustration of this “fact” appears (acceptably) convincing—as does, similarly,
(“empirical”) demonstration that any straight line segment can be extended
indefinitely in a straight line. These postulates (and the remaining three)
cannot be proved from within the confines of geometry itself, but they appear
true, and will be accepted as such, as a consequence of practical example. What
this means is that belief in Euclidean presumptions is dependent upon
acceptance of practical experience as sufficient certainty. The Euclidean draws
a line in the sand, so to speak, and says “the questions stop here.”

Similarly, it appears that what constitutes truth from the episodic perspective
is predicated upon acceptance of the validity and sufficiency of specific
procedural operations. How a thing is represented in episodic memory, for
example—which is what a thing is, insofar as we know what it is—appears
dependent upon how it was investigated and on the implicit “presuppositions”
driving or limiting the behavioral strategies applied to it in the course of
creative exploration. Kuhn states:

Scientists can agree that a Newton, Lavoisier, Maxwell or Einstein has produced
an apparently permanent solution to a group of outstanding problems and still
disagree, sometimes without being aware of it, about the particular abstract
characteristics that make those solutions permanent. They can, that is, agree
in their identification of a paradigm without agreeing on, or even attempting
to produce, a full interpretation or rationalization of it. Lack of a standard
interpretation or of an agreed reduction to rules will not prevent a paradigm
from guiding research. Normal science can be determined in part by the direct
inspection of paradigms, a process that is often aided by but does not depend
upon the formulation of rules and assumptions. Indeed, the existence of a
paradigm need not even imply that any full set of rules exists.



He continues, in a footnote:

Michael Polyani378 has brilliantly developed a very similar theme, arguing that
much of the scientist's success depends upon “tacit knowledge,” i.e., upon
knowledge that is acquired through practice and that cannot be articulated
explicitly.379



The Euclidean draws a line connecting two points in the sand, and accepts on
faith the sufficiency ofthat behavioral demonstration and the evident certainty
of its outcome (in part, because no alternative conceptualization can presently
be imagined). Euclidean geometry worked and was considered complete for
centuries because it allowed for the prediction and control of all those
experienceable phenomena that arose as a consequence of human activity, limited
in its domain by past behavioral capacity. Two hundred years ago, we did not
know how to act concretely, or think abstractly, in a manner that would produce
some situation whose nature could not be described by Euclid. That is no longer
the case. Many alternative, and more inclusive geometries have been generated
during the course of the last century. These new systems describe the nature of
“reality”—the phenomena that emerge as a consequence of ongoing behavior—more
completely.

All representations of objects (or situations, or behavioral sequences) are of
course conditional, because they may be altered unpredictably, or even
transformed, entirely, as a consequence of further exploration (or because of
some spontaneous anomaly-emergence). The (anxiety-inhibiting, goal-specifying)
model of the object of experience is therefore inevitably contingent—dependent,
for its validity, on the maintenance of those (invisible) conditions which
applied and those (unidentified) contexts which were relevant when the
information was originally generated. Knowledge is mutable, in consequence—as
Nietzsche observed:

There are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are “immediate
certainties”; for example, “I think,” or as the superstition of Schopenhauer
put it, “I will”; as though knowledge here got hold of its object purely and
nakedly as “the thing in itself,” without any falsification on the part of
either the subject or the object. But that “immediate certainty,” as well as
“absolute knowledge” and “the thing in itself,” involve a contradictio in
adjecto, I shall repeat a hundred times; we really ought to free ourselves from
the seduction of words!

Let the people suppose that knowledge means knowing things entirely; the
philosopher must say to himself: When I analyze the process that is expressed
in the sentence, “I think,” I find a whole series of daring assertions that
would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to prove; for example, that it is I who
think, that there must necessarily be something that thinks, that thinking is
an activity and operation on the part of a being who is thought of as a cause,
that there is an “ego,” and, finally, that it is already determined what is to
be designated by thinking—that I know what thinking is. For if I had not
already decided within myself what it is, by what standard could I determine
whether that which is just happening is not perhaps “willing” or “feeling”? In
short, the assertion “I think” assumes that I compare my state at the present
moment with other states of myself which I know, in order to determine what it
is; on account of this retrospective connection with further “knowledge,” it
has, at any rate, no immediate certainty for me.

In place of the “immediate certainty” in which the people may believe in the
case at hand, the philosopher thus finds a series of metaphysical questions
presented to him, truly searching questions of the intellect; to wit: “From
where do I get the concept of thinking? Why do I believe in cause and effect?
What gives me the right to speak of an ego, and even of an ego as a cause, and
finally of an ego as the cause of thought?” Whoever ventures to answer these
metaphysical questions at once by an appeal to a sort of intuitive perception,
like the person who says, “I think, and know that this, at least, is true,
actual, and certain”—will encounter a smile and two question marks from a
philosopher nowadays. “Sir,” the philosopher will perhaps give him to
understand, “it is improbable that you are not mistaken; but why insist on the
truth?”380



The “object” always remains something capable of transcending the “bounds” of
its representation; it is something that inevitably retains its mysterious
essence, its connection with the unknown, and its potential for the inspiration
of hope and fear. The “actual” or “transcendent” object, in and of itself,
insofar as such a thing can be considered, is the sum total of its explored
properties, plus that which remains unexplored—the unknown itself.

Our understanding of a given phenomenon is always limited by the temporal,
economic and technological resources that we have at our disposal. Knowledge is
necessarily contingent, although it is neither less “objective,” necessarily,
nor less “knowledge,” because of that. Our representations of objects (or
situations, or behavioral sequences) are currently accepted as valid, because
they serve their purposes as tools. If we can manipulate our models in
imagination, apply the solutions so generated to the “real” world, and produce
the outcome desired, we presume that our understanding is valid—and sufficient.
It isn't until we do something, and produce an unexpected outcome, that our
models are deemed insufficient. This means that our current representations of
a given phenomena are predicated on the (implicit) presumption that sufficient
exploration of that phenomena has taken place. “Sufficient exploration” is a
judgment rendered as a consequence of a sequence of action attaining its
desired end (“what works” is “true”). A procedure is deemed sufficient when it
attains its desired end—when it meets its goal. The nature ofthat goal,
archetypally, is establishment of or movement toward a paradisal state
characterized by stable, dynamic relief from (unbearable) suffering, freedom
from (paralyzing) anxiety, abundance of hope, and bountiful provision of
primary reward—the peaceful land of “milk and honey,” in mythical language.
This is merely to say that knowledge serves the ends of life, rather than
existing in and of itself.

Some contingent forms of knowledge—behaviors, say, and schemas of value—prove
of lasting worth, producing the desired outcome across a broad range of
contexts. These are “remembered”—stored in ritual and myth—and transmitted down
the generations. Over the course of time, they become integrated with all other
extant behaviors and schemas of value, in a hierarchy that allows for their
various expression. This hierarchy, as described previously, is composed of the
actions and valuations of past heroes, organized by other heroes into a stable
social character, shared by all members of the same culture (as the Christian
church constitutes the symbolic body of Christ). This hierarchy has been and
currently is shaped by endless loops of affective feedback, as the means and
goals chosen by each individual and the society at large are modified by the
actions and reactions of society and the eternally ineradicable presence of the
unknown itself. The resultant “hierarchy of motivation” can be most accurately
characterized as a personality—the mythic “ancestral” figure that everyone
imitates, consciously (with full participation of the semantic and episodic
system, rational thought and imagination) or unconsciously (in action only,
despite express “disbelief”). The hierarchically structured behavioral pattern
(personality) that constitutes culture comes, with the passage of time, to be
represented secondarily, isormorphically, in episodic memory, and then coded
explicitly insofar as current cognitive development makes that possible. The
explicit moral code is therefore predicated upon presumptions which are valid
purely from the episodic perspective; in turn, these episodic representations
derive their validity from procedural knowledge, designed to meet affective
requirements, in the social community and in the presence of the unknown.

A moral philosophy, which is a pattern for behavior and interpretation, is
therefore dependent for its existence upon a mythology, which is a collection
of images of behaviors, which emerge, in turn, as a consequence of social
interaction (cooperation and competition), designed to meet emotional demands.
These demands take on what is essentially a universally constant and limited
form, as a consequence of their innate psychobiological basis and the social
expression of that basis. Hence (as implied previously) the limited “forms” of
myth. Northrop Frye states, in this regard:

I should distinguish primary and secondary concern, even though there is no
real boundary line between them. Secondary concerns arise from the social
contract, and include patriotic and other attachments of loyalty, religious
beliefs, and class-conditioned attitudes and behaviors. They develop from the
ideological aspect of myth, and consequently tend to be directly expressed in
ideological prose language. In the mythical stage, they often accompany a
ritual. Such a ritual may be designed, for example, to impress on a boy that he
is to be admitted to the society of men in a ritual for men only; that he
belongs to this tribe or group and not that one, a fact which will probably
determine the nature of his marriage; that these and not those are his special
totems or tutelary deities.

Primary concerns may be considered in four main areas: food and drink, along
with related bodily needs; sex; properly (i.e. money, possessions, shelter,
clothing and everything that constitutes property in the sense of what is
“proper” to ones own life); liberty of movement. The general object of primary
concern is expressed in the Biblical phrase “life more abundantly.” In origin,
primary concerns are not individual or social in reference so much as generic,
anterior to the conflicting claims of the singular and the plural. But as
society develops they become the claims of the individual body as distinct from
those of the body politic. A famine is a social problem, but only the
individual starves. So a sustained attempt to express primary concerns can
develop only in societies where the sense of individuality has also developed.
The axioms of primary concerns are the simplest and baldest platitudes it is
possible to formulate: that life is better than death, happiness better than
misery; health better than sickness, freedom better than bondage, for all
people without significant exception.

What we have been calling ideologies are closely linked to secondary concerns,
and in large measure consist of rationalizations of them. And the longer we
look at myths, or storytelling patterns, the more clearly their links with
primary concern stand out…. This rooting of poetic myth in primary concern
accounts for the fact that mythical themes, as distinct from individual myths
or stories, are limited in number.381



The (explicit) moral code is validated by reference to the (religious, mythic)
narrative; the narrative is (primarily episodic) representation of behavioral
tradition; the tradition emerges as a consequence of individual adaptation to
the demands of natural conditions, manifest (universally) in emotion, generated
in a social context. The episodic representation—which is representation of the
outcome of a procedure and the procedure itself—is predicated upon belief in
the sufficiency and validity of that procedure; more subtly, it has the same
structure—at least insofar as it is an accurate representation of behavior—and
therefore contains the (implicit) hierarchical structure of historically
determined procedural knowledge in more explicit form.

Over lengthy historical periods, therefore, the “image” ever more accurately
encapsulates the behavior, and stories find their compelling essential form.
Frye states, with regard to the process underlying “construction” of the Old
and New Testaments:

The Bible's literary unity is a by-product of something else—we might call it
an unconscious by-product if we knew anything at all about the mental processes
involved. The earlier part of the Old Testament, with its references to the
Book of Jasher and the like, gives the effect of having distilled and fermented
a rich poetic literature to extract a different kind of verbal essence, and on
a smaller scale the same process can be seen in the New Testament…. The
editorial work done on this earlier poetic material was not an attempt to
reduce it from poetry to a kind of plain prose sense, assuming that there is
such a thing. This kind of sense implies a direct appeal to credulity, to the
infantilism which is so exasperating a feature of popular religious and other
ideologies. What we have is rather an absorption of a poetic and mythic
presentation that takes us past myth to something else. In doing so it will
elude those who assume that myth means only something that did not happen.382



The second-order semantic codification is grounded in the episodic
representation; tends, over time, to duplicate the hierarchical structure
ofthat representation; and is predicated upon acceptance of the validity of the
procedural and episodic memories. Semantic, episodic and procedural contents
therefore share (in the intrapsychically integrated, “conscious” or
psychologically healthy individual) identical hierarchical structure, in their
respective forms of action or representation. This integrated morality lends
predictability to individual and interpersonal behavior, constitutes the basis
for the stable state, and helps ensure that emotion remains controlled and
regulated.

Figure 47: The Paradigmatic Structure of the Known presents the “personality”
of a typical Western individual—in this case, a middle-class businessman and
father. His individual life is nested within an increasingly transpersonal,
shared “personality,” with deep, increasingly implicit historical roots. The
“smaller stories,” nested within the larger, are dependent for their continued
utility on maintenance of the larger—as the middle-class family, for example,
is dependent for its economic stability on the capitalist system, as the
capitalist system is nested in humanistic Western thought, as humanism is
dependent on the notion of the inherent value of the individual (on the notion
of “individual rights”), and as the inherent value of the individual is
dependent on his association, or ritual identification, with the exploratory
communicative hero. The more encompassing “outer” levels of organization may be
extant purely in behavior—that is, the individual in question may have little
or no explicit imagistic or semantic knowledge of his historical roots,
although he still “acts out” a

Figure 47: The Paradigmatic Structure of the Known





historically conditioned personality. It is certainly possible, as well—and is
increasingly the norm—for an individual to deny explicit “belief” in the
validity of the Judeo-Christian ethic or the existence of any transpersonal
“exploratory hero” whatsoever. This denial, at the explicit (verbalizable)
level of “consciousness” merely interferes with the integrity of the
personality in question. The procedural aspect that largely constitutes
Judeo-Christian belief (for example)—and even ritual identification with the
hero, to some degree (the “imitation of Christ”)—almost inevitably remains
intact (at least in the case of the “respectable citizen”). The modern educated
individual therefore “acts out” but does not “believe.” It might be said that
the lack of isomorphism between explicit abstract self-representation and
actions undertaken in reality makes for substantial existential confusion—and
for susceptibility to sudden dominance by any ideology providing a “more
complete” explanation. Equally or even more troublesome is the tendency of lack
of explicit “belief” to manifest itself, slowly, in

Figure 48: The Known: Nested Groups and Individuals





alteration of imagistic representation and behavior (as ideas change actions,
over time) and to “invisibly” undermine intrapsychic and social stability.

Groups and individuals may differ in their goals, values and behaviors at one
level of analysis, while sharing features in common at “higher,” more implicit
levels. Figure 48: The Known: Nested Groups and Individuals portrays three such
groups. This number is arbitrary: Catholic, Protestant and Greek Orthodox
Christians, for example, might all be regarded as enveloped by their
participation in the Judeo-Christian “personality”; although they may well
fight among themselves, at the drop of a hat (“within” the confines of that
personality), they are liable to eagerly join forces, to eliminate a threat,
real or perceived, from Jews or Muslims. Within each of these three groups
there are going to be differences and similarities, as well. Each community of
believers is likely to have its separate sects, separated from one another by a
certain historical duration (and the alterations in value structure and
behavior that accompany such divergence). Finally, individuals within groups
will diverge, too, according to their individual interests and idiosyncratic
beliefs. (Paradoxically, it is fidelity to these individual characteristics
that most truly unites all persons in “worship” of the exploratory hero. This
means that the innermost “level” of personality organization—that aspect which
is truly unique, rather than shared—is also the outer level, upon which the
stability of the entire structure depends.)

The emergence of anomaly—the “re-emergence of the Great Mother”—constitutes a
threat to the integrity of the moral tradition governing behavior and
evaluation. It is for this reason that adjustment to anomaly—in the many
“mythologically equivalent” forms it takes—is frequently resisted passively (by
“failure to take it into account”) and aggressively (by attempts to eradicate
its source). Anomalies may have their effect at different “levels,” as we have
seen. The most profound threats undermine the stability of the “personalities”
that encompass the largest number of people, have the deepest historical roots,
are most completely grounded in image and behavior—are most broadly applicable,
regardless of situation (“cover” the largest possible span of time and space).
We seem “aware,” in some sense, of the danger of profound anomalies, perhaps
because a substantial amount of negative emotion and abstract cognitive
consideration can be elicited merely through positing their possibility (“what
if we were truly threatened by the foreign devils?”). Our tendency to
personally identify with our respective countries, say—to foster and be proud
of our patriotism—reflects “knowledge” that our personal integrity and security
is integrally bound up, for better or worse, with the destiny of our cultures.
We are therefore motivated to protect those cultures, to defend our societies
and ourselves against the “return of the terrible Dragon of Chaos.” [It is
frequently the case, however, that our attempts to bolster the security of part
of our protective identity undermine our stability at a higher order of being.
The “American (British, Russian, Chinese) Way of Life,” for example, is a more
visible (and less personally demanding) figure than the exploratory
hero—although it is also a less critically important part of our core cultural
and personal identities. This means that attempts to increase the strength of
the state at the cost of the individual are counterproductive, even though they
may serve to heighten the sense of order and regulate emotion in the short
term. Patriotism—or any similar attempt at strengthening group identity—must
necessarily be bounded by supreme regard for the creative capacity of the
individual.]

The individual is protected from chaos in its full manifestation by the many
“walls” that surround him. All the space outside a given wall, however—despite
its probable encapsulation by additional protective structures—appears
relatively dangerous to anyone currently within that wall. All “outside
territory” evokes fear. This “equivalence” does not mean, however, that all
threats are equivalently potent—just that anything “outside” shares the
capacity to frighten (or enlighten) anything “inside.” Challenges posed to the
“highest” levels of order are clearly the most profound, and are likely to
engender the most thorough reactions. Observation of response to such threats
may be complicated, however, by the problem of time frame: challenge posed to
extremely “implicit” personalities may evoke reactions that extend over
centuries, in the form of abstract exploration and argumentation, revision of
action, and war between opposing alternative viewpoints (as in the case, for
example, of the Catholic and Protestant Christians). The fact that threats
posed to the “highest” levels of order are the most profound is complicated, to
say it another way, by the “implicitness” of those levels, and their
“invisibility.” Furthermore, the structures nested within a given personality
may have enough intrinsic strength to stand for a long while after the outer
walls that protected them and provided them with structural integrity have been
breached and destroyed. The stability of a political or social structure once
nested in a damaged religious preconception might be likened to a building
standing after an earthquake: superficially, it looks intact, but one more
minor shake may be sufficient to bring it crashing down. The “death of God” in
the modern world looks like an accomplished fact, and perhaps an event whose
repercussions have not proved fatal. But the existential upheaval and
philosophical uncertainty characteristic of the first three-quarters of the
twentieth century demonstrate that we have not yet settled back on firm ground.
Our current miraculous state of relative peace and economic tranquillity should
not blind us to the fact that gaping holes remain in our spirits.

The chaos “hidden” or given form by the establishment of temporal order may
remanifest itself at any time. It may do so in a number of guises, of apparent
diversity. Any re-emergence of chaos, however—whatever the reason—may be
regarded as the same sort of event, from the perspective of emotion,
motivational significance or meaning. This is to say that all things that
threatens the status quo, regardless of their “objective” features, tends to be
placed into the same “natural category,” as a consequence of their affective
identity. The barbarian at the gates is therefore indistinguishable from the
heretic within; both are equivalent to the natural disaster, to the
disappearance of the hero, and to the emergent senility of the king. The
“re-emergence of the Dragon of Chaos,” whatever his form, constitutes the
unleashing of dangerous, fear-producing (and promising) potential. The
different “guises” of this potential, and the reasons for and nature of their
equivalence, constitute our next topic of discussion. The nature of the
response evoked by that potential provide subject matter for the remainder of
the book.

