# 4 - The Strange Idea
[Metadata]: # {05.06}
[Descriptor]: # {05.06}
[Author]: # {peterson}
4
The Strange Idea
# The Strange Idea
Increasing ability to abstract makes previous learning, established through
nonabstract means, increasingly modifiable—and increasingly vulnerable. In a
way, this is the whole point of abstraction, and the very capacity to learn.
Words, deceptively simple and harmless, are sufficient to create disruption and
conflict, because Homo sapiens can verbalize his beliefs. It could be said,
therefore, with sufficient rationale that a new idea is an abstract stranger
(or, by the same logic, a natural disaster). It is for this reason that the pen
is mightier than the sword.

The process of increased abstraction allows for increasing self-understanding
(self-consciousness)—at least in potential—and for the prediction of the
behaviors of others [which is a capacity integrally linked to the development
of self-consciousness (how would I behave in a situation like that?)]. In
addition, abstraction eases communication of morality (instruction in how to
behave), by making it unnecessary to wait around to watch until something
important actually happens. The use of drama, for example— which is the
representation of behavior, in behavior and image—allows us to watch the
interplay of issues of mortal consequence, without the actors or the observers
actually suffering that consequence.

The capacity to abstract has not come without price, however. The incautious,
imaginative (and resentful) can easily use their gift of socially constructed
intelligence to undermine moral principles that took eons to generate and that
exist for valid but invisible reasons. Such “invisible” principles can be
subjected to facile criticism, by the historically ignorant, once they take
imagistic, written or spoken form. The consequence of this “criticism” is the
undermining of necessary faith, and the consequent dissolution of interpersonal
predictability, dys-regulation of emotion, and generation of anomie, aggression
and ideological gullibility (as the naked psyche strives to clothe itself, once
again).

The danger of such criticism can be more particularly appreciated when the
effect of what might be described as cascade is considered. We can change our
behaviors because we change how we think—although this is not as simple as is
generally considered. We can change how we think, facilely, and without regard
for the consequences, partly because we do not understand why we think what we
think (because all the facts that govern our behavior are not at our
“conscious” disposal) and because the effects of that change are often not
immediately apparent. The fact that changes in tradition have unintended and
often dangerous “side effects” accounts for the conservatism of most human
cultures. “Cascade” means that threat to the perceived validity of any
presupposition, at any level (procedural, imagistic or episodic, explicit or
semantic) threatens all levels simultaneously. This means that the casual
criticism

Figure 49: The Fragmentary Representation of “Procedure and Custom” in Image
and Word





of a given explicit presupposition can come, over time, to undermine the
unconscious imagistic and procedural personality and the emotional stability
that accompanies it. Words have a power that belie their ease of use.

Figure 49: The Fragmentary Representation of “Procedure and Custom “ in Image
and Word provides a schematic representation of the organization of behavior
and schemas of value in “memory.” Customs—that is, predictable and stable
patterns of behavior—emerge and are stored “procedurally” as a consequence of
constant social interaction, over time, and as a result of the exchange of
emotional information that characterizes that interaction. You modify me, I
modify you, we both modify others, and so on, in a cycle that involves
thousands of individuals, over thousands of years. Most of this information is
a more or less permanent part of the social network (is part of the structure
of society), but can become represented in part or whole in image, and then
more explicitly, in verbal code. The imagistic representation of the morality
constituting a given society is likely to be incomplete, as the complexity of
the patterns emerging consequential to the totality of social interaction
exceeds (current) representational capacity. The semantic representations
perched above the images are likely to be even more incomplete. This means that
the verbal systems utilized in abstract thinking, for example, contain only
“part of the puzzle,” at best; they have only partial information regarding the
structure of the whole. So, while some of the rules governing behavior have
become completely explicit and understood, others will remain partially
implicit (and poorly understood). Some of these partially implicit rules are
likely to exist for completely implicit (and therefore completely invisible)
reasons. It is rules like these on the ragged edge of comprehension that are
likely to attract ill-informed but nonetheless potentially devastating
criticism. Abstract verbal intelligence may therefore pick holes in the “absurd
mythological structure” that supports it, without understanding either that it
is supported, or that the act of undermining is
existentially—mortally—dangerous. It is easy to criticize the notion of the
“immortal soul,” for example, and the traditional forms of morality that tend
to accompany such a belief, without realizing that there is much more to the
idea than meets the eye.

“Cascade” means that threat to the perceived validity of any presupposition, at
any level—generally verbally mediated—now becomes threat to that presupposition
and to everything that rests on it. The socially mediated capacity to
abstract—to reason and represent in behavior, imagination and word—means that
an ill-chosen action, fantasy or thought may have devastating consequences.
This is true in particular of the word. One well-chosen phrase can change
everything (“from each according to his ability…”). The word, in a particular
context (one established by behavior and episodic representation) has a
polysemous significance—it excludes more (constrains more) than it appears to
and means more than it “contains,” considered as an isolated or
decontextualized element. It has this capacity in part because it is capable of
referring to phenomena outside its domain, in order to make itself understood
(this is use of metaphor). The word brings to mind events and actions,
sequenced in a particular manner; it is the imaginary presentation of these
events and actions that contains much of the meaning—the words merely act as
cues for retrieval. The information retrieved is not necessarily yet semantic;
it may still remain embodied in episodic memory and procedure. The polysemous
quality of the meaningful word, which implies something for imagistic
representation and for the structuring of behavior, is what makes it potent and
dangerous. An entire behavioral hierarchy can be undermined by a well-chosen
creative phrase, because the phrase brings with it, as integral part of an
integrated whole, moral presuppositions of entirely different, and perhaps
logically (or at least apparently) contrary nature.

There is an apocryphal story about a cosmologist, lecturing to a rural audience
of laypeople in the late 1800s. He describes the basic structure of the solar
system, laying emphasis on the fact that the earth floats unsupported in space,
endlessly circling the sun. After the lecture, an old woman approaches the
podium and says:

“That was a very interesting story, young man. Of course, it is completely
absurd”

“Absurd, madam?” the lecturer inquired. “Whatever do you mean?”

“It is a well-known fact,” replied the old woman, “that the earth rests

on the back of a giant turtle.”

“Is that so, ma' am. What, then, does the turtle rest on?”

“Don't play games with me, young man,” responded the matron. “It's turtles all
the way down.” 393



Douglas Hofstadter presented a similar idea in a fictional discussion between
Achilles, the Greek hero, and a tortoise (of Zeno 's paradox fame):

Tortoise: …. For purposes of illustration, let me suggest that you consider the
simpler statement “29 is prime.” Now in fact, this statement really means that
2 times 2 is not 29, and 5 times 6 is not 29, and so forth, doesn't it?

Achilles: It must, I suppose.

Tortoise: But you are perfectly happy to collect all such facts together, and
attach them in a bundle to the number 29, saying merely, “29 is prime?”

Achilles: Yes…

Tortoise: And the number of facts involved is actually infinite, isn't it?
After all, such facts as “4444 times 3333 is not 29” are all part of it, aren't
they?

Achilles: Strictly speaking, I suppose so. But you and I both know that you
can't produce 29 by multiplying two numbers which are both bigger than 29. So
in reality, saying “29 is prime” is only summarizing a FINITE number of facts
about multiplication.

Tortoise: You can put it that way if you want, but think of this: the fact that
two numbers which are bigger than 29 can't have a product equal to 29 involves
the entire structure of the number system. In that sense, that fact in itself
is a summary of an infinite number of facts. You can't get away from the fact,
Achilles, that when you say “29 is prime,” you are actually stating an infinite
number of things.

Achilles: Maybe so, but it feels like just one fact to me.

Tortoise: That's because an infinitude of facts are contained in your prior
knowledge— they are embedded implicitly in the way you visualize things. You
don't see an explicit infinity because it is captured implicitly inside the
images you manipulate.394

Jerome Bruner's comments on “triggers” are equally apropos here. He gives the
following sentences as examples: Trigger: “John saw/didn't see the chimera.”
Presupposition: “There exists a chimera.” Trigger: “John realized/didn't
realize he was broke.” Presupposition: “John was broke.” Trigger: “John
managed/didn't manage to open the door.” Presupposition: “John tried to open
the door.” There “exists” a virtually infinite number of “presuppositions” for
every “trigger.” Bruner states: “Obviously you cannot press a reader (or a
listener) to make endless interpretations of your obscure remarks. But you can
go a surprisingly long way—provided only that you start with something
approximating what Joseph Campbell called a “mythologically instructed
community.”395 The transmission of what is generally regarded as spiritual
wisdom is in fact able to take (to be “reduced to”) narrative form precisely
because the word—in the context of the story, which is description of episodic
representation of events and behaviors—has this deceptively simple, yet
infinitely meaningful “triggering” property:

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like
to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field:

Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof.

Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven,
which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was
leavened.

All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a
parable spake he not to them:

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open
my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the
foundation of the world. (Matthew 13:31–35)



It is not merely the story which is saturated with meaning; it is imagination,
behavior and the practical consequences of imagination and behavior, as well.
The individual ideas, particular fantasies and personal actions of individuals
presuppose the culture from which they are derived. The word, in meaningful
context, is meaningful precisely because it provides information relevant to
episodic representation, per se, and because it has relevance—which may not be
“consciously” comprehensible or declarable—for behavior. Likewise, the behavior
and fantasies of self and other—in context—are predicated upon culturally
determined values and beliefs, and could be said, in a manner of speaking, to
contain them. It is for this reason that Jung could claim, with regard to the
fantasies of a modern dreamer:

He is in fact an unconscious exponent of an autonomous psychic development,
just like the medieval alchemist or the classical Neoplatonist. Hence one could
say—cum grano salis—that history could be constructed just as easily from one's
own unconscious as from the actual texts.396



Even the more concrete implement or tool—like the word—is not an artifact
separable from the culture in which it is produced. It is failure to comprehend
this fact that dooms many well-meaning “foreign aid” projects and, no less, the
foreigners to which such aid is granted. Even something as simple as the shovel
or hoe presupposes the existence of a culture that has granted the individual
dominion over nature, so that the individual has the right to make the Great
Mother subservient to the claims of man. This notion constitutes the central
idea of complexly civilized patriarchal culture, and emerges into
consciousness, against competing claims, with the greatest of difficulty:

An American-Indian prophet, Smohalla, of the tribe of Umatilla, refused to till
the soil. “It is a sin,” he said, “to wound or cut, to tear or scratch our
common mother by working at agriculture.” And he added: “You ask me to dig in
the earth? Am I to take a knife and plunge it into the breast of my mother? But
then, when I die, she will not gather me again into her bosom. You tell me to
dig up and take away the stones. Must I mutilate her flesh so as to get at her
bones? Then I can never again enter into her body and be born again. You ask me
to cut the grass and the corn and sell them, to get rich like the white men.
But how dare I crop the hair of my mother?”397



Every society shares a moral viewpoint, which is essentially an identity
composed of unquestioned fidelity to a particular conception of “reality” (what
is and what should be), and of agreement upon the nature of those behaviors
that may reasonably be manifested. All the individuals in a particular nation
agree, fundamentally, about the nature of the unbearable present, the ideal
future, and the means to transform one into the other. Every individual plays
out that conceptualization, in terms of his or her own actions, more or less
successfully: more successfully, or at least more easily, when nothing
unintended arises to make the act of questioning necessary; less successfully
when the moral action does not produce the proper consequence. Any assumption
can be challenged. The most fundamental expectation of my fantasies—whatever
they might be—is that my assumptions are valid. Mismatch between what I desired
and what actually occurred constitutes evidences that one or more of my
assumptions are invalid (but not necessarily information about which one, or at
what level). The outcome of such a mismatch is application of other
(assumption-predicated) patterns of action, and associated expectations,
associated with gathering of new information, through active exploration. The
further down the hierarchy of assumption that mismatch occurs, the more
stressful the occurrence, the more fear is disinhibited, the more motivation
for denial, the more necessity for exploration, the more necessary
reprogramming of behavioral assumption and matching sensory expectation.

A truly unexpected event sequence upsets the implicit assumptions upon which
the original particular fantasy was predicated—and not only that fantasy, but
innumerable presently implicit others, equally dependent for their existence
upon those violated presuppositions. The inevitable consequence of such
violation is the breakdown of expectation, and consequent generation of fear
and hope, followed by exploration, the attempt to adapt to the new environment
(to behave appropriately, to fulfill motivational demands under new conditions,
and to map new conditions). This consequence requires the paralysis of the old
model, reversion of otherwise stably maintained affects to competition and
chaos, and exploration-guided reconstruction of order.

The more basic the level, the more that assumption is shared by virtually every
conceivable fantasy. The more basic the level undermined, the more anxiety and
depression [and other motivation—particularly (and non-evidently) hope]
released from containment; the more behavioral adaptation cast into
disrepute—the more motivation for denial, deceit, fascistic readaptation,
degeneration and despair—the more wish for redemption. The undermining and
reconstruction of more basic levels is, as we have seen, a revolutionary act,
even in the scientific domain. The “normal” scientist works within the
constraints of great models; the revolutionary changes the models. The normal
scientist accepts the (current) game as valid, and tries to extend its relevant
domain. The revolutionary scientist, who alters the rules of the game
themselves, is playing a different game (with different and dangerous rules,
from a within-the-game perspective). Kuhn states:

The transition from a paradigm in crisis to a new one from which a new
tradition of normal science can emerge is far from a cumulative process, one
achieved by an articulation or extension of the old paradigm. Rather it is a
reconstruction of the field from new fundamentals, a reconstruction that
changes some of the field's most elementary theoretical generalizations as well
as many of its paradigm methods and applications. During the transition period
there will be a large but never complete overlap between the problems that can
be solved by the old and the new paradigm. But there will also be a decisive
difference in the modes of solution. When the transition is complete, the
profession will have changed its view of the field, its methods, and its
goals.398



The normal scientist is often antithetical to his more extreme (more
creative/destructive) counterpart, like the good citizen opposes the heretic,
in part because alteration of the rules changes the motivational significance
of previously valued action and thought— often, apparently, reducing it to zero
(which means that the revolutionary can completely destroy the significance of
the career, past, present and future, of the dedicated plodder), in part,
because restructuring of the rules temporarily returns everything to a state of
anxiety-provoking chaos. Kuhn states:

A paradigm is prerequisite to perception itself. What a man sees depends both
upon what he looks at and also upon what his previous visual-conceptual
experience has taught him to see. In the absence of such training there can
only be, in William James's phrase, “a bloomin' buzzin' confusion.”399



That “bloomin' buzzin' confusion”—the Great Dragon of Chaos—is not affectively
neutral: in fact, its affective significance, threat and promise, is perhaps
all that can be experienced of it before it has been categorized.

Sometimes new information means mere lateral adjustment of behavior—the
modification of approach, within a domain where still defined by the familiar
goal. Sometimes, however, the unknown emerges in a manner that demands a
qualitative adjustment in adaptive strategy: the revaluation of past, present
and future, and acceptance of the suffering and confusion this necessarily
entails. Kuhn comments on the effect (and affect) of emergent and persistent
unknown in the domain of science. The pattern he describes characterized all
cognitive revolutions, including those that take place in the universe of
normal morality:

When…an anomaly comes to seem more than just another puzzle of normal science,
the transition to crisis and to extraordinary science has begun. The anomaly
itself now comes to be more generally recognized as such by the profession.
More and more attention is devoted to it by more and more of the field's most
eminent men. If it still continues to resist, as it usually does not, many of
them may come to view its resolution as the subject matter of their discipline.
For them the field will no longer look quite the same as it had earlier. Part
of its different appearance results simply from the new fixation point of
scientific scrutiny. An even more important source of change is the divergent
nature of the numerous partial solutions that concerted attention to the
problem has made available. The early attacks upon the resistant problem will
have followed the paradigm rules quite closely. But with continuing resistance,
more and more of the attacks upon it will have involved some minor or not so
minor articulation of the paradigm, no two of them quite alike, each partially
successful, but none sufficiently so to be accepted as paradigm by the group.
Through this proliferation of divergent articulations (more and more frequently
they will come to be described as ad hoc adjustments), the rules of normal
science become increasingly blurred. Though there still is a paradigm, few
practitioners prove to be entirely agreed about what it is. Even formerly
standard solutions of solved problems are called in question.

When acute, this situation is sometimes recognized by the scientists involved.
Copernicus complained that in his day astronomers were so “inconsistent in
these [astronomical] investigations…that they cannot even explain or observe
the constant length of the seasonal year. With them,” he continued, “it is as
though an artist were to gather the hands, feet, head and other members for his
images from diverse models, each part excellently drawn, but not related to a
single body, and since they in no way match each other, the result would be
monster rather than man.”400 Einstein, restricted by current usage to less
florid language, wrote only, “It was as if the ground had been pulled out from
under one, with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere, upon which one could
have built.”401 And Wolfgang Pauli, in the months before Heisenberg's paper on
matrix mechanics pointed the way to a new quantum theory, wrote to a friend,
“At the moment physics is again terribly confused. In any case, it is too
difficult for me, and I wish I had been a movie comedian or something of the
sort and had never heard of physics.” That testimony is particularly impressive
if contrasted with Pauli's words less than five months later: “Heisenberg's
type of mechanics has again given me hope and joy in life. To be sure it does
not supply the solution to the riddle, but I believe it is again possible to
march forward.”402 403



Now, Kuhn drew a qualitative distinction between the normal and revolutionary
modes of operation. No such qualitative differences exist (although exemplars
of the two types, drawn from the “extreme poles” of the process of
knowledge-production, can be easily be brought to mind). The distinction is
more along the lines of “transformation of what the group wants to transform”
vs. “transformation of what the group would like to remain stable”—with the
revolutionary changing more than might presently be desired (for the
maintenance of the extant social hierarchy, for example). The “transformation
of what the group wants to transform” is a form of bounded revolution, as we
have discussed previously. Optimally bounded revolutions produce positive
affect. Revolutions that upset the desired bounds—which are what Kuhn's
revolutionary scientist produces— evoke fear (and denial and aggression as
defense mechanisms). The revolutionary produces involuntary alteration in the
“articles of faith” of the normal individual. It is this capacity that makes
him revolutionary and necessary—and feared and despised. It may be more
generally said that processes of “discovery” which upset large-scale space-time
“maps” produce disruption of affect on an equivalent scale (and that it is such
large-scale disruption that we entitle revolution).

Mythologically structured social and individual “presumptions”—articles of
faith— provide the environment in which a given culture-specific adaptive
pattern retains its conditional validity. This pre-rational mythic environment
is analogous in structure to the physical or natural environment itself—as the
structure adapted to the environment rapidly becomes a constituent element of
the environment itself, with the same essential characteristics. (Or, to say it
somewhat differently, everything contained outside the wall defining “presently
considered space” is “environment,” even though much of it is actually the
consequence of historical or even individual activity). Disruption of the
“pre-rational mythic ‘environment’” is just as catastrophic as disruption of
the “physical or natural environment” (the two “disruptions” may not really be
distinguishable, in the final analysis). This means essentially that to give
serious consideration to another's viewpoint means to risk exposure to
indeterminate uncertainty—to risk a rise in existential anxiety, pain and
depression; to experience temporally indeterminate affective, imagistic and
cognitive chaos. It is much more likely, in consequence, that a foreign
viewpoint will appear evil or will come to be defined as such (especially
during times rendered unstable—unbearably novel—for additional alternative
reasons). Once such definition occurs, application of aggression, designed to
obliterate the source of threat, appears morally justified, even required by
duty. The alternative or foreign viewpoint is in fact reasonably considered
evil (although this consideration is dangerously one-sided), when viewed in
terms of its potential destructive capacity, from within the strict confines of
the historically determined social-psychological adaptive structure. It is only
within the domain of meta-morality (which is the morality designed to update
moral rules) that the strange may be tolerated or even welcomed.

The group, in its external social and intrapsychic incarnations, is the current
expression of a form of acting and thinking that has been given particular
content over the course of thousands of years. These particular contents,
patterns of behavior and their representations, were established initially by
individuals who faced the unknown and prevailed, who were able to do or think
something that no one had been able to do or think before. In this manner,
heroic individuals create new assumptions and formulate new values. The
integration of these assumptions and values into the group, through the
competitive process that begins with imitation and ends with verbal
abstraction, increases the permanent behavioral and abstract logical repertoire
of the individuals that form that group. The sum total of such behavioral
patterns (and second- and third-order descriptions thereof), shared within a
social group, constitutes that group. Groups are predicated upon a collective,
historically determined structure of (abstractly represented) behavioral
patterns (and consequences thereof), which tends toward internal consistency
and stability over time. Internalization of this behavioral pattern and
representations thereof protects the individuals who compose the group against
fear of their own experience. The group is the culturally determined
hierarchical structure of behavior— and abstracted conceptualization
thereof—which inhibits fear of novelty, the Terrible Mother, source of all
nightmares. The group is the historical structure that humanity has erected
between the individual and the unknown. The group, in its beneficial guise,
serves to protect the individuals who compose it from threat and the unknown.
The social establishment of how to behave, when presented with a given
situation, inhibits the paralyzing fear that situation would otherwise
instinctively induce.

The group is also simultaneously the concrete historical expression of Homo
sapiens'; unique heroic “thesis,” as stated previously: that the nature of
experience can be altered, for the better, by voluntary alteration of action
and thought. This central thesis is expressed in the myth of the way. Loss of
(previously extant) paradise initiates the “redemptive” activity, history;
restoration of paradise—in the course or as a consequence of proper behavior—is
its goal. This general pattern appears characteristic of all civilizations,
every philosophy, every ideology, all religions. The general idea that change
may bring improvement—upon which all voluntary change is predicated—is in
itself based in the ideal upon the assumption [on the (necessary) fiction] that
through historical process perfection might be attained. This myth—even in its
earliest ritual incarnation—therefore provides the basis for the idea of
progress itself. The group, history incarnate, is the embodiment of a specific
mode of being designed to attain perfection, and contains the concrete
expression of the goal of a people; it is the objective and subjective
realization of the mode by which they improve their tragic condition. History
not only protects people from the unknown; it provides them with rules for
achieving what they desire most, and, therefore, for expressing the
(essentially undeclarable) meaning of their lives.

Human moral knowledge progresses as procedural knowledge expands its domain, as
episodic memory encodes, ever more accurately, the patterns that characterize
that knowledge; as the semantic system comes to explicitly represent the
implicit principles upon which procedural knowledge and episodic representation
of that knowledge rest— and, of course, as the consequences of this second- and
third-order representation alter the nature of procedure itself. Thus the
democratic political theorist, for example, can finally put into words the
essence of religious myth after the myth had captured in image the essence of
adaptive behavior; can talk about “intrinsic right” as if that notion were
something rational. This process of increasing abstraction and representation
is equivalent to development of “higher” consciousness (especially if the
ever-more enlightened words are in fact—utopian wish—transformed back down the
hierarchy to the level of action).

The major advantage of increased abstraction of representation, apart from ease
of communication, is increased adaptive flexibility: alterations in abstract
thought can proceed “as if” a game, without immediate practical consequences,
positive or negative.404 The disadvantage of this adaptive flexibility is the
emergence of ability to constantly (and inappropriately, in most cases)
undermine the a priori presumptions of the game: to call the rules into
question; to dissolve impetus for action and to disinhibit existential anxiety.
A game is fun until the rules appear childish. Then the fun disappears. This
might be progress, in time. Until a new game appears, however, it is merely
troublesome. The process of abstract (semantic) inquiry is capable of
undermining moral adaptation at each level—semantic, episodic and
procedural—simultaneously. This possibility might be regarded, once again, as a
(destructive/beneficial) side effect of the ability to abstract.

The evolutionary construction of an adaptive social structure, simultaneously
extant in behavior and in semantic/episodic representation ofthat behavior,
means abstraction and hierarchical organization of knowledge hard won in the
physical battle for survival, and consequent capacity for immediate
communication of that knowledge, in the absence of direct demonstration.
Furthermore, it means potential for alteration and experimentation in the
abstract (in play, episodic and semantic), prior to application in the real
world. Acquisition of such ability—the capacity for abstract creative thought,
and social exchange thereof—means tremendous heightening of adaptive ability,
as concepts constructed purely semantically attain the capacity for alteration
of episodic representation and procedure itself. Once the nature of morality is
coded semantically, so that the implicit hierarchically structured
presuppositions of behavior have been rendered explicit, they can be
considered, debated and altered in their essential nature. Such alteration is
capable of resonating down the cognitive chain to procedure itself. Likewise,
alterations in procedure are (and should be) capable of producing profound
effects upon episodic and semantic representation. This increased flexibility,
the result of a tremendously complex and lengthy historical development, is
tremendously useful for the purposes of rapid adaptation and change, but also
equally promotes conflict, social and intrapsychic. Such conflict emerges as a
consequence of destabilization of historical tradition.

It is the essential flexibility of the human brain, its very capacity to learn,
and therefore to unlearn, that renders Homo sapiens so appallingly susceptible
to group and intrapsychic conflict. An animal's behavioral pattern, its
procedural knowledge, is set; its way of being in the unknown cannot easily be
altered in its fundament. The assumptions and values by which an individual
human being lives can, by contrast, be threatened with a few well-chosen and
revolutionary words, whose ease of communication belies their elaborately
complex evolutionary history, the depth of heroic endeavor necessary to their
formulation and their extreme current potency. Sufficiently novel verbally
transmitted information may disturb semantic, episodic and procedural paradigm
simultaneously, although the totality of such effects may not become manifest
for years—not infrequently, for generations.

Every culture maintains certain key beliefs that are centrally important to
that culture, upon which all secondary beliefs are predicated. These key
beliefs cannot be easily given up, because if they are, everything falls, and
the unknown once again rules. Western morality and behavior, for example, are
predicated on the assumption that every individual is sacred. This belief was
already extant in its nascent form among the ancient Egyptians, and provides
the very cornerstone of Judeo-Christian civilization. Successful challenge to
this idea would invalidate the actions and goals of the Western individual;
would destroy the Western dominance hierarchy, the social context for
individual action. In the absence of this central assumption, the body of
Western law—formalized myth, codified morality—erodes and falls. There are no
individual rights, no individual value— and the foundation of the Western
social (and psychological) structure dissolves. The Second World War and Cold
War were fought largely to eliminate such a challenge.

For the man whose beliefs have become abstracted (and, therefore, more
doubtful, more debatable), the mere idea of the stranger is sufficient to
disrupt the stability of everyday presumption. Tolstoy, in his Confessions,
recalls the impact of modern Western European ideas on the too-long-static
medieval culture of Russia:

I remember that when I was eleven years old a high-school boy named Volodin'ka
M., now long since dead, visited us one Sunday with an announcement of the
latest discovery made at school. The discovery was that there is no God and
that the things they were teaching us were nothing but fairy tales (this was in
1838). I remember how this news captured the interest of my older brothers;
they even let me in on their discussions. I remember that we were all very
excited and that we took this news to be both engaging and entirely
possible.405



This “discovery,” which was in fact the cumulative result of a very lengthy and
traumatic Western European cognitive process, had the capacity to undermine the
most fundamental presuppositions of Russian culture (as it had undermined those
of the West):

Since ancient times, when the life of which I do know something began, people
who knew the arguments concerning the vanity of life, the arguments that
revealed to me its meaninglessness, lived nonetheless, bringing to life a
meaning of their own. Since the time when people somehow began to live, this
meaning of life has been with them, and they have led this life up to my own
time. Everything that is in me and around me is the fruit of their knowledge of
life. The very tools of thought by which I judge life and condemn it were
created not by me but by them. I myself was born, educated and have grown up
thanks to them. They dug out the iron, taught us how to cut the timber, tamed
the cattle and the horses, showed us how to sow crops and live together; they
brought order to our lives. They taught me how to think and to speak. I am
their offspring, nursed by them, reared by them, taught by them; I think
according to their thoughts, their words, and now I have proved to them that it
is all meaningless!406



This rational undermining eventually, inevitably, produced the following
effects:

It happened with me as it happens with everyone who contracts a fatal internal
disease. At first there were the insignificant symptoms of an ailment, which
the patient ignores; then these symptoms recur more and more frequently, until
they merge into one continuous duration of suffering. The suffering increases,
and before he can turn around the patient discovers what he already knew: the
thing he had taken for a mere indisposition is in fact the most important thing
on earth to him, is in fact death.

This is exactly what happened to me. I realized that this was not an incidental
ailment but something very serious, and that if the same questions should
continue to recur, I would have to answer them. And I tried to answer them. The
questions seemed to be such foolish, simple, childish questions. But as soon as
I laid my hands on them and tried to resolve them, I was immediately convinced,
first of all, that they were not childish and foolish questions but the most
vital and profound questions in life, and, secondly, that no matter how much I
pondered them there was no way I could resolve them. Before I could be occupied
with my Samsara estate, with the education of my son, or with the writing of
books, I had to know why I was doing these things. As long as I do not know the
reason why, I cannot do anything. In the middle of my concern with the
household, which at the time kept me quite busy, a question would suddenly come
into my head: “Very well, you will have 6000 desyatins in the Samara province,
as well as 300 horses; what then?” And I was completely taken aback and did not
know what else to think. As soon as I started to think about the education of
my children, I would ask myself, “Why?” Or I would reflect on how the people
might attain prosperity, and I would suddenly ask myself, “What concern is it
of mine?” Or in the middle of thinking about the fame that my works were
bringing me I would say to myself, “Very well, you will be more famous than
Gogol, Pushkin, Shakespeare, Moliere, more famous than all the writers in the
world—so what?”

And I could find absolutely no reply.

My life came to a stop. I could breathe, eat, drink, and sleep; indeed, I could
not help but breathe, eat, drink, and sleep. But there was no life in me
because I had no desires whose satisfaction I would have found reasonable. If I
wanted something, I knew beforehand that it did not matter whether or not I got
it.

If a fairy had come and offered to fulfill my every wish, I would not have
known what to wish for. If in moments of intoxication I should have not desires
but the habits of old desires, in moments of sobriety I knew that it was all a
delusion, that I really desired nothing. I did not even want to discover truth
anymore because I had guessed what it was. The truth was that life is
meaningless.

It was as though I had lived a little, wandered a little, until I came to the
precipice, and I clearly saw that there was nothing ahead except ruin. And
there was no stopping, no turning back, no closing my eyes so I would not see
that there was nothing ahead except the deception of life and of happiness and
the reality of suffering and death, of complete annihilation.

I grew sick of life; some irresistible force was leading me to somehow get rid
of it. It was not that I wanted to kill myself. The force that was leading me
away from life was more powerful, more absolute, more all-encompassing than any
desire. With all my strength I struggled to get away from life. The thought of
suicide came to me as naturally then as the thought of improving life had come
to me before. This thought was such a temptation that I had to use cunning
against myself in order not to go through with it too hastily. I did not want
to be in a hurry only because I wanted to use all my strength to untangle my
thoughts. If I could not get them untangled, I told myself, I could always go
ahead with it. And there I was, a fortunate man, carrying a rope from my room
where I was alone every night as I undressed, so that I would not hang myself
from the beam between the closets. And I quit going hunting with a gun, so that
I would not be too easily tempted to rid myself of life. I myself did not know
what I wanted. I was afraid of life, I struggled to get rid of it, and yet I
hoped for something from it.

And this was happening to me at a time when, from all indications, I should
have been considered a completely happy man; this was when I was not yet fifty
years old. I had a good, loving, and beloved wife, fine children, and a large
estate that was growing and expanding without any effort on my part. More than
ever before I was respected by friends and acquaintances, praised by strangers,
and I could claim a certain renown without really deluding myself. Moreover, I
was not physically and mentally unhealthy; on the contrary, I enjoyed a
physical and mental vigor such as I had rarely encountered among others my age.
Physically, I could keep up with the peasants working in the fields; mentally,
I could work eight and ten hours at a stretch without suffering any
aftereffects from the strain. And in such a state of affairs I came to a point
where I could not live; and even though I feared death, I had to employ ruses
against myself to keep from committing suicide.

I described my spiritual condition to myself in this way: my life is some kind
of stupid and evil practical joke that someone is playing on me. In spite of
the fact that I did not acknowledge the existence of any “Someone” who might
have created me, the notion that someone brought me into the world as a stupid
and evil joke seemed to be the most natural way to describe my condition.407



Group identity—inculcated morality and accepted interpretation—serves to
constrain the motivational significance of experiential phenomena. When that
identity (which is predicated upon implicit or explicitly held faith in a
particular conceptualization of the way) is challenged, such constraints
vanish. This “deconstruction” of symbolically patriarchal custom and belief
subjects the individual to intrapsychic war of conflicting affect—the “clash of
opposites,” in Jungian terms; it subjugates him or her to unbearable cognitive,
emotional and moral conflict. Nietzsche's comments on Hamlet, “sicklied o'er by
the pale cast of thought,” are relevant in this context:

Knowledge kills action; action requires the veils of illusion: that is the
doctrine of Hamlet…. Now no comfort avails any more; longing transcends a world
after death, even the gods; existence is negated along with its glittering
reflection in the gods or in an immortal beyond. Conscious of the truth he has
once seen, man now sees everywhere only the horror or absurdity of existence;
now he understands what is symbolic in Ophelia's fate; now he understands the
wisdom of the sylvan god, Silenus: he is nauseated.408 409



Dostoevsky's tragically comic bureaucratic-personality-disordered protagonist
(the metaphoric mouse) in Notes from Underground reacts similarly, comparing
his own (sophisticated) inability to respond courageously to an insult to that
of l'homme de la nature et de la verite—the natural, and therefore truthful,
yet comparatively unconscious (procedural) man:

Let us now look at the mouse in action. Suppose, for example, that it too has
been insulted (and it will almost always be subjected to slights) and desires
revenge. Perhaps even more fury will accumulate inside it than inside l'homme
de la nature et de la verite because l'homme de la nature et de la verite, with
his innate stupidity, considers his revenge to be no more than justice, while
the mouse, with its heightened consciousness, denies that there is any justice
about it. At last comes the act itself, the revenge. The wretched mouse has by
this time accumulated, in addition to the original nastiness, so many other
nastinesses in the shape of questions and doubts, and so many other unresolved
problems in addition to the original problem, that it has involuntarily
collected round itself a fatal morass, a stinking bog, consisting of its own
doubts and agitations, and finally of the spittle rained on it by all the
spontaneous men of action standing portentously round as judges and referees,
and howling with laughter. Of course, nothing remains for it to do but shrug
the whole thing off and creep shamefacedly into its hole with a smile of
pretended contempt in which it doesn't even believe itself.410



The fictional characters of Shakespeare and Dostoevsky respond like the
flesh-and-blood Tolstoy to the same historically determined set of
circumstances—to the “death of god,” in Nietzsche's terminology, brought about,
inexorably, by continued development of abstract consciousness. The “first
modern man,” Hamlet, and those who follow him, in art and in life,
characteristically respond like Nietzsche's “pale criminal”; like Crime and
Punishment's Raskolnikov, they remain unable to bear the “terrible beauty”411
of their deeds. Nietzsche states:

Of what is great one must either be silent or speak with greatness. With
greatness—that means cynically and with innocence. What I relate is the history
of the next two centuries. I describe what is coming, what can no longer come
differently: the advent of nihilism…. Our whole European culture is moving for
some time now, with a tortured tension that is growing from decade to decade,
as toward a catastrophe: restlessly, violently, headlong, like a river that
wants to reach the end, that no longer reflects, that is afraid to reflect.

He that speaks here has, conversely, done nothing so far but to reflect: as a
philosopher and solitary by instinct who has found his advantage in standing
aside, outside. Why has the advent of nihilism become necessary? Because the
values we have had hitherto thus draw their final consequence; because nihilism
represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and
ideals—because we must experience nihilism before we can find out what value
these “values” really had.

We require, at some time, new values.

Nihilism stands at the door: whence comes this uncanniest of all guests?

Point of departure: it is an error to consider “social distress” or
“physiological degeneration,” or corruption of all things, as the cause of
nihilism. Ours is the most honest and compassionate age. Distress, whether
psychic, physical, or intellectual, need not at all produce nihilism (that is,
the radical rejection of value, meaning, and desirability). Such distress
always permits a variety of interpretations. Rather: it is in one particular
interpretation, the Christian moral one, that nihilism is rooted.

The end of Christianity—at the hands of its own morality (which cannot be
replaced), which turns against the Christian God: the sense of truthfulness,
highly developed by Christianity, is nauseated by the falseness and
mendaciousness of all Christian interpretations of the world and of history;
rebound from “God is the truth” to the fanatical faith “All is false”; an
active Buddhism.

Skepticism regarding morality is what is decisive. The end of the moral
interpretation of the world, which no longer has any sanction after it has
tried to escape into some beyond, leads to nihilism.

“All lacks meaning.” (The untenability of one interpretation of the world, upon
which a tremendous amount of energy has been lavished, awakens the suspicion
that all interpretations of the world are false.)412



That, in a nutshell, is “cascade.”

Nihilism, alter ego of totalitarianism, is response to experience of the world,
self and other, rendered devoid of certain meaning, and therefore allowed no
meaning; is reaction to the world freed from the unconscious constraints of
habit, custom and belief; is response to the re-emergence of the terrible
unknown; is reaction of a spirit no longer able, as a consequence of abstract
critical ability, to manifest unconscious or procedural identity with the
hero—no longer able to muster belief in human possibility, in the face of
exposure to the most dreadful imaginable. Phenomena remain constrained in their
affective significance, at least partially, because the group (the dominance
hierarchy) has reached agreement as to their meaning (their implications for
situation-specific action). When that hierarchy falls—perhaps as a consequence
of emergent disbelief in central presumption—nothing remains “sacred.” This
process becomes evidently manifest, from the empirical viewpoint, during a
riot. When law and order are held temporarily in abeyance [when the inhibitory
force of imposed threat is relieved (when the dominance hierarchy momentarily
collapses)], those whose moral behavior remains predicated upon resentful
obedience fall prey to their own disordered affect, and explode in aggression,
greed, hatred and vengeful destructiveness. This explosion [implosion (?)] is
“reduction to the precosmogonic continuum,” from the pre-experimental or mythic
viewpoint413— regression to the time and place prior to the division of things
into known and unknown. This can be viewed either as alteration in affect, or
transformation of the motivational significance of the phenomena whose
apprehension motivates behavior. The objective mind would postulate the former;
the mythic mind, concerned with subjective reality, the latter. This form of
regression exists as precondition to creative restructuring. Semiconscious
(semi-declarative) apprehension of this affect-laden state manifest as
paralyzing fear, exists (fortunately and catastrophically) as the greatest
impediment to change.

The dominance hierarchy of value, extant socially and intrapsychically, employs
fear (and promise) to regulate access to desired commodities—to determine the
net motivational significance of particular events and processes. Any given
phenomenon is capable of inducing a variety of affective or motivational
states. It is the socially and individually determined outcome of competition
between these intrapsychic states that determines behavioral output. The
internalized consequence of the external dominance hierarchy—which is the
“intrapsychic patriarchy,” Freud's superego—is knowledge of the net
motivational relevance of phenomena within a particular society. This implies,
as stated previously, that the historically determined power structure of a
given society could be inferred through analysis of the significance granted
technological and cognitive artifacts by the individuals within that society.
What is desired depends upon the goal toward which a given society moves. The
goal is posited as valuable, initially, as a consequence of the operation of
unconscious “presumptions,” hypothetically preceding action. The value
presupposed by the action is then coded episodically, then, perhaps, formalized
semantically. Someone from a different culture values things differently; this
difference is predicated upon acceptance of an alternate goal-directed schema.
The nature and presence of this difference may be inferred (will, in fact,
necessarily be inferred) from observation of foreign behavior, imagination and
discussion—even inferred, perhaps, from exposure to cultural artifacts (which
are generally granted the status of “mere” tools, which is to say, implements
of the way) or from cues as subtle as voice or procedural melody.414

Movement from one schema to another—or from both to a hypothetical third, which
unites both (which might constitute the consequence of revolutionary heroic
effort)— presupposes dissolution, mutual or singular, not mere addition (a
“qualitative” shift, not a “quantitative” shift). Mythically, as we have seen,
this movement might be represented as descent from the precipice into the
abyss, as the collapse of the idol with feet of clay, as dissolution to
constituent bodily or material elements, as journey to the underworld or sea
bottom, as sojourn through the valley of the shadow of death, as forty years
(or forty days) in the desert, as encounter with the hydra, as incest with the
mother. When such a journey is undertaken voluntarily—resources prepared
adequately beforehand, faith in place—chance of success (return,
reconstitution, resurrection, ascent) is substantially enhanced. When
dissolution occurs accidentally—when encounter with the unknown is
unintentional415 or avoided beyond its time of inevitable
occurrence—intrapsychic or social catastrophe, suicide or war, becomes certain.

The goal toward which behavior is devoted serves as one pole of the cognitive
schema that determines the motivational significance of events. Members of the
same culture share the same goal. This goal consists of a hypothetical desired
state that exists in contrast to some conceptualization of the present and that
can be attained through participation in a particular consensually accepted and
traditionally determined process. This schema is analogous in structure to the
normal mythological conception of the way, which includes a representation of
the (troubled) present, a conception of the (desired) future, and a description
of methods (moral prescriptions and injunctions) for transforming the former
into the latter. Moral knowledge serves to further the way by reducing the
infinite potential motivational significance of particular events to the
particular and determinate. This process of reduction is social in
nature—events take on established meaning that is socially determined, shared.
The affective relevance of a given phenomenon—which, most fundamentally, is its
significance for goal-directed behavior—is a consequence of the operation of
the goal-oriented schema, which finds partial expression in establishment of a
dominance hierarchy. A dominance hierarchy is a social arrangement which
determines access to desired commodities. In most cases, these commodities are
cues for consummatory reward—experiences that signify movement toward or
increased likelihood of attaining the desired goal. Relative position in the
dominance hierarchy—at least in the perfectly functioning society—is in itself
determined through social judgment. That judgment reflects appreciation of the
value of a particular individual. That value reflects how society views the
ability ofthat individual to contribute to attainment of the goal. This
interpretation of course implies that the postulation of a given way
necessarily, inevitably, produces a hierarchy of value (since people and things
will inevitably differ in their utility as means to the desired end). Every
phenomenon, experienced within the confines of a particular society, is laden
with dominance-hierarchy and goal-schema relevant information. The value of any
particular item or experience is determined by the mythic foundation—upon which
the entire society, consciously and unconsciously, rests. This value is the
magic of the object.

Schismatic activity, semantic, episodic, or procedural, might be considered the
within-group equivalent to arrival of an (abstracted or concrete) stranger.
Cultural schisms emerge when once-predictable and familiar individuals become
possessed by novel behavioral notions, images or semantic formulations, which
present a challenge to presumptions deemed necessarily inviolable—such as the
(most dangerous, authoritarian) presumption that all currently accepted
presumptions are “true.” Medieval horror of heresy and the drastic responses to
such ideation defined as necessary by the Catholic guardians of proper thought
is rendered comprehensible as a consequence of consideration (1) of the
protective function of intact dogma and (2) of the methodological impossibility
of “disproving,” so to speak, alternative mythically founded narrative ideas.
The Christian church fragmented chaotically (and, perhaps, creatively)—and
continues to do so—with horrendous consequences, even under conditions where
such fragmentation was severely punished. This is not stated to provide
justification for repression of creativity, but to make the motivation for such
repression understandable. Degeneration into chaos—decadence—might be
considered the constant threat of innovation undertaken in the absence of
comprehension and respect for tradition. Such decadence is precisely as
dangerous to the stability and adaptability of the community and the individual
and as purely motivated by underground wishes and desires as is totalitarianism
or desire for absolute order. The continuing absence of a generally accepted
methodology for peaceably sorting out the relative value or validity of evident
mythologically predicated differences helps ensure that savage repression will
remain the frequently utilized alternative.

Rapid development of semantic skill (and its second-order elaboration into
empirical methodology) constitutes the third major threat to the continued
stability of sociohistorically determined adaptive cultural systems (as well as
the major factor in the complex elaboration of such systems). (The first
two—just a reminder—were rapid natural environmental shift, independent of
human activity, and contact with a heretofore isolated foreign culture).
Literate individuals, members of cultures contained in express theologies or
rational philosophies, can more easily incarnate and/or abstractly adopt or
provisionally formulate different positions, with regard to the value of
initial assumptions; can also verbalize the beliefs of other people, absorb
them, and subject them to critical consideration or (theoretically) guileless
acceptance; are fated necessarily to be able to become many other people, in
imitation, imagination, and thought. Linguistically mediated criticism of the
predicates of behavior undermines faith in the validity of historically
established hierarchical patterns of adaptation. The final emergent process of
the developmental chain of abstraction can be applied to undermine the
stability of its foundation. The modern and verbally sophisticated individual
is therefore always in danger of sawing off the branch on which he or she sits.

Language turned drama into mythic narrative, narrative into formal religion,
and religion into critical philosophy, providing exponential expansion of
adaptive ability— while simultaneously undermining assumption and expectation,
and dividing knowledge from action. Civilized Homo sapiens can use words to
destroy what words did not create. This ability has left modern individuals
increasingly subject to their worst fears. Nietzsche states:

Our Europe of today, being the arena of an absurdly sudden attempt at a radical
mixture of classes, and hence races, is therefore skeptical in all its heights
and depths—sometimes with that mobile skepticism which leaps impatiently and
lasciviously from branch to branch, sometimes dismal like a cloud overcharged
with question marks—and often mortally sick of its will. Paralysis of the will:
where today does one not find this cripple sitting? And often in such finery!
How seductive the finery looks! This disease enjoys the most beautiful
pomp-and-lie costumes; and most of what today displays itself in the showcases,
for example, as “objectivity,” “being scientific,” “l'art pour l'art,” “pure
knowledge, free of will,” is merely dressed-up skepticism and paralysis of the
will: for this diagnosis of the European sickness I vouch.416



The intellectual developments which lead to the establishment of modern
scientific methodology have heightened the danger of this partially
pathological tendency. The construction of a powerful and accurate
representation of the “objective” or shared world—a logical conclusion of the
interpersonal exchange of sensory information, made possible by linguistic
communication—challenged belief in the reality of the mythic world, which was
in fact never objective. The mythic world was always affective— although it was
shared socially—and contained procedural information (and abstracted
representation thereof), arranged hierarchically in terms of value, embodied in
nonverbal procedural and abstracted imagistic and semantic form. Representation
of mythic value in verbal format allowed for simple experimentation in ethics,
in imagination (and then, often tragically, in action), and for generation of
naive but effective criticism regarding traditional foundations for behavior.
Nietzsche states:

For this is the way in which religions are wont to die out: under the stern,
intelligent eyes of an orthodox dogmatism, the mythical premises of a religion
are systematized as a sum total of historical events; one begins apprehensively
to defend the credibility of the myths, while at the same time one opposes any
continuation of their natural vitality and growth; the feeling for myth
perishes, and its place is taken by the claim of religion to historical
foundations.417



Freud maintained, as an ideal nineteenth-century empiricist, that “there is no
other source of knowledge of the universe but the intellectual manipulation of
carefully verified observations—that is, what is called research—and that no
knowledge can be obtained from revelation, intuition or inspiration.” He said,
furthermore, that “there is no appeal beyond reason”418 (grounded directly in
“observation,” one would presume). This description leaves no place for the
primal role of affect (or even of sensation, for that matter) in determination
of wisdom—“what causes me and others pain is wrong,” in the most basic and
naive form—and also fails to address the issue of the source of scientific
hypotheses in general (the narrative process). Furthermore, pure knowledge of
the sensory world—what is, most fundamentally—does not include knowledge about
how to adapt to or behave in that world (even though the gathering of such
information has obvious implications for such adaptation). Tolstoy states:

As presented by the learned and the wise, rational knowledge denies the meaning
of life, but the huge masses of people acknowledge meaning through an
irrational knowledge. And this irrational knowledge is faith, the one thing
that I could not accept. This involves the God who is both one and three, the
creation in six days, devils, angels and everything else that I could not
accept without taking leave of my senses.

My position was terrible. I knew that I could find nothing in the way of
rational knowledge except a denial of life; and in faith I could find nothing
except a denial of reason, and this was even more impossible than a denial of
life. According to rational knowledge, it followed that life is evil, and
people know it. They do not have to live, yet they have lived and they do live,
just as I myself had lived, even though I had known for a long time that life
is meaningless and evil. According to faith, it followed that in order to
understand the meaning of life I would have to turn away from reason, the very
thing for which meaning was necessary.419



Mythic thinking, so to speak, is also based on observation—but on observation
of behavior in the world of affective experience. This means cyclical
observation of action predicated upon an implicit or explicitly formulated
theory of what should be, and derivation of procedural, episodic or semantic
representations thereof. This is knowledge, as well—and appears, in the light
of careful analysis, no more arbitrary than empirical description of the
objective world.

Perhaps it was necessary for science, struggling to escape from a cognitive
world dominated by religious and mythical thinking, to devalue that world in
order to set up an independent existence. That existence has long been
established, however—but the process of devaluation, implicit and explicit,
continues (even in fields theoretically separate from the strictly empirical).
Frye states:

Ever since Plato, most literary critics have connected the word “thought” with
dialectical and conceptual idioms, and ignored or denied the existence of
poetic and imaginative thought. This attitude continued into the twentieth
century with I.A.Richards's Science and Poetry, with its suggestion that
mythical thinking has been superseded by scientific thinking, and that
consequently poets must confine themselves to pseudo-statements. The early
criticism of T.S.Eliot, though considerably more cautious than this, also
exhibited an array of confusions clustering around the word “thought.” Since
then there has been a slowly growing realization that mythological thinking
cannot be superseded, because it forms the framework and context for all
thinking. But the old views still persist, if in more sophisticated forms, and
there are still far too many literary critics who are both ignorant and
contemptuous of the mental processes that produce literature.420



Nietzsche states, similarly, but with somewhat more scorn:

Every age has its own divine type of naivety for whose invention other ages may
envy it—and how much naivety, venerable, childlike and boundlessly clumsy
naivety lies in the scholar's faith in his superiority, in the good conscience
of his tolerance, in the unsuspecting simple certainly with which his instinct
treats the religious man as an inferior and lower type that he has outgrown,
leaving it behind, beneath him—him, that presumptuous little dwarf and rabble
man, the assiduous and speedy head-and handiworker of “ideas,” of “modern
ideas!”421



Mythological thinking is not mere arbitrary superstition. Its
denigration—cascading even through literary criticism, in recent years—is not
only unwarranted but perilous. This is not to say that religious institutions
and dogmas are not prey to the same weaknesses as all other human creations.
The ideas and patterns of action that underlay and generated those
institu-tions remain of critical importance, however—remain important for
sustaining individual emotional stability, maintaining group tolerance,
cohesion and flexibility, supporting capacity to adapt to the strange, and
strengthening ability to resist domination by one-sided and murderous
ideologies. The idea that we have superseded such thinking is a prime example
of the capacity of the “semantic system” to partially represent and to
thoroughly criticize. This is wrong, arrogant and dangerous.

The group promotes an integrated pattern of behavior and conception of values.
This is strength, in that an integrated pattern provides one message, and
therefore promotes unity and direction. It is also weakness, in that
integration—stable, hierarchically organized structure—is inflexible, and
therefore brittle. This means the group, and those who identify with it, cannot
easily develop new modes of perception or change direction when such change or
development becomes necessary. Under stable environmental and social
conditions, this is an advantage, as what worked in the past will continue to
work in the present. However, in times of transition, of rapid environmental
transformation, of multicultural contact, of technological or ideological
advance, stability is not necessarily sufficient. The Russian neuropsychologist
Sokolov stated, as cited previously,422 “One way to improve the quality of
extrapolation [judgment of match between intent and outcome] is to secure
additional information; another method is to change the principles by which
such information is handled, so that the process of regulation will prove more
effective.” This fundamental idea is embodied in mythology in the figure of the
revolutionary hero. He is the fourth manner in which threat to the stability of
cultural tradition may be presented and, simultaneously, is solution to the
ever-recurring problem of such threat.

