# 2 - Exploration: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
[Metadata]: # {03.06}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
Exploration: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
# Exploration: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology
The unfamiliar exists as an invariant feature of experience. We remain
ignorant, and act while surrounded by uncertainty. Just as fundamentally,
however, we always know something, no matter who we are, or when we live. We
tend to view the “environment” as something objective, but one of its most
basic features—familiarity, or lack thereof— is something virtually defined by
the subjective. This environmental subjectivity is nontrivial, as well: mere
“interpretation” of a phenomenon can determine whether we thrive or sicken,
live or die. It appears, indeed, that the categorization or characterization of
the environment as unknown/ known (nature/culture, foreign/familiar) might be
regarded as more “fundamental” than any objective characterization—if we make
the presumption that what we have adapted to is, by definition, reality. For it
is the case that the human brain—and the brain of higher animals—has
specialized for operation in the “domain of order” and the “domain of chaos.”
And it is impossible to understand the fact of this specialization, unless
those domains are regarded as more than mere metaphor.

We normally use our conceptions of cognitive processes to illuminate the
working of the brain (we use our models of thought to determine “what must be
the case” physiologically). However, neuropsychological investigation has
advanced to the point where the reverse procedure is equally useful. What is
known about brain function can illuminate our conceptions of cognition (indeed,
of “reality” itself) and can provide those conceptions with suitable “objective
constraints.” Enlightenment thought strove to separate “reason” and “emotion”;
empirical investigations into the structure and function of the brain—given
great initial impetus by the consequences of that separation—have demonstrated
instead that the two realms are mutually interdependent, and essentially
integral.90 We live in a universe characterized by the constant interplay of
yang and yin, chaos and order: emotion provides us with an initial guide when
we don't know what we are doing, when reason alone will not suffice.91

Figure 8: The Motor and Sensory Units of the Brain





“Cognition,” by contrast, allows us to construct and maintain our ordered
environments, and keep chaos—and affect—in check.

The brain may be usefully regarded as composed of three primary units—motor,
sensory and affective—or as constituting a matched pair of hemispheres, right
and left. Each manner of conceptual subdivision has its theoretical advantages;
furthermore, the two are not mutually exclusive. We will attend to the
description of the units, portrayed schematically in Figure 8: The Motor and
Sensory Units of the Brain, first.

Most neocortical (and many subcortical) structures have attained their largest
and most complex level of development in homo sapiens. This is true, in
particular, of the motor unit,92 which comprises the anterior or forward half
of the comparatively newer neocortex (and which is composed of the motor,
premotor and prefrontal lobes). This level of heightened development accounts
in part for increased human intelligence, behavioral versatility and breadth of
experience, both actual and potential, and underlies our capacity to formulate
plans and intentions, organize them into programs of action and regulate their
execution.93

The sensory unit,94 which comprises the posterior half of the neocortex (and
which is composed of the parietal, occipital and temporal lobes), is
responsible for the construction of the separate worlds of our sensory systems
(primarily sight, hearing and touch) and for their integration into the unified
perceptual field that constitutes our conscious experience.95 The sensory unit
processes the information generated in the course of the actions planned by the
motor unit, and builds the world of the recognizable and familiar out ofthat
information.

The “limbic unit,” finally—phylogenetically ancient, tucked under the folds of
the neocortex—compares96 the nature of behavioral consequences, as they occur,
with a dynamic model, extant in fantasy, of what was supposed to occur, what
was desired to happen. It is therefore signaling of motivational significance,
or affective importance, that constitutes what is perhaps the major
responsibility of the limbic system—that, and the (integrally related)
inculcation and renewal of memory (“integrally related,” as it is significant
events that transform knowledge—that are stored in memory [more accurately,
that alter memory]). This process of signaling necessarily involves comparison
of the undesirable present, as currently understood, with the ideal future, as
currently imagined. The capacity to generate such a contrast appears dependent
upon operations undertaken deep within the comparatively ancient central
portion of the brain, particularly in the tightly integrated structures known
as the hippocampus97 and amygdala.98 The nature of this comparative process can
perhaps best be understood, in introduction, through consideration of a
phenomenon known as the event-related cortical potential.

The brain constantly produces a shifting pattern of electrical activity in the
course of its operations. The electroencephalogram (the EEG) provides a rough
picture of that pattern. The individual undergoing EEG examination has
electrodes placed in an array on his scalp. These electrodes allow the patterns
of electrical activity, generated in the course of neurological activity, to be
detected, monitored and, to some degree, localized. (The brain produces enough
electrical activity to be detected through the skull and tissue surrounding it,
although the interference produced by that surrounding tissue makes evaluation
of the EEG difficult). The rather limited capacities of EEG technology have
been greatly extended by the analytic capacities of the computer. The cortical
eventrelated potential is a measure of brain activity derived by computer from
EEG recordings averaged at different delays after the subject being evaluated
has been presented with some sort of stimulus. The nature of this stimulus may
vary. In the simplest case, it is merely something sensory, like a tone
presented repeatedly through stereo headphones. In more complex cases the
event-related potential is monitored following presentation of a stimulus with
affective valence—which means following something that must be “discriminated,
recognized, or otherwise evaluated.”99 Perhaps the simplest way to produce an
event of this sort is to randomly and rarely insert a tone that differs in
frequency into a repetitious sequence of otherwise predictable tones (although
the stimulus might just as easily be visual or tactile). These oddball events
are characterized by (relative) novelty (novelty is always relative) and evoke
a pattern of cortical electrical activity that differs from that produced by
the predictable tones. Any event that has specific or known implications for
alteration in ongoing behavior will also produce a potential like the oddball.

The average cortical event-related potential produced by infrequent or
otherwise meaningful events is a waveform with a characteristic time course and
shape. Most attention has been paid to elements of this waveform that occur
within the first half-second (500 milliseconds) after stimulus occurrence. As
the first half-second passes, the polarity of the waveform shifts. Peaks and
valleys occur at different, more or less standard times (and in essentially
predictable “locations”) and have therefore been identified and named.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are negative (N) or positive (P) depending on
polarity and are numbered according to their occurrence in time. The earliest
aspects of the ERP (<200 msec) vary with change in the purely sensory quality
of an event. The waveforms named N200 (negative 200 msec) and P300 (positive
300 msec), by contrast, vary with the affective significance and magnitude of
the stimulus, and can even be evoked by the absence of an event that was
expected, but that did not appear. The psychophysiologist Eric Halgren states:

One may summarize the cognitive conditions that evoke the N2/P3 as being the
presentation of stimuli that are novel or that are signals for behavioral
tasks, and thus need to be attended to, and processed. These evoking conditions
and functional consequences are identical to those that have been found for the
orienting reflex.100



Halgren considers the N2/P3 and the autonomic orienting reflex “different parts
of an overall organismic reaction complex evoked by stimuli that merit further
evaluation.”101 He terms this overall response pattern the orienting complex. A
substantial body of evidence suggests that the amygdalic and hippocampal
systems are critically involved in production of the N2/P3 waveforms, although
other brain systems also participate. (It is also of great interest to note
that an additional waveform, the N4, is produced when human experimental
subjects are exposed to abstracted symbols with integral significance, such as
written, spoken or signed words and faces, in a meaningful context.102 In such
a context, the N4 occurs after the N2 but before the P3, and increases in
magnitude as a function of the difficulty of integrating the word with the
context in which it appears. The amygdala and hippocampus are also directly
responsible for the production of this waveform—and, therefore, for contextual
synthesis, which is a vital aspect of the derivation of meaning, which is
significance for behavior, given the desire to attain a particular goal.)

The processes that reveal themselves behaviorally in the orienting complex and
electrophysiologically in the N2/N4/P3 waveform appear to play a central part
in the manifold processes we experience (and understand) as consciousness.
Another psychophysiologist, Arne Ohman,103 has posited that orienting initiates
a sequence of “controlled processing,” which is difficult, slow, accompanied by
awareness, sequential and generative (and which is referred to as exploratory
behavior in this document), contrasted with “automatic processing,” which is
habitual, “unconscious” and immediate (and which occurs in “explored
territory”). The orienting complex is apparently manifested only when a given
experimental subject becomes aware of some relationship between sensory input
and motor action. Likewise, the N2/P3 waveform appears only when the
experimental stimulus utilized “has captured the subject's attention and
reached his or her awareness.”104 Consciousness (affiliated tightly with
orienting, for the purposes of the present argument) therefore appears as a
phenomenon critically involved in and vital to the evaluation of
novelty—appears vital to placement of the unpredictable into a defined and
determinate context as a consequence of behavioral modification undertaken in
the territory of the unknown. This means that consciousness plays a centrally
important role in the generation of the predictable and comprehended world from
the domain of the unexpected. Such response, placement and generation remains
forever mediated by the twin forces of hope/curiosity and anxiety—forces
produced, noncoincidentally, by the same structures that govern “reflexive”
orientation and exploratory motor output.

The constant and universal presence of the incomprehensible in the world has
elicited adaptive response from us and from all other creatures with highly
developed nervous systems. We have evolved to operate successfully in a world
eternally composed of the predictable, in paradoxical juxtaposition with the
unpredictable. The combination of what we have explored and what we have still
to evaluate actually comprises our environment, insofar as its nature can be
broadly specified—and it is to that environment that our physiological
structure has become matched. One set of the systems that comprise our brain
and mind governs activity, when we are guided by our plans—when we are in the
domain of the known. Another appears to operate when we face something
unexpected— when we have entered the realm of the unknown.105

The “limbic unit” generates the orienting reflex, among its other tasks. It is
the orienting reflex, which manifests itself in emotion, thought and behavior,
that is at the core of the fundamental human response to the novel or unknown.
This reflex takes a biologically determined course, ancient in nature,
primordial as hunger or thirst, basic as sexuality, extant similarly in the
animal kingdom, far down the chain of organic being. The orienting reflex is
the general instinctual reaction to the category of all occurrences which have
not yet been categorized—is response to the unexpected, novel or unknown per
se, and not to any discriminated aspect of experience, any specifically
definable situation or thing. The orienting reflex is at the core of the
process that generates (conditional) knowledge of sensory phenomena and
motivational relevance or valence. Such knowledge is most fundamentally how to
behave, and what to expect as a consequence, in a particular situation, defined
by culturally modified external environmental circumstance and equally modified
internal motivational state. It is also information about what is, from the
objective perspective—is the record of that sensory experience occurring in the
course of ongoing behavior.

The orienting reflex substitutes for particular learned responses when the
incomprehensible suddenly makes its appearance. The occurrence of the
unpredictable, the unknown, the source of fear and hope, creates a seizure of
ongoing specifically goaldirected behavior. Emergence of the unexpected
constitutes evidence for the incomplete nature of the story currently guiding
such behavior; comprises evidence for error at the level of working description
of current state, representation of desired future state or conception of the
means to transform the former into the latter. Appearance of the unknown
motivates curious, hopeful exploratory behavior, regulated by fear, as means to
update the memory-predicated working model of reality (to update the known, so
to speak, which is defined or familiar territory). The simultaneous production
of two antithetical emotional states, such as hope and fear, means conflict,
and the unexpected produces intrapsychic conflict like nothing else. The
magnitude and potential intensity of this conflict cannot be appreciated under
normal circumstances, because under normal circumstances—in defined
territory—things are going according to plan. It is only when our goals have
been destroyed that the true significance of the decontextualized object or
experience is revealed—and such revelation makes itself known first in the form
of fear.106 We are protected from such conflict—from subjugation to instinctive
terror—by the historical compilation of adaptive information generated in the
course of previous novelty-driven exploration. We are protected from
unpredictability by our culturally determined beliefs, by the stories we share.
These stories tell us how to presume and how to act to maintain the
determinate, shared and restricted values that compose our familiar worlds.

The orienting reflex—the involuntary gravitation of attention to novelty—lays
the groundwork for the emergence of (voluntarily controlled) exploratory
behavior.107 Exploratory behavior allows for classification of the general and
(a priori) motivationally significant unexpected into specified and determinate
domains of motivational relevance. In the case of something with actual
(post-investigation) significance, relevance means context-specific punishment
or satisfaction, or their putatively “second-order” equivalents: threat or
promise (as something threatening implies punishment, as something promising
implies satisfaction). This is categorization, it should be noted, in
accordance with implication for motor output, or behavior, rather than with
regard to sensory (or, formalized, objective) property.108 We have generally
presumed that the purpose of exploration is production of a picture of the
objective qualities of the territory explored. This is evidently—but only
partially—true. However, the reasons we produce such pictures (are motivated to
produce such pictures) are not usually given sufficient consideration. Every
explorable subterritory, so to speak, has its sensory aspect, but it is the
emotional or motivational relevance of the new domain that is truly important.
We need to know only that something is hard and glowing red as a means of
keeping track of the fact that it is hot, and therefore dangerous—that it is
punishing, if contacted. We need to know the feel and look of objects so that
we can keep track of what can be eaten and what might eat us.

When we explore a new domain, we are mapping the motivational or affective
significance of the things or situations that are characteristic of our
goal-directed interactions within that domain, and we use the sensory
information we encounter to identify what is important. It is the determination
of specific meaning, or emotional significance, in previously unexplored
territory—not identification of the objective features—that allows us to
inhibit the novelty-induced terror and curiosity emergence of that territory
otherwise automatically elicits. We feel comfortable somewhere new, once we
have discovered that nothing exists there that will threaten or hurt us (more
particularly, when we have adjusted our behavior and schemas of representation
so that nothing there is likely to or able to threaten or hurt us). The
consequence of exploration that allows for emotional regulation (that generates
security, essentially) is not objective description, as the scientist might
have it, but categorization of the implications of an unexpected occurrence for
specification of means and ends. Such categorization is what an object “is,”
from the perspective of archaic affect and subjective experience. The orienting
reflex, and the exploratory behavior following its manifestation, also allows
for the differentiation of the unknown into the familiar categories of
objective reality. However, this ability is a late development, emerging only
four hundred years ago,109 and cannot be considered basic to “thinking.”
Specification of the collectively apprehensible sensory qualities of
something—generally considered, in the modern world, as the essential aspect of
the description of reality—merely serves as an aid to the more fundamental
process of evaluation, determining the precise nature of relevant or
potentially relevant phenomena.

When things are going according to plan—that is, when our actions fulfill our
desires—we feel secure, even happy. When nothing is going wrong, the cortical
systems expressly responsible for the organization and implementation of
goal-directed behavior remain firmly in control. When cortically generated
plans and fantasies go up in smoke, however, this control vanishes. The
comparatively ancient “limbic” hippocampal and amygdalic systems leap into
action, modifying affect, interpretation and behavior. The hippocampus appears
particularly specialized for comparing the (interpreted) reality of the
present, as it manifests itself in the subjective sphere, with the fantasies of
the ideal future constructed by the motor unit (acting in turn as the
higher-order mediator—the king, so to speak—of all the specialized subsystems
that compose the more fundamental or primary components of the brain). These
desire-driven fantasies might be regarded as motivated hypotheses about the
relative likelihood of events produced in the course of ongoing goal-directed
activity. What you expect to happen—really, what you want to happen, at least
in most situations—is a model you generate, using what you already know, in
combination with what you are learning while you act. The hippocampal
comparator110 constantly and “unconsciously” checks what is “actually”
happening against what is supposed to happen. This means that the comparator
contrasts the “unbearable present,” insofar as it is comprehended (because it
is a model, too), against the ideal future, as it is imagined; means that it
compares the interpreted outcome of active behavior with an image of the
intended consequences of that behavior. Past experience—skill and
representation of the outcome of skill (or memory, as it is applied)—governs
behavior, until error is committed. When something occurs that is not
intended—when the actual outcome, as interpreted, does not match the desired
outcome, as posited—the hippocampus shifts mode and prepares to update cortical
memory storage. Behavioral control shifts from the cortex to the limbic
system—apparently, to the amygdala, which governs the provisional determination
of the affective significance of unpredictable events, and has powerful output
to centers of motor control.111 This shift of control allows the activation of
structures governing orienting, heightened intensity of sensory processing and
exploration.

The “higher” cortex controls behavior until the unknown emerges—until it makes
a mistake in judgment, until memory no longer serves—until the activity it
governs produces a mismatch between what is desired and what actually occurs.
When such a mismatch occurs, appropriate affect (fear and curiosity) emerges.
But how can situationrelevant emotion attach itself to what has by definition
not yet been encountered? Traditionally, significance is attached to previously
irrelevant things or situations as a consequence of learning, which is to say
that things mean nothing until their meaning is learned. No learning has taken
place, however, in the face of the unknown—yet emotion reveals itself, in the
presence of error. It appears, therefore, that the kind of emotion that the
unpredictable arouses is not learned—which is to say that the novel or
unexpected comes preloaded with affect. Things are not irrelevant, as a matter
of course. They are rendered irrelevant, as a consequence of (successful)
exploratory behavior. When they are first encountered, however, they are
meaningful. It is the amygdala, at bottom, that appears responsible for the
(disinhibited) generation of this a priori meaning—terror and curiosity.

The amygdala appears to automatically respond to all things or situations,
unless told not to. It is told not to—is functionally inhibited—when ongoing
goal-directed behaviors produce the desired (intended) results.112 When an
error occurs, however—indicating that current memory-guided motivated plans and
goals are insufficient—the amygdala is released from inhibition and labels the
unpredictable occurrence with meaning. Anything unknown is dangerous and
promising, simultaneously: evokes anxiety, curiosity, excitement and hope
automatically and prior to what we would normally regard as exploration or as
(more context-specific) classification. The operations of the amygdala are
responsible for ensuring that the unknown is regarded with respect, as the
default decision. The amygdala says, in effect, “if you don't know what it
signifies, you'd better pay attention to it.” Attention constitutes the initial
stage of exploratory behavior, motivated by amygdalic operation—composed of the
interplay between anxiety,113 which impels caution in the face of
novelty-threat, and hope, which compels approach to novelty-promise.114
Caution-regulated approach allows for the update of memory in the form of skill
and representation. Exploration-updated memory inhibits the production of a
priori affect. On familiar ground—in explored territory—we feel no fear (and
comparatively little curiosity).

The desired output of behavior (what should be) is initially posited; if the
current strategy fails, the approach and exploration system is activated,115
although it remains under the governance of anxiety. The approach system (and
its equivalent, in abstraction) generates (1) alternative sequences of
behavior, whose goal is the production of a solution to the present dilemma;
(2) alternative conceptualizations of the desired goal; or (3) re-evaluation of
the motivational significance of the current state. This means (1) that a new
strategy for attaining the desired goal might be invented, or (2) that a
replacement goal, serving the same function, might be chosen; or (3) that the
behavioral strategy might be abandoned, due to the cost of its implementation.
In the latter case, the whole notion of what constitutes “reality,” at least
with regard to the story or frame of reference currently in use, might have to
be

Figure 9: The Regeneration of Stability from the Domain of Chaos





reconstructed. This most troublesome state of affairs is schematically
presented, in its successful form, in Figure 9: The Regeneration of Stability
from the Domain of Chaos.116

Exploratory activity culminates normally in restriction, expansion, or
transformation of the behavioral repertoire. In exceptional, non-normal
circumstances—that is, when a major error has been committed—such activity
culminates in revolution, in modification of the entire story guiding affective
evaluation and behavioral programming. Such revolutionary modification means
update of modeled reality, past, present and future, through incorporation of
information generated during exploratory behavior. Successful exploration
transforms the unknown into the expected, desired and predictable; establishes
appropriate behavioral measures (and expectations of those measures) for next
contact. Unsuccessful exploration, by contrast—avoidance or escape—leaves the
novel object firmly entrenched in its initial, “natural,” anxiety-provoking
category. This observation sets the stage for a fundamental realization: human
beings do not learn to fear new objects or situations, or even really “learn”
to fear something that previously appeared safe, when it manifests a dangerous
property. Fear is the a priori position, the natural response to everything for
which no structure of behavioral adaptation has been designed and inculcated.
Fear is the innate reaction to everything that has not been rendered
predictable, as a consequence of successful, creative exploratory behavior
undertaken in its presence, at some time in the past. LeDoux states:

It is well established that emotionally neutral stimuli can acquire the
capacity to evoke striking emotional reaction following temporal pairing with
an aversive event. Conditioning does not create new emotional responses but
instead simply allows new stimuli to serve as triggers capable of activating
existing, often hard-wired, species-specific emotional reactions. In the rat,
for example, a pure tone previously paired with footshock evokes a conditioned
fear reaction consisting of freezing behavior accompanied by a host of
autonomic adjustments, including increases in arterial pressure and heart
rate.117 Similar responses are expressed when laboratory rats are exposed to a
cat for the first time, but following amygdala lesions such responses are no
longer present,118 suggesting that the responses are genetically specified
(since they appear when the rat sees a cat, a natural predator, for the first
time) and involve the amygdala. The fact that electrical stimulation of the
amygdala is capable of eliciting the similar response patterns119 further
supports the notion that the responses are hard-wired.120



Fear is not conditioned; security is unlearned, in the presence of particular
things or contexts, as a consequence of violation of explicit or implicit
presupposition. Classical behavioral psychology is wrong in the same manner our
folk presumptions are wrong: fear is not secondary, not learned; security is
secondary, learned. Everything not explored is tainted, a priori, with
apprehension. Any thing or situation that undermines the foundations of the
familiar and secure is therefore to be feared.121

It is difficult for us to formulate a clear picture of the subjective effects
of the systems that dominate our initial response to the truly unpredictable,
because we strive with all our might to ensure that everything around us
remains normal. Under “normal” conditions, therefore, these primordial systems
never operate with their full force. It might be said, with a certain amount of
justification, that we devote our entire lives to making sure that we never
have to face anything unknown, in the revolutionary sense—at least not
accidentally. Our success in doing so deludes us about the true nature, power
and intensity of our potential emotional responses. As civilized people, we are
secure. We can predict the behaviors of others (that is, if they share our
stories); furthermore, we can control our environments well enough to ensure
that our subjection to threat and punishment remains at a minimum. It is the
cumulative consequences of our adaptive struggle—our cultures—which enable this
prediction and control. The existence of our cultures, however, blinds us to
the nature of our true (emotional) natures—at least to the range ofthat nature,
and to the consequences of its emergence.

Experimental examinations of the orienting reflex have not shed much light on
our true potential for emotional response, in the past, because they generally
took place under exceptionally controlled circumstances. Subjects evaluated for
their responses to “novelty” are generally presented with stimuli that are
novel only in the most “normal” of manners. A tone, for example, which differs
unpredictably from another tone (or which appears at a relatively unpredictable
time) is still a tone, something experienced a thousand times before and
something experienced in a lab, in a hospital or university, under the
jurisdiction of trustworthy personnel devoted to minimizing the
anxietyprovoking nature of the experimental procedure. The controlled
circumstances of the experiment (which are, in fact, the implicit and therefore
invisible theoretical presumptions of the experiment) have led us to minimize
the importance of the orienting reflex, and to misunderstand the nature of its
disappearance.

Orienting signifies “attention,” not terror, in the standard lab situation, and
its gradual elimination with repeated stimulus presentation is regarded as
“habituation”—as something boring, akin to automatic acclimation, adjustment or
desensitization. Habituation is not a passive process, however, at least at
higher cortical levels of processing. It just looks passive when observed under
relatively trivial circumstances. It is in reality always the consequence of
active exploration and subsequent modification of behavior, or interpretive
schema. The (relatively) novel target laboratory tone, for example, is
investigated for its underlying structure by the cortical systems involved in
audition. These systems actively analyze the component elements of every
sound.122 The subject is led to “expect” or predict one sort of sound and gets
another. The unexpected other has indeterminate significance, in that
particular context, and is therefore regarded as (comparatively)
meaningful—threatening and promising. The unexpected tone is presented
repeatedly. The exploratory subject notes that the repetitions signify nothing,
in the context that defines the experimental situation (nothing punishing,
satisfying, threatening or promising), and ceases to react. He has not merely
“habituated” to the stimuli. He has mapped its context-dependent significance,
which is zero. This process appears trivial because the experimental situation
makes it so. In real life, it is anything but boring.

Classical work conducted on animal “emotion” and motivation has taken place
under circumstances reminiscent of the artificially constrained situations that
define most work on human orienting. Animals, usually rats, are trained to be
afraid—or to inhibit their behavior—in the presence of a neutral stimulus
paired repeatedly with an “unconditioned” punishment [a stimulus whose
motivational valence is negative, in the supposed absence of learning (or, at
least, in the absence of interpretation)]. The rat is placed in the
experimental environment and is allowed to familiarize himself with his
surroundings. The neutral stimulus might be a light; the unconditioned
stimulus, an electric shock. The light goes on; the floor of the rat's cage is
briefly electrified. This sequence occurs repeatedly. Soon the rat “freezes” as
soon as the light appears. He has developed a “conditioned response,”
manifesting behavioral inhibition (and fear, theoretically) to something that
was previously neutral. Procedures of this sort effectively produce fear. The
implicit contextual constraints or axioms of these procedures, however, lead
researchers to draw odd conclusions about the nature of the “acquisition” of
fear.

Such experiments first imply that fear in a given situation is necessarily
something learned. Second, they imply that fear exists as a consequence of
exposure to punishment, and only because ofthat exposure. The problem with this
interpretation is that the rat was inevitably afraid as soon as he was placed
in the new experimental environment, even though nothing terrible had yet
happened there. After he is allowed to explore, he calms down. It is only then
that he is regarded as normal. The experimenter then jars the rat out of his
acquired normalcy by presenting him with something unexpected and painful—the
unconditioned stimulus, in conjunction with the neutral stimulus. He then
“learns” to be afraid. Really what has happened is that the unexpected
occurrence forces the rat to reattain the state he was in (or that same state,
in an exaggerated manner) when he first entered the cage. The fact of the
electric shock, in conjunction with the light, indicates to the rat (reminds
the rat) that he is, once again, in unexplored territory. His fear, in
unexplored territory, is just as normal as his complacency in environments that
he has mapped and that hold no danger. We regard the calm rat as the real rat
because we project our misinterpretations of our own habitual nature onto our
experimental animals. It is as D.O.Hebb states:

[The urbanity characterizing ourselves,]…the civilized, amiable, and admirable
part of mankind, well brought up and not constantly in a state of fear…depends
as much on our successfully avoiding disturbing stimulation as on a lowered
sensitivity [to fear-producing stimuli]…. [T]he capacity for emotional
breakdown may [well] be self-concealing, leading [animals and human beings] to
find or create an environment in which the stimuli to excessive emotional
response are at a minimum. So effective is our society in this regard that its
members—especially the well-to-do and educated ones—may not even guess at some
of their own potentialities. One usually thinks of education, in the broad
sense, as producing a resourceful, emotionally stable adult, without respect to
the environment in which these traits are to appear. To some extent this may be
true. But education can be seen as being also the means of establishing a
protective social environment in which emotional stability is possible. Perhaps
it strengthens the individual against unreasonable fears and rages, but it
certainly produces a uniformity of appearance and behavior which reduces the
frequency with which the individual member of the society encounters the causes
of such emotion. On this view, the susceptibility to emotional disturbance may
not be decreased. It may in fact be increased. The protective cocoon of
uniformity, in personal appearance, manners, and social activity generally,
will make small deviations from custom appear increasingly strange and thus (if
the general thesis is sound) increasingly intolerable. The inevitable small
deviations from custom will bulk increasingly large, and the members of the
society, finding themselves tolerating trivial deviations well, will continue
to think of themselves as socially adaptable.123



Our emotional regulation depends as much (or more) on the stability and
predictability of the social environment (on the maintenance of our cultures)
as on “interior” processes, classically related to the strength of the ego or
the personality. Social order is a necessary precondition for psychological
stability: it is primarily our companions and their actions (or inactions) that
stabilize or destabilize our emotions.

A rat (a person) is a complacent creature in explored territory. When in
unexplored territory, however, it is anything but calm. A rat moved from its
home cage to a new and unknown environment—a new cage, for example—will first
freeze (even though it has never been punished, in the new situation). If
nothing terrible happens to it (nothing punishing, threatening or additionally
unpredictable) it will begin to sniff, to look around, to move its head, to
gather new information about the intrinsically frightening place it now
inhabits. Gradually, it starts to move about. It will explore the whole cage
with increasing confidence. It is mapping the new environment for affective
valence. It wants to find out: is there anything here that will kill me?
Anything here I can eat? Anyone else here—someone hostile or friendly? A
potential mate? The rat is interested in determining whether the new place
contains anything of determinate interest to a rat, and it explores, to the
best of its capacity, to make that judgment. It is not primarily interested in
the “objective” nature of the new circumstances—a rat cannot actually determine
what is objective and what is merely “personal opinion.” Nor does it care. It
just wants to know what it should do.

What happens if an animal encounters something truly unexpected—something that
should just not be, according to its current frame of reference or system of
belief? The answer to this question sheds substantial light on the nature of
the orienting reflex, in its full manifestation. Modern experimental
psychologists have begun to examine the response of animals to natural sources
of mystery and threat. They allow the animals to set up their own environments,
realistic environments, and then expose them to the kinds of surprising
circumstances they might encounter in real life. The appearance of a predator
in previously safe space (space previously explored, that is, and mapped as
useful or irrelevant) constitutes one type of realistic surprise. Blanchard and
colleagues describe the naturalistic behavior of rats, under such conditions:

When a cat is presented to established mixed-sex groups of laboratory rats
living in a visible burrow system, the behaviors of the subjects change
dramatically, in many cases for 24 hours or more.124 The initial active
defensive behavior, flight to the tunnel/chamber system, is followed by a
period of immobility during which the rats make 22 kHz ultrasonic
vocalizations, which apparently serve as alarm cries, at a high rate.125 As
freezing breaks up, proxemic avoidance of the open area gradually gives way to
a pattern of “risk assessment” of the area where the cat was encountered.
Subjects poke their heads out of the tunnel openings to scan the open area
where the cat was presented, for minutes or hours before emerging, and when
they do emerge, their locomotory patterns are characterized by [behaviors that
theoretically reduce their visibility and vulnerability to predators and by]
very short “corner runs” into and out of the open area. These risk assessment
activities appear to involve active gathering of information about the possible
danger source,126 providing a basis for a gradual return to nondefensive
behaviors.127 Active risk assessment is not seen during early post-cat
exposure, when freezing and avoidance of the open area are the dominant
behaviors, but rises to a peak about 7–10 hours later, and then gradually
declines. Nondefensive behaviors128 such as eating, drinking and sexual and
aggressive activity tend to be reduced over the same period.129



The unexpected appearance of a predator where nothing but defined territory
previously existed terrifies the rats—badly enough that they “scream” about it,
persistently, for a long period of time. Once this initial terror abates—which
occurs only if nothing else horrible or punishing happens—curiosity is
disinhibited, and the rats return to the scene of the crime. The space
“renovelized” by the fact of the cat has to be transformed once again into
explored territory as a consequence of active modification of behavior (and
representational schema), not by passive desensitization to the unexpected. The
rats run across the territory “contaminated” by the presence of the cat, to
find out if anything dangerous (to running rats) still lurks there. If the
answer is “no,” then the space is defined, once again, as home territory (which
is that place where commonplace behaviors produce desired ends). The rats
transform the dangerous unknown into familiar territory as a consequence of
voluntary exploration. In the absence of such exploration, terror reigns
unchecked.

It is just as illuminating to consider the responses of rats to their kin, who
constitute “explored territory,” in contrast to their attitude toward
“strangers,” whose behavior is not predictable. Rats are highly social animals,
perfectly capable of living with their familiar compatriots in peace. They do
not like members of other kin groups, however; they will hunt them down and
kill them. Accidental or purposeful intruders are dealt with in the same
manner. Rats identify one another by smell. If an experimenter removes a
well-loved rat from its familial surroundings, scrubs it down, provides it with
a new odor, and returns it to its peers, it will be promptly dispatched by
those who once loved it. The “new” rat constitutes “unexplored territory”; his
presence is regarded as a threat (not unreasonably) to everything currently
secure.130 Chimpanzees, perfectly capable of killing “foreign devils” (even
those who were once familiar), act in much the same manner.131

