# 2 - MAPS OF MEANING
[Metadata]: # {03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
MAPS OF MEANING
# MAPS OF MEANING
Three Levels of Analysis

Human beings are prepared, biologically, to respond to anomalous information—to
novelty. This instinctive response includes redirection of attention,
generation of emotion (fear first, generally speaking, then curiosity), and
behavioral compulsion (cessation of ongoing activity first, generally speaking,
then active approach and exploration). This pattern of instinctive response
drives learning—particularly, but not exclusively, the learning of appropriate
behavior. All such learning takes place—or took place originally—as a
consequence of contact with novelty, or anomaly.

What is novel is of course dependent on what is known—is necessarily defined in
opposition to what is known. Furthermore, what is known is always known
conditionally, since human knowledge is necessarily limited. Our conditional
knowledge, insofar as that knowledge is relevant for the regulation of emotion,
consists of our models of the emotional significance of the present, defined in
opposition to an idealized, hypothetical or fantasied future state. We evaluate
the “unbearable present” in relationship to the “ideal future.” We act to
transform “where we are” into “where we would like to be.”

When our attempts to transform the present work as planned, we remain firmly
positioned in the domain of the known (metaphorically speaking). When our
behaviors produce results that we did not want, however—that is, when we err—we
move into the domain of the unknown, where more primordial emotional forces
rule. “Small-scale” errors force us to reconstruct our plans, but allow us to
retain our goals and our conceptualizations of present conditions. Catastrophic
errors, by contrast, force us not only to re-evaluate our means, but our
starting points and our ends. Such revaluation necessarily involves extreme
emotional dysregulation.

The “domain of the known” and the “domain of the unknown” can reasonably be
regarded as permanent constituent elements of human experience—even of the
human environment. Regardless of culture, place and time, human individuals are
forced to adapt to the fact of culture (the domain of the known, roughly
speaking) and the fact of its ultimate insufficiency (as the domain of the
unknown necessarily remains extant, regardless of extent of previous
“adaptation”). The human brain—and the higher animal brain— appears therefore
to have adapted itself to the eternal presence of these two “places”; the brain
has one mode of operation when in explored territory, and another when in
unexplored territory. In the unexplored world, caution—expressed in fear and
behavioral immobility—initially predominates, but may be superseded by
curiosity—expressed in hope, excitement and, above all, in creative exploratory
behavior. Creative exploration of the unknown, and consequent generation of
knowledge, is construction or update of patterns of behavior and
representation, such that the unknown is transformed from something terrifying
and compelling into something beneficial (or, at least, something irrelevant).
The presence of capacity for such creative exploration and knowledge generation
may be regarded as the third, and final, permanent constituent element of human
experience (in addition to the domain of the “known” and “unknown”).

Mythological representations of the world—which are representations of reality
as a forum for action—portray the dynamic interrelationship between all three
constituent elements of human experience. The eternal unknown—nature,
metaphorically speaking, creative and destructive, source and destination of
all determinant things—is generally ascribed an affectively ambivalent feminine
character (as the “mother” and eventual “devourer” of everyone and everything).
The eternal known, in contrast—culture, defined territory, tyrannical and
protective, predictable, disciplined and restrictive, cumulative consequence of
heroic or exploratory behavior—is typically considered masculine (in
contradistinction to “mother” nature). The eternal knower, finally—the process
that mediates between the known and the unknown—is the knight who slays the
dragon of chaos, the hero who replaces disorder and confusion with clarity and
certainty, the sun god who eternally slays the forces of darkness, and the
“word” that engenders cosmic creation.

