# 5 - The Peregrination
[Metadata]: # {06.13}
[Descriptor]: # {06.13}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Peregrination
# The Peregrination
The alchemists believed that perfection was characterized by a state of unity,
in which all “competing opposites” were united. The final stage of the
alchemical procedure—the conjunction—was therefore preceded first by
recognition and identification of all the diverse “aspects of the psyche”
warring in opposition in the “belly of the uroboric dragon”:

What, then, do the statements of the alchemists concerning their arcanum mean,
looked at psychologically? In order to answer this question we must remember
the working hypothesis we have used for the interpretation of dreams: the
images in dreams and spontaneous fantasies are symbols, that is, the best
possible formulation for still unknown or unconscious facts, which generally
compensate the content of consciousness or the conscious attitude. If we apply
this basic rule to the alchemical arcanum, we come to the conclusion that its
most conspicuous quality, namely, its unity and uniqueness—one is the stone,
one the medicine, one the vessel, one the procedure, and one the disposition—
presupposes a dissociated consciousness. For no one who is one himself needs
oneness as a medicine—nor, we might add, does anyone who is unconscious of his
dissociation, for a conscious situation of distress is needed in order to
activate the archetype of unity. From this we may conclude that the more
philosophically minded alchemists were people who did not feel satisfied with
the then prevailing view of the world, that is, with the Christian faith,
although they were convinced of its truth. In this latter respect we find in
the classical Latin and Greek literature of alchemy no evidences to the
contrary, but rather, so far as Christian treatises are concerned, abundant
testimony to the firmness of their Christian convictions. Since Christianity is
expressly a system of “salvation,” founded moreover on God's “plan of
redemption,” and God is unity par excellence, one must ask oneself why the
alchemists still felt a disunity in themselves, or not at one with themselves,
when their faith, so it would appear, gave them every opportunity for unity and
unison. (This question has lost nothing of its topicality today, on the
contrary!)625



This global recognition was conceptualized, variously, as a “journey to the
four corners of the earth”—the peregrination—or as familiarization with every
aspect of being, as a vast expansion of self-knowledge. The incorporation of
all competing states of motivation into a single hierarchy of value presupposes
recognition of all diverse (painful, uncomfortable, difficult to manage)
desires, and the “forging” of an agreement between them. This can be most
accurately viewed as a potentially “redemptive” expansion of
self-consciousness. It might be said: emergence of the limited
self-consciousness symbolically represented in myths of the Fall constituted
grounds for the descent of man. The alchemical philosophers—meditating
endlessly on the nature of perfection, or the transformative processes
necessary for the production of perfection— came to “realize” that increased
self-consciousness might constitute recompense for expulsion from paradise. But
identification of all competing desires meant clear-headed recognition of the
truly tragic situation of man, and of all the “sinful” and mortal weaknesses,
sins and insufficiencies associated with individual being—and then the attempt
to come to real terms with that situation, and those limitations.

If you are a miserable and disorganized fool, producing chaos wherever you go,
it is tremendously painful to recognize yourself—and to see the enormity of the
job ahead of you. It is very difficult to replace delusional identification
with the persona with clearheaded apprehension of the real (and insufficient)
individual personality. This clearer vision or conception is something attained
at no small cost (and this says nothing about the cost of transforming that
conception into action). The “savage, wild animal”—the “hungry robber, the
wolf, lion, and other ravening beasts”626 served as apt representative of the
“unredeemed individual,” from the alchemical perspective. Emergence and
recognition of this animal is necessary precondition to his transformation.
This idea is represented imagistically in Figure 64: The Wolf as Prima Materia,
Devouring the Dead King.627 This “devouring of the dead king” by the
now-recognized “beast of the underworld” is very much akin to Solzhenitsyn's
discovery of his personal responsibility for the Gulag that imprisoned him. For
a typical modern, an equal shock might be produced by his discovery of identity
with the Nazi. The barbarians of Hitler's state were normal men—normal men,
like you (and me). This cannot be emphasized strongly enough. But the “normal
man” does not conceptualize himself as Nazi. This means, merely, that his
self-concept provides him with illusory security (as a prison protects its
inmates from the outside). But the Nazi actions—that is, the willful torture of
innocents, and enjoyment of such—is well within the normal man's range of
capacities (and does not likely exhaust them). The individual is a terrible
force for evil. Recognition ofthat force—real recognition, the kind that comes
as a staggering blow—is a precondition for any profound improvement in
character. By such improvement, I mean the capacity to bear the tragedy of
existence, to transcend that tragedy—and not to degenerate instead into
something “unconsciously” desirous of disseminating pain and misery. Jung
states:

It is worth noting that the animal is the symbolic carrier of the self [the
psychic totality]. This hint in Maier is borne out by modern individuals who
have no notion of alchemy. It expresses the fact that the structure of
wholeness was always present but was buried in profound unconsciousness, where
it can

Figure 64: The Wolf as Prima Materia, Devouring the Dead King





always be found again if one is willing to risk one's skin to attain the
greatest possible range of consciousness through the greatest possible
self-knowledge—a “harsh and bitter drink” usually reserved for hell. The throne
of God seems to be no unworthy reward for such trials. For self-knowledge—in
the total meaning of the word—is not a one-sided intellectual pastime but a
journey through the four continents, where one is exposed to all the dangers of
land, sea, air and fire. Any total act of recognition worthy of the name
embraces the four—or 360!—aspects of existence. Nothing may be “disregarded.”
When Ignatius Loyalus recommended “imagination through the five senses” to the
meditant, and told him to imitate Christ “by use of his senses,” what he had in
mind was the fullest possible “realization” of the object of contemplation.
Quite apart from the moral or other effects of this kind of meditation, its
chief effect is the training of consciousness, of the capacity for
concentration, and of attention and clarity of thought. The corresponding forms
of Yoga have similar effects. But in contrast to these traditional modes of
realization, where the meditant projects himself into some prescribed form, the
self-knowledge alluded to by Maier is a projection into the empirical self as
it actually is. It is not the “self” we like to imagine ourselves to be after
carefully removing all the blemishes, but the empirical ego just as it is, with
everything that it does and everything that happens to it. Everybody would like
to be quit of this odious adjunct, which is precisely why in the East the ego
is explained as illusion and why in the West it is offered up in sacrifice to
the Christ figure.

By contrast, the aim of the mystical peregrination is to understand all parts
of the world, to achieve the greatest possible extension of consciousness, as
though its guiding principle were the Carpocratic idea that one is delivered
from no sin which one has not committed. Not a turning away from its empirical
“so-ness,” but the fullest possible experience of the ego as reflected in the
“ten thousand things”—that is the goal of the peregrination.628



The mask each person wears in society is based upon the pretence that the
individual is identical with his culture (usually, with the “best elements” of
that culture). The fool, hiding behind the mask, is composed of individual
deviance, which is deceitfully avoided, lied about, out of fear. This deviant,
unlived life contains the worst and the best tendencies of the individual,
suppressed by cultural opinion because they threaten the norm; forced
underground by the individual himself, because they threaten personal
short-term psychological stability (which means group identification and
ongoing inhibition of fear). In the absence of an integrated hierarchical moral
(patriarchal) system, competing values and viewpoints tend toward
disintegration, as each pursues its own end—as greed might make the pursuit of
lust difficult, as hunger might render love impossible. When a moral system
undergoes dissolution and loses its absolute validity— its higher moral
structure—the values which it held in union revert to incompatability, at least
from the conscious viewpoint. This war of conflicting values—of which each is
in itself a necessary “divine force”—engenders confusion, disorientation, and
despair. Such despair—which can be truly unbearable—might be considered the
first pitfall of moral transformation. Mere contemplation of the possibility of
such a state usually engenders sufficient discomfort to bring further moral
development to a halt. The alchemist, however, implicitly adopted a heroic role
when he voluntarily determined to pursue the unknown, in search of the ideal.
His unconscious identification with this eternal image, his active incarnation
of the mythological role, enabled him to persevere in his quest, in the face of
grave difficulty. Jung states:

Only the living presence of the eternal images can lend the human psyche a
dignity which makes it morally possible for a man to stand by his own soul, and
be convinced that it is worth his while to persevere with it. Only then will he
realize that the conflict is in him, that the discord and tribulation are his
riches, which should not be squandered by attacking others; and that, if fate
should exact a debt from him in the form of guilt, it is a debt to himself.
Then he will recognize the worth of his psyche, for nobody can owe a debt to a
mere nothing. But when he loses his own values he becomes a hungry robber, the
wolf, lion, and other ravening beasts which for the alchemists symbolized the
appetites that break loose when the black waters of chaos—i.e., the
unconsciousness of projection— have swallowed up the king.629



The unknown is contaminated with the psychoanalytic “unconscious,” so to speak,
because everything we do not know about ourselves, and everything we have
experienced and assimilated but not accommodated to, has the same affective
status as everything that exists merely as potential. All thoughts and impulses
we avoid or suppress, because they threaten our self-conception or notion of
the world—and all fantasies we experience, but do not admit to—exist in the
same domain as chaos, the mother of all things, and serve to undermine our
faith in our most vital presumptions. The encounter with the “unknown,”
therefore, is simultaneously encounter with those aspects of our selves
heretofore defined as other (despite their indisputable “existence”). This
integration means making behavioral potentialities previously disregarded
available for conscious use; means (re)construction of a self-model that
accurately represents such potential.

Experiences which are currently deemed taboo—forbidden, from the perspective of
the currently extant moral schema—may therefore contain within them seeds of
creative solution to problems that remain unsolved or may arise in the future.
Taboo experience may yet constitute “unmined” and redemptive possibility. Tales
of the “traveling sage,” “wandering magician” or “courageous adventurer”
constitute recognition of the utility of such potential. From the perspective
of such narratives, a totality of experience and action is the necessary
precondition for the attainment of wisdom. This “total immersion in life” is
the mystical “peregrination” of the medieval alchemist, in search of the
philosopher's stone, or the journey of Buddha through the complete sensory,
erotic and philosophical realms, prior to his attainment of enlightenment. The
ritual of pilgrimage—the “journey to the holy city”—constitutes half-ritual,
half-dramatic enactment of this idea. The pilgrim voluntarily places him- or
herself outside the “protective walls” of original culture and, through the
difficult and demanding (actual) journey to “unknown but holy lands,” catalyzes
a psychological process of broadening, integration and maturation. It is in
this manner that a true “quest” inevitably fulfills itself, even though its
“final, impossible goal” (the Holy Grail, for example) may remain concretely
unattained.

The necessity for experience as the precondition for wisdom may appear
self-evident, once due consideration has been applied to the problem (since
wisdom is obviously “derived” from experience)—but the crux of the matter is
that those elements of experience that foster denial or avoidance (and
therefore remain unencountered or unprocessed) always border on the maddening.
This is particularly true from the psychological, rather than ritual,
perspective. The holy pilgrimage in its abstract or spiritual version is the
journey through “elements” of experience and personal character that constitute
the subjective world of experience (rather than the shared social and natural
world). The inner world is divided into familiar and unknown territory, much as
the outer. The psychological purpose of the rite-of-passage adventure (and the
reason for the popularity of such journeys, in actuality and in drama) is the
development of character, in consequence of confrontation with the unknown. A
“journey to the place that is most feared,” however, can be undertaken
spiritually much as concretely. What “spiritually” means, however, in such a
context, is a “peregrination” through the rejected, hated and violently
suppressed aspects of personal experience. This is most literally a voyage to
the land of the enemy—to the heart of darkness.

When experience calls the absolute validity of a given belief system into
question, the validity of the definitions of immorality—and of enmity—contained
with that system also become questionable:

For one may doubt, first, whether there are any opposites at all, and secondly
whether these popular valuations and opposite values on which the
metaphysicians put their seal, are not perhaps merely foreground estimates,
only provisional perspectives, perhaps even from some nook, perhaps from below,
frog perspectives, as it were, to borrow an expression painters use. For all
the value that the true, the truthful, the selfless may deserve, it would still
be possible that a higher and more fundamental value for life might have to be
ascribed to deception, selfishness and lust. It might even be possible that
what constitutes the value of these good and revered things is precisely that
they are insidiously related, tied to, and involved with these wicked,
seemingly opposite things—maybe even one with them in essence.630



Recognition of potential in the transformation of the prima materia meant
re-encounter with personal experience formerly suppressed by cultural pressure
and personal decision. Such experience might have included hatred, cruelty,
physical passion, greed, cowardice, confusion, doubt, flight of imagination,
freedom of thought and personal talent. Things we avoid or deny are precisely
those things that transcend our individual competence, as presently
construed—the things or situations that define our limitations, and that
represent inferiority, failure, decomposition, weakness and death. This means
that everything despised and feared, every object of hatred and contempt,
everything signifying cowardice, ruthlessness, ignorance—every experience that
cries out for denial—may yet constitute information necessary for life. Jung
states:

In general, the alchemists strove for a total union of opposites in symbolic
form, and this they regarded as the indispensable condition for the healing of
all ills. Hence they sought to find ways and means to produce that substance in
which all opposites were united.631



Alchemy speaks of “the union of soul-sparks, to produce the gold.” These
sparks— scintillae—are “the light in the darkness,” the consciousness
associated with poorly integrated or even hostile elements of individual
personality.632 The germ or seed of unity may manifest itself symbolically at
any time in the procedure, and comes to dominate later if procedure is
successful. This center—Jung's “self”633—unites the disparate elements (the
“compulsion of the stars”) into one, in the course of a circular, cyclical
journey (in the course of the revolutionary spiral path of the way). This
emergent center was regarded by the alchemists as the spirit Mercurius (the
trickster, who was “embedded” in matter), or as the mythical “pelican,” who fed
her offspring with her own body and blood, and was therefore an allegory both
of Christ and the (self-nourishing) uroboros. The center was also regarded as
the philosophical stone (the solitaire) “rejected by the builders,” directly
identified with Christ, and as the rock

Figure 65: Dragon of Chaos as “Birthplace” of Christ and the Lapis





upon which security itself might be founded. This stone, this immovable and
indestructible center, “incorporated” the patriarchal and matriarchal
principles (the king and the queen), and was also regarded as the “offspring”
of chaos, fertilized by order. The emergence of the lapis/Christ/pelican from
the domain of the dragon of chaos is represented in Figure 65: Dragon of Chaos
as “Birthplace” of Christ and the Lapis.634

The mythological hero faces the unknown, voluntarily, cuts it up, and makes the
world out of its pieces; identifies and overcomes evil, and rescues the
ancestral father, languishing in the underworld; unites, consciously, with the
virgin mother, and produces the divine child; and mediates between opposing and
warlike kings. He is, therefore, explorer, creator, lover, judge and
peacemaker. The hero is also he who has traveled everywhere—he who has
“mastered strange territory” (even that inhabited by his enemy). This
“traveling everywhere” and “mastering of strange territory” has a psychological
significance and a social meaning: the divine hero knows and understands the
“ways of the enemy” and can use them to advantage.

