# 5 - THE ADVERSARY: EMERGENCE, DEVELOPMENT AND REPRESENTATION
[Metadata]: # {06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {06.03}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
THE ADVERSARY: EMERGENCE, DEVELOPMENT AND REPRESENTATION
# THE ADVERSARY: EMERGENCE, DEVELOPMENT AND REPRESENTATION
The figure of Satan is arguably the most well-developed representation of evil
extant in religious and mythological thought. Although it is tempting to
identify this “personage” with particular personality attributes, such as
aggression—or with the differences of the stranger—it is more realistic to view
him as the embodiment of a personal and social process. The devil is the spirit
who underlies the development of totalitarianism; the spirit who is
characterized by rigid ideological belief (by the “predominance of the rational
mind”), by reliance on the lie as a mode of adaptation (by refusal to admit to
the existence of error, or to appreciate the necessity of deviance), and by the
inevitable development of hatred for the self and world. Each of these
characteristics is intrinsically and causally related to the others; they are
linked inextricably together, and can be aptly conceptualized as a
transpersonal and eternal personality.

The devil is willful rejection of the process that makes life bearable, out of
spite for the tragic conditions of existence. This rejection is intellectually
arrogant, because the “conditions” are interpreted—which is to say: development
of self-consciousness tainted everything with death, but self-consciousness is
contained within a global understanding that is still exceptionally limited in
its scope. The present, as currently interpreted, is indeed the unbearable
present: but that interpretation may change, if the possibility for change is
not disallowed, as a consequence of absolutist belief, conceit and resentment.

The devil works to eliminate the world, as something whose weakness and
vulnerability makes it contemptible. He has produced dreadful suffering in the
twentieth century—not least among cultures who have dispensed with his image.
We are fortunate to have survived without an irreversible tragedy. Our luck to
date should not blind us to the dangers of continued ignorance, or to the
necessity of bringing our poorly comprehended selves under control. Every
technological advance we make increases our power; every increase in power
makes our internal integration and expanded self-consciousness that much more
necessary.



The noble soul has reverence for itself.464



As I looked deeper into the problem of evil over the last fourteen years, I
found myself increasingly and involuntarily fascinated with the myth of Satan,
and curious about the position of this story in Western thought. The idea of
the devil has exerted a powerful influence on the development of Christianity
and Christian culture—and, therefore, on Western and world society—although
there is little direct reference to Satan in the Old and New Testaments
(surprisingly little: no description of hell, to speak of, limited and oblique
reference to the rebellion of the angels and the war in heaven preceding the
establishment of hell; nothing of any consequence regarding the terrible
afterlife that theoretically awaits all sinners).

It is my understanding that traditional and literary representations of Satan,
the ruling angel of hell, constitute true mythology. These ideas surround the
established central writings and ideas of Christianity like fog surrounds a
mountain. They have been transmitted to us, in part, as religious doctrine; in
part, as oral tradition; in part, because of the efforts of Dante and Milton. I
had a very limited religious education, in my youth, and all I ever knew about
the devil was “hearsay”—bits and pieces I picked up while reading other
material (such as Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, which contains
a terrifying Jesuit sermon on the wages of sin). All I knew was the outline of
the story codified by Milton: Satan, the highest angel in God's heavenly
hierarchy, desired to become like the Most High, and fostered a rebellion in
heaven. He was defeated, and cast, unrepentant, into Hell, where he rules
eternally over the spirits of the sinful dead. I had no real idea what this
story meant, although it was obvious to me that these characters and events
could have never “really” existed.

I learned later that the association made between the serpent in Eden and the
devil was essentially speculative. Indeed, certain Gnostics had even posited
that the deity who brought Adam and Eve to the light of self-consciousness was
a higher spirit than the unconscious demiurge who had created everything in the
beginning. This idea was predicated upon Gnostic “recognition” that a fall from
paradise—from a previous “plane of stability”—often comprised the necessary
precondition for movement to a “higher place.” Traditional medieval Christians
developed a similar idea. For them, Original Sin was a “fortunate error” that
made necessary the incarnation of Christ. This meant that the Christian fall,
although tragic in and of itself, could be regarded as positively beneficial,
since it brought about the redemptive incarnation of God (which was the most
stupendous event in history, from the Christian perspective). Adoption of this
broader viewpoint allowed even the Edenic serpent, who propelled mankind into
chaos, to be interpreted as a “tool of God”—as a tool of the beneficial God who
is endlessly working to bring about the perfection of the world, despite the
troublesome existence of free choice and demonic temptation. (The name Lucifer
means “bringer of light,” after all.) I also knew, more or less
“unconsciously,” that the devil has been long associated with the power and
arrogance of rational thought (in Goethe's Faust, for example). This
association has enabled the dogmatic forces of the church to adopt an
antiscientific stance, frequently—science□rationality□devil—and to justify
unfortunate church opposition to emergent truth. However, a mythological idea
is not invalidated as an idea in consequence of its misapplication. The
capacity for rational thought is a dangerous force, without doubt, because it
is a powerful force—and the conditions under which thinking plays a purely
destructive role are still not well comprehended.

This plethora of vaguely related ideas and stories kept entering and
re-entering my mind, most frequently in combination with remembrance of a
telling symbolic historic act: the transformation of the Notre Dame Cathedral
into the “Temple of Reason,” in the midst of the terrors of the French
Revolution. It is no easy matter to come to a clear understanding of such
notions, to grasp their nature logically or emotionally, or even to determine
how they could possibly be related. After all, we tend to regard the
development of “clear understanding” as equivalent to the construction of a
“proper set” and assume that the reality of a thing can be clearly defined.
Ideas about evil, however, do not form a “proper set.” They form a “natural
category,” containing diverse material— just like ideas about the “known” or
the “unknown.” To complicate things further, evil, like good, is not something
static (although it may align itself with all that is stubbornly static). It is
rather a dynamic process, a spirit that partakes of the motivational or
affective states of pride, resentment, jealousy and hatred but cannot be
identified unerringly with the presence of any or all. The morality of an
aggressive act, for example, depends on the nature of the context in which it
is manifested, just as the meaning of a given word is defined by the sentence,
the paragraph—even the book or culture—in which it appears. Evil is a living
complex. Its nature can be most clearly comprehended through examination of the
“personality” it has “adopted” in mythology, literature and fantasy, elaborated
in the lengthy course of historical development. This personality consists of
those “meta”-attributes of evil that have remained stable over time despite
dramatic shifts in the particulars of human existence and human morality.

The image of the devil is the form that the idea of evil has taken, for better
or worse, at least in the West. We have not yet developed an explicit model of
evil that would allow us to forget, transcend or otherwise dispense with this
mythological representation. We rationalize our lack of such understanding by
presuming that the very notion of evil is archaic. This is a truly ridiculous
presumption, in this century of indescribable horror. In our ignorance and
complacency, we deride ancient stories about the nature of evil, equating them
half-consciously with childish things best put away. This is an exceedingly
arrogant position. There is no evidence whatsoever that we understand the
nature of evil any better than our forebears, despite our psychology, even
though our expanded technological power has made us much more dangerous when we
are possessed. Our ancestors were at least constantly concerned with the
problem of evil. Acceptance of the harsh Christian dogma of Original Sin, for
example (despite its pessimism and apparent inequity) at least meant
recognition of evil; such dogma at least promoted some consideration of the
tendency toward evil as an intrinsic, heritable aspect of human nature. From
the perspective informed by belief in Original Sin, individual actions and
motivations must always be carefully scrutinized and considered, even when
apparently benevolent, lest the ever-present adversarial tendencies
“accidentally” gain the upper hand. The dogma of Original Sin forces every
individual to regard himself as the (potential) immediate source of evil and to
locate the terrible underworld of mythology and its denizens in intrapsychic
space. It is no wonder that this idea has become unpopular: nonetheless, evil
exists somewhere. It remains difficult not to see hypocrisy in the souls of
those who wish to localize it somewhere else.

Once I understood these things in a provisional sort of way, the ancient ideas
began to sort themselves out. I learned from Eliade how to make sense out of
the notion of a “heavenly hierarchy.” The monotheism of Judaism and
Christianity has its roots in older, more polytheistic thinking. The many gods
of archaic conceptualization became the single ruler of more modern religious
thinking as a consequence of spiritual competition—so to speak. This
competition is the battle of ideas with implication for action—fought in
abstraction, image and in the course of genuine earthly combat— portrayed in
mythology as spiritual war, played out in heaven (which is the place where
transpersonal ideas exist). The deity who came to prevail over all is One God,
with a complex set of attributes, “surrounded” by a panoply of angels and
divine “echoes” of previous gods (who represent those transpersonal and eternal
psychological processes rendered subordinate in the course of the spiritual
phylogenesis of man).

Christian mythology portrays Satan as the “highest angel” in God's “heavenly
kingdom.” This fact renders his association with reason more comprehensible.
Reason may well be considered the “highest angel”—which is to say, the most
developed and remarkable psychological or spiritual faculty, characteristic of
all men (and therefore, something transpersonal and eternal). Figure 57: The
Devil as Aerial Spirit and Ungodly Intellect portrays Eugene Delacroix's
imagistic interpretation, an illustration for Part One of Faust.465 Reason, the
most exceptional of spirits, suffers from the greatest of temptations: reason's
own capacity for self-recognition and self-admiration means endless capacity
for pride, which is the act of presuming omniscience. It is reason's remarkable
ability and its own recognition of that ability that leads it to believe it
possesses absolute knowledge and can therefore replace, or do without, God:

He trusted to have equalled the Most High, If he opposed, and with ambitious
aim Against the throne and monarchy of God, Raised impious war in Heaven.466



It is reason's belief in its own omniscience—manifest in procedure and image,
if not in word—that “unconsciously” underlies totalitarianism in its many
destructive guises. Frye notes:

Figure 57: The Devil as Aerial Spirit and Ungodly Intellect





A demonic fall, as Milton presents it, involves defiance of and rivalry with
God rather than simple disobedience, and hence the demonic society is a
sustained and systematic parody of the divine one, associated with devils or
fallen angels because it seems far beyond normal human capacities in its
powers. We read of ascending and descending angels on Jacob's and Plato's
ladders, and similarly there seem to be demonic reinforcements in heathen life
that account for the almost superhuman grandeur of the heathen empires,
especially just before they fall.

Two particularly notable passages in the Old Testament prophets linked to this
theme are the denunciation of Babylon in Isaiah 14 and of Tyre in Ezekiel 28.
Babylon is associated with Lucifer the morning star, who said to himself: “I
will be like the Most High”; Tyre is identified with a “Covering Cherub,” a
splendid creature living in the garden of Eden “till the day that iniquity was
found in thee.” In the New Testament (Luke 10:18) Jesus speaks of Satan as
falling from heaven, hence Satan's traditional identification with Isaiah's
Lucifer and his growth in legend into the great adversary of God, once the
prince of the angels, and, before being displaced, the firstborn son of God.
The superhuman demonic force behind the heathen kingdoms is called in
Christianity the Antichrist, the earthly ruler demanding divine honors.467



It is not that easy to understand why the act of presuming omniscience is
reasonably construed as precisely opposite to the act of creative exploration
(as the adversary is opposite to the hero). What “knowing everything” means,
however—at least in practice—is that the unknown no longer exists, and that
further exploration has therefore been rendered superfluous (even treacherous).
This means that absolute identification with the “known” necessarily comes to
replace all opportunity for identification with the process that comes to know.
The presumption of absolute knowledge, which is the cardinal sin of the
rational spirit, is therefore prima facie equivalent to rejection of the
hero—to rejection of Christ, of the Word of God, of the (divine) process that
mediates between order and chaos. The arrogance of the totalitarian stance is
ineradicably opposed to the “humility” of creative exploration. [Humility—it is
only constant admission of error and capacity for error (admission of “sinful
and ignorant nature”) that allows for recognition of the unknown, and then for
update of knowledge and adaptation in behavior. Such humility is, somewhat
paradoxically, courageous—as admission of error and possibility for error
constitutes the necessary precondition for confrontation with the unknown. This
makes genuine cowardice the “underground” motivation for the totalitarian
presumption: the true authoritarian wants everything unpredictable to vanish.
The authoritarian protects himself from knowledge of this cowardice by a show
of patriotic advocacy, often at apparent cost to himself.]

In the fifth book of Paradise Lost, which Milton constructed from Biblical and
mythological allusions, Lucifer is “passed over” by God in honor of the “second
son,” Christ.468 This “shift in the dominance hierarchy of heaven” seems to me
to indicate that reason (which, in consequence of its self-recognition as the
“highest angel” of God, believes itself capable of single-handedly engendering
redemption) must remain subordinate to the processes of the exploratory hero.
Reason can serve health only when it plays a secondary role. The option of
ruling in hell, rather than serving in heaven, nonetheless appears as an
attractive alternative to the rational mind, under a wide variety of
circumstances.

The devil is the spirit who eternally states, “all that I know is all that
there is to be known”; the spirit who falls in love with his own beautiful
productions and, in consequence, can no longer see beyond them. The devil is
the desire to be right, above all, to be right once and for all and finally,
rather than to constantly admit to insufficiency and ignorance, and to
therefore partake in the process of creation itself. The devil is the spirit
which endlessly denies, because it is afraid, in the final analysis, afraid and
weak.

It is lack of discrimination between the existence of the adversary as process
with the existence of anomaly as constituent element of experience that has led
to some of the worst excesses of Christianity (and not just Christianity). It
has constantly been the case that “proper-thinking” people confuse the
existence of threats to their security and moral integrity with evil. This
means that the proper-thinking confuse the being of the genius and the
stranger, who offer up experience that exists in contrast with established
belief, with the process of rejection of such experience. This lack of
discrimination is both comprehensible and motivated: comprehensible, because
the strange/stranger/strange idea/revolutionary hero upsets the applecart and
produces affective dysregulation (which is the state most devoutly desired by
the devil); motivated, because categorizing anomaly with evil allows for its
“justified” repression. The heroic act of updating current morality,
however—through the promotion of uncomfortable contact with the unknown—creates
chaos only in the service of higher order. To repress that process and cling
“patriotically” to tradition is to ensure that tradition will collapse
precipitously—and far more dangerously—at some point in the not-too-distant
future.

The fact of my lascivious or aggressive fantasy—to take a specific example of
things generally regarded in a dim light—is not evil, if I am a devout
Christian: evil is the act of denying that such fantasy exists (or, perhaps,
the act of realizing that fantasy, without consideration of its proper place).
The fantasy itself merely constitutes information (unacceptable information, to
be sure, from the current, merely provisional standpoint: but information with
the capacity to transform, if admitted). The existence of the Muslim, and the
Muslim viewpoint, likewise is not evil, if I am a devout Christian. Evil is
instead my presumption of personal omniscience—my certainty that I understand
my Christian belief well enough to presume its necessary opposition to the
stranger and his ideas; my certainty that identification with a static
“comprehended” moral structure is sufficient to guarantee my integrity—and my
consequent ignorant and self-righteous persecution of the Muslim. The devil is
not the uncomfortable fact but the act of shrinking from that fact. The
weaknesses, stupidities, laxities and ignorances that ineradicably constitute
the individual are not evil in and of themselves. These “insufficiencies” are a
necessary consequence of the limitations that make experience possible. It is
the act of denying that stupidity exists, once it has manifested itself, that
is evil, because stupidity cannot then be overcome. Such denial brings
spiritual progress to a halt. Consciousness of ignorance and cupidity manifests
itself in shame, anxiety and pain—in the guise of the visitor whose arrival is
most feared—and such consciousness may consequently come to be considered the
embodiment of evil itself. But it is the bearer of bad news who brings us
closer to the light, if the significance of the news is allowed to manifest
itself.

Elaine Pagels has recently written a book, The Origin of Satan,469 in which she
describes how the idea of the devil as the eternal enemy of Christ enabled
those who profess Christianity to persecute those who do not. The
presuppositions of the persecutor are, for example: “the devil is the enemy,
the Jew is not a Christian—the Jew is an enemy, the Jew is the devil.” Pagels
presents the not unreasonable and justifiably popular hypothesis that the
invention of Satan was motivated by desire to transform the act of persecuting
others into a moral virtue. It appears, however, that the historical
“developmental path” of the “idea of the adversary” is somewhat more complex.
Transpersonal notions of the breadth of the “image of the Devil” cannot emerge
as a consequence of conscious motivation, because their development requires
many centuries of transgenerational work (which cannot be easily “organized”).
The image of the devil, although endlessly applied to rationalize the
subjugation of others (as all great ideas can be subverted) emerged as a
consequence of endless geniune attempts to encapsulate the “personality” of
evil. The logic that associates the other with the devil works only for those
who think that religion means belief—that is, identification with a set of
static and often unreasonable “facts”—and not action, meta-imitation, or the
incarnation of the creative process in behavior. The existence of the anomalous
fact, properly considered— the uncomfortable fact, embodied in the stranger or
rendered abstract in the form of differing philosophy—is a call to religious
action, and not an evil.

It has taken mankind thousands of years of work to develop dawning awareness of
the nature of evil—to produce a detailed dramatic representation of the process
that makes up the core of human maladaptation and voluntarily produced misery.
It seems premature to throw away the fruit of that labor or to presume that it
is something other than what it appears before we understand what it signifies.
Consciousness of evil emerged first as ritual enactment, then as dynamic image,
expressed in myth. This representation covers a broad spatial and temporal
territory, whose examination helps flesh out understanding of the personality
of the adversary. The most thoroughly developed archaic personification of evil
can perhaps be found in the ideas of Zoroastrianism, which flourished in
relatively explicit form from 1000-600 B.C. (and which undoubtedly depended for
its form on much more ancient, less explicit “ideas”). The Zoroastrians
developed a number of ideas which were later incorporated into Christianity,
including “the myth of the savior; the elaboration of an optimistic
eschatology, proclaiming the final triumph of Good and universal salvation;
[and] the doctrine of the resurrection of bodies.”470

Zarathustra, the mythic founder of Zoroastrianism, was a follower of Ahura
Mazdā (the central deity in this essentially monotheistic religion). Ahura
(“sky”) Mazdā was surrounded by a pantheon of divine entities—the Amesha
Spentas, analogous to angels— who were very evidently psychological in their
nature (at least from the modern perspective).471 These “spirits” include Asha
(justice), Vohu Manah (good thought), ārmaiti (devotion), Xshathra (power),
Haurvatāt (integrity) and Ameretāt (immortality). Ahura Mazdā was also the
father of twin “brothers,” spirits—Spenta Mainyu (the beneficient spirit) and
Angra Mainyu (the destroying spirit). Eliade states:

In the beginning, it is stated in a famous gāthā (Yasna 30, authored by
Zarathustra), these two spirits chose, one of them good and life, the other
evil and death. Spenta Mainyu declares, at the “beginning of existence,” to the
Destroying Spirit: “Neither our thoughts nor our doctrines, nor our mental
powers; neither our choices, nor our words, nor our acts; neither our
consciences nor our souls are in agreement.” This shows that the two
spirits—the one holy, the other wicked—differ rather by choice than by nature.

Zarathustra's theology is not dualistic in the strict sense of the term, since
Ahura Mazdā is not confronted by an anti-God; in the beginning, the opposition
breaks out between the two Spirits. On the other hand, the unity between Ahura
Mazdā and the Holy [Good] Spirit is several times implied (see Yasna 43.3,
etc.). In short, Good and Evil, the holy one and the destroying demon, proceed
from Ahura Mazdā; but since Angra Mainyu freely chose his mode of being and his
malificient vocation, the Wise Lord cannot be considered responsible for the
appearance of Evil. On the other hand, Ahura Mazdā, in his omniscience, knew
from the beginning what choice the Destroying Spirit would make and
nevertheless did not prevent it; this may mean either that God transcends all
kinds of contradictions or that the existence of evil constitutes the
preliminary condition for human freedom.472



The mythic “hostile brothers”—Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu, Osiris and Seth,
Gilgamesh and Enkidu, Cain and Abel, Christ and Satan—are representative of two
eternal individual tendencies, twin “sons of god,” heroic and adversarial. The
former tendency, the archetypal savior, is the everlasting spirit of creation
and transformation, characterized eternally by the capacity to admit to the
unknown and, therefore, to progress toward “the kingdom of heaven.” The eternal
adversary, by contrast, is incarnation in practice, imagination and philosophy
of the spirit of denial, eternal rejection of the “redeeming unknown,” and the
adoption of rigid self-identification. Myths of the “hostile brothers”—like
those of the Zoroastrians—tend to emphasize the role of free choice in
determination of essential mode of being. Christ, for example (and Gautama
Buddha) are tempted constantly and potently toward evil, but choose to reject
it. Angra Mainyu and Satan accept evil, by contrast, and revel in it (despite
evidence that it produces their own suffering). The choice of these spirits
cannot be reduced to some more essential aspect, such as the particular
conditions of existence (which are identical, anyway, for both “beings”) or the
vagaries of intrinsic nature. It is voluntary willingness to do what is known
to be wrong, despite the capacity to understand and avoid such action, that
most particularly characterizes evil—the evil of spirit and man. So Milton's
God can comment, on the degeneration of Satan and mankind:

So will fall

Hee and his faithless progeny: whose fault?

Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee

All he could have; I made him just and right,

sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.473



Refusal of the good is, I think, most effectively and frequently justified by
reference to the terrible affective consequences of (self)consciousness. This
means that comprehension of the vulnerability and mortality of man, and the
suffering associated with that vulnerability—apprehension of the ultimate
cruelty and pointlessness of life— may be used as rationale for evil. Life is
terrible, and appears, at some moments, ultimately terrible: unfair,
irrational, painful and meaningless. Interpreted in such a light, existence
itself may well appear as something reasonably eradicated. Goethe's
Mephistopheles, “prince of lies,” defines his philosophy, in consequence, in
the following terms (in Part One of Faust):

The spirit I, that endlessly denies.

And rightly, too; for all that comes to birth

Is fit for overthrow, as nothing worth;

Wherefore the world were better sterilized;

Thus all that's here as Evil recognized

Is gain to me, and downfall, ruin, sin

The very element I prosper in.474



He repeats this credo, in slightly elaborated form, in Part Two:

Gone, to sheer Nothing, past with null made one!

What matters our creative endless toil,

When, at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil?

“It is by-gone”—How shall this riddle run?

As good as if things never had begun,

Yet circle back, existence to possess:

I'd rather have Eternal Emptiness.475



Spiritual reality plays itself out endlessly in profane reality (as man remains
eternally subject to the “dictates of the gods”). Individual persons therefore
“unconsciously” embody mythological themes. Such embodiment becomes
particularly evident in the case of great individuals, where the play of
“divine forces” becomes virtually tangible. We analyzed sections of Leo
Tolstoy's autobiography, previously476—using his self-reported personal
experience as universal exemplar for the catastrophic primary affective
consequences of revolutionary anomaly. Tolstoy's secondary ideological response
to such anomaly is equally archetypal. The “news” from Western Europe—the
revelation of the “death of God”—cascaded through the great author's implicit
and explicit culturally determined beliefs and action schemas, propelling him
headlong, over a very lengthy period of time, into emotional turmoil and
existential chaos. Identification with the spirit of denial lurked as a
profound temptation in the midst ofthat chaos.

Tolstoy begins the relevant section of his confession with an allegory, derived
“from a tale of the East.” A traveler, chased by a wild beast, jumps down an
old well. He grabs the branch of a vine that happens to be growing there, and
clings to it. At the bottom of the well lurks an ancient dragon, mouth gaping.
Above the well is the terrible beast—so there is no turning back. The
traveler's arms grow weak, clinging to the vine, but he still holds on. Then he
sees two mice—one black, one white—gnawing at either side of the very branch
that supports him. Soon they will chew their way through, and send him
plummeting into the dragon's gullet. The traveler sees some drops of honey, on
the leaves of the vine. He stretches out his tongue, tastes the honey, and is
comforted. For Tolstoy, however, the pleasures of life had lost their analgesic
sweetness:

I could not be deceived. All is vanity. Happy is he who has never been born;
death is better than life; we must rid ourselves of life.

Having failed to find an explanation in knowledge, I began to look for it in
life, hoping to find it in the people around me. And so I began to observe
people like myself to see how they lived and to determine what sort of relation
they had with the question that had led me to despair.

And this is what I found among people whose circumstances were precisely the
same as mine with respect to education and way of life.

I found that for the people of my class there were four means of escaping the
terrible situation in which we all find ourselves.

The first means of escape is that of ignorance. It consists of failing to
realize and to understand that life is evil and meaningless. For the most part,
people in this category are women, or they are very young or very stupid men;
they still have not understood the problem of life that presented itself to
Schopenhauer, Solomon, and the Buddha. They see neither the dragon that awaits
them nor the mice gnawing away at the branch they cling to; they simply lick
the drops of honey. But they lick these drops of honey only for the time being;
something will turn their attention toward the dragon and the mice, and there
will be an end to their licking. There was nothing for me to learn from them,
since we cannot cease to know what we know.

The second escape is that of epicureanism. Fully aware of the hopelessness of
life, it consists of enjoying for the present the blessings that we do have
without looking at the dragon or the mice; it lies in licking the honey as best
we can, especially in those places where there is the most honey on the bush.
Solomon describes this escape in the following manner:

“And I commended mirth, for there is nothing better for man under the sun than
to eat, drink, and be merry; this will be his mainstay in his toil through the
days of his life that God has given him under the sun.

So go and eat your bread with joy and drink your wine in the gladness of your
heart…. Enjoy life with a woman you love through all the days of your life of
vanity, through all your vain days; for this is your fate in life and in the
labors by which you toil under the sun…. Do whatever you can do by the strength
of your hand, for there is no work in the grave where you are going, no
reflection, no knowledge, no wisdom.”

Most people of our class pursue this second means of escape. The situation in
which they find themselves is such that it affords them more of the good things
in life than the bad; their moral stupidity enables them to forget that all the
advantages of their position are accidental, that not everyone can have a
thousand women and palaces, as Solomon did; they forget that for every man with
a thousand wives there are a thousand men without wives, that for every palace
there are a thousand men who built it by the sweat of their brows, and that the
same chance that has made them a Solomon today might well make them Solomon's
slave tomorrow. The dullness of the imagination of these people enables them to
forget what left the Buddha with no peace: the inevitability of sickness, old
age, and death, which if not today then tomorrow will destroy all these
pleasures. The fact that some of these people maintain that their dullness of
thought and imagination is positive philosophy does not, in my opinion,
distinguish them from those who lick the honey without seeing the problem. I
could not imitate these people, since I did not lack imagination and could not
pretend that I did. Like every man who truly lives, I could not turn my eyes
away from the mice and the dragon once I had seen them.

The third means of escape is through strength and energy. It consists of
destroying life once one has realized that life is evil and meaningless. Only
unusually strong and logically consistent people act in this manner. Having
realized all the stupidity of the joke that is being played on us and seeing
that the blessings of the dead are greater than those of the living and that it
is better not to exist, they act and put an end to this stupid joke; and they
use any means of doing it: a rope around the neck, water, a knife in the heart,
a train. There are more and more people of our class who are acting in this
way. For the most part, the people who perform these acts are in the very prime
of life, when the strength of the soul is at its peak and when the habits that
undermine human reason have not yet taken over. I saw that this was the most
worthy means of escape, and I wanted to take it.

The fourth means of escape is that of weakness. It consists of continuing to
drag out a life that is evil and meaningless, knowing beforehand that nothing
can come of it. The people in this category know that death is better than
life, but they do not have the strength to act rationally and quickly put an
end to the delusion by killing themselves; instead they seem to be waiting for
something to happen. This is the escape of weakness, for if I know what is
better and have it within my reach, then why not surrender myself to it? I
myself belonged in this category.

Thus the people of my class save themselves from a terrible contradiction in
these four ways. No matter how much I strained my intellectual faculties, I
could see no escape other than these four.477



Tolstoy's “intellectual faculties”—his rationality—could see no way out of the
dilemma posed by his incorporation of an indigestible idea. Furthermore, logic
clearly dictated that existence characterized only by inevitable and pointless
suffering should be brought to an abrupt end, as an “evil joke.” It was
Tolstoy's clear apprehension of the endless conflict between the individual and
the conditions of existence that destroyed his ability to work and undermined
his desire to live. He was unable to see (at least at that point in his
journey) that man was fashioned to confront chaos constantly—to eternally work
toward transforming it into real being—rather than to master it finally, once
and for all (and to therefore render everything intolerably static!).

The fact of mortal vulnerability—that defining characteristic of the
individual, and the “reason” for his emergent disgust with life—may be rendered
even more “unjust” and “intolerable” by the specific manifestations of such
vulnerability. Some are poorer than others, some weaker, some unsightlier—all
less able, in some regard (and some apparently less able in all regards).
Recognition of the seemingly arbitrary distribution of skill and advantage adds
additional rationally “justifiable” grounds for the development of a philosophy
based on resentment and antipathy—sometimes, “on behalf” of an entire class,
other times, sheerly for the purposes of a specific individual. Under such
circumstances, the desire for revenge on life itself may become paramount above
all else, particularly for the “unfairly oppressed.” Shakespeare's crippled
Richard the Third speaks for all revolutionaries, all rebels, so motivated:

Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,

Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it.

I have no brother, I am like no brother:

And this word “love” which greybeards call divine,

Be resident in men like one another

And not in me: I am myself alone.478



Evil is voluntary rejection of the process that makes life tolerable, justified
by observation of life's terrible difficulty. This rejection is presumptious,
premature, because it is based on acceptance of a provisional judgment as
final: “everything is insufficient, and is therefore without worth, and nothing
whatsoever can be done to rectify the situation.” Judgment of this sort
precludes all hope of cure. Lack of belief in hope and meaning (which appear
more than willing to vanish, in the face of rationale critique) seldom means
commensurate “lack of belief in anxiety and despair” (even though recognition
of the pointlessness of everything should also undermine ones faith in
suffering). Suffering cannot be disbelieved away, however: rejection of the
process that constantly renews the positive aspect of the “constituent elements
of experience” merely ensures that their negative counterparts gain the upper
hand. Such additional torture— added to that already considered sufficient to
bring about hatred for life—is sure to produce a character motivated to perform
acts worse than mere suicide. The development of the adversary therefore
follows a predictable path, from pride (“Pride and worse Ambition threw me
down”479), through envy, to revenge480—to the ultimate construction of a
character possessed by infinite hatred and envy:

To do aught good never will be our task,

But ever to do ill our sole delight,

As being contrary to his high will

Whom we resist. If then his Providence

Out of our evil seeks to bring forth good,

Our labor must be to pervert that end,

And out of good still to find means of evil.481



Tolstoy's nihilism—disgust with the individual and human society, combined with
the desire for the eradication of existence—is one logical “evil” consequence
of heightened self-consciousness. It is not, however, the only consequence, and
may not even be the most subtle. Far more efficient—far more hidden from the
perpetrator himself, and from his closest observers—is heightened
identification with tradition and custom. This is envelopment in the guise of
patriotism, to facilitate the turning of state power toward destruction.
Nietzsche described such “loyalty” in the following manner:

Definition of morality: Morality—the idiosyncrasy of decadents, with the
ulterior motive of revenging oneself against life—successfully. I attach value
to this definition.482



This description of initial motivated decision and consequent dissolution seems
to me to characterize the processes and bifurcated final state of moral (and,
therefore, psychological) degeneration more accurately and potently than any
purely “scientific” theory of psychopathology generated to date. Of course, we
are at present unable to take our rationally reduced selves seriously enough to
presume a relationship between evil as a “cosmic force” and our petty
transgressions and self-betrayals. We believe that in reducing the scope and
importance of our errors, we are properly humble; in truth, we are merely
unwilling to bear the weight of our true responsibility.





The Adversary in Action: Voluntary Degradation of the Map of Meaning


Who alone has reason to lie himself out of actuality?

He who suffers from it.483



Tragic encounter with the forces of the unknown is inevitable, in the course of
normal development, given continued expansion of conscious awareness. Even
socialized identification with the cultural canon cannot provide final
protection. Unshielded personal contact with tragedy is inextricably linked
with emergence of self-consciousness, which has as its mythic consequence (its
virtual equivalent) heightened awareness of human limitation. This awareness is
manifested in shame, and has been expressed mythologically as shame of
nakedness, which is knowledge of essential vulnerability and weakness before
the world.

The intrinsic nature of human experience ensures that potent motivation for
deceitful adaptation is always present. It is the encounter with what is truly
horrible and terrifying, after all, that inspires fear and engenders avoidance.
The human tendency to flee into false havens of security can therefore be
viewed with sympathy and understanding. Maturation is a frightening process.
Transformation from the paradisal matriarchal world of childhood to the fallen
masculine, social world is fraught with peril. The same might be said about the
dangers of post-apprenticeship individuality. It is not easy to become an
adolescent after being a child. It might be said that this transition is in
itself a heroic act. It therefore happens, upon occasion, that those who have
abandoned heroism as a style of adaptation do not take even this first step.
The relative advantages that accompany increased freedom may seem frightening
and of dubious value, given the comparative responsibility and lack of security
that are part and parcel of maturity.

As maturation takes place, the “environment” transforms. As the developing
individual masters his powers, his behavioral capacity expands. He can do more
things and, in consequence, experience more things. The ability to bring
heretofore unknown and, therefore, frightening phenomena into being constantly
increases, and the boundaries of the experiential domain of the individual
eventually extend beyond the area shielded by the parents. The capability to
endlessly further apprehension is central to the adaptive capacity of the
individual; this capability, however, comes at an immense price, which is
knowledge of finitude and death. Potent motivation therefore exists to resist
such development, when it duly emerges; to fight desperately for maintenance of
childhood ignorance, or to hide in the commands of others. Individuality—which
is the ability to establish a realm of experience that is unique to the self;
the capacity for the creation of purely subjective experience—also means
acceptance of vulnerability and mortality. The creative capacity is divine
Logos, which in the course of its development necessitates recognition of the
inevitability of failure and death. That is in part the meaning of the symbol
of the Christian crucifixion, which paradoxically melds mortality with
divinity; which portrays the “mortal god,” infinitely creative, responsible and
vulnerable.

Individual existence means limited existence—limited in space and time. The
existence of the limits makes experience possible; the fact of them makes
experience unbearable. We have been granted the capacity for constant
transcendence, as an antidote, but frequently reject that capacity, because
using it means voluntarily exposing ourselves to the unknown. We run away
because we are afraid of the unknown, at bottom; such fear also makes us cling
to our protective social identities, which shield us from what we do not
understand. So, while running away, we necessarily become slave to convention
and habit, and deny the troublesome best within our selves. Why run away? It is
fear—fear of the unknown, and its twin, fear of rejection by the protective
social world, which leads to pathological subjugation of unique individual
personality, to rejection of the totality of personal being (which, when
manifested, has truly redemptive capability). The Great Father hates innovation
and will kill to prevent it; the Great Mother, source of all new knowledge, has
a face that paralyzes when encountered. How can we not run away, when
confronted by such powers? But running away means that everything worthwhile
ages, then dies.

When a child is born, he is protected from the vagaries of existence by the
benevolence of circumstance, through maternal presence; the infant is prepared,
a priori, instinctively, to respond to such protection, and to form a
relationship—a bond with the mother. The helpless baby is at the mother's
mercy, but is sheltered, as well, from the terrible world. Culture intercedes,
in the form of proscriptions on behavior, when mortality nonetheless threatens,
but adherence to such requirements means increased responsibility, separation
from the good mother, and sacrifice of the primary dependent relationship.
Culture molds the maturing personality, offering knowledge, but at the same
time limitation, as the social world mangles individuality, interest and
meaning.

Spirit is offered up to the group to maintain the group's benevolent nature,
ensuring its continued protection and its grant of knowledge derived from
history. It is necessary to identify with the group, in the course of normal
development—that identification fosters maturity, and separation from blind
maternal solicitude—but ultimately the group is tyrannical, and demands
obedience at the cost of unique being. This is not to say, naively, that the
group is intrinsically evil, that the root of human suffering is buried in the
ground of the social world. Society is more purely expansion of power, which
may be directed according to individual choice. The past contains within it the
behavioral wisdom of generations, established in pain and fear, and offers the
possibility of immense extension of individual power and ability. Culture and
civilization offers each individual the opportunity to stand on the shoulders
of giants. Adoption of group identity should constitute apprenticeship, not
capitulation; should constitute a developmental stage in disciplined
maturation, requiring temporary subjugation and immolation of immature
individuality, prior to its later re-emergence, in controllable form, under
voluntary direction.

Group membership, social being, represents a necessary advance over childish
dependence, but the spirit of the group requires its pound of flesh. Absolute
identification with the group means rejection of individual difference: means
rejection of “deviation,” even “weakness,” from the group viewpoint; means
repression of individuality, sacrifice of the mythic fool; means abandonment of
the simple and insufficient “younger brother.” The group, of course, merely
feels that it is doing its duty by insisting upon such sacrifice; it believes,
with sufficient justification, that it is merely protecting its structure.
However, the group is not capable of making final judgments regarding what is
necessary—what is good and what is evil—because it is incomplete by its very
nature: it is a static structure, composed of the past. Individual difference,
even weakness— anathema to the absolutist—is strength, from a more inclusive
viewpoint; is that force capable of transcending inevitable group limitation
and extending the reach of all.

Absolutists, rejecting the necessity of all change, necessarily deny to
themselves and others even their own strength, because true heroism, regardless
of its source, has the capacity to upset the status quo. Through such denial
the absolutist hopes to find protection from his individual vulnerability. In
truth, however, he has suppressed and pathologized the sole element within
himself that could actually provide such protection; he has undermined his
ability to utilize the sole process capable of actually providing security and
freedom:

A traveler who had seen many countries and peoples and several continents was
asked what human traits he had found everywhere; and he answered: men are
inclined to laziness. Some will feel that he might have said with greater
justice: they are all timorous. They hide behind customs and opinions. At
bottom, every human being knows very well that he is in this world just once,
as something unique, and that no accident, however strange, will throw together
a second time into a unity such a curious and diffuse plurality: he knows it,
but hides it like a bad conscience—why? From fear of his neighbor who insists
on convention and veils himself with it.

But what is it that compels the individual human being to fear his neighbor, to
think and act herd-fashion, and not to be glad of himself? A sense of shame,
perhaps, in a few rare cases. In the vast majority it is the desire for
comfort, inertia—in short, that inclination to laziness of which the traveler
spoke. He is right: men are even lazier than they are timorous, and what they
fear most is the troubles with which any unconditional honesty and nudity would
burden them.

Only artists hate this slovenly life in borrowed manners and loosely fitting
opinions and unveil the secret, everybody's bad conscience, the principle that
every human being is a unique wonder; they dare to show us the human being as
he is, down to the last muscle, himself and himself alone—even more, that in
this rigorous consistency of his uniqueness he is beautiful and worth
contemplating, as novel and incredible as every work of nature, and by no means
dull.

When a great thinker despises men, it is their laziness that he despises: for
it is on account of this that they have the appearance of factory products and
seem indifferent and unworthy of companionship or instruction. The human being
who does not wish to belong to the mass must merely cease being comfortable
with himself; let him follow his conscience, which shouts at him: “Be yourself!
What you are at present doing, opining, and desiring, that is not really
you.”484



Denial of unique individuality turns the wise traditions of the past into the
blind ruts of the present. Application of the letter of the law when the spirit
of the law is necessary makes a mockery of culture. Following in the footsteps
of others seems safe, and requires no thought—but it is useless to follow a
well-trodden trail when the terrain itself has changed. The individual who
fails to modify his habits and presumptions as a consequence of change is
deluding himself—is denying the world—is trying to replace reality itself with
his own feeble wish. By pretending things are other than they are, he
undermines his own stability, destabilizes his future, and transforms the past
from shelter to prison.

The individual embodiment of collective past wisdom is turned into the
personification of inflexible stupidity by means of the lie. The lie is
straightforward, voluntary rejection of what is currently known to be true.
Nobody knows what is finally true, by definition, but honest people make the
best possible use of their experience. The moral theories of the truthful,
however incomplete from some hypothetical transcendent perspective, account for
what they have seen and for who they are, insofar as that has been determined
in the course of diligent effort. It is not necessary to define truth, to have
seen and heard everything—that would make truth itself something impossible. It
is necessary only to have represented and adapted to what has been seen and
heard—to have represented and adapted to those phenomena characterizing the
natural and social worlds, as encountered, and the self, as manifested. This is
to say, merely, that the truth of children and adults differs, because their
experience—their reality—differs. The truthful child does not think like an
adult: he thinks like a child, with his eyes open. The adult, however, who
still uses the morality of the child—despite his adult capacities—he is lying,
and he knows it.

The lie is willful adherence to a previously functional schema of action and
interpretation—a moral paradigm—despite new experience that cannot be
comprehended in terms of that schema; despite new desire, which cannot find
fulfillment within that framework. The lie is willful rejection of information
apprehended as anomalous on terms defined and valued by the individual doing
the rejecting. That is to say: the liar chooses his own game, sets his own
rules and then cheats. This cheating is failure to grow, to mature; it is
rejection of the process of consciousness itself.

The lie is therefore not so much a sin of commission, in most cases, as a sin
of omission (although it may take the former condition as well). The lie is a
matter of voluntary failure to explore and to update. The appearance of an
anomalous occurrence in the ongoing stream of experience indicates only that
the present goal-directed schema within which behavior is being undertaken and
evaluated is characterized by the presence of a flaw. The place of the flaw,
the reasons for its existence, the meaning of the flaw (its potential for
altering interpretation and behavior)—all that is hypothetical, at the first
stage of anomaly emergence and analysis. The unknown has to be “mined” for
precise significance, before it can be said to have been experienced, let alone
comprehended; has to be transformed, laboriously, from pure affect into
revision of presumption and action (into “psyche” or “personality”). “Not
doing” is therefore the simplest and most common lie: the individual can just
“not act,” “not investigate,” and the pitfalls of error will remain unmanifest,
at least temporarily. This rejection of the process of creative exploration
means lack of effortful update of procedural and declarative memory, adaptation
to the present as if it still were the past, refusal to think. The
rectification of error is, after all, not inevitable; it is neither effortless
nor automatic. Mediation of order and chaos requires courage and work.

Adoption of identity with the heroes of the past is necessary, but rife with
pathological potential. It becomes certain corruption when the identified
individual is a liar, who has voluntarily rendered himself incapable of
personal heroism. Adoption of group identity and position means access to the
power embodied in the past—means access to the collective strength and
technical ability of the culture. This power is terribly dangerous in cowardly
and deceitful hands. The liar cannot see any value in weakness or deviance in
himself or others—only the potential for chaos—and he cannot see any value in
chaos or uncertainty. He has no sympathy or patience for or appreciation of his
own weaknesses— or his own strengths—and can therefore have none for the
weakness or strength of others. The liar can only pretend to embody what is
best of the past, because he cannot support or tolerate the presence of
necessary deviance in the present. This means that the liar is a tyrant,
because he cannot stand being a fool.

The liar cannot tolerate anomaly, because it provokes anxiety—and the liar does
not believe that he can or should withstand anxiety. This means that he is
motivated to first avoid and then to actively suppress any behavioral pattern
or experience of world that does not fit comfortably into his culturally
determined system of affect-regulating moral presuppositions. Avoidance means
that anomalous experience is kept “unconscious,” so to speak—which means
incompletely realized. The implications of the dangerous thought remain
unconsidered; the presence of the threatening fantasy remains unadmitted; the
existence of the unacceptable personal action remains unrecognized. Active
suppression does not mean intrapsychic “repression,” in the classic sense, but
aggressive action undertaken in the world to forcibly eliminate evidence of
error. This may mean treachery, spiritual cruelty, or the outright appli-cation
of power: may mean application of whatever maneuver is presumed necessary, to
destroy all indication of insufficiency. The bearer of bad news therefore
inevitably suffers at the hand of the deceitful individual, who would rather
kill the source of potential wisdom than benefit from its message.

The lie is easy, and rewarding, as it allows for the avoidance of anxiety, at
least in the short term. In the long run, however, the lie has terrible
consequences. The “avoidance or suppression” of novel or unexpected experience,
which is the abstract equivalent of running away, transforms it perforce into
determinate threat (is the categorical equivalent of labeling as threat). The
domain of unprocessed novelty—defined prima facie by inaction and avoidance as
“threat too intolerable to face”—expands inevitably with time, when the past is
held as absolute. More and more experience is therefore rendered intolerable,
inexplicable and chaotic, as the cumulative effects of using the lie as a mode
of adaptation inexorably manifest themselves. The lie transforms culture into
tyranny, change into danger, while sickening and restricting the development
and flexibility of adaptive ability itself. Reliance on the lie ensures, as
fear grows, heightened, pathologized identification with the past (manifested
as fascism: personal and political intolerance), or decadent degeneration
(manifested as nihilism: personal and social deterioration).

Identification with the spirit of denial eventually makes life unbearable, as
everything new—and, therefore, everything defining hope—comes to be
axiomatically regarded as punishment and threat; makes life unbearable, as the
realm of acceptable action shrinks inexorably. The attendant and unavoidable
suffering experienced generates the desire for—and motivates actions predicated
on the attainment of—the end of all experience, as compensation and revenge for
sterility, absence of meaning, anxiety, hatred and pain:

The Marabout draws a large circle in the dirt, which represents the world. He
places a scorpion, symbolic of man, inside the circle. The scorpion, believing
it has achieved freedom, starts to run around the circle—but never attempts to
go outside. After the scorpion has raced several times around the inside edge
of the circle, the Marabout lowers his stick and divides the circle in half.
The scorpion stops for a few seconds, then begins to run faster and faster,
apparently looking for a way out, but never finding it. Strangely enough, the
scorpion does not dare to cross over the line. After a few minutes, the
Marabout divides the half circle. The scorpion becomes frantic. Soon the
Marabout makes a space no bigger than the scorpion's body. This is “the moment
of truth.” The scorpion, dazed and bewildered, finds itself unable to move one
way or another. Raising its venomous tail, the scorpion turns rapidly 'round
and 'round in a veritable frenzy. Whirling, whirling, whirling until all of its
spirit and energy are spent. In utter hopelessness the scorpion stops, lowers
the poisonous point of its tail, and stings itself to death. Its torment is
ended.485



The individual who lives by the lie continually shrinks his domain of
competence, his “explored and familiar territory.” Eventually, in consequence,
he has nowhere left to turn—except to himself. But his own personality has, in
the meantime, become shrunken and inept, as a consequence of
underdevelopment—as a consequence of repeated failure to

Figure 58: The Vicious Circle of the Adversary





participate in the process that turns “precosmogonic matter” into “spirit” and
“world.” Nothing remains but weakness, resentment, hatred and fear. Thus the
chaos that is rejected out of desire for too much security attains its
inevitable victory. The “vicious circle” created by the liar spirals down
inevitably to the “underworld.” This process is schematically represented in
Figure 58: The Vicious Circle of the Adversary.

The “patriarchal” system, the known, is the concrete consequence of past
adaptation, the hierarchically integrated and represented residue of the heroic
past. Such adaptation is necessarily incomplete, in that the full scope of
“natural” phenomena always exceeds the capacity for interpretation. Absolutist
application of the past, motivated by fear of the unknown, transforms the past
perforce into tyranny, which does not tolerate inevitable individual or deviant
experience. This process of “absolute ancestral deification” is the consequence
of security-seeking, made necessary by the abandonment of individual heroism as
a potential mode of adaptation. Such abandonment occurs as a consequence of
premature and arrogant self-definition—definition that makes of evident human
vulnerability final and sufficient evidence for the unbearable cruelty of God
and the uselessness of man.

The constant search for security, rather than the embodiment of freedom, is
wish for rule by law's letter, rather than laws spirit. The resultant forcible
suppression of deviance is based upon desire to support the pretence that the
unknown does not exist. This suppression has as its consequence the elimination
of creative transformation from the individual and social spheres. The
individual who denies his individual identification with the heroic will come
to identify with and serve the tyrannical force of the past—and to suffer the
consequences. This principle is aptly illustrated by the mythic story of Judas.
Judas sacrifices Christ, the hero, to the authorities of tradition—for all the
best reasons— and is then driven to destroy himself in despair:

Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and
elders,

Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they
said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of
silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. (Matthew
27:3–5)



Sacrifice of the hero to the great and terrible father means abandonment of
identification with the process that makes cosmos out of chaos. Rejection of
the process whereby the endlessly negative and terrifying is transformed into
the acceptable and beneficial means, by definition, the end of all hope:

Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men.

And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him:
but whosover speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. (Matthew 12:31–32)



The individual lies to convince himself, and others, that he embodies the
greatness of the past. He pretends to be upright and courageous, instead of
acting morally and bravely. Truly courageous actions might turn the group
against him, and it is only identity with that group that keeps his head above
water. The lie means denial of self, means the abandonment of mythic identity
with God, means certain involuntary “revolutionary” collapse, in time. The lie
means conscious refusal to modify and reconfigure historically predicated
behavior and belief to incorporate novelty and alleviate threat.

Endless failure to voluntarily update means the generation of a morass around
the individual, where the “water of life” once existed: what could be
life-giving liquid becomes a deadly swamp, composed of past errors, unresolved
traumas and current difficulties. This is the domain characterized by Freud as
the “unconscious,” into which “repressed memories” are cast. But unprocessed
information is not precisely memory. That which has not yet been explored is
not yet memorable, not yet even “real.” The consequence of untaken action is
more accurately “potential from which ‘spirit’ and ‘world’ could be
constructed”—much of it implicit in the world as it currently exists (instead
of “stored in memory’). (Implicit, that is, in the form of unencountered but
latent “trouble”—in the form of the unanswered letter, the unpaid debt or the
unresolved dispute.)

This self-generated swamp grows increasingly impenetrable, as time passes;
becomes increasingly “uninhabitable,” as the consequences of long-term
avoidance propagate (as the monsters of the bog sprout new and hungry heads).
This “accumulation of precosmogonic potential” is tantamount to reanimation of
the dragon of chaos (is precisely equivalent to the reawakening of Tiamat, who
eternally sleeps under the secure and familiar world). The more restricted,
fear-bound, faithless and repressive the particular mode of adaptation—that is,
the more extreme the lie—the more horrendous, dangerous, intolerable and
powerful the associated dragon. It is in this manner that attitude comes to
define the world. Every attempt to wish any aspect of experience out of
existence transforms it into an enemy. Every facet of being hidden from the
light leads a corrupt and sun-starved existence, underground.
Experience—absolute reality itself, in the final analysis—cannot be denied
without consequence. Reality cannot be fantasized out of existence. The
enforcement of a wish merely ensures that the information contained in the
denied experience can neither be removed from the domain of threat nor utilized
for adaptive purposes.

It is possible that we are in fact adapted to the world—that we are adapted to
the world as it actually exists, rather than to the world as we wish it might
be. It is possible that our experience contains information precisely
sufficient to ensure our happy survival. This means that every task left
undone—every emergent “territory” left unexplored— comprises latent information
from which competent personality could yet be extracted. If experience is valid
as source of world and spirit then those elements of experience that have been
avoided or suppressed or devalued may yet contain within them what is
absolutely essential to continued successful existence. Voluntary movement
toward “the good” would therefore mean reintegration of cast-off
“material”—voluntary incorporation of that which appears, at present,
indigestible. The alternative to this “voluntary pursuit of the inedible” is
eventual psychological catastrophe, at the social or individual level,
engendered through involuntary contact with the “hostile forces” of rejected
being. From the mythological perspective, this psychological catastrophe is
accidental reunion with the Terrible Mother, on territory of her choosing. This
“Oedipal incest” culminates in certain suffering, on the part of the unwilling
“hero”: culminates in suicide, dismemberment, castration—ends in the final
sacrifice of “masculine” consciousness, and in the victory of the underworld.

The identity of the individual with his culture protects him from the terrible
unknown, and allows him to function as an acceptable member of society. This
slavish function strengthens the group. But the group states that certain ways
of thinking and acting are all that are acceptable, and these particular ways
do not exhaust the unknown and necessary capabilities of the human being. The
rigid, grinning social mask is the individual's pretence that he is “the same
person” as everyone else (that is, the same dead person)— that he is not a
natural disaster, not a stranger, not strange—that he is not deviant, weak,
cowardly, inferior and vengeful. The true individual, however—the honest
fool—stands outside the protective enclave of acceptance, unredeemed—the
personification of weakness, inferiority, vengefulness, cowardice, difference.
He cannot make the cut, and because he cannot make the cut, he is the target of
the tyranny of the group (and of his own judgment, insofar as he is that
group). But man as a fool, weak, ignorant and vulnerable, is what the group is
not: a true individual, truly existing, truly experiencing, truly suffering (if
it could only be admitted). Consciousness of intrinsic personal limitation and
apprehension of its consequences brings clear definition of the nature of
subjective experience, when allowed to surface, and fosters attempts to adapt
to that experience. It is for this reason that only the unredeemed—the outcast,
the sick, the blind, and the lame—can be “saved.” Apprehension of the true
nature of subjective experience—of individual reality, outside the delusionary
constraints of the group—is of sufficient power to demoralize, absolutely. The
eternal consequence of self-consciousness is therefore the expulsion from Eden,
in its maternal and patriarchal forms. But such a fall is a step on the way to
the “true paradise”—is a step toward adoption of identity with the hero, who is
not protected from the vagaries of existence, but who can actively transform
the terrible unknown into the sustenant and productive world. Acceptance (at
least recognition) of the mortal limitation characterizing human experience
therefore constitutes the precondition for proper adaptation. The lie, which
denies individual experience, is denial of the fool—but the fool is the truth.

Acceptance of mortal weakness is the paradoxical humility that serves as
precondition for true heroism. The heroic attitude is predicated on the belief
that something new and valuable still exists, to be encountered and
assimilated, regardless of the power and stability of the current position.
This belief is further based upon faith in human potential—upon faith that the
individual spirit will respond to challenge and flourish. Such belief must be
posited—voluntarily, freely—prior to participation in any heroic endeavor. This
is the necessary leap that makes courageous and creative action possible; that
makes religion something real. Humility means, therefore: I am not yet what I
could be. This an adage both cautious and hopeful.

The adversarial position, deceit, is predicated on the belief that the
knowledge of the present comprises all necessary knowledge—is predicated on the
belief that the unknown has finally been conquered. This belief is equivalent
to denial of vulnerability, equivalent to the adoption of omniscience—“what I
do is all there is to do, what I know is all there is to know.” Inextricably
associated with the adoption of such a stance is denial, implicit or explicit,
of the existence, the possibility, and the necessity of the heroic—as
everything worthwhile has already been done, as all problems have been solved,
as paradise has already been spread before us. This is a terrible position, as
the axiom of faith “we are redeemed” makes human suffering itself (which can
never be eradicated as a consequence of ideological identification) something
heretical—something that can exist only as an insult to the guardians of
traditional order. The authoritarian is thereby necessarily stripped of his
empathy, even for himself: in the “perfect world,” presently extant, nothing
imperfect may be allowed to exist. So the adversary backs himself into a
position where he cannot admit even to his own misery (let alone the misery of
others). A more hopeless position cannot possibly be imagined.

Acceptance of insufficiency paradoxically catalyzes identification with the
hero and opens up the possibility of participation in the process of creation
and renewal. Rejection of insufficiency produces, by contrast, identification
with the adversary, whose eternal dwelling place is hell. This hell is
something whose nature can be rendered explicitly comprehensible, despite its
mythological character; is something that has familiar and defined features; is
something that can be understood, first and foremost, as a consequence of the
“imbalance of the constituent elements of reality.” Adoption of the deceitful
or adversarial mode of adaptation produces an accelerated search for security
and increased likelihood of aggression, in those cases where identification
with the cultural canon is deemed possible—or degeneration of personality and
decadent breakdown (where the costs of cultural identity are regarded as “too
high,” where no such identity is waiting to offer protection, or where even
fascistic behavior appears as something too positive to manifest in the
all-too-unbearable world).

Denial of the heroic promotes fascism, absolute identification with the
cultural canon. Everything that is known, is known within a particular
historically determined framework, predicated upon mythologically expressed
assumptions. Denial or avoidance of the unknown therefore concomitantly
necessitates deification of a particular previously established viewpoint. The
way that things are, under such circumstances, must be the way they forever
remain. Questioning the wisdom of the past necessarily exposes the
anxiety-provoking unknown once again to view. This exposure of the unknown can
be regarded as beneficial under those circumstances where positive adaptation
to the unknown is viewed as possible, but only as destructive where lack of
faith in the heroic rules. All that lives, however, grows. When conservatism
destroys the capacity for individual creativity—when it becomes tyranny—then it
works against life, not for it. The “spirit within” has withdrawn from the
group afraid to develop. An absolutely conservative society cannot survive,
because the future transcends the limitations of the past, and the absolute
conservative wants to limit what could be to what has already been. If history
was complete, and perfect, if the individual had fully exploited his highest
potential, then the human race would be run, for all would be explored, all
known, all accomplished. But this pinnacle of attainment has not yet been
reached—and perhaps never will be. Those who pretend the contrary rapidly come
to actively oppose the very process that delivers what they claim to have
already obtained.

Denial of the heroic promotes decadence, equally—absolute rejection of the
order of tradition; absolute rejection of order itself. This pattern of
apprehension and behavior seems far removed from that of the fascist, but the
decadent is just as arrogant as his evidently more rigid peer. He has merely
identified himself absolutely with no thing, rather than with one thing. He is
rigidly convinced of the belief that nothing matters— convinced that nothing is
of value, despite the opinions of (clearly deluded, weak and despicable)
others; convinced that nothing is worth the effort. The decadent functions in
this manner like an anti-Midas—everything he touches turns to ashes.

Under normal circumstances, the individual who reaches adolescence identifies
with the tribe—with the collective historically determined structure designed
to deal with threat. The normal individual solves his problem of adaptation to
the unknown by joining a group. A group, by definition, is composed of those
who have adopted a central structure of value, and who therefore behave, in the
presence of other group members, identically—and if not identically, at least
predictably.

The fascist adapts to the group with a vengeance. He builds stronger and
stronger walls around himself and those who are “like him,” in an ever more
futile attempt to keep the threatening unknown at bay. He does this because his
worldview is incomplete. He does not believe in the heroic aspect of the
individual, does not see the negative aspect of the social world, and cannot
visualize the beneficial aspect of chaos. He is frightened enough to develop
the discipline of a slave, so that he can maintain his protected position in
the group, but he is not frightened enough to transcend his slavish condition.
He therefore remains twisted and bent. The decadent, by contrast, sees nothing
but the tyranny of the state. Since the adversarial aspect of the individual
remains conveniently hidden from his view, he cannot perceive that his
“rebellion” is nothing but avoidance of discipline. He views chaos as a
beneficial home, seeing the source of human evil in social regulation, because
he cannot imagine the Terrible Mother as soul-devouring force. So he abandons
his father in the belly of the beast, unredeemed, and has no tools to rely on
when he finally faces a true challenge.

The decadent looks to subvert the process of maturation—looks for a “way out”
of group affiliation. Group membership requires adoption of at least adolescent
responsibility, and this burden may seem too much to bear, as a consequence of
prolonged immaturity of outlook. The decadent therefore acts “as if” the
paradigmatic structure of the group has been rendered “insufficient” as a
consequence of environmental, cultural or intellectual change, and refuses to
be the fool who risks belief. The proper response to “the illness of the
father,” is, of course, “the journey to the land of living water.” The decadent
makes his intellectual superiority to the “superstitions of the past” an
article of faith, instead, and shirks his responsibility. (That is to say—it is
the desire to shirk that responsibility [and the “heroic sacrifice” it
entails], that constitutes motivation for belief in “intellectual superiority”)
The “suffering rebel” stance that such adoption allows, as a secondary
consequence, also serves admirably as mask for cowardice.

The fascist and the decadent regard each other as opposites, as mortal enemies.
They are in actuality two sides of the same bent coin:

Today is Christmas day, and I have just come home from Julie's. While I was
there it struck me, as I sat on their couch between the two girls, just how
foolish and idiotic I have been in this my only life. I hope you will have
patience while I unburden myself on you, because I need desperately to confess
my sins to someone, and I know that if I were sitting in a little cubicle
talking to an unseen clergyman I wouldn't do a proper job of it. You fit the
definition of a religious man as someone who gives careful consideration to the
demonic and irrational in humanity, so I think you will find my confession
interesting.

Imagine if you can a grown man who harbors in his heart the most vicious
resentment for his fellow man, his neighbor, who is guilty of nothing more than
embodying a superior consciousness of what it means to be a man. When I think
of all the black, scathing thoughts I have directed at those who I could not
look in the eye, it is almost unbearable. All of my lofty disdain for the
“common” man, who, so I thought, was guilty of the sin of unconsciousness, was,
I now realize, founded on nothing more than jealousy and spite. I hated, I
absolutely loathed anyone who had wrestled with their fear of leaving the
maternal confines of a childish mentality and won their battle, only because I
had not done so. I equated independence and success with egotism and
selfishness, and it was my fondest hope, my highest ambition, to witness and
participate in the destruction of everything that successful, independent
people had built for themselves. This I considered a duty. In fact there was a
decidedly fanatical element in my urge to cleanse the world of what I perceived
to be selfishness.

Think what would have happened if I had been in a position to realize my fine
feelings! The memory makes me fear that any moment the earth will crack open
and swallow me up, because if there is any justice it would. I, who had not the
faintest inkling of a capacity for moral judgment, traipsing around passing
judgment on anyone who dared cross my path. It makes me wonder that I have even
one friend in this world. But of course I had friends before. Anyone with
enough self-contempt that they could forgive me mine.

It is fortunate for humanity that there are few saviors of the caliber of
myself. Did you know that I used to identify with Christ? I considered myself
entirely, immaculately free of aggression and every other form of antisocial
feeling. But what about the hatred I have just now confessed, you ask? That
didn't count. Those feelings were based on sound common sense, you see. After
all, there are sons of bitches in the world, and one needs to be ready for
them. (Do I smell ozone? They say you get a tingling sensation just before the
lightning bolt strikes.)

That is a very apt phrase, son of a bitch. There is a passage in Jung's
Phenomenology of the Self which runs: “Often a mother appears beside him who
apparently shows not the slightest concern that her little son should become a
man, but who, with tireless and self-immolating effort, neglects nothing that
might hinder him from growing up and marrying. You now behold the secret
conspiracy between mother and son, and how each helps the other to betray
life.” This insight would be useful for me as an excuse, being a perfectly
accurate description of my situation, were it not for the fact that I am almost
daily presented with a residual bit of undiluted evil in myself. For example,
when I am faced with a frustrating situation I do not ask myself what I am
going to do about it. I ask myself who is responsible for it—and I am always
ready to conclude that if the other person were to act properly then the
problem would not exist. What is evil about that, you ask? Obviously if I am
determined to overlook my own part in the failure to resolve my own
frustrations, if I am determined to find a scapegoat for my problems, then I am
just a stone's throw away from the mentality that was responsible for Hitler's
final solution, or for the Spanish inquisition, or for Lenin's cultural
cleansing.

What was it you told me when I complained about the flaws in capitalism, about
the fact that so many people take advantage of the capitalist system? Something
like “the fact that people go on consolidating their financial position ad
nauseum is another problem, but it is no reason to conclude that there is
anything virtuous in refusing to even try to consolidate one's position in the
first place.” But it is so much easier to crown one's cowardice and laziness
with the accolade of virtue. Just ask Lenin's henchmen, who swaggered around
the countryside robbing every farmer who had managed any success whatever, and
called themselves friends of the common people and patted each other on the
back for their moral uprightness! I wonder if I have changed so much that I
would not join them when put to the test. The idea that morality stems from a
lack of personal interests is thoroughly ingrained in my mind. “Good people are
those who don't want anything for themselves” is the way I think. But I never
ask myself why such a person should put any effort into disciplining himself,
or take any pains to keep his motives clear in his own mind, because there is
nothing of value to him in this world.

In his essay Relations Between the Ego and the Unconscious Jung says that in an
unconscious state the individual is torn by the conflict of opposites, and that
achieving consciousness involves resolving that conflict on a higher level. (I
understand that this particular state of adult unconsciousness is different
from the original state of child-like unconsciousness, in which there is no
long-term conflict.) Just last week I was stuck in that dead-end again. I was
sitting and thinking about what course my life should be taking, and at every
imagined scenario of a fulfilling or meaningful activity I was met by a
counterpoint coming from somewhere in my head, showing me how this or that
aspect of my scenario was wrong because it would result in this or that
problem, to the point where it was unacceptable to consider any career at all
because just by being alive I would contribute to the destruction of the
planet. And as badly as I wanted to refute this echo of wrong to my every
imagined right as an irrational chimera, the fact is, so I told myself, that we
see daily in the newspapers how the activities of humanity, which are also the
activities of individual men and women, are causing incalculable harm.

It is of course due to my being influenced by yourself that I do not remain
stuck in that particular bog too long these days. If our industrialism is
causing problems, I now answer myself, then I should hope that there are people
out there working to solve those problems, or perhaps I should try to do
something about them myself, but by sitting idly by I do not solve a thing. Of
course what is most daunting, and also most snivelly, about being stuck in that
bog is the fact that the rational mind wants to be absolutely sure about the
successful outcome of its life plan, and obviously there is another part of the
mind that knows that such certainty is impossible, so one is then faced with
the need to accept on faith that things will turn out for the better with some
luck and perseverance. And being a fine upstanding modern mouse with an
enlightened rational mind, I have no use for faith and other such religious
sounding claptrap and nonsense. Faith is obviously irrational, and I'll not
have any irrationality influencing my behavior.

Previously my solution to this problem was to allow chance to make my career
choices for me, letting my own interests influence my decisions as little as
possible, and I then believed that I had somehow avoided personal
responsibility for the state of the modern world, because I was not really
responsible for the state of my life, and that I had escaped from the
possibility that my plans wouldn't work out because I had no plans. It was on
this rock-solid foundation that I looked out at the world, and saw around me
people who were stupid enough to add their own selves into the equation.

To put this kind of faith in oneself, to believe that there exists inside of
oneself a motive force, call it an interest, which will respond to life and
carry one through uncertainty and adversity is an irrational attitude without
equal, and it is with this irrational approach to life that the conflict of the
opposites is resolved, it seems to me. But the problem now is this: in order to
have this faith in one's irrational nature one needs proof that personal
interests and passions are capable of sustaining one through the uncertainties
and adversities of life that the rational mind foresees so clearly, and the
only way to get that proof is to risk oneself and see the result. It is a very
exceptional person who can take such an undertaking on their own. Most of us
need guidance and support from others, from believers, so to speak. Strange,
isn't it, that religious terms should become useful for this discussion?

As I wrote that last paragraph I was suddenly reminded of your idea that the
devil as he is represented

Figure 59: The Constituent Elements of Existence, Reprise





in Milton's Paradise Lost is a metaphor for the rational intellect, placed in
the position of the highest psychic authority. “Better to rule in hell than to
serve in heaven.” Hell, then, is a condition in which the rational mind, with
its acute consciousness of the many perils of life, holds sway over the
individual and effectively prevents him from engaging in life, which results in
the morally degenerate state of weakness that I described in the first pages of
this letter. And heaven, I presume, would be a condition in which the rational
mind subordinates itself to faith in…in God. But what is God?

You have a chapter in the manuscript of your book titled The Divinity Of
Interest. Your ideas are starting to make sense to me now—at least I think they
are. Faith in God means faith in that which kindles one's interest, and leads
one away from the parental sphere out into the world. To deny those interests
is to deny God, to fall from heaven and land squarely in hell, where one's
passions burn eternally in frustration. What was it God said when he cast Adam
out of Eden? Something about working in the dust to the end of his days, with
the spectre of death always looming in the future. I can certainly relate to
that. One of the most vivid impressions I get from recalling all those years I
spent moving from one job to the next is the pointlessness of my daily life
back then, and the glaring knowledge that the end was drawing near. But when
I'm doing something that has meaning for me, something that interests me, as I
am right now, death seems far away, and work seems quite agreeable, even
joyous.486



This “theory of the genesis of social psychopathology”—this theory of a direct
relationship obtaining between personal choice and fascistic or decadent
personality and social movement—finds its precise echo in Taoist philosophy,
and can be more thoroughly comprehended through application ofthat perspective.
The traditional Taoist believes that profane human experience consists of the
differentiated parts of an essentially uncategorizable back-ground—the Tao,
which may also be interpreted as “meaning” or as “the way.”487 Tao manifests
itself as the eternal flux of being. The “natural categories” of Yin and Yang,
represented in Figure 59: The Constituent Elements of Existence, Reprise
constitute the most fundamental “divisions” of Tao, the basic maternal and
patriarchal constituent elements of experience. Much of ancient Chinese
philosophy (cosmology, medicine, political theory, religious thinking) is
predicated on the idea that pathology is caused by a relative excess of one
primordial “substance” or the other. The goal of the Chinese sage—physician,
spiritual leader or social administrator—is to establish or re-establish
harmony between the fundamental “feminine” and “masculine” principles, and to
diagnose and cure the faulty action or irresponsible inactions that led to
their original discord. The schematic representation of Yin and Yang, portrayed
in Figure 59, utilizes the image of a circle to represent totality; the
paisleys that make up that circle are opposed but balanced. The image is
rendered additionally sophisticated by the presence of the white circle in the
black paisley, and vice versa. Too much chaos breeds desire for order. Yin may
therefore serve as mother to Yang. Conversely, too much order breeds the desire
for novelty, as antidote to stultifying predictability. In this manner, Yang
serves as father to Yin.

The fascist, who will not face the reality and necessity of the unknown, hides
his vulnerable face in a “pathological excess of order.” The decadent, who
refuses to see that existence is not possible without order, hides his
immaturity from himself and others in a “pathological excess of chaos.” The
fascist is willing to sacrifice painful freedom for order, and to pretend that
his unredeemed misery is meaningless, so that he does not have to do anything
for himself. The decadent believes that freedom can be attained without
discipline and responsibility, because he is ignorant of the terrible nature of
“the undifferentiated ground of reality” and is unwilling to bear the burden of
order. When he starts to suffer, as he certainly will, he will not allow the
reality of his suffering to prove to him that some things are real, because
acceptance of that proof would force him to believe and to act (would force him
as well toward painful realization of the counterproductive and wasteful
stupidity of his previous position).

The fascistic mode of adaptation is, above all, a method for the direct control
of the unknown and unpredictable. Modern human beings, like the ancients,
identify the stranger implicitly with the dragon of chaos. The stranger acts
unpredictably, and thinks unpredictable things—things which might have dramatic
and unsettling effect, if they were allowed full expression. Extreme
conservatism allows for restriction of uncertainty, for evasion of the unknown.
It performs this function by ensuring that each member of the group acts,
imagines and thinks precisely like every other member (generally, precisely
like the leader—a dark parody of the hero). In times of heightened uncertainty,
periods of increased unemployment or unsettled political structure, the call
for return to the “glorious past” therefore always arises. The fascist,
dominated by his fear, believes that the world should only be order, because
disorder is too frightening to consider. This makes the cosmos he creates—when
granted the opportunity—a place of endless sterility and machinelike
organization. This increased conformity allows at least for the temporary
alleviation and restriction of anxiety, but damages the capacity of the group
(his group, that is) to respond flexibly to inevitable change. It is as if, to
use a biological metaphor, the fascist strives to force all the genetic
diversity out of his “species.” No diversity means no variance in response to
new challenges; means one solution (likely the wrong one) to every problem. The
suppression of deviance, of the unknown, therefore merely ensures its
irrepressible emergence in negative guise, at some undetermined point in the
future (as problems ignored do not go away, but get worse, as they follow their
own peculiar developmental path). The order the fascist imposes, therefore,
bears within it the seeds of its own destruction.

The fascist tends to be cruel as well as rigid and will pursue his cruelty even
at the cost of his own stability. The Nazi persecution of the Jews, for
example, continued at an increasing rate (and with increasingly harsh
procedures) as it became more and more evidently a burden to the war effort.
Nazi hatred therefore became a force so potent, as the Third Reich developed,
that it overcame Nazi patriotism, motivated by mortal terror of the unknown.
Underneath the fascist's professed patriotism and cowardly love of order is an
even more profound phenomenon: hatred for the tragic conditions of existence,
and for the vulnerable life that makes those conditions evident.

For they reasoned unsoundly, saying to themselves, “Short and sorrowful is our
life, and there is no remedy when a man comes to his end, and no one has been
known to return from Hades

Because we were born by mere chance, and hereafter we shall be as though we had
never been; because the breath in our nostrils is smoke, and reason is a spark
kindled by the beating of our hearts.

When it is extinguished, the body will turn to ashes, and the spirit will
dissolve like empty air. Our name will be forgotten in time and no one will
remember our works; our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud, and be
scattered like mist that is chased by the rays of the sun and overcome by its
heat.

For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow, and there is no return from
our death, because it is sealed up and no one turns back.

Come, therefore, let us enjoy the good things that exist, and make use of the
creation to the full as in youth.

Let us take our fill of costly wine and perfumes, and let no flower of spring
pass by us.

Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither.

Let none of us fail to share in our revelry, everywhere let us leave signs of
enjoyment, because this is our portion, and this our lot.

Let us oppress the righteous poor man; let us not spare the widow nor regard
the gray hairs of the aged.

But let our might be our law of right, for what is weak proves itself to be
useless.” (Wisdom 2:1–11, RSV)



Fascist cruelty is motivated by the affective consequences of pathologically
increased order. When the “water of life” dries up, nothing is left of
existence but its inevitable pains and frustrations, compounded by terrible
boredom. Furthermore, anomaly inevitably accumulates, as order is imposed in an
increasingly strict manner. This adds increased apprehension of chaos to pain,
frustration and stultification. Individuals “subjected” to a surfeit of such
emotions “have every reason” to be vengeful, aggressive and cruel; have placed
themselves in a state where the emergence of such motivation is certain.

The unknown appears only when there has been error. The fascist says, “I know
everything there is to know.” He cannot, therefore, make an error. But error is
the mother of all things. The inability to admit to imperfection, therefore,
means withdrawal from every informative situation. This means death of
continued adaptation—and certain future reemergence of the unknown, in negative
guise. If you do not change, in the face of constant slow transformation, then
the discrepancies and unresolved errors pile up, and accumulate. The more
stubborn (read: arrogant) you are, the longer the period of time during which
this accretion occurs. Sooner or later so much unknown surrounds you that it is
no longer avoidable. At that point the dragon of the underworld emerges, and
swallows you whole. Then you live in the belly of the beast, in darkness, in
the night, in the kingdom of the dead. Hatred comes easily, in such an
environment.

The decadent says, “there is no such thing as to know”—and never attempts to
accomplish anything. Like his authoritarian counterpart, he makes himself
“immune from error,” since mistakes are always made with regard to some valued,
fixed and desired end. The decadent says, “look, here is something new,
something inexplicable; that is evidence, is it not, that everything that I
have been told is wrong. History is unreliable; rules are arbitrary;
accomplishment is illusory. Why do anything, under such circumstances?” But he
is living on borrowed time—feeding, like a parasite, on the uncomprehended body
of the past. If he works sufficiently hard, and saws off the branch on which he
is sitting, then he will fall, too, into the jaws of the thing he ignored.

The habitual act of avoidance—of rejection—weakens the personality, in a direct
causal manner. The strength of a personality might be defined, in part, as its
breadth of explored territory, its capacity to act appropriately in the
greatest number of circumstances. Such strength is evidently dependent upon
prior learning—at least upon learning how to act—and knowledge of how to act is
generated and renewed as a consequence of constant, voluntary, exploratory
behavior. If everything new and different is rejected out of hand, the
personality cannot adjust itself to changing circumstances. Circumstances
change inevitably, however, as a consequence of simple maturation; as a
consequence of entropy itself. It is of little use to be entirely prepared for
the past; furthermore, it is only possible to remain prepared for the future,
by facing the present. Anomaly is, therefore, spiritual “food,” in the most
literal sense: the unknown is the raw material out of which the personality is
manufactured, in the course of exploratory activity. The act of rejecting
anomaly transforms the personality into something starved, something senile,
and something increasingly terrified of change, as each failure to face the
truth undermines capacity to face truth in the future. The man who comes to
adopt an inappropriate attitude toward the unknown severs his connection with
the source of all knowledge, undermining his personality, perhaps irreparably.
This dissolution of strength is self-perpetuating: every weakness increases the
likelihood of further weakness:

For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall
be taken even that which he hath. (Mark 4:25)



The individual who turns away from indications of his own insufficiency
increases the probability that he will seek to repress and destroy all
information that indicates threat to current belief. Avoided, suppressed or
otherwise undeveloped elements of personality are not accessible for use in
conscious adaptation—will in fact offer resistance to such adaptation, as a
consequence of their “resentment” at being twisted and ignored. Failure to
utilize full human potential severely undermines strength of individual
character. Dissociation of action, imagination and ideation weakens
personality. Weakness of personality means inability to bear the weight of the
conscious world. The result of the hypocritical suppression of individual
differences, in the service of the social unit and its intrapsychic
representative, is frailty in the face of the unknown:

And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. (Mark 3:25)

