# 2 - NORMAL AND REVOLUTIONARY LIFE: TWO PROSAIC STORIES
[Metadata]: # {03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
NORMAL AND REVOLUTIONARY LIFE: TWO PROSAIC STORIES
# NORMAL AND REVOLUTIONARY LIFE: TWO PROSAIC STORIES
We tell ourselves stories about who we are, where we would like to be, and how
we are going to get there. These stories regulate our emotions, by determining
the significance of all the things we encounter and all the events we
experience. We regard things that get us on our way as positive, things that
impede our progress as negative, and things that do neither as irrelevant. Most
things are irrelevant—and that is a good thing, as we have limited attentional
resources.

Inconveniences interfere with our plans. We do not like inconveniences, and
will avoid dealing with them. Nonetheless, they occur commonly—so commonly, in
fact, that they might be regarded as an integral, predictable, and constant
feature of the human environment. We have adapted to this feature—have the
intrinsic resources to cope with inconveniences. We benefit, become stronger,
in doing so.

Ignored inconveniences accumulate, rather than disappear. When they accumulate
in sufficient numbers, they produce a catastrophe—a self-induced catastrophe,
to be sure, but one that may be indistinguishable from an “act of God.”
Inconveniences interfere with the integrity of our plans—so we tend to pretend
that they are not there. Catastrophes, by contrast, interfere with the
integrity of our whole stories, and massively dysregulate our emotions. By
their nature, they are harder to ignore—although that does not stop us from
trying to do so.

Inconveniences are common; unfortunately, so are catastrophes—self-induced and
otherwise. We are adapted to catastrophes, like inconveniences, as constant
environmental features. We can resolve catastrophe, just as we can cope with
inconvenience—although at higher cost. As a consequence of this adaptation,
this capacity for resolution, catastrophe can rejuvenate. It can also destroy.

The more ignored inconveniences in a given catastrophe, the more likely it will
destroy.



Enough has been learned in the last half-century of inquiry into intellectual
and emotional function to enable the development of a provisional general
theory of emotional regulation. Description of the role that reaction to
novelty or anomaly plays in human information processing is clearly central to
such a theory. A compelling body of evidence suggests that our affective,
cognitive and behavioral responses to the unknown or unpredictable are
“hard-wired”; suggests that these responses constitute inborn structural
elements of the processes of consciousness itself. We attend, involuntarily, to
those things that occur contrary to our predictions—that occur despite our
desires, as expressed in expectation. That involuntary attention comprises a
large part of what we refer to when we say “consciousness.” Our initial
attention constitutes the first step in the process by which we come to adjust
our behavior and our interpretive schemas to the world of experience—assuming
that we do so; constitutes as well the first step we take when we modify the
world to make it what we desire, instead of what it is currently.

Modern investigation into the role of novelty in emotion and thought began with
the Russians—E.N.Sokolov, O.Vinogradova, A.R.Luria (and, more recently,
E.Goldberg)— who adopted an approach to human function that is in many ways
unique. Their tradition apparently stems from Pavlov, who viewed the reflex arc
as a phenomenon of central importance, and from the Marxist intellectual
legacy, which regarded work—creative action—as the defining feature of man.
Whatever the specific historical precedents, it is most definitely the case
that the Russians have regarded motor output and its abstract equivalents as
the critically relevant aspect of human existence. This intellectual position
distinguished them, historically, from their Western counterparts, who tend(ed)
to view the brain as an information-processing machine, akin to the computer.
Psychologists in the West have concentrated their energies on determining how
the brain determines what is out there, so to speak, from the objective
viewpoint. The Russians, by contrast, have devoted themselves to the role of
the brain in governing behavior, and in generating the affects or emotions
associated with that behavior. Modern animal experimentalists—most notably
Jeffrey Gray25—have adopted the Russian line, with striking success. We now
know, at least in broad outline, how we respond to those (annoying, irritating,
frightening, promising) things that we do not expect.

The pioneering Russian psychophysiologist E.N.Sokolov began work on the “reflex
basis” of attention in the 1950s. By the early '60s, this work had advanced to
the point where he could formulate the following key propositions. First:

One possible approach to analyzing the process of reflection is to consider the
nervous system as a mechanism which models the external world by specific
changes that occur in its internal structure. In this sense a distinct set of
changes in the nervous system is isomorphic with the external agent that it
reflects and resembles. As an internal model that develops in the nervous
system in response to the effect of agents in the environment, the image
performs the vital function of modifying the nature of behavior, allowing the
organism to predict events and actively adjust to its environment.26



And second:

My first encounter with phenomena which indicated that the higher divisions of
the central nervous system form models of external agents involved the study of
reactions to “novel” [stimulus features. I characterized these reactions as]
orienting reflexes. The peculiar feature of the orienting reflex is that after
several applications of the same stimulus (generally five to fifteen) the
response disappears (or, as the general expression goes, “is extinguished”).
However, the slightest possible change in the stimulus is sufficient to awaken
the response…. Research on the orienting reflex indicates that it does not
occur as a direct result of incoming excitation; rather, it is produced by
signals of discrepancy which develop when afferent [that is, incoming] signals
are compared with the trace formed in the nervous system by an earlier
signal.27



Sokolov was concerned primarily with the modeling of events in the objective
external world—assuming, essentially, that when we model, we model facts. Most
of the scholars who have followed his lead have adopted this central
assumption, at least implicitly. This position requires some modification. We
do model facts, but we concern ourselves with valence, or value. It is
therefore the case that our maps of the world contain what might be regarded as
two distinct types of information: sensory and affective. It is not enough to
know that something is. It is equally necessary to know what it signifies. It
might even be argued that animals—and human beings—are primarily concerned with
the affective or emotional significance of the environment.

Along with our animal cousins, we devote ourselves to fundamentals: will this
(new) thing eat me? Can I eat it? Will it chase me? Should I chase it? Can I
mate with it? We may construct models of “objective reality,” and it is no
doubt useful to do so. We must model meanings, however, in order to survive.
Our most fundamental maps of meaning—maps which have a narrative
structure—portray the motivational value of our current state, conceived of in
contrast to a hypothetical ideal, accompanied by plans of action, which are our
pragmatic notions about how to get what we want.

Description of these three elements—current state, ideal future state, and
means of active mediation—constitute the necessary and sufficient preconditions
for the weaving of the most simple narrative, which is a means for describing
the valence of a given environment, in reference to a temporally and spatially
bounded set of action patterns. Getting to point “b” presupposes that you are
at point “a”—you can't plan movement in the absence of an initial position. The
fact that point “b” constitutes the end goal means that it is valenced more
high-ly than point “a”—that it is a place more desirable, when considered
against the necessary contrast of the current position. It is the perceived
improvement of point “b” that makes the whole map meaningful or affect-laden;
it is the capacity to construct hypothetical or abstract end points, such as
“b”—and to contrast them against “the present”—that makes human beings capable
of using their cognitive systems to modulate their affective reactions.28

The domain mapped by a functional narrative (one that, when enacted, produces
the results desired) might reasonably be regarded as “explored territory,” as
events that occur “there” are predictable. Any place where enacted plans
produce unexpected, threatening or punishing consequences, by contrast, might
be regarded as “unexplored territory.” What happens “there” does not conform to
our wishes. This means that a familiar place, where unpredictable things start
happening, is no longer familiar (even though it might be the same place with
regards to its strict spatial location, from the “objective” perspective). We
know how to act in some places, and not in others. The plans we put into action
sometimes work, and sometimes do not work. The experiential domains we
inhabit—our “environments,” so to speak—are therefore permanently characterized
by the fact of the predictable and controllable, in juxtaposition with the
unpredictable and uncontrollable. The universe is composed of “order” and
“chaos”—at least from the metaphorical perspective. Oddly enough, however, it
is to this “metaphorical” universe that our nervous system appears to have
adapted.

What Sokolov discovered, to put it bluntly, is that human beings (and other
animals far down the phylogenetic chain) are characterized by an innate
response to what they cannot predict, do not want, and cannot understand.
Sokolov identified the central characteristics of how we respond to the
unknown—to the strange category of all events that have not yet been
categorized. The notion that we respond in an “instinctively patterned” manner
to the appearance of the unknown has profound implications. These can best be
first encountered in narrative form.





Normal Life


“If problems are accepted, and dealt with before they arise, they might even be
prevented before confusion begins. In this way peace may be maintained.”30



You work in an office; you are climbing the corporate ladder. Your daily
activity reflects this superordinate goal. You are constantly immersed in one
activity or another designed to produce an elevation in your status from the
perspective of the corporate hierarchy. Today, you have to attend a meeting
that may prove vitally important to your future. You have an image in your
head, so to speak, about the nature of that meeting and the interactions that
will characterize it. You imagine what you would like to accomplish. Your image
of this potential future is a fantasy, but it is based, insofar as you are
honest, on all the relevant information derived from past experience that you
have at your disposal. You have attended many meetings. You know what is likely
to happen, during any given meeting, within reasonable bounds; you know how you
will behave, and what effect your behavior will have on others. Your model of
the desired future is clearly predicated on what you currently know.

You also have a model of the present, constantly operative. You understand your
(somewhat subordinate) position within the corporation, which is your
importance relative to others above and below you in the hierarchy. You
understand the significance of those experiences that occur regularly while you
are during your job: you know who you can give orders to, who you have to
listen to, who is doing a good job, who can safely be ignored, and so on. You
are always comparing this present (unsatisfactory) condition to that of your
ideal, which is you, increasingly respected, powerful, rich and happy, free of
anxiety and suffering, climbing toward your ultimate success. You are
unceasingly involved in attempts to transform the present, as you currently
understand it, into the future, as you hope it will be. Your actions are
designed to produce your ideal— designed to transform the present into
something ever more closely resembling what you want. Your are confident in
your model of reality, in your story; when you put it into action, you get
results.

You prepare yourself mentally for your meeting. You envision yourself playing a
centrally important role—resolutely determining the direction the meeting will
take, producing a powerful impact on your co-workers. You are in your office,
preparing to leave. The meeting is taking place in another building, several
blocks away. You formulate provisional plans of behavior designed to get you
there on time. You estimate travel time at fifteen minutes.

You leave your office on the twenty-seventh floor, and you wait by the
elevator. The minutes tick by—more and more of them. The elevator fails to
appear. You had not taken this possibility into account. The longer you wait,
the more nervous you get. Your heart rate starts increasing, as you prepare for
action (action unspecified, as of yet). Your palms sweat. You flush. You berate
yourself for failing to consider the potential impact of such a delay. Maybe
you are not as smart as you think you are. You begin to revise your model of
yourself. No time for that now: you put such ideas out of your head and
concentrate on the task at hand.

The unexpected has just become manifest—in the form of the missing elevator.
You planned to take it to get where you were going; it did not appear. Your
original plan of action is not producing the effects desired. It was, by your
own definition, a bad plan. You need another one—and quickly. Luckily you have
an alternate strategy at your disposal. The stairs! You dash to the rear of the
building. You try the door to the stairwell. It is locked. You curse the
maintenance staff. You are frustrated and anxious. The unknown has emerged once
again. You try another exit. Success! The door opens. Hope springs forth from
your breast. You still might make it on time. You rush down the stairs—all
twenty-seven floors—and onto the street.

You are, by now, desperately late. As you hurry along, you monitor your
surroundings: is progress toward your goal continuing? Anyone who gets in your
way inconveniences you—elderly women, playful, happy children, lovers out for a
stroll. You are a good person, under most circumstances—at least in your own
estimation. Why, then, do these innocent people aggravate you so thoroughly?
You near a busy intersection. The crosswalk light is off. You fume and mutter
away stupidly on the sidewalk. Your blood pressure rises. The light finally
changes. You smile and dash forward. Up a slight rise you run. You are not in
great physical shape. Where did all this energy come from? You are approaching
the target building. You glance at your watch. Five minutes left: no problem. A
feeling of relief and satisfaction floods you. You are there; in consequence,
you are not an idiot. If you believed in God, you would thank Him.

Had you been early—had you planned appropriately—the other pedestrians and
assorted obstacles would not have affected you at all. You might have even
appreciated them—at least the good-looking ones—or may at least not have
classified them as obstacles. Maybe you would have even used the time to enjoy
your surroundings (unlikely) or to think about other issues of real
importance—like tomorrow's meeting.

You continue on your path. Suddenly, you hear a series of loud noises behind
you— noises reminiscent of a large motorized vehicle hurtling over a small
concrete barrier (much like a curb). You are safe on the sidewalk—or so you
presumed a second ago. Your meeting fantasies vanish. The fact that you are
late no longer seems relevant. You stop hurrying along, instantly, arrested in
your path by the emergence of this new phenomenon. Your auditory system
localizes the sounds in three dimensions. You involuntarily orient your trunk,
neck, head and eyes toward the place in space from which the sounds apparently
emanate.31 Your pupils dilate, and your eyes widen.32 Your heart rate speeds
up, as your body prepares to take adaptive action—once the proper path of that
action has been specified.33

You actively explore the unexpected occurrence, once you have oriented yourself
toward it, with all the sensory and cognitive resources you can muster. You are
generating hypotheses about the potential cause of the noise even before you
turn. Has a van jumped the curb? The image flashes through your mind. Has
something heavy fallen from a building? Has the wind overturned a billboard or
street sign? Your eyes actively scan the relevant area. You see a truck loaded
with bridge parts heading down the street, just past a pothole in the road. The
mystery is solved. You have determined the specific motivational significance
of what just seconds ago was the dangerous and threatening unknown, and it is
zero. A loaded truck hit a bump. Big deal! Your heart slows down. Thoughts of
the impending meeting re-enter the theater of your mind. Your original journey
continues as if nothing has happened.

What is going on? Why are you frightened and frustrated by the absence of the
expected elevator, the presence of the old woman with the cane, the carefree
lovers, the loud machinery? Why are you so emotionally and behaviorally
variable?

Detailed description of the processes governing these common affective
occurrences provides the basis for proper understanding of human motivation.
What Sokolov and his colleagues essentially discovered was that the unknown,
experienced in relationship to your currently extant model of present and
future, has a priori motivational significance—or, to put it somewhat
differently, that the unknown could serve as an unconditioned stimulus.

What is the a priori motivational significance of the unknown? Can such a
question even be asked? After all, the unknown by definition has not yet been
explored. Nothing can be said, by the dictates of standard logic, about
something that has not yet been encountered. We are not concerned with sensory
information, however—nor with particular material attributes—but with valence.
Valence, in and of itself, might be most simply considered as bipolar: negative
or positive (or, of course, as neither). We are familiar enough with the
ultimate potential range of valence, negative and positive, to place
provisional borders around possibility. The worst the unknown could be, in
general, is death (or, perhaps, lengthy suffering followed by death); the fact
of our vulnerable mortality provides the limiting case. The best the unknown
could be is more difficult to specify, but some generalizations might prove
acceptable. We would like to be wealthy (or at least free from want), possessed
of good health, wise and well-loved. The greatest good the unknown might
confer, then, might be regarded as that which would allow us to transcend our
innate limitations (poverty, ignorance, vulnerability), rather than to remain
miserably subject to them. The emotional “area” covered by the unknown is
therefore very large, ranging from that which we fear most to that which we
desire most intently.

The unknown is, of course, defined in contradistinction to the known.
Everything not understood or not explored is unknown. The relationship between
the oft- (and unfairly) separated domains of “cognition” and “emotion” can be
more clearly comprehended in light of this rather obvious fact. It is the
absence of an expected satisfaction, for example, that is punishing,
hurtful34—the emotion is generated as a default response to sudden and
unpredictable alteration in the theoretically comprehended structure of the
world. It is the man expecting a raise because of his outstanding work—the man
configuring a desired future on the basis of his understanding of the
present—who is hurt when someone “less deserving” is promoted before him (“one
is best punished,” after all, “for one's virtues”35). The man whose
expectations have been dashed—who has been threatened and hurt—is likely to
work less hard in the future, with more resentment and anger. Conversely, the
child who has not completed her homework is thrilled when the bell signaling
class end rings, before she is called upon. The bell signals the absence of an
expected punishment, and therefore induces positive affect, relief,
happiness.36

It appears, therefore, that the image of a goal (a fantasy about the nature of
the desired future, conceived of in relationship to a model of the significance
of the present) provides much of the framework determining the motivational
significance of ongoing current events. The individual uses his or her
knowledge to construct a hypothetical state of affairs, where the motivational
balance of ongoing events is optimized: where there is sufficient satisfaction,
minimal punishment, tolerable threat and abundant hope, all balanced together
properly over the short and longer terms. This optimal state of affairs might
be conceptualized as a pattern of career advancement, with a long-term state in
mind, signifying perfec-tion, as it might be attained profanely (richest drug
dealer, happily married matron, chief executive officer of a large corporation,
tenured Harvard professor). Alternatively, perfection might be regarded as the
absence of all unnecessary things, and the pleasures of an ascetic life. The
point is that some desirable future state of affairs is conceptualized in
fantasy and used as a target point for operation in the present. Such
operations may be conceived of as links in a chain (with the end of the chain
anchored to the desirable future state).

A meeting (like the one referred to previously) might be viewed by those
participating in it as one link in the chain which hypothetically leads to the
paradisal state of corporate chief executive officer (or to something less
desirable but still good). The (well-brought-off) meeting, as subgoal, would
therefore have the same motivational significance as the goal, although at
lesser intensity (as it is only one small part of a large and more important
whole). The exemplary meeting will be conceptualized in the ideal—like all
target states—as a dynamic situation where, all things considered, motivational
state is optimized. The meeting is imagined, a representation of the desired
outcome is formulated, and a plan of behavior designed to bring about that
outcome is elaborated and played out. The “imagined meeting” is fantasy, but
fantasy based on past knowledge (assuming that knowledge has in fact been
generated, and that the planner is able and willing to use it).

The affective systems that govern response to punishment, satisfaction, threat
and promise all have a stake in attaining the ideal outcome. Anything that
interferes with such attainment (little old ladies with canes) will be
experienced as threatening and/or punishing; anything that signifies increased
likelihood of success (open stretches of sidewalk) will be experienced as
promising37 or satisfying. It is for this reason that the Buddhists believe
that everything is Maya, or illusion:38 the motivational significance of
ongoing events is clearly determined by the nature of the goal toward which
behavior is devoted. That goal is conceptualized in episodic imagery—in
fantasy. We constantly compare the world at present to the world idealized in
fantasy, render affective judgment, and act in consequence. Trivial promises
and satisfactions indicate that we are doing well, are progressing toward our
goals. An unexpected opening in the flow of pedestrians appears before us, when
we are in a hurry; we rush forward, pleased at the occurrence. We get somewhere
a little faster than we had planned and feel satisfied with our intelligent
planning. Profound promises or satisfactions, by contrast, validate our global
conceptualizations—indicate that our emotions are likely to stay regulated on
the path we have chosen. Trivial threats or punishments indicate flaws in our
means of attaining desired ends. We modify our behavior accordingly and
eliminate the threat. When the elevator does not appear at the desired time, we
take the stairs. When a stoplight slows us down, we run a bit faster, once it
shuts off, than we might have otherwise. Profound threats and punishments
(read: trauma) have a qualitatively different nature. Profound threats or
punishments undermine our ability to believe that our conceptualizations of the
present are valid and that our goals are appropriate. Such occurrences disturb
our belief in our ends (and, not infrequently, in our starting points).

We construct our idealized world, in fantasy, according to all the information
we have at our disposal. We use what we know to build an image of what we could
have and, therefore,

Figure 3: Normal Life





of what we should do. But we compare our interpretation of the world as it
unfolds in the present to the desired world, in imagination, not to mere
expectation; we compare what we have (in interpretation) to what we want,
rather than to what we merely think will be. Our goal setting, and consequent
striving, is motivated: we chase what we desire, in our constant attempts to
optimize our affective states. (Of course, we use our behavior to ensure that
our dreams come true; that is healthy “adaptation.” But we still compare what
is happening to what we want—to what we desire to be—not merely to what we
coldbloodedly expect.)

The maps that configure our motivated behavior have a certain comprehensible
structure. They contain two fundamental and mutually interdependent poles, one
present, the other future. The present is sensory experience as it is currently
manifested to us—as we currently understand it—granted motivational
significance according to our current knowledge and desires. The future is an
image or partial image of perfection, to which we compare the present, insofar
as we understand its significance. Wherever there exists a mismatch between the
two, the unexpected or novel occurs (by definition), grips our attention, and
activates the intrapsychic systems that govern fear and hope.39 We strive to
bring novel occurrences back into the realm of predictability or to exploit
them for previously unconsidered potential by altering our behavior or our
patterns of representation. We conceive of a path connecting present to future.
This path is “composed” of the behaviors required to produce the
transformations we desire— required to turn the (eternally) insufficient
present into the (ever-receding) paradisal future. This path is normally
conceived of as linear, so to speak, as something analogous to Thomas Kuhn's
notion of normal science, wherein known patterns of behavior operating upon an
understood present will produce a future whose desirability is an unquestioned
given.40

Anything that interferes with our potential means to a specified end is
punishing or threatening, in the rather trivial sense described previously.
Encounter with punishments or threats of this category merely oblige us to
choose an alternative mean from among the number we generally have present. A
similar situation obtains for promises and satisfactions. When a means produces
the end desired (or furthers progress along that path) we experience
satisfaction (and hope—as an interim end accomplished also signifies increased
likelihood of success, farther out in the future). Such satisfaction brings our
particular behaviors to an end; we switch goals and continue into the future.
Modification of our means, as a consequence of the motivational significance of
the outcomes of those means, might be considered normal adaptation. The
structure of normal adaptation is schematically portrayed in Figure 3: Normal
Life. We posit a goal, in image and word, and we compare present conditions to
that goal. We evaluate the significance of ongoing events in light of their
perceived relationship to the goal. We modify our behavioral outputs—our
means—when necessary, to make the attainment of our goal ever more likely. We
modify our actions within the game but accept the rules without question. We
move in a linear direction from present to future.

