# Fine
[Metadata]: # {08}
[Descriptor]: # {08}
[Author]: # {peterson}
Fine
# Fine
NOTES





Preface


1. Jung, C.G. (1978a), p. 78; also:

Although seemingly paradoxical,

the person who takes upon himself,

the people's humiliation,

is fit to rule;

and he is fit to lead,

who takes the country's disasters upon himself. (Lao-Tzu, 1984c)



“Sometimes I look at a Socialist—the intellectual, tract-writing type of
Socialist, with his

2. pullover, his fuzzy hair, and his Marxian quotation—and wonder what the
devil his motive really is. It is often difficult to believe that it is a love
of anybody, especially of the working class, from whom he is of all people the
furthest removed.” (Orwell, G. [1981], pp. 156–157)

3. Jung, C.G. (1970a), p. 157.

4. Ibid., p. 158.

5. Ten years later, when I was finishing this manuscript, a student of mine,
Heidi Treml, wrote:

During the journey from Egypt to Canaan the impatient Israelites accused God
and Moses of leading them into the desert to die. As a consequence of this
complaining, Yahweh sent venomous serpents among the Israelites. Those
Israelites who were not bitten by the serpents repented and asked Moses to
intervene with God. Yahweh instructed Moses to make a bronze [or fiery] serpent
and to place it on top of a pole so that those who were bitten could behold it
and live. Moses did as he was commanded and, whenever a snake bit someone, that
person would look at the bronze statue and live [Numbers 21:5–10]…. John the
Evangelist has Jesus explaining to Nicodemus, “And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; That
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life.” [John
3:13–15]



Treml pointed out that the serpent has been widely regarded both as an agent of
death (because of its venom) and as an agent of transformation and rebirth
(because it could shed its skin). This intense ambivalence of feature makes it
an apt representative of the “numinous” (following Rudolf Otto, whose ideas are
described later in this manuscript). The numinous is able to invoke trembling
and fear (mysterium tremendum) and powerful attraction and fascination
(mysterium fascinans). Treml commented, further: “if a person could sustain the
gaze of the serpent—which symbolized his greatest fear—he would be healed.”

Why was Christ assimilated to the serpent, in my painting and in the New
Testament? (Understand that I knew nothing whatsoever of this relationship when
I originally constructed the sketch.) It has something to do with his
representation as judge in Revelations:

I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or
hot.

So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee
out of my mouth.

Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked:

I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich;
and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou mayest
see. (Revelations 3:15–19)



The idea of the Savior necessarily implies the Judge—and a judge of the most
implacable sort—because the Savior is a mythological representation ofthat
which is ideal, and the ideal always stands in judgment over the actual. The
archetypal image of the Savior, who represents perfection or completion, is
therefore terrifying in precise proportion to personal distance from the ideal.

6. Joyce, J. (1986), p. 28.

7. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 32.

8. Ibid., pp. 32–33.





Chapter 1


9. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' tape measure sold for $45,000 in 1996 (Gould,
L., Andrews, D., & Yevin, J. [1996 December], p. 46).

10. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 92–93.

11. Ibid., pp. 10–11.

12. Eliade, M. (1978b).

13. Jung, C.G. (1933), p. 204.

14. Nietzsche, F. (1981), pp. 69–70. Nietzsche referred to “the English” in the
original; the viewpoint he was criticizing is so widely held now that my
substitution of “modern Westerners” seems perfectly apropos.

15. Fukuyama, F. (1993).

16. Nietzsche, F. In Kaufmann, W. (1975), p. 126.

17. There are at least four independent Sumerian narratives (including the
Enuma elish, detailed later) that describe the origin of the cosmos. Eliade
assumes a “plurality of traditions,” most likely deriving from the peoples
whose union produced Sumerian civilization. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 59.

18. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 57–58.

19. Nietzsche, F. (1966), pp. 97–98.

20. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), pp. 77–78.

21. Dostoevsky, F. In Kaufmann, W. (1975), pp. 75–76.

22. Frye, N. (1990), pp. 90–92.

23. Richard Wilhelm translated the Chinese Tao, the ground of being, the way,
as “sinn,” the German equivalent of “meaning” (Wilhelm, R. [1971], p. iv). The
way is a path of life, guided by processes manifested outside the area
circumscribed by defined, logic, internally consistent cognitive structures.
From such a perspective, meaningful experiences might be considered
“guideposts” marking the path to a new mode of being. Any form of art that
produces an aesthetic seizure, or intimation of meaning, might therefore serve
as such a guidepost—at least in principle (see Solzhenitsyn, A.I. [1990], pp.
623–630).

24. See, for example, Eliade, M. (1975).





Chapter 2


25. Gray, J.A. (1982; 1987); Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. (1996); Gray, J.A.,
Feldon, J., Rawlins, J.N.P., Hemsley, D.R., & Smith, A.D. (1996).

26. Sokolov, E.N. (1969), p. 672.

27. Ibid. (1969), p. 673.

28. These “maps” are so important to us, so vital, that their mere abstract
description (acted, orally transmitted or written) is intrinsically
interesting, capable of engaging us in a simulated world (see Oatley, K.
[1994]).

29. Vinogradova, O. (1961; 1975); Luria, A.R. (1980).

30. Lao Tzu (1984b).

31. Ohman, A. (1979); Vinogradova, O. (1961).

32. Ibid.

33. Obrist, P.A., Light, K.C., Langer, A.W., Grignolo, A., & McCubbin, J.A.
(1978).

34. Gray, J.A. (1982).

35. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 88.

36. Gray, J.A. (1982).

37. I use the term “promise” here partly because it makes a good (that is,
symmetric) counterpart to “threat.” The term “promise” used here means
“incentive reward” or “cue for satisfaction” or “cue for consummatory reward.”
Furthermore, neither the former term, nor the latter, appear particularly
appropriate for the positive state induced by contact with novelty. Novelty
does not seem reasonably categorized as a “reward"; also, positive affect can
be generated through contact with novelty, in the absence of any conditioning
whatsover (Gray, J.A. [1982]), so the term “cue” seems inappropriate.

38. Eliade, M. (1978b); Jung, C.G. (1969).

39. Gray, J.A. (1982; 1987); Gray, J.A., & McNaughton, N. (1996).

40. Kuhn, T.S. (1970).

41. Ibid., (1970).

42. Obrist, P.A., Light, K.C., Langer, A.W., Grignolo, A., & McCubbin, J.A.
(1978).

43. Kuhn, T.S. (1970).

44. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 540–541.

45. Jung, C.G. (1967a; 1968; 1967b); Ellenberger, H. (1970); Campbell, J.
(1968); Eliade, M. (1964; 1978b; 1982; 1985); Piaget, J. (1977).

46. Bruner, J. (1986).

47. Eliade, M. (1965).

48. Jung, C.J. (1967a; 1968b; 1969; 1967b); Eliade, M. (1978b; 1982; 1985).

49. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), pp. 203–204.

50. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 59.

51. Frankl, V. (1971), pp. 70–72.

52. Skinner, B.F. (1966; 1969).

53. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 605–606.

54. Gray, J.A. (1982); Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. (1996); Pihl, R.O. &
Peterson, J.B. (1993; 1995); Tomarken, A.J., Davidson, R.J., Wheeler, R.E., &
Doss, R.C. (1992); Wheeler, R.E., Davidson, R.J., & Tomarken, A.J. (1993);
Tomarken, A.J., Davidson, R.J., & Henriques, J.B. (1990); Davidson, R.J. & Fox,
N.A. (1982).

55. Gray, J.A. (1982); Ikemoto, S. & Panksepp, J. (1996).

56. Wise, R.A. (1988); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

57. Gray, J.A. (1982).

58. Mowrer, O.H. (1960).

59. Wise, R.A. (1988); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

60. Gray, J.A. (1982).

61. Reviewed in Gray, J.A. (1982).

62. Skinner, B.F. (1966; 1969).

63. Panksepp, J., Siviy, S. & Normansell, L.A. (1985).

64. Gray, J.A. (1982).

65. Ibid.; Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

66. Gray, J.A. (1982).

67. Ibid.

68. Ibid.

69. Ibid.

70. Ibid.

71. Ibid.

72. Reviewed in Gray, J.A. (1982).

73. Reviewed in Gray, J.A. (1982); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

73. Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

74. Wise, R.A. (1988); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

75. Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

76. Ibid., (1950).

77. Luria, A.R. (1980).

78. Goldman-Rakic, P.S. (1987); Shallice,T. (1982); Milner, B., Petrides, M., &
Smith, M.L. (1985).

79. Oatley, K. (1994).

80. Patton, M.F. (1988), p. 29.

81. Gray, J.A. (1982).

82. Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

83. Gray, J.A. (1982); Gray, J.A., Feldon, J., Rawlins, J.N.P., Hemsley, D.R.,
& Smith, A.D. (1991).

84. Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

85. Gray, J.A. (1982); Fowles, D.C. (1980; 1983; 1988; 1994).

86. Wise, R.A. (1988); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987); Gray, J.A. (1982).

87. Gray, J.A. (1982).

88. Wise, R.A. (1988); Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

89. Gray, J.A. (1982).

90. Damasio, A.R. (1994; 1996); Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H. & Damasio,
A.R. (1996); Bechara, A., Damasio, H.,Tranel, D., & Damasio, A.R. (1997).

91. Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A.R. (1997); Damasio, A.R.
(1994); Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H. & Damasio, A.R. (1996).

92. Luria, A.R. (1980); Nauta, W.J.H. (1971).

93. Luria, A.R. (1980); Granit, R. (1977).

94. Luria, A.R. (1980).

95. Ibid.

96. Sokolov, E.N. (1963); Vinogradova, O. (1975); Gray, J.A. (1982; 1987);
Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. (1996).

97. Gray, J.A. (1982; 1987); Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. (1996); Sokolov, E.N.
(1969); Vinogradova, O. (1975); Halgren, E., Squires, N.K., Wilson, C.L.,
Rohrbaugh, J.W., Babb, T.L., & Crandell, P.H. (1980); Watanabe, T. & Niki, H.
(1985).

98. See Aggleton, J.P (1993).

99. Halgren, E. (1992), p. 205.

100. Ibid.

101. Ibid., p. 206.

102. Halgren, E. (1992).

103. Ohman, A. (1979; 1987).

104. Halgren, E. (1992), p. 206.

105. For reviews of supporting evidence, see Tucker, D.M. & Williamson, P.A.
(1984); Davidson, R.J. (1984a; 1984b; 1992); Goldberg, E., Podell, K., &
Lovell, H. (1994); Goldberg, R (1995); Goldberg, E. & Costa, L.D. (1981); for
some indication of why two different systems may in fact be necessary, see
Grossberg, S. (1987).

106. Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950).

107. Ohman, A. (1979; 1987).

108. Brown, R. (1986); Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., &
Boyes-Braem. (1976); Lakoff, G. (1987); Wittgenstein, L. (1968).

109. Eliade, M. (1978b).

110. Sokolov, E.N. (1969); Vinogradova, O. (1975); Gray, J.A. (1982); Gray,
J.A. (1987); Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. (1996).

111. Aggleton, J.P. (1993).

112. For a discussion of the simplicity and general utility of “default-on”
systems (as opposed to “default-off”) see Brooks, A. & Stein, L.A. (1993);
Brooks, A. (1991).

113. LeDoux, J.E. (1992).

114. Ibid.

115. Luria, A.R. (1980).

116. This point appears to me to be related to the stability-plasticity dilemma
outlined by Grossberg, S. (1987).

117. Blanchard, D.C. & Blanchard, R.J. (1972); Bouton, M.E. &, Bolles, R.C.
(1980); LeDoux, J.E., Sakaguchi, A., & Reis, D.J. (1984).

118. Blanchard, D.C. & Blanchard, R.J. (1972).

119. Kapp, B.S., Pascoe, J.P., & Bixler, M.A. (1984); Iwata, J., Chida, K., &
LeDoux, J.E. (1987).

120. LeDoux, J.E. (1992).

121. Recent work conducted on three related phenomena—latent inhibition,
prepulse inhibition of startle, and negative priming—illustrates the essential
validity of this viewpoint. “Latent inhibition” (LI) is the difficulty in
learning that “a” signifies “b,” when “a” previously signified “c” (where “c”
is, most frequently, nothing) (see Lubow, R.E. [1989], for a review of the
literature; Gray, J.A. & McNaughton, N. [1996] and Gray, J.A., Feldon, J.,
Rawlins, J.N.P., Hemsley, D.R., & Smith, A.D. [1991] for a discussion of
putative neuropsychology). If you expose a caged rat repeatedly to a
intermittent light, paired with a shock, he becomes afraid of the light. In
classical terms, the light has become a conditioned stimulus for shock, and
therefore elicits fear. However, if you have pre-exposed the rat to the same
light, repeatedly, in the absence of any consequence, then he takes
substantially longer to learn the new light/shock connection. Latent inhibition
(LI) provides an example of the difficulty in learning (new valence),
consequential to previous learning (an alternative is provided by the related
Kamin blocking effect [Jones, S.H., Gray, J.A., & Hemsley, D.R. (1992)]). The
capacity for LI characterizes a variety of animal species, as well as man; the
phenomena itself can be elicited using a number of different experimental
paradigms (using differently valenced “unconditioned” stimuli). Acute
first-onset schizophrenics and their close “cousins” (schizotypes)—overwhelmed
by their everyday experience—manifest decreased LI, as do individuals taking
amphetamines or other dopa-minergic agonists (which produce heightened
exploratory behavior [Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987)]). Antipsychotic
medications, which damp down the a priori significance of things, normalize
this decrease.

Prepulse inhibition (PPI) of startle occurs when the magnitude of a startle
response to an intense, unexpected “stimuli” (such as a loud noise) is
attenuated as a consequence of a “hint” (such as a similar, but less intense
noise) given 30–500 msec earlier. The fact of the hint apparently decreases the
relative novelty (the unpredictability) of the more intense subsequent stimuli,
at least among normal individuals; alternatively, it might be regarded as an
analog of graduated exposure (the procedure by which behavioral therapists
“desensitize” the fear responses of their clients). Schizophrenics, once again,
or persons with related cognitive abnormalities (Swerdlow, N.R, Filion, D.,
Geyer, M.A., & Braff, D.L. [1995]) manifest decreased PPI, indicating, perhaps,
that they cannot effectively use the capacity to predict, on the basis of past
experience, to modulate their affective/psychophysiological responses to
stimuli that “intrinsically demand” response (to “unconditioned stimuli,” in
the old terminology).

Individuals participating in the “negative priming” paradigm must learn to
respond to a stimulus that appears in the same place recently (< 350 msec)
occupied by an irrelevant or distractor stimulus. Normals are better at
defining a place as irrelevant than are schizophrenic or schizotypic
individuals—hence, their reaction times, when “negatively primed,” are longer
(Swerdlow, N.R., Filion, D., Geyer, M.A., & Braff, D.L. [1995]). The negative
priming paradigm, like the others, demonstrates that irrelevancy (the cardinal
characteristic of the unassociated “conditioned stimulus”) must be learned and
may be unlearned (sometimes with devastating consequences). At issue,
therefore, is the a priori status of the conditioned stimulus with regard to
valence and how that status might be altered or “explored away.” The
experiments utilizing LI (and related procedures) are fascinating—and
critically important—because they demonstrate that the irrelevance of most
context-dependent irrelevant things is not given. Irrelevance must be learned;
furthermore, such learning is sufficiently powerful to interfere with
subsequent learning, when motivational contingencies shift. The original
curiosity- or hope-inducing aspect of now-familiar things appears to be driven
by disinhibited amygdalic-driven dopaminergic activation in the nucleus
accumbens (Gray, J.A., Feldon, J., Rawlins, J.N.P., Hemsley, D.R., & Smith,
A.D. [1991]) which is the same center activated by most, if not all,
“positively reinforcing” drugs of abuse (Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. [1987]).
The “fear-inducing aspect"—which must logically co-exist—has received less
attention (although the role of the amygdala in producing novelty-driven fear
is well-established, as described previously). It is these twin aspects—threat
and promise, inducing a priori fear and hope (relevance, in its most
fundamental guise)—that normally lie beyond (Huxley, A. [1956]) William Blake's
“doors of perception” and that lend to existence itself its “intrinsic” (and
sometimes overwhelming) meaning:

If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it
is, infinite.

For man has closed himself up, till he sees all things thro' narrow chinks of
his cavern.

(Blake, W. [1946], p. 258)



Physiological or environmental events that open these doors allow us insight
into the original nature of things; such insight, when involuntary (as it
appears to be in the case of schizophrenia, for example) is of sufficient power
to terrify and, perhaps, to destroy. The a priori valence of the object is
potent, and potentially terrifying (as terrifying, literally, as anything
imaginable). Our normal circumstances, our prior learning, protect us from this
valence; they shield us, restrict our access to meaning as such. Events that
interfere with the stability of that learning or with its conditional validity
have the capacity to allow meaning to re-emerge, with its awful force
unshielded.

122. Luria, A.R. (1980), pp. 30–32.

123. Hebb, D.O. & Thompson, W.R. (1985), p. 766.

124. Blanchard, R.J. & Blanchard, D.C. (1989).

125. Blanchard, D.C., Blanchard, R.J., & Rodgers, R.J. (1991).

126. Pinel, J.P.J. & Mana, M.J. (1989).

127. Blanchard, R.J., Blanchard, D.C., & Hori, K. (1989).

128. Blanchard, R.J. & Blanchard, D.C. (1989).

129. Blanchard, D.C., Veniegas, R., Elloran, I., & Blanchard, R.J. (1993).

130. Lorenz, K. (1974).

131. Goodall, J. (1990).

132. Exploration is not merely specification of the “inherent” properties of
the unexpected thing or situation. The actual nature of things or situations
(from the perspective of valence and objective classification) is dependent
upon the behavioral strategies employed in its presence, and on the ends that
are currently being pursued. This means that determinate experience must be
considered an emergent property of behavior to a degree that is presently
unspecifiable. This appears as true for the purely objective aspects of
experience (which constitute the subject matter for science) (see Kuhn, T.
[1970]; Feyeraband, P.K. [1981]) as for the subjective.

The word itself, as case in point, can no longer reasonably be regarded as a
“label” for a “thing” (Wittgenstein, L. [1968], pp. 46e–47e). The notion that a
concept is a label for an object is nothing but a slightly higher-order version
of the same error. Wittgenstein pointed out, essentially, that our sense of
unified “thing” is not simply given (Wittgenstein, L. [1968]). We tend to think
of the objects we perceive as “being there” in some essential sense; but we see
the tree before the branches. Despite this conceptual phenomenon, the tree has
no objective precedence over the branches (or the leaves, or the cells that
make up the leaves, or the forest, for that matter). Roger Brown, following
Wittgenstein's lead, demonstrated that “objects” have their “basic
levels”—their levels of resolution, essentially, that appear most easily and
rapidly learned by children, and constant across cultures (Brown, R. [1986]).

Wittgenstein solved the “words are not labels for objects” problem by positing
that a word was a tool. A word plays a role in a game and is akin to a chessman
in chess (Wittgenstein, L. [1968], pp. 46e–47e). “The meaning of a piece is its
role in the game” (Wittgenstein, L. [1968], p. 150e). He noted, furthermore,
that the “game” has “not only rules, but a point” (Wittgenstein, L. [1968], p.
150e).

Wittgenstein was driving at a general principle: an object is defined, even
perceived (categorized as a unity, rather than a multiplicity), with regard to
its utility as a means to a given end. In a basic sense, an object is a tool or
an obstacle. What we perceive as objects are phenomena that may be easily
utilized (to grant our desires)—at least in principle (or things that may well
interfere with our attainment of desired ends). Facilitators are valenced,
positively (as incentive rewards); obstacles, negatively (as punishments or
threats). Normal facilitators and obstacles have minor valence, relatively
speaking; their revolutionary counterparts may produce overwhelming emotion
(think of Archimedes' “Eureka!”). What can reasonably be parsed out of the
environmental flux as an object is therefore determined in large part by the
goal we have in mind while interacting with that flux. This complex situation
is further complicated by the fact that the valence of objects, once given as
objects, may still change with alteration in the ends we are pursuing (because
tools in one situation may easily become obstacles—or something irrelevant—in
another). Finally, many things that could manifest themselves as objects, at a
given time or place, will not (because they are apparently irrelevant to the
task at hand, and remain invisible).

133. Luria, A.R. (1980).

134. Granit, R. (1977).

135. Agnew, N.M. & Brown, J.L. (1990).

136. Holloway, R.L. & Post, D.G. (1982).

137. Jerison, H.J. (1979).

138. Ridgeway, S.H. (1986).

139. Lilly, J.C. (1967).

140. Penfield, W. & Rasmussen, T. (1950).

141. Brown, R. (1986).

142. Garey, L.J. & Revishchin, A.V. (1990).

143. Granit, R. (1977).

144. Ibid.

145. Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987).

146. Granit, R. (1977).

147. Oatley, K. (1994).

148. For reviews of supporting evidence, see Tucker, D.M. & Williamson, P.A.
(1984); Davidson, R.J. (1984a, 1984b, 1992); Goldberg, E., Podell, K., &
Lovell, H. (1994); Goldberg, E. (1995); Goldberg, E. & Costa, L.D. (1981); for
some indication of why two different systems may in fact be necessary, see
Grossberg, S. (1987).

149. Fox, N.A. & Davidson, R.J. (1986, 1988).

150. Maier, N.R.F. & Schnierla, T.C. (1935).

151. Schnierla, T.C. (1959).

152. See review by Springer, S.P. & Deutsch, G. (1989).

153. Goldberg, E. (1995); Goldberg, E. & Costa, L.D. (1981); Goldberg, E.,
Podell, K., & Lovell, H. (1994).

154. Springer, S.P. & Deutsch, G. (1989).

155. Fox, N.A. & Davidson, R.J. (1986, 1988).

156. Goldberg, E. & Costa, L.D. (1981).

157. Goldberg, E. (1995).

158. Donald, M. (1993).

159. “We believe that the internal and external states which constitute the
response to the stimulus are identical with the ‘evaluation’ of the stimulus”
(Kling, A.S. & Brothers, L.A. [1992], p. 372); “affect is no more and no less
than the confluence and integration of sensory information in several
modalities, combined with immediate coactivation of somatic effector systems
(motor, autonomic and endocrine)” (p. 371); “reciprocal connections between
amygaloid nuclei and the hippocampal formation may serve to link affective
response patterns with the encoding of perceptions in memory, thus providing
rapid access to appropriate motivational states when complex social situations
or particular individuals are reencountered” (p. 356).

160. Vitz, P.C. (1990).

161. Ibid.

162. Ibid.

163. Ryle, G. (1949).

164. Milner, B. (1972); Zola-Morgan, S., Squire, L.R., & Amaral, D.G. (1986);
Teylor, T.J. & Discenna, P. (1985, 1986).

165. Squire, L.R. & Zola-Morgan, S. (1990).

166. Ibid.

167. Squire and Zola-Morgan state:

The term declarative, which we have used, captures the notion that one kind of
memory can be “declared”; it can be brought to mind explicitly, as a
proposition or image. The capacity for declarative memory may be a relatively
recent feat of evolution, appearing early in the vertebrates with the
development of the hippocampus, and the capacity for declarative memory may be
ontogenetically delayed. Procedural knowledge, by contrast, can be expressed
only through performance, and the contents of this knowledge are not accessible
to awareness. Procedural knowledge is considered to be phylogenetically
primitive and ontogenetically early…. We agree with Tulving and his colleagues
that the episodic-semantic distinction, which has something interesting to say
about the structure of normal memory, is a subset of declarative
(prepositional) memory. (Squire, L.R. & Zola-Morgan, S. [1990], p. 138.).



My presupposition is that a story is a semantic representation of an episodic
representation of the outputs of the procedural system: a verbal description of
an image of behavior (and the consequences of that behavior).

168. Schachter, D.L. (1994).

169. Kagan, J. (1984).

170. Piaget, J. (1962), p. 3.

171. Ibid., p. 5.

172. Ibid.

173. Ibid., p. 6.

174. Adler, A. (1958); Vaihinger, H. (1924).

175. Oatley, K. (1994).

176. Donald, M. (1993).

177. An idea is (in part) an abstracted action, whose consequences can be
analyzed in abstracted fantasy. The distance between the idea and the action
has widened within the course of recent evolutionary history. Medieval people,
unused to rhetorical speech, were easily seized emotionally or inspired to
action by passionate words (see Huizinga, J. [1967]). In the modern world,
flooded by meaningless speech, words have lost much of their immediate
procedural power, under normal conditions. However, music still unconsciously
compels movement, dance or, at least, the compulsion to keep the beat. Even
chimpanzees seem capable of becoming possessed by simple rhythms (see Campbell,
J. [1987], pp. 358–359). In addition, modern individuals are still easily
seized and motivated by drama, like that portrayed in motion pictures—much like
the “primitive” seized by ritual—and can easily lose themselves in the act of
acting “as if” the drama is actually happening. In the absence of this seizure,
which is meaningful, drama loses its interest. Rhetoric—the call to action—also
still dominates advertising, with evident effect.

178. “Meaningful” drama, or meaningful information, per se, has that
characteristic because it produces affect, indicative of occurrence outside of
predictability, and because it implies something for alteration of behavior.
The phenomenon of meaning occurs when information can be translated from one
“level” of memory to another, or to all others.

179. Piaget, J. (1932).

180. Piaget, J. (1962).

181. Nietzsche, F. (1966), p. 98.

182. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 217.

183. Ibid., p. 203.

184. Wittgenstein, L. (1968).

185. Eliade, M. (1978b).

186. Wittgenstein, L. (1968), p. 16e.

187. An analogous notion of “goal-hierarchy” was presented by Carver, C.S. &
Scheier, M.F. (1982).

188. Eysenck, H.J. (1995).

189. Shallice, T. (1982).

190. Milner, B., Petrides, M., & Smith, M.L. (1985).

191. Petrides, M. & Milner, B. (1982).

192. Milner, B. (1963).

193. “And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of
it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on
it. And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD God of
Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac.” (Genesis 28:12–13)

194. Frye, N. (1982), p. 220.

195. Eliade, M. (1957), pp. 107–108.

196. Brown, R. (1965), p. 476.

197. Ibid., p. 478.

198. Goethe, J.W. (1976).

199. Frazier, J.G. (1994).

200. Brown, R. (1986), p. 470.

201. Lakoff, G. (1987), pp. 12–13.

202. Brown, R. (1965), p. 321.

203. Wittgenstein, L. (1968), pp. 66–71.

204. See Armstrong, S.L., Gleitman, L.R., & Gleitman, H. (1983).

205. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 57–58.

206. Heidel, A. (1965).

207. Eliade, M. (1978b).

208. “Logosλδγοζ. and Philos. [Gr. logos word, speech, discourse, reason, f.
log-, ablaut-variant of Piaget, J. (1932). leg- in leg-ein to say.] A term used
by Greek (esp. Hellenistic and Neo-Platonist) philosophers in certain
metaphysical and theological applications developed from one or both of its
ordinary senses ‘reason’ and ‘word’; also adopted in three passages of the
Johannine writings of the N.T. (where the English versions render it by ‘Word’)
as a designation of Jesus Christ; hence employed by Christian theologians, esp.
those who were versed in Greek philosophy, as a title of the Second Person of
the Trinity. By mod. writers the Gr. word is used untranslated in historical
expositions of ancient philosophical speculation, and in discussions of the
doctrine of the Trinity in its philosophical aspects.” (Oxford English
Dictionary: CD-ROM for Windows [1994]).

209. Eliade, M. (1978b); Jung, C.G. (1967b).

210. Shakespeare, W. (1952).

211. Neumann, E. (1955, 1954); Jung, C.G. (1976b, 1967b, 1968b, 1967a); Eliade,
M. (1978b).

212. Ibid.

213. Ibid.

214. Brown, R. (1986).

215. Brown, R. (1986); Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976); Lakoff, G. (1987).

216. Lao Tzu (1984a).

217. Vierge Ouvrante, reproduced as plate 177 in Neumann, E. (1955).

218. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 88–89.

219. See Frye, N. (1990).

220. Heidel, A. (1965).

221. Frye, N. (1982), p. 146.

222. Frye, N. (1990).

223. Tablet 1:4; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

224. Tablet 1:5; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

225. Tablet 1:6–8; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

226. Tablet 1:9; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

227. Ea is also known as Nudimmud, in the original text. I have used the single
appellation here, for the sake of simplicity.

228. Tablet 1:17; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

229. Tablet 1:18–19; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

230. Tablet 1:20; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 18.

231. Tablet 1:23; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 19.

232. Tablet 1:80; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 21.

233. Tablet 1:86; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 21.

234. Tablet 1:90-102; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 21–22.

235. Tablet 1:133–138; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 23.

236. Tablet 1:156; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 24.

237. Tablet 2:1–10; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 25.

238. Tablet 2:96–117; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 28–29.

239. Tablet 2:118–129; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 29–30.

240. Jacobsen, T. (1943).

241. Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 30–31.

242. Tablet 3:1–66; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 30–33.

243. Tablet 3:131–138, 4:1–10; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 35–36.

244. According to Campbell, J. (1964), p. 82.

245. Ibid.

246. Tablet 4:27–34; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 37–38.

247. Tablet 4:87–94; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 40.

248. Tablet 4:129–144; Heidel, A. (1965), pp. 42–43.

249. Yahweh's role in creation is considered similarly, in relationship to
Rahab, or Leviathan—the serpent from whom the world is constructed. Isaiah 51:9
states, for example “Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake,
as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath
cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?” Psalm 74 contains several comparable
passages (14–17):

Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the
people inhabiting

the wilderness. Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up
mighty rivers. The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared
the light and the sun. Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast
made summer and winter.



250. Tablet 6:8; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 46.

251. Tablet 6:49–51; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 48.

252. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 73–74.

253. Ibid., pp. 74–76.

254. Tablet 6:151; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 52.

255. Tablet 6:152–153; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 53.

256. Tablet 6:155–156; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 53.

257. Tablet 7:1–2; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 53.

258. Tablet 7:21; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 54.

259. Tablet 7:30; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 55.

260. Tablet 7:39; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 55.

261. Tablet 7:81; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 57.

262. Tablet 7:112, 7:115; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 58.

263. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 89.

264. In Pritchard, J.B. (1955), p. 4.

265. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 89–90.

266. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 91.

267. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 91–92. It is of additional interest to note that
the Egyptians prohibited foreigners from entering their sanctuaries, which were
“microcosmic images of the country”; native Egyptians were the only “rightful
inhabitants” of Egypt, the “first country formed,” and the “center of the
world.” Foreigners brought disorder (Eliade, M. [1978b], p. 90).

268. Eliade comments: “When Horus descended into the otherworld and
resuscitated Osiris, he bestowed on him the power of “knowing.” Osiris was an
easy victim because he “did not know,” he had no knowledge of Seth's true
nature.” (Eliade, M. [1978b], p. 100, footnote 41). The story of Osiris is in
part a parable about the dangers of the incapacity to recognize evil.

269. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 100.

270. Anaximander of Miletus (611 B.C. to 546 B.C.).

271. William James, in the throes of nitrous oxide intoxication. Quoted by
Tymoczko, D. (May 1996), p. 100.

272. These myths express the fact that the unknown tends to manifest itself
first in terrifying form.

273. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 205–207.

274. Derived from The Self-Consuming Dragon, an allegorical figure in the works
of Lamspringk, reproduced as plate LIXa in Jung (1967a).

275. Neumann, E. (1954), pp. 10–11.

276. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 145.

277. Evans, P.I. (1973). See also footnote 593.

278. Cornford, F.M. (1956).

279. Wilhelm, R. (1971), pp. liv–lvii.

280. Ibid.

281. Eliade, M. (1957), p. 29.

282. “Indra's combat served as model for the battles that the Aryans had to
sustain against the Dasyus (also termed vrtani): ‘he who triumphs in a battle,
he truly kills V r□tra’ (Maitrayana-Samhita 2.1.3.).” (Eliade, M. [1978b], p.
207).

283. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 104, footnote 48.

284. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 320. Eliade also points out that the name Faridun
is derived from Thraetona (Thraetona—Freton—Faridun), and states: “in Iran as
elsewhere, the process of historicization of mythical themes and personages is
counterbalanced by a contrary process: the real adversaries of the nation or
the empire are imagined as monsters, and especially as dragons.”

285. Eliade, M. (1957), pp. 29–32.

286. Stevenson, M.S. (1920), p. 354.

287. Eliade, M. (1991b), p. 19.

288. Neumann, E. (1955), faceplate, Part II.

289. Whitehead, A.N. (1958), p. xx.

290. Otto, R. (1958).

291. Ibid., pp. 12–13.

292. Jung, C.G. (1971), p. 477.

293. There is good evidence for actual independence of subpersonalities in the
human imagination (in the episodic and procedural memory systems [?]), and
incontrovertible evidence for the use of metaphoric personality in ritual, art
and literature. There are many forms of normal experience that involve the
explicit participation of “foreign” personalities, or partial personalities.
These include dreams, in which characters appear within experience in known and
unknown guise, and follow what are apparently their own intrinsic and often
incomprehensible laws of behavior (see Jung, C.G. [1968b] for an analysis of an
extensive series of dreams [the physicist Wolfgang Pauli's, as it happens]).

Moods, arriving upon the stage of consciousness, influence perception, memory,
cognition and behavior, producing perplexing outbursts of sadness and rage on
the part of the person who is so influenced (Jung identified the “anima,” the
archetype of the feminine, with mood [see Jung, C.G. (1968a), p. 70]). “Active
imagination” (see Jung, C.G. [1968a], p. 190), a process that might be compared
to purposive daydreaming—with mood as the focus—can generate images and
fantasies associated with that mood. Participation in this process helps
illuminate the structure of the “personalities” associated with given states of
emotional seizure.

In states of abnormal tension and in psychopathological or neurological
breakdown the effects of foreign personalities are easily observable.
Individuals afflicted with Tourette's syndrome appear “possessed” by a complex
spirit, for want of a better description, whose personality uncannily matches
that of the Trickster of the North American Indian (see Sacks, O. [1987]; Jung,
C.G. [1968a], pp. 255–274).

Schizophrenic breakdown involves the apparent participation of many fragmented
personalities who make their appearance in voices and urges “foreign” to the
assaulted mind of the psychotic (see Jung, C.G. [1967a]; Romme, M.A. & Escher,
A.D. [1989]). The physiologist and schizophrenia researcher Doty states:

Among the more widely recognized diagnostic criteria are the “first rank”
symptoms identified by Kurt Schneider. As summarized by Crow and Johnstone,
these are: “(1) hearing one's thoughts spoken aloud within one's head, (2)
hearing voices arguing, (3) hearing voices that comment upon what one is doing,
(4) experiences of bodily influence (that bodily functions are affected by an
outside agency), (5) experiences that one's thoughts are being withdrawn from
or inserted into one's head, (6) thought diffusion or the experience that one's
thoughts are broadcast to others, (7) delusional perception (the attribution of
special significance to a particular perception), and (8) feelings or volitions
experienced as imposed on the patients by others.” This list of first rank
schizophrenic symptoms is uniquely fascinating in the present context, for, as
Nasrallah astutely phrases it, they can all be summarized by the basic idea
“that in the schizophrenic brain the unintegrated right-hemisphere
consciousness may become an ‘alien intruder’ on the verbally expressive left
hemisphere.” In other words, they are prototypical of what one might expect
were interhemispheric communication so distorted that the left hemisphere could
no longer identify the origin of activities in the right hemisphere as
belonging to the unified consciousness of self. (Doty, R.W. [1989], p. 3).



Cleghorn has reported that schizophrenics experiencing auditory hallucinations
were characterized by increased glucose uptake (assessed with positron-emission
tomography [PET] scan) in regions of the right hemisphere, corresponding to the
language areas of the left hemisphere (Cleghorn, J.M. [1988]). Doty suggests
that these right-hemisphere structures may have been released from tonic
inhibition by the dominant left-hemisphere language center, in the course of
the schizophrenic breakdown (Doty, R.W. [1989]).

Multiple personality disorder, a historically cycling condition (see
Ellenberger, H.F. [1970]), emerges when “personalities” and representations
thereof, external to the central ego, appear without union of memory, often in
those with dissociative tendencies who were punished severely and arbitrarily
early in life.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder reduces its victims to total domination by an
object of experience or a thought, producing behavioral and cognitive patterns
foreign to those afflicted (and to those concerned with the afflicted)
(Rapoport, J. [1989]). Shamanic and religious rituals, primitive initiation
rites and psychoactive chemicals produce complex physiological changes within
the individual brain, activating affectively based complexes that could not
otherwise reach consciousness, producing insights and affects not otherwise
attainable, with oftdramatic consequences. (It is of interest to note, in this
regard, that LSD and other psychotomimetic or hallucinogenic drugs are
characterized by their effect on the phylogenetically ancient serotonergic
brain-stem projections [see Doty, R.W. (1989)].)

Epileptic seizures, often accompanied by strange perceptual, emotional and
cognitive changes, run the gamut from awe-inspiring and holy to demonic and
terrifying (see Ervin, F. & Smith, M. [1986]). The discussion presented in this
chapter is particularly interesting, insofar as it describes pathological
alterations, not of systematic cognition, but of meaning. Ervin describes cases
where epileptic patients refuse pharmacological treatment, risking their
physiological and psychological well-being, because they are unwilling to forgo
the pre-epileptic “aura”—a condition of altered experience, preceding the
epileptic seizure per se. This “aura” may partake of the quality of
revelation—producing apparently profound subjective insight into the deepest
meaning of the universe, for example (although it is more commonly associated
with extreme terror). Before such states are packaged as pathological,
necessarily delusional, it should be remembered that Dostoyevski was epileptic,
altered, and perhaps deepened in psychological insight by the processes of his
illness. Such seizures can also induce violent outbursts, completely
dissociated from the individual's normal behavioral state (see Mark, V.H. &
Ervin, F.R. [1970]).

294. See Jung, C.G. (1967b).

295. With regard to the potentially four-dimensional structure of the human
memory system, see Teylor, T.J. & Discenna, P. (1986).

296. See Russell, J.B. (1986).

297. Jung states: “All numinous contents…. have a tendency to
self-amplification, that is to say they form the nuclei for an aggregation of
synonyms” (Jung, C.G. [1976b], p. 458). Contents in memory with the same
affective valence tend to group. This phenomena has long been recognized in the
case of depression. Depressed people are characterized by a bias toward the
perception, remembrance and conception of punishments: disappointment,
frustration (absences of expected rewards), loneliness and pain (see Beck, A.
[1979]).

298. See Gall, J. (1988).

299. This figure is derived from the tray painting The Triumph of Venus,
reproduced as plate 62 in Neumann, E. (1955).

300. The vesica pisces is a very complex symbol, associated with the fish that
is (waterdwelling) serpent, phallus and womb simultaneously. See Johnson, B.
(1988), particularly Part Nine: The Fish.

301. Eliade,M. (1982), pp. 20–21.

302. Eliade,M. (1982), p. 21.

303. Neumann, E. (1955), pp. 31–32.

304. This classic Freudian state of affairs is intelligently and accurately
portrayed in the movie Crumb (Zwigoff, T. [1995]).

305. Shelton, G. (1980), p. 45.

306. 306 Neumann, E. (1955), pp. 12–13.

307. It is my understanding that this progression has not been demonstrated,
and that the “patriarchal” deities stand in a secondary “psychological,” rather
than historical, relationship to the matriarchal deities (as “things derived
from the matrix”). Furthermore, as we have discussed, the “unknown” can also be
regarded as “derived” from the “known” (as “things defined in opposition to the
known”). For the purposes of this book, however, the precise
temporal/historical relationship of the various deities to one another is of
secondary importance, compared to the fact and meaning of their existence as
eternal “categories” of imagination.

308. Neumann, E. (1955), pp. 153–157.

309. See Bowlby, J. (1969). Bowlby investigated the curious fact that a
substantial proportion of orphaned or otherwise isolated babies, provided with
adequate food, basic physical care and shelter, still “failed to thrive” and
died. More recent research has been devoted toward investigation of the
processes underlying social attachment in general, and maternal attachment in
particular, and has focused in part on the role of the opiate system, which is
also involved in governing reaction to pain, frustration and
disappointment—broadly, to punishment (reviewed in Pihl, R.O. & Peterson, J.B.
[1992]).

310. Neumann, E. (1955), pp. 149–150.

311. See Neumann, E. (1955).

312. Kali, the Devourer, reproduced as plate 66 in Neumann, E. (1955).

313. From MacRae, G.W. (Trans.) (1988), p. 297.

314. A similar—and illuminating—conflation of source with attitude also
characterizes Christ's terminology with regard to himself. He is to be regarded
both as model for subjective stance (I am the way, the truth, and the life
[John 14:6]), but also as source of the “water of life” (If any man thirst, let
him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water [John 7:37–38]).

315. I am indebted to Mike McGarry for bringing these passages to my attention.

316. “Diana of Ephesus” (plate 35 in Neumann, E. [1955]).

317. See Neumann, E. (1955).

318. See, for example, the “Venuses” of Willendorf, Menton and Lespugne
(portrayed in plate 1 in Neumann, E. [1955]).

319. Neumann, E. (1955), p. 39.

320. See McGlynn, F.D. & Cornell, C.C. (1985); Chambless, D.L. (1985).

321. Foa, E.B, Molnar, C., & Cashman, L. (1995). See also Pennebaker, J.W.
(1997); Pennebaker, J., Mayne, T.J., & Francis, M.E. (1997).

322. Koestler, A. (1976).

323. Durga is Kali's benevolent counterpart.

324. Zimmer, H. (1982), pp. 74–75.

325. Rychlak, J.F. (1981), p. 767.

326. See Neumann, E. (1955, 1954).

327. Derived from unknown source.

328. Castle derived from a temenos, in Maier's Viatorium (1651) (plate 31 in
Jung, C.G. [1968b]); St. George derived from Ripa, C. (1630) Virtue
(Didi-Huberman, G., Garbetta, R. & Morgaine, M. [1994], p. 50).

329. This brief description is a summary of (isomorphic) information contained
in the writings of Carl Jung (particularly in Jung, C.G. [1967a]; Joseph
Campbell (particularly in Campbell, J. [1987 and 1968]); Northrop Frye
(particularly in Frye, N. [1982 and 1990]; and Erich Neumann (particularly in
Neumann, E. [1954 and 1955].

330. Bellini, J. (15th century), St. George battling the dragon. In
Didi-Huberman, G., Garbetta, R., & Morgaine, M. (1994), p. 102. Dozens of
representative examples are provided in this volume.

331. Didi-Huberman, G., Garbetta, R., & Morgaine, M. (1994), pp. 53, 59, 64,
65, 67, 69, 74, 77, 81.

332. Neumann, E. (1954), pp. 160–161.

333. Neumann, E. (1954, 1955); Jung, C.G. (1976b, 1967b, 1968b, 1967a); Eliade,
M. (1978b).

334. See Jung, C.G. (1970a).

335. See Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 147.

336. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 145–146.

337. See Chapter 2.

338. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 147–149.

339. Binswanger, L. (1963), pp. 152–153.

340. See Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 114–125.

341. Ibid., p. 123.

342. Ibid., p. 124.

343. Eliade, M. (1965), p. xi.

344. Borski, L.M. & Miller, K.B. (1956).

345. Eliade, M. (1991a).

346. L'Engle, M. (1997), p. 136.

347. Ibid., p. 142.

348. Lucas, B.V., Crane, L. & Edwards, M. (1945), pp. 171–178.

349. This is imagery of paradise.

350. Frye states, in keeping with this theme:

There is one theme that recurs frequently in the early books of the Bible: the
passing over of the firstborn son, who normally has the legal right of
primogeniture, in favor of a young one. The firstborn son of Adam, Cain, is
sent into exile, and the line of descent goes through Seth. Ham, the rejected
son of Noah, is not said to be his eldest son, but the same pattern recurs.
Abraham is told to reject his son Ishmael because a younger son (Isaac) is to
be born to him. Isaac's eldest son Esau loses his birthright to Jacob through
some rather dubious maneuvers on Jacob's part, some of them backed by his
mother. Jacob's eldest son Reuben loses his inheritance for the reason given in
Genesis 49:4. Joseph's younger son Ephraim takes precedence over the elder
Manasseh. The same theme is extended, though not essentially changed, in the
story of the founding of the monarchy, where the first chosen king, Saul, is
rejected and his line passed over in favor of David, who is practically his
adopted son (I Samuel 18:2). In later literature the theme is carried much
farther back: if we look at the fifth book of Paradise Lost, for instance, we
see an archetype of the jealousy of an older son, Lucifer or Satan, at the
preference shown to the younger Christ. (Frye, N. [1982], pp. 180–181)



351. Frye, N. (1982).

352. Figure of God derived from anonymous Italian (15th century) Saint George
and the Dragon. In Didi-Huberman, G., Garbetta, R., & Morgaine, M. (1994), p.
65.

353. Derived from Figurea et emblemata in Lambspringk's Musaeum hermeticum C.G.
(1678) (plate 179 in Jung, [1968b]).

354. Smith, H. (1991), pp. 289–290.

355. Smith, H. (1991), p. 292.

356. There is some evidence, in our times, that would-be tyrants themselves are
even beginning to realize this. Many of the “transitions to democracy”
characteristic of the last 30 years have been voluntary transferrals of power
on the part of military strongmen unable to believe in the justice of their own
“strength.” See Fukuyama, F. (1993).

357. Derived from Figurea et emblemata in Lambspringk's Musaeum hermeticum
(1678) (plate 168 in Jung, C.G. [1968b]).

358. “Pregnant father” derived from derived from Tabula smaragdina in Maier,
Scrutinium chymicum (1687) (plate 210 in Jung, C.G. [1968b]).





Chapter 3


359. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 86.

360. Morley, J. (1923), p. 127.

361. Nietzsche, F. (1966), pp. 100–102.

362. Field, T.M., Schanberg, S.M., Scafidi, F., Bauer, C.R., Vega-Lahr, N.,
Garcia, R., Nystrom, J., & Kuhn, C.M. (1986).

363. Polan, H.J. & Ward, M.J. (1994); Berkowitz, C.D. & Senter, S.A. (1987);
also footnote 309.

364. Hyde, J.S. (1984); Saner, H. & Ellickson, P. (1996).

365. See Eliade, M. (1965).

366. This is something akin to Jung's animus. See Jung, C.G. (1968a).

367. Eliade, M. (1965).

368. See Neumann, E. (1955), p. 61.

369. Ibid., particularly chapter 15.

370. Eliade, M. (1965), pp. xii–xiv.

371. There is evidence, for example, that the dynastic cultures of ancient
Egypt existed in virtually unchanged form over periods of time as long as
fifteen hundred years (after the Fifth Dynasty, 2500–2300 B.C.). Eliade, M.
(1978b), p. 86.

372. This is the mythic theme of Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment (1993).
Raskolnikov, Dostoyevsky's “revolutionary” socialist protagonist, places
himself above God (somewhat in the manner of Nietzsche's superman), and
resolves to commit a crime (murder) justified elaborately and carefully by
recourse to demythologized rationality. The crime succeeds, but Raskolnikov is
unable to bear its burden, and confesses, as a consequence of intrapsychic
compulsion (in the absence of objective necessity). In consequence, he is able
to regain his (protective) identity with the common community.

This theme has been revisited, in recent years, by Woody Allen, a great admirer
of Russian literature, in his motion picture Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989).
Allen's protagonist, a respected physician, murders his mistress to prevent her
from disrupting his family's (false) security. Unlike Raskolnikov, however, the
good physician suffers no long-term psychic trauma, and everything “returns to
normal” within the year. The movie, placid on the surface, is more horrifying
than Dostoyevsky's tortured book. In the latter, moral order (predicated on
respect for the intrinsic value of the individual) rules, in contrast to
presumptuous rationality. In the former, rational meaninglessness prevails
absolutely—although it remains thinly veiled by urban pleasantry and pretence.

373. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 217.

374. Tablet 6:152–153; Heidel, A. (1965), p. 53. See footnote 255.





Chapter 4


375. Wittgenstein, L. (1958), p. 50.

376. Kuhn, T.S. (1970), p. viii.

377. Taken from Hofstadter, D.R. (1979), p. 89.

378. Polyani, M. (1958).

379. Kuhn, T.S. (1970), p. 44.

380. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 213, section 16.

381. Frye, N. (1990), pp. 42–44.

382. Ibid., pp. 103–104.

383. See Peake, M. (1995) for a dramatic portrayal of this state of affairs.

384. Bruner, J.S. & Postman, L. (1949).

385. Kuhn, TS.. (1970), pp. 62–64.

386. For elaborated description, see Jung, C.G. (1967a); Neumann, E. (1954).
Jung states: “The purpose of the descent as universally exemplified in the myth
of the hero is to show that only in the region of danger (watery abyss, cavern,
forest, island, castle, etc.) can one find the “treasure hard to attain”
(jewel, virgin, life-potion, victory over death.”) (Jung, C.G. [1968b], p.
335).

387. Nietzsche states: “The unhistorical is like the surrounding atmosphere
that can alone create life and in whose annihilation life itself disappears. It
is true that man can only become man by first suppressing this unhistorical
element in his thoughts, comparisons, distinctions, and conclusions, letting a
clear sudden light break through these misty clouds by his power of turning the
past to the uses of the present. But an excess of history makes him flag
again.” (Nietzsche, F. [1957]).

388. Frye, N. (1990), p. 256.

389. See Neumann, E. (1954 and 1955).

390. Tablet 7:112, 7:115; Heidel, A. (Trans.) (1965), p. 58 (see footnote 262).

391. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 301.

392. Nietzsche, F. (1995).

393. This story was recently cited in Hawking, S. (1988).

394. Hofstadter, D.R. (1979), pp. 397–398.

395. Discussion, Bruner, J. (1986), pp. 27–28.

396. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 86.

397. Eliade, M. (1975), p. 155.

398. Kuhn, T.S. (1970), pp. 84–85.

399. Ibid., p. 113.

400. Quoted in Kuhn, T.S. (1957), p. 138.

401. Einstein, A. (1959), p. 45.

402. Kronig, R. (1960), pp. 22, 25–26.

403. Kuhn, T.S. (1970), pp. 82–84.

404. This, as Karl Popper pointed out, “permits our hypotheses to die in our
stead.”

405. Tolstoy, L. (1887 [1983]), p. 13.

406. Ibid., p. 54.

407. Ibid., pp. 26–29.

408. Another relevant Nietzschean comment:

The structure of the scenes and the visual images reveal a deeper wisdom than
the [ancient Greek poets themselves could] put into words and concepts: the
same is also observable in Shakespeare, whose Hamlet, for instance, similarly,
talks more superficially than he acts, so that the previously mentioned lesson
of Hamlet is to be deduced, not from his words, but from a profound
contemplation and survey of the whole. (Nietzsche, F. [1967a], p. 105).



409. Nietzsche, F. (1967a), p. 60.

410. Dostoyevski, F. (1961), p. 21.

411. Nietzsche's epigrams: “A criminal is frequently not equal to his deed: he
makes it smaller and slanders it.” (Nietzsche, F. [1968a], p. 275); “The
lawyers defending a criminal are rarely artists enough to turn the beautiful
terribleness of his deed to his advantage.” (Nietzsche, F. [1968a], p. 275).

412. Cited in Kaufmann, W. (1975), pp. 130–131.

413. See Eliade, M. (1965, 1975).

414. See Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1992).

415. As when Oedipus unwittingly sleeps with his mother, then blinds himself.

416. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), p. 320.

417. Nietzsche, F. (1967a), p. 75.

418. Binswanger, L. (1963), p. 157.

419. Tolstoy, L. (1983), pp. 57–58.

420. Frye, N. (1990), p. xvi.

421. Nietzsche, F. (1968a), pp. 260–261.

422. See footnote 26.

423. Eliade, M. (1972), p. 4.

424. Ellenberger, H.F. (1970), pp. 447–448.

425. Jung, C.G. (1971), p. 477.

426. Eliade, M. (1964).

427. Eliade, M. (1965), p. 89.

428. The symbol of the tree and the meanings ofthat symbol are discussed in
detail in chapter 4.

429. Eliade, M. (1965), pp. 88–89.

430. “The Brazen Serpent of Moses on the Cross.” From serpens mercurialis in
Eleazar, Uraltes chymisches Werk (1760) (plate 238 in Jung, C.G. [1968b]).

431. When I first began the process that led me to understand these ideas, I
painted a frightening picture of the crucified Christ, “glaring, judgmental,
demonic, with a cobra wrapped around his naked waist, like a belt” (as
described in the Preface). I was struggling with problems of identity, in an
world that had apparently gone insane. The image of the exploratory hero
manifested itself to me in imagistic representation, contaminated with the
figure of the Dragon of Chaos—“and as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up” (John 3:14). This
contamination might be regarded as indicative of the danger the development of
full understanding of that hero and the “world” he inhabited posed to my
then-extant personality structure (which in fact dissolved and regenerated,
over a lengthy period, thereafter). The “identity” of the revolutionary hero
with the serpent of chaos, however, accounts for the hatred and fear his
necessary actions produce among the population he is striving to help.

432. Origen, in Hodson, G. (1963), p. xii.

433. Eliade, M. (1975), p. 60.

434. Campbell, J. (1973), p. 25.

435. Neumann, E. (1968), p. 395.

436. Tao Te Ching 25 in Waley, A. (1934), p. 34.

437. See Part I.A. III: The separation of the world parents. In Neumann, E.
(1954).

438. Tiuitchev, F.I. Sviataia noch na nebosklon vzoshla, translated by Vladimir
Nabokov, cited in Joravsky, D. (1989), p. 173. I am indebted to Carolyn Butler
for bringing this poem to my attention.

439. Frye states:

A descent into a world below consciousness involves some break in the
continuity of conscious memory, or some annihilation of the previous conditions
of existence, corresponding to falling asleep. The lower world is often a world
of greatly enlarged time, where a few moments may correspond to many years in
the upper world. (Frye, N. [1990], p. 266).



This is reminiscent of Jung's notion that time is relativized in the collective
unconscious.

440. Frye, N. (1982), p. 108.

441. Cited in Neumann, E. (1968), p. 395.

442. Wheeler, J. (1980), p. 341.

443. Nietzsche generated a hypothesis that seems relevant:

Suppose nothing else were “given” as real except our world of desires and
passions, and we could not get down, or up, to any other “reality” besides the
reality of our drives—for thinking is merely a relation of these drives to each
other: is it not permitted to make the experiment and to ask the question
whether this “given” would not be sufficient for also understanding on the
basis of this kind of thing the so-called mechanistic or (“material”) world? I
mean, not as a deception, as “mere appearance,” and “idea” (in the sense of
Berkeley and Schopenhauer) but as holding the same rank of reality as our
affect—as a more primitive form of the world of affects in which everything
still lies contained in a powerful unity before it undergoes ramifications and
developments in the organic process (and, as is only fair, also becomes
tenderer and weaker)—as a kind of instinctive life in which all organic
functions are still synthetically intertwined along with self-regulation,
assimilation, nourishment, excretion, and metabolism—as a preform of life.
(Nietzsche, F. [1966], pp. 47–48).



444. Eliade, M. (1982), p. 75.

445. For a modern illustration, see Tchelitchew, P. (1992), p. 49.

446. See tree and snake discussion in Jung, C.G. (1988), pp. 1431–1450; Jung,
C.G. (1967b), pp. 251–350.

447. Radha, Swami S. (1978), pp. 16–20.

448. Frye, N. (1990), pp. 284–285.

449. Eliade, M. (1975), p. 64.

450. “Yggdrasil, the world tree of the Edda.” From the Elder Edda by Magnusson,
F. (18th century) (figure 55 in Neumann, E. [1955]).

451. In Bellows, H.A. (1969), p. 60.

452. Neumann, E. (1954), pp. 30–31.

453. Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 117.

454. See Jung, C.G. (1967b), pp. 240, 315; Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 317.

455. The role of the reticular activating system in regulating consciousness
was established by Morruzzi, G. & Magoun, H.W. (1949). The precise mechanisms
by which such regulation take place are still under debate.

456. Goethe, J.W. (1979a), p. 99.

457. Voltaire (1933), p. 450.

458. Frye elaborates on the myth of Narcissus:

The beautiful youth paralyzed by the mirror-reflection of himself and hence
unable to love. Mythologists very early made Narcissus a type of the fall of
Adam, as Adam, like Narcissus, identified himself with his own parodyreflection
in a lower world. Paul's conception of Christ as the second Adam makes Christ
the double of the Narcissus-Adam who delivers the original one from what Lacan
calls the stade de miroir and Eliot a wilderness of mirrors. (Frye, N. [1990],
p. 271)



459. Consider Nietzsche's statement:

On his way to becoming an “angel” (to employ no uglier word) man has evolved
that queasy stomach and coated tongue through which not only the joy and
innocence of the animal but life itself has become repugnant to him—so that he
sometimes holds his nose in his own presence, and, with Pope Innocent the
Third, disapprovingly catalogues his own repellent aspects (“impure begetting,
disgusting means of nutrition in his mother's womb, baseness of the matter out
of which man evolves, hideous stink, secretion of saliva, urine, and filth”).
(Nietzsche, F. [1967b], p. 67).



The human neocortex developed at an unprecedented rate, from the evolutionary
standpoint.

460. This expansion and the extension of consciousness to the self were
synchronous phenomena. One factor limiting this expansion, which increases head
size dramatically, is the diameter of the female pelvic girdle, which must
allow the infant passage during birth. The frequently traumatic nature of human
birth is a consequence, at least in part, of the conflict between neonate
cranial circumference and maternal pelvic structure.

461. Eve taken from “the Tree of Knowledge: Church and Synagogue” from a Swiss
manuscript (15th century) (Figure 56, Neumann, E. [1955]).





Chapter 5


462. Eliade, M. (1978b), pp. 62–63.

463. See chapter 3: Apprenticeship and Enculturation: Adoption of a Shared Map.

464. Nietzsche, F. (1966), p. 228.

465. Plate 36 in Jung, C.G. (1968b).

466. Milton, J., (1961), 1:40–43, p. 38.

467. Frye, N. (1990), pp. 272–273.

468. See footnote 350.

469. Pagels, E. (1995).

470. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 302.

471. These can be reasonably considered akin to the “elder gods” in the Enuma
elish (see chapter 2).

472. Eliade, M. (1978b), p. 310.

473. Milton, J. (1961), 3:96–99, p. 95.

474. Goethe, J.W. (1979a), p. 75.

475. Goethe, J.W. (1979b), p. 270.

476. See chapter 4: The revolutionary hero.

477. Tolstoy, L. (1983), pp. 49–52.

478. Shakespeare, W. (1952b), 3:5:78–83, p. 104.

479. Milton, J. (1961), 4:40, p. 116.

480. Detailed in Russell, J.B. (1986), p. 103.

481. Milton, J. (1961), 1:159–165, p. 41.

482. Nietzsche, F. (1967b), p. 333.

483. Nietzsche, F. (1981), p. 125.

484. Cited in Kaufmann, W. (1975), pp. 122–123.

485. Edwardes, A. & Masters, R.E.L. (1963), p. 124.

486. Durnin, R. (1994).

487. Wilhelm, R. (1971), p. lv.

488. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), p. 390.

489. Joyce, J. (1992).

490. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 4–7.

491. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1974), pp. 5–7.

492. Frankl, V. (1971), pp. 20–21.

493. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 602–603.

494. Solzhenitsyn estimates that 250,000 destructive labor camp inmates lost
their lives to build the Volga-Moscow canal, which, when finished, was much too
shallow to serve any of its intended uses. Much of the canal was dug by hand,
with the most primitive tools, in the midst of the winter (see Solzhenitsyn,
A.I. [1975], pp. 80–102).

495. Frankl, V. (1971), p. 50.

496. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), p. 201.

497. Blake, W. in Keynes, G. (1966), p. 213.

498. “Zek” is Russian slang for prison-camp inmate.

499. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 195–197.

500. See, for example, Browning, C.R. (1993).

501. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 147–149.

502. Milton, J. (1961), 2:380–385, p. 71.

503. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), p. 603.

504. Ibid., pp. 619–620.

505. Lao Tzu (1984d).

506. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 338, 341–342.

507. Ibid., p. 626.

508. Frankl, V. (1971), pp. 117–120.

509. Ibid., p. 7.

510. Ibid., p. 4.

511. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), p. 622.

512. Milton, J. (1961), 1:249–253, p. 44.

513. Milton, J. (1961), 4:109–123, p. 118.

514. Shakespeare, W. (1952c). Titus Andronicus. 5:3:184–190, p. 198.

515. Milton, J. (1961), 9:119-130, p. 37.

516. Shakespeare (1952b), Richard III, 5:3:200–203, p. 145.

517. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 326–328.

518. Ibid., p. 347.

519. Milton, J. (1961), 1:54–74, p. 38.

520. Ibid., 1:44–48, p. 38.

521. Nietzsche, F. (1966), p. 86.

522. From the Gospel of Thomas, in Robinson, J.R. (1988), pp. 133–134.

523. Milton, J. (1961), 4:75–78, p. 117.

524. Ibid., 4:79–105, p. 117.

525. Frye, N. (1982), p. 130.

526. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 610–612.

527. Frankl, V. (1971), p. 104.

528. Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1975), pp. 624–626.

529. Ibid., p. 615.

530. Arendt, H. (1994).

531. “All nature is through fire renewed.” Occult/gnostic interpretation of the
meaning of the initials traditionally depicted at the top of the cross of
Christ: I.N.R.I. (Iesus Nasaremus Rex Iudaeorum [Jesus of Nazareth, King of the
Jews]); see Dee, J. (1993) for amplification.

532. Jaeger, W. (1968), p. 35.

533. Niebuhr, R. (1964), pp. 6–7.

534. Ibid., pp. 13–14.

535. Piaget, J. (1932), pp. 16–18.

536. See footnote 463.

537. Frye states, with regard to the role of criticism in illuminating
narrative meanings:

The poetic imagination constructs a cosmos of its own, a cosmos to be studied
not simply as a map but as a world of powerful conflicting forces. This
imaginative cosmos is neither the objective environment studied by natural
science nor a subjective inner space to be studied by psychology. It is an
intermediate world in which the images of higher and lower, the categories of
beauty and ugliness, the feelings of love and hatred, the associations of sense
experience, can be expressed only by metaphor and yet cannot be dismissed or
reduced to projections of something else. Ordinary consciousness is so
possessed by the either-or contrast of subject and object that it finds
difficulty in taking in the notion of an order of words that is neither
subjective nor objective, though it interpenetrates with both. But its presence
gives a very different appearance to many elements of human life, including
religion, which depend on metaphor but do not become less “real” or “true” by
doing so.

Of course “metaphorical” is as treacherous a conception as “truth” or “reality”
could ever be. Some metaphors are illuminating; some are merely indispensable;
some are misleading or lead only to illusion; some are socially dangerous.
Wallace Stevens speaks of “the metaphor that murders metaphor.” But for better
or worse it occupies a central area—perhaps the central area—of both social and
individual experience. It is a primitive form of awareness, established long
before the distinction of subject and object became normal, but when we try to
outgrow it we find that all we can really do is rehabilitate it.

At this point another recent critical observation comes to hand, from Italo
Calvino's posthumous Norton lectures, also a paradox, but an exhilarating one:
“Literature remains alive only if we set ourselves immeasurable goals, far
beyond any hope of achievement.” Strictly speaking the writer does not set the
goals: these are set by the shaping spirit of literature itself, the source of
a writer's ability to write. But in general the same principal should apply to
criticism, when the critic sees in the far distance some such axiom as
“Criticism can and should make sense of literature,” and refuses to settle for
anything less.

(Frye, N. [1990], pp. xxii–xxiii).



538. 538 The attempts by the pharaoh to control the Jewish “threat” through
means of infanticide provides a (noncoincidental) narrative parallel to the
actions of Herod, who killed all the Jewish children under two in Bethlehem and
environs, for similar reasons, many centuries later (see Matthew 2:1–16).

539. Frye continues:

And yet Canaan seems a rather shrunken and anticlimactic form of the paradisal
land of promise flowing with milk and honey that was originally promised to
Israel. Perhaps Moses was really the only person to see the Promised Land:
perhaps the mountain outside it he climbed in his last hours was the only place
from which it could be seen. (Frye, N. [1990], p. 299).



540. Frye, N. (1990), p. 299.

541. The Hebrews feed on manna during their desert sojourn. Such “spiritual
bread”—made, in its profane condition, from wheat, the metaphorical body of
eternally dying and resurrecting corn god—is later offered by and equated with
Christ, to aid, ritually (procedurally), in the incorporation of heroic faith
and courage. Frye states:

Christ is constantly associated with the miraculous provision of food. Miracles
of feeding large multitudes with very small amounts of food (fish, as contents
drawn up from the [unconscious, maternal] deep, as well as bread) are recorded
in all four Gospels, sometimes more than once, and such miracles are explicitly
antitypes of the provision of manna in the wilderness (John 6:49–51). The
imagery of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood meets us in the Gospels
even before the institution of the Eucharist. That Christ's body is an
unfailing source of food and drink is asserted on both physical and spiritual
levels (the “daily {epiousion} bread” of the Lord's Prayer might also be
regarded as “supersubstantial” bread). The body of Christ is not only “to be
eaten, to be divided, to be drunk,” in the words of Eliot's “Gerontion,” but is
the source of the continuity of the life of his people, hidden within their
bodies. It was so in Old Testament times too, according to Paul, who says that
the Israelites in the wilderness all ate the same spiritual food and drank the
same spiritual drink, the latter from a rock which was Christ (I Corinthians
10:3). (Frye, N. [1990], p. 257).



542. Reference to mythic narrative as source for explicit rule is explicitly
presented here.

543. Frye states:

I have noted (Great Code 18) the passage in Faust where Faust deliberately
alters “In the beginning was the Word” to “In the beginning was the Act.” I
should have added that Faust was simply following the established Christian
practice up to his time. In the beginning God did something, and words are
descriptive servomechanisms telling us what he did. This imports into Western
religion what post-structural critics call the “transcendental signified,” the
view that what is true or real is something outside the words that the words
are pointing to. (Frye, N. [1990], p. 34).



544. Frye states: 544.

If it is true that creative verbal power is associated with something in the
mind supplementary to ordinary consciousness, we have inched a little closer to
the writer's social context. Such a mind would often be baffled by the
arbitrary conventions of behavior that consciousness more easily masters: one
often finds a naivete in the writer that may sometimes incapacitate him from
almost anything except writing. But he might have in compensation an insight
into social phenomena that would give him, not merely an intense vision of the
present, but an unusual ability to see a conditional future, the consequence of
tendencies in the present. This in turn may give the sense of a distinctive
kind of knowledge hidden from

most of society. The element of the prophetic in literature is often spoken of
very vaguely, but is tangible enough to be worth looking into. In any case, the
word comes closer to anything we have stumbled over so far to indicate the
quality of the poet's authority, and to indicate also the link between secular
and sacred literature that is one of our main themes.

If we look at the prophetic writers of the Old Testament, beginning with Amos,
the affiliation of primitive and prophetic emerges at once. Amos has the
refusal to compromise with polite conventions, a social reputation in northern
Israel for being a fool and a madman, and an ability to derive the substance of
what he says from unusual mental states, often allied to trance. Such prophets
also foretell a future which is an inevitable result of certain foolish
policies, like the policy of the king of Judah toward Babylon that led, as
Jeremiah told him it would, to the destruction of Jerusalem. The principle
involved here is that honest social criticism, like honest science, extends the
range of predictability in society.

In modern times the writers that we instinctively call prophetic—Blake,
Dostoevsky, Rimbaud—show similar features. Such writers are as deeply pondered
by readers as the Greek and Hebrew oracles were: like them, they shock and
disturb; like them, they may be full of contradictions and ambiguities, yet
they retain a curiously haunting authority. As early as Elizabethan times there
were critics who suggested that the distinction between sacred and secular
inspiration might be less rigid than generally assumed. George Puttenham,
writing in the 1580s, pointed to the etymology of poet as “maker,” which
implied for him an analogy between the poet's creative power and the creative
power of God in making the world. He quotes Ovid's phrase in the Fasti, ‘est
deus in nobis,’ which would mean either God or a god. In the sixteenth century
it would certainly have been safer to settle for a Muse or a God of Love or
something sanctioned by convention and not taken seriously as doctrine, but the
analogy is still there, though latent until the time of Coleridge. It has been
frequently observed that the arts are prophetic also in the sense of indicating
symbolically the social trends that become obvious several generations later.

The term prophetic in itself might apply to some writers (Luther, Condorcet,
Marx) whom we normally would place outside literature. This troublesome
apparatus of inside and outside will not go away even when so many aspects of
it vanish under examination. It appears to be the connection with the
psychologically primitive that characterizes the prophetic writer who is
generally thought of as inside literature or at least (as with Rousseau,
Kierkegaard, or Nietzsche) impossible to ignore as a literary figure. (Frye, N.
[1990], pp. 52–54).



545. See Jung, C.G. (1978a) for a complete work on the topic of prophecy; also
Jung's prescient comments (1918) on the “Blond Beast” (Jung, C.G. [1978a], pp.
3–28).

546. The pleroma.

547. Nietzsche, F. (1981), p. 97.

548. Dostoevsky, F. (1981), pp. 299–301.

549. Ibid., p. 309.

550. Ibid., p. 313.

551. Ibid., p. 316.

552. James, W. (1880, October), p. 100.

553. Frye, N. (1982), pp. 132–133.

554. Frye, N. (1990), p. 104.

555. Frye, N. (1982), p. 56.

556. Frye also states:

We referred earlier to the structure of the Book of Judges, in which a series
of stories of traditional tribal heroes is set within a repeating mythos of the
apostasy and restoration of Israel. This gives us a narrative structure that is
roughly U-shaped, the apostasy being followed by a descent into disaster and
bondage, which in turn is followed by repentance, then by a rise through
deliverance to a point more or less on the level from which the descent began.
This U-shaped pattern, approximate as it is, recurs in literature as the
standard shape of comedy, where a series of misfortunes and misunderstandings
brings

the action to a threateningly low point, after which some fortunate twist in
the plot sends the conclusion up to a happy ending. The entire Bible, viewed as
a “divine comedy,” is contained within a U-shaped story of this sort, one in
which man, as explained, loses the tree and water of life at the beginning of
Genesis and gets them back at the end of Revelation. In between, the story of
Israel is told as a series of declines into the power of heathen kingdoms,
Egypt, Philistia, Syria, Rome, each followed by a rise into a brief moment of
independence. The same U-narrative is found outside the historical sections
also, in the account of the disasters and restoration of Job and in Jesus’
parable of the prodigal son. This last, incidentally, is the only version in
which the redemption takes place as the result of a voluntary decision on the
part of the protagonist (Luke 15:18).

It would be confusing to summarize all the falls and rises of the Biblical
history at once. In honor of the days of creation, let us select six, with a
seventh forming the end of time. The first fall, naturally, is that of Adam
from Eden, where Adam goes into a wilderness that modulates to the heathen
cities founded by the family of Cain. Passing over the story of Noah, which
adds the sea to the images of disaster, the first rise is that of Abraham,
called out of the city of Ur in Mesopotamia to a Promised Land in the west.
This introduces the pastoral era of the patriarchs, and ends at the end of
Genesis, with Israel in Egypt. This situation again changes to an oppressive
and threatening servitude; Israel again passes through a sea and a wilderness,
and under Moses and Joshua reaches its promised land again, a smaller territory
where the main images are agricultural. There succeed the invaders in the Book
of Judges, of whom the most formidable were the Philistines, probably a
Greek-speaking people from Crete (if that is the “Caphtor” of Amos 9:7) who
gave their name to Palestine. They held the mastery of Israel after the defeat
and death of Saul and his son Jonathan. The third rise begins with David and
continues with Solomon, where the imagery is urban, concerned with cities and
buildings. After Solomon, however, another disaster begins with the splitting
of the kingdom. The northern kingdom was destroyed by Assyria in 722 B.C.; the
southern kingdom of Judah had a reprieve until after Assyria was destroyed in
its turn (Nahum 2:3ff.); but with the capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in
586 the Babylonian captivity began.

The fourth rise in the fortunes of the Israelites, now the Jews, begins with
the permission—perhaps the encouragement—given the Jewish captives in Babylon
by Cyrus of Persia to return and rebuild their temple. Two returns are
prominently featured in the Old Testament, and there were probably more, but
symbolically we need only one. Some flickering hopes of a restored Israel
clustered around the chief figure of the first return, Zerubbabel of the line
of David. After several changes of masters, the next dramatic descent was
caused by the savage persecution of the non-Hellenized Jews by Antiochus
Epiphanes of the Seleucian empire, which provoked the rebellion of the
Maccabees, five brothers of a priestly family who finally gained independence
for Judea and established a royal dynasty. This lasted until the Roman legions
under Pompey rolled over the country in 63 B.C., and began the Roman domination
that lasts throughout the New Testament period. At this point Jewish and
Christian views of the sixth deliverance of Israel diverge. For Christianity,
Jesus achieved a definitive deliverance for all mankind with his revelation
that the ideal kingdom of Israel was a spiritual kingdom. For Judaism, the
expulsion from their homeland by the edict of Hadrian in 135 A.D. began a
renewed exile which in many respects still endures.

This is a sequence of mythoi, only indirectly of historical events, and our
first step is to realize that all the high points and all the low points are
metaphorically related to one another. That is, the garden of Eden, the
Promised Land, Jerusalem, and Mount Zion are interchangeable synonyms for the
home of the soul, and in Christian imagery they are identical, in their
“spiritual” form (which we remember means metaphorically, whatever else it may
mean) with the kingdom of God spoken of by Jesus. Similarly, Egypt, Babylon and
Rome are all spiritually the same place, and the Pharaoh of the Exodus,
Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Nero are spiritually the same person.
And the deliverers of Israel—Abraham, Moses, and Joshua, the judges, David, and
Solomon—are all prototypes of the Messiah or final deliverer…. As the various
declines of Israel through apostasy and the like are not acts so much as
failures to act, it is only the rises and restorations that are real events,
and as the Exodus is

the definitive deliverance and the type of all the rest, we may say that
mythically the Exodus is the only thing that really happens in the Old
Testament. On the same principle the resurrection of Christ, around which the
New Testament revolves, must be, from the New Testament's point of view, the
antitype of the Exodus. The life of Christ as presented in the Gospels becomes
less puzzling when we realize that it is being presented in this form.

Like that of many gods and heroes, the birth of Jesus is a threatened birth:
Herod orders a massacre of infants in Bethlehem from which Jesus alone escapes.
Moses similarly escapes from an attempt to destroy Hebrew children, as they in
turn escape later from a slaughter of Egyptian firstborn. The infant Jesus is
taken down into Egypt by Joseph and Mary, and his return from there, Matthew
(2:15) says, fulfills the prophecy of Hosea (11:1) “I called my son out of
Egypt,” where the reference is quite explicitly to Israel. The names Mary and
Joseph recall the Miriam who was the sister of Moses and the Joseph who led the
family of Israel into Egypt. The third Sura of the Koran appears to be
identifying Miriam and Mary; Christian commentators on the Koran naturally say
this is ridiculous, but from the purely typological point of view from which
the Koran is speaking, the identification makes good sense.

Moses organizes the twelve tribes of Israel; Jesus gathers twelve disciples.
Israel crosses the Red Sea and achieves its identity as a nation on the other
side; Jesus is baptized in the Jordan and is recognized as the Son of God. The
baptism is the point at which Mark and John begin, the infancy stories of
Matthew and Luke being probably later material. Israel wanders forty years in
the wilderness; Jesus, forty days. Miraculous food is provided for Israel and
by Jesus for those gathered around him (see John 6:49–50). The law is given
from Mount Sinai and the gospel preached in the Sermon on the Mount. A brazen
serpent is placed on a pole by Moses as preservation against the fatal bites of
“fiery serpents” (Numbers 21:9); this brazen serpent was accepted by Jesus as a
type of his crucifixion (John 3:14) with an underlying association between the
lethal serpents and the serpent of Eden. Moses dies just outside the Promised
Land, which in Christian typology signifies the inability of the law alone to
redeem man, and the Promised Land is conquered by Joshua. The hidden link here
is that Jesus and Joshua are the same word, hence when the Virgin Mary is told
to call her child Jesus or Joshua, the typological meaning is that the reign of
the law is over, and the assault on the Promised Land has begun (Matthew 1:21).
(Frye, N. [1982], pp. 169–172).



557. Frye, N. (1982), p. 131.

558. See Chapter 2: The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored
Territory.

559. The Dialogue of the Savior, in Robinson, J.R. (1988), p. 525.

560. It is not merely the Gnostic Gospels that lay stress on the psychological
nature of the Kingdom of God:

And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come,
he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation:

Neither shall they say Lo here! or lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is
within you. (Luke 17:20–21).



561. Referring to Exodus 31:12–15:

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak thou also unto the children of
Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me
and you throughout your generations: that ye may know that I am the Lord that
doth sanctify you.

Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore: for it is holy unto you: every one that
defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein,
that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to
the Lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put
to death.



562. There is an apocryphal insertion at Luke 6:4. The insertion reads “Man, if
indeed thou 562. knowest what thou doest, thou art blessed; but if thou knowest
not, thou art cursed, and a transgressor of the law” (Codex Bezae ad Lucam [to
Luke] 6:4). More information is available in James M.R. (1924). Jung notes that
the moral of this story is analagous to that in the parable of the unjust
steward:

It is the task of the Paraclete, the “spirit of truth,” to dwell and work in
individual human beings, so as to remind them of Christ's teachings and lead
them into the light. A good example of this activity is Paul, who knew not the
Lord and received his gospel not from the apostles but through revelation. He
is one of those people whose unconscious was disturbed and produced revelatory
ecstasies. The life of the Holy Ghost reveals itself through its own activity,
and through effects which not only confirm the things we all know, but go
beyond them. In Christ's sayings there are already indications which go beyond
the traditionally “Christian” morality— for instance the parable of the unjust
steward (Luke 16:1–8), the moral of which agrees with the Logion of the Codex
Bezae, and betrays an ethical standard very different from what is expected.
Here the moral criterion is consciousness, and not law or convention. One might
also mention the strange fact that it is precisely Peter, who lacks
self-control and is fickle in character, whom Christ wishes to make the rock
and foundation of his church. (Jung, C.G. [1969], pp. 433–444).



Jung also makes reference to the Oxyrhynchus papyrus, which is “older than the
first conception of the gospels” (Jung, C.G. [1969], p. 444): Christ says,
“Wherever there are two they are not without God, and wherever there is one
alone I say I am with him.” Jung notes that this is in contrast to the standard
version: “For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them” (Matthew 18:20). The latter part of the former statement
is strikingly reminiscent of Kierkegaard's notion:

For a “crowd” is the untruth. In a godly sense it is true, eternally,
Christianly, as St. Paul says, that “only one attains the goal”—which is not
meant in a comparative sense, for comparison takes others into account. It
means that every man can be that one, God helping him therein—but only one
attains the goal. And again this means that every man should be chary about
having to do with “the others,” and essentially should talk only with God and
with himself—for only one attains the goal. And again this means that man, or
to be a man, is akin to deity. In a worldly and temporal sense, it will be said
by the man of bustle, sociability, and amicableness, “How unreasonable that
only one attains the goal; for it is far more likely that many, by the strength
of united effort, should attain the goal; and when we are many success is more
certain and it is easier for each man severally.” True enough, it is far more
likely, and it is true also with respect to all earthly and material goods. If
it is allowed to have its way, this becomes the only true point of view, for it
does away with God and eternity and with man's kinship with deity. It does away
with it or transforms it into a fable, and puts in its place the modern (or, we
might rather say, the old pagan) notion that to be a man is to belong to a race
endowed with reason, to belong to it as a specimen, so that the race or species
is higher than the individual, which is to say that there are no more
individuals but only specimens. But eternity which arches over and high above
the temporal, tranquil as the starry vault at night, and God in heaven who in
the bliss of that sublime tranquillity holds in survey, without the least sense
of dizziness at such a height, these countless multitudes of men and knows each
single individual by name—He, the Great Examiner, says that only one attains
the goal, (cited in Kaufmann, W. [1975], pp. 94–95).



563. Piaget, J. (1965), p. 197.

564. Ibid., p. 13.

565. Ibid., p. 398.

566. Ibid., p. 111.

567. Ibid., p. 102.

568. Ibid., p. 362.

569. Rychlak, J. (1981), p. 699.

570. Lao Tzu (1984c).

571. Socrates’ comments on the internal oracle are of interest here. He states,
in The Apology, after (voluntarily) accepting his sentence of death:

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for I am
about to die, and in the hour of death men are gifted with prophetic power. And
I prophesy to you who are my murderers, that immediately after my departure
punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely await you. Me
you have killed because you wanted to escape the accuser, and not to give an
account of your lives. But that will not be as you suppose: far otherwise. For
I say that there will be more accusers of you than there are now; accusers whom
hitherto I have restrained: and as they are younger they will be more
inconsiderate with you, and you will be more offended at them. If you think
that by killing men you can prevent some one from censuring your evil lives,
you are mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either possible or
honourable; the easiest and the noblest way is not to be disabling others, but
to be improving yourselves. This is the prophecy which I utter before my
departure to the judges who have condemned me. Friends, who would have
acquitted me, I would like also to talk with you about the thing which has come
to pass, while the magistrates are busy, and before I go to the place at which
I must die. Stay then a little, for we may as well talk with one another while
there is time. You are my friends, and I should like to show you the meaning of
this even which has happened to me. O my judges—for you I may truly call
judges—I should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. Hitherto the
divine faculty of which the internal oracle is the source has constantly been
in the habit of opposing me even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip
or error in any matter; and now you may see there has come upon me that which
may be thought, and is generally believed to be, the last and worst evil. But
the oracle made no sign of opposition, either when I was leaving my house in
the morning, or when I was my way to the court, or while I was speaking, at
anything which I was going to say; and yet I have often been stopped in the
middle of a speech, but now in nothing I either said or did touching the matter
in hand has the oracle opposed me. What do I take to be the explanation of this
silence? I will tell you. It is an intimation that what has happened to me is a
good, and that those of us who think that death is an evil are in error. For
the customary sign would surely have opposed me had I been going to evil and
not to good. (Plato, in Hutchins, R.M. [1952], pp. 210–211).



572. Neumann, E. (1954), pp. 173–174.

573. “The Tree of Knowledge: Church and Synagogue” from a Swiss manuscript
(15th century). (Figure 56, Neumann, E. [1955]).

574. Eliade comments: “See (Eliade, M. [1978a], pp. 154–155) for other
citations on the ‘philosophical incest.’ The acrostic constructed by Basil
Valentine with the term vitriol underscores the implacable necessity of the
decensus ad inferos: Visita Interior a Terrae Recflficando invenies Occultum
Lapidem (‘Visit the interior of the Earth, and by purification you will find
the secret Stone’).” (Eliade, M. [1985], p. 256, footnote 89).

575. Eliade comments: “Liber Platonis quartorum (of which the Arabic original
cannot be later than the tenth century), cited in (Eliade, M. [1978a], p. 158).
One will find the same doctrine among the Chinese alchemists (see Eliade, M.
[1982], pp. 37–43).” (Eliade, M. [1985], p. 256, footnote 90).

576. Additional quotation in parenthesis from Eliade, M. (1978a), pp. 163–164.

577. Eliade comments: “According to Basil Valentine, ‘evil must become the same
as good.’ Starkey describes the stone as ‘the reconciliation of Contraries, a
making of friendship between enemies’ (Eliade, M. [1978a], p. 166).” (Eliade,
M. [1985], p. 256, footnote 91).

578. Eliade comments: (see Multhauf, R.P. [1967], p. 135 and following).
(Eliade, M. [1985], p. 257, footnote 92).

579. Eliade comments: (see Eliade, M. [1978a], p. 51). (Eliade, M. [1985], p.
257, footnote 93).

580. Eliade comments: “We have discussed the consequences of this Promethean
gesture, in (Eliade, M. [1978a], pp. 169–178).” (Eliade, M. [1985], p. 257,
footnote 94).

581. Eliade comments: “Even in the eighteenth century, the learned did not
question the growth of minerals. They asked themselves, however, whether
alchemy could assist nature in this process, and above all whether ‘those
alchemists who claimed to have done so already were honest men, fools, or
impostors’ (see Dobbs, B.J.T. [1975], p. 44). Herman Boerhaave (1664-1739),
considered the greatest ‘rationalist’ chemist of his time and famous for his
strictly empirical experiments, still believed in the transmutation of metals.
And we will see the importance of alchemy in the scientific revolution
accomplished by Newton.” (Eliade, M. [1985], p. 257, footnote 95).

582. Eliade, M. (1985), pp. 255–258.

583. Becker, E. (1973), p. xiv.

584. After the publication of Jung, C.G. (1912).

585. See Ellenberger, H.F. (1970).

586. Costa, P.T., Jr. & McCrae, R.R. (1992a); Goldberg, L.R. (1993b).

587. Representative samples of modern exemplars of “complex” and “unconscious”:
Banaji, M.R., Hardin, C., & Rothman, A.J. (1993); Nader, A., McNally, R.J., &
Wiegartz, P.S. (1996); Watkins, P.C., Vache, K., Verney, S.P., & Mathews, A.
(1996); Gabrieli, J.D.E., Fleischman, D.A., Keane, M., Reminger, M., Sheryl,
L., et al. (1995).

588. Wilson, E.O. (1998).

589. von Franz, M.L. (1980), pp. 32–34.

590. Ibid., p. 34.

591. Translation: “It is found in cesspools,” cited in Jung, C.G. (1976b), p.
35.

592. The Gospel of Thomas. In Robinson, J.R. (Ed.). (1988), p. 134.

593. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 306.

594. I am indebted to Erin Driver-Linn for bringing this phrase to my
attention, in this context.

595. Cited in Evans, P.I. (1973), p. 126.

596. Jung, C.G. (1968b), pp. 342–343.

597. See Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 253, for illustration.

598. See Jung, E. & von Franz, M.L. (1980), pp. 369–370. The authors describe
the apprentice Taliesen's description of Merlin, spirit of transformation:

I am the wind that blows upon the sea;

I am the ocean wave;

I am the murmur of the surges;

I am seven battalions;

I am a strong bull;

I am an eagle on a rock;

I am a ray of the sun;

I am the most beautiful of herbs;

I am a courageous wild boar;

I am a salmon in the water;

I am a lake upon the plain;

I am a cunning artist;

I am a gigantic, sword-wielding champion;

I can shift my shape like a god.



599. Jung, C.G. (1968b), pp. 66–67.

600. At least two years after experiencing this dream (and a year or so after
writing it down) I was reading Dante's Inferno (Dante, A. [1982]). In the ninth
Canto, a messenger from God appears in hell to open the Gate of Dis, which is
barring the divinely ordained way of Virgil and Dante. The approach of this
messenger is preceded by a great storm, described in the following manner (p.
90):

Suddenly there broke on the dirty swell

of the dark marsh a squall of terrible sound

that sent a tremor through both shores of Hell;

a sound as if two continents of air,

one frigid and one scorching, clashed head on

in a war of winds that stripped the forests bare,

ripped off whole boughs and blew them helter skelter

along the range of dust it raised before it

making the beasts and shepherds run for shelter.



The similarity of imagery and meaning in my dream and this poem struck me as
very interesting.

601. This was actually an image I had used in therapeutic discussions,
previously. I told my clients that an unresolved anomaly was like the tip of a
monster's tail: it looked harmless enough, viewed only as a tail—but that meant
pretending that the part did not imply the whole.

602. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 343.

603. Eliade, M. (1978a), p. 50.

604. Ibid., pp. 51–52.

605. Ibid., p. 35.

606. Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 439.

607. von Franz, M.L. (1980), pp. 21–22.

608. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 482–483.

609. Ibid., p. xiv.

610. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 319–320.

611. Eliade comments: “(Dobbs, B.J.T. [1975], p. 90), citing the article of
E.McGuire & P.M.Rattansi, ‘Newton and the “Pipes of Pan,”’ pp. 108–143.” (In
Eliade, M. [1985], p. 260, footnote 104).

612. Eliade comments: (Westfall, R.S. [1971], pp. 377–391; Dobbs, R.J.T.
[1975], p. 211). (In Eliade, M. [1985], p. 260, footnote 104).

613. Eliade, M. (1985), pp. 259–261.

614. Jung, C.G. (1968b), p. 324.

615. Ibid., pp. 322–323.

616. Eliade, M. (1978a), pp. 8–9.

617. Dorn, in Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 271.

618. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 358–359.

619. Frye states:

Prophet, high priest, and king are all figures of authority, but prophets are
often martyred and even kings …have scapegoat and victim imagery attached to
them. Joshua was a type of Christ as the conqueror of the Promised Land: his
enemies included five kings who were hung on trees and then buried in a cave
with great stones rolled against it (Joshua 10:16ff.). Solomon, the king who
succeeded David, is a type of Christ as a temple builder and wise teacher:
Absalom, equally a son of David, rebelled against his father and was caught in
a tree, traditionally by his golden hair, hanging there “between heaven and
earth” until David's general Joab came up and thrust darts into his side (II
Samuel 18:14). Absalom's curious helplessness in what seems a relatively easy
situation to get out of suggests a ritual element in the story of his death.
The writers of the Gospels found that in telling the story of Jesus they needed
the imagery of the executed kings and Absalom quite as much as that of the
figures of glory and triumph. (Frye, N. [1982], p. 180).



620. Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 21.

621. Ibid., p. 283.

622. Ibid., p. 308.

623. Jung describes this state as a quaternity of opposites; I have eliminated
this particular reference in the attempt to simplify an already sufficiently
complex discussion.

624. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 353–354.

625. Ibid., pp. 540–541.

626. Ibid., pp. 363–364.

627. From Maier, Scrutinium chymicum (1687) (plate 175 in Jung, C.G. [1968b]).

628. Ibid., pp. 214–215.

629. Ibid., pp. 363–364.

630. Nietzsche, F. (1966), p. 10.

631. Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 475.

632. Jung, C.G. (1976a).

633. It seems possible that Piaget's hypothetical “organ of equilibration” is
equivalent to Jung's “self”—the highest regulator of intrapsychic activity:

The organism has special organs of equilibrium. The same is true of mental
life, whose organs of equilibrium are special regulatory mechanisms. This is so
at all levels of development, from the elementary regulators of motivation
(needs and interests) up to will for affectivity and from perceptual and
sensorimotor regulations up to operations for cognition. (Piaget, J. [1967], p.
102).



Piaget also points out (a) that consciousness arises in personality “when the
environmental situation in which some person finds himself or herself blocks
some ongoing (goal-directed) activity. Children act in accordance with their
needs and everything takes place without conscious awareness or the
equilibrations going on until there is a frustration [Piaget's terminology,
likely equivalent to emergence of the unexpected (and punishing ?)]…. Each of
these frustrating circumstances serves to focus the child's attention on the
reasons for the dis-equilibration rather than simply on the desired goal”
(Rychlak, J. [1981], p. 688—see Piaget, J. [1967]; Piaget, J. [1962]), and (b)
that will arises when there is a conflict in behavioral tendencies (Jung would
say, when there is a conflict in duty). Piaget believed that the will (the will
to power; the heroic principle) could be considered the consequence of
integration of affect and motivation:

To the extent that the emotions become organized, they emerge as regulations
whose final form of equilibrium is none other than the will. Thus, will is the
true affective equivalent of the operation in reason. Will is a late-appearing
function. The real exercise of will is linked to the function of the autonomous
moral feelings, which is why we have waited until this [late-childhood] stage
to discuss it. (Piaget, J. [1967], p. 58).



This idea, in passing, is very much like Jung's notion of the integration of
feelingtoned complexes into the ego. Piaget elaborates, elsewhere:

The act of will does not consist of following the inferior and stronger
tendency; on the contrary, one would then speak of a failure of will or “lack
of will power.” Will power involves reinforcing the superior but weaker
tendency so as to make it triumph. (Piaget, J. [1965], p. 59).



634. “Fabulous monster containing the mass confusa, from which rises the
pelican (symbol of Christ and the lapis).” In Hermaphroditisches Sonn- und
Mondskind (1752) (plate 256 in Jung, C.G. [1968b]).

635. Jung, C.G. (1968b), pp. 327–329.

636. Ibid., p. 331.

637. Ibid., p. 302.

638. Ibid., p. 329.

639. Ibid., pp. 332–334.

640. Ibid., p. 335.

641. Ibid., p. 336–339.

642. Ibid., p. 346–348.

643. Dorn, in Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 465.

644. See chapter 2: The Great Father: Images of the Known, or Explored
Territory.

645. Dorn, in Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 41.

646. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 34–35.

647. Khunrath, in Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 329.

648. Jung, C.G. (1976b), p. 349.

649. Jung, C.G. (1968a), p. 179.

650. Nietzsche, F. (1967a), p. 122–123.

651. Russell, J.B. (1986).

652. Ibid., p. 246.

653. Ibid., p. 300.

654. Milton, J. (1961), 3:100–128, p. 95.

655. Wechsler, D. (1981).

656. See, for example, The Gospel of Mary, in Robinson, J.R. (Ed.) (1988), p.
527.

657. See, for example, The Gospel of Thomas, in Robinson, J.R. (Ed.) (1988),
pp. 132, 138.

658. Jung, C.G. (1968b), pp. 35–37.

659. See footnote 1.

660. Jung, C.G. (1976b), pp. 374–375.

661. Jung, C.G. (1967b), p. 304.

662. There are (at least) two (major) alternative dogmatic formulations of
Original Sin, in Christian tradition: (1) the source of eternal guilt; (2) the
fortunate error, which leads to the incarnation of Christ. Toni Wolff notes:

There are early medieval representations of the genealogical tree of Christ. On
the branches, as the fruits of the tree, are the prophets and all Christ's
ancestors. The roots of the tree grow out of the skull of Adam, and Christ is
its central and more precious fruit.



Jung amplifies this comment:

Well, the tree sometimes grows out of Adam's navel, and on the branches, as you
say, sit the prophets and kings of the Old Testament, Christ's ancestors, and
then on top of the tree is the triumphant Christ. That life begins with Adam
and ends with Christ is the same idea. (Jung, C.G. [1988], p. 1440).



663. Neumann states:

Originally, Messianism was bound up with a historical process ending in the
emergence of a savior who, after the transformation crisis of the apocalypse,
ushers in the eschatological age of redemption. This conception can easily be
shown to be a projection of an individuation process, the subject of which,
however, is the people, the chosen collectivity, and not the individual. In the
collective projection, history appears as the collective representation of
destiny; the crisis is manifested in the projection of the ways which
characterize the Last Days; and the transformation, as the Last Judgment, death
and resurrection. Similarly, the transfiguration and conquest of the self
corresponds to transfiguration in the celestial paradise which in the shape of
a mandala gathers in mankind, or else it is projected as life in a re-created
and renewed world governed by the king-Adam-anthropos-self at its center.
(Neumann, E. [1968], p. 408).



664. “The restitution of the mystic apple to the tree of knowledge.” Giovanni
da Modena (15th century) (plate 116 In Neumann, E. [1955]).

665. Eliade, M. (1982), p. 73.

666. “The Boddhisatva” (plate XII in Campbell, J. [1973]).

667. From the Gospel of Thomas. Cited in Pagels, E. (1979), p. xv.

668. The Gospel of Thomas. In Robinson, J.R. (Ed.) (1988), pp. 126–127.





REFERENCES



Adler, A. (1958). What life should mean to you. New York: Capricorn Books.

Aggleton, J.P. (Ed.). (1993). The amygdala: Neurobiological aspects of emotion,
memory, and mental dysfunction. New York: Wiley-Liss.

Agnew, N.M. & Brown, J.L. (1990). Foundations for a model of knowing:
Constructing reality. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 30, 152–183.

Ambady, N. & Rosenthal, R. (1992). Thin slices of expressive behavior as
predictors of interpersonal consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 111, 256–274.

Arendt, H. (1994). Eichmann in Jerusalem: A report on the banality of evil. New
York: Penguin.

Armstrong, S.L., Gleitman, L.R., & Gleitman, H. (1983). What some concepts
might not be. Cognition, 13, 263–308.



Banaji, M.R., Hardin, C., & Rothman, A.J. (1993). Implicit stereotyping in
person judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 272–281.

Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A.R. (1997). Deciding
advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275,
1293–1295.

Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A.R. (1996). Failure to
respond autonomically to anticipated future outcomes following damage to
prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 6, 215–225.

Beck, A. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.

Becker, E. (1973). The denial of death. New York: The Free Press.

Bellows, H.A. (1969). The poetic Edda. New York: Biblo and Tannen.

Berkowitz, C.D. & Senter, S.A. (1987). Characteristics of mother-infant
interactions in nonorganic failure to thrive. Journal of Family Practice, 25,
377–381.

Binswanger, L. (1963). Being in the world. New York: Basic Books.

Blake, W. (1793/1946). The marriage of heaven and hell. In A. Kazin (Ed.), The
portable Blake (pp. 249–266). New York: Viking.

Blanchard, D.C. & Blanchard, R.J. (1972). Innate and conditioned reactions to
threat in rats with amygdaloid lesions. Journal of Comparative Physiology and
Psychology, 81, 281–290.

Blanchard, D.J. & Blanchard, D.C. (1989). Antipredator defensive behaviors in a
visible burrow system. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 103, 70–82.

Blanchard, D.C., Blanchard, R.J., & Rodgers, R.J. (1991). Risk assessment and
animal models of anxiety. In B. Olivier, J. Mos & J.L. Slangen (Eds.), Animal
models in psychopharmacology (pp. 117–134). Boston: Birkhauser Verlag.

Blanchard, D.C., Veniegas, R., Elloran, I., & Blanchard, R.J. (1993). Alcohol
and anxiety: Effects on offensive and defensive aggression. Journal of Studies
on Alcohol, Supplement Number 11, 9–19.

Blanchard, R.J., Blanchard, D.C., & Hori, K. (1989). Ethoexperimental approach
to the study of defensive behavior. In R.J. Blanchard, P.F. Brain, D.C.
Blanchard, & S. Parmigiani, (Eds.), Ethoexperimental approaches to the study of
behavior (pp. 114–136). Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing.

Borski, L.M. & Miller, K.B. (1956). The jolly tailor who became king. In P.R.
Evans (Ed.), The family treasury of children's stories: Book two (pp. 60–68).
New York: Doubleday and Company.

Bouton, M.E. and Bolles, R.C. (1980). Conditioned fear assessed by freezing and
by the suppression of three different baselines. Animal Learning and Behavior,
8, 429–434.

Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic
Books.

Brooks, A. (1991). Intelligence without reason. MIT Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory: Artificial Intelligence Memo 1293.

Brooks, A., and Stein, L.A. (1993). Building brains for bodies. MIT Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory: Artificial Intelligence Memo 1439.

Brown, R. (1965). Social psychology. New York: The Free Press.

Brown, R. (1986). Social psychology: The second edition. New York: Macmillan.

Browning, C.R. (1993). Ordinary men: Reserve police battalion 101 and the final
solution in Poland. New York: Harper Perennial.

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Bruner, J.S. & Postman, L. (1949). On the perception of incongruity: A
paradigm. Journal of Personality, 18, 206–223.



Campbell, J. (1964). Occidental mythology: The masks of God. London: Penguin
Books.

Campbell, J. (1968). The hero with a thousand faces. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Campbell, J. (1973). Myths to live by. New York: Bantam Books.

Campbell, J. (1987). The masks of God: Vol. 1. Primitive mythology. New York:
Penguin.

Carver, C.S. & Scheier, M.F. (1982). Control theory: A useful conceptual
framework for personality, social,clinical, and health psychology.
Psychological Bulletin, 92, 111–135.

Cornford, F.M. (1956). Plato's cosmology: The timaeus of Plato. London:
Routledge.

Costa, P.T.Jr., & McCrae, R.R. (1992a). Four ways five factors are basic.
Personality and Individual Differences, 13, 653–665.



Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes' error. New York: Putnam.

Damasio, A.R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions
of the prefrontal cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London (Biological Science), 351, 1413–1420.

Dante, A. (1982). The inferno: Dante's immortal drama of a journey through hell
(J. Ciardi, Trans.). New York: Mentor Books.

Davidson, R.J. (1984a). Affect, cognition, and hemispheric specialization. In
C.E. Izard, J. Kagan, & R. Zajonc (Eds.), Emotion, cognition, and behavior (pp.
320–365). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Davidson, R.J. (1984b). Hemispheric asymmetry and emotion. In K. Scherer & P.
Ekman (Eds.), Approaches to emotion (pp. 39–57). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Davidson, R.J. (1992). Anterior cerebral asymmetry and the nature of emotion.
Brain and Cognition, 20, 125–151.

Davidson, R.J. and Fox, N.A. (1982). Asymmetrical brain activity discriminates
between positive and negative affective stimuli in human infants. Science, 218,
1235–1237.

Dee, J. (1993). Diary of Doctor John Dee: Together with a catalogue of his
library of manuscripts. New York: Holmes.

Didi-Huberman, G., Garbetta, R., & Morgaine, M. (1994). Saint-Georges et le
dragon: Versions d'une legende. Paris: Societe Nouvelle Adam Biro.

Dobbs, B.J.T (1975). The foundations of Newton's alchemy. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Dollard, J. & Miller, N. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy: An analysis in
terms of learning, thinking, and culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Donald, M. (1993). The origins of the modern mind. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Dostoyevsky, F. (1961). Notes from underground. New York: Penguin Group.

Dostoyevsky, F. (1981). The brothers Karamazov (A.H. MacAndrew, Trans.). New
York: Bantam Books.

Dostoyevsky, F. (1993). Crime and punishment. New York: Vintage Classics.

Doty, R.W. (1989). Schizophrenia: A disease of interhemispheric processes at
forebrain and brainstem levels? Behavioural Brain Research, 34, 1–33.

Durnin, R. (1994). Letter to Thomas. Unpublished manuscript.



Edwardes, A. & Masters, R.E.L. (1963). The cradle of erotica. New York: Julian
Press.

Einstein, A. (1959). Autobiographical note. In P.A. Schilpp (Ed.), Albert
Einstein: Philosopher scientist. New York: Harper.

Eliade, M. (1957). The sacred and the profane: The nature of religion. New
York: Harcourt Brace.

Eliade, M. (1964). Shamanism: Archaic techniques of ecstasy (W.R. Trask,
Trans.). Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Eliade, M. (1965). Rites and symbols of initiation: The mysteries of birth and
rebirth (W.R. Trask, Trans.). New York: Harper and Row.

Eliade, M. (1975). Myths, dreams, and mysteries: The encounter between
contemporary faiths and archaic realities (P. Mairet, Trans.). New York: Harper
Colophon, Harper and Row.

Eliade, M. (1978a). The forge and the crucible (S. Corrin, Trans.) (2nd ed.).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eliade, M. A history of religious ideas (W.R. Trask, Trans.). Chicago: Chicago
University Press.

(1978b). Vol. 1. From the stone age to the Eleusinian mysteries.

(1982). Vol. 2. From Gautama Buddha to the triumph of Christianity.

(1985). Vol. 3. From Muhammad to the age of reforms.

Eliade, M. (1991a). Images and symbols: Studies in religious symbolism (P.
Mairet, Trans.). Princeton: Mythos.

Eliade, M. (1991b). The myth of the eternal return, or, cosmos and history
(W.R. Trask, Trans.). Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Ellenberger, H. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: The history and
evolution of dynamic psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.

Ervin, F. & Smith, M. (1986). Neurophysiological bases of the primary emotions.
In R. Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and
experience: Vol. 3. Biological foundations of emotion (pp. 145–170). New York:
Academic Press.

Evans, P.I. (1973). Jean Piaget: The man and his ideas. New York: E.P. Dutton
and Company.

Eysenck, H.J. (1995). Creativity as a product of personality and intelligence.
In D.H. Saklofske & M. Zeidner (Eds.), International handbook of personality
and intelligence (pp. 231–247). New York: Plenum Press.



Feyeraband, P.K. (1981). Realism, rationalism, and scientific method:
Philosophical papers (Vol. 1). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Field, T.M., Schanberg, S.M., Scafidi, F., Bauer, C.R., Vega-Lahr, N., Garcia,
R., Nystrom, J., & Kuhn, C.M. (1986). Tactile-kinesthetic stimulation effects
on preterm neonates. Pediatrics, 77, 654–658.

Fierz, M. & Weisskopf, V.F. (Eds.). (1960). Theoretical physics in the
twentieth century: A memorial volume to Wolfgang Pauli. New York: Interscience
Publishers.

Foa, E.B., Molnar, C., & Cashman, L. (1995). Change in rape narratives during
exposure therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 8, 675–690.

Fowles, D.C. (1980). The three arousal model: Implications of Gray's two factor
learning theory for heartrate, electrodermal activity, and psychopathy.
Psychophysiology 17, 87–104.

Fowles, D.C. (1983). Motivational effects of heart rate and electrodermal
activity: Implications for research on personality and psychopathology. Journal
of Research on Personality, 17, 48–71.

Fowles, D.C. (1988). Psychophysiology and psychopathology: A motivational
approach. Psychophysiology, 25, 373–391.

Fox, N.A. & Davidson, R.J. (1986). Taste-elicited changes in facial signs of
emotion and the asymmetry of brain electrical activity in human newborns.
Neuropsychologia, 24, 417–422.

Fox, N.A. & Davidson, R.J. (1988). Patterns of brain electrical activity during
facial signs of emotion in 10—month old infants. Developmental Psychology, 24,
230–236.

Frankl, V. (1971). Man's search for meaning: An introduction to logotherapy.
New York: Pocket Books.

Frazier, J.G. (1994). The golden bough: A study in magic and religion (the
world's classics). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Frye, N. (1982). The great code: The Bible and literature. London: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovitch.

Frye, N. (1990). Words with power: Being a second study of the Bible and
literature. London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovitch.

Fukuyama, F. (1993). The end of history and the last man. New York: Avon Books.



Gabrieli, J.D.E., Fleischman, D.A., Keane, M., Reminger, M., Sheryl, L., et al.
(1995). Double dissociation between memory systems underlying explicit and
implicit memory systems in the human brain. Psychological Science, 6, 76–82.

Gall, J. (1988). Systemantics: The underground text of systems lore. Ann Arbor:
The General Systemantics Press.

Garey, L.J. & Revishchin, A.V. (1990). Structure and thalamocortical relations
of the cetacean sensory cortex: Histological, tracer, and immunocytochemical
studies. In J.A. Thomas & R.A. Kastelein (Eds.), Sensory abilities of
Cetaceans: Laboratory and field evidence (pp. 19–30). New York: Plenum Press.

Goethe, J.W. (1979a). Faust, part one (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin
Books.

Goethe, J.W. (1979b). Faust, part two (P. Wayne, Trans.). London: Penguin
Books.

Goldberg, E. (1995). Rise and fall of modular orthodoxy. Journal of Clinical
and Experimental Neuropsychology, 17, 193–208.

Goldberg, E. and Costa, L.D. (1981). Hemisphere differences in the acquisition
and use of descriptive systems. Brain and Language, 14, 144–173.

Goldberg, E., Podell, K., and Lovell, M. (1994). Lateralization of frontal lobe
functions and cognitive novelty. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 6, 371–378.

Goldberg, L.R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American
Psychologist, 48, 26–34.

Goldman-Rakic, P.S. (1987). Circuitry of primate prefrontal cortex and
regulation of behavior by representational memory. In F. Plum (Ed.), Handbook
of physiology: Vol. 5: The nervous system (pp. 373–417). Baltimore: American
Physiological Society. Society.

Goodall, J. (1990). Through a window. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Gould, L., Andrews, D. & Yevin, J. (1996, December). The spy 100 line-up. Spy
Magazine.

Granit, R. (1977). The purposive brain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gray, J.A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the
functions of the septal-hippocampal system. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gray, J.A. (1987). The psychology of fear and stress: Vol. 5. Problems in the
behavioral sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gray, J.A., & McNaughton, N. (1996). The neuropsychology of anxiety: Reprise.
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 43, 61–134.

Gray, J.A., Feldon, J., Rawlins, J.N.P., Hemsley, D.R., and Smith, A.D. (1991).
The neuropsychology of schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 1–84.

Grossberg, S. (1987). Competitive learning: From interactive activation to
adaptive resonance. Cognitive Science, 11, 23–63.



Halgren, E. (1992). Emotional neurophysiology of the amygdala within the
conyext of human cognition. In J.P. Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala:
Neurobiological aspects of emotion, memory and mental dysfunction (pp.191–228).
New York: Wiley-Liss.

Halgren, E., Squires, N.K., Wilson, C.L., Rohrbaugh, J.W., Babb, T.L., and
Crandell, P.H. (1980). Endogenous potentials generated in the human hippocampal
formation and amygdala by infrequent events. Science, 210, 803–805.

Hawking, S. (1988). A brief history of time. New York: Bantam.

Hebb, D.O. & Thompson, W.R. (1985). The social significance of animal studies.
In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (pp.
729–774). New York: Random House.

Heidel, A. (1965). The Babylonian genesis. Chicago: Chicago University Press
(Phoenix Books).

Hodson, G. (1963). The hidden wisdom in the Holy Bible: Vol. 1. Adyar, India:
Theosophical Publishing House.

Hofstadter, D.R. (1979). Godel, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid. New
York: Vintage.

Holloway, R.L. & Post, D.G. (1982). The relativity of relative brain measures
and hominid mosaic evolution. In E. Armstrong & D. Falk (Eds.), Primate brain
evolution: Method and concepts (pp. 57–76). New York: Plenum Press.

Huizinga, J. (1967). The waning of the Middle Ages. New York: St. Martin's
Press.

Huxley, A. (1956). The doors of perception, and heaven and hell. New York:
Harper and Row.

Hyde, J.S. (1984). How large are gender differences in aggression? A
developmental meta-analysis. Developmental Psychology, 20, 722–736.



Ikemoto, S. & Panksepp, J. (1996). Dissociations between appetitive and
consummatory responses by pharmacological manipulations of reward-relevant
brain regions. Behavioral Neuroscience, 110, 331–345.

Iwata, J., Chida, K., & LeDoux, J.E. (1987). Cardiovascular responses elicited
by stimulation of neurons in the central amygdaloid complex in awake but not
anesthetized rats resemble conditioned emotional responses. Brain Research, 36,
192–306.



Jacobsen, Thorkild. (1943). Primitive democracy in ancient Mesopotamia. Journal
of Near Eastern Studies, 2, 159–170.

Jaeger, W. (1968). The theology of the early Greek philosophers: The Gifford
lectures 1936. London: Oxford University Press.

Jaffe, A. (1961). Memories, dreams, and reflections. New York: Random House.

James, M.R. (1924). The apocryphal New Testament. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

James, W. (1880). Great men and their environment. Atlantic Monthly, October.

Jerison, H.J. (1979) The evolution of diversity in brain size. In M.E. Hahn, C.
Jensen, & B.C. Dudek (Eds.), Development and evolution of brain size:
Behavioral implications (pp. 29–57). New York: Academic Press.

Johnson, B. (1988). Lady of the beasts. New York: Harper and Row.

Jones, S.H., Gray, J.A., & Hemsley, D.R. (1992). The Kamin blocking effect,
incidental learning, and schizotypy: A reanalysis. Personality and Individual
Differences, 13, 57–60.

Joravsky, D. (1989). Russian psychology: A critical history. Cambridge: Basil
Blackwell.

Joyce, J. (1986). Ulysses. New York: Random House.

Joyce, J. (1992). The portrait of the artist as a young man. New York: Bantam
Classics.

Jung, C.G. The collected works of C.G. Jung (R.F.C. Hull, Trans.). Bollingen
Series XX. Princeton University Press.

(1967a). Vol. 5. Symbols of transformation: an analysis of the prelude to a
case of schizophrenia.

(1971). Vol. 6. Psychological types.

(1970a). Vol. 7. Two essays on analytical psychology.

(1976a). Vol. 8. The structure and dynamics of the psyche.

(1968a). Vol. 9. Part 1. The archetypes and the collective unconscious.

(1978a). Vol. 9. Part 2. Aion: researches into the phenomenology of the self.

(1978b). Vol. 10. Civilization in transition.

(1969). Vol. 11. Psychology and religion: west and east.

(1968b). Vol. 12. Psychology and alchemy.

(1967b). Vol. 13. Alchemical studies.

(1976b). Vol. 14. Mysterium Coniunctionis: an inquiry into the separation and
synthesis of psychic opposites in alchemy.

(1970b). Vol. 17. The development of personality.

Jung, C.G. (1912). Wandlungen und symbole der libido. Leipzig: F. Deuticke.

Jung, C.G. (1933). Modern man in search of a soul. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Jung, C.G. (1988). Nietzsche's Zarathrustra: Notes of the seminar given in 1934
(J.L. Jarrett, Ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Jung, E. & von Franz, M.L. (1980). The grail legend. Boston: Sigo Press.



Kagan, J. (1984). Behavioral inhibition in young children. Child Development,
55, 1005–1019.

Kapp, B.S., Pascoe, J.P. & Bixler, M.A. (1984). The amygdala: A neuroanatomical
systems approach to its contributions to aversive conditioning. In N. Butters &
L.R. Squire (Eds.), Neuropsychology of Memory. (pp. 473–488). New York:
Guilford.

Kaufmann, W. (Ed. and Trans.). (1968). The basic writings of Nietzsche. New
York: Random House.

Kaufmann, W. (Ed. and Trans.). (1975). Existentialism from Dostoevsky to
Sartre. New York: Meridian.

Keynes, G. (Ed.). (1966). The complete works of William Blake, with variant
readings. London: Oxford University Press.

Kling, A.S. & Brothers, L.A. (1992). The amygdala and social behavior. In J.P.
Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala: Neurobiological aspects of emotion, memory, and
mental dysfunction (pp. 353–377). New York: Wiley-Liss.

Koestler, A. (1976). The ghost in the machine. London: Hutchison.

Kronig, R. (1960). The turning point. In M. Fierz & V.F. Weisskopf (Eds.),
Theoretical physics in the twentieth century: A memorial volume to Wolfgang
Pauli. (pp. 5–39). New York: Interscience Publishers.

Kuhn, T.S. (1957). The Copernican revolution: Planetary astronomy in the
development of Western thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Kuhn, T.S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.



L'Engle, M. (1997). A wrinkle in time. New York: Bantam Doubleday Yearling
Newbery.

Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal
about the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lao Tzu. (1984a). 64: Staying with the misery. In Tao Te Ching (S. Rosenthal,
Trans.) [On-line]. Available: http://www.warrior-scholar.com/text/tao.htm.

Lao Tzu. (1984b). 78: Sincerity. In Tao Te Ching (S. Rosenthal, Trans.)
[On-line]. Available: http://www.warrior-scholar.com/text/tao.htm.

Lao Tzu. (1984c). 38: The concerns of the great. In Tao Te Ching (S. Rosenthal,
Trans.) [On-line]. Available: http://www. warrior-scholar.com/text/tao.htm.

Lao Tzu. (1984d). 50: The value set on life. In Tao Te Ching (S. Rosenthal,
Trans.) [On-line]. Available: http://www.warrior-scholar.com/text/tao.htm.

LeDoux, J.E. (1992). Emotion and the amygdala. In J.P. Aggleton (Ed.), The
amygdala: Neurobiological aspects of emotion, memory, and mental dysfunction
(pp. 339–351). New York: Wiley-Liss.

LeDoux, J.E. (1993). Emotional networks in the brain. In M. Lewis and J.M.
Haviland (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions (pp. 109–118). New York: Guilford.

LeDoux, J.E., Sakaguchi, A., & Reis, D.J. (1984). Subcortical efferent
projections of the medial geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses
conditioned to acoustic stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience, 4, 683–698.

Lewis, M. & Haviland, J.M. (Eds.). (1993). Handbook of emotions. New York:
Guilford.

Lilly, J.C. (1967). The mind of the dolphin. New York: Doubleday.

Lindzey, G. & Aronson, E. (1985). The handbook of social psychology. New York:
Random House.

Lorenz, K. (1974). On aggression. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovitch.

Lubow, R.E. (1989). Latent inhibition and conditioned attention theory.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lucas, B.V., Crane, L. & Edwards, M. (Trans.) (1945). Grimm's fairy tales (pp.
171–178). New York: Grosset and Dunlap, Companion Library.

Luria, A.R. (1980). Higher cortical functions in man. New York: Basic Books.



MacRae, G.W. (Trans.). (1988). The thunder: Perfect mind. In J.M. Robinson
(Ed.), The Nag Hammadi library in English (pp. 297–319). New York: Harper
Collins.

Maier, N.R.F. & Schnierla, T.C. (1935). Principles of animal psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Mark, V.H. & Ervin, F.R. (1970). Violence and the brain. New York: Harper and
Row, Medical Division.

Melzack, R. (1973). The puzzle of pain. New York: Basic Books.

Melzack, R. & Wall, P.D. (1983). The challenge of pain. New York: Basic Books.

Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on card sorting. Archives
of Neurology, 9, 100–110.

Milner, B. (1972). Disorders of learning and memory after temporal lobe lesions
in man. Clinical Neurosurgery, 19, 421–446.

Milner, B., Petrides, M., & Smith, M.L. (1985). Frontal lobes and the temporal
organization of memory. Human Neurobiology, 4, 137–142.

Milton, J. (1961). Paradise lost (and other poems). New York: New American
Library.

Morley, J. (1923). Rousseau and his era: Vol. 1. New York: Harper and Brothers.

Morruzzi, G. & Magoun, H.W. (1949). Brainstem reticular formation and
activation of the EEG. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1,
455–473.

Mowrer, O.H. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.

Multhauf, Robert P. (1967). The origins of chemistry. London: Oldbourne.



Nader, A., McNally, R.J., & Wiegartz, P.S. (1996). Implicit memory bias for
threat in posttraumatic stress disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 20,
625–635.

Nauta, W.J.H. (1971). The problem of the frontal lobe: A reinterpretation.
Psychiatry Research, 8, 167–187.

Neumann, E. (1954). The origins and history of consciousness (R.F.C. Hull,
Trans.). New York: Pantheon Books.

Neumann, E. (1955). The great mother: An analysis of the archetype (R. Manheim,
Trans.). New York: Pantheon Books.

Neumann, E. (1968). Mystical man. In J. Campbell (Ed.), Papers from the Eranos
yearbooks: Vol. 6. The mystic vision) (pp. 375–415). Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Niebuhr, R. (1964). The nature and destiny of man: A Christian interpretation:
Vol. 1. Human nature. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

Nietzsche, F. (1957). The use and abuse of history (A. Collins, Trans.). New
York: Bobbs-Merrill Company.

Nietzsche, F. (1966). Beyond good and evil: Prelude to a philosophy of the
future (W. Kaufmann, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.

Nietzsche, F. (1967a). On the genealogy of morals/Ecce homo (W. Kaufmann & R.J.
Hollingdale, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.

Nietzsche, F. (1967b). The birth of tragedy/The case of Wagner (W. Kaufmann,
Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.

Nietzsche, F. (1968a). Beyond good and evil. In W. Kaufmann (Ed. and Trans.),
The basic writings of Nietzsche (pp. 181–438). New York: Random House.

Nietzsche, F. (1968b). The will to power (W. Kaufmann, Ed.) (W. Kaufmann & R.J.
Hollingdale, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.

Nietzsche, F. (1981). Twilight of the idols/The anti-Christ (R.J. Hollingdale,
Trans.). New York: Penguin Classics.

Nietzsche, F. (1995). Thus spake Zarathustra: A book for all and none (W.
Kaufmann, Trans.). New York: Modern Library.



Oatley, K. (1994). A taxonomy of the emotions of literary response and a theory
of identification in fictional narrative. Poetics, 23, 53–74.

Obrist, P.A., Light, K.C., Langer, A.W., Grignolo, A., & McCubbin, J.A. (1978).
Behavioural-cardiac interactions: The psychosomatic hypothesis. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 22, 301–325.

Ohman, A. (1979). The orienting response, attention and learning: An
information-processing perspective. In H.D. Kimmel, E.H. Van Olst and J.F.
Orlebeke (Eds.), The Orienting Reflex in Humans (pp. 443–467). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Ohman, A. (1987). The psychophysiology of emotion: An evolutionary-cognitive
perspective. In P.K. Ackles, J.R. Jennings, and M.G.H. Coles (Eds.), Advances
in Psychophysiology: A Research Annual (Volume 2) (pp. 79–127). Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.

Orwell, G. (1981). The road to Wigan Pier. London: Penguin.

Otto, R. (1958). The idea of the holy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Oxford English dictionary: CD-ROM for windows (1994). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.



Pagels, E. (1979). The gnostic Gospels. New York: Random House.

Pagels, E. (1995). The origin of Satan. New York: Random House.

Panksepp, J., Siviy, S. & Normansell, L.A. (1985). Brain opioids and social
emotions. In M. Reste & T. Field (Eds.), The psychobiology of attachment and
separation (pp. 1–49). New York: Academic Press.

Patton, M.F. (1988). Can bad men make good brains do bad things? Proceedings
and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, January.

Peake, M. (1995). The Gormenghast novels: Titus groan, Gormenghast, Titus
alone. New York: Overlook Press.

Penfield, W. & Rasmussen, T. (1950). The cerebral cortex of man: A clinical
study of localization of function. New York: Macmillan.

Pennebaker, J.W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic
process. Psychological Science, 8, 162–166.

Pennebaker, J., Mayne, T.J., & Francis, M.E. (1997). Linguistic predictors of
adaptive bereavement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72,
863–871.

Petrides, M. & Milner, B. (1982). Deficits on subject-ordered tasks after
frontal and temporal lobe lesions in man. Neuropsychologia, 20, 249–263.

Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgement of the child. London: Kegan, Paul,
Trench, Trubner, and Company.

Piaget, J. (1965). The moral judgement of the child. New York: The Free Press.

Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. New York: W.W.
Norton.

Piaget, J. (1967). Six psychological studies. New York: Random House.

Piaget, J. (1977). The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive
structures (A. Rosin, Trans.). New York: Viking.

Pihl, R.O. & Peterson, J.B. (1993). Etiology. Annual Review of Addictions
Research and Treatment, 2, 153–174.

Pihl, R.O. & Peterson, J.B. (1995). Heinz Lehmann Memorial Prize Address:
Alcoholism: The role of different motivational systems. Journal of Psychiatry
and Neuroscience, 20, 372–396.

Pinel, J.P.J. & Mana, M.J. (1989). Adaptive interactions of rats with dangerous
inanimate objects: Support for a cognitive theory of defensive behavior. In
R.J. Blanchard, P.F. Brain, D.C. Blanchard, & S. Parmigiani (Eds.),
Ethoexperimental approaches to the study of behavior (pp. 137–155). Boston:
Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing.

Plato (1952). The apology (B. Jowett, Trans.). In R.M. Hutchins (Ed.), Great
books of the western world: Vol. 7. Plato (pp. 200–212). Chicago: Encyclopaedia
Brittanica.

Polan, H.J. & Ward, M.J. (1994). Role of the mother's touch in failure to
thrive: A preliminary investigation. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1098–1105.

Polyani, M. (1958). Personal knowledge: Towards a post-critical philosophy.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Pritchard, J.B. (1955). Ancient Near Eastern texts relating to the Old
Testament. Princeton: Princeton University Press.



Radha, Swami S. (1978). Kundalini yoga for the west. Boston: Shambala.

Rapoport, J. (1989). The boy who couldn't stop washing: The experience and
treatment of OCD. New York: E.P. Dutton.

Ridgway, S.H. (1986). Dolphin brain size. In M.M. Bryden & R.J. Harrison
(Eds.), Research on dolphins (pp. 59–70). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Robinson, J.R. (Ed.). (1988). The Nag Hammadi library in English. New York:
Harper Collins.

Romme, M.A. & Escher, A.D. (1989). Hearing voices. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15,
209–216.

Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & Boyes-Braem (1976). Basic
objects in natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382–439.

Russell, J.B. (1986). Mephistopheles: The devil in the modern world. London:
Cornell University Press.

Rychlak, J. (1981). Introduction to personality and psychotherapy. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Hutchison.



Sacks, O. (1987). The man who mistook his wife for a hat and other clinical
tales. New York: Harper and Row.

Saner, H. & Ellickson, P. (1996). Concurrent risk factors for adolescent
violence. Journal of Adolescent Health, 19, 94–103.

Schachter, D.L. (1994). What are the memory systems of 1994? In D.L. Schacter &
E. Tulving (Eds.), Memory systems 1994. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Schnierla, T.C. (1959). An evolutionary and developmental theory of biphasic
processes underlying approach and withdrawal. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
1–42.

Shakespeare, W. (1952a). King Henry VI. In R.M. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books of
the western world: Vol. 26. I. (pp. 69–104). Chicago: Encyclopaedia Brittanica.

Shakespeare, W. (1952b). Richard III. In R.M. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books of
the western world: Vol. 26. I. (pp. 105–148). Chicago: Encyclopaedia
Brittanica.

Shakespeare, W. (1952c). Titus Andronicus. In R.M. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books
of the western world: Vol. 26. I. (pp. 170–198). Chicago: Encyclopaedia
Brittanica.

Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments in planning. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London (Biological Sciences), 289,
199–209.

Shelton, G. (1980). The fabulous furry freak brothers: Best of the Rip-Off
Press (Vol. 4). San Francisco: Rip-Off Press.

Skinner, B.F. (1966). The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Skinner, B.F. (1969). Contingencies of reinforcement: A theoretical analysis.
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Smith, H. (1991). The world's religions. New York: Harper Collins.

Sokolov, E.N. (1969). The modeling properties of the nervous system. In
Maltzman, I., & Coles, K. (Eds.), Handbook of Contemporary Soviet Psychology
(pp. 670–704). New York: Basic Books.

Solzhenitsyn, A.I. The gulag archipelago, 1918–1956: An experiment in literary
investigation (T.P. Whitney, Trans.). New York: Harper and Row.

(1974). Vol. 1. The gulag archipelago.

(1975). Vol. 2. The gulag archipelago two.

(1978). Vol. 3. The gulag archipelago three.

Solzhenitsyn, A.I. (1990). Beauty will save the world. In J. Pelikan (Ed.), The
world treasury of modern religious thought. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.

Springer, S.P. & Deutsch, G. (1989). Left brain, right brain. New York: W.H.
Freeman.

Squire, L.R. & Zola-Morgan, S. (1990). The neuropsychology of memory. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 608, 137–147.

Stevenson, M.S. (1920). The rites of the twice born. London: Oxford University
Press.

Swerdlow, N.R., Filion, D., Geyer, M.A., & Braff, D.L. (1995). “Normal”
personality correlates of sensorimotor, cognitive, and visuospatial gating.
Biological Psychiatry, 37, 286–299.



Tchelitchew, P. (1992). Hide and seek. Scientific American, 267, 49.

Teylor, T.J. & Discenna, P. (1985). The role of hippocampus in memory: A
hypothesis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 9, 377–389.

Teylor, T.J. & Discenna, P. (1986). The hippocampal memory indexing theory.
Behavioural Neuroscience, 100, 147–154.

The Holy Bible, King James version (reference ed.). Iowa: World Bible
Publishers, Inc.

Tolstoy, L. (1887–1983). Confessions (D. Patterson, Trans.). New York: W.W.
Norton and Company.

Tomarken, A.J., Davidson, R.J., & Henriques, J.B. (1990). Resting frontal brain
asymmetry predicts affective responses to films. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 59, 791–801.

Tomarken, A.J., Davidson, R.J., Wheeler, R.E., & Doss, R.C. (1992). Individual
differences in anterior brain asymmetry and fundamental dimensions of emotion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 672–687.

Tucker, D.M. & Williamson, P.A. (1984). Asymmetric neural control systems in
human self-regulation. Psychological Review, 91, 185–215.

Tymoczko, D. (1996, May). The nitrous oxide philosopher. Atlantic Monthly,
93–101.



Vaihinger, H. (1924). The philosophy of “as if:” A system of the theoretical,
practical, and religious fictions of mankind (C.K. Ogden, Trans.). New York:
Harcourt, Brace, and Company.

Vinogradova, O. (1961). The orientation reaction and its neuropsychological
mechanisms. Moscow: Academic Pedagogical Sciences.

Vinogradova, O. (1975). Functional organization of the limbic system in the
process of registration of infor-mation: facts and hypotheses. In Isaacson, R.,
and Pribram, K. (Eds.), The hippocampus, neurophysiology, and behaviour Vol. 2,
(pp. 3–69). New York: Plenum Press.

Vitz, P.C. (1990). The use of stories in moral development: New psychological
reasons for an old education method. American Psychologist, 45, 709–720.

Voltaire. (1933). Romances. New York: Tudor.

von Franz, M.L. (1980). Alchemy. Toronto: Inner City Books.



Waley, A. (1934). The way and its power. London: Allen and Unwin.

Watanabe, T., and Niki, H. (1985). Hippocampal unit activity and delayed
response in the monkey. Brain Research, 325, 241–245.

Watkins, P.C., Vache, K., Verney, S.P., & Mathews, A. (1996). Unconscious
mood-congruent memory bias in depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105,
34–41.

Wechsler, D. (1981). Wechsler adult intelligence scale-Revised. San Antonio:
The Psychological Corporation.

Westfall, R.S. (1971). Force in Newton's physics: the science of dynamics in
the seventeenth century. London: Macdonald.

Wheeler, J. (1980). Beyond the black hole. In H. Woolf (Ed.), Some strangeness
in the proportion: A centennial symposium to celebrate the achievements of
Albert Einstein (pp. 341–375). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Advanced Books
Program.

Wheeler, R.E., Davidson, R.J., & Tomarken, A.J. (1993). Frontal brain asymmetry
and emotional reactivity: a biological substrate of affective style.
Psychophysiology, 30, 82–89.

Whitehead, A.N. (1958). An introduction to mathematics. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Wilhelm, R. (1971). The I Ching (C. Baynes, Trans.). Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Wilson, E.O. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. New York: Knopf.

Wise, R.A. (1988). Psychomotor stimulant properties of addictive drugs. Annals
of the New York Academy of Science, 537, 228–234.

Wise, R.A. & Bozarth, M.A. (1987). A psychomotor stimulant theory of addiction.
Psychological Review, 94, 469–492.

Wittgenstein, L. (1968). Philosophical investigations (3rd ed.) (G.E.M.
Anscombe, Trans.). New York: Macmillan.



Zimmer, H. (1982). The Indian world mother. In J. Campbell (Ed.), Papers from
the Eranos yearbooks: Vol. 6. The mystic vision (pp. 70–102). Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Zola-Morgan, S., Squire, L.R., & Amaral, D.G. (1986). Human amnesia and the
medial temporal region: Enduring memory impairment following a bilateral lesion
limited to field CA1 of the hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience, 6, 2950–2967.

Zwigoff, T. (1995). Crumb. Columbia Tri-Star: Sony Pictures Classics.





PERMISSIONS



Brothers Grimm; excerpts from Grimm's Fairy Tales, translated by B.V. Lucas, L.
Crane and M. Edwards. Translation copyright © 1945, Grosset and Dunlap.
Reprinted with permission of Penguin Putnam Inc.

Dostoevsky, Fyodor; excerpts from The Brothers Karamazov by Fyodor Dostoevsky,
translated by Andrew R. MacAndrew. Translation copyright © 1970 by Bantam, a
division of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc. Used by permission of
Bantam Books, a division of Bantam, Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc.

Eliade, Mircea; excerpts from The Forge and the Crucible, second edition.
Copyright © 1978 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Eliade, Mircea; excerpts from A History of Religious Ideas, Vol. 1. Copyright ©
1978 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Eliade, Mircea; excerpts from A History of Religious Ideas, Vol. 2 Copyright ©
1982 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Eliade, Mircea; excerpts from A History of Religious Ideas, Vol. 3 Copyright ©
1985 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Eliade, Mircea; specified excerpts from Myths, Dreams and Mysteries. Copyright
© 1957 by Librairie Gallimard. English translation copyright 1960 by Harville
Press. Copyright Renewed. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers,
Inc.

Heidel, Alexander; excerpts from The Babylonian Genesis, second edition.
Copyright © 1967 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Jung, C.G.; Mysterium Conjunctionis. Copyright © 1970 by Princeton University
Press. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press.

Jung, C.G.; Psychology and Alchemy. Copyright © 1953 by Bollingen Foundation.
Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press.

Kuhn, Thomas; excerpts from The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Copyright
© 1970 by The University of Chicago Press. Reprinted with permission.

Neumann, Erich; The Great Mother. Copyright © 1955 by Princeton University
Press.

Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. Copyright renewed 1983
by Bollingen Foundation.

Neumann, Erich; The Origins and History of Consciousness. Copyright © 1954 by
Princeton University Press. Reprinted by Permission of Princeton University
Press. Copyright renewed 1982 by Bollingen Foundation.

Nietzsche, Friedrich; excerpts from The Basic Writings of Nietzsche by
Friedrich Nietzsche, translated by Walter Kaufmann. Copyright © 1967 by Walter
Kaufmann. Reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc.

Nietzsche, Friedrich; excerpts from Beyond Good and Evil by Friedrich
Nietzsche, translated by Walter Kaufmann. Copyright © 1966 by Random House,
Inc. Reprinted with permission of Random House, Inc.

Plato's Dialogues; reprinted from Great Books of the Western World. Copyright ©
1952, 1990 Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.

Shelton, Gilbert; Cartoon: The Adventures of Fat Freddy's Cat from The Best of
the Rip Off Press, Vol. IV: The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers, p. 45. Copyright
© 1980 by Rip Off Press, Inc. Reprinted with permission of Rip Off Press, Inc.

Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr I.; specified excerpts from The Gulag Archipelago
1918–1956: An Experiment in Literary Investigation I-II by Aleksandr I.
Solzhenitsyn. Copyright © 1973 by Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn. English language
translation copyright © 1973, 1974 by Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. Reprinted
by permission of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.

Tolstoy, Leo; excerpts from Confession by Leo Tolstoy, translated from the
Russian by David Patterson. Copyright © 1983 by David Patterson. Reprinted by
permission of W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.

Von Franz, M.L.; excerpts from Alchemy. Copyright © 1980 by Inner City Books.
Reprinted with permis-





INDEX



a priori, 26, 43, 53–57, 69, 71, 101, 196, 226, 234, 249, 260, 286, 325, 383,
402, 424

Aaron, 376, 377

Abel, 319, 395

Abraham, 364, 396, 425

abyss, 161, 163, 266, 364, 440

Academy, 351, 353

Achilles, 254

act of God, 20, 87

active approach, 19, 65

acts, xx, 10, 36, 42, 62, 71, 76, 81, 90, 99, 111, 128, 144, 153, 172, 177,
180, 198, 201, 233, 235, 241, 242, 274, 290, 309, 318, 322, 323, 335, 339, 360,
390, 391, 397, 411, 417, 452, 455, 468

Adak, 342, 343

Adam, 97, 110, 284, 291, 303, 304, 305, 312, 338, 463, 465

adamah, 110, 461

Adamic, 285

Adamovich, 358

adaptation, xxi, 20, 21, 28, 29, 31, 38, 40, 42, 44, 48, 57–70, 73–81, 93, 99,
125, 129, 135, 149, 150, 151, 158, 159, 161, 169, 172, 176, 178, 179, 190, 197,
221, 223, 226, 227, 229, 230, 231, 232, 236, 241, 246, 248, 250, 256, 260, 261,
268, 269, 271, 273, 274, 277, 278, 279, 283, 301, 302, 311, 316, 324–342, 353,
357, 358, 361, 363, 365, 367, 370, 371, 382, 384, 385, 391, 402–411, 429, 467

adolescent, 181, 213, 222, 226, 232, 283, 324, 374, 387, 397, 447

adult, xii, 33, 59, 88, 93, 157, 189, 222, 223, 225, 272, 288, 327, 337, 387,
396, 463, 469

adulthood, 73, 157, 216, 221, 222, 287, 375, 387, 396

adversary, xxi, 90, 104, 129, 136, 217, 307, 309, 316, 317, 318, 319, 323, 333,
334, 429, 439,

see also devil

Aerial Spirit, viii, 314

affect, 3, 4, 5, 9, 13, 23, 26, 40, 42, 43, 49, 54, 55, 67, 69, 77, 103, 113,
118, 137, 152, 153, 158, 196, 228, 231, 246, 249, 257, 258, 264, 266, 269, 275,
328, 358, 360, 376, 382, 403, 409, 413, 424, 429, 430, 431, 459, 460,

see also emotion

affectively-unbearable, 227

affect-laden, 23, 226, 266

Africa, 142, 308

aggression, xxi, 3, 113, 137, 163, 189, 191, 194, 246, 251, 258, 259, 266, 310,
311, 334, 336, 347, 361, 369

Agni, 147

Ahab, 210, 296

Ahura Mazda, 318, 319

Aion, 142

Akitu, 125, 126

Akkadian, 125

Alalu, 192, 193

Alberta, xiv, xv, xviii, 453

alchemical, 4, 142, 370, 401, 403, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 413, 416, 417, 419,
420, 421, 423, 424, 426, 427, 428, 429, 432, 433, 439, 440, 441, 443, 444, 445

alchemist, 4, 5, 255, 300, 370, 400–456

alchemy, 3, 4, 144, 300, 369, 401–457, 463

Alchimia, 430

alchymicum, 400, 401, 457

alcoholic, 449

Alexander, 35, 118, 342

alienation, 300, 364, 402

allegorically, 431

Almighty, 167, 360, 442

Alpha, 142, 144

altar, 147, 211

Alyosha, 379

Aman, 160

Ameretat, 318

American, 15, 148, 244, 255, 412, 451

Amesha Spenta, 318

Ammonites, 210

Amorite, 211

amorphous, 105, 140, 275

Amos, 212

amygdala, 50, 51, 54, 55, 57, 73,

see also affect, emotion, hippocampus, limbic

anachronistic, 93, 132, 272

analogy, 35, 72, 290

anarchists, 219

ancestor, 133, 136, 196, 271, 288, 297, 374

ancestor-hero, 197

ancestral, xxi, 8, 14, 81, 104, 128, 152, 153, 161, 178, 192, 197, 203, 215,
221, 239, 247, 285, 295, 304, 305, 330, 333, 369, 382, 391, 439–449,

see also megalithic

Andreae, 422

Andree, 308

androgynous, 145, 177

androgyny, 419

angel, 312, 314, 316, 359

Angra Mainyu, 318, 319

anima, 407, 430

animistically, 113

Annam, 414

annihilation, xv, 225, 263, 359, 379, 451

anomalous information, 16, 19, 144, 358, 360, 405, 406

anomaly, xxi, 18, 19, 21, 179, 190, 232, 233, 234, 244, 247, 257, 271–283, 284,
302, 307, 317, 320, 328, 340, 341, 343, 355, 358, 360, 367, 429, 443, 447, 465,

see also novelty, unexpected, unpredictable

Anshar, 114, 116, 117, 118, 121

anthropology, 92

anthropomorphic, 169

Anthropos, 439

Antibess, 366

anti-Midas, 334

Anu, 114, 115, 117, 119, 121, 192, 193, 201

Anubis, xviii

Anunnaki, 119

anxiety, 24, 37, 43, 52, 55, 72, 73, 161, 166, 167, 170, 190, 220, 226, 227,
239, 249, 256, 259, 260, 279–293, 305, 306, 310, 317, 323, 328, 329, 339, 355,
369, 378, 379, 391, 402, 416, 430, 431, 441, 463, 465,

see also affect, emotion, novelty, threat

anxiety-inhibiting, 238

Apocrypha, 165

apocryphal, 253, 401

Apollo, 288

Apophis, 128, 139, 142, 147

apparition, 451, 461

Appolinian, 414

apprenticeship, 216, 220, 231, 232, 326, 443

Apsu, vii, 90, 110–123, 200

Aquarium, 431

aquatic, 100, 109, 308

Arabic, 401

arcane, 300

archetypal, xx, xxi, 78, 92, 93, 98, 103, 133, 157, 176, 182, 187, 198, 271,
297, 311, 319, 320, 369, 382, 384, 396, 397, 404, 427, 428, 456, 457

archetype, 142, 160, 396, 405, 427, 432,

see also natural category

Arendt, 369

Ares, 113, 194

Arisleus, 439, 440, 441

Aristotelian, 220

Aristotelianism, 422

Aristotle, 371

armor, 178, 249, 308

Arnold, 401

arrogance, 175, 213, 309, 313, 316, 458

arrogant, 32, 90, 203, 205, 217, 227, 271, 281, 291, 311, 313, 330, 334, 341,
370,

see also adversary, deceit, denial, devil, evil

Artemis, 168

Arthur, 16, 405

Asag, 139

Asaru, 127

asceticism, 294

Asha, 318

ashes, 292, 307, 334, 340

Asiatic, 220

assumption, xxi, 22, 177, 190, 227, 256, 260, 261, 268, 278, 302, 417, 443,

see also axiom, presumption, presupposition

Assur, 126

Assyrians, 126

astonished, 362, 365, 393, 469

atheism, 448

atmosphere, xii, 8, 100, 109, 110, 147

atomic, 138, 411

atoms, 441

attentional resources, 20

Atum, 110, 127

aureole, 185

Auschwitz, 33, 34, 448

authoritarian, xi, 213, 215, 231, 247, 267, 307, 316, 333, 341, 353, 359, 361,
378, 428

authoritarianism, 133, 282, 359

automatized, 38, 71

awe, 76, 150, 159

axiom, 85, 333,

see also presumption, presupposition

axiomatic, 42, 46, 71, 235, 405, 417,

see also implicit

Azdahak, 147

Azhi-dahaka, 140

Azi, 147

Aztec, 161



Baal, 193

Babylon, 123, 125, 142, 147, 181, 296, 316

Babylonian, 110, 288

Bacon, 5, 401

Bali, 161

Balkan, 343

baptism, 225

barbarian, 245

Barlach, 396

barrier, 25, 196, 214, 215, 226, 227, 275, 303, 442, 465, 466

Basilius, 409

Bathsheba, 210

bear, 36, 164, 172, 264, 278, 324, 335, 339, 342, 357, 360, 362, 370, 377, 394,
420, 433, 452, 454

beauty, 3, 98, 113, 165, 167, 248, 264, 291, 292, 293, 439, 449

Becker, 401

behavioral immobility, 20

Berolinensis, 441

Bible, 16, 209, 241, 296, 369, 396, 459

biblical, 166, 230

binds, 122, 198, 201

Binswanger, 195

bird, 97, 141, 142, 155

birth, xii, 8, 94, 99–115, 123, 130, 140, 142, 145, 157–167, 180, 183, 207,
225, 274, 275, 286, 287, 289, 303, 305, 320, 351, 374, 389, 393, 426, 444, 445

blasphemy, 210, 331

blind, 130, 133, 217, 245, 296, 304, 311, 326, 327, 333, 351, 379, 389, 390,
392, 453

blizzard, 246

blood, xvi, 7, 25, 115, 119, 121, 122, 137, 148, 157, 161, 163, 171, 172, 210,
248, 331, 365, 395, 405, 424, 429, 437

blood-drenched, 171

bloodthirsty, 309

bodies, 95, 115, 119, 121, 124, 248, 250, 303, 318

body-vessel, 169

bones, 173, 184, 211, 255, 275, 276, 277

bounded, 14, 22, 45, 76, 77, 85, 94, 95, 197, 244, 258, 278, 286, 325, 353, 453

Brahmana, 140, 147

Brahmin, 302, 303

brainstem, 301

bread, 118, 121, 202, 204, 299, 305, 321, 346, 350, 351, 352, 366, 375, 376,
388, 390, 393

breasts, 119, 162, 169, 172

brothers, 93, 97, 114, 149, 202–206, 262, 307, 318, 319, 378, 451

Bruner, 247, 254, 402

brute, 282, 296

Buddha, viii, 105, 291, 292, 293, 294, 302, 319, 321, 383, 436, 442, 463

Buddhism, 16, 265

Buddhists, 27

bug, 276

bureaucracy, 449

bureaucratic-personality-disordered, 264,

see also deceit, denial, persona

Burgomaster, 199, 201

burial, 134, 178

Buriat, 297

Burton, 448, 452

Byblos, 193

Byzantine, 439



cadaverous, 163

Caesar, 394

Cain, 319

Cakra, 295

Cakras, 295

Cambodia, 311, 347

camel, 11, 362

Canaan, 375, 393

Canaanite, 192

Canada, xiii

canalization, 275

cancer, 41, 43, 63, 163, 217, 454

cannibalism, 12, 176

capacity to abstract, 234, 251, 253

Capernaum, 393

capitalism, 336

Capos, 354

cards, 247, 371, 450

Carpocratic, 435

cascade, 251, 265, 342

castle, 184, 202, 203, 205, 215, 377, 440

castration, 332

catastrophe, 20, 21, 85, 220, 246, 265, 267, 300, 332

categorical knowledge, 90

categorization, 9, 48, 53, 54, 69, 87, 88, 92, 95, 96, 146, 151, 166, 281, 376,
409

category, 9, 23, 29, 37, 52, 56, 95, 96, 97, 151, 152, 154, 166, 169, 195, 200,
245, 313, 321, 322, 408, 413, 415, 418, 419, 422, 443, 452,

see also archetype, natural category

cathedral, 178, 379, 380, 460, 461

Catholic, 243, 245, 267, 401

celestial, 114, 123, 140, 277, 297

cemetery, 196, 342,

see also necropolis

cerebellum, 73

ceremony, 128, 176, 178, 190, 225, 248, 297

cetacean, 62

chair, 44, 83, 97

chaos, xi, xiv, xxi, 12, 16, 18, 20, 23, 31, 46, 48, 49, 70, 86–118, 124–148,
155, 156, 157, 161, 163, 169, 171, 177, 179–186, 198–209, 215–235, 244, 245,
248, 256, 257, 259, 268, 274, 278–288, 301, 308–322, 328–342, 358, 359, 360,
361, 362, 367, 368, 369, 370, 382, 384, 385, 397, 400, 410, 419, 424, 429–439,
446, 461, 465, 468, 469,

see also domain of the unknown, novelty, unexpected, unexplored territory,
unpredictable

characters, xxi, 75, 90, 97, 98, 103, 114, 136, 217, 264, 312, 452, 453, 455

charisma, 191, 196, 445

Charles, 201

Cherub, 316

child, 2, 7, 26, 33, 73, 74, 88, 91, 93, 105, 123, 136, 145, 153, 154, 157,
163, 164, 176, 180, 189, 193, 194, 210, 218, 220, 221, 222, 225, 280, 283, 286,
287, 288, 292, 293, 324, 325, 327, 346, 372, 373, 374, 375, 380, 387, 390, 410,
439, 445, 448, 452, 454, 458, 467, 469

chimera, 161, 254, 337,

see also monster

China, 347, 414

Chinese, 16, 244, 339, 343, 347, 401, 426, 457, 459

Christ, viii, xix, 107, 122, 135, 144, 148, 154, 155, 175, 178, 185, 190, 204,
239, 242, 289, 297, 298, 300, 312, 316, 317, 319, 331, 336, 369, 370, 378, 379,
381, 383, 384–405, 415, 416, 418, 428, 432–438, 443, 444, 445, 452, 455, 456,
461, 463, 465,

see also lapis, stone

Christendom, v, 417

Christ-equivalent, 465

Christian, xi, xii, 6, 11, 16, 17, 106, 107, 123, 127, 128, 134, 135, 154, 175,
178, 190, 196, 219, 220, 239, 265, 267, 286, 287, 297, 300, 302, 309, 312, 313,
314, 317, 325, 365, 370, 375, 383, 385, 387, 398, 404, 407, 415, 416, 418, 419,
422, 425, 427, 428, 432, 443, 452, 456, 465, 466

Christianity, 6, 107, 125, 144, 219, 265, 312, 314, 316, 317, 318, 383, 401,
418, 422, 432, 443, 445, 456, 466

Christians, 111, 154, 185, 243, 245, 312

Christification, 463

Christmas, 185, 335

chthonic, 277, 429

churchyard, 203

chymical, 457

circle, 17, 141, 144, 236, 294, 320, 329, 330, 339, 413, 439

civilization, 105, 108, 123, 126, 261, 283, 326, 378, 420

clay, 147, 165, 266, 348, 389

clergyman, 335

cleric, 456

client, 218, 219

cliffs, 286

cobra, xix

Codex, 441

coffin, 161, 380

cognition, 26, 43, 48, 69, 72, 88, 102, 152, 246, 361, 376, 378

coif, 163

collective, xvii, xx, 91, 92, 93, 98, 113, 159, 169, 226, 259, 278, 327, 328,
334, 352, 372, 373, 403, 430, 431, 444, 445, 451, 456, 457

combat, 114, 118, 122, 183, 193, 248, 314, 350, 460

communication, 10, 64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 77, 78, 88, 89, 147,
178, 196, 197, 229, 234, 251, 260, 261, 269, 304, 305, 384, 400

Communist, 351, 353, 357,

see also comrade, ideologue

complex, 7, 14, 29, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 49, 50, 51, 62–71, 77, 79, 82–89, 92,
95, 98, 102, 103, 108, 123, 128, 134, 139, 147, 149, 152, 157, 159, 172, 179,
185, 191, 192, 208, 219, 222, 227, 228, 230, 234, 235, 261, 268, 273, 276, 286,
291, 295, 304, 313, 314, 317, 358, 382, 391, 392, 402, 403, 408, 411, 413, 419,
423, 424

comrade, 353, 355, 410

concentration camp, 34, 307, 343, 346, 349, 366, 452,

see also Gulag Archipelago, holocaust

conditional knowledge, 19, 48, 150, 151, 274

conditions of experience, 308

conflict, 12, 39, 41, 53, 77, 81, 84, 94, 98, 119, 127, 128, 179, 187, 188,
189, 190, 192, 194, 226, 228, 229, 248, 249, 251, 261, 264, 278, 286, 287, 303,
306, 322, 337, 343, 356, 363, 387, 391, 396, 419, 420, 430, 431, 435, 460, 468

confusion, xiii, xvii, 10, 20, 23, 242, 247, 257, 375, 380, 435, 437, 466

Congress, 404

conjunction, 59, 62, 87, 95, 395, 415, 432, 439, 442

conquistadors, 148

consciousness, xv, xx, 3, 21, 46, 51, 52, 65, 66, 71, 78–88, 90, 103, 105, 109,
111, 115, 121, 123, 127, 133, 138, 139, 143, 160, 161, 181, 184, 209, 234, 242,
255, 260, 264, 272, 274, 282–291, 300–303, 311, 317, 319, 328, 332–338, 353,
354, 362, 372–378, 382, 383, 387, 397, 398, 407, 414, 429, 430–441, 454, 463,
465, 468

consecrated, 147

consensually validatable, 150

conservatism, 251, 334, 339

conservative, xi, xiii, 43, 125, 196, 213, 216, 230, 250, 334, 359

constant environmental features, 21

constituent, xxi, 19, 20, 68, 76, 89, 90, 93, 98, 99, 105, 106, 107, 126, 128,
136, 144, 164, 176, 217, 249, 258, 266, 277, 282, 285, 287, 297, 309, 317, 323,
334, 339, 392, 408, 411, 412, 431

constituent element of experience, 107, 164, 317, 412,

see also knower, known, unknown

consummatory, 36, 39, 85, 267

contaminated, 4, 60, 62, 106, 163, 246, 278, 284, 285, 302, 360, 361, 408, 422,
426, 436

contaminated with death, 284

contamination of anomaly, 234, 307,

see also death

continuum, 23, 36, 266, 455

contradictio, 238

convoy, 33, 346, 348, 353

Corinthians, 385

cornerstone, 148, 261, 370, 407

corpse, 163, 440

corpus, 248, 278, 419

corruption, 211, 265, 287, 328, 350, 353, 366, 426, 427, 428, 443, 445, 469

cortex, 54, 55, 62, 64, 67, 85, 88

cortical, 39, 50, 51, 54, 58, 62, 65, 67, 72, 73, 276

cosmic, 8, 87, 99, 109, 140, 147, 225, 284, 289, 297, 308, 324

cosmogonic, 8, 91, 99, 100, 108, 109, 133, 140, 147, 148, 156, 222

cosmogony, 109, 110, 127, 128, 140, 147, 148, 225, 275

cosmos, 5, 8, 20, 86, 87, 90, 99, 100, 108, 114, 128, 139, 142, 145, 146, 147,
148, 156, 157, 171, 172, 181, 185, 278, 285, 291, 295, 297, 300, 308, 331, 339,
404, 452

Count, 198, 199, 200

countenance, 169, 171

cowardice, 316, 333, 335, 336, 343, 437, 456

cowardly, 217, 328, 332, 340, 466

creation, xii, 8, 20, 64, 66, 90, 99, 100, 104, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 114,
123, 127, 128, 140, 142, 145, 147, 148, 156, 157, 160, 162, 169, 171, 177, 179,
202, 206, 230, 232, 248, 269, 275, 279, 284, 290, 296, 297, 306, 308, 316, 319,
325, 334, 340, 382, 410, 420, 422, 424, 428, 431, 445, 448, 453, 466, 467, 468

creative, xxi, xxii, 10, 11, 20, 21, 57, 62, 64, 65, 66, 71, 72, 75, 80, 81,
89, 99–133, 153, 156, 159, 169, 171, 172, 175, 178, 181, 184, 185, 186, 197,
200, 206, 209, 217–232, 237, 244, 246, 248, 253, 257, 261, 266, 271–282, 294,
296, 307, 309, 310, 316, 318, 320, 325, 328, 331, 333, 353, 367, 370–387, 392,
396, 397, 410, 424, 427, 430, 436, 445, 467

creative exploration, xxi, 20, 65, 71, 72, 81, 101, 237, 310, 316, 328, 396,
410

creative/destructive, 123, 257

creator, 93, 117, 127, 136, 145, 186, 272, 291, 308, 371, 439, 465

credulity, 241

Crete, 161

criminal, 6, 264, 347, 394, 449

crisis, xii, 31, 121, 173, 181, 249, 257, 275, 277, 282, 286, 353, 354, 457

Croat, 94

crocodile, 160, 163

crucified, xix, 104, 297, 461

crucifixion, 325, 452

cruel, 91, 170, 172, 176, 217, 309, 340, 341, 368, 370, 449, 455

culturally-determined, 34, 53, 80, 152, 154, 207, 222, 227, 249, 255, 259, 282,
320, 328, 382, 429, 468,

see also socially-determined

culturally-governed, 73

culture, xi, xiv, xxi, 4, 7, 10, 14, 19, 20, 38, 47, 48, 78, 79, 89, 90, 93,
96, 99, 100, 104, 105, 108, 113, 116, 123, 127, 134, 136, 145, 149–164, 171,
187, 192–213, 221–249, 255, 261–285, 303–313, 326–332, –385, 391, 392, 396,
401, 421, 429, 435, 436, 451, 459, 465, 467, 469,

see also society

culture-hero, 135, 176, 190, 369,

see also Buddha, Christ, hero, Horus, individual, Marduk

curiosity, 18, 19, 20, 37, 43, 52–73, 100, 143, 151, 152, 189, 220, 272, 284,
292, 300, 302, 413, 420

Cyprian, 4



Dachau, 33

Dad, 164, 249, 276, 457, 459

dance, 33, 149, 219, 220, 239, 291, 292, 343, 347

danger, xiii, 59, 60, 66, 67, 104, 134, 149, 154, 157, 173, 177, 184, 216, 217,
222, 231, 244, 251, 268, 269, 271, 279, 301, 309, 329, 369, 382, 411, 440, 441,
454, 466, 467

Daniel, 187, 441

Danielyan, 358

Dante, 16, 312

darkness, 12, 20, 110, 111, 115, 128, 140, 141, 143, 161, 176, 185, 225, 288,
289, 296, 310, 341, 349, 359, 380, 382, 414, 419, 437, 440, 456

Darwin, 272

Darwinian, 376,

see also adaptation, evolution

databank, 93

daughter, 154, 177, 181, 199, 215, 249, 275, 357, 374, 375, 377, 380, 393, 396,
448, 454

David, 34, 210, 388, 393

Davidson, 67

dawn, 113, 115, 128, 137, 140, 148, 286, 290

day, xix, 15, 44, 87, 104, 119, 121, 124, 125, 138, 144, 145, 159, 171, 174,
178, 196, 200, 210, 211, 212, 258, 288, 289–304, 316, 335, 344, 346, 348, 349,
350, 354, 357, 362, 366, 377, 380, 388, 389, 392, 395, 397, 398, 400, 404, 406,
418, 447, 453, 456, 457, 461

deadly, 91, 135, 160, 161, 246, 331, 364, 388

death, xxii, 7, 15, 26, 33, 35, 43, 47, 94, 103, 115, 126, 129, 131, 133, 134,
140, 143, 149, 157, 159, 160, 161, 163, 168, 175, 176, 178, 191, 197, 199, 200,
202, 207, 217, 222, 223, 225, 227, 234, 240, 245, 248, 249, 262, 263, 264, 266,
272–311, 318–325, 329, 338, 340–355, 364, 383, 385, 392, 396, 397, 400, 401,
411, 424, 429, 430, 431, 437, 440, 452, 454, 457, 465, 469,

see also contamination of anomaly, self-consciousness, tragedy

decadence, 268, 282, 308, 334, 359, 369, 370, 469

decadent, 217, 307, 329, 334, 335, 338, 339, 341, 353, 359, 460,

see also adolescent, deceit, denial, fascist, lie, self-deception

Decalogue, 377, 387,

see also law, Moses, tradition

decay, 130, 159, 291, 293, 308, 353, 414, 429, 456

deceit, 91, 256, 333, 343, 356, 398,

see also decadent, devil, fascist, lie

deceitful, 90, 104, 307, 324, 328, 329, 334, 359

deception, 263, 437

declarable, 222, 226, 255, 382,

see also procedural

declarative memory, 102, 328, 373,

see also episodic memory, semantic memory

decontextualized, 53, 227, 253

decrepitude, 213, 308, 310,

see also senility, senescent

defiance, 296, 315

degeneration, 130, 231, 256, 265, 282, 288, 291, 308, 319, 324, 329, 334, 427,
468, 469,

see also disintegration, descent, dissolution

deity, 8, 9, 89, 100, 105, 110, 112, 113, 123, 125, 129, 134, 135, 142, 171,
175, 190, 223, 312, 318, 386, 410

Delacroix, 314

deliverer, 205, 206, 288

deluge, 199, 308, 359

demiurge, 110, 300, 439

demonic, xix, 4, 151, 296, 313, 315, 316, 335, 358, 418, 422, 426, 467

demons, 108, 119, 143, 146, 172

denial, 172, 242, 256, 258, 269, 311, 317, 319, 320, 326, 329, 331, 333, 355,
356, 358, 359, 419, 432, 436, 437, 444, 455, 465, 466, 469,

see also decadent, deceit, deception, devil, fascist, self-deception

denigration, 231, 234, 270

denizens, 297, 314

denunciation, 316

dependent, 19, 38, 50, 73, 85, 88, 95, 98, 116, 127, 189, 191, 195, 222, 223,
224, 227–246, 256, 287, 289, 290, 310, 325, 341, 360, 377, 397, 463

depressed, xix, 86, 283, 286

depths, xx, 151, 159, 161, 163, 168, 177, 223, 268, 289, 296, 440,

see also underworld

Descartes, 5, 404

descent, 126, 129, 130, 169, 203, 215, 266, 275, 277, 279, 285, 296, 300, 344,
364, 383, 418, 423, 433, 440,

see also despair, revolutionary, underworld

despair, 218, 234, 256, 279, 321, 323, 331, 353, 355, 357, 410, 435, 456,

see also descent

destabilize, 59, 234, 279

destiny, 117, 118, 120, 121, 244, 278, 281, 305, 306, 347, 378, 414

destruction, xv, 12, 87, 90, 104, 108, 110, 116, 146, 157, 160, 162, 176, 178,
199, 222, 282, 292, 300, 309, 323, 336, 337, 340, 345, 347, 364, 370, 379, 456,
457, 460, 466, 467, 469

destructive, xv, xxi, 10, 20, 89, 90, 99, 103, 104, 115, 123, 125, 126, 169,
172, 176, 180, 181, 205, 228, 257, 259, 260, 274, 279, 282, 296, 309, 313, 314,
334, 378, 400, 418, 454, 466, 468 destructive-labor, 347

desyatins, 262

determinant things, 20

dethrone, 192

devil, xxi, 4, 91, 106, 154, 163, 309, 313, 317, 337, 343, 358, 363, 393, 410,
431, 452, 460,

see also Aerial Spirit, arrogance, decadent, deceit, deception, denial,
fascist, self-deception

Devil, viii, 122, 311, 312, 313, 314, 316, 317, 318, 448, 449, 451

devour, 114, 122, 159, 177, 211, 231, 347, 353, 359, 363, 371, 467

devouring, 12, 142, 161, 181, 223, 347, 433

dialectical, 270, 383

Diane, xviii

dictators, 207

Didymos, 469

die, 41, 48, 104, 114, 156, 181, 202, 210, 211, 248, 255, 269, 294, 342, 350,
357, 375, 383, 400, 440

differentiated, 66, 110, 111, 113, 124, 138, 145, 152, 271, 273, 288, 290, 338,
384

dilemma, 41, 55, 82, 100, 322

diluvial, 308,

see also flood

disciples, 204, 362, 386, 388, 389, 390, 393, 394, 398, 461, 463, 469,

see also adolescent, apprentice

discipline, xiv, 3, 216, 218, 219, 220, 232, 234, 257, 294, 306, 335, 339, 347,
420, 466,

see also apprenticeship

disease, 94, 163, 262, 268, 282, 292, 309, 416, 452

disembodied, 78, 192, 275, 304, 412

disembowelled, 183

disinhibit, 260

disintegrated, xiv, 132, 218

disintegration, 129, 154, 250, 272, 275, 279, 370, 414, 427, 429, 435, 441,

see also disintegration, dissolution

dismemberment, 161, 203, 275, 277, 332

disorder, 3, 20, 128, 154, 201, 339, 416,

see also chaos

disordered, 266, 344, 416

disruption, 226, 227, 234, 251, 258, 259, 427

dissolution, xx, 11, 16, 31, 87, 141, 144, 157, 169, 176, 180, 181, 200, 227,
249, 251, 266, 274, 275, 276, 277, 282, 284, 324, 341, 347, 355, 358, 359, 365,
369, 419, 429–435, 441, 460

distilled, 75, 77, 113, 179, 241

divine, xxi, 8, 87, 90, 99, 107, 110, 114, 124, 127, 129, 136, 148, 151, 156,
172, 176, 183, 192, 193, 194, 197, 220, 244, 246, 248, 270, 282, 289, 305, 308,
314, 315, 316, 318, 320, 323, 325, 355, 374, 384, 396, 397, 398, 400, 407, 414,
424, 435, 439, 441, 443, 444, 445, 453, 466, 467

divine son, 90, 107, 136, 176, 424

divinity, 126, 156, 206, 300, 325, 413, 419, 455, 466, 467, 469

Dixi!, 381

Dobbs, 421

dog, 96, 115, 119, 449, 453

dogma, 103, 104, 175, 185, 216, 229, 267, 275, 313, 314, 357, 418, 420, 422,
427, 428, 445,

see also security, tradition

dogmatic, xi, 229, 313, 369, 387, 395, 423, 444

dolts, 219

domain, xiv, xx, xxi, 2, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 23, 45, 47, 48, 52, 53,
69, 73, 84, 88, 92, 99, 100, 104, 108, 109, 111, 125, 126, 128, 130, 131, 143,
148–158, 171, 187, 192, 194, 222, 226, 229, 235, 238, 253–277, 290, 295, 297,
300, 325, 329, 331, 332, 360, 367, 376, 403, 409, 416, 418, 427, 430, 436, 438,
468

domain of the known, 14, 18, 19, 52, 99, 109, 171, 187

domain of the unknown, 19, 48, 100, 154, 295

dominance, 80, 81, 84, 163, 172, 179, 191, 195, 242, 247, 249, 261, 265, 266,
267, 310, 316, 379, 391, 392, 416

dominance-hierarchy, 179, 195, 267

Dorn, 400, 431, 442

Dostoevsky, 12, 264, 272, 379, 381, 397, 448, 452

doubt, xiv, 22, 44, 313, 419, 437, 447, 455, 461

Douglas, 254

Draco, 142

dragon, 20, 90, 100, 103, 104, 110, 115, 119, 121, 139–147, 168, 169, 176–185,
200, 215, 248, 249, 277, 279, 280, 285, 296–309, 320, 321, 322, 332, 339, 341,
359, 360, 361, 406, 407, 410, 424, 430–442, 467,

see also devil, serpent, snake

dragon of chaos, 20, 90, 146, 169, 177, 181, 200, 215, 248, 279, 280, 285, 296,
297, 300, 332, 339, 359, 360, 361, 410, 424, 438, 439,

see also constituent element of experience, Great Mother, Great Father

drama, xxi, 1, 13, 40, 73, 77, 78, 79, 89, 93, 105, 114, 171, 176, 177, 248,
251, 268, 382, 383, 407, 436, 456, 465, 469

dramatic, 16, 70, 76, 77, 92, 98, 103, 110, 123, 125, 135, 143, 152, 171, 185,
222, 223, 225, 227, 249, 301, 313, 318, 339, 354, 382, 384, 398, 439

dream, xvii, xx, 73, 92, 154, 163, 203, 218, 275, 276, 289, 295, 354, 406, 412,
413, 420, 441, 458, 460, 461, 465

drought, 143, 163, 201, 215, 233, 246, 247, 281

drunk, 248, 367, 453

dungeon, 209, 359

Durga, 171,

see also Kali, Great Mother

dwarf, 202, 203, 204, 270

dysregulation, 19, 39, 188, 190, 251, 317



Ea, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 122

Earth, 8, 9, 99, 109, 110, 122, 140, 145, 156, 285, 287, 350, 366, 411, 426

Eastern, 87, 100, 185, 371, 403

Ecclesiastes, 15

economics, xiv, 35

Eden, 105, 284, 285, 287, 290, 306, 312, 316, 338, 463

Edenic, 300, 312

Edmonton, xv

Edom, 211

EEG, 50, see also ERP

ego, 59, 103, 238, 297, 429, 435

egoistic, 195

Egypt, 128, 132, 134, 142, 147, 185, 211, 296, 374, 375

Egyptian, xviii, 4, 90, 97, 100, 108, 109, 111, 125, 127, 128, 131, 132, 133,
134, 135, 142, 185, 309, 374, 375

Egyptians, 109, 126, 127, 128, 134, 146, 261

eight-armed, 162,

see also spider

Einstein, 237, 258,

see also Hawking

Einsteinian, 83

Ekibastuz, 366

El, 193

elder, 90, 113, 114, 115, 118, 121, 189, 203, 205, 206, 396

elements, xxi, 19–22, 43, 47, 51, 58, 66, 68, 75, 77, 83–106, 123, 126, 128,
136, 138, 140, 144, 150, 157, 176, 183, 193, 198, 217, 250, 266, 272, 277,
282–291, 297, 309, 323, 332, 334, 339, 342, 408, 416, 419, 430, 435, 436, 437,
439, 441, 445

Eliade, 81, 87, 125, 126, 127, 128, 134, 146, 147, 156, 192, 193, 196, 225,
275, 277, 314, 318, 414, 415, 421, 426

Elias, 386, 393

Elijah, 210

Eliot, 270

Elioun, 193

Eliseus, 393

Elizabeth, 207

Ellenberger, 272

embodied, 78, 93, 96, 98, 124, 125, 127, 132, 134, 135, 149, 163, 190, 192,
198, 228, 229, 232, 235, 253, 269, 271, 274, 307, 318, 328, 377, 379, 384, 392,
412, 418, 420, 422, 431, 443, 445, 447, 461

embody, 77, 93, 99, 176, 217, 320, 328, 391

emergence of anomaly, 233, 244

emissary, 46, 184, 198, 370

emotion, xvi, xxi, 3, 4, 19, 21, 23, 26, 30, 39, 48, 52, 55, 58, 59, 64, 68,
87, 103, 113, 154, 186, 190, 193, 196, 216, 233, 235, 241, 244, 245, 246, 251,
409, 413, 430,

see also affect, amygdala, fear, hippocampus, limbic, threat

emotional dysregulation, 19, 190

empathy, 163, 310, 333

emperor, 90, 100, 124, 125, 132, 185, 192, 215

empirical, 1–13, 48, 92, 100, 103, 113, 150, 151, 152, 177, 237, 265–270, 358,
403–409, 416, 417, 420, 426, 428, 435, 459, 466

empiricism, 7, 98

emulate, xiii

encapsulated in image, 234

encephalization, 62

enemy, 14, 33, 120, 121, 159, 217, 219, 246, 296, 311, 317, 332, 350, 360, 361,
368, 379, 392, 393, 396, 437, 439

English, 15, 16, 285, 343, 463

Enkidu, 319

enlightened, 103, 260, 337, 463

En-lil, 8, 9, 100, 109

ennobling, 452

enslaved, 343

entertainment, 93

entropy, 341

Enuma elish, v, vii, 90, 100, 108–127, 190, 193, 200,

see also Ea, Heidel, Marduk, Mesopotamia, Sumeria, Tiamat

environment, xii, xxi, 10, 14, 19–23, 30, 46, 48, 52, 58–88, 99–103, 113, 152,
186, 194, 196, 203, 217, 221–233, 256, 258, 259, 305, 309, 324, 341, 345, 362,
372, 378, 395, 424, 449

environmental shift, 245, 268,

see also anomaly, novelty, unexpected, unpredictable, strange, strange idea,
stranger

epiphenomenal, 108, 290, 291

episodic, 27, 73–95, 102, 153, 177, 179, 191, 221, 225–241, 251, 253, 254, 255,
260–275, 363, 373–391, 396, 403, 413, 436, 439

episodic memory, 77, 78, 81, 229, 237, 240, 253, 260, 378, 382, 403,

see also declarative memory, imagination, procedural memory, semantic memory

equilibration, 391

erection, 147, 226

erotic, 113, 163, 194, 195, 436

error, 8, 30, 43–61, 149, 152, 175, 203, 265, 302, 311–316, 328, 341, 363, 365,
398, 402, 406, 445, 458,

see also anxiety, chaos, novelty, threat, unexpected, unpredictable

Erzvater, 396

Esasias, 392

eschatology, 318

Esharra, 122

Esias, 390

ethics, 82, 219, 269, 466

Euclid, 237, 238

Euclidean, 236–238

Eureka!, 376

Europe, 196, 268, 320, 417, 422

European, 219, 220, 261, 262, 265, 268, 271, 285, 404, 421, 422

Eve, 163, 291, 302, 303, 312, 398, 418, 463

ever-resurrecting, 175

evil, xii, xv, xix, 4, 6, 10, 99–132, 167, 191, 195, 205, 210, 213, 215, 216,
231, 234, 259, 263, 269, 270, 278, 284, 285, 289, 294–326, 335, 336, 347, 350,
353, 358–371, 383, 388, 398, 427, 433, 439, 448–466,

see also arrogance, bureaucratic-personality-disordered, decadence, deceit,
denial, fascism, lie, self-deception

evolution, 12, 62, 66, 73, 229, 290, 303, 305, 378, 466

evolutionary, xii, 68, 192, 234, 260, 261, 301, 376, 377, 384

ex-biker, 453

executive, 27, 39, 207

exemplary, 27, 85, 93, 197, 198, 411, 463

exhausted, xviii, 149, 164, 197, 200, 346, 463

existential, xii, xiii, 7, 10, 33, 87, 164, 226, 234, 242, 245, 249, 259, 260,
274, 282, 287, 305, 311, 320, 382, 465

existential despair, 234

Exodus, 230, 375, 376, 377, 385

experimental, 3, 10, 35, 51–61, 98, 113, 177, 247, 402, 403, 451

explicit, xvi, 5–14, 32, 39, 57, 65, 70–88, 92, 93, 94, 96, 102, 111, 123, 128,
135, 152, 172, 175, 177, 188, 190, 194, 209, 219, 226, 229–242, 251–261, 270,
295, 309, 313, 318, 320, 333, 353, 374, 376, 377, 384, 385, 386, 397, 416, 417,
431, 459,

see also declarative memory, implicit

exploration, xxi, 19, 20, 30, 36, 43, 48, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 61, 62, 64, 65,
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 81, 90, 93, 101, 108, 109, 135, 141, 152, 154,
160, 164, 166, 170, 177, 179, 185, 195, 209, 222, 236, 237, 238, 239, 244, 256,
301, 302, 310, 316, 328, 396, 408, 410, 411, 413, 415, 427, 440,

see also knower

explored, xxi, 3, 7, 14, 20, 23, 26, 42–75, 87, 99, 100–109, 136–156, 171, 178,
187, 239, 245, 276, 283, 295, 300, 329, 331, 334, 341, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412,
415, 424, 446

explored territory, xxi, 14, 20, 23, 42, 51–75, 99, 100, 101–109, 144, 146,
148, 171, 178, 187, 283, 341,

see also domain of the known, knower

exposure, xxi, 18, 36, 58, 60, 66, 75, 93, 163, 169, 170, 171, 176, 195, 196,
220, 223, 226, 247, 259, 265, 266, 282, 287, 288, 334, 360, 369, 370, 460, 468

expulsion from paradise, 284, 333

Ezekiel, 147, 316



failure, xiii, 2, 30, 218, 222, 226, 244, 255, 281, 282, 308, 309, 310, 325,
328, 329, 331, 336, 341, 342, 352, 369, 409, 420, 430, 437, 447, 451

faith, xiii, xiv, 5, 11, 40, 78, 92, 95, 164, 166, 180, 191, 236, 238, 251,
258–270, 281, 282, 304, 308, 323, 333–338, 353, 354, 355, 358–367, 375, 383,
385, 393, 397, 398, 418, 432, 436, 444, 446, 449, 451, 454, 457, 460, 465, 468

Falike, 353

Fall, 302, 433, 445

familiar, 9, 23, 26, 32, 34, 37, 42–57, 61, 69, 83, 85, 88, 89, 90, 94, 99,
101–110, 122, 123, 132, 136, 137, 143, 144, 150, 166, 170, 207, 217, 224, 236,
245, 257, 267, 276, 277, 283, 293, 295, 300, 307, 329, 332, 334, 354, 366, 400,
408, 409, 410, 414, 436, 440, 444, 461,

see also expected, explored territory, ideology, known, security

family, xi, xiii, xiv, xviii, 30, 40, 62, 68, 113, 182, 189, 196, 210, 218,
241, 272, 283, 293, 344, 406, 448, 449

fantasy, xx, 13, 14, 24, 26, 27, 39, 45, 50, 68, 69, 72, 73, 76, 103, 152, 154,
158, 235, 249, 253, 256, 272, 286, 297, 313, 317, 328, 363, 402–420, 428–431,
436, 451, 457, 465, 466,

see also imagination

fascinated, 292, 312

fascination, 77, 143, 159, 418, 428, 440,

see also curiosity

fascism, 11, 308, 329, 334, 370

fascist, 8, 281, 307, 334, 335, 339, 340, 341,

see also authoritarian, concentration camp, deceit, denial, evil, decadent,
Great Father, lie, self-deception, tyranny

fascistic, 256, 334, 338, 339, 361

father, xi, 86, 105, 110, 115, 117, 131–134, 153, 164, 179, 193, 201–215, 219,
241, 277, 282, 287–292, 302, 318, 331, 335, 339, 362, 376, 377, 396, 397, 429,
439, 469

Faust, 91, 313, 314, 319, 457,

see also Mephistopheles

fear, xxi, 2, 18–28, 34, 37, 39, 43, 52–59, 67, 90, 101, 113–117, 126, 137,
140, 143, 151–157, 161, 163, 169, 170, 176, 189–197, 213, 214, 223, 226, 231,
239, 244, 246, 248, 256–266, 278, 279, 280, 281, 283, 284, 301, 303, 307, 324,
325, 326, 327, 330, 336, 339, 344, 351, 353, 355, 368, 379, 382, 391, 406, 409,
435, 441, 456, 457, 467

fear-provoking, 190, 213, 214

February, 354

fecund, 103, 156, 164

female, 4, 8, 99, 100, 110, 156, 157, 161, 222, 288, 443, 453, 457

feminine, 20, 90, 104, 105, 110, 114, 125, 141, 144, 154–161, 176, 181, 199,
288, 339, 398, 429, 439, 441

fertility, 126, 127, 155, 156, 169, 171, 197, 248

festival, 90, 118, 125, 171, 292, 308

fetus, 157, 163

filth, 406, 448

fire, 46, 65, 84, 101, 115, 117, 122, 143, 147, 157, 162, 168, 183, 211, 223,
277, 343, 349, 350, 360, 368, 380, 381, 401, 406, 408, 424, 429, 431, 434, 441,
465

fire-belching, 168

fire-breathing, 177

firmament, 110

fish, 142, 182, 183, 204, 430, 469

flesh, xviii, 143, 225, 255, 305, 318, 326, 343, 385

flood, 116, 144, 148, 171, 182, 274, 308, 371, 454

floodgate, 214, 274

Floris, 401

Fludd, 422

flux, 108, 308, 339, 370, 411

folktale, 198

food, xviii, 2, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 157, 172, 175, 204, 224, 240, 295, 299,
341, 366, 375, 411, 441

football, 236

foreigner, 103, 143, 146, 148, 393

forum, xxi, 1, 20, 32, 89, 105, 218, 226

forum for action, xxi, 1, 20, 32, 89, 105, 218, 226,

see also place of things

four-dimensional, 72, 154

frame, 36, 40, 55, 60, 104, 138, 139, 244, 404

Frankl, 33, 354, 366,

see also existential

Frazer, 248, 308

Frazier, 91

freedom, 85, 104, 116, 123, 216, 219, 220, 227, 239, 240, 285, 286, 305, 319,
324, 326, 329, 331, 339, 349, 353, 366, 378, 381, 437, 450

French, 92, 106, 313, 401, 404

Frenchmen, 149

Freud, xix, 77, 177, 195, 266, 269, 272, 297, 331, 402, 465

Freudian, 163, 402, 403

frontal, 67, 68, 71, 88

fruit, 172, 211, 262, 284, 294, 295, 298, 299, 300, 318, 398, 414, 419, 420,
463

Frye, 15, 85, 207, 240, 241, 248, 270, 296, 314, 364, 375, 383, 384, 385, 387

future, xv, 9–62, 72, 76, 82, 83, 85, 101, 105, 121, 135, 139, 150, 173, 177,
179, 185–194, 218, 228, 246, 250, 256, 257, 267, 272, 273–290, 293, 301, 302,
308, 317, 327, 334, 338–358, 382, 393, 396, 397, 402, 411, 413, 416, 423, 436,
457, 463, 465



Galilee, 393

Galileo, 5

game, xi, xvi, 14, 29, 38, 174, 236, 256, 260, 328, 352, 371, 372, 388, 452,
453

Ganges, 303

garden, 127, 285, 291, 294, 304, 306, 316,

see also Eden, Genesis, paradise, serpent

garhapatya, 147

Gautama, 291, 292, 293, 294, 319, 463,

see also Buddha

Geb, 110

Genesis, viii, xii, 100, 110, 111, 282, 288, 289, 295, 299, 302, 303, 304, 305,
306, 396, 418, 443, 461

genital, 163, 169,

see also Eden, Genesis, paradise, serpent

genius, 66, 121, 171, 177, 214, 218, 317, 370, 371, 378, 381

genocidal, 343

geometry, 236, 237, 238

German, 310, 366

Germany, 207, 349

ghora-rupa, 171

ghosts, 146

giant, 104, 254

Gilgamesh, 319

gnome, 173, 174, 175

gnostic, 153, 300

Gnostic, 300, 312, 439, 456

goal, 13, 23–55, 76–88, 100, 185, 195, 207, 213, 227, 231, 239, 249–266, 267,
301, 302, 339, 360, 361, 362, 368, 384, 397, 398, 409, 413–421, 435, 436, 445,
455, 463, 467

god, 8, 71, 87, 100, 104, 109–116, 121, 125, 126, 127, 128, 132, 134, 139, 140,
158, 172, 175, 186, 192, 193, 194, 201, 214, 215, 220, 245, 248, 264, 277, 288,
300, 319, 325, 404, 432, 442

God, xxi, 3–8, 14, 17, 20, 25, 87, 100–111, 128, 135, 138, 144, 151, 152,
165–171, 185, 187, 196, 207, 210, 211, 220, 221, 230, 247, 262, 265, 269, 280,
284–321, 330, 331, 338, 350, 351, 359, 361, 362, 364, 371–390, 394–400, 404,
410, 412, 414, 421–425, 430, 432, 434, 439–468

goddess, 8, 90, 99, 103, 110, 116, 125, 155, 160–171, 176, 194, 288

Goethe, 301, 313, 319, 402,

see also Faust

Gogol, 263

gold, 4, 165, 205, 206, 288, 370, 401, 407, 408, 413, 414–431, 437, 445

Goldberg, 21

Gordian knot, 388

gorgon, 161, 163, 171, 183,

see also Great Mother

Gorion, 396

Gorka, 342

Gospels, 384, 461

gothic, 163, 461

graduate, 451, 453

grammar, 217, 459

Grand Inquisitor, 379, 380, 381

grandfather, 114, 115, 116

Grandma, 164

grandmother, 163

graveyard, 178

gravid, 160, 169

Gray, 21

Greco-Roman, 168, 459

greed, 163, 266, 435, 437, 455

Greek, 4, 16, 113, 162, 185, 193, 243, 254, 371, 432, 461

Greeks, 185

grieve, 453

Grigory, 366, 367

Grigoryev, 366

Grimm, 202

group, xxi, xxii, 35, 37, 97, 98, 113, 152, 160, 176, 182, 187, 190, 216–250,
258, 259, 260, 261, 265, 271, 279, 281, 282, 305, 307, 308, 325–339, 344, 355,
360, 363, 367, 368, 369, 379, 387, 391, 392, 435, 447, 458, 460, 469

group-fostered, xii, xx, 216, 370

guise, 76, 126, 153, 163, 171, 191, 199, 203, 206, 208, 214, 215, 220, 223,
234, 246, 248, 250, 259, 302, 309, 317, 323, 340, 341, 403, 467

Gulag Archipelago, 35,

see also concentration camp, communist, Russia, Soviet Union, Solzhenitsyn

gypsy, 198

Gypsy, 202



habergeon, 143

habit, 226, 265, 325, 346

habitually, 14, 203, 218

habituation, 58, 94, 101, 152, 154, 161, 170,

see also learn, security

Hades, 340, 441,

see also hell

Halgren, 51

Hamlet, 77, 264

hand, xii, 2, 23, 24, 43, 64–66, 83, 91, 119, 126, 129, 142, 164, 172, 193,
196, 210, 217, 238, 279, 280, 306, 314, 319, 321, 323, 329, 341, 355, 356, 371,
376, 380, 388, 398, 409, 418, 419, 420, 428

hand-mediated, 64, 65

Harforetus, 441

Harvatat, 318

Hathor, 160

hatred of the good, 356

havoc, 5, 466

Hawking, 412

heaven, 4, 5, 6, 46, 104–118, 125, 142, 153, 187, 192, 199–204, 220, 230, 255,
277, 284, 285, 288, 291, 294, 295, 297, 300, 304, 312, 314, 316, 319, 338, 343,
345, 361, 362, 377, 385, 393, 397, 429, 431, 450, 455, 469

Heaven, viii, 85, 144, 156, 192, 199, 277, 285, 287, 297, 314, 355, 356, 359,
363, 456

Hebrew, 16, 105, 110, 209, 285, 374

Hebrews, 147, 374, 375

Heidel, 118

Heisenberg, 258

heliocentric, 6

Heliopolis, 109, 110

hell, xxi, 46, 103, 153, 161, 183, 275, 297, 312, 316, 323, 334, 338, 360, 364,
434, 441, 468

Hell, viii, 5, 297, 312, 338, 343, 349, 350, 355, 363, 364, 366, 453, 456

Hellenistic, 400

helpmistress, 171

hemisphere, 32, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73

Heraclitean, 428

Heraclitus, 289

heretic, 87, 245, 257, 394

heretical, 247, 280, 333, 358, 422, 427

heritable, 16, 91, 92, 185, 284, 285, 294, 314

hermaphroditic, 110, 139

Hermes, 410

Hermeticism, 401, 421

Hermeticist, 401

Hermopolis, 109

hero, xxi, xxii, 20, 90, 91, 93, 100, 103, 104, 114, 123–126, 132, 135, 140,
145, 147, 170–189, 194, 198, 199, 200, 203, 204, 206, 218, 219, 228, 231, 232,
235, 241–249, 254, 265, 271–280, 282, 288, 294, 307, 308, 309, 316, 317,
331–339, 358, 359, 369, 370–379, 384, 385, 396, 397, 398, 406, 415, 427,
439–447, 463–467,

see also consciousness, exploratory, explored territory, individual, unexplored
territory, voluntary

Herodians, 394

hideous, 171, 360, 383

hierarchy, 23, 24, 73, 80–87, 97, 114, 125, 129, 134, 172, 179, 191–195, 203,
216, 222, 231, 239, 250–256, 258–267, 279, 282, 312, 314, 316, 344, 367, 378,
391, 392, 410, 429, 432, 433, 442, 465

hierodule, 125, 126, 130,

see also prostitute

hierogamy, 140

hieros gamos, 8, 99, 110, 125, 126

Hillebrandt, 140

Hindu, 94, 161

hippocampus, 50, 51, 54, 73,

see also amygdala, affect, ERP, memory

hippopotamus, 160

hips, 169

history, xiii–xx, 4, 8, 35, 36, 77–81, 92, 113, 121, 127, 139, 155, 180,
195–198, 207, 210, 223, 228, 255, 260, 261, 265, 272, 274, 278, 282, 287, 295,
301, 304, 312, 325, 334, 364, 368, 370, 375, 378, 379, 382–384, 396, 403, 407,
411, 443–445, 452, 458, 459, 463, 465, 466, 468

Hitler, 41, 207, 310, 336, 433

Hittite, 139, 192, 193, 210

Hofstadter, 254

Holocaust, 310, 311

holy, 117, 127, 164, 167, 169, 181, 211, 318, 319, 377, 380, 405, 436

homeostasis, 38

Homo sapiens, 65, 157, 159, 181, 185, 251, 259, 261, 284, 411

homunculi, 64

homunculus, 63, 64, 65, 419, 420

Honda, 453

honest, 24, 171, 265, 287, 327, 332, 354, 447, 455, 467

hope, xx, 24–39, 42, 43, 52, 53, 55, 65, 67, 69, 98, 117, 134, 142, 152, 154,
157, 164, 174, 190, 218, 231, 239, 256, 258, 279, 283, 287, 301, 323, 329–337,
344–359, 363, 364, 382, 409, 447, 456, 459, 467

horrible, xviii, xx, 60, 115, 163, 324, 359, 427, 452, 453, 454, 456

Horus, vii, 128–134, 161, 176, 206, 231, 232, 288, 367

Hosannah!, 379

hospital, 41, 58, 449, 450, 451

Host, 299

hostile, 60, 129, 190, 215, 283, 307, 319, 332, 378, 419, 437

hostile brother, 307, 319,

see also adversary, divine son, knower

Housman, 15

Hubur, 119

humanity, 90, 113, 116, 157, 193, 226, 259, 288, 304, 308, 335, 336, 337, 350,
368, 398, 401, 431, 449, 457, 465

humble, xxi, 171, 175, 181, 199, 202, 203, 215, 310, 324, 374, 400, 447,

see also hero, individual

Hume, 34

humility, 16, 151, 175, 316, 333, 359

hunted, 153, 159, 296

huntsman, 205

Hurrian, 192, 193

husband, 42, 90, 114, 115, 201, 210, 288, 292, 295, 305, 357, 361

Huston, 209

hydra, 266

Hyksos, 146

Hypistos, 193

hypocrisy, 314, 358

hypotheses, 4, 25, 54, 103, 176, 185, 269, 403, 404, 417

hypothesis, xx, 68, 69, 91, 92, 99, 121, 153, 156, 180, 195, 256, 317, 404,
405, 412, 432, 456



I.N.R.I., 370

Iceland, 147

icon, 3, 155

id, 7, 103, 163, 190, 199, 211, 288, 297, 306, 353, 374, 388, 389, 413, 420

idea, xiii, xvii, 6, 15–17, 31, 73, 85, 88–92, 100, 113, 114, 117, 124–134,
138, 143, 148, 154, 155, 160, 171–180, 185, 191, 202, 232, 234, 246–261, 267,
271, 272, 280, 285, 286, 290, 299, 300, 305, 312–322, 336–343, 360–369, 381,
385, 398–406, 414–422, 428–440, 444, 449, 454, 457, 458, 459, 463, 465, 467

ideal fixture, 17, 19, 30, 38, 40, 45, 47, 50, 54, 228, 256, 277, 301, 355,

see also goal, unbearable present

identification, xiv, xxi, 10, 53, 67, 111, 124, 126, 163, 170–175, 185, 186,
215, 221–249, 279, 300, 308, 316–333, 334, 351–359, 367, 369, 385, 401, 406,
415, 418, 427, 432, 433, 435, 445, 447, 460, 468, 469

identity, xxi, 14, 138, 156, 159, 161, 172, 185, 194, 196, 216, 226, 231, 232,
234, 235, 244, 245, 246, 249, 256, 264, 265, 279, 282, 285, 286, 289, 297, 326,
328, 331, 332, 333, 334, 344, 345, 357, 364, 369, 371, 384, 387, 407, 416, 428,
433, 452, 468

ideological, xii, xiii, xiv, 11, 75, 76, 94, 213, 217, 240, 251, 271, 311, 320,
333, 343, 351, 358, 379

ideologue, 358, 369,

see also concentration camp, communist, decadent, fascist, lie, self-deception,
security, tyranny

ideology, xiii, xiv, 217, 242, 260, 358, 426,

see also security, self-deception, tyranny

idol, 3, 153, 266

Igni, 370

illusion, 6, 27, 264, 429, 435, 466

Illyunakas, 140

image, xiii, xvi, 13, 15, 22–29, 38, 45, 54, 72–75, 81, 82, 83, 90, 100, 109,
127, 140, 153, 157, 160, 167–186, 219, 230–244, 251, 252, 260, 272, 296, 297,
309–318, 339, 342, 344, 347, 349, 371, 372, 377, 378, 382, 394, 410, 412, 414,
435, 439, 444, 456, 458, 463, 465

imagination, xviii, 3, 4, 13, 28, 30, 45, 54, 73–79, 95, 96, 98, 103, 113, 135,
143, 145, 153–169, 233, 239, 253, 255, 266, 268, 269, 287, 290, 319, 321, 322,
342, 343, 358, 360, 361, 363, 366, 367, 370, 372, 376, 378, 385, 391, 402, 403,
406, 410, 424, 428, 429, 434, 437, 451,

see also fantasy, episodic memory

imagistic, 68, 71, 73, 74, 76, 88, 91, 94, 103, 123, 135, 185, 191, 192, 234,
237, 241, 243, 251, 252, 253, 259, 269, 275, 300, 314, 391, 398, 416, 430

imagistic/semantic, 192

imitate, 75, 78, 81, 94, 102, 135, 148, 198, 322, 434

imitation, xxi, 64, 74–81, 100, 125, 135, 153, 178, 180, 187, 192, 197, 202,
222, 227, 229, 232, 242, 259, 268, 304, 309, 369, 372, 384, 396, 397, 398, 414,
444, 458

immolation, 326

immortal, 114, 129, 130, 134, 144, 171, 197, 253, 264, 407, 413, 420, 453

immutability, 404

impediment, 177, 214, 215, 266, 275

implements, 87, 233, 266

implication for action, 1, 3, 96, 98, 314

incarnated, 63, 112, 125, 168, 175, 185, 229, 235, 430

incarnation, 125–128, 133, 134, 155, 172, 186, 194, 224, 226, 232, 260, 285,
300, 312, 318, 319, 344, 358, 410, 427, 435, 442, 451, 463

incestuous, 105

Index, 401

India, 142, 148, 161, 169, 171, 308, 414

Indian, 4, 87, 140, 405, 414, 459

Indians, 142

individual, xxii, 11, 31, 36, 59, 64, 70, 77, 104, 112, 123, 157, 159, 161,
169, 170–181, 186, 187, 189, 195, 196, 207, 215–235, 240, 241, 244, 250, 255,
259, 264, 268, 274, 276, 278, 282, 283, 290–311, 317, 322–338, 360–384, 397,
400, 409, 431, 432, 435, 444, 445, 446, 457, 463–469,

see also Buddha, consciousness, Christ, culture-hero, hero, knower, Horus,
Marduk

individual right, 241, 261

Indo-European, 139

indologist, 171

Indra, 139, 140, 146, 148

ineffable, 156

infant, 157, 181, 208, 218, 219, 221, 222, 292, 325

infantile, 157, 276

information, 6–16, 19–30, 39, 47, 48–103, 125, 132, 141, 144, 150, 152, 156,
157, 169, 172–179, 182, 188, 190–198, 202, 214, 226, 236, 238, 252–261, 267,
269, 271, 278, 279, 294, 301, 302, 317, 327, 331, 332, 342, 358, 360, 367, 370,
372, 382, 405, 406, 408, 409, 413, 424, 427, 437, 446, 460

information-processing, 21, 69

inhibitory, 36, 43, 67, 195, 207, 265

initiation, 31, 91, 221, 222, 223, 225, 272, 273, 275, 277, 297, 396, 423, 426,

see also descent, regeneration, underworld

initiatory, 225, 275, 277, 426

innate, 23, 26, 37, 57, 65, 76, 79, 113, 218, 228, 240, 264, 274, 300, 302,
304, 343, 382, 392

innocent, 25, 205, 217, 287, 331, 343, 347, 448, 452

insane, xv, xix, 30, 163, 271, 296, 305, 393, 452

integrated, 80, 134, 187, 191, 206, 226, 229, 230, 233, 234, 239, 241, 248,
249, 250, 251, 253, 271, 274, 285, 294, 330, 367, 379, 396, 435, 437, 442, 445

integration, 31, 50, 81, 134, 191, 192, 229, 259, 271, 275, 312, 357, 361, 375,
376, 384, 436, 441, 442

intellect, 238, 295, 338, 402

intellectual, 3, 21, 35, 265, 269, 295, 322, 335, 402, 434, 456

intelligence, 49, 62, 66, 74, 75, 190, 232, 251, 253, 449, 450

interest, xiv, xviii, xxi, 23, 43, 47, 51, 60, 64, 65, 77, 134, 151, 157, 180,
228, 246, 262, 294, 301, 325, 337, 338, 365, 401, 410, 412, 413, 446, 447, 451,
467, 468, 469

interloper, 292

intermediary, 36, 74, 75, 78, 126, 206, 277, 401

interpretive schema, 1, 21, 58, 66, 150, 179, 187, 193

intoxication, 138, 263, 368

intrapsychic, xi, 2, 12, 28, 34, 39, 53, 64, 90, 113, 114, 134, 135, 176,
187–193, 207, 222, 226, 234, 243, 259–283, 295, 297, 301, 304, 306, 311, 314,
328, 342, 345, 347, 351, 355, 359–378, 385, 397, 400, 403, 422, 427, 430, 443,
445, 465, 467, 469

intrapsychic integrity, 400

intrinsic right, 6, 260

inundated, 183, 201

Iranian, 140

iron, 143, 200, 202, 203, 262, 375, 380, 411, 412, 424

Isaac, 421

Isaiah, 146, 176, 316

Isis, 110, 125, 130, 134, 160

Islam, 144

isomorphic, 22, 83, 113, 157, 195, 226, 233

Israel, 210, 211, 375, 376, 377, 393

Israelites, 134, 376, 385

Italy, 207

Ivan, 379, 381, 448, 452

Ivanovich, 366, 367

Ivashev-Musatov, 353



Jacob, 315

Jahwist, 110

James, xix, 138, 257, 382, 386

Japan, 207

Japanese, 92, 246, 347

Jasher, 241

jealous, 230, 377

Jean, 73, 143, 179

Jehovah, 396

Jeremiah, 147

Jerusalem, 211, 390

Jesus, 148, 204, 255, 316, 361, 362, 364, 375, 383, 384–407, 444, 456, 469

jewel, 168, 173, 174, 440

Jews, 111, 185, 243, 340, 364, 383, 389, 390

Job, 143, 296, 431, 432

Johannes, 404

John, 41, 111, 127, 142, 173, 174, 185, 254, 290, 298, 364, 383, 385, 386, 390,
422, 425, 455, 461, 463

Jonson, 401

Joseph, 97, 254, 390, 393

journey, xix, 15, 25, 33, 34, 131, 173, 181, 184, 197, 203, 206, 266, 273, 277,
278, 279, 322, 335, 375, 423, 433, 434, 436, 437, 440, 441, 442, 454,

see also day, way

Joyce, xix, 312

Judah, 210, 211

Judaism, 144, 314, 383

Judas, 331, 469

Juden, 396

Judeo-Christian, xi, 6, 100, 111, 135, 242, 243, 261, 294, 318, 371, 374

Judeo-Christianity, 420

judge, 179, 195, 262, 305, 375, 376, 429, 450

Julian, 249, 275, 276, 277

Jung, xvii, xix, xx, 4, 5, 91, 92, 98, 153, 218, 255, 272, 273, 300, 336, 337,
342, 369, 370, 401–442, 451, 457, 460

Jungian, 91, 264



Kaka, 118, 121

Kali, 161, 164, 171

Kant, 220

Karamazov, 448

Kazan, 357

Kemerovo, 366

Kepler, 5, 404

Khadira, 148

Khunrath, 401

Ki, 8, 9, 99, 100, 109

king, 54, 64, 90, 104, 118–135, 143, 147, 172, 178, 192, 198–215, 231, 245–248,
280, 288, 296, 304, 309, 374, 378, 424, 428–442,

see also Great Father, tyrant

kingdom, 4, 14, 17, 39, 52, 91, 99, 104, 124–134, 165, 179, 182, 183, 187,
199–214, 247, 248, 249, 255, 279–297, 314, 319, 341, 362, 364, 381–398, 414,
439, 440, 442, 456, 469,

see also explored territory, Great Father, king, paradise

Kingu, 115, 119, 122, 123,

see also Enuma elish, Mesopotamia, Sumeria

Kishar, 114,

see also Enuma elish, Mesopotamia, Sumeria

knife, 82, 160, 255, 322, 453, 454

knife-wielding, 454

knower, 20, 72, 89, 99, 103, 104, 109, 116, 141, 145, 149, 378,

see also consciousness, hero, individual

knowing, xviii, 2, 3, 72, 73, 75, 79, 102, 104, 112, 125, 177, 238, 295, 316,
322, 418, 458, 459

knowledge of good and evil, 10, 234, 284, 285, 294, 297, 353,

see also Eden, fall, garden, paradise

known, 14, 18, 19, 20, 32, 52, 53, 75, 89, 90, 99, 103, 104, 107, 109, 116,
135, 144, 145, 149, 171, 176, 187, 207, 215, 235, 245, 278, 281, 309, 330, 382,
431, 468

Komsomol, 357,

see also apprenticeship, communist, Solzhenitsyn

Korea, 196

Korean, 207

Kronos, 193

Kuhn, 29, 235, 237, 247, 256, 257, 258, 403, 405

Kumarbi, 192, 193

Kundalini, 301

Kurtz, 296

Kypris, 4



labyrinthine, 375

ladder, 23, 85, 200

Lahamu, 114, 118,

see also Enuma elish, Mesopotamia, Sumeria

Lahmu, 114, 118,

see also Enuma elish, Mesopotamia, Sumeria

Lakoff, 96,

see also natural category

Lamarckian, 92, 383

landlord, 453

language, xix, 15, 16, 64, 65, 75, 81, 92, 93, 94, 187, 202, 219, 239, 240,
258, 352, 370, 375, 400, 403, 459, 460

languish, 440

Lao-Tzu, 156, 391

lapis, 407, 410, 416, 420, 422, 424, 438, 444, 445

Lapis, viii, 438

latent information, 88, 332

Latin, 432

laughing, 192, 352, 453

law, 94, 126, 135, 211, 261, 265, 280, 307, 327, 331, 340, 355, 373, 375, 376,
378, 385, 387, 388, 391, 395, 396, 397, 428, 466,

see also tradition, security

lawgiver, 387

laws, 12, 126, 138, 165, 175, 219, 232, 365, 373, 374, 376, 385, 388, 391, 456

lawyer, xiv, 395, 451

learn, xiv, 18, 48, 56, 62, 70, 75, 76, 81, 93, 102, 174, 179, 189, 195, 220,
245, 251, 261, 321, 346, 369, 423, 448, 457

left hemisphere, 32, 68, 69, 73,

see also right hemisphere, language

legal, 201, 228, 383

Lenin, 336, 353,

see also communist, concentration camp

leviathan, 142, 144, 147, 184, 296,

see also whale, serpent, snake

liar, 328, 330, 466, 467,

see also decadent, fascist

liberal, 194, 359

lie, xiv, xvi, xviii, 35, 210, 280, 308, 311, 324, 327, 328, 329, 331, 332,
333, 343, 355, 359, 360, 362, 370, 432, 459, 466, 467, 469,

see also arrogance, deceit, denial, devil, fear, Satan, self-deception, threat

lies, 152, 163, 211, 270, 271, 283, 284, 319, 321, 331, 344, 380, 426, 431,
440, 460, 466, 469

life-story, 85, 87

light, xviii, 13, 25, 26, 29, 30, 57–60, 78, 83, 85, 87, 98, 104, 105, 109,
111, 126, 135, 143, 144, 160, 161, 165, 167, 173, 181, 184, 185, 190, 216, 217,
246, 270–290, 300, 310–332, 359, 360, 371, 379, 380, 385, 386, 389, 404, 413,
414, 419, 437, 439, 448, 455, 456, 465, 468,

see also consciousness, day, sun, Lucifer

lilies, 397

limbic, 50, 52, 54, 68, 154, 274,

see also affect, amygdala, emotion, ERP, hippocampus, memory

limitations, 26, 40, 66, 76, 116, 232, 235, 282, 289, 291, 293, 317, 334, 345,
361, 387, 388, 427, 433, 437, 452, 453, 454

lion, 115, 119, 153, 160, 178, 286, 410, 429, 433, 435

lioness, 160, 430

literature, xxi, 1, 7, 15, 16, 40, 93, 97, 241, 247, 270, 296, 301, 313, 343,
417, 421, 432, 441, 452

loaf, 202, 203, 204, 205

lobes, 49, 50

locomotion, 36, 37, 43

logicians, 95, 180

logos, 289, 290, 371

Logos, 100, 111, 123, 127, 148, 171, 186, 288, 289, 325, 439, 441,

see also word

lover, 90, 176, 181, 185, 439

Loyalus, 434

Lucifer, 300, 302, 313, 316,

see also demon, devil, evil, light, Mephistopheles, Seth

Luciferian, xxi

Luke, 316, 388, 389, 393, 395, 396

lunatic, 370

Luria, 21



Macrobius, 142

Macrocosm, 401

Macrocosma, 430

macrocosmic, 308

madman, 7, 371

maelstrom, 296

magic, 2, 108, 117, 196, 253, 267, 415, 416, 430

magico-religious, 198, 426

Magritte, 412

mahapralaya, 87

mahayuga, 87

maiden, 181, 203, 211, 380, 415

Maier, 68, 414, 433, 435

male, 4, 8, 99, 111, 160, 185, 189, 222, 288, 443, 457

malice, 350, 356, 365

malicious, 447

Manah, 318

Mandaeans, 142

Manhattan, 94

manvantara, 87

Marabout, 329

March, 354

Marduk, 90, 100, 110–142, 190, 193, 201, 248, 288,

see also Christ, Enuma elish, hero, Horus, individual, Mesopotamia, Sumeria

Marfino, 349

Mariya, 358

Mariyutu, 115

Mark, 204, 342, 362, 390

Markandeya, 140

marriage, 8, 100, 125, 185, 189, 190, 206, 218, 240, 361

Mars, 113, 137

marsh, 111

marshes, 207

Martin, 403

martyr, 191, 361

Marxist, 21, 351

Mary, 106, 107, 125, 153, 155

masculine, 20, 104, 110, 111, 114, 116, 124, 141, 144, 176, 181, 200, 207, 282,
324, 332, 339, 398, 429, 439,

see also feminine, Great Father, individual, knower, hero, spirit

mask, xiii, xvii, 30, 157, 332, 335, 359, 435

massacres, 347

masturbating, 110

Materia, v, 424

material, xx, 2, 26, 64, 65, 73, 96, 108, 128, 134, 143, 144, 150, 152, 155,
166, 173, 200, 206, 221, 229, 241, 266, 276, 290, 295, 299, 312, 313, 332, 341,
351, 360, 361, 363, 378, 383, 397, 405, 408, 410, 411, 413–429, 440–455, 466,

see also maternal, matter, matrix, mother

maternal, 103, 109, 156, 157, 163, 169, 181, 222, 295, 325, 326, 333, 336, 339,
369, 374, 441, 469

matriarchal, 115, 161, 275, 324, 418, 429, 430, 431, 438, 443

matrix, 48, 90, 103, 125, 127, 143, 154, 156, 159, 164, 166, 258, 295, 370,
430,

see also material, matter, mother

Matronina, 348

matter, xv, 5, 8, 23, 35, 39, 48, 55, 62, 63, 64, 70, 87, 89, 95, 99–116, 129,
135, 137, 139, 141, 143, 154, 155, 156, 179, 186, 188, 205, 210, 220, 222, 225,
229, 232, 245, 250, 257, 262, 263, 269, 277, 288, 291, 295, 297, 300, 302, 313,
322, 328, 330, 353, 369, 370, 371, 376, 387, 393, 397–445, 458, 461, 465,

see also material, matrix, mother

Matthew, ix, 166, 255, 287, 331, 359, 361, 363, 364, 385, 386, 393, 394, 395,
398, 400

maturation, 18, 78, 208, 222, 283, 284, 293, 302, 324, 326, 335, 341, 369, 397,
414, 420, 436,

see also adolescence, apprenticeship, adulthood

Maxwell, 237

Maya, 27,

see also illusion

MCAT, 85

McGuire, 421

medicine, 277, 339, 401, 422, 432

Medusa, 162,

see also gorgon, Great Mother, serpent, snake

meeting, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 119, 376

Meg, 201

megalithic, 197

megaliths, 196, 197

melancholia, 456,

see also depression

Melanesian, 161

Melekula, 161

Melville, 296

memory, xv, 43, 50, 54, 55, 71, 72, 73, 77, 78, 80, 81, 92, 93, 98, 102, 149,
153, 154, 179, 196, 198, 224, 229, 232, 237, 240, 252, 253, 260, 309, 311, 328,
331, 332, 336, 344, 352, 373, 376, 378, 382, 383, 384, 385, 391, 403, 413

mendaciousness, 265, 447

Mephistopheles, 91, 301, 319, 448

mercurialis, 410

Mercurius, 410, 415, 437

Mere, 427, 435

Mesopotamia, 124, 128, 134, 308,

see also Enuma elish, Sumeria

Mesopotamian, 90, 100, 108, 111, 112, 114, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130, 132,
134, 135, 185

Messiah, 186, 187,

see also Christ

meta-imitation, 318

metal, 137, 401, 413, 418, 426

meta-morality, 259

metamorphosis, 157, 279, 364, 414, 431

metanoia, 363, 364, 365, 366

metaphor, 15, 16, 48, 69, 72, 96, 112, 114, 137, 207, 216, 253, 286, 289, 290,
299, 338, 340, 429, 455

metaphoric, xxi, 76, 88, 115, 152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 164, 166, 249, 264, 276,
295

metaphorical, 14, 15, 16, 23, 32, 89, 111, 124, 137, 289, 295, 358, 452

meta-problem, 230, 231, 373

Mexico, 142, 161, 207

Micah, 425

Michael, 237, 414

microcosmic, 147

midrash, 290, 396

Mikhaila, 249, 275, 276

mill, 286

Milton, 312, 315, 316, 319, 338

mimesis, 70, 153

mimetic, 70, 76, 77, 170

mind, xviii, xx, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 25, 26, 33, 52, 63, 69, 75, 94, 96, 98–113,
121, 127, 151, 154, 176, 201, 217, 220, 253, 258, 266, 283, 286, 289, 291, 299,
300, 311, 313, 316, 323, 336, 337, 338, 349, 350, 352, 355, 371, 395, 401–434,
440–449, 455, 457

mineral, 4, 414

mismatch, 28, 45, 55, 73, 177, 256

mistake, 8, 46, 55, 206, 287, 290, 344, 366

mnestic, 72, 77

Moab, 211

Moby Dick, 296

model, 11, 22, 24, 26, 29, 31, 46, 50, 53, 54, 72, 74, 77, 95–103, 124, 125,
134, 135, 144, 147, 156, 177, 179, 182, 198, 200, 207, 226, 235, 238, 256, 287,
297, 313, 345, 363, 379, 382, 384, 391, 404, 409, 422

Moiseyevaite, 353

Moliere, 263

Mom, 276, 460

monad, 140

monarchy, 314

monotheism, 127, 134, 314

monster, 110, 115, 119, 124, 139, 140, 160, 162, 163, 182, 183, 184, 225, 258

Montreal, 246, 448, 453

moon, 4, 16, 103, 123, 148, 172, 344, 415, 424, 430

morality, xi, xiv, 6, 10, 12, 17, 78, 80, 103, 118, 180, 192, 217–241, 251,
252–265, 277, 285, 305, 313, 317, 324, 327, 336, 355, 359, 360, 367, 373, 374,
378, 382, 383, 384, 385, 387, 390–402, 415

mortal, 99, 104, 108, 135, 161, 163, 202, 230, 251, 282, 283, 284, 291, 293,
294, 301, 302, 303, 311, 322, 325, 333, 335, 340, 345, 353, 370, 379, 415, 433,
445, 467, 468

Moses, 97, 369, 374, 375, 376, 377, 385, 386, 387, 390,

see also hero, law, security, tradition

mothers, 156, 160, 223,

see also femininity, underworld

motivation, xiv, 4–13, 23, 25, 39, 43, 45, 58, 68, 69, 73, 76, 77, 113, 114,
118, 152, 191, 196, 221, 239, 256, 268, 284, 305, 316, 318, 324, 325, 335, 341,
382, 433, 442, 460, 466

motor, 2, 21, 43, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 62, 64, 65, 67, 68, 72, 73, 83, 100,
177, 372, 373

Mount Sinai, 376, 377

mountain, 109, 126, 140, 161, 177, 184, 202, 285, 312, 386

music, 220, 291, 454, 460

Muslim, 317, 347

mussel, 122

Mussolini, 207

mysterium tremendum, 151

mystery, 7, 11, 17, 25, 40, 42, 60, 99, 112, 137, 142, 146, 151, 163, 168, 296,
300, 301, 310, 381, 410, 420, 463

myth, xix, xxi, 2–14, 69, 75, 78, 79, 90, 93, 97–111, 123, 125, 128, 137, 139,
140, 176, 180–193, 221, 222, 229, 239, 240, 241, 259, 260, 261, 267, 269, 278,
282, 290, 292, 295, 299, 301, 302, 308, 312, 318, 363, 369, 373, 377, 383, 384,
396, 402–407, 420, 428, 429, 441–446, 452, 465

mythological, xx, xxi, 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 14, 89, 91, 95, 99, 105, 107, 108,
114, 136, 137, 139, 143, 163, 196, 198, 202, 216, 217, 253, 267, 270, 282, 287,
291, 300, 307, 311, 313, 316, 320, 332, 334, 369, 370, 376, 383, 417, 418, 424,
435, 439, 443, 445, 459, 466, 467, 468



Naboth, 210

naked, xix, 212, 251, 288, 289, 294, 303, 304, 363, 463

nakedness, 282, 288, 291, 324, 345

Namaan, 393

Nammu, 8, 99

Namshub, 127

Namtillaku, 127

narrative, xxi, 1, 2, 4, 15, 22, 23, 70–79, 90, 98–103, 112, 123, 129, 131,
144, 172–179, 186, 191–202, 223–233, 240, 247, 254, 267–269, 282, 309, 358,
359, 373–378, 382, 385, 388, 403, 439, 465,

see also story

narrative processes, 1

Nathan, 210

NATO, xii

Natura, 370

natural category, 152, 200, 245, 313

natural disaster, 245, 246, 249, 251, 300, 332, 454

Navajo, 142

Nazareth, 392

Nazi, 33, 340, 369, 433

Nazirites, 211

NDP, 458,

see also Alberta, socialism

Nebuchadnezzar, 147, 441

necropolis, 196,

see also cemetery

negotiation, 194

Neith, 160

neocortex, 49, 50, 62, 63, 65

Neoplatonist, 255

nephew, 406

Nephthys, 110

nested, 83, 84, 85, 87, 179, 228, 231, 235, 241, 245, 460

Neumann, 160, 299

neural, 451

neuroanatomy, 459

neurophysiological, 69, 459

neuropsychology, 13, 459

neurotic, 172, 307, 310, 358, 402, 429

neurotransmitter, 65

New Testament, 111, 166, 241, 312, 316, 369, 384, 385, 388, 461

Newton, 5, 237, 407, 421, 422

Newtonian, 421

Niebuhr, 371

Nietzsche, 6, 7, 10, 11, 78, 79, 219, 228, 238, 250, 264, 268, 269, 270, 272,
323, 378, 402

night, xix, 7, 15, 34, 41, 45, 87, 103, 115–123, 138–145, 157, 163, 167, 184,
187, 223, 225, 248, 263, 276, 288, 289, 341, 342, 344, 347, 348, 349, 380, 389,
396, 406, 440, 448, 451, 460

night sea-journey, 184,

see also hero, knower, individual

nightmare, xix, 406, 460

nigredo, 400, 431, 456,

see also descent, depression, melancholia

nihilism, 250, 265, 323, 329

Nikolai, 358

Ninurta, 139

Nitechka, 198, 199, 200, 201

non-awareness, 289

non-being, 137, 285

nondeclarative, 102, 223

normal, xv, xvi, xviii, 23, 29, 34, 38, 39, 44, 53–59, 66, 67, 83, 87, 91, 97,
121, 125, 151, 156, 158, 177, 178, 210, 233, 247, 256, 257, 258, 272, 274, 275,
296, 315, 324, 326, 334, 343, 344, 351, 355, 396, 405, 409, 423, 433,

see also revolutionary

normal scientist, 256, 257,

see also Kuhn, paradigm, revolutionary scientist

Norse, 297

nostalgia, 401

Notre Dame, 313

Nous, 439, 441

novelty, 19, 21, 32, 43, 44, 50, 52, 53, 57, 65, 68, 69, 85, 91, 122, 150, 154,
157, 181, 227, 246, 259, 329, 331, 339,

see also anomaly, chaos, dragon, Great Mother, snake, serpent, unpredicted,
unexplored, unexplored territory, unknown

novelty-driven, 53, 70

nuclear, xv, xviii, 411, 451, 452

numinous, 151, 169, 275, 456

Nuremburg, 368

Nut, 110



objective, xxi, 1–13, 18, 21, 22, 23, 34, 48, 52, 53, 54, 60, 69, 81, 87,
103–113, 138, 139, 152, 154, 157, 196, 206, 236, 239, 245, 260, 266, 269, 270,
290, 291, 294, 303, 304, 404, 408, 422, 427, 442, 459, 467

objective reality, 1, 9, 34, 54, 87, 427

objects, 5, 9, 33, 34, 53, 56, 64, 78, 83, 87, 88, 94–97, 102, 108, 113,
136–144, 150, 152, 157, 159, 169, 193, 196, 198, 201, 207, 221–229, 232, 235,
238, 239, 275, 295, 296, 361, 392, 410, 411, 416, 424

ocean, 48, 196, 214, 286

Odin, 297, 298

Oedipus, 402

offspring, 91, 105, 107, 110, 115, 185, 207, 262, 404, 437, 438

Ohman, 51

Old Testament, 110, 147, 241, 316, 364, 369, 384, 385, 387, 392, 397

Oldenberg, 140

Olga, 357

Omega, 142, 144

omnipresent, 104, 138, 150, 196, 217

ontogenetic, 73, 196

Ophelia, 264

ophidian, 139, 140, 157

opposites, 23, 105, 138, 139, 140, 144, 264, 282, 286, 288, 290, 335, 337, 401,
424, 430, 432, 437, 441, 443, 446, 457

oppress, 214, 340

Optics, 421

opus, 400, 401, 407, 420, 422, 431, 441, 445, 457, 463

Opus, viii, 422, 424, 445

order, xiv, 5, 12, 22, 23, 30, 32, 39, 48, 59, 72, 79, 83, 86, 90, 91, 93,
100–108, 114, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128–156, 172, 181, 185–190, 198–232, 238,
244–249, 253, 256, 262–268, 270, 274, 279, 284, 285, 288, 290, 297, 300, 305,
308, 309, 316, 317, 328, 333–342, 353, 354, 358, 360, 367, 373, 376, 379,
384–391, 396, 398, 412, 415, 416, 420, 421, 424, 430–446, 456, 459, 468

organization, 8, 13, 54, 62, 78, 86, 118, 120, 130, 134, 178, 187–194, 207,
227, 228, 232, 233, 236, 241, 244, 252, 260, 310, 339, 357, 360, 382, 384

Orient, 144, 291, 407, 417

origin, 6, 91, 110, 111, 137–144, 156, 198, 229, 240, 285, 286, 287, 289, 290,
291, 296, 414, 421, 463

Osiris, vii, 110, 125–134, 161, 176, 197, 200, 203, 206, 231, 232, 309, 319,
440

Oxford, 348



Pacanow, 198, 200

Pagels, 317

pain, xix, 37, 39, 63, 103, 161, 189, 259, 269, 285, 309, 310, 317, 326, 329,
341, 347, 358, 364, 375, 378, 433, 452, 467

panacea, 250, 420

Pandora, 286

panic, 18, 113, 283

Panin, 351

Paracelsus, 400, 422, 425

paradigm, 235, 236, 237, 249, 257, 258, 261, 327, 424

paradisaic, 222

paradisal, 27, 29, 138, 144, 222, 239, 285, 287, 288, 291, 303, 324, 413, 463

paradise, 16, 31, 144, 178, 182, 221, 234, 260, 284, 285, 286, 291–312, 333,
343, 345, 363, 369, 370, 375, 397, 423, 463, 465, 467,

see also Eden, garden, goal

paradox, 254, 282, 388, 460

paradoxical, 6, 23, 42, 43, 52, 66, 100, 105, 107, 137, 149, 157, 159, 175,
206, 250, 285, 288, 333, 397, 400, 445

paranoid, 451

parasitical, 217

parents, xviii, 8, 75, 77, 89, 93, 100–114, 136, 139, 140, 145, 163, 189, 220,
221, 247, 300, 325, 389, 390, 406, 448, 451, 458, 463, 467

party, xii, xiii, xix, 366

Party, 343, 352, 357, 358

party-worker, xiii

past, xv, 5, 9, 57, 70, 81, 102, 131, 133, 158, 172, 178, 179, 182, 194, 196,
197, 198, 202, 208, 209, 215, 222, 231, 232, 271, 272, 278, 279, 283, 287, 289,
308, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 334, 335, 341, 344, 350, 351, 352, 367, 373,
379, 382, 387, 393, 396, 397, 416, 466, 469

patriarchal, 90, 99, 114, 115, 117, 121, 123, 160, 201, 208, 228, 248, 255,
264, 330, 333, 339, 414, 422, 427, 428, 429, 431, 435, 438, 443, 444,

see also Great Father, matriarchal, security, tradition, tyranny

patriotism, 244, 323, 340, 347

pattern, 19, 26, 50, 51, 60, 69–81, 90, 100, 102, 103, 105, 111, 120, 124–135,
152, 172, 177–187, 192, 195, 197, 208, 210, 221–233, 240, 246, 248, 249,
257–277, 284, 328, 334, 353, 358, 368, 369, 375, 382, 384, 385, 396, 397, 403,
405, 413, 429, 443, 450, 463, 465, 466

Paul, 384, 385, 401

Pauli, 258, 404

pavilion, 291, 297

peace, 14, 23, 61, 93, 103, 127, 140, 168, 178, 194, 205, 245, 307, 321, 349,
359, 364, 369, 388, 396, 400, 407, 443

peacemaker, 179, 186, 194, 439,

see also hero, judge

peasant, 448

Pechora, 342

pelican, 437, 438,

see also Christ, lapis, stone

perceive, xii, 9, 32, 62, 96, 99, 109, 204, 284, 288, 335, 455

persecutor, 317, 357

persona, xvii, 344, 433

personality, 36, 59, 77, 120, 124, 134, 135, 136, 153, 158, 159, 181, 189, 190,
192, 198, 206, 209, 213, 215, 221–235, 239–252, 272–279, 283, 293, 307–318,
325, 328, 329, 332, 334, 338, 341, 342, 347, 359–370, 378, 384, 402, 416, 427,
429, 433, 437, 440–447, 458

personified, 106, 127, 154, 166, 198, 430, 431

pestilence, 163

Peter, 386

phallic, 160, 162

phallus, 103, 130

phantoms, 160

pharaoh, 97, 109, 128, 133, 134

Pharisees, 204, 385, 388, 389, 390, 394, 395

phenomenological, 102, 108, 137, 159, 193, 409

phenomenology, xx

Philo of Byblos, 193

philosopher, 73, 209, 235, 238, 239, 265, 274, 303, 400, 401, 404, 407, 420,
424, 426, 436, 441, 445

philosophical, 4, 8, 78, 79, 177, 228, 245, 304, 342, 427, 436, 437, 443, 445,
448

Phoenicia, 192

Phoenician, 193

phylogenesis, 157, 314

phylogenetic, 23, 196, 283

phylogenetically, 39, 50, 75, 95, 301

physiology, 39, 62

piano-key, 12

pictograph, 8, 99

pigheadedness, 358

Pilate, 455

pioneer, 217, 402

place of things, xxi, 1

plague, 163

plan, xiv, 17, 22, 24, 27, 29, 32, 37, 42, 45, 46, 53, 54, 117, 173, 337, 417,
432

planetary, 5, 439

Plato, 144, 153, 270, 315, 371

Platonic, 108, 192

play, xii, 14, 35, 40, 51, 61, 71–81, 87, 96, 98, 104, 142, 152, 169, 222, 236,
254, 260, 273, 277, 292, 305, 320, 342, 352, 371, 372, 373, 400, 401, 419, 454

plenitude, 164, 401

plenum, 226

pleroma, 153, 154

pluralistic, 134

pneuma, 404, 461

poison, 40, 115, 119, 122, 424, 468

Pole Star, 297

Polish, 198

Polyani, 237

polymorphous, 272

Polynesians, 197, 198

polysemic, 97, 218

polysemous, 85, 253

polysemy, 97

polytheistic, 314

pomegranate, 169

Pompeii, 345

Port-Royal, 219

Portugal, xv

possessed, 3, 26, 104, 109, 113, 130, 153, 158, 201, 267, 309, 313, 323, 361,
396, 402, 404, 410, 412, 456, 460

Postman, 247

power, xiii, 5, 10, 11, 40, 57, 65, 104, 111–115, 121–133, 142, 151, 152, 159,
160, 162, 167, 171–182, 191, 195–227, 234, 252, 266, 277, 284, 295–329, 333,
347, 357–369, 377, 379, 380, 385, 386, 392–400, 406, 414, 420, 430, 431, 444,
445, 447, 467, 468, 469

precipice, 263, 266

precosmogonic, 89, 112, 114, 126, 171, 198, 200, 202, 207, 223, 225, 266, 275,
285, 330, 332, 424

precosmogonic chaos, 89, 126, 171, 202, 207, 223, 225, 285, 424

pre-experimental, 3, 5, 9, 103, 111, 112, 113, 176, 197, 223, 266, 373, 408,
412, 413, 415, 466

premotor, 49

pre-scientific, 410

Presley, 196

presumptions, 30, 34, 46, 57, 58, 72, 149, 177, 189, 190, 237, 240, 258, 260,
266, 267, 327, 370, 378, 391, 414, 436,

see also axioms, presuppositions

presuppositions, 4, 6, 11, 94, 102, 190, 220, 233, 236, 237, 250, 253, 254,
256, 261, 262, 308, 317, 328, 371, 372, 373, 384,

see also axioms, presumptions

pride, xxi, 143, 202, 247, 296, 302, 303, 313, 314, 323, 358, 363, 398, 447,
455, 456, 467,

see also arrogance, deceit, denial, devil, Satan, lie

priest, 35, 126, 210, 380, 381

primal, 89, 111, 114, 123, 136, 141, 166, 269, 291, 296, 408, 409, 410, 419,
424

primary/matriarchal, 115

primates, 62, 64, 191

primeval, 105, 110, 128, 159, 285

primitive, xx, 9, 13, 31, 104, 108, 109, 113, 152, 161, 198, 285, 299, 373,
374, 397, 402, 426, 430, 440

primordial, 1, 8, 19, 52, 57, 79, 90, 99, 105, 109, 110, 113, 114, 125, 126,
128, 135–161, 171, 179, 181, 182, 198, 199, 228, 271, 285, 288, 339, 408, 421

prince, 128, 134, 203, 205, 249, 291, 292, 293, 316, 319

princess, 177, 205, 206, 213, 248, 249

Principia, 421

privy, 91, 128, 448

procedural, 73–81, 88, 94, 96, 102, 191, 206, 221–242, 251, 252, 260, 261–270,
274, 275, 328, 358, 372, 373, 376, 378, 382, 384, 387, 392, 396,

see also declarative, habit

procreation, 111, 172, 439

profane, 125, 138, 148, 151, 155, 225, 275, 284, 286, 294, 297, 320, 338, 418

progenitor, 107, 116, 142, 163, 198, 206

projection, 405, 417, 418, 428, 435, 440

Prometheus, 296

promise, 27, 53, 67, 69, 101, 150, 168, 169, 171, 175, 177, 182, 207, 257, 266,
278, 300, 302, 350, 351, 376, 409, 411, 424

prophet, 210, 219, 255, 381, 389, 392, 393

prophetic, 383, 387

prostitute, 125, 181, 393,

see also hierodule

protect, xx, 3, 40, 129, 166, 171, 228, 234, 244, 249, 259, 291, 307, 345, 347,
355, 378, 382, 460

Protestant, xi, 243, 245

prototypical, 81, 97, 100, 108, 272

provision, 221, 223, 224, 226, 231, 239, 375

Prussia, 368

Psalm, 375

psyche, xvii, 111, 152, 175, 185, 223, 246, 248, 250, 251, 294, 296, 297, 300,
328, 370, 383, 405, 407, 410, 417, 427, 428, 429, 431, 432, 435, 440, 456

psychiatric, 402, 449

psychoanalytic, 71, 96, 172, 401, 403, 436

psycholinguist, 95

psychologist, xv, xvi, 34, 73, 143, 160, 448

psychopathology, 218, 272, 324, 338, 466

psychophysiologist, 21, 51

psychopomp, 277

psychosis, 272, 296

psychotherapist, 33, 195

Ptah, 110, 127, 128

Puah, 374

puberty, 223, 396

publicans, 361

punish, 206, 227

punishment, 6, 26, 27, 34, 36, 37, 43, 53, 57, 58, 67, 69, 71, 149, 150, 190,
195, 211, 214, 223, 227, 231, 293, 329, 391, 409, 427, 458

Purana, 140

Puritanism, 219

Pushkin, 263

putrefactio, 431

putrefaction, 427

pyramids, 134, 248

Pythagoras, 441



quadrants, 412

quasichemical, 417

Queen, v, 429, 430, 431, 438, 443

quest, 181, 206, 296, 405, 435, 436, 440, 460

quicksilver, 424



rage, 82, 189, 274, 349

Rahab, 142, 147, 176

railman, 41

railroad, 41, 353

rain, xviii, 34, 48, 64, 140, 149, 198, 199, 200, 201, 248, 348, 361, 400

rank-ordering, 230, 231, 360

Raskolnikov, 264

rat, 35, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 411

rationalist, xx, 8

raven, 410

ravening, 394, 433, 435

Re, vii, 110, 117, 128, 132, 133, 139, 140, 231

reality, xvii, xviii, xxi, 1, 5, 8, 9, 13, 20, 24, 34, 45, 48, 53–58, 77, 87,
93, 103, 108, 109, 141, 145, 147, 156, 157, 160, 171, 184, 188, 189, 191, 217,
235, 238, 242, 254, 256, 263, 266, 269, 274, 275, 278–296, 305, 313, 320, 327,
332, 333, 334, 339, 343, 361, 371, 390, 404, 405, 409, 413, 417, 418, 421, 427,
457, 465, 466, 467

realm, 10, 28, 52, 79, 150, 154, 177, 191, 275, 277, 279, 295, 297, 301, 325,
329, 358, 430, 441

reason, xiii, xvi, xxi, 11, 12, 18, 27, 38, 40, 48, 70, 71, 76, 77, 82, 85, 92,
106, 122, 143, 178, 195, 198, 219, 220, 228, 234, 244, 245, 250, 251, 253, 255,
262, 269, 270, 290, 300, 302, 308, 314, 316, 322, 324, 333, 336, 340, 341, 349,
350, 371, 404, 416–421, 436, 449, 455, 456, 460, 463

rebellion, xii, 97, 213, 312, 335

rebirth, 31, 103, 161, 162, 176, 222, 225, 248, 276, 277, 278, 468

reborn, 32, 141, 175, 223, 225, 248, 300, 441

reconnaissance, xv

redeemer, 186, 384, 398, 407, 440, 441, 445

redemption, 17, 31, 161, 226, 256, 282, 284, 285, 294, 305, 307, 316, 357, 361,
363, 369, 401, 405, 407, 408, 415, 416, 418, 420, 422, 426, 428, 430, 432, 442,
443, 444, 445, 463, 465, 467

redemptive, 164, 168, 171, 175, 176, 182, 198, 226, 260, 275, 278, 279, 294,
301, 302, 303, 312, 325, 363, 376, 415, 422, 427, 433, 436, 445, 463, 465

redirection of attention, 19, 151

re-evaluate, 19, 83, 86

regenerate, 449

Reich, 340

reign, 91, 115, 121, 201, 342, 355, 428

reinforcement, 34, 35, 36, 195

reintegration, 272, 273, 279, 370

rejects, 105, 308, 363, 375

relevant, xiv, 3, 13, 19, 21, 24, 25, 40, 54, 73, 83, 84, 85, 88, 95, 103, 189,
238, 246, 255, 256, 264, 267, 296, 320, 382, 408, 411, 416, 457

religion, xii, xix, xx, 78, 79, 161, 209, 268, 269, 318, 333, 371, 401, 402,
403, 405, 421, 448, 459, 460, 463

Renaissance, 155, 401, 421, 422

Renovatur, 370

renovelization, 223, 376

renovelized, 60, 275, 424

renunciation, 195, 294, 358, 405

repertoire, 56, 72, 222, 246, 259, 305

representation, xxi, 20, 27, 29, 44, 47, 52, 53, 54, 55, 62–84, 90, 102–113,
123–139, 144, 151–169, 176–186, 195, 197, 202, 206, 221–230, 236, 239, 240,
241, 243, 251–255, 260, 261, 267, 269, 274, 275, 276, 279–287, 293–297, 304,
307, 311, 313, 318, 339, 358, 359, 363, 369–378, 382, 391–398, 403, 409, 412,
413, 415, 429, 430, 444

reptile, 301, 413,

see also dragon, fear, serpent, snake, threat

reptilian, 155, 157, 277, 296

resources, xiv, 20, 25, 36, 65, 150, 221, 239, 266, 310, 353, 463

responsibility, 6, 50, 163, 224, 324, 325, 335, 337, 339, 360, 381, 397, 433,
453, 454, 457, 466, 469

resurrecting, 175, 248

resurrection, 127, 161, 178, 225, 266, 274, 277, 279, 318, 381, 384, 401, 440

revaluation, 19, 30, 42, 187, 257, 360, 367

Reveille, 15

revelation, xvi, 53, 199, 250, 269, 278, 299, 320, 376, 421, 430

Revelations, 144

revenge, xiii, 218, 264, 296, 322, 323, 329, 356, 467

revenge-seeking, 218

revitalizing, 205

revolution, xii, 56, 99, 134, 178, 227, 258, 396, 403, 406, 407, 421, 423

revolutionary, 5, 14, 23–31, 56, 57, 65, 87, 177–189, 197, 210, 211, 218, 219,
232, 233, 234, 245, 248, 256–278, 282, 294, 317, 320, 331, 358, 360, 375, 378,
383, 384, 397, 403, 405, 409, 427, 437

reward, 36, 39, 65, 85, 150, 176, 181, 199, 231, 239, 267, 361, 434

Rex Marinus, 439, 441

rich, xii, xiii, 24, 127, 241, 256, 362, 458

Richard, 67, 322, 421

Richards, 270

Ricoeur, 401

right, xiii, xvii, 6, 8, 32, 41, 49, 67–73, 78, 88, 91, 128, 129, 134, 164,
174, 178, 194, 202–206, 227, 236, 238, 255, 260, 289, 296, 303, 316, 319,
327–354, 366, 368, 369, 375, 380–388, 421, 429, 442, 450, 454

right hemisphere, 32, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73,

see also left hemisphere

righteous, 211, 280, 287, 340

Rimbaud, 296

risk, 12, 18, 39, 60, 163, 176, 202, 207, 211, 259, 282, 284, 302, 306, 337,
367, 369, 392, 417, 434, 440

rites, 31, 92, 172, 222, 225, 396, 426

ritual, xi, xviii, xxi, 1, 75–79, 93, 95, 124, 125, 127, 130, 135, 147, 148,
153, 159, 163, 170, 171, 172, 175, 176, 178, 181, 190, 196, 197, 200, 215, 216,
221, 223, 225, 226, 228, 239–248, 260, 272, 277, 297, 299, 308, 318, 359, 379,
398, 415, 429, 436

rock, 139, 174, 400, 411, 437

Roman, 113, 142, 380

Romans, 161, 383

roots, 11, 122, 154, 211, 241, 244, 295, 296, 297, 314, 381, 456

royalty, 207, 210, 211

rubea, 4

ruby, 173, 174,

see also jewel, sacrifice

rules, xi, 7, 14, 29, 69, 75, 79, 91, 94, 95, 135, 152, 187, 188, 213, 215,
216, 233, 234, 236, 237, 248, 253, 256–277, 297, 309, 312, 328, 334, 341,
371–378, 387–396, 452, 458, 459, 469

Ruska, 441

Russell, 448, 452

Russia, 261, 352,

see also communist, concentration camp, ideologue, Solzhenitsyn, Soviet Union

Russian, 21, 244, 262, 271, 348

ruthlessness, 437

Rwandan, 347

Rychlak, 180, 390



sacrality, 125, 126

sacralized, 148

sacrament, 299

sacred, 7, 16, 108, 123, 147, 161, 261, 265, 272, 289, 303, 309, 373, 390, 426,
461

sacrifice, 40, 159, 171, 172, 175, 176, 223, 231, 278, 308, 325, 326, 332, 335,
339, 355, 362, 370, 415, 429, 435, 443, 467, 468

sacrifices, 191, 296, 307, 331

sacrificial, 161, 171, 172, 176, 248, 415, 430

sacrilegious, xix

salutary, 163, 219, 309

salvation, 161, 220, 294, 318, 397, 405, 423, 432, 440, 445, 456

Samara, 262

Samarka, 35

Samkhya, 294

Samuel, 210

sanctuary, 103, 109, 126

sarcophagus, 161

Sarepta, 393

Satan, 296, 297, 298, 311, 312, 314, 316, 317, 319, 378, 449,

see also arrogant, deceit, denial, devil, evil, fall, lie, Lucifer

Satanic, 451

Satapatha, 140

satiation, 36

satiety, 443,

see also satisfaction

satisfaction, 11, 25, 26, 27, 29, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 53, 67, 69, 169, 263,
409, 420,

see also satiety

Saul, 210

savior, xxii, 90, 97, 164, 179, 186, 190, 194, 278, 279, 288, 291, 297, 310,
311, 318, 319, 358, 367, 383, 384, 398, 414, 463,

see also Christ, hero, individual, redemption, revolutionary

Scandinavian, 147

scapegoat, 336

scarecrow, 198

Scarecrow, 199, 200

scary, 2

schema, 1, 14, 58, 60, 70, 72, 87, 88, 145, 150, 153, 169, 172, 177, 180, 185,
220, 226, 266, 267, 327, 328, 359, 382, 436

schemas, 21, 53, 66, 70, 74, 78, 88, 99, 135, 150, 178, 179, 187, 188, 192,
193, 221, 222, 228, 233, 239, 252, 307, 320, 372, 409

schisms, 267

schizophrenia, 416, 441

schizophrenic, xvii, 449, 450, 451

school, 85, 111, 174, 261, 372, 444, 451

Schopenhauer, 238, 321

scientist, 3, 54, 237, 256, 257, 258, 271, 274, 366, 402, 420

scion, 215

scorpion, 157, 329

scorpion-man, 115, 119

scribes, 385, 388, 390, 394, 395, 465

sea, xx, 4, 7, 8, 12, 48, 99, 109, 110, 139, 142, 143, 157, 171, 184, 205, 206,
266, 296, 348, 377, 424, 430, 434, 440, 460, 469,

see also abyss, water, water of life

seawater, 137

secondary/patriarchal, 114, 115

security, xv, 54, 57, 75, 85, 86, 90, 91, 101, 104, 141, 200, 207, 208, 223,
224, 244, 281, 302, 308, 317, 324–331, 334, 344, 351, 353, 357, 361, 362, 363,
366, 378, 400, 407, 411, 413, 433, 438, 447, 467,

see also tradition, tyranny

security-seeking, 330

seizure, 52, 77

self, 79, 103, 144, 185, 188, 195, 196, 197, 221, 226, 228, 230, 255, 265, 285,
287, 291, 294, 295, 303, 304, 311, 319–331, 351, 354, 358, 366, 371, 373, 384,
395, 397, 398, 433, 434, 435, 437, 440–445, 454

self-conscious, 17, 149, 169, 305

self-consciousness, 113, 161, 234, 251, 284, 288, 290, 291, 294, 302, 303, 304,
305, 307, 311, 312, 323, 324, 333, 345, 347, 361, 433, 445, 465

self-consuming serpent, 89,

see also dragon of chaos, uroboros

self-deceit, 456,

see also arrogance, denial, decadence, deceit, devil, fascism, lie, Satan,
self-deception

self-deception, 468,

see also arrogance, denial, decadence, deceit, devil, fascism, lie, Satan,
self-deceit

self-deluded, 466

self-devouring, 90, 140, 144, 412

self-discipline, 442

self-disciplined, 455

self-evident, xiv, 95, 108, 404, 419, 436, 458

self-indulgence, 466

selfish, 206, 455

selfishness, 336, 437, 456

self-model, 302, 304, 436

self-nourishing, 437

self-pity, 449

self-reference, 290, 291, 304, 305, 463

self-referential, 141, 290

self-respect, 455, 458

self-sacrifice, 444

semantic, 73–88, 95, 103, 177, 179, 191, 192, 221, 222, 229, 232, 237, 239,
241, 251, 253, 260, 261, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 274, 311, 360, 363, 374, 376,
377, 378, 382, 384, 385, 391, 396, 413,

see also declarative memory, episodic memory, procedural memory

senescent, 246, 309,

see also senility

senility, 245, 279,

see also senescent

Sennacherib, 126

sensorimotor, 73, 74, 179

sensory, 2, 3, 22, 25, 26, 28, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 69,
71, 72, 73, 113, 115, 149, 150, 152, 154, 177, 256, 269, 289, 411, 417, 418,
419, 436

sepulchres, 394

Serb, 94

serpent, 89, 90, 109, 110, 127, 128, 139, 140, 142, 143, 147, 154, 155, 163,
177, 184, 275, 277, 279, 288, 294, 295, 296, 297, 300, 301, 302, 312, 412, 413,
418, 424, 430, 431, 463,

see also anomaly, dragon, novelty, threat, snake

servant, 142, 192, 362, 400, 407, 432

Seth, vii, 110, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 203, 309, 319, 463

sexual, xix, 33, 60, 105, 111, 125, 155, 166, 181, 224, 415, 424, 430

sexualized, 114

shadow, 234, 266, 284, 303, 340, 397, 424, 439, 440, 450, 456, 457, 461

Shakespeare, 77, 177, 207, 263, 264, 322

shaman, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 277, 278

shameful, 281, 365, 415

Sharasrara, 295

Shatapatha, 147

shewbread, 388

Shiprah, 374

Siamese, 96

Sidon, 393

sin, 128, 210, 255, 284, 287, 312, 316, 320, 328, 331, 335, 355, 364, 381, 387,
389, 435, 443, 463, 465

skeleton, 275, 294

skepticism, xiii, 217, 268

skewer, 296

skull, 50, 122, 160, 163, 171, 398

sky, xviii, 8, 9, 100, 104, 105, 110, 121, 122, 139, 140, 141, 172, 192, 198,
199, 200, 277, 285, 295, 318, 345, 424, 442, 465, 469

slaughter, 163, 171, 375

slave, 125, 215, 321, 325, 335, 410

slavery, 345, 365, 375

Smith, 97, 209, 211

smithies, 352

Smohalla, 255

snake, 141, 148, 155, 157, 160, 162, 183, 277, 300, 301, 463

social identity, 196, 234, 345, 364

socialism, xiii, xiv, xv, 11, 458

socially-determined, 75, 195, 196, 272, 274, 275, 304, 361, 427

society, xi, xiv, xvii, xix, 6, 10, 11, 59, 93, 97, 101, 104, 125, 127, 148,
179, 187, 193–232, 239,–256, 266, 267, 271, 272, 273, 277, 278, 279, 281, 282,
283, 307–315, 323, 332, 334, 347, 355, 360, 361, 362, 372, 378, 383, 384, 396,
405, 431, 435, 447, 452, 457, 468, 469

sociobiologist, 403

socioculturally-determined, 2

sociologist, 401

Sokolov, 21, 22, 23, 25, 271,

see also novelty

solar, 110, 128, 138, 184, 185, 253, 377, 386, 414

Solomon, 165, 206, 321, 397

solutio, 431

solvent, 429

Solzhenitsyn, 35, 342, 347, 351, 354, 357, 366, 423, 433, 456,

see also communism, concentration camp, Gulag Archipelago, Russia, Soviet Union

soma, 139

son, xv, 90, 100–139, 145, 153, 155, 163, 176, 177, 181, 185, 186, 202, 205,
206, 218, 219, 231, 232, 247, 262, 275, 280, 291, 297, 300, 307, 316, 336, 374,
375, 377, 389, 393, 396, 406, 407, 424, 428, 430, 440, 441, 443, 451, 456

sons of God, 307

Sorbonne, 348

soul, 11, 30, 63, 79, 135, 144, 151, 161, 185, 197, 220, 221, 228, 253, 275,
279, 289, 301, 302, 307, 308, 312, 322, 343, 344, 351, 356, 357, 359, 365, 366,
369, 371, 381, 387, 395, 397, 398, 400, 410, 431, 435, 443, 449

soul-devouring, 335

source, xvii, xxi, 20, 52, 60, 66, 89, 90, 91, 100, 103, 104, 105, 109, 111,
123, 136, 137, 139, 141, 142, 144, 150–169, 194, 196, 206, 221, 224, 230, 244,
246, 257, 259, 269, 275, 276, 287, 290, 291, 292, 295–308, 314, 325, 326, 329,
332, 335, 341, 376, 378, 384, 402, 406, 413, 424, 430, 440, 460, 463, 467

sovereign, 125, 126, 192, 193, 201, 207

sovereignty, 121, 140, 192, 193, 207,

see also Enuma elish

Soviet, xii, 35, 247, 311, 342, 347, 348, 349, 351, 357

Soviet Union, xii, 247, 311, 342, 347, 348, 349,

see also communism, concentration camp, Gulag Archipelago, Russia, Solzhenitsyn

Soviets, 343

space-time, 83, 154, 258

spade, 247

spagyric, 419

Spanish, 148, 336, 379

spatial-temporal, 81, 83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 411

speech-mediated, 64

Spenta Mainyu, 318, 319

spherical, 144

sphinx, 161

spider, 157, 162

spirit, 8, 10, 30, 32, 63, 89, 103, 105–121, 132–143, 153, 154, 155, 161, 165,
166, 167, 170–176, 197, 201, 204–220, 225, 247, 265, 277, 278, 283–320,
326–340, 358–371, 379, 383, 385, 387, 395–430, 437–447, 461–467

spirit of unbridled rationality, 307

spiritus, 410

spite, xxii, 12, 21, 34, 75, 94, 191, 196, 263, 311, 327, 336, 345, 350, 420,
460, 468

spittle, 264, 389

SS, 345, 354

St. George, vii, 183,

see also dragon, hero

stage, 6, 12, 13, 43, 55, 56, 64, 69–81, 103, 108, 216, 232, 240, 249, 285,
291, 326, 328, 372, 373, 375, 383, 427, 428, 431, 432, 439, 442, 443, 456, 466

stairs, xviii, 24, 27, 45, 46

Stakhanovites, 357

Stalin, 310, 311, 342, 368

standard-bearers, 223

stasis, 279, 361, 460

state, 1, 11, 14, 33, 59, 83, 106, 110, 124, 125, 128, 133, 134, 136, 195, 201,
202, 215, 223, 232, 244, 271, 279, 285, 286, 287, 294, 317, 335, 337, 355, 365,
407, 414, 415, 424, 432, 442

static, xviii, 9, 129, 202, 214, 261, 278, 291, 299, 308, 309, 313, 317, 318,
322, 326, 358, 359, 385, 397

statuettes, 169

sterquiliniis invenitur, 405, 406,

see also filth

Steven, 412

stimuli, 34, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 51, 57, 58, 59, 113, 170

stimulus, 2, 22, 26, 34, 43, 48, 50, 51, 58, 59, 69, 82, 88, 113, 378, 410

Stoicism, 219

Stolypin, 351

stone, 143, 148, 160, 163, 173, 178, 196, 197, 202, 283, 336, 366, 370, 387,
407, 420, 424, 425, 426, 432, 436, 437, 438, 441, 444, 445,

see also Christ, cornerstone, lapis, Stone

Stone, v, 172, 400, 401,

see also Christ, cornerstone, lapis, stone

story, xii, 18, 24, 31, 33, 39, 42, 46, 52, 55, 56, 72–88, 94–115, 121,
123–135, 159, 173–186, 196–217, 229, 248, 253, 254, 255, 260, 276, 286, 292,
293, 294, 300, 302, 309, 311, 312, 331, 357, 359, 366, 369, 375, 378, 379, 381,
384, 385, 396, 401, 418, 423, 440, 441, 443, 451, 452

strange, xix, xx, 10, 12, 23, 43, 52, 59, 103, 106, 109, 163, 174, 201, 234,
246, 248, 250, 259, 271, 296, 317, 326, 332, 343, 354, 417, 439, 461

strange idea, 234, 246, 317

stranger, 106, 143, 174, 194, 198, 232, 233, 246, 249, 250, 251, 261, 267, 280,
311, 317, 318, 332, 339, 363, 377

subcortical, 49

subdeities, 115

subordinate, 24, 84, 100, 161, 187, 189, 190, 215, 232, 314, 316, 422

subterranean, 154, 192, 295, 426,

see also descent, underworld

succour, 168, 441

suffer, 126, 147, 273, 287, 288, 303, 311, 331, 339, 361, 363, 381, 430, 441

Sumer, 8, 9, 99, 100, 108, 113, 123, 125, 232

Sumerians, 8, 9, 99, 100, 108, 113, 123, 125, 232

Sumero-Akkadian, 193

Summa, 401

sun, 3, 4, 5, 7, 15, 103, 104, 109, 110, 121–128, 139, 140–147, 160, 161, 167,
172, 173, 175, 184, 185, 200, 210, 248, 253, 288, 290, 321, 340, 343, 346, 361,
379, 386, 413, 414, 415, 429

Sunday, 261, 350

sun-deity, 90, 184, 185

sun-god, 20, 90, 115, 117, 118, 121, 132, 133, 187

sun-hero, 248

sun-king, 232, 288

Sununu, 41

superego, 104, 266, 297

swamp, 163, 331, 332

swampy, 447

Swiss, 143

sword, 143, 184, 203, 205, 210, 251, 306, 406

symbol, 15, 104, 140, 141, 142, 152, 158, 162, 184, 200, 288, 300, 325, 405,
406, 412, 414, 449

symbolic, 40, 74, 76, 93, 96, 124, 137, 152–169, 181, 190, 207, 225, 239, 264,
275, 277, 285, 286, 295, 297, 303, 313, 329, 359, 375, 377, 412, 424–437, 444

symbolically, 110, 137, 147, 153, 156, 171, 181, 191, 223, 225, 247, 264, 308,
383, 426, 429, 433, 437, 441, 443, 461

sympathy, 324, 328, 356, 382, 444

synagogue, 388, 389, 392, 393

syncretistic, 193

syncretists, 142

synergistically, 283

synthesis, 51, 221, 419, 421, 422

Syrian, 393



tabernacles, 386

taboo, 197, 214, 357, 361, 436, 440

tacit, 237

tailor, 198, 199, 442

talent, 437

Tales, 436

Tao, 16, 100, 104, 105, 156, 185, 339, 370, 398, 408, 411

Taoism, 16, 426

Tatyana, 353

Ta-Urt, 160

tax-collector, 393

Tefnut, 110

tehom, 110

telescope, 198

telluric, 225

temple, 109, 125, 331, 395

temptation, xiii, xxi, 188, 263, 294, 310, 313, 320, 452

tempter, 410,

see also devil, Lucifer, Satan

tenants, 407

terrible father, 331,

see also Great Father, security, tyranny

terrible mother, 146, 175, 332, 465,

see also creation, destruction, Great Mother, Kali

terror-inspiring, 122

Teshub, 192, 193

Thabritius, 439, 440, 441

Theanthropos, 444

Theocosmos, 444

theogony, 110, 127, 192

theologians, 207

theological, 448

theologically, 211

theologist, 371

theology, 110, 127, 128, 131, 318

theory, 5, 6, 9, 13, 21, 37, 77, 92, 98, 151, 153, 177, 258, 270, 291, 324,
338, 339, 347, 355, 358, 403, 404, 411, 416, 439, 449

theriomorphic, 140

theriomorphized, 276

Thomas, 29, 235, 403, 469

thousand-petalled, 295

Thraetona, 140, 147

threat, xv, 2, 5, 26, 27, 40, 43, 53, 57–71, 87, 93, 101, 135, 148, 149, 150,
157, 166, 169, 170, 171, 175, 181, 182, 191, 207, 217, 227, 231, 233, 234, 243,
244, 246, 249, 251, 253, 257, 259, 265, 268, 271, 279, 301, 302, 307, 329, 331,
332, 334, 342, 343, 355, 366, 379, 384, 394, 409, 411, 418, 424, 451

three-headed, 140

thunderbolt, 139, 148

Tiamat, vii, 90, 100, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,
121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 131, 139, 142, 200, 201, 248, 288, 332

tiara, 162

Timaeus, 144

Timofeyev-Ressovsky, 35

titanic, 296, 297

titanium, 412

tithe, 394

toad, 168, 430

Tolstoy, 261, 264, 269, 272, 320, 322, 323, 455

tone, xvi, 50, 57, 58, 152, 454

Tonkin, 414

too-conservative, 134

tool, 98, 137, 162, 203, 216, 235, 255, 308, 312, 408, 453

tortoise, 254

torture, 30, 223, 275, 280, 323, 347, 359, 427, 433

totalitarian, xxi, 206, 207, 213, 231, 248, 309, 316

totalitarianism, 265, 268, 311, 314,

see also arrogance, communism, concentration camp, ideology, Soviet Union

totality, 2, 8, 85, 87, 99, 108, 113, 114, 136, 137, 138, 145, 156, 217, 252,
261, 287, 288, 325, 339, 383, 410, 411, 428, 433, 436, 452

tradition, 5, 6, 8, 11, 21, 69, 86, 99, 100, 104, 110, 111, 116, 132–135, 176,
178, 185, 193, 197, 198, 208, 213–219, 232, 233, 234, 240–249, 251, 257, 261,
268, 271, 279, 287, 294, 297, 305–318, 323, 331, 334, 373–387, 390, 391, 395,
400, 403, 417, 418, 421, 422, 427, 431, 460,

see also law, security, tyranny

traditional, xi, 5, 6, 8, 11, 12, 17, 81, 94, 146, 153, 197, 198, 203, 206,
231, 232, 233, 234, 253, 269, 275, 312, 316, 333, 338, 344, 363, 373, 390, 395,
401, 408, 434

traditions, xii, 8, 11, 14, 109, 110, 133, 140, 216, 231, 234, 327, 403, 421,
426, 459,

see also law

tragedy, 159, 303, 305, 308, 311, 324, 358, 363, 383, 433, 452, 465, 466, 467,
468

tragic, 6, 99, 164, 175, 260, 291, 293, 294, 302, 305, 311, 312, 340, 358, 359,
361, 362, 370, 427, 430, 433, 452, 454, 467,

see also death, self-consciousness

transcendent, 6, 12, 93, 150, 159, 168, 190, 239, 297, 327, 347, 358, 409

transcendental, 6, 99

transformation, xx, 9, 14, 32, 56, 61, 64, 82, 87, 89, 108, 135, 137, 141, 148,
155–162, 176, 177, 178, 195, 202, 221–232, 246, 248, 249, 258, 266, 271–278,
284, 287, 291, 300, 313, 319, 331, 332, 341, 358, 359, 366, 369, 370, 378, 382,
384, 387, 398, 407–437, 444, 445, 465

transmutation, 272, 278, 400, 401, 414, 415, 421, 426

transpersonal, 40, 113, 134, 153, 154, 158, 159, 190, 193, 194, 241, 242, 284,
289, 307, 309, 311, 314, 369, 396

trauma, 27, 163, 246, 402,

see also descent, disintegration, revolutionary

traumatic, 157, 170, 176, 262, 369

travelers, 198

tree, 139, 148, 185, 255, 276, 277, 284, 285, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299,
300, 305, 306, 350, 415, 441, 454, 463

trial, 61, 223, 280

tribal, 223, 271, 272

tribe, 223, 240, 255, 271, 334, 381

triggers, 57, 254

trinitarian, 404

Trinity, 196, 404

truism, 402

Tsar, 352

Tsarist, 351

Tsetkova, 357

Turk, 448

turtles, 254

tutelary, 240, 456

TV, xviii, 154

Tvastr, 139, 140

twin, 52, 67, 68, 108, 129, 164, 169, 309, 311, 318, 319, 325, 441

Typhon, 4, 140

tyrannical, xxi, 20, 90, 135, 202, 212, 215, 216, 246, 247, 280, 281, 282, 284,
309, 310, 326, 331, 381, 387, 428

tyrannical father, 215

tyranny, 16, 91, 104, 106, 141, 180, 186, 198, 207, 217, 219, 220, 283, 329,
330, 333, 334, 335, 356, 359, 375, 430, 432, 444, 456, 469

tyrant, 36, 41, 90, 104, 105, 206, 213, 248, 309, 328, 365, 378

Tyre, 316, 393



UFO, 153

Umatilla, 255

unbearable present, 19, 47, 54, 85, 120, 135, 192, 228, 256, 277, 311, 415,
423,

see also ideal future

unconscious, xx, 5, 10, 42, 51, 65, 71, 73, 79, 88–98, 102, 103, 105, 152, 160,
172, 181, 190, 218, 221, 225, 226, 230, 234, 237, 241, 250, 252, 255, 264, 265,
266, 272, 279, 288, 289, 297, 300, 303, 312, 328, 331, 337, 370, 392, 396, 402,
403, 405, 416, 417, 418, 428–444, 451–465

unconsciousness, 71, 138, 163, 301, 335, 337, 433, 435, 440

underground, 183, 268, 277, 310, 316, 332, 435

undermine, 6, 7, 18, 27, 87, 116, 227, 234, 243, 244, 246, 249, 251, 252, 260,
262, 268, 322, 323, 347, 355, 370, 436

underworld, 90, 99, 128, 129, 131, 132, 160, 161, 179, 184, 185, 203, 206, 248,
266, 277, 278, 279, 314, 330, 332, 341, 344, 345, 418, 433, 439, 440

undifferentiated, 66, 113, 114, 124, 136, 146, 150, 154, 156, 300, 339, 411

undisciplined, 218, 307, 369

unexpected, 16–30, 42, 43–71, 83, 109, 131, 144, 149, 150, 151, 163, 166, 179,
182, 226, 239, 246, 256, 274, 284, 290, 301, 329, 344, 363, 365, 370, 381, 395,
409,

see also anomaly, chaos, novelty, unexplored, unpredictable

unexplored, xxi, 20, 23, 42, 46, 53, 59, 61, 67, 69, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103,
105, 108, 123, 141, 156, 157, 166, 178, 232, 239, 332, 370, 409,

see also anomaly, chaos, novelty, unpredictable

unexplored territory, xxi, 20, 23, 46, 53, 59, 61, 67, 69, 99, 100, 101, 102,
103, 105, 108, 123, 157, 166, 232,

see also anomaly, chaos, explored territory, novelty, unpredictable

unhappy, 172, 201, 302, 379

union, 6, 8, 89, 90, 100–114, 125, 127, 137, 139, 140, 141, 144, 157, 176, 177,
181, 182, 190, 193, 200, 221, 227, 248, 250, 279, 282, 286, 288, 307, 370, 415,
418, 423, 424, 430, 435–457

union with the Great Mother, 105, 307

universal, xx, 12, 43, 52, 90, 91, 92, 94, 98, 152, 193, 228, 248, 291, 318,
320

universe, 4, 5, 6, 9, 23, 35, 48, 62, 83, 87, 93, 100, 103, 108, 109, 110, 115,
124, 147, 201, 257, 269, 288, 289, 290, 411, 421, 426, 452, 461, 465, 467

unjust, 41, 91, 208, 309, 322, 344, 361

unknowable, 123, 127, 151, 196, 371

unknown, xxi, xxii, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 30, 31, 32, 42, 47, 48, 52, 54, 55,
56, 61–76, 81–90, 99, 100, 101–109, 115, 116, 122–135, 142–186, 200–208, 215,
221, 223, 226, 234, 239, 240, 248, 249, 257, 259, 260, 261, 267, 274–283, 289,
294, 295, 296, 300–310, 316, 317, 319, 324, 325, 330–342, 368–379, 382, 383,
400, 406–447, 460–468,

see also anomaly, chaos, domain of the unknown, novelty, unexpected,
unpredictable

unpredictable, 18, 21, 23, 26, 30, 39–59, 88, 105, 109, 123, 136, 145, 150,
157, 158, 172, 181, 182, 214, 221, 231, 250, 316, 339, 345, 412, 420, 448, 454

unredeemed, 333, 335, 339, 419, 422, 423, 425, 426, 433, 442

unus mundus, 442

update, 20, 53, 54, 55, 56, 72, 99, 135, 175, 177, 191, 228, 248, 259, 281,
316, 328, 331

Uranus, 193

Uriah, 210

uroboric, 111, 144, 145, 285, 300, 412, 432

uroboros, 89, 90, 140–156, 181, 406, 410, 413, 424, 437

Uroboros, vii, 140, 155, 207

uterus, 225

utilitarian, 41, 219

utopia, xiii, xiv, 13, 214



vajra, 139, 140

valence, xxii, 9, 10, 13, 18, 22, 26, 34, 35, 36, 40, 50, 52, 58, 60, 61, 67,
70, 71, 76, 82, 83, 87, 88, 101, 105, 106, 109, 157, 160, 171, 194, 307, 410,
411, 455,

see also value

validatable, 150

value, xiv, xxi, 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12, 22, 33, 38, 39, 40, 67, 70, 72, 77, 80,
81, 92, 97, 109, 114, 134, 138, 172, 180, 183, 187–209, 213, 220–243, 250, 252,
261, 265–282, 288, 324, 328, 334, 337, 351, 362, 375, 391, 392, 393, 395,
402–433, 437, 445, 454, 455, 457, 465,

see also valence

Varuna, 140

Veda, 139, 140, 148

Vedic, 147

Venus, 4, 155

Verlaine, 296

vessel, 147, 169, 430, 432, 444

victim, 6, 30, 163, 280, 344, 347, 356, 357

victory, 122, 128, 140, 184, 185, 193, 250, 293, 309, 330, 332, 414, 440, 460

Vilenchuk, 358

village, 153, 348, 400, 417

vineyard, 210, 407

Vinogradova, 21

viper, 115, 119

virgin, xii, 90, 91, 164, 177, 182, 184, 213, 215, 309, 439, 440

Virgin, vii, 153, 181, 183, 221, 286

virtuality, 128, 140, 290

visage, 163, 166, 355

Vishnu, 303

Visio, 440, 441

vizier, 118, 121, 128

Vladykino, 349

Voichenko, 353

void, 77, 110, 120, 288, 364, 379

Volga, 352

Voltaire, 302

voluntarily, 65, 83, 90, 104, 108, 118, 122, 123, 127, 131, 132, 166, 171, 172,
175, 178, 181, 190, 199, 231, 266, 272, 274, 278, 302, 307, 309, 318, 325, 328,
331, 333, 357, 358, 360, 368, 369, 371, 397, 413, 432, 435, 436, 439, 446, 454,
465, 467, 468

voluntary, 36, 61, 81, 99, 112, 123, 131, 164, 169, 170, 172, 176, 180, 181,
190, 203, 206, 222, 223, 232, 259, 260, 273, 282, 302, 308, 309, 319, 323, 326,
327, 328, 332, 341, 367, 369, 370, 376, 397, 413, 427, 431, 442, 444, 446, 452

voluntary exposure, 170, 176,

see also hero, individual

von Franz, 403

vortex, 296

voyage, 7, 203, 205, 206, 278, 437

Vrtra, 139, 140, 146

vulnerability, 26, 60, 161, 163, 282, 288, 291, 303, 306, 311, 319, 322, 324,
325, 326, 330, 333, 344, 345, 347, 353, 378, 448, 463, 468

vulnerable, 26, 108, 135, 169, 202, 206, 208, 216, 232, 234, 247, 248, 251,
288, 303, 325, 333, 339, 340, 345, 453

vulture, 161, 296

Vyazma, 366



WAIS-R, 450

Waley, 16

wall, 35, 83, 94, 200, 215, 235, 244, 259, 279, 285, 351, 358, 412, 419

war, xv, xviii, xix, xx, 27, 30, 36, 41, 85, 87, 100, 114, 128, 151, 153, 160,
161, 163, 178, 182, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 194, 205, 215, 218, 244, 250, 264,
267, 312, 314, 340, 342, 350, 352, 354, 361, 362, 431, 432, 435, 441, 451, 452,
457, 458, 460, 463

warden, 33, 354

Washington, 246

Washya, 415

wastrel, 429

water, xix, 4, 7, 36, 37, 38, 103, 104, 147, 163, 164, 183, 198–206, 225, 230,
232, 247, 276, 286, 296, 299, 303, 307, 322, 331, 335, 340, 349, 351, 375, 376,
377, 397, 408, 424, 429, 430, 439, 461,

see also sea, water of life

water of life, 232, 247, 276, 307, 331, 340, 424,

see also sea, water

water-serpent, 184

waveform, 51

Westerners, 6

whale, 62, 64, 182, 183, 296, 441

what is, xxi, 1–28, 36, 39–70, 80, 81, 94, 98, 99, 105, 113, 128, 135, 138,
139, 143, 145, 150, 152, 167, 170, 177, 179, 182, 188, 195, 197, 203, 206, 210,
224, 230, 231, 236, 238, 240, 246, 254, 256, 264, 265, 269, 292, 295, 296, 308,
310, 319, 322, 324–332, 337, 338, 340, 344, 360, 361, 365, 373, 387, 391, 398,
409, 412, 417, 428, 430, 431, 454, 465, 469

what should be, xxi, 1, 10, 13, 14, 38, 55, 69, 256, 270, 375, 382, 387, 388,
465

whore, 164, 181, 350, 430

Wigan Pier, xiii

wilderness, 144, 211, 375, 381, 456

William, 138, 257, 382

wind, 25, 34, 114, 122, 210, 349, 350, 404, 461

wine, 4, 118, 121, 211, 321, 340

wisdom, xxi, 12, 48, 73–81, 90, 93, 94, 102, 117, 126, 131, 133, 164–167, 187,
191, 196, 221, 226, 229, 232, 254, 264, 269, 278, 294–298, 306, 321, 326, 327,
329, 334, 357, 360, 373, 375, 379, 387, 394, 406, 420, 430, 436, 440, 442, 445,
447, 469

Wisdom, vi, 81, 165, 166, 168, 206, 250, 281, 296, 340

wish, 11, 33, 40, 67, 71, 174, 199, 256, 258, 260, 263, 302, 308, 314, 327,
331, 332, 354, 359, 365, 406, 450, 457, 469

wish-fulfillments, xix

witch, 183, 418

wolf, 433, 435

Wolfgang, 258, 404

woman, xviii, 25, 117, 142, 160, 161, 169, 183, 194, 202, 253, 254, 255, 286,
292, 294, 295, 302, 303, 305, 321, 374, 393, 405, 430, 448, 449

womb, 161, 225, 410, 414, 440,

see also creation, destruction, femininity, Great Mother, Terrible Mother

word, xiii, 16, 51, 66, 77, 94, 100, 111, 117, 119, 121, 169, 186, 210, 253,
254, 255, 270, 342, 346, 364, 376, 380, 402, 434, 461

Word, viii, xxi, xxii, 90, 111, 123, 127, 135, 158, 171, 175, 246, 252, 288,
316, 371, 385

word-association, 402

world of the familiar, 32, 90

world parents, 89, 105, 107, 114, 145

world-annihilating, 451

world-creating, xxi, 148, 186, 371

world-destroying, 97

world-engendering, 201

world-picture, 1, 358

world-redemption, 397

World-Tree, viii, 297, 398

worldview, 466

world-view, 1, 30, 274, 305, 335, 413, 427, 466

worship, 76, 151, 196, 230, 232, 244, 296, 369, 381, 390, 445, 449



Xshathra, 318



Yahweh, 114, 142, 147

yang, 48, 100, 104, 144, 185, 339, 457

Yasna, 318, 319

Yggdrasill, 296, 297

yin, 48, 100, 104, 144, 185, 339

Yugoslavia, 153, 347



Zacharias, 395

Zaddik, 287

zagmuk, 125

Zarathustra, 318

Zeus, 140, 193

Zimmer, 171

Zola-Morgan, 73

Zoroastrianism, 318

Zoroastrians, 147, 318, 319

