# 5 - HEROIC ADAPTATION: VOLUNTARY RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MAP OF MEANING
[Metadata]: # {06.05}
[Descriptor]: # {06.05}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
HEROIC ADAPTATION: VOLUNTARY RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MAP OF MEANING
# HEROIC ADAPTATION: VOLUNTARY RECONSTRUCTION OF THE MAP OF MEANING
The group provides the protective structure—conditional meaning and behavioral
pattern—that enables the individual to cast off the dependence of childhood, to
make the transition from the maternal to the social, patriarchal world. The
group is not the individual, however. Psychological development that ceases
with group identification—held up as the highest attainable good by every
ideologue—severely constricts individual and social potential, and dooms the
group, inevitably, to sudden and catastrophic dissolution. Failure to transcend
group identification is, in the final analysis, as pathological as failure to
leave childhood.

Movement from the group to the individual—like that from childhood to
group—follows the archetypal transformative pattern of the heroic (paradise,
breach, fall, redemption; stability, incorporation, dissolution,
reconstruction). Such transformation must be undertaken voluntarily, through
conscious exposure to the unknown—although it may be catalyzed by sufficiently
unique or traumatic experience. Failure to initiate and/or successfully
complete the process of secondary maturation heightens risk for intrapsychic
and social decadence, and consequent experiential chaos, depression and anxiety
(including suicidal ideation), or enhances tendency toward fanaticism, and
consequent intrapsychic and group aggression.

The Bible, considered as a single story, presents this “process of maturation”
in mythological terms. The Old Testament offers group identity, codified by
Moses, as antidote for the fallen state of man. This antidote, while useful, is
incomplete—even Moses himself, a true ancestral hero, fails to reach the
promised land. The New Testament, by contrast, offers identification with the
hero as the means by which the “fallen state” and the problems of group
identity might both be “permanently” transcended. The New Testament has been
traditionally read as a description of a historical event, which redeemed
mankind, once and for all: it might more reasonably be considered the
description of a process that, if enacted, could bring about the establishment
of peace on earth.

The problem is, however, that this process cannot yet really be said to be
consciously—that is, explicitly—understood. Furthermore, if actually
undertaken, it is extremely frightening, particularly in the initial stages. In
consequence, the “imitation of Christ”—or the central culture-hero of other
religious systems-tends to take the form of ritualistic worship, separated from
other “nonreligious” aspects of life. Voluntary participation in the heroic
process, by contrast—which means courageous confrontation with the
unknown—makes “worship” a matter of true identification. This means that the
true “believer” rises above dogmatic adherence to realize the soul of the
hero—to “incarnate that soul”—in every aspect of his day-to-day life.

This is easy to say, but very difficult to understand—and to do. It is no easy
matter to translate the transpersonal myth of the hero into a template for
action and representation, in the unique conditions that make up an individual
life. It appears equally troublesome—even hubristic—to presume that the
individual might be a force worthy of identification with the hero.
Nonetheless, we are more than we seem—and are more trouble than we imagine,
when undisciplined and unrealized. The “banality of evil”—Hannah Arendt's
famous phrase,530 applied to the oft-unprepossessing Nazi “personality,” is
more accurately “the evil of banality.” Our petty weaknesses accumulate, and
multiply, and become the great evils of state. As our technological power
expands, the danger we pose increases—and the consequences of our voluntary
stupidity multiply. It is increasingly necessary that we set ourselves—not
others—right, and that we learn explicitly what that means.

The nature of the process of identification with the hero can be understood in
great detail as a consequence of the analysis of alchemy, which Jung made his
life's work. Alchemy—considered most generally as the precursor of modern
chemistry—was in fact a twenty-centuries'—long endeavor to understand the
“transformations of matter.” The alchemical matter, however, was not the matter
of modern science—logically enough, as the ancient alchemists practiced in the
absence of the presumptions and tools of modern science. It was a substance
more like Tao—“that which produced or constituted the flux of being”; something
more like “information” in the modern sense (if information may be considered
latent in unexplored places); something more like the unknown as such
(something like the matrix of being). Investigation of this instrinsically
compelling “matter”—this unknown—produced a series of internal transformations
in the alchemical psyche, making it ever-more akin to the Philosopher's stone:
something that could turn “base matter” into spiritual gold; something that
had, in addition, the eternal, durable and indestructible nature of stone. As
the alchemical endeavor progressed, through the Christian era, the “stone”
became increasingly assimilated to Christ—the cornerstone “rejected by the
builders,” the agent of voluntary transformation— whose actions eternally
transform the “fallen world” into paradise.

The late-stage alchemists “posited” that a personality that had completely
assimilated the “spirit of the unknown” was equivalent to Christ. Jung
translated their image-laden mythological language into something more
comprehensible—but not yet understood. The terrible central message of this
mode of thought is this: do not lie, particularly to yourself, or you will
undermine the process that gives you the strength to bear the tragic world. In
your weakness—the consequence of your lie—you will become cruel, arrogant and
vengeful. You will then serve as an “unconscious” emissary of the agent of
destruction, and work to bring about the end of life.

