# CONCLUSION: THE DIVINITY OF INTEREST - Introduction
[Metadata]: # {07.01}
[Descriptor]: # {07.01}
[Author]: # {peterson}
CONCLUSION: THE DIVINITY OF INTEREST
Introduction
# Introduction
Where does one not encounter that veiled glance which burdens one with a
profound sadness, that inward-turned glance of the born failure which betrays
how such a man speaks to himself—that glance which is a sigh! “If only I were
someone else,” sighs this glance: “but there is no hope of that. I am who I am:
how could I ever get free of myself? And yet—I am sick of myself

It is on such soil, on swampy ground, that every weed, every poisonous plant
grows, always so small, so hidden, so false, so saccharine. Here the worms of
vengefulness and rancor swarm; here the air stinks of secrets and concealment;
here the web of the most malicious of all conspiracies is being spun constant
ly—the conspiracy of the suffering against the well-constituted and victorious,
here the aspect of the victorious is hated. And what mendaciousness is employed
to disguise that this hatred is hatred! What a display of grand words and
postures, what an art of “honest” calumny! These failures: what noble elo
quence flows from their lips! How much sugary, slimy, humble submissiveness
swims in their eyes! What do they really want? At least to represent justice,
love, wisdom, superiority—that is the ambition of the “lowest,” the sick. And
how skillful such an ambition makes them! Admire above all the forger's skill
with which the stamp of virtue, even the ring, the golden-sounding ring of
virtue, is here counterfeited. They monopolize virtue, these weak, hopelessly
sick people, there is no doubt of it: “we alone are the good and just,” they
say, “we alone are homines bonae voluntatis.” They walk among us as embodied
reproaches, as warnings to us—as if health, well-constitutedness, strength,
pride and sense of power were in themselves necessarily vicious things for
which one must pay some day, and pay bitterly: how ready they themselves are at
bottom to make one pay; how they crave to be hangmen.650



I was reading Jeffrey Burton Russell's Mephistopheles: The Devil in the Modern
World,651 when I came across his discussion of Dostoyevsky's The Brothers
Karamazov. Russell discusses Ivan's argument for atheism, which is perhaps the
most powerful ever mounted:

Ivan's examples of evil, all taken from the daily newspapers of 1876, are
unforgettable: the nobleman who orders his hounds to tear the peasant boy to
pieces in front of his mother; the man who whips his struggling horse “on its
gentle eyes”; the parents who lock their tiny daughter all night in the
freezing privy while she knocks on the walls pleading for mercy; the Turk who
entertains a baby with a shiny pistol before blowing its brains out. Ivan knows
that such horrors occur daily and can be multiplied without end. “I took the
case of children,” Ivan explains, “to make my case clearer. Of the other tears
with which the earth is soaked, I will say nothing.”652



Russell states:

The relation of evil to God has in the century of Auschwitz and Hiroshima once
again become a center of philosophical and theological discussion. The problem
of evil can be stated simply: God is omnipotent; God is perfectly good; such a
God would not permit evil to exist; but we observe that evil exists; therefore
God does not exist. Variations on this theme are nearly infinite. The problem
is not only abstract and philosophical, of course; it is also personal and
immediate. Believers tend to forget that their God takes away everything that
one cares about: possessions, comforts, success, profession or craft,
knowledge, friends, family and life. What kind of God is this? Any decent
religion must face this question squarely, and no answer is credible that
cannot be given in the face of dying children.653



It seems to me that we use the horrors of the world to justify our own
inadequacies. We make the presumption that human vulnerability is a sufficient
cause of human cruelty. We blame God, and God's creation, for twisting and
perverting our souls, and claim, all the time, to be innocent victims of
circumstance. What do you say to a dying child? You say, “You can do it; there
is something in you that is strong enough to do it.” And you don't use the
terrible vulnerability of children as an excuse for the rejection of existence,
and the perpetration of conscious evil.

I do not have much experience as a clinical psychologist. Two of my patients,
however, stay in my mind. The first was a woman, about thirty-five years old.
She looked fifty. She reminded me of a medieval peasant—of my conception of a
medieval peasant. She was dirty—clothes, hair, teeth; dirty with the kind of
filth that takes months to develop. She was unbearably shy; she approached
anyone who she thought was superior in status to her—which was virtually
everyone—hunched over, with her eyes shaded by her hands, both hands, as if she
could not tolerate the light emanating from her target.

She had been in behavioral treatment in Montreal, as an outpatient, before, and
was in fact a sight known to the permanent staff at the clinic. Others had
tried to help her overcome her unfortunate manner of self-presentation, which
made people on the street shy away from her; made them regard her as crazy and
unpredictable. She could learn to stand or sit up, temporarily, with eyes
unguarded, but she reverted to her old habits as soon as she left the clinic.

She may have been intellectually impaired, in consequence of some biological
fault; it was difficult to tell, because her environment was so appalling it
may have caused her ignorance. She was illiterate, as well. She lived with her
mother, whose character I knew nothing about, and with an elderly, desperately
ill, bed-ridden aunt. Her boyfriend was a violent alcoholic schizophrenic who
mistreated her psychologically and physically, and was always muddling her
simple mind with tirades about the devil. She had nothing going for her—no
beauty, no intelligence, no loving family, no skills, no creative employment.
Nothing.

She didn't come to therapy to resolve her problems, however, nor to unburden
her soul, nor to describe her mistreatment and victimization at the hands of
others. She came because she wanted to do something for someone who was worse
off than her. The clinic where I was interning was associated with a large
psychiatric hospital. All of the patients that still remained after the shift
to community care in the aftermath of the sixties were so incapacitated that
they could not survive, however poorly, on the streets. My client had done some
volunteer work, of some limited type, in that hospital, and decided that she
might befriend a patient—take him or her outside for a walk. I think she got
this idea because she had a dog, which she walked regularly, and which she
liked to take care of. All she wanted from me was help arranging this—help
finding someone whom she could take outside; help finding someone, in the
hospital bureaucracy, who would allow this to happen. I was not very successful
in aiding her, but she didn't seem to hold that against me.

It is said that one piece of evidence that runs contrary to a theory is
sufficient to disprove that theory. Of course, people do not think this way,
and perhaps should not. In general, a theory is too useful to give up,
easily—too difficult to regenerate—and the evidence against should be
consistent and believable before it is accepted. But the existence of this
woman made me think. She was destined for a psychopathological end, from the
viewpoint of biological and environmental determinism—fated as surely as anyone
I had even met. And maybe she kicked her dog sometimes and was rude to her sick
aunt. Maybe. I never saw her vindictive, or unpleasant—even when her simple
wishes were thwarted. I don't want to say that she was a saint, because I
didn't know her well enough to tell. But the fact was that in her misery and
simplicity she remained without self-pity and could still see outside of
herself. Why wasn't she corrupted—cruel, unbalanced and miserable? She had
every reason to be. And yet she wasn't.

In her simple way, she had made the proper choices. She remained bloody but
unbowed. And she seemed to me, rightly or wrongly, to be a symbol of suffering
humanity, sorely afflicted, yet capable of courage and love:

Such I created all the Ethereal Powers

And Spirits, both them who stood and them who failed;

Not free, what proof could they have given sincere

Of true allegiance, constant faith, or love,

Where only what they needs must do appeared,

Not what they would? What praise could they receive

What pleasure I, from such obedience paid,

When Will and Reason (Reason also is Choice),

Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,

Made passive both, had served Necessity,

Not me? They, therefore, as to right belonged,

So were created, nor can justly accuse

Their Maker, or their making, or their fate,

As if Predestination overruled

Their will, disposed by absolute decree

Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed

Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,

Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,

Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.

So without least impulse or shadow of fate,

Or aught by me immutably foreseen,

They trespass, authors to themselves in all,

Both what they judge and what they choose; for so

I formed them free, and free they must remain

Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change

Their nature, and revoke the high decree

Unchangeable, eternal, which ordained

Their freedom; they themselves ordained their fall.654



The other patient I wish to describe was a schizophrenic in a small inpatient
ward at a different hospital. He was about twenty-nine when I met him—a few
years older than I was at the time—and had been in and out of confinement for
seven years. He was, of course, on anti-psychotic medication, and participated
in occupational-therapy activities on the ward—making coasters and pencil
holders and so on—but he could not maintain attention for any amount of time,
and was not even much good at craft. My supervisor asked me to administer an
intelligence test to him—the standard WAIS-R655 (more for the sake of my
experience than for any possible diagnostic good). I gave my patient some of
the red-and-white blocks that made up the Block Design Subtest. He was supposed
to arrange the blocks so they matched a pattern printed on some cards. He
picked them up, and started to rearrange them on the desk in front of him,
while I timed him, stupidly, with a stopwatch. The task was impossible for him,
even at the simplest of stages. He looked constantly distracted and frustrated.
I asked, “What's wrong?” He said, “The battle between good and evil in heaven
is going on in my head.”

I stopped the testing at that point. I didn't know exactly what to make of his
comment. He was obviously suffering, and the testing seemed to make it worse.
What was he experi-encing? He wasn't lying, that was for sure. In the face of
such a statement it seemed ridiculous to continue.

I spent some time with him that summer. I had never met someone who was so
blatantly mentally ill. We talked on the ward, and occasionally I would take
him for a walk through the hospital grounds. He was the third son of
first-generation immigrants. His firstborn brother was a lawyer; the other, a
physician. His parents were obviously ambitious for their children, hardworking
and disciplined. He had been a graduate student, working toward a degree (in
immunology, perhaps—I don't precisely remember). His brothers had set him a
daunting example, and he felt pressure to succeed. His experimental work had
not turned out as he had expected, however, and he apparently came to believe
that he might not graduate—not, at least, when he had hoped to. So he faked his
experimental results, and wrote up his thesis anyway.

He told me that the night he finished writing, he woke up and saw the devil
standing over him, at the foot of his bed. This event triggered the onset of
his mental illness, from which he had never recovered. It might be said that
the Satanic apparition merely accompanied the expression of some pathological
stress-induced neural development, whose appearance was biologically
predetermined, or that the devil was merely personification of his culture's
conception of moral evil, manifesting itself in imagination, as a consequence
of his guilt. Both explanations have their merits. But the fact remains that he
saw the devil, and that the vision accompanied or even was the event that
destroyed him.

He was afraid to tell me much of his fantasy, and it was only after I had paid
careful attention to him that he opened up. He was not bragging, or trying to
impress me. He was terrified about what he believed; terrified as a consequence
of the fantasies that impressed themselves upon him. He told me that he could
not leave the hospital, because someone was waiting to shoot him—a typical
paranoid delusion. Why did someone want to kill him?

Well, he was hospitalized during the Cold War—not at its height, perhaps, but
still during a time when the threat of purposeful nuclear annihilation seemed
more plausible than it does now. Many of the people I knew used the existence
of this threat to justify, to themselves, their failure to participate fully in
life—a life which they thought of, romantically, as doomed, and therefore as
pointless. But there was some real terror in the pose, and the thought of the
countless missiles pointed here and there around the world sapped the energy
and faith of everyone, hypocritical or not.

My schizophrenic patient believed that he was, in fact, the incarnation of the
world-annihilating force; that he was destined, upon his release from the
hospital, to make his way south to a nuclear missile silo, on American
territory; that he was fated to make the decision that would launch the final
war. The “people” outside the hospital knew this, and that is why they were
waiting to shoot him. He did not want to tell me this story, in
consequence—although he did—because he thought I might then want to kill him
too.

My friends in graduate school thought it ironic that I had contact with a
patient of this type. My peculiar interest in Jung was well known to them, and
it seemed absurdly fitting that I would end up talking to someone with
delusions of this type. But I didn't know what to do with his ideas. Of course,
they were crazy, and they had done in my patient. But it still seemed to me
that they were true, from the metaphorical viewpoint.

His story, in totality, linked his individual choice, between good and evil,
with the cumulative horror then facing the world. His story implied that
because he had given in to temptation, at a critical juncture, he was in fact
responsible for the horror of the potential of nuclear war. But how could this
be? It seemed insane to me to even consider that the act of one powerless
individual could be linked in some manner to the outcome of history as a whole.

But I am no longer so sure. I have read much about evil, and its manner of
perpetration and growth, and I am no longer convinced that each of us is so
innocent, so harmless. It is of course illogical to presume that one person—one
speck of dust, among six billion motes—is in any sense responsible for the
horrible course of human events. But that course in itself is not logical, far
from it, and it seems likely that it depends on processes that we do not
understand.

The most powerful arguments for the non-existence of God (at least a good God)
are predicated on the idea that such a Being would not allow for the existence
of evil in its classical natural (diseases, disasters) or moral (wars, pogroms)
forms. Such arguments can be taken further even, than atheism—can be used to
dispute the justice of the existent world itself. Dostoyevsky states, “Perhaps
the entire cosmos is not worth a single child's suffering.” How can the
universe be constructed such that pain is permitted? How can a good God allow
for the existence of a suffering world?

These difficult questions can be addressed, in part, as a consequence of
careful analysis of evil. First, it seems reasonable to insist upon the value
of the natural/moral distinction. The “tragic circumstances of life” should not
be placed in the same category as “willfully undertaken harm.”
Tragedy—subjugation to the mortal conditions of existence—has an ennobling
aspect, at least in potential, and has been constantly exploited to that end in
great literature and mythology. True evil, by contrast, is anything but noble.

Participation in acts whose sole purpose is expansion of innocent pain and
suffering destroys character; forthright encounter with tragedy, by contrast,
may increase it. This is the meaning of the Christian myth of the crucifixion.
It is Christ's full participation in and freely chosen acceptance of his fate
(which he shares with all mankind) that enables him to manifest his full
identity with God—and it is that identity which enables him to bear his fate,
and which strips it of its evil. Conversely—it is the voluntary demeaning of
our own characters that makes the necessary tragic conditions of existence
appear evil.

But why is life tragic? Why are we subject to unbearable limitation—to pain,
disease, and death; to cruelty at the hands of nature and society? Why do
terrible things happen to everyone? These are, of course, unanswerable
questions. But they must be answered, somehow, if we are to be able to face our
own lives.

The best I can make of it is this (and this has helped me): Nothing can exist
without preconditions. Even a game cannot be played without rules—and the rules
say what cannot be done, as much as what can. Perhaps the world is not
possible, as a world, without its borders, without its rules. Maybe existence
wouldn't be possible in the absence of our painful limitations.

Think of it this way: If we could have everything we wanted, merely for wishing
it; if every tool performed every job, if all men were omniscient and
immortal—then everything would be the same, the same all-powerful thing, God,
and creation would not exist. It is the difference between things, which is a
function of their specific limitations, that allows them to exist at all.

But the fact that things do exist does not mean that they should exist, even if
we are willing to grant them their necessary limitations.

Should the world exist? Are the preconditions of experience so terrible that
the whole game should be called off? (There is never any shortage of people
working diligently toward this end.)

It seems to me that we answer this question, implicitly but profoundly, when we
lose someone we loved, and grieve. We cry not because they existed, but because
they are lost. This presupposes a judgment rendered, at a very fundamental
level. Grief presupposes having loved, presupposes the judgment that this
person's specific, bounded existence was valuable, was something that should
have been (even in its inevitably imperfect and vulnerable form). But still the
question lingers—why should things, even loved things, exist at all, if their
necessary limitations cause such suffering?

Perhaps we could reserve answer to the question of God's nature, his
responsibility for the presence of the evil in creation, until we have solved
the problem of our own. Perhaps we could tolerate the horrors of the world if
we left our own characters intact, and developed them to the fullest; if we
took full advantage of every gift we have been granted. Perhaps the world would
not look horrible then.

I dreamed I was walking up out of a deep valley, along a paved two-lane
highway. The highway was located in northern Alberta, where I grew up, and came
out of the only valley for miles around, in the endlessly flat prairie. I
passed a man, hitchhiking, and could see another in the distance. As I
approached him I could see that he was in the first stages of old age; but he
still looked terribly strong. Someone passed him in a car, driving the opposite
direction, and a female voice yelled, “Look out—he has a knife!”

He was carrying what looked like a wooden-handled kitchen knife, well-worn and
discolored, but it had a blade at least two and a half feet long. Across his
shoulder he had strapped a large leather sheaf. He was walking along the edge
of the highway, muttering to himself, and swinging the blade in a jerky and
chaotic fashion.

He looked like the landlord who lived next door to me when I was a graduate
student, living in a poor district in Montreal. My landlord was a powerful,
aging ex-biker—-former president of the local Hell's Angels chapter, by his own
account—who had spent some time in prison as a younger man. He had settled down
somewhat, typically, as he became more mature, and had brought his drinking
under control for a long time. His wife committed suicide when I lived there,
however, and he went back to his wilder ways. He often went on binge drinking
sprees, and spent all the money he earned in the electronics shop he ran out of
his small apartment. He would drink forty or even fifty beers in a single day,
and would return home in the evening, blind drunk, howling at his little dog,
laughing, hissing between his teeth, incoherent, good-natured still, but able
to become violent at the slightest provocation. He took me once to a favourite
haunt on his 1200 cc Honda, which had the acceleration of a jet plane for short
distances—me perched precariously on the back of his bike, clinging to him,
wearing his wife's helmet, which sat on my head ridiculously, uselessly, at
least five sizes too small. Drunk, he was almost innocently destructive, and
ended up in fights constantly, unavoidably—as he would take slights from people
whose paths he crossed, who were insufficiently cautious in their conversation
with him.

I hurried by this figure. He seemed upset that no one would stop and pick him
up, as if he were unaware of the danger he posed. As I went by, his gaze fell
on me, and he started after me—not from anger, but from desire for
companionship. He was not fast, however, and I easily stayed ahead of him on
the road.

The scene shifted. The knife-wielding figure and I were now on opposite sides
of an immense tree—-perhaps a hundred yards in diameter—on a spiral staircase
emerging from the dark below and ascending equally far above. The staircase was
made of old, worn dark wood. It reminded me of the pews in the church I
attended with my mother as a child, and where I was eventually married. The
figure was looking for me, but he was a long way back, and I had hidden myself
from his view as I ascended the staircase. I remember wanting to continue on my
original journey, out of the valley, onto the flat surrounding plain, where the
walking would be easy. The only way to stay away from the knife, however, was
to continue up the staircase—up the axis mundi.



It is thus that awareness of death, the grim reaper—the terrible face of
God—compels us inexorably upwards, toward a consciousness sufficiently
heightened to bear the thought of death.

The point of our limitations is not suffering; it is existence itself. We have
been granted the capacity to voluntarily bear the terrible weight of our
mortality. We turn from that capacity and degrade ourselves because we are
afraid of responsibility. In this manner, the necessarily tragic preconditions
of existence are made intolerable.

It seems to me that it is not the earthquake, the flood or the cancer that
makes life unbearable, horrible as those events appear. We seem capable of
withstanding natural disaster, even of responding to that disaster in an
honorable and decent manner. It is rather the pointless suffering that we
inflict upon each other—our evil—that makes life appear corrupt beyond
acceptability; that undermines our ability to manifest faith in our central
natures. So why should the capacity for evil exist?

I have been teaching my six-year old daughter to play the piano. I am trying to
teach her hard lessons—that is, trying to show her that there is really a right
way to play the piano, and a wrong way. The right way involves paying attention
to each phrase, each written note, every sound she makes, every finger motion.
I taught her what rhythm meant, a few weeks ago, in one difficult lesson. And
what does difficult mean? Well, she will sit at the piano and work so hard that
she cries—but she won't stop. And she is really interested in learning to play.
She spends time in the car listening to music, working out the rhythms. She
uses the metronome by herself, playing songs she likes faster and slower.
Yesterday I taught her the difference between playing loudly and playing
softly. She found this challenging, experimenting carefully with each key on
our old piano (which has many idiosyncracies), trying to determine exactly how
hard it had to be pressed to emit a whispery tone.

I woke up the morning after one of her lessons, and caught a fragment of the
end of a dream revery. This is the idea revealed by that revery: it is the fact
that differences exist between paths of action that makes actions worthwhile. I
know that what is believed determines the value of things. But I had never
taken this argument to its logical conclusion. If belief determines value, then
the distance between good and evil gives life its meaning. The more worthwhile
a path of action (which is to say, the “better” it is—the more it is good,
rather than evil) the more positive emotional valence that path “contains.”
This means that things have no meaning, because no differential value, for
those who do not believe in good and evil.

I have certainly known people in that position (although I did not know
explicitly that they were in that position because they did not know the
difference between good and evil). They were unable to do anything, because
they could not tell the difference between one path and another. And it is the
case that in the absence of differences between one thing and another, life
begins to appear a “cruel and meaningless joke,” to use Tolstoy's phrase. I
guess that is because the burdens of life do not appear worth sustaining in the
absence of evidence that striving and work have any real value.

This all means: value is a continuum, a line stretching from necessary point
“a” to necessary point “b.” “A” and “b” are defined in relation to one another,
as two points define a line. The polarity between the two determines the
valence of the goal. The more polarity (that is, the more tension) between the
two points, the more worthwhile the enterprise. Good cannot be defined—cannot
exist-in the absence of evil. Value cannot exist in the absence of polarity.
So, for the world to be worthwhile (that is, for the choice between two things
to constitute a real choice) both good and evil have to exist.

But then it would be possible to only choose good, at least in the ideal—and
then evil would not exist, except in potential. So it appears that the world
could be valuable (could justify the burden it requires to maintain) if evil
were only to exist in potential—if everyone chose to act properly, that is.
This seems to me to be the most optimistic thought I have ever encountered.



But how can we put an end to our errors? What path can we follow to eliminate
our blindness and stupidity, to bring us closer to the light? Christ said, Be
ye therefore perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.656 But how? We seem
stymied, as always, by Pontius Pilate's ironic query: What is truth? (John
18:38)

Well, even if we don't know precisely what the truth is, we can certainly tell,
each of us, what it isn't. It isn't greed, and the desire, above all else, for
constant material gain; it isn't denial of experience we know full well to be
real, and the infliction of suffering for the purpose of suffering. Perhaps it
is possible to stop doing those things which we know, beyond doubt, to be
wrong—to become self-disciplined and honest—and to therefore become ever more
able to perceive the nature of the positive good.

The truth seems painfully simple—so simple that it is a miracle, of sorts, that
it can every be forgotten. Love God, with all thy mind, and all thy acts, and
all thy heart. This means, serve truth above all else, and treat your fellow
man as if he were yourself—not with the pity that undermines his self-respect,
and not with the justice that elevates you above him, but as a divinity,
heavily burdened, who could yet see the light.

It is said that it is more difficult to rule oneself than a city, and this is
no metaphor. This is truth, as literal as it can be made. It is precisely for
this reason that we keep trying to rule the city. It is a perversion of pride
to cease praying in public and to clean up the dust under our feet, instead; it
seems too mundane to treat those we actually face with respect and dignity,
when we could be active, against, in the street. Maybe it is more important to
strengthen our characters than to repair the world. So much of that reparation
seems selfish anyway; is selfishness and intellectual pride masquerading as
love, creating a world polluted with good works that don't work.

Who can believe that it is the little choices we make, every day, between good
and evil, that turn the world to waste and hope to despair? But it is the case.
We see our immense capacity for evil, constantly realized before us, in great
things and in small, but can never seem to realize our infinite capacity for
good. Who can argue with a Solzhenitsyn when he states: “One man who stops
lying can bring down a tyranny”?

Christ said, the kingdom of heaven is spread out upon the earth, but men do not
see it.657 What if it was nothing but our self-deceit, our cowardice, hatred
and fear, that pollutes our experience and turns the world into hell? This is a
hypothesis, at least—as good as any other, admirable and capable of generating
hope. Why can't we make the experiment, and find out if it is true?

