# 2 - The Great Mother: Images of the Unknown, or Unexplored Territory
[Metadata]: # {03.12}
[Descriptor]: # {03.12}
[Author]: # {peterson}
2
The Great Mother: Images of the Unknown, or Unexplored Territory
# The Great Mother: Images of the Unknown, or Unexplored Territory
The Mother of Songs, the mother of our whole seed, bore us in the beginning.
She is the mother of all races of men and the mother of all tribes. She is the
mother of the thunder, the mother of the rivers, the mother of trees and of all
kinds of things. She is the mother of songs and dances. She is the mother of
the older brother stones. She is the mother of the grain and the mother of all
things. She is the mother of the younger brother Frenchmen and of the
strangers. She is the mother of the dance paraphernalia and of all temples, and
the only mother we have. She is the mother of the animals, the only one, and
the mother of the Milky Way. It was the mother herself who began to baptize.
She gave us the limestone coca dish. She is the mother of the rain, the only
one we have. She alone is the mother of all things, she alone. And the mother
has left a memory in all the temples. With her sons, the saviors, she left
songs and dances as a reminder. Thus the priests, the fathers, and the older
brothers have reported.288



Representation of culture, the known, is simple, comparatively; it is
second-order abstraction, depiction of that which has already been made subject
to order. Representation of culture is encapsulation of that to which
behavioral adaptation has previously occurred; of those things or situations
whose sensory properties, affective implications and motivational significances
have been and are presently specified. Representation of the knower, the human
subject, is also depiction of that which is constantly encountered, in all
interpersonal interactions, and in all self-conscious states: is portrayal of
those aspects of an infinitely complex set of data which have at least been
experienced, if not exhausted. Representation of the unknown, however, appears
impossible, a contradiction in terms. How can what has not yet been encountered
be comprehended, understood, embodied, faced or adapted to? But what has not
been encountered must be comprehended. The range of our experience continually
supersedes the domain of our determinate knowledge. We are therefore prone to
constant contact with the unknown. It appears every time we make an error;
every time our presumptions are wrong—every time our behaviors do not produce
the consequences we expect and desire. The absence of specific depiction,
appropriate to inexplicable circumstance, does not alleviate the necessity of
appropriate action—even though the nature of that action cannot yet be
specified. This means that the nature of the unknown, as such, must become
represented, in order to design action patterns, which are broadly suited for
response to what cannot yet (and cannot eternally) be predicted or controlled.
We are in fact capable of a set of paradoxical abilities: we know what to do,
when we do not know what to do; we know how to represent what to do, when we do
not know what to do; finally, we know how to represent what we have not yet
encountered. These adaptive capacities— impossible, at first glance—immensely
further our capacity to behave, successfully, in the face of our mysterious
experience, and to communicate and broaden that capacity.

If an error in judgment, interpretation or behavior occurs, and something
unexpected appears, that unexpected thing has identifiable properties: it is
dangerous, and promising. The danger is potential for punishment, frustration,
disappointment, social isolation, physical damage—even death. Every moment of
threat, however, is simultaneously a moment of opportunity. The change that
upsets the presently predictable and orderly also means potential for
advancement into a more promising future. The unexpected is information itself,
information necessary for the constant expansion of adaptive competence. Such
information comes packaged in danger and promise. To gain the information
promised, the danger must be overcome. This process of necessary eternal
overcoming constantly constructs and transforms our behavioral repertoires and
representational schemas.

Everything presently known about the subject and objects of human experience
was at one time merely the undifferentiated unknown—which was far more than
what yet remained to be discovered about the collectively apprehensible sensory
qualities of the world. The unknown may manifest itself in the consensually
validatable empirical realm, as an aspect of the material world; likewise, it
may appear as new significance, where none was evident before. What is known
and familiar poses no threat, but offers no possibility beyond that which has
been previously determined. The explored thing or situation has been associated
with behaviors that render it beneficial, in the ideal, or at least irrelevant.
The omnipresent unknown, by contrast, presents threat and promise infinite in
scope, impossible to encapsulate, equally impossible to ignore. The unknown,
unexpected, or unpredictable is the source of all conditional knowledge—and the
place that such knowledge “returns” to, so to speak, when it is no longer
useful. Everything we know, we know because someone explored something they did
not understand—explored something they were afraid of, in awe of. Everything we
know, we know because someone generated something valuable in the course of an
encounter with the unexpected.

“Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we
can perform without thinking about them.”289 All things that we know no longer
demand our attention. To know something is to do it automatically, without
thinking, to categorize it at a glance (or less than a glance), or to ignore it
entirely. The nervous system is “designed” to eliminate predictability from
consideration, and to focus limited analytical resources where focus would
produce useful results. We attend to the places where change is occurring;
where something is happening that has not yet been modeled, where something is
happening that has not yet had behaviors erected around it—where something is
happening that is not yet understood. Consciousness itself might be considered
as that organ which specializes in the analysis and classification of
unpredictable events. Attention and concentration naturally gravitate to those
elements in the experiential field that contain the highest concentration of
novelty, or that are the least expected, prior to what might normally be
considered higher cognitive processing. The nervous system responds to
irregular change and eliminates regularity. There is limited information,
positive and negative, in the predictable. The novel occurrence, by contrast,
might be considered a window into the “transcendent space” where reward and
punishment exist in eternal and unlimited potential.

The unknown or unexpected or novel appears when plans go wrong: when behavioral
adaptation or interpretive schema fails to produce what is desired or to
predict what occurs. The appearance of the unexpected or unpredictable inhibits
ongoing goal-directed activity in the absence of conscious volition.
Concurrently with this inhibition of activity comes inex-orable redirection of
attention toward the unexpected event. The unexpected grips behavior and
spontaneously generates antithetical affects, varying in intensity with the
improbability of the occurrence, creating heightened interest, fear, intense
curiosity or outright terror. This motivational significance appears to have
been experienced as an intrinsic feature of the unknown, prior to the strict
formal modern division of experiential world into empirical object and
subjective observer—and is still fundamentally experienced in that manner
today. Rudolf Otto, in his seminal investigation into the nature of religious
experience, described such experience as numinous,290 involuntarily gripping,
indicative of significance beyond the normal and average. The “numinous”
experience has two aspects: mysterium tremendum, which is capacity to invoke
trembling and fear; and mysterium fascinans, capacity to powerfully attract,
fascinate and compel. This numinous power, divine import, is extreme affective
relevance and concomitant direction of behavior by the (unknown) object. This
“power” is commonly considered by those subject to it as a manifestation of
God, personification of the unknown, and ultimate source of all conditional
knowledge:

The feeling of it may at times come sweeping like a gentle tide, pervading the
mind with a tranquil mood of deepest worship. It may pass over into a more set
and lasting attitude of the soul, continuing, as it were, thrillingly vibrant
and resonant, until at last it dies away and the soul resumes its “profane,”
non-religious mood of everyday experience. It may burst in sudden eruptions up
from the depths of the soul with spasms and convulsions, or lead to the
strangest excitements, to intoxicated frenzy, to transport, and to ecstasy. It
has its wild and demonic forms and can sink to an almost grisly horror and
shuddering. It has its crude, barbaric antecedents and early manifestations,
and again it may be developed into something beautiful and pure and glorious.
It may become the hushed, trembling, and speechless humility of the creature in
the presence of— whom or what? In the presence of that which is a mystery
inexpressible and above all creatures.291



Nothing that is not represented can be said to be understood—not as we normally
use that term. Nonetheless, understanding of the unknown—which cannot, in
theory, be represented—is vital to continued survival. Desire to represent the
unknown, to capture its essence, is in consequence potent enough to drive the
construction of culture, the net that constrains the unknowable source of all
things. The impetus for representation of the domain of the unexpected arose
(and arises) as consequence of the intrinsic, biologically determined affective
or emotional significance of the unknown or novel world. Representations of the
unknown constitute attempts to elaborate upon its nature, to illuminate its
emotional and motivational significance (to illuminate its being, from the
prescientific or mythic perspective). This is categorization of all that has
not yet been explored and represented, in the service of adaptation to that
which has not yet been understood. This is the attempt to formulate a
conception of “the category of all as-of-yet uncategorized things,” so that a
useful stance might be adopted, with regard to that category.

The novel ceaselessly inspires thought and allows itself to be entangled, yet
inevitably transcends all attempts at final classification. The unknown
therefore provides a constant powerful source of “energy” for exploration and
the generation of new information. Desire to formulate a representation of that
which supersedes final classification and remains eternally motivating might
well be understood as a prepotent and irresistible drive. That drive
constitutes what might be regarded as the most fundamental religious
impulse—constitutes the culturally universal attempt to define and establish a
relationship with God—and underlies the establishment of civilized historical
order. The product of this drive, the culturally constructed complex, extant in
fantasy—the symbol, composed of communicable representation of all things
constantly threatening and promising to man—affects and structures the
experience of each individual, yet remains impersonal, distinct and separate:

The living symbol formulates an essential unconscious factor, and the more
widespread this factor is, the more general is the effect of the symbol, for it
touches a corresponding chord in every psyche. Since, for a given epoch, it is
the best possible expression for what is still unknown, it must be the product
of the most complex and differentiated minds ofthat age. But in order to have
an effect at all, it must embrace what is common to a large group of men. This
can never be what is most differentiated, the highest attainable, for only a
very few attain to that or understand it. The common factor must be something
that is still so primitive that its ubiquity cannot be doubted. Only when the
symbol embraces that and expresses it in the highest possible form is it of
general efficacy. Herein lies the potency of the living, social symbol and its
redeeming power.292



This dynamic representation might form part of the subjective experience of a
myriad of people, and therefore have its “own” biologically grounded,
culturally determined existence, independent of any given person at any given
time—even to follow its own intrinsic rules of development—yet fail to exist
“objectively” as the objective is currently understood.

Ritualized, dramatic or mythic representations of the unknown—the domain that
emerges when error is committed—appear to have provided the initial material
for the most primordial and fundamental aspects of formalized religions.
Appreciation of the nature of the unknown as a category developed as a
consequence of observation of our inherent response to what we did not expect,
manifested as predictable pattern of affect and behavior: fear and curiosity,
terror and hope, inhibition of ongoing activity and cautious exploration,
“habituation” and generation of novel and situation-specific appropriate
behavioral strategies. Two things are the same, from the empirical viewpoint,
if they share collectively apprehended sensory features. Two things are the
same, from the metaphoric, dramatic, or mythical perspective—from the
perspective of the natural category—if they produce the same subjective state
of being (affect or motivation), or have the same functional status (which is
implication for behavior). Experiences that share affective tone appear
categorizable in single complexes, symbolic in nature (from the standpoint of
abstract cognition)—appear as products of culture, which evolved in the social
environment characteristic of ancestral Homo sapiens and later disappeared.
Such complexes might play a useful role, in the promotion of general adaptive
behavior, in the face of feared and promising objects, in the absence of
detailed exploration-generated information, regarding the explicit nature of
these objects.

These representations might be considered the consequence of first-level
representation—of imitation, as Piaget pointed out—and then, later, the
consequence of more abstracted second-order representation (of symbolic
understanding). Understanding can be reached at the most inclusive, yet primary
level, through ritual and mimesis. An unknown phenomenon, gripping but
incomprehensible, can yet be represented ritually, can be acted out. Secondary
representation of this “acting out” constitutes the initial form of abstract
representation. To understand the lion, for example—or the hunted beast—it is
first necessary to “become” the lion or the hunted beast—to mimic, physically,
and later to represent the mimicry in imagination. It is in this manner that
the son imitates the father, whom he will later become. A child's embodiment of
the parent means his incorporation of the knowledge of the parent, at least
insofar as that knowledge is action. The child acts out his father, without
understanding him and without understanding the reasons for his acting out. It
could be said, metaphorically, that the imitating child is possessed by the
spirit of the father, as the father was possessed in his own childhood. The
“spirit of the father” may be conceived, in this representational schema, as an
entity independent of the particular father, or the particular son—as something
that manifests itself in imagination and in possession of behavior generation
after generation, in more or less constant and traditional form. Similarly, the
unknown, which might be considered object and subject simultaneously—which
manifests itself in the perceptible world, in affect, and which grips
behavior—might well be regarded as (or manifest itself in imagination as) a
transpersonal entity (or as the result of the actions of a transpersonal
entity). The ancestral “primordial hunter,” terrified by something unknown in
the bush, portrays his encounter with what frightened him by acting out the
unknown demon when he returns to the village. This acting out is simultaneously
embodiment and representation; it is basic-level hypothesis regarding the
nature of the unknown, as such. Alternatively, perhaps, he fashions an image,
an idol, of the thing—and gives concrete form to what until then is merely
behavioral compulsion. The unknown first appears symbolically as an independent
personality, when it cannot be conceived of in any other fashion, and later
appears as if it were a personality (in evidently metaphoric guise). Evidence
for the adoption of “personality” by representational or quasi-representational
“complexes” is plentiful.293 Such “complexes” may “construct themselves” over
the course of many centuries, as a consequence of the exploratory and creative
endeavors of many disparate individuals, united within the communicative
network of culture.

It is in this manner, over vast stretches of time, that the “transpersonal”
domain of the imagination becomes populated with “spirits.” Jung described the
“space” occupied by such “spirits” as the pleroma (a gnostic term).294 The
pleroma might be described as the subjective world of experience, in
remembrance—the episodic world, perhaps, from the perspective of modern memory
theory—although representations apparently collectively apprehensible under
certain peculiar circumstances (like those of the Virgin Mary, in Yugoslavia,
prior to the devastating Serbian-Bosnian-Muslim war, or those of “alien
spaceships” [UFOs] during the Cold War) also make their “home” there. The
pleroma is the “space” in which heaven and hell have their existence, the place
where Plato's “supracelestial” ideals reside, the ground of dream and fantasy.
It appears to have a four-dimensional structure, like that of objective
space-time (and of memory),295 but is characterized by a tremendous vagueness
with regards to category and temporality. The “spirits” which inhabit the
pleroma, in its “natural” condition, are deities— undifferentiated mixes of
subject and object, motivational significance and sensory aspect, elaborated
into personified representations by the efforts of many. This is merely to say
that a representation is a social construct, with historical (even biological)
roots— like any idea—and that the spirit who inhabits the imagination is not
necessarily a figment created by the person who “has” that imagination. The
devil is not the product of the particular Christian. It is more accurate to
note that the figure of the devil—or of Christ, for that matter—inhabits the
mind of the Christian (and of all Christians), and that such habitation occurs
as a consequence of transpersonal social and historical processes operating
almost completely beyond the realm of individual control.296 The child,
similarly, cannot be said to create the monsters that live in his imagination.
They grow there, so to speak, and are then subjectively observed—are fed by
casual statements on the part of adults, by action patterns the child observes
but cannot explain, by emotions and motivational states that emerge suddenly
and unpredictably, by the fantasies in books, on TV and in the theater.

Events or experiences that remain beyond the reach of exploration, assimilation
and accommodation stay firmly entrenched in or automatically ascribed to the
domain of the unknown, threatening and promising. The category of all events
that cannot yet be categorized can nonetheless be modeled, through metaphoric
application of partially comprehensible yet affect-inducing occurrences whose
emotional relevance in some way matches that of the unknown. Each of the
specific things that signifies danger, for example—or, alternatively, the
enhancement of life—appears easily associated with every other specific thing,
characterized by the same property, as well as with novelty itself, which
produces fear and hope as part of its (subjectively) intrinsic nature. These
experiences appear interassociated on the basis of the similar affective or
behavioral states they inspire—the motivational effects they engender, prior to
development of “habituation” in course of exploratory behavior.297 The archaic
“limbic system” has its own method of classification, so to speak, experienced
privately as emotion—or as behavior spontaneously undertaken—manifested outside
the realm of conditional abstract culturally determined presumption.298
Everything novel encountered, avoided because of involuntary or willfully
manifested fear or ignorance, is potentially or actively linked with all that
remains outside of individual competence and/or cultural classification.
Everything that produces fear may be subjectively considered one aspect of the
same (subterranean) thing. What is that thing?

The unknown, as such, surrounds all things, but exists only in a hypothetical
state, and finds representation in symbolic form as the uroboros, as we have
seen. The disintegration or division of the uroboros gives rise to all things,
including the disorder or unpredictability that is defined in opposition to
what has been explored. This more narrowly defined domain of disorder or
unpredictability—which is the unknown as it is actually experienced (rather
than as a hypothetical entity)—tends to be portrayed as something distinctly
feminine, as the daughter of the great serpent, as the matrix of all
determinate being. It is useful to regard the Great

Figure 32: Novelty, the Great Mother, as Daughter of the Uroboros





Mother as the primary agent of the serpent of chaos—as the serpent's
representative, so to speak, in the profane domain. The serpent of chaos can be
seen lurking “behind” the Great Mother, as we shall see, and she often “adopts”
reptilian (material) or birdlike (spiritual) features. This relationship is
schematically represented in Figure 32: Novelty, the Great Mother, 299 as
Daughter of the Uroboros. In the incarnation depicted, the Great Mother is
Venus, goddess of fertility and love. As the winged mother—bird and matter— she
is “spirit” and “earth” at once; the wings might just as easily be replaced by
the icon of a snake, which would tie her figure more closely to the earth (and
to the idea of transformation). The capsule that surrounds her, for
example—frequently found enveloping Christ (as son of the Divine Mother) or
Mary (the Divine Mother herself) in late medieval and early Renaissance art—is
the mandorla, or vesica pisces, the “fishes' bladder,” which appears to have
served as sexual/symbolic representation of the source of all things since well
before written history began.300

The uroboros and the figure of the Great Mother commonly overlap because the
“chaos comprising the original state” is hard to distinguish from the “chaos
defined in opposition to established order.” Two things that have no
distinguishable features (as is the case for the “two domains of chaos”) are
difficult to separate from one another. The distinctions between the figures of
the uroboros and the Great Mother are just as important as their similarities,
however. An immense difference obtains between the possibility of something
unknown and an actual unknown (the difference between potential and reality).
Eliade provides an example of a careful attempt to disentangle the categories,
drawn from Lao-Tzu:

In another cosmogonic fragment (chap. 25), the Tao is denominated “an
undifferentiated and perfect being, born before Heaven and Earth…. We can
consider it the Mother of this world, but I do not know its name; I will call
it Tao; and if it must be named, its name will be: the Immense (ta).” The
“undifferentiated and perfect” being is interpreted by a commentator of the
second century B.C. thus: “the mysterious unity [Hung-t'ung] of Heaven and
Earth chaotically [hun-tun] constitutes [the condition] of the uncarved block.”
Hence the Tao is a primordial totality, living and creative but formless and
nameless. “That which is nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth. That which
has a name is the Mother of the ten thousand beings.”301



The unknown, as such, is the thing “in and of itself.” By contrast, the unknown
as encountered (by a determinate subject, in a particular situation) is the
matrix of all being—the actual source of information that, once explored and
categorized, constitutes “cosmos” or order (and, for that matter, exploring
agent).

Lao-Tzu also says, in an attempt to further clarify the situation:

The divinity of the Valley does not die: it is the Obscure Female. The gate of
the Obscure Female—that is the origin of Heaven and Earth.302



The unknown appears to be generally conceptualized or symbolically represented
as female primarily because the female genitalia—hidden, private, unexplored,
productive—serve as “gateway” or “portal” to the “(divine) unknown world or
source of creation,” and therefore easily come to stand for that “place.”
Novelty and femininity share analogical or categorical identity, from this
perspective: both constitute a window, so to speak, into the world “beyond.”
Woman, insofar as she is subject to natural demands, is not merely a model for
nature—she is divine nature, in imagination and actuality. She literally
embodies the matrix of biological being, and provides, as such, an appropriate
figure for the metaphoric modeling of the ground of everything. The female body
constitutes the border between normal experience and the totality from which
all forms emerge. Infants come from mothers; this hypothesis, based upon direct
observation, accounts for the provisional source of particular individuals. The
origin, per se, partakes of the same essential ineffable nature—partakes of
whatever is characteristic of the (experienceable) mother, and other
identifiable points of origin, which cannot be described or comprehended so
easily (such as the caves where ores “grow and mature,” or the ground where
crops thrive). The matrix of all things is something feminine, like the mothers
of experience; it is something with an endlessly fecund and renewed (maternal
and virginal) nature—something that defines fertility and, therefore,
femininity itself. Things come from somewhere; all things have their
birthplace. The relationship of man writ large to nature, eternal mother,
endlessly mimics that of the particular child to his personal mother—or, to be
more accurate, the child and the mother mimic life and the world.

The unknown—as it can be encountered—is female, with paradoxical qualities. The
Great and Terrible Mother of All Things promises endlessly; she also threatens,
absolutely. The outcome of an encounter with the unknown—which constitutes the
necessary precondition for the generation of new information (for generation of
the “cosmos” and of the experiencing subject)—cannot be specified beforehand;
something new might benefit, or destroy. Femininity shares emotional valence
with novelty and threat, furthering the utility of the female as metaphoric
grist, because of the union that exists within experience between creation of
one thing, and destruction and transformation of another.303 The processes of
embryogenesis itself require that blood change form, as the fetus thrives on
the “blood” of its mother. The act of birth itself is traumatic, painful,
dangerous and frightening, recapitulating the natural theme of creation,
transformation and destruction. Nourishment is linked integrally with death and
terror, even from the beginning, when the metamorphosis of blood into milk
transforms the mother into food for the infant. Nature is feminine, in
addition, because of the isomorphic relationship that exists between childhood
dependency on maternal beneficience and caprice, and adult subjugation to
biological reality. Human infants are prepared, instinctively, to establish
relationship with the mother, and to respond with vitality to manifestation of
maternal interest. Every individual's primordial world-experience is experience
of mother, who is the world itself, in initial developmental stages (insofar as
the world has any motivational significance, whatsoever). (Indeed, for
individuals who are sufficiently stunted in their psychological development,
the “world” never evolves into anything other beyond “mother.”304) Furthermore,
the ontogenesis of the individual, and the mother-child symbiosis, is
comparable to the phylogenesis of humanity, and the relationship ofthat
humanity with—or its dependence upon—earth and sea. The archetypal infantile
situation, which extends back into time, prior to the establishment of culture
itself, is recapitulated in adulthood, with the maternal object of fear and
respect, hope, love and gratitude abstracted into experience itself.

The threatening aspects of the Great Mother gather metaphoric representation as
chimeras of anxiety-producing places, animals, gestures, expressions and
things. These elements—diverse from the objective perspective (from the
standpoint of the “proper set”)—nonetheless unite to produce an image of the
ever-present potential danger inherent in anything unpredictable. The Great
Mother—unexplored territory—is the dark, the chaos of the night, the insect,
ophidian and reptilian worlds, the damaged body, the mask of anger or terror:
the entire panoply of fear-inducing experiences, commonly encountered (and
imagined) by Homo sapiens. A dynamic complex of such objects appears as the
most subtle and exact representation of the unknown imaginable— something
capable, simultaneously, of characterizing the active bite of the snake, the
life of fire, the sting of the scorpion, the trap of the spider—the most
suitable embodiment of the manifest desire of nature's vital transformative
forces, generative of death, dissolution, destruction and endless creation.
Feared

Figure 33: The Spontaneous Personification of Unexplored Territory





experiences, grounded in the inexplicable, acquire representation in fantasy,
as fear-producing spirits. These spirits, clothed in particular
anxiety-provoking occurrences, give form to aspects of experience that
otherwise remain inexplicable—beyond understanding, from the perspective of
conditional adaptation, action and abstract thought, but impossible to ignore,
from the standpoint of affect. The “personality” of such beings constitutes the
embodiment of incomprehensible, and often intolerable, motivational
significance—comprises representation of the ground of violent emotional
experience, capable of inducing cognitive and behavioral possession, impossible
to incorporate into the domain of normal, culturally established being. Figure
33: The Spontaneous Personification of Unexplored Territory presents one such
figure, and its process of development, in comical form.305 Equivalent but more
serious dynamic representations of this type are deities, gods borne of human
experience, possessed of quasi-objective transpersonal status—like the
Word—manifestations of the unfamiliar, the other, the unknown and the
unpredictable.

What can now be calmly described as an archaic symbol or god from the past may
also reasonably be considered as the manifestation of a primeval “independent”
personality—the unified “embodiment” in ritual or imagination of some set of
phenomena united by their affective or functional equivalence. These
personalities— deities—have with time lost affective and conceptual relevance,
as a consequence of the constant expansion of human adaptive capacity, and have
become “broken down” into less complex, more determinate aspects of experience.
In their original form, however, these “representational personalities”
revealed themselves within the creative, compensatory experience of exceptional
individuals, beset by their own incomprehensible (although not purely
idiosyncratic) personal tragedy. Concrete realization of such
manifestation—transformation into an artistic production or potent story, for
example—involuntarily seized the attention of peers and inspired a sense of
fascination and awe. Centuries-long cultural elaboration of such production
gave rise to the elaborated “existence” of transpersonal beings, of
transcendent power, who inhabited the “space” defined by the collective
imagination of mankind, and who behaved in accordance with the dictates of
their own irrational, myth-predicated souls. These “representations” served as
active images, detailing to everyone what was as of yet explicitly unknown,
only partially known; they pointed the way toward aspects of experience beyond
the grasp of “conscious” abstract apprehension, but dangerous to ignore.

It is no simple manner for the limited subject to formulate an accurate
representation of the unlimited unknown, of nature, the ground of existence.
The unknown is the matrix of everything, the source of all birth and the final
place of rest. It hides behind our personal identity and our culture; it
constantly threatens and engenders all that we do, all that we understand, and
all that we are. It can never be eliminated permanently from consideration,
since every solution merely provides the breeding place for a host of new
problems. The unknown is Homo sapiens'; everlasting enemy and greatest friend,
constantly challenging individual facility for adaptation and representation,
constantly pushing men and women to greater depths and more profound heights.
The unknown as Nature appears as paradoxical formidable overwhelming power,
applied simultaneously in one direction and its opposite. Hunger, the will to
self-preservation, drives living creatures to devour each other rapaciously,
and the hunters have no mercy for the hunted. Sexuality bends the individual
will inexorably and often tragically to the demand of the species, and
existence maintains itself in endless suffering, transformation and death. Life
generates and destroys itself in a pitiless cycle, and the individual remains
constantly subject to forces beyond understanding or control. The desire to
exist permeates all that lives, and expresses itself in terrible fashion, in
uncontrollable impulse, in an endless counterpoint of fecundity and decay. The
most basic, fundamental and necessary aspects of experience are at the same
time most dangerous and unacceptable.

Empirical (classical) “objects” are either one thing or another. Nature, by
contrast— the great unknown—is one thing and its (affective) opposite at the
same time, and in the same place. The novel, primeval experience was (and
remains) much too complex to be gripped, initially, by rational understanding,
as understood in the present day. Mythic imagination, “willing” to sacrifice
discriminatory clarity for inclusive phenomenological accuracy, provided the
necessary developmental bridge. The earliest embodiments of nature are
therefore symbolic combinations of rationally irreconcilable attributes;
monsters, essentially feminine, who represent animal and human, creation and
destruction, birth and cessation of experience. The analytical psychologist
Erich Neumann, who wrote a definitive, comprehensive and useful book on the
symbolism of the feminine, states:

In the early phases of consciousness, the numinosity [that is, the emotional
valence] of the archetype …exceeds man's power of representation, so much so
that at first no form can be given to it. And when later the primordial
archetype takes form in the imagination of man, its representations are often
monstrous and inhuman. This is the phase of the chimerical creatures composed
of different animals or of animal and man—the griffins, sphinxes, harpies, for
example—and also of such monstrosities as phallic and bearded mothers. It is
only when consciousness learns to look at phenomena from a certain distance, to
react more subtly, to differentiate and distinguish [this is a function of
exploration and its related abstract processes], that the mixture of symbols
prevailing in the primordial archetype separates into the groups of symbols
characteristic of a single archetype or of a group of related archetypes; in
short, that they became recognizable.306



The terrible aspects of the primordial Great Mother have been represented,
symbolized, in variety of manners, but her underlying reality and essential
ideation remain immediately recognizable. Neumann states:

These figures are gruesomely alike. Their sheer frightfulness makes us
hesitate, whether they represent a skull, the head of a snake or hippopotamus,
a face showing human likeness, or a head consisting of two stone knives borne
by a body pieced together from parts of snakes, panthers, lions, crocodiles,
and human beings. So great is the inhuman, extrahuman, and superhuman quality
in this experience of dread that man can visualize it only through phantoms.
But all this—and it should not be forgotten—is an image not only of the
Feminine but particularly and specifically of the Maternal. For in a profound
way life and birth are always bound up with death and destruction. That is why
this Terrible Mother is “Great,” and this name is also given to Ta-Urt, the
gravid monster, which is hippopotamus and crocodile, lioness and woman, in one.
She too is deadly and protective. There is a frightening likeness to Hathor,
the good cow goddess, who in the form of a hippopotamus is the goddess of the
underworld. She has a positive aspect, and at the same time she is the goddess
of war and death.

In the course of the later307 development of patriarchal values, i.e., of the
male deities of the sun and light, the negative aspect of the Feminine was
submerged. Today it is discernible only as a content of the primordial age, or
of the unconscious. Thus the terrible Ta-Urt, as well as the terrible Hathor,
Isis, Neith, and others, can be reconstituted from their pictures that have
been “painted over,” but cannot be viewed directly. Only the monster Am-mit or
Aman, which devours the souls condemned at the judgment of the dead, points by
its parallelism to the terrible aspect of Ta-Urt. Am-mit was described as
follows: “Her forepart (is that of) crocodiles, her hinderpart (is that of)
hippopotamus, and her middle (is that of a) lion.” The feminine, animal-mother
character of this many-breasted creature is evident as is that of the monster
wielding the terrible knife, which guards one of the underworld gates through
which the souls of the departed must pass.

Am-mit devours the souls that have not withstood the midnight judgment of the
dead in the underworld. But her role has become subordinate, for the religion
of Osiris and Horus with its mysteries has now promised rebirth and
resurrection to all human souls, and not only, as originally, to the soul of
Pharaoh. The certainty of magical success in following the path of the sun,
which is communicated to each man after death by the priests, has overlaid the
primordial fear represented by Am-mit. But originally she was the terrible
ancestral spirit of the matriarchal culture, in which the Feminine takes back
what has been born of it—just as among the primitive inhabitants of the
Melanesian island of Melekula or in the high culture of Mexico.308



The Terrible Mother challenges and threatens the individual, absolutely. She is
goddess of anxiety, depression and psychological chaos—goddess of the
possibility of pain and death. She is horror, insofar as horror can be
imagined, and is the ground ofthat horror, beyond. She exposes and turns to her
advantage constant mortal vulnerability. She barters, paradoxically, offering
continuance of life for sacrificial death. She demands reconciliation, without
offering the certainty of survival. She embodies the potential for salvation,
and the central problem of life; impels the individual, involuntarily, toward
further expansion of consciousness, or induces involuntary contraction, leading
to death.309 The Great Mother impels—pushes (with certainty of mortality) and
pulls (with possibility of redemption)—development of consciousness and of
self-consciousness. The identity of death with the unknown has permanently and
incurably destroyed any possibility of final habituation to—adaptation to, more
accurately—the world of experience. Man is in consequence the (incurably)
anxious animal:

Thus the womb of the earth becomes the deadly devouring maw of the underworld,
and beside the fecundated womb and the protective cave of earth and mountain
gapes the abyss of hell, the dark hole of the depths, the devouring womb of the
grave and death, and darkness without light, of nothingness. For this woman who
generates life and all living things on earth is the same who takes them back
into herself, who pursues her victims and captures them with snare and net.
Disease, hunger, hardship, war above all, are her helpers, and among all
peoples the goddesses of war and the hunt express man's experience of life as a
female exacting blood. This Terrible Mother is the hungry earth, which devours
its own children and fattens on their corpses; it is the tiger and the vulture,
the vulture and the coffin, the flesh-eating sarcophagus voraciously licking up
the blood seed of men and beasts and, once fecundated and sated, casting it out
again in new birth, hurling it to death, and over and over again to death.310



The terrible feminine has been represented by figures such as the chimera, the
sphinx, the griffin and the gorgon, which combined and unified the most
disparate, yet related, aspects of nature (those aspects which, individually,
intrinsically, inspire terror and deference). Gorgon-like figures and their
“sisters” appear commonly throughout the world.311 As the Aztec Coatlicue,
whose gruesome headdress was composed of skulls, the Terrible Mother was
goddess of death and dismemberment, object of sacrificial homage. As Goddess of
the Snake, she was sacred in ancient Crete, and worshiped by the Romans. Her
modern equivalents remain extant in Bali and India. Kali, Hindu
goddess—portrayed in Figure 34:



Figure 34: Unexplored Territory as Destructive Mother





Unexplored Territory as Destructive Mother 312—is eight-armed, like a spider,
and sits within a web of fire. Each of her arms bears a tool of creation or
weapon of destruction. She wears a tiara of skulls, has pointed, phallic
breasts, and aggressive, staring eyes. A snake, symbol of ancient, impersonal
power, transformation and rebirth, is coiled around her waist. She
simultaneously devours, and gives birth, to a full-grown man. Medusa, Greek
monster, with her coif of snakes, manifests a visage so terrible that a single
exposure turns strong men to stone—paralyzes them, permanently, with fear. This
gorgon is a late “vestigial” remnant, so to speak, of an early goddess, who
simultaneously embodied nature's incredible productive fecundity and callous
disregard for life.

A neuropsychological description of the brain's response to the unexpected—such
as we encountered earlier—is one thing; the mythological representation is
another. Consideration of the figure of the Great and Terrible Mother is
salutary; helps breed understanding of just what it is that our cultures—that
is, our ritual identification with the dead—protects us from. We are shielded
from the terrors of our imagination (and from the things that breed such
terror) by the overlay of familiarity granted by shared frameworks of action
and interpretation. These “walls” serve their purpose so well that it is easy
for us to forget our mortal vulnerability; indeed, we generated those walls to
aid that forgetting. But it is impossible to understand why we are so motivated
to maintain our cultures—our beliefs, and associated patterns of action—without
gazing at and appreciating the horrible figures generated by our ancestors.

The Great Mother, in her negative guise, is the force that induces the child to
cry in the absence of her parents. She is the branches that claw at the night
traveler, in the depths of the forest. She is the terrible force that motivates
the commission of atrocity—planned rape and painful slaughter—during the waging
of war. She is aggression, without the inhibition of fear and guilt; sexuality
in the absence of responsibility, dominance without compassion, greed without
empathy. She is the Freudian id, unconsciousness contaminated with the unknown
and mortal terror, and the flies in the corpse of a kitten. She is everything
that jumps in the night, that scratches and bites, that screeches and howls;
she is paralyzing dismay, horror and the screams that accompany madness. The
Great Mother aborts children, and is the dead fetus; breeds pestilence, and is
the plague; she makes of the skull something gruesomely compelling, and is all
skulls herself. To unveil her is to risk madness, to gaze over the abyss, to
lose the way, to remember the repressed trauma. She is the molester of
children, the golem, the bogey-man, the monster in the swamp, the rotting
cadaverous zombie who threatens the living. She is progenitor of the devil, the
“strange son of chaos.” She is the serpent, and Eve, the temptress; she is the
femme fatale, the insect in the ointment, the hidden cancer, the chronic
sickness, the plague of locusts, the cause of drought, the poisoned water. She
uses erotic pleasure as bait to keep the world alive and breeding; she is a
gothic monster who feeds on the blood of the living. She is the water that
washes menacingly over the ridge of the crumbling dam; the shark in the depths,
the wide-eyed creature of the deep forests, the cry of the unknown animal, the
claws of the grizzly and the smile of the criminally insane. The Great and
Terrible Mother stars in every horror movie, every black comedy; she lies in
wait for the purposefully ignorant like a crocodile waits in the bog. She is
the mystery of life that can never be mastered; she grows more menacing with
every retreat.

I dreamed I saw my maternal grandmother sitting by the bank of a swimmingpool,
which was also a river. In real life, she had been a victim of Alzheimer's
disease and had regressed to a semi-conscious state. In the dream, as well, she
had lost her capacity for self-control. Her genital region was exposed, dimly;
it had the appearance of a thick mat of hair. She was stroking herself,
absentmindedly. She walked over to me, with a handful of pubic hair compacted
into something resembling a large artist's paintbrush. She pushed this at my
face. I raised my arm, several times, to deflect her hand; finally, unwilling
to hurt her, or interfere with her any further, I let her have her way. She
stroked my face with the brush, gently, and said, like a child, “Isn 't it
soft?” I looked at her ruined face and said, “Yes, Grandma, it's soft.”;

Out from behind her stepped an old white bear. It stood to her right, to my
left. We were all beside the pool. The bear was old, like little dogs get old.
It could not see very well, seemed miserable and behaved unpredictably. It
started to growl and wave its head at me—-just like little mean dogs growl and
look just before they bite you. It grabbed my left hand in its jaws. We both
fell into the pool, which was by this time more like a river. I was pushing the
bear away with my free hand. I yelled, “Dad, what should I do?” I took an axe
and hit the bear behind the head, hard, a number of times, killing it. It went
limp in the water. I tried to lift its body onto the bank. Some people came to
help me. I yelled, “I have to do this alone!” Finally I forced it out of the
water. I walked away, down the bank. My father joined me and put his arm around
my shoulder. I felt exhausted but satisfied.



The unknown never disappears; it is a permanent constituent element of
experience. The ability to represent the terrible aspects of the unknown allow
us to conceptualize what has not yet been encountered, and to practice adopting
the proper attitude toward what we do not understand.

For I am the first and the last.

I am the honored one and the scorned one.

I am the whore and the holy one.

I am the wife and the virgin.313



The positive aspect of the matrix of all being—the “twin sister” of Kali, so to
speak— stands in marked contrast to the Terrible Mother. The beneficial unknown
is the source of eternal plenitude and comfort. It is “positive femininity,”
metaphorically speaking, that constitutes the ground for hope itself—for the
faith and belief in the essential goodness of things necessary to voluntary
maintenance of life and culture. The beneficial “sister” has in consequence
acquired breadth and depth of metaphoric mythic representation equivalent to
that of the Terrible Mother. The beneficient aspect of the matrix of all
things—the eternally fecund “virgin” (because eternally renewed), the mother of
the savior—is the embodiment of the helpful source, a constant aid to painful
travail, tragic suffering and existential concern. Redemptive knowledge itself
springs from the generative encounter with the unknown, from exploration of
aspects of novel things and novel situations; is part of the potential of
things, implicit in them, intrinsic to their nature. This redemptive knowledge
is wisdom, knowledge of how to act, generated as a consequence of proper
relationship established with the positive aspect of the unknown, the source of
all things:

Wisdom is radiant and unfading,

and she is easily discerned by those who love her,

and is found by those who seek her.

She hastens to make herself known to those who desire her.

He who rises early to seek her will have no difficulty,

for he will find her sitting at his gates.

To fix one's thought on her is perfect understanding,

and he who is vigilant on her account will

soon be free from care,

because she goes about seeking those worthy of her,

and she graciously appears to them in their paths,

and meets them in every thought.

The beginning of wisdom is the most sincere

desire for instruction,

and concern for instruction is love of her,

and love of her is the keeping of her laws,

and giving heed to her laws is assurance of immortality,

and immortality brings one near to God;

so the desire for wisdom leads to a kingdom. [Wisdom of Solomon (of the

Apocrypha), RSV 6:12–20]



also

Therefore I prayed, and understanding was given me;

I called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me.

I preferred her to scepters and thrones,

and I accounted wealth as nothing in comparison with her.

Neither did I liken to her any priceless gem,

because all gold is but a little sand in her sight,

and silver will be accounted as clay before her.

I loved her more than health and beauty,

and I chose to have her rather than light,

because her radiance never ceases.

All good things came to me along with her,

and in her hands uncounted wealth.

I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom leads them;

but I did not know that she was their mother.

I learned without guile and I impart without grudging;

I do not hide her wealth,

for it is an unfailing treasure for men;

those who get it obtain friendship with God,

commended for the gifts that come from instruction.

May God grant that I speak with judgment

and have thought worthy of what I have received,

for he is the guide even of wisdom

and the corrector of the wise. (Wisdom 7:7–15)



Wisdom may be personified as a spirit who eternally gives, who provides to her
adherents unfailing riches. She is to be valued higher than status or material
possessions, as the source of all things. With the categorical inexactitude
characteristic of metaphoric thought and its attendant richness of connotation,
the act of valuing this spirit is also Wisdom. So the matrix itself becomes
conflated with—that is, grouped into the same category as—the attitude that
makes ofthat matrix something beneficial. This conflation occurs because primal
generative capacity characterizes both the “source of all things” and the
exploratory/hopeful attitudes and actions that make of that source determinate
things. We would only regard the latter—the “subjective stance”—as something
clearly psychological (as something akin to “wisdom” in the modern sense). The
former is more likely to be considered “external,” from our
perspective—something beyond subjective intervention. But it is the case that
without the appropriate attitude (Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every one that asketh
receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be
opened” [Matthew 7:7–8].) the unknown is a sterile wasteland.314 Expectation
and faith determine the “response” of the unknown (as courageous approach
eliminates anticipatory anxiety, and exploration makes the unexpected something
valuable). So the indiscriminate categorization characterizing these passages
has its worth.

We are motivated to protect the products of our exploration, our familiar
territories, because unexplored phenomena are intrinsically meaningful, and
that meaning is apt to show itself as threat. The probability that the meaning
of unexplored territory will be threat, however, appears to be a function of
the interpretive context within which it makes its appearance. If the unknown
is approached voluntarily (which is to say, “as if” it is beneficial), then its
promising aspect is likely to appear more salient. If the unknown makes its
appearance despite our desire, then it is likely to appear more purely in its
aspect of threat. This means that if we are willing to admit to the existence
of those things that we do not understand, those things are more likely to
adopt a positive face. Rejection of the unknown, conversely, increases the
likelihood that it will wear a terrifying visage when it inevitably manifests
itself. It seems to me that this is one of the essential messages of the New
Testament, with its express (although difficult-to-interpret) insistence that
God should be regarded as all-good.

The beneficial aspect of the unknown is something unavailable to the
“unworthy,” something eternal and pure; something that enters into relationship
with those who are willing, from age to age; and something that makes friends
of God. The unknown is also something that may be conceptualized using sexual
symbolism: something that may be “known,” in the biblical sense. Joined with,
as with a “bride,” she produces all things that are good:

I learned both what is secret and what is manifest,

for wisdom, the fashioner of all things, taught me.

For in her there is a spirit that is intelligent, holy,

unique, manifold, subtle,

mobile, clear, unpolluted,

distinct, invulnerable, loving the good, keen,

irresistible,

beneficient, humane,

steadfast, sure, free from anxiety,

all-powerful, overseeing all,

and penetrating through all spirits

that are intelligent and pure and most subtle.

For wisdom is more mobile than any motion;

because of her pureness she pervades and penetrates all things.

For she is a breath of the power of God,

and a pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty;

therefore nothing defiled gains entrance into her.

For she is a reflection of eternal light,

a spotless mirror of the working of God,

and an image of his goodness.

Though she is but one, she can do all things,

and while remaining in herself, she renews all things;

in every generation she passes into holy souls

and makes them friends of God, and prophets;

for God loves nothing so much as the man who lives with wisdom.

For she is more beautiful than the sun,

and excels every constellation of the stars.

Compared with the light she is found to be superior,

for it is succeeded by the night,

but against wisdom evil does not prevail.

She reaches mightily from one end of the earth to the other,

and she orders all things well.

I loved her and sought her from my youth,

and I desired to take her for my bride,

and I became enamored of her beauty.

She glorifies her noble birth by living with God,

and the Lord of all loves her.

For she is an initiate in the knowledge of God,

and an associate in his works.

If riches are a desirable possession in life,

what is richer than wisdom who effects all things?



Figure 35: Unexplored Territory as Creative Mother





And if understanding is effective, who more than she is fashioner of what
exists? (Wisdom 7:22–8:6)315



The terrible unknown compels representation; likewise, the beneficial unknown.
We are driven to represent the fact that possibility resides in every uncertain
event, that promise beckons from the depths of every mystery. Transformation,
attendant upon the emergence of change, means the death of everything old and
decayed—means the death of everything whose continued existence would merely
mean additional suffering on the part of those still striving to survive. The
terrible unknown, which paralyzes when it appears, is also succour for the
suffering, calm for the troubled, peace for the warrior, insight and discovery
for the perplexed and curious—is the redemptive jewel in the head of the toad
or in the lair of the fire-belching dragon. The unknown is the fire that burns
and protects, the endlessly mysterious transcendent object that simultaneously
gives and takes away. The positive aspect of the unknown, incarnated as the
many-breasted Greco-Roman Goddess Diana or Artemis, mistress of the animals, is
portrayed in Figure 35: Unexplored Territory as Creative Mother. 316

Everything that contains, shelters and produces exists as source for the
symbolic representation of—occupies the same category as—this promising
element. Fruit distinctive for its seed-bearing properties, such as the
pomegranate or poppy, provides appropriate motif for gravid containment. The
pig stands as representative of fertility, and the cow—the holy beast of
India—as embodiment of principle of nourishment. Shellfish “stand for”
generation and fertility because of their vulvalike shape. Inanimate items such
as boxes, sacks and troughs contain and shelter, while similar objects, such as
the bed, the cradle and the nest are characterized by protective and therefore
“maternal” function.317 Humanized representations—statuettes of nude goddesses,
among the most ancient objects of representation known318—appear to represent
fecundity and the productive countenance of nature, in anthropomorphic form.
The creation and subsequent appreciation of such figures perhaps aided
individuals and societies in their efforts to clarify the nature of the human
relationship to the protective aspect of existence. Makers of such statuettes
placed great emphasis on collective, impersonal features of generation, such as
breasts, genitals and hips (features whose functions remain largely outside
voluntary control), but devoted little attention to features defining
self-conscious individuality—like those of the face. Such figures apparently
represented the vessel of life, and were rendered in the image of woman, whose
body generated human life, and nourishment for that life. The body-vessel
represented beneficial nature itself:

All the basic vital functions occur in this vessel-body schema, whose “inside”
is an unknown. Its entrance and exit zones are of special significance. Food
and drink are put into this unknown vessel, while in all creative functions,
from the elimination of waste and the emission of seed to the giving forth of
breath and the word, something is “born” out of it. All body openings—eyes,
ears, nose, mouth (navel), rectum, genital zone—as well as the skin, have, as
places of exchange between inside and outside, a numinous accent for early man.
They are therefore distinguished as “ornamental” and protected zones, and in
man's artistic self-representation they play a special role as idols.319



The unknown, source of all determinate information, is simultaneously
destructive and creative. The terrible aspect of the Great Mother threatens
everything with dissolution. Her positive sister is the generative aspect of
being. Figure 36: The “Heavenly Genealogy” of the Destructive and Creative
Mothers portrays the relationship between the two “discriminable” sisters,
their derivation from the unified but ambivalent unknown, and their ultimate
“descent” from the “dragon of chaos.”

The ability to “restrict the appearance of the Terrible Mother,” and “foster
the realization of her Benevolent Sister” (that is, the ability to decrease
threat, and maximize promise and satisfaction) might well be regarded as the
secret of successful adaptation. The existence of representations of the twin
aspects of the unknown allowed for practice in adaptation in the face of such
representations, allowed for exposure of the individual, in imagination and
action, in controlled fashion, to potently constructed representations of those
things that he or she was destined to fear most, was necessarily most
vulnerable to, but which could not be forever avoided. Similar “rituals”
underly every form of successful modern psychotherapy.

Figure 36: The “Heavenly Genealogy” of the Destructive and Creative Mothers





Modern treatment for disorders of anxiety, to take a specific example—
“desensitization”—involves exposing an individual, “ritualistically” (that is,
under circumstances rendered predictable by authority), to novel or otherwise
threatening stimuli (with appropriate reaction modeled by that authority.320
Such desensitization theoretically induces “habituation”; what is actually
happening is that guided exploration, in the course of behavior therapy,
produces reclassification and behavioral adjustment [such that the once
terrifying thing or once again terrifying thing is turned (back) into something
controllable, familiar, and known]. Voluntary exposure additionally teaches the
previously anxiety-ridden individual the nontrivial lesson that he or she is
capable of facing the “place of fear” and prevailing. The process of guided
voluntary exposure appears to produce therapeutic benefits even when the “thing
being avoided” is traumatic321—when it might appear cruel, from a superficially
“empathic” perspective, to insist upon exposure and “processing.”

The ritual of voluntary exposure fosters mimetic identification with the hero
(whether this is explicitly recognized or not); teaches the individual that the
courageous exploratory spirit can eternally prevail over threat. It is this
mimetic identification and its abstracted equivalents and consequences that
account for the increased general confidence and capabilities that tend to
accompany exposure training. The reclassification and behavioral adjustment,
attendant upon therapeutic exposure, places the previously terrible forces of
the unknown back under the dominion of knowledge, into the domain of the
known—expands “explored territory” into chaos—places the “Great Mother” under
the strictures of her “consort,” culture, the Great Father. This is
exploration-predicated “creation of the cosmos” from the precosmogonic chaos,
and the fostering of implicit identification with the Logos, the creative and
redemptive Word.

Analysis of the much more dramatic, very widespread, but metaphorically
equivalent phenomena of the sacrifical ritual—a rite whose very existence
compelled one insightful author to argue for the essential insanity of man322—
provides additional insight into the nature of the ability to transform threat
into promise. We have already discussed the fact that the valence of an object
switches with context of interpretation. It is knowledge of this idea that
allows for comprehension of the meaning of the sacrificial attitude. The
beautiful countenance of the beneficial mother is the face the unknown adopts
when approached from the proper perspective. Everything unknown is
simultaneously horrifying and promising; it is courage and genius (and the
grace of God) that determines which aspect dominates. The uncontrollable
strength and bloodlust of the bull is the power which, when domesticated,
serves to foster, protect and engender the herd. The devastating power of
sudden explosive combustion is reliable and efficient transportation when
appropriately harnessed. The gorgon of Nature is helpmistress when approached
by the brave, the honest and the humble.

Primary religious rituals, serving a key adaptive purpose, “predicated” upon
knowledge of proper approach mechanisms, evolved to suit the space surrounding
the primary deity, embodiment of the unknown. The ubiquitous drama of human
sacrifice, (proto)typical of primordial religious practice, enacted the idea
that the essence of man was something to be offered up voluntarily to the
ravages of nature—something to be juxtaposed into creative encounter with the
terrible unknown. The offering, in ritual, was often devoured, in reality or
symbolically, as aid to embodiment of the immortal human spirit, as aid to
incorporation of the heroic process. Such rituals were abstracted and altered,
as they developed—with the nature of the sacrificial entity changing (with
constancy of underlying “ideation”).

As late as 1871, in India the festival honoring the Great Mother, in the guise
of Durga323 or Kali, was accompanied by the daily slaughter of twenty buffalo,
two hundred and fifty goats, and two hundred and fifty pigs. The blood-drenched
sand in the sacrificial pits was replaced twice a day—removed and buried in the
earth to ensure fertility. The slaughter of animals is a relatively late
development from the psychohistorical viewpoint, and is generally preceded by,
and stands in place of, the ritual sacrifice of human victims. The indologist
Heinrich Zimmer states:

In her “hideous aspect” (ghora-rupa) the goddess, as Kali, “the dark one,”
raises the skull full of seething blood to her lips; her devotional image shows
her dressed in blood red, standing in a boat floating on a sea of blood: in the
midst of the life flood, the sacrificial sap, which she requires that she may,
in her gracious manifestation (sundara-murti) as the world mother (jagad-amba),
bestow existence upon new living forms in a process of unceasing procreation,
that as world nurse (jagad-dhatri) she may suckle them at her breasts and give
them the food that is “full of nourishment” (anna-purna). An ancient
conception, extending back as far as the Stone Age: Nature must at every step
be given a helping hand; even she can accomplish nothing by herself. She is no
more self-sufficient than man. Nothing takes place of itself, either in the
cosmos or in human beings. Man must perform clamorous rites in order to
liberate the moon from the clutches of the eclipse, to dispel its demons; and
if the sun is to be released from its winter feebleness and rise ever higher
with the rising year, a young girl, symbolizing the sun, must swing higher and
higher into the sky. In order to bear fruit and nurture life, the earth mother
demands to be fertilized and strengthened by potations of blood, the vital
fluid.324



The mysterious and seemingly irrational “sacrificial” ritual actually
dramatizes or acts out two critically important and related ideas: first, that
the essence of man—that is, the divine aspect—must constantly be “offered up”
to the unknown, must present itself voluntarily to the destructive/creative
power that constitutes the Great Mother, incarnation of the unpredictable (as
we have seen); and second, that the “thing that is loved best” must be
destroyed—that is, sacrificed—in order for the positive aspect of the unknown
to manifest itself.

The former idea is “predicated” on the notion that the unknown must be
encountered, voluntarily, for new information to be generated, for new
behavioral patterns to be constructed; the latter idea is “predicated” on the
observation that an improper or outdated or otherwise invalid attachment—such
as the attachment to an inappropriate pattern of behavior or belief—turns the
world into waste, by interfering with the process of adaptation itself. Rigid,
inflexible attachment to “inappropriate things of value”— indicative of
dominance by a pathological hierarchy of values (a “dead god”)—is tantamount to
denial of the hero. Someone miserable and useless in the midst of plenty— just
for the sake of illustration—is unhappy because of his or her attachments to
the wrong “things.” Unhappiness is frequently the consequence of immature or
rigid thinking—a consequence of the overvaluation of phenomena that are in fact
trivial. The neurotic clings to the things that make her unhappy, while
devaluing the processes, opportunities and ideas that would free her, if she
adopted them. The sacrifice of the “thing loved best” to “appease the gods” is
the embodiment in procedure of the idea that the benevolent aspect of the
unknown will return if the present schema of adaptation (the “ruling king”) is
sufficiently altered (that is, destroyed and regenerated). An individual
stripped of his “identification” with what he previously valued is
simultaneously someone facing the unknown—and is, therefore, someone
“unconsciously” imitating the hero. The voluntary “stripping” of such identity
makes the supplicant into a “new man”— at least if the sacrifice was genuine.
This is not to say that such ideas cannot degenerate into meaningless, empty
and cruel ritual.

The intimate relationship between clinging to the past, rejection of heroism,
and denial of the unknown is most frequently explicated in narrative form
(perhaps because the association is so complex that it has not yet been made
explicit). The following fairy tale—a “wakeup call,” from the
psychoanalytic-“unconscious”—may serve as useful exemplar. It occurred
spontaneously to me, in a single piece, while I was trying to help a man I
knew, who was undergoing a psychological crisis. His attachment to the
unnecessary and superfluous was putting his future in serious danger, but he
would not admit this. I wanted to warn him that he would eventually pay a great
price for his shortsightedness. He ignored the story, however, at least in the
short term—with predictable results.

Cock-a-doodle-doo

Once upon a time there was a man who had a long hard journey ahead of him. He
was trudging along the way, over the boulders and through the brushes, when he
saw a little shiny gnome with big white teeth and a black toupee sitting by the
side of the road. He was drumming on a log with two white bones, and humming
oddly to himself. The little gnome said,

“John—why work so hard? Why walk so fast? Who knows if you'll ever get there
anyway? Come over here. I have something to show you.”

So John walked off the road. He was sick of walking, anyhow, because people
kept throwing sticks and stones at him. The little gnome said,

“I have a shiny red jewel I would like to sell you. Cheap. Here it is,” and
from beneath his cloak he pulled the biggest ruby that the man had ever seen.
It must have weighed a hundred pounds, and it shone like the sun.

The gnome said, “Do you like it? It is an enchanted stone. What will you offer
me for it?” and the man said, “I don't have much—much money. But I will give
you everything I have.” The gnome looked displeased, so John added: “I could
pay some more monthly.”

So the gnome accepted: “Fair enough! Buy now, pay later. Sounds good to me. I'm
all for the installment plan.”

So the man gave the gnome all his money, and promised to pay the rest later.
And the gnome walked back into the bush by the road, clacking his teeth and
giggling and twitching.

The more the man thought about his ruby, and the great deal he got, the happier
he became. He started back on the road, with a light heart, but soon discovered
that he couldn't make much progress, because a hundred pounds was a lot to
carry. He said to himself:

“Why continue, anyway? I have what I want. Why don't I just stand here, holding
my ruby—and when people walk by, they can see how well I have already done!”

So he stopped. A little while later, one of his friends came along, and saw him
standing there. His friend said,

“John, why don't you come along with me? I have just opened a new business, and
I could really use some help! Come along quick! It will be opening soon!”

John thought that sounded good, but his friend was in a hurry. Besides,
couldn't he see the ruby? How could he speed along beside him? Where would he
put his jewel? So he said, “Thanks, but I have to take care of my jewel. Maybe
I'll see you later.”

His friend looked at him like he was crazy—but he was trying to get somewhere
quick. So he just shrugged a bit and said, “Okay, John. See you later,” and he
sped on down the road.

A little while later, another friend came by, and he said, “John! Nice to see
you! I am going back to school! There are lots of wonderful things to learn!
Lots of great things to do! The world is full of unsolved problems! I could use
some company! Would you like to come along?” John thought that sounded pretty
good—but this friend, too, looked like he was in a hurry. Besides, standing
beside the road, holding the jewel, was tiring, and he needed all the energy he
had for that. So he said to his friend, “Thanks, but I have to take care of my
jewel. Isn't it beautiful? Maybe I'll see you later.”

His friend looked at him like he was crazy—but he was trying to get somewhere
quick. So he just shrugged and said, “Hope everything goes all right with you.
See you later.”

Many friends came and went, and the years went by. The jewel got heavier and
heavier, but the man got more and more attached to it. The only thing was,
nobody seemed to notice how beautiful it was. People would rush by, and talk
about their plans

and nobody had a ruby as big

and nobody seemed likely to get a ruby as big

so you'd think that someone might have said something

something, at least, like

“Nice ruby, John. Sure wish I had one like that.”

But it never happened.

Then one day someone new came down the road. He was bent over, and he was thin,
and his hair was gray, although he did not look that old. He was carrying a
big, dirty rock carefully in his arms, and he was not making much progress.

The strange figure approached and glanced up at John. Then he grinned and said,

“Why are you standing there stupidly, with a big ugly rock in your tired old
hands? You look pretty daft. I bet you wish you had a big ruby, like the one I
am carrying!” and John thought, “This poor man is deluded. He is carrying a
rock—it is I who have the ruby!” so he said, “Excuse me sir, but you are sadly
mistaken. I am the one with the jewel. I met a little gnome by the side of the
road, and he sold it to me. I am still paying for it—although not so very much!
You are carrying a rock!”

The tired stranger looked annoyed. He said, “I don't know what game you are
playing, mister. You have a rock. I have a jewel. The little gnome you
described sold it to me—and he said it was the only one! I have been carrying
it for twenty years, and I will never let it go!” and John said, “But I have
been carrying mine for twenty years, too. It can't be just a rock!”

Rock or jewel? On and on they argued.

Suddenly, out stepped the little gnome, as if he had never left! Only this
time, he wasn't so little. He was bigger, and redder, and menacing, and his
laugh sounded like the rattling of chains.

“Quit arguing, you two! I've never seen a sight quite so pathetic. You're
carrying rocks—both of you. And if you ever would have had the sense to put
them down for a second or two, you would have seen that!

“Oh well, at least you were diligent. And I played a mean trick. I feel bad.

“So, I'm going to give you what you really deserve. Do you want what you really
deserve?” and John and the thin stranger nodded eagerly. Finally, they thought.

“You haven't seen anything yet. Throw down your rocks!”

So John and the thin stranger obeyed. Each rock split down the middle, when it
hit the ground. Out flowed a river of ravenous white worms, which rushed toward
the men and devoured them whole, while they thrashed about and screamed.

Soon, nothing was left except a leg bone from each. The little gnome picked
them up, and walked off the road. He sat down by a hollow log, and started to
drum.

He drummed, and he waited, and he hummed an odd little tune:

“A picture of food

feeds the whole hungry clan

the image of good

makes the whole healthy man

Why walk the mile?

Why do the work?

Just smile the smile!

success

after all

is a quirk!

Life isn't real

that's the message I give

It's easy that way

plus

who wants to live?”



It is ideas of the “necessity of sacrifice” that underlie, for example, the
well-known but explicitly incomprehensible ritual of Christian communion (more
accurately, the ritual of the Christian communion serves as one behavioral
precursor for these explicit ideas). The Christian hero—Christ—is the spirit
who offers himself voluntarily to the cross, to the grave, to suffering and
death, to the terrible mother. Such a spirit is, above all, “humble”—which is a
very paradoxical term, in this context. Arrogance is belief in personal
omniscience. Heroic humility, set against such arrogance, means recognition of
constant personal error, conjoined with belief in the ability to transcend that
error (to face the unknown, and to update fallible belief, in consequence).
“Humble” therefore means, “greater than dogma” (as the spirit of man is a
“higher power” than the laws which govern his behavior). Christ's body
(represented, in the communion ritual, by the “ever-resurrecting” wheaten
wafer), is the container of the incarnate spirit of the dying, reborn and
redemptive deity. This “body” is ritually devoured—that is, incorporated—to aid
the ritual participants in their identification with Christ, the eternally
dying and resurrecting (sun) god. Construction of this awful ritual meant
furtherance of the abstract conceptualization of a permanent structural aspect
of (every) human psyche—the heroic aspect, the Word—as active, individually
doomed, yet mythically eternal, destined to tragic contact with threat and
promise of unknown, yet constant participant in the creative adaptive
redemptive process.

The ritual act of exposure is held simultaneously to placate or minimize the
cruel aspect of nature, and to allow for establishment of contact with the
beneficient. From the modern perspective, it might be said (much more
abstractly) that voluntary cautious, careful, exploratory encounter with the
threatening and unknown constitutes the precondition for transformation of that
unknown into the promising (or at least the mundane), as a consequence of shift
in behavior or interpretation. We moderns interpret this “change in experience”
as alteration in subjective state. The pre-experimental mind, less capable of
clearly differentiating subject from object, more concerned with the
motivational significance of the experience, observes instead that the
fear-inducing character of the object has receded (as a consequence of the
courage of the explorer, or the benevolence of the thing in question).

Ritual sacrifice was an early (pre-abstract behavioral) variant of the “idea”
of heroism, of belief in individual power—the acting out of the idea that
voluntary exposure to the unknown (or dissolution of the most favored thing)
constituted a necessary precondition (1) for the emergence of the beneficial
“goddess” and (2) for continued successful adaptation. Incorporation of the
sacrificial individual, in actuality (in ritual cannibalism) or in religious
ceremony (in the mass, for example) meant assimilation of the culture-hero.
Such incorporation was a “preconscious” attempt to embody the heroic essence,
to fortify the constituent elements of the community against paralyzing fear of
death and darkness—to fortify the individual and the social group against fear
of the unknown itself. The sacrificial ritual was acting out of the hero,
before such “acting out” could be represented in abstraction, in drama, in
story. More abstract narrative representation of the target of the “heroic
sacrifice” then came to portray the emergence of the beneficient goddess,
capable of showering reward upon man, her eternal lover and child.

The spirit forever willing to risk personal (more abstractly, intrapsychic)
destruction to gain redemptive knowledge might be considered the archetypal
representative of the adaptive process as such. The pre-experimental mind
considered traumatic union of this “masculine” representative with the
destructive and procreative feminine unknown a necessary precedent to continual
renewal and rebirth of the individual and community. This is an idea precisely
as magnificent as that contained in the Osiris/Horus myth; an idea which adds
additional depth to the brilliant “moral hypotheses” contained in that myth.
The exploratory hero, divine son of the known and unknown, courageously faces
the unknown, unites with it creatively—abandoning all pretence of pre-existent
“absolute knowledge”—garners new information, returns to the community, and
revitalizes his tradition. It is to this more complete story that we now turn
our attention.

