# 5 - The Adversary In Action: A Twentieth-Century Allegory
[Metadata]: # {06.04}
[Descriptor]: # {06.04}
[Author]: # {peterson}
5
The Adversary In Action: A Twentieth-Century Allegory
# The Adversary In Action: A Twentieth-Century Allegory
Jung once said that “any internal state of contradiction, unrecognized, will be
played out in the world as fate.” This statement carries with it the apparent
stamp of mysticism. How could the world play out a psychological condition (or
the refusal to recognize a psychological condition)? Well, the purpose of
abstraction is to represent experience, and to manipulate the representations,
to further successful adaptation. If we both want the same toy, we can argue
about our respective rights to it; if the argument fails, or if we refuse to
engage in it, we can fight. If we are suffering from moral uncertainty, at the
philosophical level, and cannot settle the internal war, then our behavior
reflects our inner disquiet, and we act out our contradictions in behavior,
much to our general discredit. Thus the means of settling a dispute cascade,
with each failure, down the chain of abstraction: from the word, to the image,
to the deed—and those who will not let their outdated identities and beliefs
die, when they must, kill themselves instead. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn describes
how “order and predictability” were thereby established in the Soviet Union,
during Stalin's extensive reign of terror:

A. B——v has told how executions were carried out at Adak—a camp on the Pechora
River. They would take the opposition members “with their things” out of the
camp compound on a prisoner transport at night. And outside the compound stood
the small house of the Third Section. The condemned men were taken into a room
one at a time, and there the camp guards sprang on them. Their mouths were
stuffed with something soft and their arms were bound with cords behind their
backs. Then they were led out into the courtyard, where harnessed carts were
waiting. The bound prisoners were piled on the carts, from five to seven at a
time, and driven off to the “Gorka”—the camp cemetery. On arrival they were
tipped into big pits that had already been prepared and buried alive. Not out
of brutality, no.

It had been ascertained that when dragging and lifting them, it was much easier
to cope with living people than with corpses.

The work went on for many nights at Adak.

And that is how the moral-political unity of our Party was achieved.488



The invention, establishment and perfection of the concentration camp, the
efficient genocidal machine, might be regarded as the crowning achievement of
human technological and cultural endeavor, motivated by resentment and loathing
for life. Invented by the English, rendered efficient by the Germans, applied
on a massive scale by the Soviets and the Chinese, revivified by the Balkan
conflict—perfection of the factory whose sole product is death has required
truly multinational enterprise. Such enterprise constitutes, perhaps, the prime
accomplishment of the cooperative bureaucratization of hatred, cowardice and
deceit. Tens of millions of innocent people have been dehumanized, enslaved and
sacrificed in these efficient disassembly lines, in the course of the last
century, to help their oppressors maintain pathological stability and
consistency of moral presumption, enforced through terror, motivated by
adherence to the lie.

The very name has an uncanny aspect: horrifying, ironical, allegorical.
Camp—that is summer sun and holiday, satirical comedy and masquerade, military
rule, obedience and efficiency: death camp—the very devil's idea of a joke, of
camp; black humor and vacation paradise; the dystopian state induced in reality
by diligent pursuit of fantastic ideal, ideological purity, statist heaven on
earth. Concentration camp—that is concentration of people in arbitrary
association, restriction of movement and thought to a particular area;
concentration of the processes of human life, distillation, reduction to
essence, forcing attention to, concentration on, the central values underlying
human endeavor.

The concentration camp has spawned its own literature, remembrance of survival
under conditions as harsh as imagination can construct—human imagination,
capable of positing the existence and describing the nature of an eternally
torturous hell, with walls seven miles thick, lit by a fire which consumes and
renews flesh, simultaneously, so it can once again be burned away.489 This camp
literature has a strange affective and descriptive consistency—a consequence of
the constant re-emergence of patterned, innate modes of adaptive action and
thought, arising naturally in response to experience of overwhelming anomaly
and extreme threat.

Camp life is still human existence, analogous to normal life in all its facets,
but made starker, less ambiguous, clarified, laid bare:

“Pardon me, you…love life? You, you! You who exclaim and sing over and over and
dance it too: ‘I love you, life! Oh, I love you, life!’ Do you? Well, go on,
love it! Camp life—love that too! It too, is life!



There where there is no struggle with fate,

there you will resurrect your soul…



You haven't understood a thing. When you get there, you'll collapse.”490



The extreme nature of camp conditions appears merely to augment tendencies for
behavior always present, under normal conditions; appears merely to exaggerate
the expression of possibilities innately characteristic of the human soul.

Camp incarceration, in the typical case, begins with the fall, with arrest:
unexpected, unjust, arbitrary, implacable and terrifying. The prisoner-to-be
starts his involuntary descent into the underworld with his historically
determined defenses intact, firmly embedded in his cultural context, entrenched
in his persona—identified with his job, his social status, his view of the
present, his hopes for the future. The initial intrusion of fate into this
self-deceptive security occurs at night. Arrest takes place without warning, in
the early hours of the morning, when people are easily frightened, dazed and
less likely to offer resistance, more willing to cooperate, in their fear and
naive hope—afraid for the security of their nervously gathered family, standing
helpless in their household, at the mercy of state authority, in its most
contemptible and repressive incarnation:

“That's all there is to it! You are arrested!”

And you'll find nothing better to respond with than a lamblike bleat: “Me? What
for?”

That's what arrest is: it's a blinding flash and a blow which shifts the
present instantly into the past and the impossible into omnipotent actuality.

That's all. And neither for the first hour nor for the first day will you be
able to grasp anything else.

Except that in your desperation the fake circus moon will blink at you: “It's a
mistake! They'll set things right!”

And everything which is by now comprised in the traditional, even literary,
image of an arrest will pile up and take shape, not in your own disordered
memory, but in what your family and your neighbours in your apartment remember:
The sharp nighttime ring or the rude knock at the door. The insolent entrance
of the unwiped jackboots of the unsleeping State Security operatives. The
frightened and cowed civilian witness at their backs….

The traditional image of arrest is also trembling hands packing for the
victim—a change of underwear, a piece of soap, something to eat; and no one
knows what is needed, what is permitted, what clothes are best to wear; and the
Security agents keep interrupting and hurrying you:

“You don't need anything. They'll feed you there. It's warm there.” (It's all
lies. They keep hurrying you to frighten you.)…

The kind of night arrest described is, in fact, a favourite, because it has
important advantages. Everyone living in the apartment is thrown into a state
of terror by the first knock at the door. The arrested person is torn from the
warmth of his bed. He is in a daze, half-asleep, helpless, and his judgment is
befogged. In a night arrest the State Security men have a superiority in
numbers; there are many of them, armed, against one person who hasn't even
finished buttoning his trousers.491



Arrest means instantaneous depersonalization, isolation from family, friends
and social position. This forcibly induced shift of context removes, by design,
all concrete reminders of group identity, all hallmarks of social hierarchy,
destroys all previous ideals, undermines all goal-directed activity—exposes
essential human vulnerability and subjects it to ruthless exploitation. The
arrested individual is brutally stripped of every reminder of previous
identity, his predictable environment, his conditional hope—left bereft even of
his clothes and hair. He is treated with utmost contempt and derision,
regardless of his previous social status. This complete destruction of social
context, of social identity, heightens the newly arrested individual's sense of
self-consciousness, of nakedness and vulnerability. This leaves him unbearably
anxious, tremendously uncertain, miserably subject to a new and uncertain
world—or underworld:

We waited in a shed which seemed to be the anteroom to the disinfecting
chamber. SS men appeared and spread out blankets into which we had to throw all
our possessions, all our watches and jewellry. There were still naive prisoners
among us who asked, to the amusement of the more seasoned ones who were there
as helpers, if they could not keep a wedding ring, a medal, or a good-luck
piece. No one could yet grasp the fact that everything would be taken away.

I tried to take one of the old prisoners into my confidence. Approaching him
furtively, I pointed to the roll of paper in the inner pocket of my coat and
said, “Look, this is the manuscript of a scientific book. I know what you will
say; that I should be glad to escape with my life, that that should be all I
can expect of fate. But I cannot help myself. I must keep this manuscript at
all costs; it contains my life's work. Do you understand that?”

Yes, he was beginning to understand. A grin spread slowly over his face, first
piteous, then more amused, mocking, insulting, until he bellowed one word at me
in answer to my question, a word that was ever present in the vocabulary of the
camp inmates: “Shit!” At that moment I saw the plain truth and did what marked
the culminating point of the first phase of my psychological reaction: I struck
out the whole of my former life.492



The arrested individual has no specific sociohistorically determined
intrapsychic structure to protect himself from the terrible world of
incarceration and slavery; no model of desire and expectation to inhibit his
mortal terror, to guide his activity and to channel his hope. He has been
forcibly ejected from paradise, made intolerably aware of his own essential
limitations, his own nakedness, has been sentenced to endless labor and
subjugation. In consequence, he has been rendered vulnerable to his worst
fears, his most chaotic psychological states, and his most severe depressions:

Here is how it was with many others, not just with me. Our initial, first
prison sky consisted of black swirling storm clouds and black pillars of
volcanic eruptions—this was the heaven of Pompeii, the heaven of the Day of
Judgment, because it was not just anyone who had been arrested, but I—the
center of this world.

Our last prison sky was infinitely high, infinitely clear, even paler than
sky-blue.

We all (except religious believers) began from one point: we tried to tear our
hair from our head, but our hair had been clipped close!… How could we? How
could we not have seen those who informed against us?! How could we not have
seen our enemies? (And how we hated them! How could we avenge ourselves on
them?) And what recklessness! What blindness! How many errors! How can they be
corrected? They must be corrected all the more swiftly! We must write…. We must
speak out….. We must communicate….

But—there is nothing we can do. And nothing is going to save us! At the
appropriate time we will sign Form 206. At the appropriate time the tribunal
will read us our sentence, in our presence, or we will learn it in absentia
from the OSO.

Then there begins the period of transit prisons. Interspersed with our thoughts
about our future camp, we now love to recall our past: How well we used to
live! (Even if we lived badly.) But how many unused opportunities there were!
How many flowers we left uncrumpled!… When will we now make up for it? If I
only manage to survive—oh, how differently, how wisely, I am going to live! The
day of our future release? It shines like a rising sun!

And the conclusion is: Survive to reach it! Survive! At any price!

This is simply a turn of phrase, a sort of habit of speech: “at any price.”

But then the words swell up with their full meaning, and an awesome vow takes
shape: to survive at any price.

And whoever takes that vow, whoever does not blink before its crimson
burst—allows his own misfortune to overshadow both the entire common misfortune
and the whole world.

This is the great fork of camp life. From this point the roads go to the right
and to the left. One of them will rise, and the other will descend. If you go
to the right you lose your life, and if you go to the left—you lose your
conscience.493



Work at a killing pace characterizes concentration camp life—work under
conditions made deathly harsh, for the sake of the sheer aesthetic quality of
the misery; senseless labor—mere parody of productive work494—accompanied by
constant, consciously arranged privation:

The most ghastly moment of the twenty-four hours of camp life was the
awakening, when, at a still nocturnal hour, the three shrill blows of a whistle
tore us pitilessly from our exhausted sleep and from the longings in our
dreams. We then began the tussle with our wet shoes, into which we could
scarcely force our feet, which were sore and swollen with edema. And there were
the usual moans and groans about petty troubles, such as the snapping of wires
which replaced shoelaces. One morning I heard someone, whom I knew to be brave
and dignified, cry like a child because he finally had to go to the snowy
marching grounds in his bare feet, as his shoes were too shrunken for him to
wear. In those ghastly moments, I found a little bit of comfort: a small piece
of bread which I drew out of my pocket and munched with absorbed delight.495

In cold lower than 60 degrees below zero [!], workdays were written off: in
other words, on such days the records showed that the workers had not gone out
to work; but they chased them out anyway, and whatever they squeezed out of
them on those days was added to the other days, thereby raising the
percentages. (And the servile Medical Section wrote off those who froze to
death on such cold days on some other basis. And the ones who were left who
could no longer walk and were straining every sinew to crawl along on all fours
on the way back to camp, the convoy simply shot, so that they wouldn't escape
before they could come back to get them).496



No one can immerse himself in description of the consciously perpetrated
horrors of the twentieth century without recognizing, first, that such evil was
perpetrated in large part by the well-socialized and obedient. No one can come
to such recognition—which is self-comprehension, as well—and remain unimpressed
by the power and profundity of literary and mythic representations of the power
of evil: that living force, that eternally active, transcendent personality,
intrapsychically incarnate; that permanent aspect of man—every man—dedicated
solely, vengefully to destruction, dissolution, suffering and death:

O Rose, thou art sick!

The invisible worm

That flies in the night

In the howling storm,

Hath found out thy bed

Of crimson joy

And his dark secret love

Does thy life destroy.497



The Rwandan massacres, the killing fields in Cambodia, the tens of millions
dead (by Solzhenitsyn's estimate) as a consequence of internal repression in
the Soviet Union, the untold legions butchered during China's Cultural
Revolution [the Great Leap Forward (!), another black joke, accompanied upon
occasion, in the particular, by devouring of the victim], the planned
humiliation and rape of hundreds of Muslim women in Yugoslavia, the holocaust
of the Nazis, the carnage perpetrated by the Japanese in mainland China— such
events are not attributable to human kinship with the animal, the innocent
animal, or even by the desire to protect territory, interpersonal and
intrapsychic, but by a deep-rooted spiritual sickness, endemic to mankind, the
consequence of unbearable self-consciousness, apprehension of destiny in
suffering and limitation, and pathological refusal to face the consequences
thereof.

Man is not merely innately aggressive, a poorly socialized, and therefore
uncontrolled predator; at best, such theory can account for his criminal
aggression; it is in fact slavish adherence to the forces of socialization—to
the very principle of domestication itself— that enables him to participate in
production of the most truly efficient and organized of human evils. It was the
discipline of the Germans, not their criminality, that made the Nazis fearsome.
It was the loyalty, patriotism and commitment of the Soviet and Chinese
communists that enabled the mass persecution and destructive-labor camp
elimination of their countrymen. Neither is man a victim of society, innocent
lamb perverted by social forces beyond individual control. Man created society
in his own image; it enables him as much as it corrupts him. Man chooses evil,
for the sake of the evil. Man exults in agony, delights in pain, worships
destruction and pathology. Man can torture his brother and dance on his grave.
Man despises life, his own weak life, and the vulnerability of others, and
constantly works to lay waste, to undermine, to destroy, to torment, to abuse
and devour:

From the side we looked like two reddish stones in the field.

Somewhere young men of our age were studying at the Sorbonne or at Oxford,
playing tennis during their ample hours of relaxation, arguing about the
problems of the world in student cafes. They were already being published and
were exhibiting their paintings. They were twisting and turning to find ways of
distorting the insufficiently original world around them in some new way. They
railed against the classics for exhausting all the subjects and themes. They
railed at their own governments and their own reactionaries who did not want to
comprehend and adopt the advanced experience of the Soviet Union. They recorded
interviews through the microphones of radio reporters, listening all the time
to their own voices and coquettishly elucidating what they wished to say in
their last or their first book. They judged everything in the world with
self-assurance, but particularly the prosperity and justice of our country.
Only at some point in their old age, in the course of compiling encyclopedias,
would they notice with astonishment that they could not find any worthy Russian
names for our letters—for all the letters of our alphabet.

The rain drummed on the back of our heads, and the chill crept up our wet
backs.

We looked about us. The half-loaded cars had been overturned. Everyone had
left. There was no one in the entire clay pit, nor in the entire field beyond
the compound. Out in the gray curtain of rain lay the hidden village, and even
the roosters had hidden in a dry place.

We, too, picked up our spades, so that no one would steal them—they were
registered in our names. And dragging them behind us like heavy wheelbarrows,
we went around Matronina's plant beneath the shed where the empty galleries
wound all around the Hoffman kilns that fired the bricks. There were drafts
here and it was cold, but it was also dry. We pushed ourselves down into the
dust beneath the brick archway and sat there.

Not far away from us a big heap of coal was piled. Two zeks498 were digging
into it, eagerly seeking something there. When they found it, they tried it in
their teeth, then put it in their sack. Then they sat themselves down and each
ate a similar black-grey lump.

“What are you eating there, fellows?”

“It's ‘sea clay.’ The doctor doesn't forbid it. It doesn't do any good, but it
doesn't do any harm either. And if you add a kilo of it a day to your rations,
it's as if you had really eaten. Go on, look for some; there's a lot of it
among the coal.”

And so it was that right up to nightfall the clay pit did not fulfill its work
norms. Matronina gave orders that we should be left out all night. But…. the
electricity went out everywhere, and the work compound had no lights, so they
called everyone in to the gatehouse. They ordered us to link arms, and with a
beefed-up convoy, to the barking of dogs and curses, they took us to the camp
compound. Everything was black. We moved along without seeing where it was wet
and where the earth was firm, kneading it all up in succession, losing our
footing and jerking one another.

And in the camp compound it was dark. Only a hellish glow came from beneath the
burners for “individual cooking.” And in the mess hall two kerosene lamps
burned next to the serving window. And you could not read the slogan, nor see
the double portion of nettle gruel in the bowl, and you sucked it down with
your lips by feel.

And tomorrow would be the same and every day: six cars of red clay— three
scoops of black gruel. In prison, too, we seemed to have grown weak, but here
it went much faster. There was already a ringing in the head. That pleasant
weakness, in which it is easier to give in than to fight back, kept coming
closer.

And in the barracks—total darkness. We lay there dressed in everything wet on
everything bare, and it seemed it was warmer not to take anything off—like a
poultice.

Open eyes looked at the black ceiling, at the black heavens.

Good Lord! Good Lord! Beneath the shells and the bombs I begged you to preserve
my life. And now I beg you, please send me death!499



It is reassuring to presume that the individuals who constructed, organized and
ran the concentration camps of Germany and the Soviet Union were in some
profound manner different from the people that we know, and love, and are. But
there is no reason to make this presumption, except for convenience and naive
peace of mind.500 The image of the concentration camp guard, much as the
inmate, defines the modern individual. Hell is a bottomless pit, and why?
Because nothing is ever so bad that we cannot make it worse:

Fire, fire! The branches crackle and the night wind of late autumn blows the
flame of the bonfire back and forth. The compound is dark; I am alone at the
bonfire, and I can bring it still some more carpenters' shavings. The compound
here is a privileged one, so privileged that is almost as if I were out in
freedom—this is an Island of Paradise; this is the Marfino “sharashka”—a
scientific institute staffed with prisoners—in its most privileged period. No
one is overseeing me, calling me to a cell, chasing me away from the bonfire. I
am wrapped in a padded jacket and even then it is chilly in the penetrating
wind.

But she—who has already been standing in the wind for hours, her arms straight
down, her head drooping, weeping, then growing numb and still. And then again
she begs piteously: “Citizen Chief! Forgive me! Please forgive me! I won't do
it again.”

The wind carries her moan to me, just as if she were moaning next to my ear.
The citizen chief at the gatehouse fires up his stove and does not answer.

This was the gatehouse of the camp next door to us, from which workers came
into our compound to lay water pipes and to repair the old ramshackle seminary
building. Across from me, beyond the artfully intertwined, many-stranded
barbed-wire barricade and two steps away from the gatehouse, beneath a bright
lantern, stood the punished girl, head hanging, the wind tugging at her gray
work skirt, her feet growing numb from the cold, a thin scarf over her head. It
had been warm during the day, when they had been digging a ditch on our
territory. And another girl, slipping down into a ravine, had crawled her way
to the Vladykino Highway and escaped. The guard had bungled. And Moscow city
buses ran right along the highway. When they caught on, it was too late to
catch her. They raised the alarm. A mean, dark major arrived and shouted that
if they failed to catch the girl, the entire camp would be deprived of visits
and parcels for a whole month, because of her escape. And the women brigadiers
went into a rage, and they were all shouting, one of them in particular, who
kept viciously rolling her eyes: “Oh, I hope they catch her, the bitch! I hope
they take scissors and—clip, clip, clip—take off all her hair in front of the
line-up!” (This wasn't something she had thought up herself. This was the way
they punished women in the Gulag.) But the girl who was now standing outside
the gatehouse in the cold had sighed and said instead: “At least she can have a
good time out in freedom for all of us!” The jailer overheard what she said,
and now she was being punished; everyone else had been taken off to the camp,
but she had been set outside there to stand “at attention” in front of the
gatehouse. This had been at 6 PM, and it was now 11 PM. She tried to shift from
one foot to another, but the guard stuck out his head and shouted: “Stand at
attention, whore, or else it will be worse for you!” And now she was not
moving, only weeping: “Forgive me, Citizen Chief! Let me into the camp, I won't
do it anymore!”

But even in the camp no one was about to say to her: All right, idiot! Come on
in!

The reason they were keeping her out there so long was that the next day was
Sunday, and she would not be needed for work.

Such a straw-blond, naive, uneducated slip of a girl! She had been imprisoned
for some spool of thread. What a dangerous thought you expressed there, little
sister! They want to teach you a lesson for the rest of your life!

Fire, fire! We fought the war—and we looked into the bonfires to see what kind
of Victory it would be. The wind wafted a glowing husk from the bonfire.

To that flame and you, girl, I promise: the whole wide world will read about
you.501



Who would admit, even to himself: “given the choice, I would be the citizen
chief, in preference to the punished girl?” And without this admission there is
no reason to change, and no reason to combat the evil within:

for whence

But from the author of all ill could spring

So deep a malice, to confound the race

Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell

To mingle and involve, done all to spite

The great Creator?502



Faced with the horror of camp life—“It too, is life”—many become corrupted:

Let us admit the truth: At that great fork in the camp road, at that great
divider of souls, it was not the majority of the prisoners that turned to the
right.503



This corruption was not caused by camp conditions, appalling as they were:

Bread is not issued in equal pieces, but thrown onto a pile—go grab! Knock down
your neighbours, and tear it out of their hands! The quantity of bread issued
is such that one or two people have to die for each that survives. The bread is
hung up on a pine tree—go fell it. The bread is deposited in a coal mine—go
down and mine it. Can you think about your own grief, about the past and the
future, about humanity and God? Your mind is absorbed in vain calculations
which for the present moment cut you off from the heavens—and tomorrow are
worth nothing. You hate labor—it is your principal enemy. You hate your
companions—rivals in life and death. You are reduced to a frazzle by intense
envy and alarm lest somewhere behind your back others are right now dividing up
that bread which could be yours, that somewhere on the other side of the wall a
tiny potato is being ladled out of the pot which could have ended up in your
own bowl.504



Such conditions merely provided the precondition for the emergence of the
consequences of decisions already taken, prior to incarceration, in the large
part—decisions to choose security instead of maintenance of conscience; to
embrace safety instead of soul:

In looking at the people, we might see

that in the space twixt birth and death,

one third follow life, and one third death,

and those who merely pass from birth to death,

are also one third of those we see.505



Greed and fear in the everyday world culminate in the same blind inability
Solzhenitsyn recognized in the camps—the same incapacity to think about grief,
about the past and future, about man and God—but with far less evident
justification. Fear of mortality, in normal life, is most generally dealt with
in the same manner as in the camp situation: through absolute identification
with the system and consequent rejection of the self; through acceptance of
ideological promise, offer of material security and guarantee of (unearned)
intrapsychic stability:

My friend Panin and I are lying on the middle shelf of a Stolypin compartment
and have set ourselves up comfortably, tucked our salt herring in our pockets
so we don't need water and can go to sleep. But at some station or other they
shove into our compartment…a Marxist scholar! We can even tell this from his
goatee and spectacles. He doesn't hide the fact: he is a former Professor of
the Communist Academy. We hang head down in the square cutout—and from his very
first words we see that he is: impenetrable. But we have been serving time for
a long while, and have a long time left to serve, and we value a merry joke. We
must climb down to have a bit of fun! There is ample space left in the
compartment, and so we exchange places with someone and crowd in:

“Hello.”

“Hello.”

“You're not too crowded?”

“No, it's all right.”

“Have you been in the jug a long time?”

“Long enough.”

“Are you past the halfway mark?”

“Just.”

“Look over there: how poverty-stricken our villages are—straw thatch, crooked
huts.”

“An inheritance from the Tsarist regime.”

“Well, but we've already had thirty Soviet years.”

“That's an insignificant period historically.”

“It's terrible that the collective farmers are starving.”

“But have you looked in all their ovens?”

“Just ask any collective farmer in our compartment.”

“Everyone in jail is embittered and prejudiced.”

“But I've seen collective farms myself.”

“That means they were uncharacteristic.”

(The goatee had never been in any of them—that way it was simpler.)

“Just ask the old folks: under the Tsar they were well fed, well clothed, and
they used to have so many holidays.”

“I'm not even going to ask. It's a subjective trait of human memory to praise
everything in the past. The cow that died is the one that gave twice the milk.
(Sometimes he even cited proverbs!) And our people don't like holidays. They
like to work.”

“But why is there a shortage of bread in many cities?”

“When?”

“Right before the war, for example.”

“Not true! Before the war, in fact, everything had been worked out.”

“Listen, at that time in all the cities on the Volga there were queues of
thousands of people…”

“Some local failure in supply. But more likely your memory is failing you.”

“But there's a shortage now!”

“Old wives' tales. We have from seven to eight billion poods of grain.”

“And the grain itself is rotten.”

“Not at all. We have been successful in developing new varieties of grain.”…

And so forth. He is imperturbable. He speaks in a language which requires no
effort of the mind. And arguing with him is like walking through a desert.

It's about people like that that they say: “He made the rounds of all the
smithies and came home unshod.” And when they write in their obituaries:
“perished tragically during the period of the cult,” this should be corrected
to read: “perished comically.”

But if his fate had worked out differently, we would never have learned what a
dry, insignificant little man he was. We would have respectfully read his name
in the newspaper. He would have become a people's commissar or even ventured to
represent all Russia abroad.

To argue with him was useless. It was much more interesting to play with him….
no, not at chess, but at the game of “comrades.” There really is such a game.
It is a very simple game. Just play up to him a couple of times or so, use some
of his own pet words and phrases. He will like it. For he has grown accustomed
to find that all around him…are enemies. He has become weary of snarling and
doesn't like to tell his stories because all those stories will be twisted
around and thrown right back in his face. But if he takes you for one of his
own, he will quite humanly disclose to you what he has seen at the station:
People are passing by, talking, laughing, life goes on. The Party is providing
leadership, people are being moved from job to job. Yet you and I are
languishing here in prison, there are a handful of us, and we must write and
write petitions, begging a review of our cases, begging for a pardon….

Or else he will tell you something interesting: In the Communist Academy they
decided to devour one comrade; they decided he wasn't quite genuine, not one of
our own; but somehow they couldn't manage it: there were no errors in his
essays, and his biography was clean. Then all of a sudden, going through the
archives, what a find! They ran across an old brochure written by this comrade
which Vladimir Ilyich Lenin himself had held in his hands and in the margin of
which he had written in his own handwriting the notation: “As an economist he
is shit.” “Well now, you understand,” our companion smiled confidentially,
“that after that it was no trouble at all to make short work ofthat muddlehead
and impostor. He was expelled from the Academy and deprived of his scholarly
rank.”

The railroad cars go clicking along. Everyone is already asleep, some lying
down, some sitting up. Sometimes a convoy guard passes along the corridor,
yawning.

And one more unrecorded episode from Lenin's biography is lost from view.506



Human life is bounded on all fronts by vulnerability, is eternally subject to
fear for lack of resources and security of person. Moral knowledge, knowledge
of good and evil, is the capability to choose pattern of
adaptation—authoritarian, decadent or creative—in the face of mortal
limitation, explicit and implicit, in camp, and outside:

Those people became corrupted in camp who had already been corrupted out in
freedom or who were ready for it. Because people are corrupted in freedom too,
sometimes even more effectively than in camp.

The convoy officer who ordered that Moiseyevaite be tied to a post in order to
be mocked—had he not been corrupted more profoundly than the camp inmates who
spat on her?

And for that matter did every one of the brigade members spit on her? Perhaps
only two from each brigade did. In fact, that is probably what happened.

Tatyana Falike writes: “Observation of people convinced me that no man could
become a scoundrel in camp if he had not been one before.”

If a person went swiftly bad in camp, what it might mean was that he had not
just gone bad, but that that inner foulness which had not previously been
needed had disclosed itself.

Voichenko has his opinion: “In camp, existence did not determine consciousness,
but just the opposite: consciousness and steadfast faith in the human essence
decided whether you became an animal or remained a human being.”

A drastic, sweeping declaration!…But he was not the only one who thought so.
The artist Ivashev-Musatov passionately argued exactly the same thing.507



This corruption—this turning to the left—led some to dissolve, to decay; to
fall into the sickness unto death, despair; to embrace death, with final
hope—necessary faith— irrevocably, understandably crushed and shattered:

The prisoner who had lost faith in the future—his future—was doomed. With his
loss of belief in the future, he also lost his spiritual hold; he let himself
decline and became subject to mental and physical decay. Usually, this happened
quite suddenly, in the form of a crisis, the symptoms of which were familiar to
the experienced camp inmate. We all feared this moment—not for ourselves, which
would have been pointless, but for our friends. Usually it began with the
prisoner refusing one morning to get dressed and wash to to go out on the
parade grounds. No entreaties, no blows, no threats had any effect. He just lay
there, hardly moving. If this crisis was brought about by an illness, he
refused to be taken to the sick-bay or to do anything to help himself. He
simply gave up. There he remained, lying in his own excreta, and nothing
bothered him anymore.

I once had a dramatic demonstration of the close link between the loss of faith
in the future and this dangerous giving up. F—, my senior block warden, a
fairly well-known composer and librettist, confided in me one day: “I would
like to tell you something, Doctor. I have had a strange dream. A voice told me
that I could wish for something, that I should only say what I wanted to know,
and all my questions would be answered. What do you think I asked? That I would
like to know when the war would be over for me. You know what I mean,
Doctor—for me! I wanted to know, when we, when our camp, would be liberated and
our sufferings come to an end.”

“And when did you have this dream?” I asked.

“In February, 1945,” he answered. It was then the beginning of March.

“What did your dream voice answer?”

Furtively he whispered to me, “March thirtieth.”

When F——told me about this dream, he was still full of hope and convinced that
the voice of his dream would be right. But as the promised day drew nearer, the
war news which reached our camp made it appear very unlikely that we would be
free on the promised date. On March twenty-ninth, F——suddenly became ill and
ran a high temperature. On March thirtieth, the day his prophecy had told him
that the war would be over for him, he became delirious and lost consciousness.
On March thirty-first, he was dead. To all appearances, he had died of
typhus.508



Other camp victims, by contrast—but equally comprehensibly—chose to identify
with the camp authorities, when allowed such honor, and therefore arrayed
themselves against those who shared their fate, those who were also starved and
deprived, frightened and worked to exhaustion. The persecution of others
presents no difficulty—is, in fact, inevitable—in the wake of bondage and
persecution of the self. Frankl states:

The process of selecting Capos [trustees] was a negative one; only the most
brutal of the prisoners were chosen for this job (although there were some
happy exceptions). But apart from the selection of Capos which was undertaken
by the SS, there was a sort of self-selecting process going on the whole time
among all of the prisoners.

On the average, only those prisoners could keep alive who, after years of
trekking from camp to camp, had lost all scruples in their fight for existence;
they were prepared to use every means, honest and otherwise, even brutal force,
theft, and betrayal of their friends, in order to save themselves….509

Many of the Capos fared better in the camp than they had in their entire lives.
Often they were harder on the prisoners than were the guards, and beat them
more cruelly than the SS men did.510



Likewise, Solzhenitsyn:

You—had fallen. You—were punished. You—had been uprooted from life—but you want
to avoid the very bottom of the pile? You want to hover over someone else,
rifle in hand? Over your brother? Here! Take it! And if he runs—shoot him! We
will even call you comrade. And we will give you a Red Army man's ration.

And…he grows proud. And…he tightens his grip on his gun stock. And…he shoots.
And… he is even more severe than the free guards. (How is one to understand
this: Was it really a purblind faith in social initiative? Or was it just an
icy, contemptuous calculation based on the lowest human feelings?)511



Most camp inmates were normal, well-adapted members of society before their
imprisonment. These normal people had identified with the structure and
successes of that society, with its definitions of present and ideal future,
with its means to its ends. Unjust incarceration meant loss of status,
heightened fear of morality; demonstrated as nothing else could the evidently
pathological operations of the state, constructed in theory precisely to
protect against such deprivation and anxiety. Unjust incarceration presented
anomaly sufficient in its fundamental import to undermine faith in previous
identification, to demonstrate the incomplete, or even corrupt, nature of
previous status, to foster anxiety, depression and desire, often realized, for
dissolution and death. How could such a threat be countered?

Conscious, rationalized denial of evident injustice made social identification
possible once again—but at the cost of substantial intrapsychic damage,
dissociation. The lie involved meant sacrifice of more personal experience,
more individual possibility, more divine meaning to the group. The inevitable
result of such sacrifice—the sin against the Holy Spirit—is fanatical adherence
to the letter of the law—

Farewell happy Fields

Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail

Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell

Receive thy new possessor—one who brings

A mind not to be changed by place or time.512



is fidelity to the lie—

Farewell remorse! All good to me is lost

Evil, be thou my Good: by thee at least

Divided empire with Heaven's King I hold,

By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign;

As Man erelong, and this new World, shall know.

Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face,

Thrice changed with pale ire, envy and despair,

Which marred his borrowed visage, and betrayed

Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld,

For Heavenly minds from such distempers foul

Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware

Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm,

Artificer of fraud, and was the first

That practised falsehood under saintly show,

Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge.513



allegiance to cruelty and deceit—

Oh why should wrath be mute and fury dumb?

I am no baby, I, that with base prayers

I should repent the evils I have done.

Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did

Would I perform if I might have my will.

If one good deed in all my life I did,

I do repent it from my very soul.514



and hatred of the good:

The more I see

Pleasures about me, so much more I feel

Torment within me, as from the hateful siege

Of contraries; all good to me becomes

Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state,

But neither here seek I, no, nor in Heaven,

To dwell, unless by mastering Heaven's Supreme,

Nor hope to be myself less miserable

By what I seek, but others to make such

As I, though thereby worse to me redound:

For only in destroying I find ease

To my relentless thoughts.515



Human beings are emotionally attached to those whom with they identify;
sympathy for the victim of injustice means inability to perpetrate such
injustice. Identification with tyranny, on the other hand, means temporary
effortless surcease from painful (intra- and extrapsychic) moral conflict. Such
identification merely requires denial of the injustice committed to one's own
person, and the subsequent falsification of individual experience. This
falsification cuts the empathic bonds, connecting prisoner to prisoner,
connecting man to man, connecting man to himself:

I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;

And if I die, no soul will pity me:

Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself

Find in myself no pity to myself.516



The victim who finds personal security in identity with his persecutor has
become that persecutor. He has eliminated the possibility of further
adaptation, integration and growth, and has voluntarily forfeited possibility
of redemption. Solzhenitsyn describes the reactions and actions of staunch
Communist Party members, imprisoned and devoured by the system they supported
and produced:

To say that things were painful for them is to say almost nothing. They were
incapable of assimilating such a blow, such a downfall, and from their own
people, too, from their own dear Party, and, from all appearances, for nothing
at all. After all, they had been guilty of nothing as far as the Party was
concerned—nothing at all. It was painful for them to such a degree that it was
considered taboo among them, uncomradely, to ask: “What were you imprisoned
for?” The only squeamish generation of prisoners! The rest of us, in 1945, with
tongues hanging out, used to recount our arrests, couldn't wait to tell the
story to every chance newcomer we met and to the whole cell—as if it were an
anecdote.

Here's the sort of people they were. Olga Sliozberg's husband had already been
arrested, and they had come to carry out a search and arrest her too. The
search lasted four hours—and she spent those four hours sorting out the minutes
of the congress of Stakhanovites of the bristle and brush industry, of which
she had been the secretary until the previous day. The incomplete state of the
minutes troubled her more than her children, whom she was now leaving forever!
Even the interrogator conducting the search could not resist telling her: “Come
on now, say farewell to your children!”

Here's the sort of people they were. A letter from her fifteen-year old
daughter came to Yelizaveta Tsetkova in the Kazan Prison for long-term
prisoners: “Mama! Tell me, write to me—are you guilty or not? I hope you
weren't guilty, because then I won't join the Komsomol [a Soviet youth
organization], and I won't forgive them because of you. But if you are guilty—I
won't write you any more and will hate you.” And the mother was stricken by
remorse in her damp gravelike cell with its dim little lamp: How could her
daughter live without the Komsomol? How could she be permitted to hate Soviet
power? Better that she should hate me. And she wrote: “I am guilty…. Enter the
Komsomol!”

How could it be anything but hard! It was more than the human heart could bear:
to fall beneath the beloved axe—then to have to justify its wisdom. But that is
the price a man pays for entrusting his God-given soul to human dogma. Even
today any orthodox Communist will affirm that Tsetkova acted correctly. Even
today they cannot be convinced that this is precisely the “perversion of small
forces,” that the mother perverted her daughter and harmed her soul.

Here's the sort of people they were: Y.T. gave sincere testimony against her
husband—anything to aid the Party!

Oh, how one could pity them if at least now they had come to comprehend their
former wretchedness! This whole chapter could have been written quite
differently if today at least they had forsaken their earlier views!

But it happened the way Mariya Danielyan had dreamed it would: “If I leave here
someday, I am going to live as if nothing had taken place.”

Loyalty? And in our view it is just plain pigheadedness. These devotees to the
theory of development construed loyalty to that development to mean
renunciation of any personal development whatsoever! As Nikolai Adamovich
Vilenchuk said, after serving seventeen years: “We believed in the Party—and we
were not mistaken!” Is this loyalty or pigheadedness?

No, it was not for show and not out of hypocrisy that they argued in the cells
in defense of all the government's actions. They needed ideological arguments
in order to hold on to a sense of their own rightness— otherwise, insanity was
not far off.517



“The evidence is intolerable—so much the worse for the evidence!” The hero, the
savior, is metaphorical or narrative description of the pattern by which the
existence of anomalous information is accepted, mined for significance, and
incorporated into the body of cultural adaptation. The devil, incarnation of
evil, is embodiment, in procedure, episode and word, of the tendency that
denies, rather than accepts; embodiment of the process that consciously
inhibits life and its development, and brings to a halt the spirit's
revolutionary process of adaptation:

Just tell us one thing: Who laid the bricks, who laid the bricks in the wall?
Was it you, you hard-heads?518



Ideology confines human potential to a narrow and defined realm. Adaptation
undertaken within that realm necessarily remains insufficient, destined to
produce misery—as it is only relationship with the transcendent that allows
life to retain its savor. Ideology says “it must be thus,” but human behavior
constantly exceeds its realm of representation; such capacity for exception
must therefore be denied, lest faith in ideology vanish, and intolerable chaos
reappear. The ideologue says: anomaly means dissolution, dissolution means
terror—that which frightens is evil: anomaly is evil. It is not the existence
of anomalous information that constitutes evil, however—such information
rejuvenates, when properly consumed. Evil is the process by which the
significance of the anomaly is denied; the process by which meaning
itself—truth itself—is rejected. This rejection means, necessarily, life
rendered unbearable, hellish:

For now the thought

Both of lost happiness and lasting pain

Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes,

That witnessed huge affliction and dismay,

Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate;

At once, as far as angel's ken, he views

The dismal situation waste and wild;

A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,

As one great furnace flamed, yet from these flames

No light, but rather darkness visible

Served only to discover sights of woe,

Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace

And rest can never dwell, hope never comes

That comes to all, but torture without end

Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed

With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed.

Such place Eternal Justice had prepared

For those rebellious, here their prison ordained

In utter darkness, and their portion set,

As far removed from God and light of Heaven

As from the center thrice to the utmost pole.519



The fact, regardless of content, is not evil; it is mere (terrible) actuality.
It is the attitude to the fact that has a moral or immoral nature. There are no
evil facts—although there are facts about evil; it is denial of the
unacceptable fact that constitutes evil—at least insofar as human control
extends. The suppression of unbearable fact transforms the conservative
tendency to preserve into the authoritarian tendency to crush; transforms the
liberal wish to transform into the decadent desire to subvert. Confusing evil
with the unbearable fact, rather than with the tendency to deny the fact, is
like equating the good with the static product of heroism, rather than with the
dynamic act of heroism itself. Confusion of evil with the fact—the act of
blaming the messenger—merely provides rationale for the act of denial,
justification for savage repression, and mask of morality for decadence and
authoritarianism.

Denial of (anomalous) experience eliminates possibility of growth; culminates
in establishment of a personality whose weakness in the face of inevitable
tragic circumstance and suffering produces desire for annihilation of life.
Repression of fact— of truth—ensures deterioration of personality; assures
transformation of subjective experience into endless meaningless sterility and
misery. Acceptance, by contrast—in the spirit of ignorant humility, courage
disguised—provides the necessary precondition for change.

Myth offers an imitative schema for the generation of such acceptance—for
development of the ability to adapt—through encouragement of identification
with the hero, whose form is constantly represented in ethical behavior,
portrayed in ritual and described in narrative. The story of the hero is
symbolic depiction of the man who chooses the third way, when confronted by
facts whose significance undermines personal or social stability—who risks
intrapsychic dissolution as voluntarily chosen alternative to adoption of
tyranny or acceptance of decadence. Failure to adopt such identification
ensures constant restriction of action and imagination; generates hatred,
cruelty, disgust for the weak; assures adoption of the lie as prime, and
perhaps most common, adaptive strategy. Such adoption inevitably transforms
human experience into hell on earth:

Him the Almighty Power

Hurled headlong flaming from the ethereal Sky

With hideous ruin and combustion down

To bottomless perdition, there to dwell

In adamantine chains and penal fire.520



The definitions of moral and immoral accepted by the members of a given society
remain dependent upon the conceptualization of the way accepted by that
society. From within the confines of a particular conceptualization, certain
behaviors, productions of the imagination and ideas are attributed status of
good and status of evil, in accordance with their perceived utility, with
regard to a particular goal. Any act or idea that interferes with current
individual desire becomes the fool, or worse—the enemy. This means that if the
individual or the group desires anything more than to live in the light, so to
speak, then truth and wisdom necessarily become foreign, abhorrent. What may be
regarded as useful and necessary from a higher order of morality may look
positively useless and counterproductive from a lower—and will come to be
treated in that manner. So the individual (or the attribute) that is serving
such a higher function may well appear contaminated by the dragon of chaos to
those who have not yet seen or who will not admit to the necessity and
desirability of that function. Such devaluation of the “revolutionary best”
dooms the individual and those he can affect to weakness and misery. Restricted
and narrow goals produce warped and stunted personalities, who have cast the
best within them into the domain of anomaly—defining their true talents and
“deviances” as (threatening and frustrating) impediments to their too-narrow
ambitions. The stunted personality will experience life as a burden, a
responsibility too heavy to bear, and turn to resentment and hatred as
“justifiable” responses.

Reconceptualization of the way, by contrast, means revaluation of behavior,
episode and semantic proposition, so that a new order might exist; means
uncomfortable return to chaos, however, prior to the reconstruction ofthat more
inclusive order. Re-evaluation of the goal, of the ideal undertaken
voluntarily, as a consequence of exposure to anomalous information, may bring
suppressed material, action potential, imagination and thought, back to light.
The shift toward conceptualization of the process of heroism as goal—to
valuation of truth, courage and love—allows for reincorporation and subsequent
development of hitherto repressed, stunted and pathologized possibilities:

The great epochs of our lives come when we gain the courage to rechristen our
evil as what is best in us.521



This is not to say, stupidly, that all motivational states—or all facts, or all
behavioral possibilities—are equally “beneficial,” in all situations. It is
rather that our acts of self-definition (many of which have an “arbitrary”
cultural grounding) determine what we are willing to accept, at any given place
and moment, as “good” and as “evil.” The self-sacrificing domestic martyr, for
example, who accepts her husband's every authoritarian demand—she has defined
her capacity for violence as ethically unsuitable, and will regard it as
something forbidden and evil. This makes aggression something contaminated by
the dragon of chaos, from the martyr's perspective. She will therefore remain a
miserable doormat, unless she learns to bite—which means, until she drops her
present all-too-restrictive “easygoing and affectionate” stance (which is not
doing her husband any good, either, by reinforcing his weak, fascistic
tendencies; nor improving the society of which her marriage is a part. Her
inability to be angry—which is, in reality, her inability to regard herself as
possessed of intrinsic worth—removes necessary limitations to her husband's
inappropriate and socially dangerous expansion of power). It is thus the
“unsuitable desire” that is often precisely what is necessary to lift us beyond
our present uncomfortable stasis. This does not mean simpleminded application
of a poorly designed strategy of “previously repressed” motivated behavior. It
means, instead, true integration of what has not yet been expressed—or even
admitted—into the structure of harmonious intrapsychic and social relations:

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate
thine enemy.

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you;

That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and
on the unjust.

For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans the same?

And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more [than others]? do not even
the publicans so?

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.
(Matthew 5:43–48)



The adoption of a particular (socially determined) conceptualization of the way
allows for provisional establishment of the meaning of experiences—objects,
situations and processes. The nature of the goal toward which action and
ideation is devoted, in the ideal, determines what behaviors and products of
imagination and abstract thought come to be regarded as acceptable, and are
therefore developed, and which are forbidden, and are therefore left repressed
and stunted. If the individual or social ideal remains undeveloped, immature in
conceptualization, or twisted in the course of development, then aspects of
behavior and cognition necessary for redemption—for deliverance from the
unbearable weight of tragic self-consciousness—will be suppressed, with
intrapsychic and social pathology as the inevitable result. If the individual
strives primarily for material security, or social acceptance, rather than for
the mythic love of God and fellow man, then respect for truth will suffer, and
complete adaptation will become impossible.

And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to
him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life?

And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one,
that is, God.

Thow knowest the commmandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother.

And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my
youth.

Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest:
go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me.

And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great
possessions.

And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!

And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and
saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to
enter into the kingdom of God!

It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God.

And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can
be saved? (Mark 10:17–26)



The highest value toward which effort is devoted determines what will become
elevated, and what subjugated, in the course of individual and social
existence. If security or power is valued above all else, then all will become
subject to the philosophy of expedience. In the long term, adoption of such a
policy leads to development of rigid, weak personality (or social environment)
or intrapsychic dissociation and social chaos:

Jesus said, “A man had received visitors. And when he had prepared the dinner,
he sent his servant to invite the guest. He went to the first one and said to
him, ‘My master invites you.’ He said, ‘I have some claims against some
merchants. They are coming to me this evening. I must go and give them my
orders. I ask to be excused from the dinner.’ He went to another and said to
him, ‘My master has invited you.’ He said to him, ‘I have just bought a house
and am required for the day. I shall not have any spare time.’ He sent to
another and said to him, ‘My master invites you.’ He said to him, ‘My friend is
going to get married, and I am to prepare the banquet. I shall not be able to
come. I ask to be excused from the dinner.’ He went to another and said to him,
‘I have just bought a farm, and I am on my way to collect the rent. I shall not
be able to come. I ask to be excused.’ The servant returned and said to his
master, ‘Those whom you invited to the dinner have asked to be excused.’ The
master said to his servants, ‘Go outside to the streets and bring back those
whom you happen to meet, so that they may dine.’ Businessmen and merchants
[will] not enter the places of my father.”522



A man who has put his faith in what he owns, rather than what he stands for,
will be unable to sacrifice what he owns, for what he is. He will necessarily
choose—when the re-emergence of uncertainty forces choice—what he has gathered
around him instead of what he could be. This decision will weaken his nature
and make him unable to cope with the tragic weight of his consciousness; it
will turn him toward the lie and make him an active agent in production of his
own and his society's insufficiency.

If the goal toward which behavior is devoted remains pathologically
restricted—if the highest ideal remains, for example, sensual pleasure, social
acceptance, power or material security—then aspects of behavior and ideation
which exist in conflict to these goals will become pathologically twisted in
orientation, because forced to serve a contemptible master; will be defined as
evil, left undeveloped in consequence, and remain unavailable for use in more
potentially inclusive redemptive activity; will become subjugated, suppressed,
and stagnant. This lack of development and associated sickening will decrease
adaptive flexibility, in the face of the true challenges of life; will ensure
that life's challenges appear devastating. The myth of the way, which describes
human experience itself, encompasses loss of paradise, emergence of tragedy and
then, redemption—and it is the fool, the true individual, who is in desperate
need of redemption. To identify with the group is to deny the fool—

Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw I Thee an hungred, or
athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee?

Then shall He answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it
not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to Me. (Matthew 25:44–45)



and to therefore lose all hope.

We have a model of ourselves, in imagination and semantic representation, which
is in ill accord with the actuality of ourselves, in procedure, imaginative
capacity and potential for thought. This lack of isomorphism, this willful lack
of attention to truth, means that behavior and potential thereof exist, which
is anomalous with regard to the ideal of behavior in representation—“I couldn't
do that”; that episodic capacity and content exist, which is anomalous to the
ideal of such capability and content in representation—“I couldn't imagine
that”; and that semantic ability and content exists, which is anomalous with
regard to the ideal of semantic ability and content, in representation—“I
couldn't think that.” Pathological use of this model (the replacement of
actuality, with an insufficient idea, conceptualized in fantasy) restricts
adaptation to the unexpected—to change itself. This means existence in
boundless and ever-expanding misery:

Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell;

And in the lowest deep a lower deep

Still threatening to devour me opens wide,

To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.523



The devil, traditional representation of evil, refuses recognition of
imperfection, refuses to admit “I was in error, in my action, in my
representation”; accepts, as a consequence of unbending pride, eternal
misery—refuses metanoia, confession and reconciliation; remains forever the
spirit that refuses and rejects:

O, then at last relent; is there no place

Left for repentance, none for pardon left?

None left but by submission; and that word

Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame

Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced

With other promises and other vaunts

Than to submit, boasting I could subdue

The Omnipotent. Ay me! they little know

How dearly I abide that boast so vain,

Under what torments inwardly I groan;

While they adore me on the throne of Hell,

With diadem and sceptre high advanced,

The lower still I fall, only supreme

In misery—such joy ambition finds!

But say I could repent, and could obtain,

By act of grace, my former state; how soon

Should height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay

What feigned submission swore; ease would recant

Vows made in pain, as violent and void—

For never can true reconcilement grow

Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:

Which would but lead me to a worse relapse,

And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear

Short intermission bought with double smart.

This knows my Punisher; therefore as far

From granting he, as I from begging, peace:

All hope excluded thus.524



Such refusal—the inability to say, “I was wrong, I am sorry, I should change,”
means the death of hope, existence in the abyss. Rejection of fact means
alienation from God, from meaning, from truth—and life without meaning is
suffering without recourse, worthy of nothing but destruction, in accordance
with self-definition. Frye states:

The way of life is described as beginning in metanoia, a word translated
“repentance” by the [Authorized Version], which suggests a moralized inhibition
of the “stop doing everything you want to do” variety. What the word primarily
means, however, is change of outlook or spiritual metamorphosis, an enlarged
vision of the dimensions of human life. Such a vision, among other things,
detaches one from one's primary community and attaches him to another. When
John the Baptist says “Bring forth fruits worthy of metanoia” (Matthew 3:8) he
is addressing Jews, and goes on to say that their primary social identity
(descent from Abraham) is of no spiritual importance….

The dialectic of metanoia and sin splits the world into the kingdom of genuine
identity, presented as Jesus‘ “home,” and a hell, a conception found in the Old
Testament only in the form of death or the grave. Hell is that, but it is also
the world of anguish and torment that man goes on making for himself all
through history.525



The act of metanoia is adaptation itself: admission of error, founded on faith
in ability to tolerate such admission and its consequences; consequential
dissolution, subjugation to the “hateful siege of contraries, and—Deo
concedente—restoration of intrapsychic and interpersonal integrity:

As soon as you have renounced that aim of “surviving at any price,” and gone
where the calm and simple people go—then imprisonment begins to transform your
former character in an astonishing way. To transform it in a direction most
unexpected to you.

And it would seem that in this situation feelings of malice, the disturbance of
being oppressed, aimless hate, irritability, and nervousness ought to multiply.
But you yourself do not notice how, with the impalpable flow of time, slavery
nurtures in you the shoots of contradictory feelings.

Once upon a time you were sharply intolerant. You were constantly in a rush.
And you were constantly short of time. And now you have time with interest. You
are surfeited with it, with its months and years, behind you and ahead of
you—and a beneficial calming fluid pours through your blood vessels—patience.

You are ascending….

Formerly you never forgave anyone. You judged people without mercy. And you
praised people with equal lack of moderation. And now an understanding mildness
has become the basis of your uncategorical judgments. You have come to realize
your own weakness—and you can therefore understand the weakness of others. And
be astonished at another's strength. And wish to possess it yourself.

The stones rustle beneath our feet. We are ascending….

With the years, armor-plated restraint covers your heart and all your skin. You
do not hasten to question and you do not hasten to answer. Your tongue has lost
its flexible capacity for easy oscillation. Your eyes do not flash with
gladness over good tidings, nor do they darken with grief.

For you still have to verify whether that's how it is going to be. And you also
have to work out—what is gladness, and what is grief.

And now the rule of your life is this: do not rejoice when you have found, do
not weep when you have lost.

Your soul, which formerly was dry, now ripens from suffering. And even if you
haven't come to love your neighbours in the Christian sense, you are at least
learning to love those close to you.

Those close to you in spirit who surround you in slavery. And how many of us
come to realize: It is particularly in slavery that for the first time we have
learned to recognize genuine friendship!

And also those close to you in blood, who surrounded you in your former life,
who loved you—while you played the tyrant over them… .

Here is a rewarding and inexhaustible direction for your thoughts: Reconsider
all your previous life. Remember everything you did that was bad and shameful
and take thought—can't you possibly correct it now?

Yes, you have been imprisoned for nothing. You have nothing to repent of before
the state and its laws.

But…before your own conscience? But…in relation to other individuals?526



Refusal of metanoia means inevitable intermixture of Earth and the underworld;
conscientious acceptance, by contrast, produces a characteristic transformation
of personality, of action, imagination and thought. Frankl states:

We who lived in concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the
huts comforting others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have
been few in number, they they offer sufficient proof that everything can be
taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one's
attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own way.

And there were always choices to make. Every day, every hour, offered the
opportunity to make a decision, a decision which determined whether you would
or would not submit to those powers which threatened to rob you of your very
self, your inner freedom; which determined whether or not you would become the
plaything of circumstance, renouncing freedom and dignity to become moulded
into the form of the typical inmate.527



Solzhenitsyn echoes these sentiments, almost precisely:

And how can one explain that certain unstable people found faith right there in
the camp, that they were strengthened by it, and that they survived
uncorrupted?

And many more, scattered about and unnoticed, came to their alloted turning
point and made no mistake in their choice. Those who managed to see that things
were not only bad for them, but even worse, even harder, for their neighbours.

And all those who, under the threat of a penalty zone and a new term of
imprisonment, refused to become stoolies?

How, in general, can one explain Grigory Ivanovich Grigoryev, a soil scientist?
A scientist who volunteered for the People's Volunteer Corps in 1941—and the
rest of the story is a familiar one. Taken prisoner near Vyazma, he spent his
whole captivity in a German camp. And the subsequent story is also familiar.
When he returned, he was arrested by us and given a tenner. I came to know him
in winter, engaged in general work in Ekibastuz. His forthrightness gleamed
from his big quiet eyes, some sort of unwavering forthrightness. This man was
never able to bow in spirit. And he didn't bow in camp, either, even though he
worked only two of his ten years in his own field of specialization, and didn't
receive food parcels from home for nearly the whole term. He was subjected on
all sides to the camp philosophy, to the camp corruption of soul, but he was
incapable of adopting it. In the Kemerovo camps (Antibess) the security chief
kept trying to recruit him as a stoolie. Grigoryev replied to him quite
honestly and candidly: “I find it quite repulsive to talk to you. You will find
many willing without me.” “You bastard, you'll crawl on all fours.” “I would be
better hanging myself from the first branch.” And so he was sent off to a
penalty situation. He stood it for about half a year. And he made mistakes
which were even more unforgivable: When he was sent on an agricultural work
party, he refused (as a soil scientist) to accept the post of brigadier offered
him. He hoed and scythed with enthusiasm. And even more stupidly: in Ekibastuz
at the stone quarry he refused to be a work checker—only because he would have
had to pad the work sheets for the sloggers, for which, later on, when they
caught up with it, the eternally drunk free foreman would have to pay the
penalty (but would he?). And so he went to break rocks! His honesty was so
monstrously unnatural that when he went out to process potatoes with the
vegetable storeroom brigade, he did not steal any, though everyone else did.
When he was in a good post, in the privileged repair-shop brigade at the
pumping-station equipment, he left simply because he refused to wash the socks
of the free bachelor construction supervisor, Treivish. (His fellow brigade
members tried to persuade him: Come on now, isn't it all the same, the kind of
work you do? But no, it turned out it was not at all the same to him!) How many
times did he select the worst and hardest lot, just so as not to have to offend
against his conscience—and he didn't, not in the least, and I am a witness. And
even more: because of the astounding influence on his body of his bright and
spotless human spirit (though no one today believes in any such influence, no
one understands it) the organism of Grigory Ivanovich, who was no longer young
(close to fifty), grew stronger in camp; his earlier rheumatism of the joints
disappeared completely, and he became particularly healthy after the typhus
from which he recovered: in winter, he went out in cotton sacks, making holes
in them for his head and his arms—and he did not catch cold!528



The process of voluntary engagement in the “revaluation of good and evil,”
consequent to recognition of personal insufficiency and suffering, is
equivalent to adoption of identification with Horus (who, as the process that
renews, exists as something superordinate to “the morality of the past”). This
means that the capacity to reassess morality means identification with the
figure that “generates and renews the world”— with the figure that mediates
between order and chaos. It is “within the domain of that figure” that room for
all aspects of the personality actually exist—as the demands placed on the
individual who wishes to identify with the savior are so high, so to speak,
that every aspect of personality must become manifested, “redeemed,” and
integrated into a functioning hierarchy. The revaluation of good and evil
therefore allows for the creative reintegration of those aspects of
personality—and their secondary representations in imagination and
idea—previously suppressed and stunted by immature moral ideation, including
that represented by group affiliation (posited as the highest level of ethical
attainment).

The act of turning away from something anomalous is the process of labeling
that anomalous thing as “too terrifying to be encountered or considered,” in
its most fundamental form. To avoid something is also to define it—and, in a
more general sense, to define oneself. To avoid is to say “that is too
terrible,” and that means—“too terrible for me.” The impossibility of a task is
necessarily determined in relationship to the abilities of the one faced with
it. The act of turning away therefore means willful opposition to the process
of adaptation, since nothing new can happen when everything new is avoided or
suppressed. The act effacing an anomaly, by contrast, is the process of
labeling that event as tolerable—and, simultaneously, the definition of oneself
as the agent able to so tolerate. Adoption of such a stance means the
possibility of further growth, since it is in contact with anomaly that new
information is generated. This “faith in oneself and the benevolence of the
world” manifests itself as the courage to risk everything in the pursuit of
meaning. If the nature of the goal is shifted from desire for predictability to
development of personality capable of facing chaos voluntarily, then the
unknown, which can never be permanently banished, will no longer be associated
with fear, and safety, paradoxically, will be permanently extablished:

It was granted me to carry away from my prison years on my bent back, which
nearly broke beneath its load, this essential experience: how a human being
becomes evil and how good. In the intoxication of youthful successes I had felt
myself to be infallible, and I was therefore cruel. In the surfeit of power I
was a murderer, and an oppressor. In my most evil moments, I was convinced that
I was doing good, and I was well supplied with systematic arguments. And it was
only when I lay there on rotting prison straw that I sensed within myself the
first stirrings of good. Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line
separating good and evil passes not through states, nor between classes, nor
between political parties either—but right through every human heart—and
through all human hearts. This line shifts. Inside us, it oscillates with the
years. And even within hearts overwhelmed by evil, one small bridgehead of good
is retained. And even in the best of all hearts, there remains…an uprooted
small corner of evil.

Since then I have come to understand the truth of all the religions of the
world: They struggle with the evil inside a human being (inside every human
being). It is impossible to expel evil from the world in its entirety, but it
is possible to constrict it within each person.

And since that time I have come to understand the falsehood of all the
revolutions in history: They destroy only those carriers of evil contemporary
with them (and also fail, out of haste, to discriminate the carriers of good as
well). And they then take to themselves as their heritage the actual evil
itself, magnified still more.

The Nuremburg Trials have to be regarded as one of the special achievements of
the twentieth century: they killed the very idea of evil, though they killed
very few of the people who had been infected by it. (Of course, Stalin deserves
no credit here. He would have preferred to explain less and shoot more.) And if
by the twenty-first century humanity has not yet blown itself up and has not
suffocated itself—perhaps it is this direction that will triumph?

Yes, and if it does not triumph—then all humanity's history will have turned
out to be an empty exercise in marking time, without the tiniest mite of
meaning! Whither and to what end will we otherwise be moving? To beat the enemy
over the head with a club—even cavemen knew that.

“Know thyself!” There is nothing that so aids and assists the awakening of
omniscience within us as insistent thoughts about ones own trangressions,
errors, mistakes. After the difficult cycles of such ponderings over many
years, whenever I mentioned the heartlessness of our highest-ranking
bureaucrats, the cruelty of our executioners, I remember myself in my captains
shoulder boards and the forward march of my battery through East Prussia,
enshrouded in fire, and I say: “So, were we any better?”529

