# CONCLUSION


With the death of Turgenev and Dostoyevsky, the great epoch of Russian
literature came to an end. A period of literary as well as of
political stagnation began, which lasted until the Russo-Japanese War.
This was followed by the revolutionary movement, which, in its turn,
produced a literary as well as a political chaos, the effect of which
and of the manifold reactions it brought about are still being felt.
It was only natural, if one considers the extent and the quality of
the productions of the preceding epoch, that the soil of literary
Russia should require a rest.

As it is, one can count the writers of prominence which the epoch of
stagnation produced on one's fingers--CHEKHOV, GARSHIN, KOROLENKO, and
at the end of the period MAXIME GORKY, and apart from them, in a
by-path of his own, MEREZHKOVSKY. Of these Chekhov and Gorky tower
above the others. Chekhov enlarged the range of Russian literature by
painting the middle-class and the _Intelligentsia_, and brought back
to Russian literature the note of humour; and Gorky broke altogether
fresh ground by painting the vagabond, the artisan, the tramp, the
thief, the flotsam and jetsam of the big town and the highway, and by
painting in a new manner.

Gorky's work came like that of Mr. Rudyard Kipling to England, as a
revelation. Not only did his subject matter open the doors on
dominions undreamed of, but his attitude towards life and that of his
heroes towards life seemed to be different from that of all Russian
novelists before his advent; and yet the difference between him and
his forerunners is not so great as it appears at first sight. It is
true that his rough and rebellious heroes, instead of playing the
Hamlet, or of finding the solution of life in charity and humility or
submission, are partisans of the survival of the fittest with a
vengeance, the survival of the strongest fist and the sharpest knife;
yet are these new heroes really so different from the uncompromising
type that we have already seen sharing one half of the Russian stage,
right through the story of Russian literature, from Bazarov back to
Peter the Great, and on whose existence was founded the remark that
Peter the Great was one of the ingredients in the Russian character?
Put Bazarov on the road, or Lermontov, or even Peter the Great, and
you get Gorky's barefooted hero.

Where Gorky created something absolutely new was in the surroundings
and in the manner of life which he described, and in the way he
described them; this is especially true of his treatment of nature:
for the first time in Russian prose literature, we get away from the
"orthodox" landscape of convention, and we are face to face with the
elements. We feel as if a new breath of air had entered into
literature; we feel as people accustomed to the manner in which the
poets treated nature in England in the eighteenth century must have
felt when Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley and Coleridge began to write.

Chekhov worked on older lines. He descends directly from Turgenev,
although his field is a different one. He, more than any other writer
and better than any other writer, painted the epoch of stagnation,
when Russia, as a Russian once said, was playing itself to death at
_vindt_ (an older form of _Bridge_). The tone of his work is grey, and
indeed resembles, as Tolstoy said, that of a photographer, by its
objective realism as well as by its absence of high tones; yet if
Chekhov is a photographer, he is at the same time a supreme artist, an
artist in black and white, and his pessimism is counteracted by two
other factors, his sense of humour and his humanity; were it not so,
the impression of sadness one would derive from the sum of misery
which his crowded stage of merchants, students, squires, innkeepers,
waiters, schoolmasters, magistrates, popes, officials, make up between
them, would be intolerable. Some of Chekhov's most interesting work
was written for the stage, on which he also brought Scenes of Country
Life, which is the sub-title of the play _Uncle Vanya_. There are the
same grey tints, the same weary, amiable, and slack people, bankrupt
of ideals and poor in hope, whom we meet in the stories; and here,
too, behind the sordid triviality and futility, we hear the "still sad
music of humanity." But in order that the tints of Chekhov's delicate
living and breathing photographs can be effective on the stage, very
special acting is necessary, in order to convey the quality of
atmosphere which is his special gift. Fortunately he met with exactly
the right technique and the appropriate treatment at the Art Theatre
at Moscow.

Chekhov died in 1904, soon after the Russo-Japanese War had begun.
Apart from the main stream and tradition of Russian fiction and
Russian prose, Merezhkovsky occupies a unique place, a place which
lies between criticism and imaginative historical fiction, not unlike,
in some respects--but very different in others--that which is occupied
by Walter Pater in English fiction. His best known work, at least his
best known work in Europe, is a prose trilogy, "The Death of the Gods"
(a study of Julian the apostate), "The Resurrection of the Gods" (the
story of Leonardo da Vinci), and "The Antichrist" (the story of Peter
the Great and his son Alexis), which has been translated into nearly
every European language. This trilogy is an essay in imaginative
historical reconstitution; it testifies to a real and deep culture,
and it is lit at times by flashes of imaginative inspiration which
make the scenes of the past live; it is alive with suggestive thought;
but it is not throughout convincing, there is a touch of Bulwer
Lytton as well as a touch of Goethe and Pater in it. Merezhkovsky is
perhaps more successful in his purely critical work, his books on
Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky and Gogol, which are infinitely stimulating,
suggestive, and original, than in his historical fiction, although,
needless to say, his criticism appeals to a far narrower public. He is
in any case one of the most brilliant and interesting of Russian
modern writers, and perhaps the best known outside Russia.

During the war, a writer of fiction made his name by a remarkable
book, namely KUPRIN, who in his novel, _The Duel_, gave a vivid and
masterly picture of the life of an officer in the line. Kuprin has
since kept the promise of his early work. At the same time, LEONID
ANDREEV came forward with short stories, plays, a description of war
(_The Red Laugh_), moralities, not uninfluenced by Maeterlinck, and a
limpid and beautiful style in which pessimism seemed to be speaking
its last word.

In 1905 the revolutionary movement broke out, with its great hopes,
its disillusions, its period of anarchy on the one hand and
repression on the other; out of the chaos of events came a chaos of
writing rather than literature, and in its turn this produced, in
literature as well as in life, a reaction, or rather a series of
reactions, towards symbolism, æstheticism, mysticism on the one hand,
and towards materialism--not of theory but of practice--on the other.
But since these various reactions are now going on, and are vitally
affecting the present day, the revolutionary movement of 1905 seems
the right point to take leave of Russian literature. In 1905 a new era
began, and what that era will ultimately produce, it is too soon even
to hazard a guess.

Looking back over the record of Russian literature, the first thing
which must strike us, if we think of the literature of other
countries, is its comparatively short life. There is in Russian
literature no Middle Ages, no Villon, no Dante, no Chaucer, no
Renaissance, no _Grand Siècle_. Literature begins in the nineteenth
century. The second thing which will perhaps strike us is that, in
spite of its being the youngest of all the literatures, it seems to be
spiritually the oldest. In some respects it seems to have become
over-ripe before it reached maturity. But herein, perhaps, lies the
secret of its greatness, and this may be the value of its contribution
to the soul of mankind. It is--

    "Old in grief and very wise in tears":

and its chief gift to mankind is an expression, made with a
naturalness and sincerity that are matchless, and a love of reality
which is unique,--for all Russian literature, whether in prose or
verse, is rooted in reality--of that grief and that wisdom; the grief
and wisdom which come from a great heart; a heart that is large enough
to embrace the world and to drown all the sorrows therein with the
immensity of its sympathy, its fraternity, its pity, its charity, and
its love.




