# PART 5 - The saint and the prostitute
[Metadata]: # {05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {05.04}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
The saint and the prostitute
# The saint and the prostitute
Henry’s psychic condition was most impressively depicted in the following
dream, which exposed his fear of primitive sensuality and his desire to escape
into a kind of asceticism. In it one can see the direction his development was
taking. For this reason the dream will be interpreted at greater length.

I find myself on a narrow mountain road. On the left (going down) there is a
deep abyss, on the right a wall of rock. Along the road there are several
caves, shelters, cut out of the rock, as protection from the weather for lonely
wanderers. In one of these caves, half hidden, a prostitute has taken refuge.
Strangely, I see her from behind, from the rock side. She has a formless,
spongy body. I look at her with curiosity and touch her buttocks. Perhaps, it
suddenly seems to me, she is not a woman but a kind of male prostitute.

This same creature comes then to the fore as a saint with a short crimson coat
thrown around his shoulders. He strides down the road and goes into another,
much larger cave fitted with rough-hewn chairs and benches. With a haughty look
he drives out all those already present, also me. Then he and his followers
move in and establish themselves.

The personal association that Henry contributed to the prostitute was the
“Venus of Willendorf,” a little carved figure (from the Paleolithic Age) of a
fleshy woman, probably a nature or fertility goddess. Then he added:

“I first heard that touching the buttocks is a fertility rite when I was on a
tour through the Wallis [a canton in French Switzerland], where I visited
ancient Celtic graves and excavations. There I was told that there was once a
smooth sloping surface of tiles smeared with all kinds of substances. Infertile
women had to slide down on their bare buttocks in order to cure their
sterility.”

To the coat of the “saint,” Henry associated this: “My fiancée owns a jacket of
similar shape, but it’s white. On the evening before the dream we were out
dancing, and she was wearing this white jacket. Another girl, who is her
friend, was with us. She had a crimson jacket that I liked better.”

If dreams are not wish-fulfillments (as Freud taught) but rather, as Jung
assumed, “self-representations of the unconscious,” then we must admit that
Henry’s phychic condition could hardly be better represented than in the
description given in the “saint” dream.

Henry is a “lonely wanderer” on the narrow path. But (perhaps thanks to
analysis) he is already on his way down from inhospitable heights. To the left,
on the side of the unconscious, his road is bordered by the terrifying depths
of an abyss. On the right side, the side of consciousness, the way is blocked
by the rigid rock wall of his conscious views. However, in the caves (which
might represent, so to speak, unconscious areas in Henry’s field of
consciousness) there are places where refuge can be found when bad weather
comes—in other words, when outside tensions become too threatening.

The caves are the result of purposeful human work: cut into the rock. In a way
they resemble the gaps that occur in our consciousness when our power of
concentration has reached its limits and is broken, so that the stuff of
fantasy can penetrate without restraint. At such times something unexpected can
reveal itself and allow a deep insight into the background of the psyche—a
glimpse into the unconscious regions where our imagination has free play.
Moreover, rock caves may be symbols of the womb of Mother Earth, appearing as
mysterious caverns in which transformation and rebirth can come about.

Thus the dream seems to represent Henry’s introverted withdrawal—when the world
becomes too difficult for him—into a “cave” within his consciousness where he
can succumb to subjective fantasies. This interpretation would also explain why
he sees the female figure—a replica of some of the inner feminine traits of his
psyche. She is a formless, spongy, half-hidden prostitute representing the
repressed image in his unconscious of a woman who Henry would have never
approached in conscious life. She would always have been strictly taboo to him
in spite of the fact that (as the opposite of a too-much venerated mother) the
prostitute would have a secret fascination for him—as for every son with a
mother-complex.



Left, the prehistoric sculpture known as the “Venus of Willendorf”—one of
Henry’s associations to the image of the prostitute in his dream.

The idea of restricting a relationship with a woman to a purely animal-like
sensuality, excluding all feelings, is often enticing to such a young man. In
such a union he can keep his feelings split off, and thus can remain “true” to
his mother in an ultimate sense. Thus, in spite of everything, the taboo set by
the mother against every other woman remains inflexibly effective in the psyche
of the son.

Henry, who seems to have withdrawn totally to the background of his
fantasy-cave, sees the prostitute only “from behind.” He dares not look her in
the face. But “from the back” also means from her least human side—her buttocks
(i.e., the part of her body that will stimulate the sensual activity of the
male).

By touching the buttocks of the prostitute, Henry unconsciously carries out a
kind of fertility rite, similar to the rites that are practiced in many
primitive tribes. The laying on of hands and healing often go together; in the
same way touching with the hand can be either a defense or a curse.

Immediately the idea arises that the figure is not a woman after all but a male
prostitute. The figure thus becomes hermaphroditic, like many mythological
figures (and like the “priest” figure of the first dream). Insecurity
concerning his own sex can often be observed in a pubescent individual; and for
this reason homosexuality in adolescence is not considered unusual. Nor is such
uncertainty exceptional for a young man with Henry’s psychological structure;
he had already implied this in some of his earlier dreams.

But repression (as well as sexual uncertainty) may have caused the confusion
about the sex of the prostitute. The female figure that has both attracted and
repelled the dreamer is transformed—first of all into a man and then into a
saint. The second transformation eliminates everything sexual from the image,
and implies that the only means of escape from the reality of sex lies in the
adoption of an ascetic and holy life, denying the flesh. Such dramatic
reversals are common in dreams: Something turns into its opposite (as the
prostitute becomes a saint) as if to demonstrate that by transmutation even
extreme opposites can change into each other.

Henry also saw something significant in the saint’s coat. A coat is often a
symbol of the protective cover or mask (which Jung called the persona) that an
individual presents to the world. It has two purposes: first, to make a
specific impression on other people: second, to conceal the individual’s inner
self from their prying eyes. The persona that Henry’s dream gives the saint
tells us something about his attitude to his fiancée and her friend. The
saint’s coat has the color of the friend’s jacket, which Henry had admired, but
it also had the shape of his fiancée’s coat. This may imply that Henry’s
unconscious wanted to confer the quality of saintliness on both women, in order
to protect himself against their womanly attractiveness. Also, the coat is red,
which (as has been noted before) is traditionally the symbolic color of feeling
and passion. It thus gives the saint figure a kind of eroticized spirituality—a
quality that is frequently found in men who repress their own sexuality and try
to rely solely on their “spirit” or reason.

Such an escape from the world of the flesh, however, is unnatural in a young
person. In the first half of life, we should learn to accept our sexuality: It
is essential to the preservation and continuation of our species. The dream
seems to be reminding Henry of just this point.

When the saint leaves the cave and walks down the road (descending from the
heights toward the valley), he enters a second cave with rough-hewn benches and
chairs, which reminds one of the early Christians’ places of worship and refuge
from persecution. This cave seems to be a healing, holy place—a place of
meditation and of the mystery of transformation from the earthly to the
heavenly, from the carnal to the spiritual.

Henry is not permitted to follow the saint, but is turned out of the cave with
all those present (that is, with his unconscious entities). Seemingly, Henry
and all the others who are not followers of the saint are being told that they
must live in the outside world. The dream seems to say that Henry must first
succeed in outer life before he will be able to immerse himself in a religious
or spiritual sphere. The figure of the saint also seems to symbolize (in a
relatively undifferentiated, anticipatory fashion) the Self; but Henry is not
yet mature enough to stay in the immediate vicinity of this figure.



A coat can often symbolize the outer mask or persona that one presents to the
world. The mantle of the prophet Elijah bore a similar meaning: When he
ascended to heaven (above, in a Swedish peasant painting), he left the mantle
behind for his successor Elisha. Thus the mantle represented the prophet’s
power and role, to be assumed by his successor. (Note that the mantle is red,
like the coat of the saint in Henry’s dream.)

