# PART 4 - Union of opposites
[Metadata]: # {04.06}
[Descriptor]: # {04.06}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
Union of opposites
# Union of opposites
There is one more point to be made. The spirit of the age is in constant
movement. It is like a river that flows on, invisibly but surely, and given the
momentum of life in our century, even 10 years is a long time.

About the middle of this century a change began to come over painting. It was
nothing revolutionary, nothing like the change that happened about 1910, which
meant the reconstruction of art to its very foundations. But there were groups
of artists who formulated their aims in ways not heard before. This
transformation is going on within the frontiers of abstract painting.

The representation of concrete reality, which springs from the primal human
need of catching the passing moment on the wing, has become a truly concrete
sensuous art in the photography of such men as France’s Henri Cartier-Bresson,
Switzerland’s Werner Bischof, and others. We can therefore understand why
artists continued on their own way of inwardness and imagination. For a good
many of the young artists, however, abstract art as it had been practiced for
many years offered no adventure, no field of conquest. Seeking the new, they
found it in what lay nearest, yet had been lost—in nature and man. They were
and are not concerned with the reproduction of nature in pictures, but with the
expression of their own emotional experience of nature.

The French painter Alfred Manessier defined the aims of his art in these words:
“What we have to reconquer is the weight of lost reality. We must make for
ourselves a new heart, a new spirit, a new soul, in the measure of man. The
painter’s true reality lies neither in abstraction nor in realism, but in the
reconquest of his weight as a human being. At present non-figurative art seems
to me to offer the one opportunity for the painter to approach the inward
reality of himself and to grasp the consciousness of his essential self, or
even of his being. It is only by the reconquest of his position, I believe,
that the painter will be able, in the time to come, to return slowly to
himself, to rediscover his own weight and so to strengthen it that it can even
reach the outward reality of the world.”



In this century the depiction of actuality—once the province of the painter and
sculptor—has been taken over by the photographer whose camera can not only
record but (like any landscape painting of past centuries) can express the
photographer’s own emotional experience of the subject. Above, a Japanese scene
photographed by Werner Bischof (1916–54).

Jean Bazaine speaks in similar terms: “It is a great temptation for the painter
of today to paint the pure rhythm of his feeling, the most secret pulse of his
heart, instead of embodying it in a concrete form. That, however, leads only to
a desiccated mathematics or a kind of abstract expressionism, which ends in
monotony and a progressive impoverishment of form.… But a form that can
reconcile man with his word is an ‘art of communion’ by which man, at any
moment, can recognize his own unformed countenance in the world.”

What in fact artists now have at heart is a conscious reunion of their own
inward reality with the reality of the world or of nature; or, in the last
resort, a new union of body and soul, matter and spirit. That is their way to
the “reconquest of their weight as human beings.” Only now is the great rift
that set in with modern art (between “great abstraction” and “great realism”)
being made conscious and on the way to being healed.

For the onlooker, this first becomes evident in the changed atmosphere in the
works of these artists. There radiates from the pictures of such artists as
Alfred Manessier or the Belgian-born painter Gustave Singier, in spite of all
abstraction, a belief in the world, and, in spite of all intensity of feeling,
a harmony of forms and colors that often attains serenity. In the French
painter Jean Lurcat’s famous tapestries of the 1950s the exuberance of nature
pervades the picture. His art could be called sensuous as well as imaginative.

We find a serene harmony of forms and colors also in the work of Paul Klee.
This harmony was what he had always been striving for. Above all, he had
realized the necessity of not denying evil. “Even evil must not be a triumphant
or degrading enemy, but a power collaborating in the whole.” But Klee’s
starting point was not the same. He lived near “the dead and the unborn” at an
almost cosmic distance from this world, while the younger generation of
painters can be said to be more firmly rooted in earth.

An important point to notice is that modern painting, just when it has advanced
far enough to discern the union of the opposites, has taken up religious
themes. The “metaphysical void” seems to have been overcome. And the utterly
unexpected has happened: The Church has become patron of modern art. We need
only mention here All Saints at Basle, with windows by Alfred Manessier; Assy
church, with pictures by a large number of modern artists; the Matisse chapel
at Vence; and the church at Audincourt, which has works by Jean Bazaine and the
French artist Fernand Léger.

The admission of modern art to the Church means more than an act of
broadmindedness on the part of its patrons. It is symbolic of the fact that the
part played by modern art in relation to Christianity is changing. The
compensatory function of the old hermetic movements has made way for the
possibility of collaboration. In discussing the animal symbols of Christ, it
was pointed out that the light and the chthonic spirits belonged to each other.
It seems as if the moment had come today when a new stage in the solution of
this millennial problem might be reached.

What the future will yield we cannot know—whether the bridging of the opposites
will give positive results, or whether the way will lead through yet more
unimaginable catastrophes. There is too much anxiety and too much dread at work
in the world, and this is still the predominant factor in art and society.
Above all, there is still too much unwillingness on the part of the individual
to apply to himself and his life the conclusions that can be drawn from art,
although he might be ready to accept them in art. The artist can often express
many things, unconsciously and without awakening hostility, which are resented
when they are expressed by a psychologist (a fact that could be demonstrated
even more conclusively in literature than in the visual arts). Confronted by
the statements of the psychologist, the individual feels directly challenged;
but what the artist has to say, particularly in our century, usually remains in
an impersonal sphere.



Mid-20th century art seems to be moving away from a Marini like despair. Above,
Pour la Naissance du Surhomme by France’s Pierre-Yves Trémois (born 1921)
indicates a tendency toward life and wholeness.

And yet it seems important that the suggestion of a more whole, and therefore
more human, form of expression should have become visible in our time, It is a
glimmer of hope, symbolized for me (at the time of writing: 1961) by a number
of paintings by the French artist Pierre Soulages. Behind a cataract of huge,
black rafters there glimmers a clear, pure blue or a radiant yellow. Light is
dawning behind darkness.

