# PART 1 - The problem of types
[Metadata]: # {01.05}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The problem of types
# The problem of types
In all other branches of science, it is legitimate to apply a hypothesis to an
impersonal subject. Psychology, however, inescapably confronts you with the
living relations between two individuals, neither of whom can be divested of
his subjective personality, nor, indeed, depersonalized in any other way. The
analyst and his patient may set out by agreeing to deal with a chosen problem
in an impersonal and objective manner; but once they are engaged, their whole
personalities are involved in their discussion. At this point, further progress
is possible only if mutual agreement can be reached.

Can we make any sort of objective judgment about the final result? Only if we
make a comparison between our conclusions and the standards that are generally
valid in the social milieu to which the individuals belong. Even then, we must
take into account the mental equilibrium (or “sanity”) of the individual
concerned. For the result cannot be a completely collective leveling out of the
individual to adjust him to the “norms” of his society. This would amount to a
most unnatural condition. A sane and normal society is one in which people
habitually disagree, because general agreement is relatively rare outside the
sphere of instinctive human qualities.



An assertive extravert overpowers a withdrawn introvert in a cartoon by
America’s Jules Feiffer. These Jungian terms for human “types” are not
dogmatic.

Disagreement functions as a vehicle of mental life in society, but it is not a
goal; agreement is equally important. Because psychology basically depends upon
balanced opposites, no judgment can be considered to be final in which its
reversability has not been taken into account. The reason for this peculiarity
lies in the fact that there is no standpoint above or outside psychology that
would enable us to form an ultimate judgment of what the psyche is.

In spite of the fact that dreams demand individual treatment, some generalities
are necessary in order to classify and clarify the material that the
psychologist collects by studying many individuals. It would obviously be
impossible to formulate any psychological theory, or to teach it, by describing
large numbers of separate cases without any effort to see what they have in
common and how they differ. Any general characteristic can be chosen as a
basis. One can, for instance, make a relatively simple distinction between
individuals who have “extraverted” personalities and others who are
“introverted.” This is only one of many possible generalizations, but it
enables one to see immediately the difficulties that can arise if the analyst
should happen to be one type and his patient the other.

Since any deeper analysis of dreams leads to the confrontation of two
individuals, it will obviously make a great difference whether their types of
attitude are the same or not. If both belong to the same type, they may sail
along happily for a long time. But if one is an extravert and the other an
introvert, their different and contradictory standpoints may clash right away,
particularly when they are unaware of their own type of personality, or when
they are convinced that their own is the only right type. The extravert, for
instance, will choose the majority view; the introvert will reject it simply
because it is fashionable. Such a misunderstanding is easy enough because the
value of the one is the non-value of the other. Freud himself, for instance,
interpreted the introverted type as an individual morbidly concerned with
himself. But introspection and self-knowledge can just as well be of the
greatest value and importance.

It is vitally necessary to take account of such differences of personality in
dream interpretation. It cannot be assumed that the analyst is a superman who
is above such differences, just because he is a doctor who has acquired a
psychological theory and a corresponding technique. He can only imagine himself
to be superior in so far as he assumes that his theory and technique are
absolute truths, capable of embracing the whole of the human psyche. Since such
an assumption is more than doubtful, he cannot really be sure of it.
Consequently, he will be assailed by secret doubts if he confronts the human
wholeness of his patient with a theory or technique (which is merely a
hypothesis or an attempt) instead of with his own living wholeness.

The analyst’s whole personality is the only adequate equivalent of his
patient’s personality. Psychological experience and knowledge do not amount to
more than mere advantages on the side of the analyst. They do not keep him
outside the fray, in which he is bound to be tested just as much as his
patient. Thus it matters a good deal whether their personalities are
harmonious, in conflict, or complementary.

Extraversion and introversion are just two among many peculiarities of human
behavior. But they are often rather obvious and easily recognizable. If one
studies extraverted individuals, for instance, one soon discovers that they
differ in many ways from one another, and that being extraverted is therefore a
superficial and too general criterion to be really characteristic. That is why,
long ago, I tried to find some further basic peculiarities—peculiarities that
might serve the purpose of giving some order to the apparently limitless
variations in human individuality.

I had always been impressed by the fact that there are a surprising number of
individuals who never use their minds if they can avoid it, and an equal number
who do use their minds, but in an amazingly stupid way. I was also surprised to
find many intelligent and wide-awake people who lived (as far as one could make
out) as if they had never learned to use their sense organs: They did not see
the things before their eyes, hear the words sounding in thir ears, or notice
the things they touched or tasted. Some lived without being aware of the state
of their own bodies.

There are others who seemed to live in a most curious condition of
consciousness, as if the state they had arrived at today were final, with no
possibility of change, or as if the world and the psyche were static and would
remain so forever. They seemed devoid of all imagination, and they entirely and
exclusively depended upon their sense-perception. Chances and possibilities did
not exist in their world, and in “today” there was no real “tomorrow.” The
future was just the repetition of the past.

I am trying here to give the reader a glimpse of my own first impressions when
I began to observe the many people I met. It soon became clear to me, however,
that the people who used their minds were those who thought—that is, who
applied their intellectual faculty in trying to adapt themselves to people and
circumstances. And the equally intelligent people who did not think were those
who sought and found their way by feeling.

“Feeling” is a word that needs some explanation. For instance, one speaks of
“feeling” when it is a matter of “sentiment” (corresponding to the French term
sentiment). But one also applies the same word to define an opinion; for
example, a communication from the White House may begin: “The President
feels.…” Furthermore, the word may be used to express an intuition: “I had a
feeling as if.…”

When I use the word “feeling” in contrast to “thinking,” I refer to a judgment
of value—for instance, agreeable or disagreeable, good or bad, and so on.
Feeling according to this definition is not an emotion (which, as the word
conveys, is involuntary). Feeling as I mean it is (like thinking) a rational
(i.e., ordering) function, whereas intuition is an irrational (i.e.,
perceiving) function. In so far as intuition is a “hunch,” it is not the
product of a voluntary act; it is rather an involuntary event, which depends
upon different external or internal circumstances instead of an act of
judgment. Intuition is more like a sense-perception, which is also an
irrational event in so far as it depends essentially upon objective stimuli,
which owe their existence to physical and not to mental causes.

These four functional types correspond to the obvious means by which
consciousness obtains its orientation to experience. Sensation (i.e., sense
perception) tells you that something exists; thinking tells you what it is;
feeling tells you whether it is agreeable or not; and intuition tells you
whence it comes and where it is going.

The reader should understand that these four criteria of types of human
behavior are just four viewpoints among many others, like will power,
temperament, imagination, memory, and so on. There is nothing dogmatic about
them, but their basic nature recommends them as suitable criteria for a
classification. I find them particularly helpful when I am called upon to
explain parents to children and husbands to wives, and vice versa. They are
also useful in understanding one’s own prejudices.

Thus, if you want to understand another person’s dream, you have to sacrifice
your own predilections and suppress your prejudices. This is not easy or
comfortable, because it means a moral effort that is not to everyone’s taste.
But if the analyst does not make the effort to criticize his own standpoint and
to admit its relativity, he will get neither the right information about, nor
sufficient insight into, his patient’s mind. The analyst expects at least a
certain willingness on the patient’s part to listen to his opinion and to take
it seriously, and the patient must be granted the same right. Although such a
relationship is indispensable for any understanding and is therefore of
self-evident necessity, one must remind oneself again and again that it is more
important in therapy for the patient to understand than for the analyst’s
theoretical expectations to be satisfied. The patient’s resistance to the
analyst’s interpretation is not necessarily wrong; it is rather a sure sign
that something does not “click.” Either the patient has not yet reached the
point where he understands, or the interpretation does not fit.

In our efforts to interpret the dream symbols of another person, we are almost
invariably hampered by our tendency to fill in the unavoidable gaps in our
understanding by projection—that is, by the assumption that what the analyst
perceives or thinks is equally perceived or thought by the dreamer. To overcome
this source of error, I have always insisted on the importance of sticking to
the context of the particular dream and excluding all theoretical assumptions
about dreams in general—except for the hypothesis that dreams in some way make
sense.

It will be clear from all I have said that we cannot lay down general rules for
interpreting dreams. When I suggested earlier that the overall function of
dreams seems to be to compensate for deficiencies or distortions in the
conscious mind, I meant that this assumption opened up the most promising
approach to the nature of particular dreams. In some cases you can see this
function plainly demonstrated.

One of my patients had a very high opinion of himself and was unaware that
almost everyone who knew him was irritated by his air of moral superiority. He
came to me with a dream in which he had seen a drunken tramp rolling in a
ditch—a sight that evoked from him only the patronizing comment: “It’s terrible
to see how low a man can fall.” It was evident that the unpleasant nature of
the dream was at least in part an attempt to offset his inflated opinion of his
own merits. But there was something more to it than this. It turned out that he
had a brother who was a degenerate alcoholic. What the dream also revealed was
that his superior attitude was compensating the brother, both as an outer and
inner figure.

In another case I recall, a woman who was proud of her intelligent
understanding of psychology had recurring dreams about another woman. When in
ordinary life she met this woman, she did not like her, thinking her a vain and
dishonest intriguer. But in the dreams the woman appeared almost as a sister,
friendly and likeable. My patient could not understand why she should dream so
favorably about a person she disliked. But these dreams were trying to convey
the idea that she herself was “shadowed” by an unconscious character that
resembled the other woman. It was hard for my patient, who had very clear ideas
about her own personality, to realize that the dream was telling her about her
own power complex and her hidden motivations—unconscious influences that had
more than once led to disagreeable rows with her friends. She had always blamed
others for these, not herself.

It is not merely the “shadow” side of our personalities that we overlook,
disregard, and repress. We may also do the same to our positive qualities. An
example that comes to mind is that of an apparently modest and self-effacing
man, with charming manners. He always seemed content with a back seat, but
discreetly insisted on being present. When asked to speak he would offer a
well-informed opinion, though he never intruded it. But he sometimes hinted
that a given matter could be dealt with in a far superior way at a certain
higher level (though he never explained how).

In his dreams, however, he constantly had encounters with great historical
figures, such as Napoleon and Alexander the Great. These dreams were clearly
compensating for an inferiority complex. But they had another implication. What
sort of man must I be, the dream was asking, to have such illustrious callers?
In this respect the dreams pointed to a secret megalomania, which offset the
dreamer’s feeling of inferiority. This unconscious idea of grandeur insulated
him from the reality of his environment and enabled him to remain aloof from
obligations that would be imperative for other people. He felt no need to
prove—either to himself or to others—that his superior judgment was based on
superior merit.

He was, in fact, unconsciously playing an insane game, and the dreams were
seeking to bring it to the level of consciousness in a curiously ambiguous way.
Hobnobbing with Napoleon and being on speaking terms with Alexander the Great
are exactly the kind of fantasies produced by an inferiority complex. But why,
one asks, could not the dream be open and direct about it and say what it had
to say without ambiguity?

I have frequently been asked this question, and I have asked it myself. I am
often surprised at the tantalizing way dreams seem to evade definite
information or omit the decisive point. Freud assumed the existence of a
special function of the psyche, which he called the “censor.” This, he
supposed, twisted the dream images and made them unrecognizable or misleading
in order to deceive the dreaming consciousness about the real subject of the
dream. By concealing the critical thought from the dreamer, the “censor”
protected his sleep against the shock of a disagreeable reminiscence. But I am
skeptical about the theory that the dream is a guardian of sleep; dreams just
as often disturb sleep.

It rather looks as if the approach to consciousness has a “blotting-out” effect
upon the subliminal contents of the psyche. The subliminal state retains ideas
and images at a much lower level of tension than they possess in consciousness.
In the subliminal condition they lose clarity of definition; the relations
between them are less consequential and more vaguely analogous, less rational
and therefore more “incomprehensible.” This can also be observed in all
dreamlike conditions, whether due to fatigue, fever, or toxins. But if
something happens to endow any of these images with greater tension, they
become less subliminal and, as they come close to the threshold of
consciousness, more sharply defined.

It is from this fact that one may understand why dreams often express
themselves as analogies, why one dream image slides into another, and why
neither the logic nor the time scale of our waking life seems to apply. The
form that dreams take is natural to the unconscious because the material from
which they are produced is retained in the subliminal state in precisely this
fashion. Dreams do not guard sleep from what Freud called the “incompatible
wish.” What he called “disguise” is actually the shape all impulses naturally
take in the unconscious. Thus, a dream cannot produce a definite thought. If it
begins to do so, it ceases to be a dream because it crosses the threshold of
consciousness. That is why dreams seem to skip the very points that are most
important to the conscious mind, and seem rather to manifest the “fringe of
consciousness,” like the faint gleam of stars during a total eclipse of the
sun.

We should understand that dream symbols are for the most part manifestations of
a psyche that is beyond the control of the conscious mind. Meaning and
purposefulness are not the prerogatives of the mind; they operate in the whole
of living nature. There is no difference in principle between organic and
psychic growth. As a plant produces its flower, so the psyche creates its
symbols. Every dream is evidence of this process.

So, by means of dreams (plus all sorts of intuitions, impulses, and other
spontaneous events), instinctive forces influence the activity of
consciousness. Whether that influence is for better or for worse depends upon
the actual contents of the unconscious. If it contains too many things that
normally ought to be conscious then its function becomes twisted and
prejudiced; motives appear that are not based upon true instincts, but that owe
their existence and psychic importance to the fact that they have been
consigned to the unconscious by repression or neglect. They overlay, as it
were, the normal unconscious psyche and distort its natural tendency to express
basic symbols and motifs. Therefore it is reasonable for a psychoanalyst,
concerned with the causes of a mental disturbance, to begin by eliciting from
his patient a more or less voluntary confession and realization of everything
that the patient dislikes or fears.

This is like the much older confession of the Church, which in many ways
anticipated modern psychological techniques. At least this is the general rule.
In practice, however, it may work the other way round; overpowering feelings of
inferiority or serious weakness may make it very difficult, even impossible,
for the patient to face fresh evidence of his own inadequacy. So I have often
found it profitable to begin by giving a positive outlook to the patient; this
provides a helpful sense of security when he approaches the more painful
insights.

Take as an example a dream of “personal exaltation” in which, for instance, one
has tea with the queen of England, or finds oneself on intimate terms with the
pope. If the dreamer is not a schizophrenic, the practical interpretation of
the symbol depends very much upon his present state of mind—that is, the
condition of his ego. If the dreamer overestimates his own value, it is easy to
show (from the material produced by association of ideas) how inappropriate and
childish the dreamer’s intentions are, and how much they emanate from childish
wishes to be equal to or superior to his parents. But if it is a case of
inferiority, where an all-pervading feeling of worthlessness has already
overcome every positive aspect of the dreamer’s personality, it would be quite
wrong to depress him still more by showing how infantile, ridiculous, or even
perverse he is. That would cruelly increase his inferiority, as well as cause
an unwelcome and quite unnecessary resistance to the treatment.

There is no therapeutic technique or doctrine that is of general application,
since every case that one receives for treatment is an individual in a specific
condition. I remember a patient I once had to treat over a period of nine
years. I saw him only for a few weeks each year, since he lived abroad. From
the start I knew what his real trouble was, but I also saw that the least
attempt to get close to the truth was met by a violent defensive reaction that
threatened a complete rupture between us. Whether I liked it or not, I had to
do my best to maintain our relation and to follow his inclination, which was
supported by his dreams and which led our discussion away from the root of his
neurosis. We ranged so wide that I often accused myself of leading my patient
astray. Nothing but the fact that his condition slowly but clearly improved
prevented me from confronting him brutally with the truth.

In the 10th year, however, the patient declared himself to be cured and freed
from all his symptoms. I was surprised because theoretically his condition was
incurable. Noticing my astonishment, he smiled and said (in effect): “And I
want to thank you above all for your unfailing tact and patience in helping me
to circumvent the painful cause of my neurosis. I am now ready to tell you
everything about it. If I had been able to talk freely about it, I would have
told you what it was at my first consultation. But that would have destroyed my
rapport with you. Where should I have been then? I should have been morally
bankrupt. In the course of ten years I have learned to trust you; and as my
confidence grew, my condition improved. I improved because this slow process
restored my belief in myself. Now I am strong enough to discuss the problem
that was destroying me.”

He then made a devastatingly frank confession of his problem, which showed me
the reasons for the peculiar course our treatment had had to follow. The
original shock had been such that alone he had been unable to face it. He
needed the help of another, and the therapeutic task was the slow establishment
of confidence, rather than the demonstration of a clinical theory.

From cases like this I learned to adapt my methods to the needs of the
individual patient, rather than to commit myself to general theoretical
considerations that might be inapplicable in any particular case. The knowledge
of human nature that I have accumulated in the course of 60 years of practical
experience has taught me to consider each case as a new one in which, first of
all, I have had to seek the individual approach. Sometimes I have not hesitated
to plunge into a careful study of infantile events and fantasies; at other
times I have begun at the top, even if this has meant soaring straight into the
most remote metaphysical speculations. It all depends on learning the language
of the individual patient and following the gropings of his unconscious toward
the light. Some cases demand one method and some another.

This is especially true when one seeks to interpret symbols. Two different
individuals may have almost exactly the same dream. (This, as one soon
discovers in clinical experience, is less uncommon than the layman may think.)
Yet if, for instance, one dreamer is young and the other is old, the problem
that disturbs them is correspondingly different and it would be obviously
absurd to interpret both dreams in the same way.

An example that comes to my mind is a dream in which a group of young men are
riding on horseback across a wide field. The dreamer is in the lead and he
jumps a ditch full of water, just clearing this hazard. The rest of the party
fall into the ditch. Now the young man who first told me this dream was a
cautious, introverted type. But I also heard the same dream from an old man of
daring character, who had lived an active and enterprising life. At the time he
had this dream, he was an invalid who gave his doctor and nurse a great deal of
trouble; he had actually injured himself by his disobedience of medical
instructions.

It was clear to me that this dream was telling the young man what he ought to
do. But it was telling the old man what he actually was still doing. While it
encouraged the hesitant young man, the old man was in no such need of
encouragement; the spirit of enterprise that still flickered within him was,
indeed, his greatest trouble. This example shows how the interpretation of
dreams and symbols largely depends upon the individual circumstances of the
dreamer and the condition of his mind.

