# PART 3 - The anima: the woman within
[Metadata]: # {03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The anima: the woman within
# The anima: the woman within
Difficult and subtle ethical problems are not invariably brought up by the
appearance of the shadow itself. Often another “inner figure” emerges. If the
dreamer is a man, he will discover a female personification of his unconscious;
and it will be a male figure in the case of a woman. Often this second symbolic
figure turns up behind the shadow, bringing up new and different problems. Jung
called its male and female forms “animus” and “anima.”

The anima is a personification of all feminine psychological tendencies in a
man’s psyche, such as vague feelings and moods, prophetic hunches,
receptiveness to the irrational, capacity for personal love, feeling for
nature, and—last but not least—his relation to the unconscious. It is no mere
chance that in olden times priestesses (like the Greek Sibyl) were used to
fathom the divine will and to make connection with the gods.

A particularly good example of how the anima is experienced as an inner figure
in a man’s psyche is found in the medicine men and prophets (shamans) among the
Eskimo and other arctic tribes. Some of these even wear women’s clothes or have
breasts depicted on their garments, in order to manifest their inner feminine
side—the side that enables them to connect with the “ghost land” (i.e., what we
call the unconscious).

One reported case tells of a young man who was being initiated by an older
shaman and who was buried by him in a snow hole. He fell into a state of
dreaminess and exhaustion. In this coma he suddenly saw a woman who emitted
light. She instructed him in all he needed to know and later, as his protective
spirit, helped him to practice his difficult profession by relating him to the
powers of the beyond. Such an experience shows the anima as the personification
of a man’s unconscious.

In its individual manifestation the character of a man’s anima is as a rule
shaped by his mother. If he feels that his mother had a negative influence on
him, his anima will often express itself in irritable, depressed moods,
uncertainty, insecurity, and touchiness. (If, however he is able to overcome
the negative assaults on himself, they can serve to reinforce his masculinity.)
Within the soul of such a man the negative mother-anima figure will endlessly
repeat this theme: “I am nothing. Nothing makes any sense. With others it’s
different, but for me … I enjoy nothing.” These “anima moods” cause a sort of
dullness, a fear of disease, of impotence, or of accidents. The whole of life
takes on a sad and oppressive aspect. Such dark moods can even lure a man to
suicide, in which case the anima becomes a death demon. She appears in this
role in Cocteau’s film Orphée.

The French call such an anima figure a femme fatale. (A milder version of this
dark anima is personified by the Queen of the Night in Mozart’s Magic Flute.)
The Greek Sirens or the German Lorelei also personify this dangerous aspect of
the anima, which in this form symbolizes destructive illusion. The following
Siberian tale illustrates the behavior of such a destructive anima:

One day a lonely hunter sees a beautiful woman emerging from the deep forest on
the other side of the river. She waves at him and sings:



The anima (the female element in a male psyche) is often personified as a witch
or a priestess—women who have links with “forces of darkness” and “the spirit
world” (i.e., the unconscious). Below, a sorceress with imps and demons (in a
17th-century engraving).





The anima (like the shadow) has two aspects, benevolent and malefic (or
negative). Above, a scene from Orphée (a film version by Cocteau of the Orpheus
myth): The woman can be seen as a lethal anima, for she has led Orpheus (being
carried by dark “underworld” figures) to his doom. Also malevolent are the
Lorelei of Teutonic myth (right, in a 19th-century drawing), water spirits
whose singing lures men to their death. Left, a parallel from Slavonic myth:
the Rusalka. These beings were thought to be spirits of drowned girls who
bewitch and drown passing men.



Oh, come, lonely hunter in the stillness of dusk.

Come, come! I miss you, I miss you!

Now I will embrace you, embrace you!

Come, come! My nest is near, my nest is near.

Come, come, lonely hunter, now in the stillness of dusk.

He throws off his clothes and swims across the river, but suddenly she flies
away in the form of an owl, laughing mockingly at him. When he tries to swim
back to find his clothes, he drowns in the cold river.

In this tale the anima symbolizes an unreal dream of love, happiness, and
maternal warmth (her nest)—a dream that lures men away from reality. The hunter
is drowned because he ran after a wishful fantasy that could not be fulfilled.

Another way in which the negative anima in a man’s personality can be revealed
is in waspish, poisonous, effeminate remarks by which he devalues everything.
Remarks of this sort always contain a cheap twisting of the truth and are in a
subtle way destructive. There are legends throughout the world in which “a
poison damsel” (as they call her in the Orient) appears. She is a beautiful
creature who has weapons hidden in her body or a secret poison with which she
kills her lovers during their first night together. In this guise the anima is
as cold and reckless as certain uncanny aspects of nature itself, and in Europe
is often expressed to this day by the belief in witches.

If, on the other hand, a man’s experience of his mother has been positive, this
can also affect his anima in typical but different ways, with the result that
he either becomes effeminate or is preyed upon by women and thus is unable to
cope with the hardships of life. An anima of this sort can turn men into
sentimentalists, or they may become as touchy as old maids or as sensitive as
the fairy-tale princess who could feel a pea under 30 mattresses. A still more
subtle manifestation of a negative anima appears in some fairy tales in the
form of a princess who asks her suitors to answer a series of riddles or,
perhaps, to hide themselves under her nose. If they cannot give the answers, or
if she can find them, they must die—and she invariably wins. The anima in this
guise involves men in a destructive intellectual game. We can notice the effect
of this anima trick in all those neurotic pseudo-intellectual dialogues that
inhibit a man from getting into direct touch with life and its real decisions.
He reflects about life so much that he cannot live it and loses all his
spontaneity and outgoing feeling.

The most frequent manifestations of the anima takes the form of erotic fantasy.
Men may be driven to nurse their fantasies by looking at films and strip-tease
shows, or by day-dreaming over pornographic material. This is a crude,
primitive aspect of the anima, which becomes compulsive only when a man does
not sufficiently cultivate his feeling relationships—when his feeling attitude
toward life has remained infantile.

All these aspects of the anima have the same tendency that we have observed in
the shadow: That is, they can be projected so that they appear to the man to be
the qualities of some particular woman. It is the preance of the anima that
causes a man to fall suddenly in love when he sees a woman for the first time
and knows at once that this is “she.” In this situation, the man feels as if he
has known this woman intimately for all time; he falls for her so helplessly
that it looks to outsiders like complete madness. Women who are of “fairy-like”
character especially attract such anima projections, because men can attribute
almost anything to a creature who is so fascinatingly vague, and can thus
proceed to weave fantasies around her.

The projection of the anima in such a sudden and passionate form as a love
affair can greatly disturb a man’s marriage and can lead to the so-called
“human triangle,” with its accompanying difficulties. A bearable solution to
such a drama can be found only if the anima is recognized as an inner power.
The secret aim of the unconscious in bringing about such an entanglement is to
force a man to develop and to bring his own being to maturity by integrating
more of his unconscious personality and bringing it into his real life.

But I have said enough about the negative side of the anima. There are just as
many important positive aspects. The anima is, for instance, responsible for
the fact that a man is able to find the right marriage partner. Another
function is at least equally important: Whenever a man’s logical mind is
incapable of discerning facts that are hidden in his unconscious, the anima
helps him to dig them out. Even more vital is the role that the anima plays in
putting a man’s mind in tune with the right inner values and thereby opening
the way into more profound inner depths. It is as if an inner “radio” becomes
tuned to a certain wave length that excludes irrelevancies but allows the voice
of the Great Man to be heard. In establishing this inner “radio” reception, the
anima takes on the role of guide, or mediator, to the world within and to the
Self. That is how she appears in the example of the initiations of shamans that
I described earlier; this is the role of Beatrice in Dante’s Paradiso, and also
of the goddess Isis when she appeared in a dream to Apuleius, the famous author
of The Golden Ass, in order to initiate him into a higher, more spiritual form
of life.



A traditional view of the demonic anima as an ugly witch—in a 16th-century
German drawing entitled “The Bewitched Groom.”

The dream of a 45-year-old psychotherapist may help to make clear how the anima
can be an inner guide. As he was going to bed on the evening before he had this
dream, he thought to himself that it was hard to stand alone in life, lacking
the support of a church. He found himself envying people who are protected by
the maternal embrace of an organization. (He had been born a Protestant but no
longer had any religious affiliation.) This was his dream:

I am in the aisle of an old church filled with people. Together with my mother
and my wife, I sit at the end of the aisle in what seem to be extra seats.

I am to celebrate the Mass as a priest, and I have a big Mass book in my hands,
or, rather, a prayer book or an anthology of poems. This book is not familiar
to me, and I cannot find the right text. I am very excited because I have to
begin soon, and, to add to my troubles, my mother and wife disturb me by
chattering about unimportant trifles. Now the organ stops, and everybody is
waiting for me, so I get up in a determined way and ask one of the nuns who is
kneeling behind me to hand me her Mass book and point out the right place—which
she does in an obliging manner. Now, like a sort of sexton, this same nun
precedes me to the altar, which is somewhere behind me and to the left, as if
we are approaching it from a side aisle. The Mass book is like a sheet of
pictures, a sort of board, three feet long and a foot wide, and on it is the
text with ancient pictures in columns, one beside the other.

First the nun has to read a part of the liturgy before I begin, and I have
still not found the right place in the text. She has told me that it is Number
15, but the numbers are not clear, and I cannot find it. With determination,
however, I turn toward the congregation, and now I have found Number 15 (the
next to the last on the board), although I do not yet know if I shall be able
to decipher it. I want to try all the same. I wake up.

This dream expressed in a symbolic way an answer from the unconscious to the
thoughts that the dreamer had had the evening before. It said to him, in
effect: “You yourself must become a priest in your own inner church—in the
church of your soul.” Thus the dream shows that the dreamer does have the
helpful support of an organization; he is contained in a church—not an external
church but one that exists inside his own soul.

The people (all his own psychic qualities) want him to function as the priest
and celebrate the Mass himself. Now the dream cannot mean the actual Mass, for
its Mass book is very different from the real one. It seems that the idea of
the Mass is used as a symbol, and therefore it means a sacrificial act in which
the Divinity is present so that man can communicate with it. This symbolic
solution is, of course, not generally valid but relates to this particular
dreamer. It is a typical solution for a Protestant, because a man who through
real faith is still contained in the Catholic Church usually experiences his
anima in the image of the Church herself, and her sacred images are for him the
symbols of the unconscious.

Our dreamer did not have this ecclesiastical experience, and this is why he had
to follow an inner way. Furthermore, the dream told him what he should do. It
said: “Your mother-boundness and your extraversion (represented by the wife who
is an extravert) distract you and make you feel insecure and by meaningless
talk keep you from celebrating the inner Mass. But if you follow the nun (the
introverted anima), she will lead you as both a servant and a priest. She owns
a strange Mass book which is composed of 16 (four times four) ancient pictures.
Your Mass consists of your contemplation of these psychic images that your
religious anima reveals to you.” In other words, if the dreamer overcomes his
inner uncertainty, caused by his mother complex, he will find that his life
task has the nature and quality of a religious service and that if he meditates
about the symbolic meaning of the images in his soul, they will lead him to
this realization.

In this dream the anima appears in her proper positive role—that is, as a
mediator between the ego and the Self. The four-times-four configuration of the
pictures points to the fact that the celebration of this inner Mass is
performed in the service of totality. As Jung has demonstrated, the nucleus of
the psyche (the Self) normally expresses itself in some kind of fourfold
structure. The number four is also connected with the anima because, as Jung
noted, there are four stages in its development. The first stage is best
symbolized by the figure of Eve, which represents purely instinctual and
biological relations. The second can be seen in Faust’s Helen: She personifies
a romantic and aesthetic level that is, however, still characterized by sexual
elements. The third is represented, for instance, by the Virgin Mary—a figure
who raises love (eros) to the heights of spiritual devotion. The fourth type is
symbolized by Sapientia, wisdom transcending even the most holy and the most
pure. Of this another symbol is the Shulamite in the Song of Solomon. (In the
psychic development of modern man this stage is rarely reached. The Mona Lisa
comes nearest to such a wisdom anima.)

At this stage I am only pointing out that the concept of fourfoldness
frequently occurs in certain types of symbolic material. The essential aspects
of this will be discussed later.

But what does the role of the anima as guide to the inner world mean in
practical terms? This positive function occurs when a man takes seriously the
feelings, moods, expectations, and fantasies sent by his anima and when he
fixes them in some form—for example, in writing, painting, sculpture, musical
composition, or dancing. When he works at this patiently and slowly, other more
deeply unconscious material wells up from the depths and connects with the
earlier material. After a fantasy has been fixed in some specific form, it must
be examined both intellectually and ethically, with an evaluating feeling
reaction. And it is essential to regard it as being absolutely real; there must
be no lurking doubt that this is “only a fantasy.” If this is practiced with
devotion over a long period, the process of individuation gradually becomes the
single reality and can unfold in its true form.

Many examples from literature show the anima as a guide and mediator to the
inner world: Francesco Colonna’s Hypnerotomachia, Rider Haggard’s She, or “the
eternal feminine” in Goethe’s Faust. In a medieval mystical text, an anima
figure explains her own nature as follows:

I am the flower of the field and the lily of the valleys. I am the mother of
fair love and of fear and of knowledge and of holy hope.… I am the mediator of
the elements, making one to agree with another; that which is warm I make cold
and the reverse, and that which is dry I make moist and the reverse, and that
which is hard I soften.… I am the law in the priest and the word in the prophet
and the counsel in the wise. I will kill and I will make to live and there is
none that can deliver out of my hand.

In the Middle Ages there took place a perceptible spiritual differentiation in
religious, poetical, and other cultural matters; and the fantasy world of the
unconscious was recognized more clearly than before. During this period, the
knightly cult of the lady signified an attempt to differentiate the feminine
side of man’s nature in regard to the outer woman as well as in relation to the
inner world.

The lady to whose service the knight pledged himself, and for whom he performed
his heroic deeds, was naturally a personification of the anima. The name of the
carrier of the Grail, in Wolfram von Eschenbach’s version of the legend, is
especially significant: Conduir-amour (“guide in love matters”). She taught the
hero to differentiate both his feelings and his behavior toward women. Later,
however, this individual and personal effort of developing the relationship
with the anima was abandoned when her sublime aspect fused with the figure of
the Virgin, who then became the object of boundless devotion and praise. When
the anima, as Virgin, was conceived as being all-positive, her negative aspects
found expression in the belief in witches.

In China the figure parallel to that of Mary is the goddess Kwan-Yin. A more
popular Chinese anima-figure is the “Lady of the Moon,” who bestows the gift of
poetry or music on her favorites and can even give them immortality. In India
the same archetype is represented by Shakti, Parvati, Rati, and many others;
among the Moslems she is chiefly Fatima, the daughter of Mohammed.



A connection between the motif of four and the anima appears above in a
painting by the Swiss artist Peter Birkhäuser. A four-eyed anima appears as an
overwhelming, terrifying vision. The four eyes have a symbolic significance
similar to that of the 16 pictures in the dream quoted on this page. They
allude to the fact that the anima contains the possibility of achieving
wholeness.

Worship of the anima as an officially recognized figure brings the serious
disadvantage that she loses her individual aspects. On the other hand, if she
is regarded as an exclusively personal being, there is the danger that, if she
is projected into the outer world, it is only there that she can be found. This
latter state of affairs can create endless trouble, because man becomes either
the victim of his erotic fantasies or compulsively dependent on one actual
woman.

Only the painful (but essentially simple) decision to take one’s fantasies and
feelings seriously can at this stage prevent a complete stagnation of the inner
process of individuation, because only in this way can a man discover what this
figure means as an inner reality. Thus the anima becomes again what she
originally was—the “woman within,” who conveys vital messages of the Self.

