# PART 2 - The eternal symbols
[Metadata]: # {02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 2
The eternal symbols
# The eternal symbols
The ancient history of man is being meaningfully rediscovered today in the
symbolic images and myths that have survived ancient man. As archaeologists dig
deep into the past, it is not the events of historical time that we learn to
treasure but the statues, designs, temples, and languages that tell of old
beliefs. Other symbols are revealed to us by the philologists and religious
historians, who can translate these beliefs into intelligible modern concepts.
These in turn are brought to life by the cultural anthropologists. They can
show that the same symbolic patterns can be found in the rituals or myths of
small tribal societies still existing, unchanged for centuries, on the
outskirts of civilization.

All such researches have done much to correct the one-sided attitude of those
modern men who maintain that such symbols belong to the peoples of antiquity or
to “backward” modern tribes and are therefore irrelevant to the complexities of
modern life. In London or New York we may dismiss the fertility rites of
Neolithic Man as archaic superstition. If anyone claims to have seen a vision
or heard voices, he is not treated as a saint or as an oracle. It is said he is
mentally disturbed. We read the myths of the ancient Greeks or the folk stories
of American Indians, but we fail to see any connection between them and our
attitudes to the “heroes” or dramatic events of today.

Yet the connections are there. And the symbols that represent them have not
lost their relevance for mankind.

One of the main contributions of our time to the understanding and revaluing of
such eternal symbols has been made by Dr. Jung’s School of Analytical
Psychology. It has helped to break down the arbitrary distinction between
primitive man, to whom symbols seem a natural part of everyday life, and modern
man, for whom symbols are apparently meaningless and irrelevant.

As Dr. Jung has pointed out earlier in this book, the human mind has its own
history and the psyche retains many traces left from previous stages of its
development. More than this, the contents of the unconscious exert a formative
influence on the psyche. Consciously we may ignore them, but unconsciously we
respond to them, and to the symbolic forms—including dreams—in which they
express themselves.

The individual may feel that his dreams are spontaneous and disconnected. But
over a long period of time the analyst can observe a series of dream images and
note that they have a meaningful pattern; and by understanding this his patient
may eventually acquire a new attitude to life. Some of the symbols in such
dreams derive from what Dr. Jung has called “the collective unconscious”—that
is, that part of the psyche which retains and transmits the common
psychological inheritance of mankind. These symbols are so ancient and
unfamiliar to modern man that he cannot directly understand or assimilate them.

It is here that the analyst can help. Possibly the patient must be freed from
the encumbrance of symbols that have grown stale and inappropriate. Or possibly
he must be assisted to discover the abiding value of an old symbol that, far
from being dead, is seeking to be reborn in modern form.

Before the analyst can effectively explore the meaning of symbols with a
patient, he must himself acquire a wider knowledge of their origins and
significance. For the analogies between ancient myths and the stories that
appear in the dreams of modern patients are neither trivial nor accidental.
They exist because the unconscious minds of modern man preserves the
symbol-making capacity that once found expression in the beliefs and rituals of
the primitive. And that capacity still plays a role of vital psychic
importance. In more ways that we realize, we are dependent on the messages that
are carried by such symbols, and both our attitudes and behavior are profoundly
influenced by them.

In wartime, for instance, one finds increased interest in the works of Homer,
Shakespeare, or Tolstoi, and we read with a new understanding those passages
that give war its enduring (or “archetypal”) meaning. They evoke a response
from us that is much more profound than it could be from someone who has never
known the intense emotional experience of war. The battles on the plains of
Troy were utterly unlike the fighting at Agincourt or Borodino, yet the great
writers are able to transcend the differences of time and place and express
themes that are universal. We respond because these themes are fundamentally
symbolic.

A more striking example should be familiar to anyone who has grown up in a
Christian society. At Christmas we may express our inner feeling for the
mythological birth of a semi-divine child, even though we may not believe in
the doctrine of the virgin birth of Christ or have any kind of conscious
religious faith. Unknowingly, we have fallen in with the symbolism of rebirth.
This is a relic of an immensely older solstice festival, which carries the hope
that the fading winter landscape of the northern hemisphere will be renewed.
For all our sophistication we find satisfaction in this symbolic festival, just
as we join with our children at Easter in the pleasant ritual of Easter eggs
and Easter rabbits.

But do we understand what we do, or see the connection between the story of
Christ’s birth, death, and resurrection and the folk symbolism of Easter?
Usually we do not even care to consider such things intellectually.

Yet they complement each other. Christ’s crucifixion on Good Friday seems at
first sight to belong to the same pattern of fertility symbolism that one finds
in the rituals of such other “saviors” as Osiris, Tammuz, Orpheus, and Balder.
They, too, were of divine or semi-divine birth, they flourished, were killed,
and were reborn. They belonged, in fact, to cyclic religions in which the death
and rebirth of the god-king was an eternally recurring myth.

But the resurrection of Christ on Easter Sunday is much less satisfying from a
ritual point of view than is the symbolism of the cyclic religions. For Christ
ascends to sit at the right hand of God the Father: His resurrection occurs
once and for all.

It is this finality of the Christian concept of the resurrection (the Christian
idea of the Last Judgment has a similar “closed” theme) that distinguishes
Christianity from other god-king myths. It happened once, and the ritual merely
commemorates it. But this sense of finality is probably one reason why early
Christians, still influenced by pre-Christian traditions, felt that
Christianity needed to be supplemented by some elements of an older fertility
ritual. They needed the recurring promise of rebirth; and that is what is
symbolized by the egg and the rabbit of Easter.

I have taken two quite different examples to show how modern man continues to
respond to profound psychic influences of a kind that, consciously, he
dismisses as little more than the folk tales of superstitious and uneducated
peoples. But it is necessary to go much further than this. The more closely one
looks at the history of symbolism, and at the role that symbols have played in
the life of many different cultures, the more one understands that there is
also a re-creative meaning in these symbols.

Some symbols relate to childhood and the transition to adolescence, others to
maturity, and others again to the experience of old age, when man is preparing
for his inevitable death. Dr. Jung has described how the dreams of a girl of
eight contained the symbols one normally associates with old age. Her dreams
presented aspects of initiation into life as belonging to the same archetypal
pattern as initiation into death. This progression of symbolic ideas may take
place, therefore, within the unconscious mind of modern man just as it took
place in the rituals of ancient societies.

This crucial link between archaic or primitive myths and the symbols produced
by the unconscious is of immense practical importance to the analyst. It
enables him to identify and to interpret these symbols in a context that gives
them historical perspective as well as psychological meaning. I shall now take
some of the more important myths of antiquity and show how—and to what
purpose—they are analogous to the symbolic material that we encounter in our
dreams.

