# PART 1 - The function of dreams
[Metadata]: # {01.03}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The function of dreams
# The function of dreams
I have gone into some detail about the origins of our dream life, because it is
the soil from which most symbols originally grow. Unfortunately, dreams are
difficult to understand. As I have already pointed out, a dream is quite unlike
a story told by the conscious mind. In everyday life one thinks out what one
wants to say, selects the most telling way of saying it, and tries to make
one’s remarks logically coherent. For instance, an educated person will seek to
avoid a mixed metaphor because it may give a muddled impression of his point.
But dreams have a different texture. Images that seem contradictory and
ridiculous crowd in on the dreamer, the normal sense of time is lost, and
commonplace things can assume a fascinating or threatening aspect.

It may seem strange that the unconscious mind should order its material so
differently from the seemingly disciplined pattern that we can impose on our
thoughts in waking life. Yet anyone who stops for a moment to recall a dream
will be aware of this contrast, which is in fact one of the main reasons why
the ordinary person finds dreams so hard to understand. They do not make sense
in terms of his normal waking experience, and he therefore is inclined either
to disregard them or to confess that they baffle him.

Perhaps it may be easier to understand this point if we first realize the fact
that the ideas with which we deal in our apparently disciplined waking life are
by no means as precise as we like to believe. On the contrary, their meaning
(and their emotional significance for us) becomes more imprecise the more
closely we examine them. The reason for this is that anything we have heard or
experienced can become subliminal—that is to say, can pass into the
unconscious. And even what we retain in our conscious mind and can reproduce at
will has acquired an unconscious undertone that will color the idea each time
it is recalled. Our conscious impressions, in fact, quickly assume an element
of unconscious meaning that is physically significant for us, though we are not
consciously aware of the existence of this subliminal meaning or of the way in
which it both extends and confuses the conventional meaning.

Of course, such psychic undertones differ from one person to another. Each of
us receives any abstract or general notion in the context of the individual
mind, and we therefore understand and apply it in our individual ways. When, in
conversation, I use any such terms as “state,” “money,” “health,” or “society,”
I assume that my listeners understand more or less the same thing I do. But the
phrase “more or less” makes my point. Each word means something slightly
different to each person, even among those who share the same cultural
background. The reason for this variation is that a general notion is received
into an individual context and is therefore understood and applied in a
slightly individual way. And the difference of meaning is naturally greatest
when people have widely different social, political, religious, or
psychological experiences.

As long as concepts are identical with mere words, the variation is almost
imperceptible and plays no practical role. But when an exact definition or a
careful explanation is needed, one can occasionally discover the most amazing
variations, not only in the purely intellectual understanding of the term, but
particularly in its emotional tone and its application. As a rule, these
variations are subliminal and therefore never realized.



An ordinary European highway with a familiar sign that means “look out for
animals crossing.” But the motorists (their shadows appear in the foreground)
see an elephant, a rhinoceros, even a dinosaur. This painting of a dream (by
the modern Swiss artist Erhard Jacoby) accurately depicts the apparently
illogical, incoherent nature of dream imagery.

One may tend to dismiss such differences as redundant or expendable nuances of
meaning that have little relevance to everyday needs. But the fact that they
exist shows that even the most matter-of-fact contents of consciousness have a
penumbra of uncertainty around them. Even the most carefully defined
philosophical or mathematical concept, which we are sure does not contain more
than we have put into it, is nevertheless more than we assume. It is a psychic
event and as such partly unknowable. The very numbers you use in counting are
more than you take them to be. They are at the same time mythological elements
(for the Pythagoreans, they were even divine); but you are certainly unaware of
this when you use numbers for a practical purpose.

Every concept in our conscious mind, in short, has its own psychic
associations. While such associations may vary in intensity (according to the
relative importance of the concept to our whole personality, or according to
the other ideas and even complexes to which it is associated in our
unconscious), they are capable of changing the “normal” character of that
concept. It may even become something quite different as it drifts below the
level of consciousness.

These subliminal aspects of everything that happens to us may seem to play very
little part in our daily lives. But in dream analysis, where the psychologist
is dealing with expressions of the unconscious, they are very relevant, for
they are the almost invisible roots of our conscious thoughts. That is why
commonplace objects or ideas can assume such powerful psychic significance in a
dream that we may awake seriously disturbed, in spite of having dreamed of
nothing worse than a locked room or a missed train.

The images produced in dreams are much more picturesque and vivid than the
concepts and experiences that are their waking counterparts. One of the reasons
for this is that, in a dream, such concepts can express their unconscious
meaning. In our conscious thoughts, we restrain ourselves within the limits of
rational statements—statements that are much less colorful because we have
stripped them of most of their psychic associations.

I recall one dream of my own that I found difficult to interpret. In this
dream, a certain man was trying to get behind me and jump on my back. I knew
nothing of this man except that I was aware that he had somehow picked up a
remark I had made and had twisted it into a grotesque travesty of my meaning.
But I could not see the connection between this fact and his attempts in the
dream to jump on me. In my professional life, however, it has often happened
that someone has misrepresented what I have said—so often that I have scarcely
bothered to wonder whether this kind of misrepresentation makes me angry. Now
there is a certain value in keeping a conscious control over one’s emotional
reactions; and this, I soon realized, was the point the dream had made. It had
taken an Austrian colloquialism and translated it into a pictorial image. This
phrase, common enough in ordinary speech, is Du kannst mir auf den Buckel
steigen (You can climb on my back), which means “I don’t care what you say
about me.” An American equivalent, which could easily appear in a similar
dream, would be “Go jump in the lake.”

One could say that this dream picture was symbolic, for it did not state the
situation directly but expressed the point indirectly by means of a metaphor
that I could not at first understand. When this happens (as it so often does)
it is not deliberate “disguise” by a dream; it simply reflects the deficiencies
in our understanding of emotionally charged pictorial language. For in our
daily experience, we need to state things as accurately as possible, and we
have learned to discard the trimmings of fantasy both in our language and in
our thoughts—thus losing a quality that is still characteristic of the
primitive mind. Most of us have consigned to the unconscious all the fantastic
psychic associations that every object or idea possesses. The primitive, on the
other hand, is still aware of these psychic properties; he endows animals,
plants, or stones with powers that we find strange and unacceptable.

An African jungle dweller, for instance, sees a nocturnal creature by daylight
and knows it to be a medicine man who has temporarily taken its shape. Or he
may regard it as the bush soul or ancestral spirit of one of his tribe. A tree
may play a vital part in the life of a primitive, apparently possessing for him
its own soul and voice, and the man concerned will feel that he shares its
fate. There are some Indians in South America who will assure you that they are
Red Arara parrots, though they are well aware that they lack feathers, wings,
and beaks. For in the primitive’s world things do not have the same sharp
boundaries they do in our “rational” societies.

What psychologists call psychic identity, or “mystical participation,” has been
stripped off our world of things. But it is exactly this halo of unconscious
associations that gives a colorful and fantastic aspect to the primitive’s
world. We have lost it to such a degree that we do not recognize it when we
meet it again. With us such things are kept below the threshold; when they
occasionally reappear, we even insist that something is wrong.

I have more than once been consulted by well-educated and intelligent people
who have had peculiar dreams, fantasies, or even visions, which have shocked
them deeply. They have assumed that no one who is in a sound state of mind
could suffer from such things, and that anyone who actually sees a vision must
be pathologically disturbed. A theologian once told me that Ezekiel’s visions
were nothing more than morbid symptoms, and that, when Moses and other prophets
heard “voices” speaking to them, they were suffering from hallucinations. You
can imagine the panic he felt when something of this kind “spontaneously”
happened to him. We are so accustomed to the apparently rational nature of our
world that we can scarcely imagine anything happening that cannot be explained
by common sense. The primitive man confronted by a shock of this kind would not
doubt his sanity; he would think of fetishes, spirits, or gods.

Yet the emotions that effect us arc just the same. In fact, the terrors that
stem from our elaborate civilization may be far more threatening than those
that primitive people attribute to demons. The attitude of modern civilized man
sometimes reminds me of a psychotic patient in my clinic who was himself a
doctor. One morning I asked him how he was. He replied that he had had a
wonderful night disinfecting the whole of heaven with mercuric chloride, but
that in the course of this thorough-going sanitary process he had found no
trace of God. Here we see a neurosis or something worse. Instead of God or the
“fear of God,” there is an anxiety neurosis or some kind of phobia. The emotion
has remained the same, but its object has changed both its name and nature for
the worse.

I recall a professor of philosophy who once consulted me about his cancer
phobia. He suffered from a compulsive conviction that he had a malignant tumor,
although nothing of the kind was ever found in dozens of X-ray pictures. “Oh, I
know there is nothing,” he would say, “but there might be something.” What was
it that produced this idea? It obviously came from a fear that was not
instilled by conscious deliberation. The morbid thought suddenly overcame him,
and it had a power of its own that he could not control.

It was far more difficult for this educated man to make an admission of this
kind than it would have been for a primitive to say that he was plagued by a
ghost. The malign influence of evil spirits is at least an admissible
hypothesis in a primitive culture, but it is a shattering experience for a
civilized person to admit that his troubles are nothing more than a foolish
prank of the imagination. The primitive phenomenon of obsession has not
vanished; it is the same as ever. It is only interpreted in a different and
more obnoxious way.

I have made several comparisons of this kind between modern and primitive man.
Such comparisons, as I shall show later, are essential to an understanding of
the symbol-making propensities of man, and of the part that dreams play in
expressing them. For one finds that many dreams present images and associations
that are analogous to primitive ideas, myths, and rites. These dream images
were called “archaic remnants” by Freud; the phrase suggests that they are
psychic elements surviving in the human mind from ages long ago. This point of
view is characteristic of those who regard the unconscious as a mere appendix
of consciousness (or, more picturesquely, as a trash can that collects all the
refuse of the conscious mind).

Further investigation suggested to me that this attitude is untenable and
should be discarded. I found that associations and images of this kind are an
integral part of the unconscious, and can be observed everywhere—whether the
dreamer is educated or illiterate, intelligent or stupid. They are not in any
sense lifeless or meaningless “remnants.” They still function, and they are
especially valuable (as Dr. Henderson shows in a later chapter of this book)
just because of their “historical” nature. They form a bridge between the ways
in which we consciously express our thoughts and a more primitive, more
colorful and pictorial form of expression. It is this form, as well, that
appeals directly to feeling and emotion. These “historical” associations are
the link between the rational world of consciousness and the world of instinct.

I have already discussed the interesting contrast between the “controlled”
thoughts we have in waking life and the wealth of imagery produced in dreams.
Now you can see another reason for this difference: Because, in our civilized
life, we have stripped so many ideas of their emotional energy, we do not
really respond to them any more. We use such ideas in our speech, and we show a
conventional reaction when others use them, but they do not make a very deep
impression on us. Something more is needed to bring certain things home to us
effectively enough to make us change our attitude and our behavior. That is
what “dream language” does; its symbolism has so much psychic energy that we
are forced to pay attention to it.

There was, for instance, a lady who was well known for her stupid prejudices
and her stubborn resistance to reasoned argument. One could have argued with
her all night to no effect; she would have taken not the slightest notice. Her
dreams, however, took a different line of approach. One night, she dreamed she
was attending an important social occasion. She was greeted by the hostess with
the words: “How nice that you could come. All your friends are here, and they
are waiting for you.” The hostess then led her to the door and opened it, and
the dreamer stepped through—into a cowshed!

This dream language was simple enough to be understood even by a blockhead. The
woman would not at first admit the point of a dream that struck so directly at
her self-importance; but its message nevertheless went home, and after a time
she had to accept it because she could not help seeing the self-inflicted joke.

Such messages from the unconscious are of greater importance than most people
realize. In our conscious life, we are exposed to all kinds of influences.
Other people stimulate or depress us, events at the office or in our social
life distract us. Such things seduce us into following ways that are unsuitable
to our individuality. Whether or not we are aware of the effect they have on
our consciousness, it is disturbed by and exposed to them almost without
defense. This is especially the case with a person whose extraverted attitude
of mind lays all the emphasis upon external objects, or who harbors feelings of
inferiority and doubt concerning his own innermost personality.

The more that consciousness is influenced by prejudices, errors, fantasies, and
infantile wishes, the more the already existing gap will widen into a neurotic
dissociation and lead to a more or less artificial life far removed from
healthy instincts, nature, and truth.

The general function of dreams is to try to restore our psychological balance
by producing dream material that re-establishes, in a subtle way, the total
psychic equilibrium. This is what I call the complementary (or compensatory)
role of dreams in our psychic make-up. It explains why people who have
unrealistic ideas or too high an opinion of themselves, or who make grandiose
plans out of proportion to their real capacities, have dreams of flying or
falling. The dream compensates for the deficiencies of their personalities, and
at the same time it warns them of the dangers in their present course. If the
warnings of the dream are disregarded, real accidents may take their place. The
victim may fall downstairs or may have a motor accident.

I remember the case of a man who was inextricably involved in a number of shady
affairs. He developed an almost morbid passion for dangerous mountain climbing,
as a sort of compensation. He was seeking “to get above himself.” In a dream
one night, he saw himself stepping off the summit of a high mountain into empty
space. When he told me his dream, I instantly saw his danger and tried to
emphasize the warning and persuade him to restrain himself. I even told him
that the dream foreshadowed his death in a mountain accident. It was in vain.
Six months later he “stepped off into space.” A mountain guide watched him and
a friend letting themselves down on a rope in a difficult place. The friend had
found a temporary foothold on a ledge, and the dreamer was following him down.
Suddenly he let go of the rope, according to the guide, “as if he were jumping
into the air.” He fell upon his friend, and both went down and were killed.

Another typical case was that of a lady who was living above herself. She was
high and mighty in her daily life, but she had shocking dreams, reminding her
of all sorts of unsavory things. When I uncovered them, she indignantly refused
to acknowledge them. The dreams then became menacing, and full of references to
the walks she used to take by herself in the woods, where she indulged in
soulful fantasies. I saw her danger, but she would not listen to my many
warnings. Soon afterwards, she was savagely attacked in the woods by a sexual
pervert; but for the intervention of some people who heard her screams, she
would have been killed.



One influence to which an individual’s subjected today: political propaganda (a
French poster for a 1962 referendum, urging a vote of “yes” but plastered with
the opposition’s “no”). This and other influences may cause us to live in ways
unsuited to our individual natures; and the psychic imbalance that can follow
must be compensated for by the unconscious.

There was no magic in this. What her dreams had told me was that this woman had
a secret longing for such an adventure—just as the mountain climber
unconsciously sought the satisfaction of finding a definite way out of his
difficulties. Obviously, neither of them expected the stiff price involved: She
had several bones broken, and he paid with his life.

Thus, dreams may sometimes announce certain situations long before they
actually happen. This is not necessarily a miracle or a form of precognition.
Many crises in our lives have a long unconscious history. We move toward them
step by step, unaware of the dangers that are accumulating. But what we
consciously fail to see is frequently perceived by our unconscious, which can
pass the information on through dreams.

Dreams may often warn us in this way; but just as often, it seems, they do not.
Therefore, any assumption of a benevolent hand restraining us in time is
dubious. Or, to state it more positively, it seems that a benevolent agency is
sometimes at work and sometimes not. The mysterious hand may even point the way
to perdition; dreams sometimes prove to be traps, or appear to be so. They
sometimes behave like the Delphic oracle that told King Croesus that if he
crossed the Halys River he would destroy a large kingdom. It was only after he
had been completely defeated in battle after the crossing that he discovered
that the kingdom meant by the oracle was his own.

One cannot afford to be naïve in dealing with dreams. They originate in a
spirit that is not quite human, but is rather a breath of nature—a spirit of
the beautiful and generous as well as of the cruel goddess. If we want to
characterize this spirit, we shall certainly get closer to it in the sphere of
ancient mythologies, or the fables of the primeval forest, than in the
consciousness of modern man. I am not denying that great gains have resulted
from the evolution of civilized society. But these gains have been made at the
price of enormous losses, whose extent we have scarcely begun to estimate. Part
of the purpose of my comparisons between the primitive and the civilized states
of man has been to show the balance of these losses and gains.

Primitive man was much more governed by his instincts than are his “rational”
modern descendants, who have learned to “control” themselves. In this
civilizing process, we have increasingly divided our consciousness from the
deeper instinctive strata of the human psyche, and even ultimately from the
somatic basis of the psychic phenomenon. Fortunately, we have not lost these
basic instinctive strata; they remain part of the unconscious, even though they
may express themselves only in the form of dream images. These instinctive
phenomena—one may not, incidentally, always recognize them for what they are,
for their character is symbolic—play a vital part in what I have called the
compensating function of dreams.

For the sake of mental stability and even physiological health, the unconscious
and the conscious must be integrally connected and thus move on parallel lines.
If they are split apart or “dissociated,” psychological disturbance follows. In
this respect, dream symbols are the essential message carriers from the
instinctive to the rational parts of the human mind, and their interpretation
enriches the poverty of consciousness so that it learns to understand again the
forgotten language of the instincts.

Of course, people are bound to query this function, since its symbols so often
pass unnoticed or uncomprehended. In normal life, the understanding of dreams
is often considered superfluous. I can illustrate this by my experience with a
primitive tribe in East Africa. To my amazement, these tribesmen denied that
they had any dreams. But through patient, indirect talks with them I soon found
that they had dreams just like everyone else, but that they were convinced
their dreams had no meaning. “Dreams of ordinary men mean nothing,” they told
me. They thought that the only dreams that mattered were those of chiefs and
medicine men; these, which concerned the welfare of the tribe, were highly
appreciated. The only drawback was that the chief and the medicine man both
claimed that they had ceased having meaningful dreams. They dated this change
from the time that the British came to their country. The district
commissioner—the British official in charge of them—had taken over the function
of the “great dreams” that had hitherto guided the tribe’s behavior.

When these tribesmen conceded that they did have dreams, but thought them
meaningless, they were like the modern man who thinks that a dream has no
significance for him simply because he does not understand it. But even a
civilized man can sometimes observe that a dream (which he may not even
remember) can alter his mood for better or worse. The dream has been
“comprehended,” but only in a subliminal way. And that is what usually happens.
It is only on the rare occasions when a dream is particularly impressive or
repeats itself at regular intervals that most people consider an interpretation
desirable.

Here I ought to add a word of warning against unintelligent or incompetent
dream analysis. There are some people whose mental condition is so unbalanced
that the interpretation of their dreams can be extremely risky; in such a case,
a very one-sided consciousness is cut off from a correspondingly irrational or
“crazy” unconscious, and the two should not be brought together without taking
special precautions.

And, speaking more generally, it is plain foolishness to believe in ready-made
systematic guides to dream interpretation, as if one could simply buy a
reference book and look up a particular symbol. No dream symbol can be
separated from the individual who dreams it, and there is no definite or
straightforward interpretation of any dream. Each individual varies so much in
the way that his unconscious complements or compensates his conscious mind that
it is impossible to be sure how far dreams and their symbols can be classified
at all.

It is true that there are dreams and single symbols (I should prefer to call
them “motifs”) that are typical and often occur. Among such motifs are falling,
flying, being persecuted by dangerous animals or hostile men, being
insufficiently or absurdly clothed in public places, being in a hurry or lost
in a milling crowd, fighting with useless weapons or being wholly defenseless,
running hard yet getting nowhere. A typical infantile motif is the dream of
growing infinitely small or infinitely big, or being transformed from one to
the other—as you find it, for instance, in Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland.
But I must stress again that these are motifs that must be considered in the
context of the dream itself, not as self-explanatory ciphers.



Top of page, a famous example of the common dream of growing larger: a drawing
from Alice in Wonderland (1877) shows Alice growing to fill a house. Below, the
equally common dream of flying, in a drawing (by the 19th-century British
artist William Blake) entitled: “O, How I Dreamt of Things Impossible.”

The recurring dream is a noteworthy phenomenon. There are cases in which people
have dreamed the same dream from childhood into the later years of adult life.
A dream of this kind is usually an attempt to compensate for a particular
defect in the dreamer’s attitude to life; or it may date from a traumatic
moment that has left behind some specific prejudice. It may also sometimes
anticipate a future event of importance.

I myself dreamed of a motif over several years, in which I would “discover” a
part of my house that I did not know existed. Sometimes it was the quarters
where my long-dead parents lived, in which my father, to my surprise, had a
laboratory where he studied the comparative anatomy of fish and my mother ran a
hotel for ghostly visitors. Usually this unfamiliar guest wing was an ancient
historical building, long forgotten, yet my inherited property. It contained
interesting antique furniture, and toward the end of this series of dreams I
discovered an old library whose books were unknown to me. Finally, in the last
dream, I opened one of the books and found in it a profusion of the most
marvelous symbolic pictures. When I awoke, my heart was palpitating with
excitement.

Some time before I had this particular last dream of the series, I had placed
an order with an antiquarian bookseller for one of the classic compilations of
medieval alchemists. I had found a quotation in literature that I thought might
have some connection with early Byzantine alchemy, and I wished to check it.
Several weeks after I had had the dream of the unknown book, a parcel arrived
from the bookseller. Inside was a parchment volume dating from the 16th
century. It was illustrated by fascinating symbolic pictures that instantly
reminded me of those I had seen in my dream. As the rediscovery of the
principles of alchemy came to be an important part of my work as a pioneer of
psychology, the motif of my recurring dream can easily be understood. The
house, of course, was a symbol of my personality and its conscious field of
interests; and the unknown annex represented the anticipation of a new field of
interest and research of which my conscious mind was at that time unaware. From
that moment, 30 years ago, I never had the dream again.

