# PART 4 - Sacred symbols — the stone and the animal
[Metadata]: # {04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
Sacred symbols — the stone and the animal
# Sacred symbols — the stone and the animal
The history of symbolism shows that everything can assume symbolic
significance: natural objects (like stones, plants, animals, men, mountains and
valleys, sun and moon, wind, water, and fire), or man-made things (like houses,
boats, or cars), or even abstract forms (like numbers, or the triangle, the
square, and the circle). In fact, the whole cosmos is a potential symbol.

Man, with his symbol-making propensity, unconsciously transforms objects or
forms into symbols (thereby endowing them with great psychological importance)
and expresses them in both his religion and his visual art. The intertwined
history of religion and art, reaching back to prehistoric times, is the record
that our ancestors have left of the symbols that were meaningful and moving to
them. Even today, as modern painting and sculpture show, the interplay of
religion and art is still alive.

For the first part of my discussion of symbolism in the visual arts, I intend
to examine some of the specific motifs that have been universally sacred or
mysterious to man. Then, for the remainder of the chapter, I wish to discuss
the phenomenon of 20th-century art, not in terms of its use of symbols, but in
terms of its significance as a symbol itself—a symbolic expression of the
psychological condition of the modern world.

In the following pages, I have chosen three recurring motifs with which to
illustrate the presence and nature of symbolism in the art of many different
periods. These are the symbols of the stone, the animal, and the circle—each of
which has had enduring psychological significance from the earliest expressions
of human consciousness to the most sophisticated forms of 20th-century art.



Left, a prehistoric menhir—a rock that has been slightly carved into a female
form (probably a mother goddess). Right, a sculpture by Max Ernst (born 1891)
has also hardly altered the natural shape of the stone.

We know that even unhewn stones had a highly symbolic meaning for ancient and
primitive societies. Rough, natural stones were often believed to be the
dwelling places of spirits or gods, and were used in primitive cultures as
tombstones, boundary stones, or objects of religious veneration. Their use may
be regarded as a primeval form of sculpture—a first attempt to invest the stone
with more expressive power than chance and nature could give it.

The Old Testament story of Jacob’s dream is a typical example of how, thousands
of years ago, man felt that a living god or a divine spirit was embodied in the
stone and how the stone became a symbol:

And Jacob … went toward Haran. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried
there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of the
place, and put them for his pillows and lay down in that place to sleep. And he
dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven, and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And,
behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give
it, and to thy seed.

And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this
place; and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this
place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning and took the stone that he had put for
his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it. And
he called the name of that place Beth-el.

For Jacob, the stone was an integral part of the revelation. It was the
mediator between himself and God.

In many primitive stone-sanctuaries, the deity is represented not by a single
stone but by a great many unhewn stones, arranged in distinct patterns. (The
geometrical stone alignments in Brittany and the stone circle at Stone-henge
are famous examples.) Arrangements of rough natural stones also play a
considerable part in the highly civilized rock gardens of Zen Buddhism. Their
arrangement is not geometrical but seems to have come about by pure chance. In
fact, however, it is the expression of a most refined spirituality.

Very early in history, men began trying to express what they felt to be the
soul or spirit of a rock by working it into a recognizable form. In many cases,
the form was a more or less definite approximation to the human figure—for
instance, the ancient menhirs with their crude outlines of faces, or the hermae
that developed out of boundary stones in ancient Greece, or the many primitive
stone idols with human features. The animation of the stone must be explained
as the projection of a more or less distinct content of the unconscious into
the stone.

The primitive tendency to give merely a hint of a human figure, and to retain
much of the stone’s natural form, can also be seen in modern sculpture. Many
examples show the artists’ concern with the “self-expression” of the stone; to
use the language of myth, the stone is allowed to “speak for itself.” This can
be seen, for instance, in the work of the Swiss sculptor Hans Aeschbacher, the
American sculptor James Rosati, and the German-born artist Max Ernst. In a
letter from Maloja in 1935, Ernst wrote: “Alberto [the Swiss artist Giacometti]
and I are afflicted with sculpturitis. We work on granite boulders, large and
small, from the moraine of the Forno glacier. Wonderfully polished by time,
frost, and weather, they are in themselves fantastically beautiful. No human
hand can do that. So why not leave the spadework to the elements, and confine
ourselves to scratching on them the runes of our own mystery?”

What Ernst meant by “mystery” is not explained. But later in this chapter I
shall try to show that the “mysteries” of the modern artist are not very
different from those of the old masters who knew the “spirit of the stone.”

The emphasis on this “spirit” in much sculpture is one indication of the
shifting, indefinable borderline between religion and art. Sometimes one cannot
be separated from the other. The same ambivalence can also be seen in another
symbolic motif, as it appears in age-old works of art: the symbol of the
animal.

Animal pictures go back to the Ice Age (i.e., between 60,000 and 10,000 B.C.).
They were discovered on the walls of caves in France and Spain at the end of
the last century, but it was not until early in the present century that
archaeologists began to realize their extreme importance and to inquire into
their meaning. These inquiries revealed an infinitely remote prehistoric
culture whose existence had never even been suspected.

Even today, a strange magic seems to haunt the caves that contain the rock
engravings and paintings. According to the German art historian Herbert Kühn,
inhabitants of the areas in Africa, Spain, France, and Scandinavia where such
paintings are found could not be induced to go near the caves. A kind of
religious awe, or perhaps a fear of spirits hovering among the rocks and the
paintings, held them back. Passing nomads still lay their votive offerings
before the old rock paintings in North Africa. In the 15th century, Pope
Calixtus II prohibited religious ceremonies in the “cave with the
horse-pictures.” Which cave the pope meant is not known, but there can be no
doubt that it was a cave of the Ice Age containing animal pictures. All this
goes to prove that the caves and rocks with the animal paintings have always
been instinctively felt to be what they originally were—religious places. The
numen of the place has outlived the centuries.

In a number of caves the modern visitor must travel through low, dark, and damp
passages till he reaches the point where the great painted “chambers” suddenly
open out. This arduous approach may express the desire of the primitive men to
safeguard from common sight all that was contained and went on in the caves,
and to protect their mystery. The sudden and unexpected sight of the paintings
in the chambers, coming after the difficult and awe-inspiring approach, must
have made an overwhelming impression on primitive man.

The Paleolithic cave paintings consist almost entirely of figures of animals,
whose movements and postures have been observed in nature and rendered with
great artistic skill. There are, however, many details that show that the
figures were intended to be something more than naturalistic reproductions.
Kühn writes: “The strange thing is that a good many primitive paintings have
been used as targets. At Montespan there is an engraving of a horse that is
being driven into a trap; it is pitted with the marks of missiles. A clay model
of a bear in the same cave has 42 holes.”

These pictures suggest a hunting-magic like that still practiced today by
hunting tribes in Africa. The painted animal has the function of a “double”; by
its symbolic slaughter, the hunters attempt to anticipate and ensure the death
of the real animal. This is a form of sympathetic magic, which is based on the
“reality” of a double represented in a picture: What happens to the picture
will happen to the original. The underlying psychological fact is a strong
identification between a living being and its image, which is considered to be
the being’s soul. (This is one reason why a great many primitive people today
will shrink from being photographed.)

Other cave pictures must have served magic fertility rites. They show animals
at the moment of mating; an example can be seen in the figures of a male and
female bison in the Tuc l’Audubert cave in France. Thus the realistic picture
of the animals was enriched by overtones of magic and took on a symbolic
significance. It became the image of the living essence of the animal.

The most interesting figures in the cave paintings are those of semihuman
beings in animal disguise, which are sometimes to be found besides the animals.
In the Trois Frères cave in France, a man wrapped in an animal hide is playing
a primitive flute as if he meant to put a spell on the animals. In the same
cave, there is a dancing human being, with antlers, a horse’s head, and bear’s
paws. This figure, dominating a medley of several hundred animals, is
unquestionably the “Lord of the Animals.”

The customs and usages of some primitive African tribes today can throw some
light on the meaning of these mysterious and doubtless symbolic figures. In
initiations, secret societies, and even the institution of monarchy in these
tribes, animals and animal disguises often play an important part. The king and
chief are animals too—generally lions or leopards. Vestiges of this custom may
still be discerned in the title of the emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie
(“The Lion of Judah”), or the honorific name of Dr. Hastings Banda (“The Lion
of Nyasaland”).

The further back we go in time, or the more primitive and close to nature the
society is, the more literally such titles must be taken. A primitive chief is
not only disguised as the animal; when he appears at initiation rites in full
animal disguise, he is the animal. Still more, he is an animal spirit, a
terrifying demon who performs circumcision. At such moments he incorporates or
represents the ancestor of the tribe and the clan, and therefore the primal god
himself. He represents, and is, the “totem” animal. Thus we probably should not
go far wrong in seeing in the figure of the dancing animal-man in the Trois
Frères cave a kind of chief who has been transformed by his disguise into an
animal demon.



Left, a prehistoric painting from Trois Frères cave includes (lower right
corner) a human figure, perhaps a shaman, with horns and hoofs. As an example
of “animal” dances: right, a Burmese buffalo dance in which masked dancers are
possessed by the buffalo spirit.

In the course of time, the complete animal disguise was superseded in many
places by animal and demon masks. Primitive men lavished all their artistic
skill on these masks, and many of them are still unsurpassed in the power and
intensity of their expression. They are often the objects of the same
veneration as the god or demon himself. Animal masks play a part in the folk
arts of many modern countries, like Switzerland, or in the magnificently
expressive masks of the ancient Japanese No drama, which is still performed in
modern Japan. The symbolic function of the mask is the same as that of the
original animal disguise. Individual human expression is submerged, but in its
place the wearer assumes the dignity and the beauty (and also the horrifying
expression) of an animal demon. In psychological terms, the mask transforms its
wearer into an archetypal image.

Dancing, which was originally nothing more than a completion of the animal
disguise by appropriate movements and gestures, was probably supplementary to
the initiation or other rites. It was, so to speak, performed by demons in
honor of a demon. In the soft clay of the Tuc d’Audubert cave, Herbert Kühn
found footprints that led round animal figures. They show that dancing was part
of even the Ice Age rites. “Only heel prints can be seen,” Kühn writes. “The
dancers had moved like bisons. They had danced a bison dance for the fertility
and increase of the animals and for their slaughter.”

In his introductory chapter, Dr. Jung has pointed out the close relation, or
even identification, between the native and his totem animal (or “bush-soul”).
There are special ceremonies for the establishment of this relationship,
especially the initiation rites for boys. The boy enters into possession of his
“animal soul,” and at the same time sacrifices his own “animal being” by
circumcision. This dual process admits him to the totem clan and establishes
his relationship to his totem animal. Above all, he becomes a man, and (in a
still wider sense) a human being.

East Coast Africans described the uncircumcised as “animals.” They have neither
received an animal soul nor sacrificed their “animality.” In other words, since
neither the human nor the animal aspect of an uncircumcised boy’s soul has
become conscious, his animal aspect was regarded as dominant.

The animal motif is usually symbolic of man’s primitive and instinctual nature.
Even civilized men must realize the violence of their instinctual drives and
their powerlessness in face of the autonomous emotions erupting from the
unconscious. This is still more the case with primitive men, whose
consciousness is not highly developed and who are still less well equipped to
weather the emotional storm. In the first chapter of this book, when Dr. Jung
is discussing the ways in which man developed the power of reflection, he takes
an example of an African who fell into a rage and killed his beloved little
son. When the man recovered himself, he was overwhelmed with grief and remorse
for what he had done. In this case a negative impulse broke loose and did its
deadly work regardless of the conscious will. The animal demon is a highly
expressive symbol for such an impulse. The vividness and concreteness of the
image enables man to establish a relationship with it as a representative of
the overwhelming power in himself. He fears it and seeks to propitiate it by
sacrifice and ritual.

A large number of myths are concerned with a primal animal, which must be
sacrificed in the cause of fertility or even creation. One example of this is
the sacrifice of a bull by the Persian sun-god Mithras, from which sprang the
earth with all wealth and fruitfulness. In the Christian legend of St. George
slaying the dragon, the primeval rite of sacrificial slaughter again appears.

In the religions and religious art of practically every race, animal attributes
are ascribed to the supreme gods, or the gods are represented as animals. The
ancient Babylonians translated their gods into the heavens in the shape of the
Ram, the Bull, the Crab, the Lion, the Scorpion, the Fish, and so on—the signs
of the Zodiac. The Egyptians represented the goddess Hathor as cow-headed, the
god Amon as ram-headed, and Thoth as ibis-headed or in the shape of a baboon.
Ganesh, the Hindu god of good fortune, has a human body but the head of an
elephant, Vishnu is a boar, Hanuman is an ape-god, etc. (The Hindus,
incidentally, do not assign the first place in the hierarchy of being to man:
The elephant and lion stand higher.)

Greek mythology is full of animal symbolism. Zeus, the father of the gods,
often approaches a girl whom he desires in the shape of a swan, a bull, or an
eagle. In Germanic mythology, the cat is sacred to the goddess Freya, while the
boar, the raven, and the horse are sacred to Wotan.

Even in Christianity, animal symbolism plays a surprisingly great part. Three
of the Evangelists have animal emblems: St. Luke has the ox, St. Mark the lion,
and St. John the eagle. Only one, St. Matthew, is represented as a man or as an
angel. Christ himself symbolically appears as the Lamb of God or the Fish, but
he is also the serpent exalted on the cross, the lion, and in rarer cases the
unicorn. These animal attributes of Christ indicate that even the Son of God
(the supreme personification of man) can no more dispense with his animal
nature than with his higher, spiritual nature. The subhuman as well as the
superhuman is felt to belong to the realm of the divine; the relationship of
these two aspects of man is beautifully symbolized in the Christmas picture of
the birth of Christ, in a stable among animals.

The boundless profusion of animal symbolism in the religion and art of all
times does not merely emphasize the importance of the symbol; it shows how
vital it is for men to integrate into their lives the symbol’s psychic
content—instinct. In itself, an animal is neither good nor evil; it is a piece
of nature. It cannot desire anything that is not in its nature. To put this
another way, it obeys its instincts. These instincts often seem mysterious to
us, but they have their parallel in human life: The foundation of human nature
is instinct.

But in man, the “animal being” (which lives in him as his instinctual psyche)
may become dangerous if it is not recognized and integrated in life. Man is the
only creature with the power to control instinct by his own will, but he is
also able to suppress, distort, and wound it—and an animal, to speak
metaphorically, is never so wild and dangerous as when it is wounded.
Suppressed instincts can gain control of a man; they can even destroy him.

The familiar dream in which the dreamer is pursued by an animal nearly always
indicates that an instinct has been split off from the consciousness and ought
to be (or is trying to be) readmitted and integrated into life. The more
dangerous the behavior of the animal in the dream, the more unconscious is the
primitive and instinctual soul of the dreamer, and the more imperative is its
integration into his life if some irreparable evil is to be forestalled.

Suppressed and wounded instincts are the dangers threatening civilized man;
uninhibited drives are the dangers threatening primitive man. In both cases the
“animal” is alienated from its true nature; and for both, the acceptance of the
animal soul is the condition for wholeness and a fully lived life. Primitive
man must tame the animal in himself and make it his helpful companion;
civilized man must heal the animal in himself and make it his friend.

Other contributors to this book have discussed the importance of the stone and
animal motifs in terms of dream and myth; I have used them here only as general
examples of the appearance of such living symbols throughout the history of art
(and especially religious art). Let us now examine in the same way a most
powerful and universal symbol: the circle.

