# PART 5 - The final dream
[Metadata]: # {05.08}
[Descriptor]: # {05.08}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
The final dream
# The final dream
A further dream came to confirm irrevocably the insights Henry had gained.
After some unimportant short dreams that concerned his everyday life, the last
dream (the 50th in the series) appeared with all the wealth of symbols that
characterizes the so-called “great dreams.”

Four of us form a friendly group, and we have the following experiences:
Evening. We are sitting at a long, raw-lumber table and drinking out of each of
three different vessels: from a liqueur glass, a clear, yellow, sweet liqueur;
from a wine glass, dark red Campari; from a large, classically shaped vessel,
tea. In addition to us there is also a girl of reserved, delicate nature. She
pours her liqueur into the tea.

Night : We have returned from a big drinking bout. One of us is the Président
de la République Française. We are in his palace. Walking out onto the balcony
we perceive him beneath us in the snowy street as he, in his drunken condition,
urinates against a mound of snow. His bladder content seems to be
inexhaustible. Now he even runs after an old spinster who carries in her arms a
child wrapped in a brown blanket. He sprays the child with his urine. The
spinster feels the moisture but ascribes it to the child. She hurries away with
long steps.

Morning : Through the street, which glistens in the winter sun, goes a Negro: a
gorgeous figure, completely naked. He walks toward the east, toward Berne (that
is, the Swiss capital). We are in French Switzerland. We decide to go to pay
him a visit.

Noon : After a long automobile trip through a lonely snowy region we come to a
city, and into a dark house where the Negro is said to have put up. We are very
much afraid that he might be frozen to death. However, his servant, who is just
as dark, receives us. Negro and servant are mute. We look into the rucksacks we
have brought with us, to see what each could give the Negro as a gift. It must
be some sort of object characteristic of civilization. I am the first to make
up my mind and I take a package of matches from the floor and offer it to the
Negro with deference. After all have presented their gifts, we join with the
Negro in a happy feast, a joyous revel.

Even at first glance the dream with its four parts makes an unusual impression.
It encompasses a whole day and moves toward the “right,” in the direction of
growing consciousness. The movement starts with the evening, goes over into the
night, and ends at noon, when the sun is at its zenith. Thus the cycle of the
“day” appears as a totality pattern.

In this dream the four friends seem to symbolize the unfolding masculinity of
Henry’s psyche, and their progress through the four “acts” of the dream has a
geometric pattern that reminds one of the essential construction of the
mandala. As they first came from the east, then from the west, moving on toward
the “capital” of Switzerland (i.e., the center), they seem to describe a
pattern that tries to unite the opposites in a center. And this point is
underlined by the movement in time—the descent into the night of the
unconsciousness, following the sun’s circuit, which is followed by an ascent to
the bright zenith of consciousness.

The dream begins in the evening, a time when the threshold of consciousness is
lowered and the impulses and images of the unconscious can pass across it. In
such a condition (when the feminine side of man is most easily evoked) it is
natural to find that a female figure joins the four friends. She is the anima
figure that belongs to them all (“reserved and delicate,” reminding Henry of
his sister) and connects them all to each other. On the table stand three
vessels of different character, which by their concave form accentuate the
receptiveness that is symbolic of the feminine. The fact that these vessels are
used by all present indicates a mutual and close relatedness among them. The
vessels differ in form (liqueur glass, wine glass, and a classically formed
container) and in the color of their contents. The opposites into which these
fluids divide—sweet and bitter, red and yellow, intoxicating and sobering—are
all intermingled, through being consumed by each of the five persons present,
who sink into an unconscious communion.

The girl seems to be the secret agent, the catalyst who precipitates events
(for it is the role of the anima to lead a man into his unconscious, and thus
to force him to deeper recollection and increased consciousness). It is almost
as though with the mixing of liqueur and tea the party would approach its
climax.

The second part of the dream tells us more of the happenings of this “night.”
The four friends suddenly find themselves in Paris (which, for the Swiss,
represents the town of sensuality, of uninhibited joy and love). Here a certain
differentiation of the four takes place, especially between the ego in the
dream (which is to a great extent identified with the leading thinking
function) and the “Président de la République,” who represents the undeveloped
and unconscious feeling function.

The ego (Henry and two friends, who may be considered as representing his
semi-conscious functions) looks down from the heights of a balcony on the
President, whose characteristics are exactly what one would expect to find in
the undifferentiated side of the psyche. He is unstable, and has abandoned
himself to his instincts. He urinates on the street in a drunken state; he is
unconscious of himself, like a person outside civilization, following only his
natural animal urges. Thus the President symbolizes a great contrast to the
consciously accepted standards of a good middle-class Swiss scientist. Only in
the darkest night of the unconscious could this side of Henry reveal itself.

However, the President-figure also has a very positive aspect. His urine (which
could be the symbol of a stream of psychic libido) seems inexhaustible. It
gives evidence of abundance, of creative and vital strength. (Primitives, for
instance, regard everything coming from the body—hair, excrement, urine, or
saliva—as creative, as having magical powers.) This unpleasant President-image,
therefore, could also be a sign of the power and plenty that often adheres to
the shadow side of the ego. Not only does he urinate without embarrassment, but
he runs after an old woman who is holding a child.

This “old spinster” is in a way the opposite or complement of the shy, fragile
anima of the first part of the dream. She is still a virgin, even though old
and seemingly a mother; in fact, Henry associated her to the archetypal image
of Mary with the child Jesus. But the fact that the baby is wrapped in a brown
(earth-colored) blanket makes it seem to be the chthonic, earth-bound
counter-image of the Savior rather than a heavenly child. The President, who
sprinkles the child with his urine, seems to perform a travesty of baptism. If
we take the child as a symbol of a potentiality within Henry that is still
infantile, then it could receive strength through this ritual. But the dream
says nothing more; the woman hurries away with the child.

This scene marks the turning point of the dream. It is morning again.
Everything that was dark, black, primitive, and powerful in the last episode
has been gathered together and symbolized by a magnificent Negro, who appears
naked—i.e., real and true.

Just as darkness and bright morning—or hot urine and cold snow—are opposites,
so now the black man and the white landscape form a sharp antithesis. The four
friends now must orient themselves within these new dimensions. Their position
has changed; the way that led through Paris has brought them unexpectedly into
French Switzerland (where Henry’s fiancée came from). A transformation has
taken place in Henry during the earlier phase, when he was overpowered by
unconscious contents of his psyche. Now, for the first time, he can begin to
find his way forward from a place that was his fiancée’s home (showing that he
accepts her psychological background).



A drinking vessel from ancient Peru, in the shape of a woman, reflects the
feminine symbolism of such containers, which occurs in Henry’s final dream.

At the beginning he went from eastern Switzerland to Paris (from the east to
the west, where the way leads into darkness, the unconsciousness). He has now
made a turn of 180°, toward the rising sun and the ever-increasing clarity of
consciousness. This way points to the middle of Switzerland, to its capital,
Berne, and symbolizes Henry’s striving toward a center that would unite the
opposites within him.

The Negro is for some people the archetypal image of “the dark primal creature”
and thus a personification of certain contents of the unconscious. Perhaps this
is one reason why the Negro is so often rejected and feared by people of the
white race. In him the white man sees his living counterpart, his hidden, dark
side brought before his eyes. (This is just what most people try to avoid; they
want to cut it off and repress it.) White men project onto the Negro the
primitive drives, the archaic powers, the uncontrolled instincts that they do
not want to admit in themselves, of which they are unconscious, and that they
therefore designate as the corresponding qualities of other people.

For a young man of Henry’s age the Negro may stand on the one hand for the sum
of all dark traits repressed into unconsciousness; on the other hand, he may
represent the sum of his primitive, masculine strength and potentialities, his
emotional and physical power. That Henry and his friends intend consciously to
confront the Negro signifies therefore a decisive step forward on the way to
manhood.

In the meantime it has become noon, when the sun is at its highest, and
consciousness has reached its greatest clarity. We might say that Henry’s ego
has continued to become more and more compact, that he has enhanced his
capacity consciously to make decisions. It is still winter, which may indicate
a lack of feeling and warmth in Henry; his psychic landscape is still wintry
and apparently intellectually very cold. The four friends are afraid that the
naked Negro (being accustomed to a warm climate) might be frozen. But their
fear turns out to be groundless, for after a long drive through deserted
snow-covered country they stop in a strange city and enter a dark house. This
drive and the desolate country is symbolic of the long and wearisome search for
self-development.

A further complication awaits the four friends here. The Negro and his servant
are mute. Therefore it is not possible to make verbal contact with them; the
four friends must seek other means to get in touch with the Negro. They cannot
use intellectual means (words) but rather a feeling gesture to approach him.
They offer him a present as one gives an offering to the gods, to win their
interest and their affection. And it has to be an object of our civilization,
belonging to the values of the intellectual white man. Again a sacrificium
intellectus is demanded to win the favor of the Negro, who represents nature
and instinct.

Henry is the first to make up his mind what to do. This is natural, since he is
the bearer of the ego, whose proud consciousness (or hybris) has to be humbled.
He picks up a box of matches from the floor and presents it “with deference” to
the Negro. At first glance it may seem absurd that a small object lying on the
floor and probably thrown away should be the proper gift, but this was the
right choice. Matches are stored and controlled fire, a means by which a flame
can be lit and put out at any time. Fire and flame symbolize warmth and love,
feeling and passion; they are qualities of the heart, found wherever human
beings exist.

In giving the Negro such a present, Henry symbolically combines a highly
developed civilized product of his conscious ego with the center of his own
primitivity and male strength, symbolized by the Negro. In this way, Henry can
come into the full possession of his male sides, with which his ego must remain
in constant touch from now on.

This was the result. The six male persons—the four friends, the Negro, and his
servant—are now together in a gay spirit at a communal meal. It is clear that
here Henry’s masculine totality has been rounded out. His ego seems to have
found the security it needs to enable him consciously and freely to submit to
the greater archetypal personality within himself, which foreshadows the
emergence of the Self.

What happened in the dream had its parallel also in Henry’s waking life. Now he
was sure of himself. Deciding quickly, he became serious about his engagement.
Exactly nine months after his analysis had begun, he married in a little church
of western Switzerland; and he left the following day with his young wife for
Canada to take up an appointment that he had received during the decisive weeks
of his last dreams. Since then he has been living an active, creative life as
the head of a little family and holds an executive position in a great
industry.

Henry’s case reveals, so to speak, an accelerated maturation to an independent
and responsible manliness. It represents an initiation into the reality of
outer life, a strengthening of the ego and of his masculinity, and with this a
completion of the first half of the individuation process. The second
half—which is the establishment of a right relationship between the ego and the
Self—still lies ahead of Henry, in the second half of his life.

Not every case runs such a successful and stirring course, and not every case
can be handled in a similar way. On the contrary, every case is different. Not
only do the young and the old, or the man and the woman, call for different
treatment; so does every individual in all these categories. Even the same
symbols require different interpretation in each case. I have selected this one
because it represents an especially impressive example of the autonomy of the
unconscious processes and shows by its abundance of images the untiring
symbol-creating power of the psychic background. It proves that the
self-regulating action of the psyche (when not disturbed by too much rational
explanation or dissection) can support the developmental process of the soul.

