# PART 5 - The beginning of the analysis
[Metadata]: # {05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {05.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
The beginning of the analysis
# The beginning of the analysis
There is a widespread belief that the methods of Jungian psychology are
applicable only to middle-aged people. True, many men and women reach middle
age without achieving psychological maturity, and it is therefore necessary to
help them through the neglected phases of their development. They have not
completed the first part of the process of individuation that Dr. M.-L. von
Franz has described. But it is also true that a young person can encounter
serious problems as he grows up. If a young person is afraid of life and finds
it hard to adjust to reality, he might prefer to dwell in his fantasies or to
remain a child. In such a young person (especially if he is introverted) one
can sometimes discover unexpected treasures in the unconscious, and by bringing
them into consciousness strengthen his ego and give him the psychic energy he
needs to grow into a mature person. That is the function of the powerful
symbolism of our dreams.

Other contributors to this book have described the nature of these symbols and
the role they play in man’s psychological nature. I wish to show how analysis
can aid the individuation process by taking the example of a young engineer,
aged 25, whom I shall call Henry.

Henry came from a rural district in eastern Switzerland. His father, of
Protestant peasant stock, was a general practitioner: Henry described him as a
man with high moral standards, but a rather withdrawn person who found it
difficult to relate to other people. He was more of a father to his patients
than to his children. At home, Henry’s mother was the dominant personality. “We
were raised by the strong hand of our mother,” he said on one occasion. She
came from a family with an academic background and wide artistic interests. She
herself, in spite of her strictness, had a broad spiritual horizon; she was
impulsive and romantic (she had a great love for Italy). Though she was by
birth a Catholic, her children had been brought up in the Protestantism of
their father. Henry had a sister, older than himself, with whom he had a good
relationship.

Henry was introverted, shy, finely drawn, and very tall, with light hair, a
high pale forehead and blue eyes with dark shadows. He did not think that a
neurosis (the most usual reason) had brought him to me, but rather an inner
urge to work on his psyche. A strong mother-tie, however, and a fear of
committing himself to life were hidden behind this urge; but these were only
discovered during the analytical work with me. He had just completed his
studies and taken a position in a large factory, and he was facing the many
problems of a young man on the threshold of manhood. “It appears to me,” he
wrote in a letter asking for an interview, “that this phase of my life is
particularly important and meaningful. I must decide either to remain
unconscious in a well-protected security, or else to venture on a yet unknown
way of which I have great hopes.” The choice thus confronting him was whether
to remain a lonely, vacillating, and unrealistic youth or to become a
self-sufficient and responsible adult.

Henry told me that he preferred books to society; he felt inhibited among
people, and was often tormented by doubts and self-criticism. He was well read
for his age and had a leaning toward aesthetic intellectualism. After an
earlier atheistic stage, he became rigorously Protestant, but finally his
religious attitude became completely neutral. He had chosen a technical
education because he felt his talents lay in mathematics and geometry. He
possessed a logical mind, trained in the natural sciences, but he also had a
propensity toward the irrational and mystical that he did not want to even
admit to himself.

About two years before his analysis began, Henry had become engaged to a
Catholic girl from the French part of Switzerland. He described her as
charming, efficient, and full of initiative. Nevertheless, he was uncertain
whether he should undertake the responsibility of marriage. Since he had so
little acquaintance with girls, he thought it might be better to wait, or even
to remain a bachelor dedicated to a scholarly life. His doubts were strong
enough to prevent his reaching a decision; he needed a further step toward
maturity before he could feel sure of himself.

Although qualities of both his parents were combined in Henry, he was markedly
mother-bound. In his consciousness, he was identified with his real (or
“light”) mother, who represented high ideals and intellectual ambitions. But in
his unconscious he was deeply in the power of the dark aspects of his
mother-bound condition. His unconscious still held his ego in a strangle-hold.
All his clear-cut thinking and his efforts to find a firm standpoint in the
purely rational remained nothing more than an intellectual exercise.

The need to escape from this “mother-prison” was expressed in hostile reactions
to his real mother and a rejection of the “inner mother” as a symbol of the
feminine side of the unconscious. But an inner power sought to hold him back in
the condition of childhood, resisting everything that attracted him to the
outside world. Even the attractions of his fiancée were not enough to free him
from his mother-ties, and thus help him find himself. He was not aware that his
inner urge for growth (which he felt strongly) included the need to detach
himself from his mother.

My analytical work with Henry lasted nine months. Altogether, there were 35
sessions in which he presented 50 dreams. So short an analysis is rare. It is
only possible when energy-laden dreams like Henry’s speed up the process of
development. Of course, from the Jungian point of view, there is no rule for
the length of time required for a successful analysis. All depends on the
individual’s readiness to realize inner facts and on the material presented by
his unconscious.

Like most introverts, Henry led a rather monotonous outer life. During the day
he was completely involved in his job. In the evenings he sometimes went out
with his fiancée or with friends, with whom he liked to have literary
discussions. Quite often he sat in his lodgings absorbed in a book or in his
own thoughts. Though we regularly discussed the happenings of his daily life,
and also his childhood and youth, we usually got fairly quickly to the
investigation of his dreams and the problems his inner life presented to him.
It was extraordinary to see how strongly his dreams emphasized his “call” to
spiritual development.

But I must make it clear that not everything described here was told to Henry.
In analysis one must always remain conscious of how explosive the dreamer’s
symbols may be for him. The analyst can hardly be too careful and reserved. If
too bright a light is thrown on the dream-language of symbols, the dreamer can
be driven into anxiety, and thus led into rationalization as a defense
mechanism. Or he can no longer assimilate them, and can fall into a severe
psychic crisis. Also, the dreams reported and commented on here are by no means
all the dreams that Henry had during his analysis. I can discuss only an
important few that influenced his development.

In the beginning of our work, childhood memories with important symbolic
meanings came up. The oldest dated back to Henry’s fourth year. He said: “One
morning I was allowed to go with my mother to the baker’s shop and there I
received a crescent roll from the baker’s wife. I did not eat the roll but
carried it proudly in my hand. Only my mother and the baker’s wife were
present, so I was the only man.” Such crescents are popularly called
“moon-teeth,” and this symbolic allusion to the moon underlines the dominating
power of the feminine—a power to which the little boy may have felt exposed and
which, as the “only man,” he was proud of being able to confront.

Another childhood memory came from his fifth year. It concerned Henry’s sister,
who came home after her examinations at school and found him constructing a toy
barn. The barn was made with blocks of wood arranged in the form of a square
and surrounded with a kind of hedge that looked like the battlements of a
castle. Henry was pleased with his achievement, and said teasingly to his
sister: “You have started school but you’re already on holiday.” Her reply,
that he was on holiday all year, upset him terribly. He felt deeply hurt that
his “achievement” was not taken seriously.

Even years later Henry had not forgotten the bitter hurt and injustice that he
had felt when his construction was rejected. His later problems concerning the
assertion of his masculinity and the conflict between rational and fantasy
values are already visible in this early experience. And these problems are
also to be seen in the images of his first dream.

