# PART 3 - The relation to the Self
[Metadata]: # {03.07}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The relation to the Self
# The relation to the Self
Nowadays more and more people, especially those who live in large cities,
suffer from a terrible emptiness and boredom, as if they are waiting for
something that never arrives. Movies and television, spectator sports and
political excitements may divert them for a while, but again and again,
exhausted and disenchanted, they have to return to the wasteland of their own
lives.

The only adventure that is still worthwhile for modern man lies in the inner
realm of the unconscious psyche. With this idea vaguely in mind, many now turn
to Yoga and other Eastern practices. But these offer no genuine new adventure,
for in them one only takes over what is already known to the Hindus or the
Chinese without directly meeting one’s own inner life center. While it is true
that Eastern methods serve to concentrate the mind and direct it inward (and
that this procedure is in a sense similar to the introversion of an analytical
treatment), there is a very important difference. Jung evolved a way of getting
to one’s inner center and making contact with the living mystery of the
unconscious, alone and unaided. That is utterly different from following a
well-worn path.

Trying to give the living reality of the Self a constant amount of daily
attention is like trying to live simultaneously on two levels or in two
different worlds. One gives one’s mind, as before, to outer duties, but at the
same time one remains alert for hints and signs, both in dreams and in external
events, that the Self uses to symbolize its intentions—the direction in which
the life-stream is moving.

Old Chinese texts that are concerned with this kind of experience often use the
simile of the cat watching the mousehole. One text says that one should allow
no other thoughts to intrude, but one’s attention should not be too sharp—nor
should it be too dull. There is exactly the right level of perception. “If the
training is undergone in this manner … it will be effective as time goes on,
and when the cause comes to fruition, like a ripe melon that automatically
falls, anything it may happen to touch or make contact with will suddenly cause
the individual’s supreme awakening. This is the moment when the practitioner
will be like one who drinks water and alone knows whether it is cold or warm.
He becomes free of all doubts about himself and experiences a great happiness
similar to that one feels in meeting one’s own father at the crossroads.”

Thus, in the midst of ordinary outer life, one is suddenly caught up in an
exciting inner adventure; and because it is unique for each individual, it
cannot be copied or stolen.

There are two reasons why man loses contact with the regulating center of his
soul. One of them is that some single instinctive drive or emotional image can
carry him into a one-sidedness that makes him lose his balance. This also
happens to animals; for example, a sexually excited stag will completely forget
hunger and security. This one-sidedness and consequent loss of balance are much
dreaded by primitives, who call it “loss of soul.” Another threat to the inner
balance comes from excessive daydreaming, which in a secret way usually circles
around particular complexes. In fact, daydreams arise just because they connect
a man with his complexes; at the same time they threaten the concentration and
continuity of his consciousness.

The second obstacle is exactly the opposite, and is due to an
over-consolidation of ego-consciousness. Although a disciplined consciousness
is necessary for the performance of civilized activities (we know what happens
if a railway signalman lapses into daydreaming), it has the serious
disadvantage that it is apt to block the reception of impulses and messages
coming from the center. This is why so many dreams of civilized people are
concerned with restoring this receptivity by attempting to correct the attitude
of consciousness toward the unconscious center or Self.



A winter landscape by the German artist Kaspar Friedrich. Landscape paintings
usually express indefinable “moods”—as do symbolic landscapes in dreams.

Among the mythological representations of the Self one finds much emphasis on
the four corners of the world, and in many pictures the Great Man is
represented in the center of a circle divided into four. Jung used the Hindu
word mandala (magic circle) to designate a structure of this order, which is a
symbolic representation of the “nuclear atom” of the human psyche—whose essence
we do not know. In this connection it is interesting that a Naskapi hunter
pictorially represented his Great Man not as a human being but as a mandala.

Whereas the Naskapi experience the inner center directly and naively, without
the help of religious rites or doctrines, other communities use the mandala
motif in order to restore a lost inner balance. For instance, the Navaho
Indians try, by means of mandala-structured sand paintings, to bring a sick
person back into harmony with himself and with the cosmos—and thereby to
restore his health.

In Eastern civilizations similar pictures are used to consolidate the inner
being, or to enable one to plunge into deep meditation. The contemplation of a
mandala is meant to bring an inner peace, a feeling that life has again found
its meaning and order. The mandala also conveys this feeling when it appears
spontaneously in the dreams of modern men who are not influenced by any
religious tradition of this sort and know nothing about it. Perhaps the
positive effect is even greater in such cases because knowledge and tradition
sometimes blur or even block the spontaneous experience.

An example of a spontaneously produced mandala occurs in the following dream of
a 62-year-old woman. It emerged as a prelude to a new phase of life in which
she became very creative:

I see a landscape in a dim light. In the background I see the rising and then
evenly continuing crest of a hill. Along the line where it rises moves a
quadrangular disk that shines like gold. In the foreground I see dark plowed
earth that is beginning to sprout. Now I suddenly perceive a round table with a
grey stone slab as its top, and at the same moment the quadrangular disk
suddenly stands upon the table. It has left the hill, but how and why it has
changed its place I do not know.

Landscapes in dreams (as well as in art) frequently symbolize an inexpressible
mood. In this dream, the dim light of the landscape indicates that the clarity
of daytime consciousness is dimmed. “Inner nature” may now begin to reveal
itself in its own light, so we are told that the quadrangular disk becomes
visible on the horizon. Hitherto the symbol of the Self, the disk, had been
largely an intuitive idea on the dreamer’s mental horizon, but now in the dream
it shifts its position and becomes the center of the landscape of her soul. A
seed, sown long ago, begins to sprout: for a long time previously the dreamer
had paid careful attention to her dreams, and now this work bears fruit. (One
is reminded of the relation between the symbol of the Great Man and plant life,
which I mentioned before.) Now the golden disk suddenly moves to the “right”
side—the side where things become conscious. Among other things “right” often
means, psychologically, the side of consciousness, of adaptation, of being
“right,” while “left” signifies the sphere of unadapted, unconscious reactions
or sometimes even of something “sinister.” Then, finally, the golden disk stops
its movement and comes to rest on—significantly—a round stone table. It has
found a permanent base.



Jung stressed that the only real adventure remaining for each individual is the
exploration of his own unconscious. The ultimate goal of such a search is the
forming of a harmonious and balanced relationship with the Self. The circular
mandala images this perfect balance—embodied in the structure of the modern
cathedral (above) of the city of Brasilia.



In the paintings, below and opposite, of the dream discussed on this page
(painted by the dreamer), the mandala motif appears as a quadrangle rather than
a circle. Usually quadrangular forms symbolize conscious realization of inner
wholeness; the wholeness itself is most often represented in circular forms,
such as the round table that also appears in the dream.



As Aniela Jaffé observes later in this book, roundness (the mandala motif)
generally symbolizes a natural wholeness, whereas a quadrangular formation
represents the realization of this in consciousness. In the dream the square
disk and the round table meet, and thus a conscious realization of the center
is at hand. The round table, incidentally, is a well-known symbol of wholeness
and plays a role in mythology—for instance, King Arthur’s round table, which
itself is an image derived from the table of the Last Supper.

In fact, whenever a human being genuinely turns to the inner world and tries to
know himself—not by ruminating about his subjective thoughts and feelings, but
by following the expressions of his own objective nature such as dreams and
genuine fantasies—then sooner or later the Self emerges. The ego will then find
an inner power that contains all the possibilities of renewal.

But there is a great difficulty that I have mentioned only indirectly up till
now. This is that every personification of the unconscious—the shadow, the
anima, the animus, and the Self—has both a light and a dark aspect. We saw
before that the shadow may be base or evil, an instinctive drive that one ought
to overcome. It may, however, be an impulse toward growth that one should
cultivate and follow. In the same way the anima and animus have dual aspects:
They can bring life-giving development and creativeness to the personality, or
they can cause petrification and physical death. And even the Self, the
all-embracing symbol of the unconscious, has an ambivalent effect, as for
instance in the Eskimo tale (this page), when the “little woman” offered to
save the heroine from the Moon Spirit but actually turned her into a spider.

The dark side of the Self is the most dangerous thing of all, precisely because
the Self is the greatest power in the psyche. It can cause people to “spin”
megalomanic or other delusory fantasies that catch them up and “possess” them.
A person in this state thinks with mounting excitement that he has grasped and
solved the great cosmic riddles; he therefore loses all touch with human
reality. A reliable symptom of this condition is the loss of one’s sense of
humor and of human contacts.

Thus the emerging of the Self may bring great danger to a man’s conscious ego.
The double aspect of the Self is beautifully illustrated by this old Iranian
fairy tale, called “The Secret of the Bath Bâdgerd”:

The great and noble Prince Hâtim Tâi receives orders from his king to
investigate the mysterious Bath Bâdgerd [castle of nonexistence]. When he
approaches it, having gone through many dangerous adventures, he hears that
nobody ever returned from it, but he insists on going on. He is received at a
round building by a barber with a mirror who leads him into the bath, but as
soon as the prince enters the water, a thunderous noise breaks out, it gets
completely dark, the barber disappears, and slowly the water begins to rise.

Hâtim swims desperately round until the water finally reaches the top of the
round cupola, which forms the roof of the bath. Now he fears he is lost, but he
says a prayer and grabs the centerstone of the cupola. Again a thunderous
noise, everything changes, and Hâtim stands alone in a desert.

After long and painful wandering, he comes to a beautiful garden in the middle
of which is a circle of stone statues. In the center of the statues, he sees a
parrot in its cage, and a voice from above says to him: “Oh, hero, you probably
will not escape alive from this bath. Once Gayomart (the First Man) found an
enormous diamond that shone more brightly than sun and moon. He decided to hide
it where no one can find it, and therefore he built this magical bath in order
to protect it. The parrot that you see here forms part of the magic. At its
feet lie a golden bow and arrow on a golden chain, and with them you may try
three times to shoot the parrot. If you hit him the curse will be lifted, if
not, you will be petrified, as were all these other people.”

Hâtim tries once, and fails. His legs turn to stone. He fails once more and is
petrified up to his chest. The third time he just shuts his eyes, exclaiming
“God is great,” shoots blindly, and this time hits the parrot. An outbreak of
thunder, clouds of dust. When all this has subsided, in place of the parrot is
an enormous, beautiful diamond, and all the statues have come to life again.
The people thank him for their redemption.

The reader will recognize the symbols of the Self in this story—the First Man
Gayomart, the round mandala-shaped building, the centerstone, and the diamond.
But this diamond is surrounded by danger. The demonic parrot signifies the evil
spirit of imitation that makes one miss the target and petrify psychologically.
As I pointed out earlier, the process of individuation excludes any parrot-like
imitation of others. Time and again in all countries people have tried to copy
in “outer” or ritualistic behavior the original religious experience of their
great religious teachers—Christ or Buddha or some other master—and have
therefore become “petrified.” To follow in the steps of a great spiritual
leader does not mean that one should copy and act out the pattern of the
individuation process made by his life. It means that we should try with a
sincerity and devotion equal to his to live our own lives.

The barber with the mirror, who vanishes, symbolizes the gift of reflection
that Hâtim loses when he wants it most; the rising waters represent the risk
that one may drown in the unconscious and get lost in one’s own emotions. In
order to understand the symbolic indications of the unconscious, one must be
careful not to get outside oneself or “beside oneself,” but to stay emotionally
within oneself. Indeed, it is vitally important that the ego should continue to
function in normal ways. Only if I remain an ordinary human being, conscious of
my incompleteness, can I become receptive to the significant contents and
processes of the unconscious. But how can a human being stand the tension of
feeling himself at one with the whole universe, while at the same time he is
only a miserable earthly human creature? If, on the one hand, I despise myself
as merely a statistical cipher, my life has no meaning and is not worth living.
But if, on the other hand, I feel myself to be part of something much greater,
how am I to keep my feet on the ground? It is very difficult indeed to keep
these inner opposites united within oneself without toppling over into one or
the other extreme.

