# PART 3 - The first approach of the unconscious
[Metadata]: # {03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The first approach of the unconscious
# The first approach of the unconscious
For most people the years of youth are characterized by a state of gradual
awakening in which the individual slowly becomes aware of the world and of
himself. Childhood is a period of great emotional intensity, and a child’s
earliest dreams often manifest in symbolic form the basic structure of the
psyche, indicating how it will later shape the destiny of the individual
concerned. For example, Jung once told a group of students about a young woman
who was so haunted by anxiety that she committed suicide at the age of 26. As a
small child, she had dreamed that “Jack Frost” had entered her room while she
was lying in bed and pinched her on the stomach. She woke and discovered that
she had pinched herself with her own hand. The dream did not frighten her; she
merely remembered that she had had such a dream. But the fact that she did not
react emotionally to her strange encounter with the demon of the cold—of
congealed life—did not augur well for the future and was itself abnormal. It
was with a cold, unfeeling hand that she later put an end to her life. From
this single dream it is possible to deduce the tragic fate of the dreamer,
which was anticipated by her psyche in childhood.

Sometimes it is not a dream but some very impressive and unforgettable real
event that, like a prophecy, anticipates the future in symbolic form. It is
well known that children often forget events that seem impressive to adults but
keep a vivid recollection of some incident or story that no one else has
noticed. When we look into one of these childhood memories, we usually find
that it depicts (if interpreted as if it were a symbol) a basic problem of the
child’s psychic make-up.

When a child reaches school age, the phase of building up the ego and of
adapting to the outer world begins. This phase generally brings a number of
painful shocks. At the same time, some children begin to feel very different
from others, and this feeling of being unique brings a certain sadness that is
part of the loneliness of many youngsters. The imperfections of the world, and
the evil within oneself as well as outside, become conscious problems; the
child must try to cope with urgent (but not yet understood) inner impulses as
well as the demands of the outer world.

If the development of consciousness is disturbed in its normal unfolding,
children frequently retire from outer or inner difficulties into an inner
“fortress”; and when that happens, their dreams and symbolic drawings of
unconscious material often reveal to an unusual degree a type of circular,
quadrangular, and “nuclear” motif (which I will explain later). This refers to
the previously mentioned psychic nucleus, the vital center of the personality
from which the whole structural development of consciousness stems. It is
natural that the image of the center should appear in an especially striking
way when the psychic life of the individual is threatened. From this central
nucleus (as far as we know today), the whole building up of ego consciousness
is directed, the ego apparently being a duplicate or structural counterpart of
the original center.

In this early phase there are many children who earnestly seek for some meaning
in life that could help them to deal with the chaos both within and outside
themselves. There are others, however, who are still unconsciously carried
along by the dynamism of inherited and instinctive archetypal patterns. These
young people are not concerned about the deeper meaning of life, because their
experiences with love, nature, sport, and work contain an immediate and
satisfying meaning for them. They are not necessarily more superficial; usually
they are carried by the stream of life with less friction and disturbance than
their more introspective fellows. If I travel in a car or train without looking
out, it is only the stops, starts, and sudden turns that make me realize I am
moving at all.

The actual processes of individuation—the conscious coming-to-terms with one’s
own inner center (psychic nucleus) or Self—generally begins with a wounding of
the personality and the suffering that accompanies it. This initial shock
amounts to a sort of “call,” although it is not often recognized as such. On
the contrary, the ego feels hampered in its will or its desire and usually
projects the obstruction onto something external. That is, the ego accuses God
or the economic situation or the boss or the marriage partner of being
responsible for whatever is obstructing it.

Or perhaps everything seems outwardly all right, but beneath the surface a
person is suffering from a deadly boredom that makes everything seem
meaningless and empty. Many myths and fairy tales symbolically describe this
initial stage in the process of individuation by telling of a king who has
fallen ill or grown old. Other familiar story patterns are that a royal couple
is barren; or that a monster steals all the women, children, horses, and wealth
of the kingdom; or that a demon keeps the king’s army or his ship from
proceeding on its course; or that darkness hangs over the lands, wells dry up,
and flood, drought, and frost afflict the country. Thus it seems as if the
initial encounter with the Self casts a dark shadow ahead of time, or as if the
“inner friend” comes at first like a trapper to catch the helplessly struggling
ego in his snare.

In myths one finds that the magic or talisman that can cure the misfortune of
the king or his country always proves to be something very special. In one tale
“a white blackbird” or “a fish that carries a golden ring in its gills” is
needed to restore the king’s health. In another, the king wants “the water of
life” or “three golden hairs from the head of the devil” or “a woman’s golden
plait” (and afterward, naturally, the owner of the plait). Whatever it is, the
thing that can drive away the evil is always unique and hard to find.

It is exactly the same in the initial crisis in the life of an individual. One
is seeking something that is impossible to find or about which nothing is
known. In such moments all well-meant, sensible advice is completely
useless—advice that urges one to try to be responsible, to take a holiday, not
to work so hard (or to work harder), to have more (or less) human contact, or
to take up a hobby. None of that helps, or at best only rarely. There is only
one thing that seems to work; and that is to turn directly toward the
approaching darkness without prejudice and totally naively, and to try to find
out what its secret aim is and what it wants from you.

The hidden purpose of the oncoming darkness is generally something so unusual,
so unique and unexpected, that as a rule one can find out what it is only by
means of dreams and fantasies welling up from the unconscious. If one focuses
attention on the unconscious without rash assumptions or emotional rejection,
it often breaks through in a flow of helpful symbolic images. But not always.
Sometimes it first offers a series of painful realizations of what is wrong
with oneself and one’s conscious attitudes. Then one must begin the process by
swallowing all sorts of bitter truths.



A woodcut from a 17-century alchemical manuscript depicts a king who has fallen
ill—a common symbolic image of the emptiness and boredom (in the consciousness)
that can mark the initial stage of the individuation process.

