# PART 5 - How the analysis developed
[Metadata]: # {05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {05.05}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
How the analysis developed
# How the analysis developed
In spite of an initial skepticism and resistance, Henry began to take a lively
interest in the inner happenings of his psyche. He was obviously impressed by
his dreams. They seemed to compensate for his conscious life in a meaningful
way and to give him valuable insights into his ambivalence, his vacillation,
and his preference for passivity.

After a time more positive dreams appeared that showed that Henry was already
“well on his way.” Two months after his analysis had begun he reported this
dream:

In the harbor of a little place not far from my home, on the shore of a lake in
the neighborhood, locomotives and freight cars are being raised from the bottom
of the lake where they had been sunk in the last war. First a large cylinder
like a locomotive boiler is brought up. Then an enormous, rusty freight car.
The whole picture presents a horrible yet romantic sight. The recovered pieces
have to be transported away under the rails and cables of the nearby railway
station. Then the bottom of the lake changes into a green meadow.

Here we see what a remarkable inner advance Henry has made. Locomotives
(probably symbols of energy and dynamism) have been “sunk”—i.e., repressed into
the unconscious—but are now being brought into the light of day. With them are
freight cars, in which all kinds of valuable cargo (psychic qualities) can be
transported. Now that these “objects” have again become available for Henry’s
conscious life, he can begin to realize how much active power could be at his
disposal. The transformation of the dark lake bottom into a meadow underlines
his potential for positive action.

Sometimes, on Henry’s “lonely journey” toward maturity, he also received help
from his feminine side. In his 24th dream he meets a “humpbacked girl”:

I am on the way to a school together with an unknown young lady of small and
dainty appearance but disfigured by a hump. Many other people also go into the
schoolhouse. While the others disperse to different rooms for singing lessons,
the girl and I sit at a little square table. She gives me a private singing
lesson. I feel an impulse of pity for her and therefore kiss her on the mouth.
I am conscious, however, that by this act I am unfaithful to my fiancée—even
though it may be excusable.

Singing is one of the immediate expressions of feelings. But (as we have seen)
Henry is afraid of his feelings; he knows them only in an idealized adolescent
form. Nevertheless, in this dream he is taught singing (the expression of
feelings) at a square table. The table, with its four equal sides, is a
representation of the “fourfoldness” motif, usually a symbol of completeness.
Thus the relation between singing and the square table seems to indicate that
Henry must integrate his “feeling” side before he can achieve psychic
wholeness. In fact, the singing lesson does move his feelings, and he kisses
the girl on the mouth. Thereby he has, in a sense, “espoused” her (otherwise he
would not feel “unfaithful”); he has learned to relate to “the woman within.”



The locomotive is clearly an image of driving, dynamic energy. In Henry’s dream
(which he drew, above), locomotives are raised out of a lake—an expression of
the release of a potential for valuable action that had previously been
repressed into his unconscious.

Another dream demonstrates the part that this little humpbacked girl had to
play in Henry’s inner development:

I am in an unknown boys’ school. During the instruction period I secretly force
my way into the house. I don’t know for what purpose. I hide in the room behind
a little square closet. The door to the corridor is half open. I fear being
detected. An adult goes by without seeing me. But a little humpbacked girl
comes in and sees me at once. She pulls me out of my hiding place.

Not only does the same girl appear in both dreams, but both appearances take
place in a schoolhouse. In each instance Henry must learn something to assist
his development. Seemingly, he would like to satisfy his desire for knowledge
while remaining unnoticed and passive.

The figure of a deformed little girl appears in numerous fairy tales. In such
tales the ugliness of the hump usually conceals great beauty, which is revealed
when the “right man” comes to free the girl from a magic spell—often by a kiss.
The girl in Henry’s dream may be a symbol of Henry’s soul, which also has to be
released from the “spell” that has made it ugly.

When the humpbacked girl tries to awaken Henry’s feelings by song, or pulls him
out of his dark hiding place (forcing him to confront the light of day), she
shows herself as a helpful guide. Henry can and must in a sense belong
simultaneously to both his fiancée and the little humpbacked girl (to the first
as a representative of the real, outer woman, and to the second as the
embodiment of the inner psychic anima).

