# PART 1 - The analysis of dreams
[Metadata]: # {01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {01.04}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The analysis of dreams
# The analysis of dreams
I began this essay by noting the difference between a sign and a symbol. The
sign is always less than the concept it represents, while a symbol always
stands for something more than its obvious and immediate meaning. Symbols,
moreover, are natural and spontaneous products. No genius has ever sat down
with a pen or a brush in his hand and said: “Now I am going to invent a
symbol.” No one can take a more or less rational thought, reached as a logical
conclusion or by deliberate intent, and then give it “symbolic” form. No matter
what fantastic trappings one may put upon an idea of this kind, it will still
remain a sign, linked to the conscious thought behind it, not a symbol that
hints at something not yet known. In dreams, symbols occur spontaneously, for
dreams happen and are not invented; they are, therefore, the main source of all
our knowledge about symbolism.

But symbols, I must point out, do not occur solely in dreams. They appear in
all kinds of psychic manifestations. There are symbolic thoughts and feelings,
symbolic acts and situations. It often seems that even inanimate objects
co-operate with the unconscious in the arrangement of symbolic patterns. There
are numerous well-authenticated stories of clocks stopping at the moment of
their owner’s death; one was the pendulum clock in the palace of Frederick the
Great at Sans Souci, which stopped when the emperor died. Other common examples
are those of a mirror that breaks, or a picture that falls, when a death
occurs; or minor but unexplained breakages in a house where someone is passing
through an emotional crisis. Even if skeptics refuse to credit such reports,
stories of this kind are always cropping up, and this alone should serve as
ample proof of their psychological importance.

There are many symbols, however (among them the most important), that are not
individual but collective in their nature and origin. These are chiefly
religious images. The believer assumes that they are of divine origin—that they
have been revealed to man. The skeptic says flatly that they have been
invented. Both are wrong. It is true, as the skeptic notes, that religious
symbols and concepts have for centuries been the object of careful and quite
conscious elaboration. It is equally true, as the believer implies, that their
origin is so far buried in the mystery of the past that they seem to have no
human source. But they are in fact “collective representations,” emanating from
primeval dreams and creative fantasies. As such, these images are involuntary
spontaneous manifestations and by no means intentional inventions.

This fact, as I shall later explain, has a direct and important bearing upon
the interpretation of dreams. It is obvious that if you assume the dream to be
symbolic, you will interpret it differently from a person who believes that the
essential energizing thought or emotion is known already and is merely
“disguised” by the dream. In the latter case, dream interpretation makes little
sense, for you find only what you already know.

It is for this reason that I have always said to my pupils: “Learn as much as
you can about symbolism; then forget it all when you are analyzing a dream.”
This advice is of such practical importance that I have made it a rule to
remind myself that I can never understand somebody else’s dream well enough to
interpret it correctly. I have done this in order to check the flow of my own
associations and reactions, which might otherwise prevail over my patient’s
uncertainties and hesitations. As it is of the greatest therapeutic importance
for an analyst to get the particular message of a dream (that is, the
contribution that the unconscious is making to the conscious mind) as
accurately as possible, it is essential for him to explore the content of a
dream with the utmost thoroughness.

I had a dream when I was working with Freud that illustrates this point. I
dreamed that I was in “my home,” apparently on the first floor, in a cosy,
pleasant sitting room furnished in the manner of the 18th century. I was
astonished that I had never seen this room before, and began to wonder what the
ground floor was like. I went downstairs and found the place was rather dark,
with paneled walls and heavy furniture dating from the 16th century or even
earlier. My surprise and curiosity increased. I wanted to see more of the whole
structure of this house. So I went down to the cellar, where I found a door
opening onto a flight of stone steps that led to a large vaulted room. The
floor consisted of large slabs of stone and the walls seemed very ancient. I
examined the mortar and found it was mixed with splinters of brick. Obviously
the walls were of Roman origin. I became increasingly excited. In one corner, I
saw an iron ring on a stone slab. I pulled up the slab and saw yet another
narrow flight of steps leading to a kind of cave, which seemed to be a
prehistoric tomb, containing two skulls, some bones, and broken shards of
pottery. Then I woke up.

If Freud, when he analyzed this dream, had followed my method of exploring its
specific associations and context, he would have heard a far-reaching story.
But I am afraid he would have dismissed it as a mere effort to escape from a
problem that was really his own. The dream is in fact a short summary of my
life, more specifically of the development of my mind. I grew up in a house 200
years old, our furniture consisted mostly of pieces about 300 years old, and
mentally my hitherto greatest spiritual adventure had been to study the
philosophies of Kant and Schopenhauer. The great news of the day was the work
of Charles Darwin. Shortly before this, I had been living with the still
medieval concepts of my parents, for whom the world and men were still presided
over by divine omnipotence and providence. This world had become antiquated and
obsolete. My Christian faith had become relative through its encounter with
Eastern religions and Greek philosophy. It is for this reason that the ground
floor was so still, dark, and obviously uninhabited.

My then historical interests had developed from an original preoccupation with
comparative anatomy and paleontology while I was working as an assistant at the
Anatomical Institute. I was fascinated by the bones of fossil man, particularly
by the much discussed Neanderthalensis and the still more controversial skull
of Dubois’ Pithecanthropus. As a matter of fact these were my real associations
to the dream; but I did not dare to mention the subject of skulls, skeletons,
or corpses to Freud, because I had learned that this theme was not popular with
him. He cherished the peculiar idea that I anticipated his early death. And he
drew this conclusion from the fact that I had shown much interest in the
mummified corpses in the so-called Bleikeller in Bremen, which we visited
together in 1909 on our way to take the boat to America.

Thus I felt reluctant to come out with my own thoughts, since through recent
experience I was deeply impressed by the almost unbridgeable gap between
Freud’s mental outlook and background and my own. I was afraid of losing his
friendship if I should open up to him about my own inner world, which, I
surmised, would look very queer to him. Feeling quite uncertain about my own
psychology, I almost automatically told him a lie about my “free associations”
in order to escape the impossible task of enlightening him about my very
personal and utterly different constitution.

I must apologize for this rather lengthy narration of the jam I got into
through telling Freud my dream. But it is a good example of the difficulties in
which one gets involved in the course of a real dream analysis. So much depends
upon the personal differences between the analyst and the analyzed.

I soon realized that Freud was looking for some incompatible wish of mine. And
so I suggested tentatively that the skulls I had dreamed of might refer to
certain members of my family whose death for some reason, I might desire. This
proposal met with his approval, but I was not satisfied with such a “phoney”
solution.

While I was trying to find a suitable answer to Freud’s questions, I was
suddenly confused by an intuition about the role that the subjective factor
plays in psychological understanding. My intuition was so overwhelming that I
thought only of how to get out of this impossible snarl, and I took the easy
way out by a lie. This was neither elegant nor morally defensible, but
otherwise I should have risked a fatal row with Freud—and I did not feel up to
that for many reasons.

My intuition consisted of the sudden and most unexpected insight into the fact
that my dream meant myself, my life and my world, my whole reality against a
theoretical structure erected by another, strange mind for reasons and purposes
of its own. It was not Freud’s dream, it was mine; and I understood suddenly in
a flash what my dream meant.

This conflict illustrates a vital point about dream analysis. It is not so much
a technique that can be learned and applied according to the rules as it is a
dialectical exchange between two personalities. If it is handled as a
mechanical technique, the individual psychic personality of the dreamer gets
lost and the therapeutic problem is reduced to the simple question: Which of
the two people concerned—the analyst or the dreamer—will dominate the other? I
gave up hypnotic treatment for this very reason, because I did not want to
impose my will on others. I wanted the healing processes to grow out of the
patient’s own personality, not from suggestions by me that would have only a
passing effect. My aim was to protect and preserve my patient’s dignity and
freedom, so that he could live his life according to his own wishes. In this
exchange with Freud, it dawned on me for the first time that before we
construct general theories about man and his psyche we should learn a lot more
about the real human being we have to deal with.

The individual is the only reality. The further we move away from the
individual toward abstract ideas about Homo sapiens, the more likely we are to
fall into error. In these times of social upheaval and rapid change, it is
desirable to know much more than we do about the individual human being, for so
much depends upon his mental and moral qualities. But if we are to see things
in their right perspective, we need to understand the past of man as well as
his present. That is why an understanding of myths and symbols is of essential
importance.

