# PART 3 - The pattern of psychic growth
[Metadata]: # {03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The pattern of psychic growth
# The pattern of psychic growth
At the beginning of this book Dr. C. G. Jung introduced the reader to the
concept of the unconscious, its personal and collective structures, and its
symbolic mode of expression. Once one has seen the vital importance (that is,
the healing or destructive impact) of the symbols produced by the unconscious,
there remains the difficult problem of interpretation. Dr. Jung has shown that
everything depends on whether any particular interpretation “clicks” and is
meaningful to the individual concerned. In this way he has indicated the
possible meaning and function of dream symbolism.

But, in the development of Jung’s theory, this possibility raised another
question: What is the purpose of the total dream life of the individual? What
role do dreams play, not only in the immediate psychic economy of the human
being, but in his life as a whole?

By observing a great many people and studying their dreams (he estimated that
he interpreted at least 80,000 dreams), Jung discovered not only that all
dreams are relevant in varying degrees to the life of the dreamer, but that
they are all parts of one great web of psychological factors. He also found
that, on the whole, they seem to follow an arrangement or pattern. This pattern
Jung called “the process of individuation.” Since dreams produce different
scenes and images every night, people who are not careful observers will
probably be unaware of any pattern. But if one watches one’s own dreams over a
period of years and studies the entire sequence, one will see that certain
contents emerge, disappear, and then turn up again. Many people even dream
repeatedly of the same figures, landscapes, or situations; and if one follows
these through a whole series, one will see that they change slowly but
perceptibly. These changes can be accelerated if the dreamer’s conscious
attitude is influenced by appropriate interpretation of the dreams and their
symbolic contents.



Above, a “meander” (a decoration in a seventh-century manuscript). Individual
dreams seem as strange and fragmented as the detail, right, from the
decoration; but over a lifetime’s dreaming, a meandering pattern
appears—revealing the process of psychic growth.

Thus our dream life creates a meandering pattern in which individual strands or
tendencies become visible, then vanish, then return again. If one watches this
meandering design over a long period of time, one can observe a sort of hidden
regulating or directing tendency at work, creating a slow, imperceptible
process of psychic growth—the process of individuation.

Gradually a wider and more mature personality emerges, and by degrees becomes
effective and even visible to others. The fact that we often speak of “arrested
development” shows that we assume that such a process of growth and maturation
is possible with every individual. Since this psychic growth cannot be brought
about by a conscious effort of will power, but happens involuntarily and
naturally, it is in dreams frequently symbolized by the tree, whose slow,
powerful, involuntary growth fulfills a definite pattern.

The organizing center from which the regulatory effect stems seems to be a sort
of “nuclear atom” in our psychic system. One could also call it the inventor,
organizer, and source of dream images. Jung called this center the “Self” and
described it as the totality of the whole psyche, in order to distinguish it
from the “ego,” which constitutes only a small part of the total psyche.



Throughout the ages men have been intuitively aware of the existence of such an
inner center. The Greeks called it man’s inner daimon; in Egypt it was
expressed by the concept of the Ba-soul; and the Romans worshiped it as the
“genius” native to each individual. In more primitive societies it was often
thought of as a protective spirit embodied within an animal or a fetish.

This inner center is realized in exceptionally pure, unspoiled form by the
Naskapi Indians, who still exist in the forests of the Labrador peninsula.
These simple people are hunters who live in isolated family groups, so far from
one another that they have not been able to evolve tribal customs or collective
religious beliefs and ceremonies. In his lifelong solitude the Naskapi hunter
has to rely on his own inner voices and unconscious revelations; he has no
religious teachers who tell him what he should believe, no rituals, festivals,
or customs to help him along. In his basic view of life, the soul of man is
simply an “inner companion,” whom he calls “my friend” or Mista’peo, meaning
“Great Man.” Mista-peo dwells in the heart and is immortal; in the moment of
death, or shortly before, he leaves the individual, and later reincarnates
himself in another being.

Those Naskapi who pay attention to their dreams and who try to find their
meaning and test their truth can enter into a deeper connection with the Great
Man. He favors such people and sends them more and better dreams. Thus the
major obligation of an individual Naskapi is to follow the instructions given
by his dreams, and then to give permanent form to their contents in art. Lies
and dishonesty drive the Great Man away from one’s inner realm, whereas
generosity and love of one’s neighbors and of animals attract him and give him
life. Dreams give the Naskapi complete ability to find his way in life, not
only in the inner world but also in the outer world of nature. They help him to
foretell the weather and give him invaluable guidance in his hunting, upon
which his life depends. I mention these very primitive people because they are
uncontaminated by our civilized ideas and still have natural insight into the
essence of what Jung calls the Self.

The Self can be defined as an inner guiding factor that is different from the
conscious personality and that can be grasped only through the investigation of
one’s own dreams. These show it to be the regulating center that brings about a
constant extension and maturing of the personality. But this larger, more
nearly total aspect of the psyche appears first as merely an inborn
possibility. It may emerge very slightly, or it may develop relatively
completely during one’s lifetime. How far it develops depends on whether or not
the ego is willing to listen to the messages of the Self. Just as the Naskapi
have noticed that a person who is receptive to the hints of the Great Man gets
better and more helpful dreams, we could add that the inborn Great Man becomes
more real within the receptive person than in those who neglect him. Such a
person also becomes a more complete human being.

It even seems as if the ego has not been produced by nature to follow its own
arbitrary impulses to an unlimited extent, but to help to make real the
totality—the whole psyche. It is the ego that serves to light up the entire
system, allowing it to become conscious and thus to be realized. If, for
example, I have an artistic talent of which my ego is not conscious, nothing
will happen to it. The gift may as well be non-existent. Only if my ego notices
it can I bring it into reality. The inborn but hidden totality of the psyche is
not the same thing as a wholeness that is fully realized and lived.

One could picture this in the following way: The seed of a mountain pine
contains the whole future tree in a latent form; but each seed falls at a
certain time onto a particular place, in which there are a number of special
factors, such as the quality of the soil and the stones, the slope of the land,
and its exposure to sun and wind. The latent totality of the pine in the seed
reacts to these circumstances by avoiding the stones and inclining toward the
sun, with the result that the tree’s growth is shaped. Thus an individual pine
slowly comes into existence, constituting the fulfillment of its totality, its
emergence into the realm of reality. Without the living tree, the image of the
pine is only a possibility or an abstract idea. Again, the realization of this
uniqueness in the individual man is the goal of the process of individuation.

From one point of view this process takes place in man (as well as in every
other living being) by itself and in the unconscious; it is a process by which
man lives out his innate human nature. Strictly speaking, however, the process
of individuation is real only if the individual is aware of it and consciously
makes a living connection with it. We do not know whether the pine tree is
aware of its own growth, whether it enjoys and suffers the different
vicissitudes that shape it. But man certainly is able to participate
consciously in his development. He even feels that from time to time, by making
free decisions, he can cooperate actively with it. This co-operation belongs to
the process of individuation in the narrower sense of the word.

Man, however, experiences something that is not contained in our metaphor of
the pine tree. The individuation process is more than a coming to terms between
the inborn germ of wholeness and the outer acts of fate. Its subjective
experience conveys the feeling that some supra-personal force is actively
interfering in a creative way. One sometimes feels that the unconscious is
leading the way in accordance with a secret design. It is as if something is
looking at me, something that I do not see but that sees me—perhaps that Great
Man in the heart, who tells me his opinions about me by means of dreams.

But this creatively active aspect of the psychic nucleus can come into play
only when the ego gets rid of all purposive and wishful aims and tries to get
to a deeper, more basic form of existence. The ego must be able to listen
attentively and to give itself, without any further design or purpose, to that
inner urge toward growth. Many existentialist philosophers try to describe this
state, but they go only as far as stripping off the illusions of consciousness:
They go right up to the door of the unconscious and then fail to open it.

People living in cultures more securely rooted than our own have less trouble
in understanding that it is necessary to give up the utilitarian attitude of
conscious planning in order to make way for the inner growth of the
personality. I once met an elderly lady who had not achieved much in her life,
in terms of outward achievement. But she had in fact made a good marriage with
a difficult husband, and had somehow developed into a mature personality. When
she complained to me that she had not “done” anything in her life, I told her a
story related by a Chinese sage, Chuang-Tzu. She understood immediately and
felt great relief. This is the story:

A wandering carpenter, called Stone, saw on his travels a gigantic old oak tree
standing in a field near an earth-altar. The carpenter said to his apprentice,
who was admiring the oak: “This is a useless tree. If you wanted to make a
ship, it would soon rot; if you wanted to make tools, they would break. You
can’t do anything useful with this tree, and that’s why it has become so old.”

But in an inn, that same evening, when the carpenter went to sleep, the old oak
tree appeared to him in his dream and said: “Why do you compare me to your
cultivated trees such as whitethorn, pear, orange, and apple trees, and all the
others that bear fruit? Even before they can ripen their fruit, people attack
and violate them. Their branches are broken, their twigs are torn. Their own
gifts bring harm to them, and they cannot live out their natural span. That is
what happens everywhere, and that is why I have long since tried to become
completely useless. You poor mortal! Imagine if I had been useful in any way,
would I have reached this size? Furthermore, you and I are both creatures, and
how can one creature set himself so high as to judge another creature? You
useless mortal man, what do you know about useless trees?”

The carpenter woke up and meditated upon his dream, and later, when his
apprentice asked him why just this one tree served to protect the earth-altar,
he answered, “Keep your mouth shut! Let’s hear no more about it! The tree grew
here on purpose because anywhere else people would have ill-treated it. If it
were not the tree of the earth-altar, it might have been chopped down.”

The carpenter obviously understood his dream. He saw that simply to fulfill
one’s destiny is the greatest human achievement, and that our utilitarian
notions have to give way in the face of the demands of our unconscious psyche.
If we translate this metaphor into psychological language, the tree symbolizes
the process of individuation, giving a lesson to our shortsighted ego.

Under the tree that fulfilled its destiny, there was—in Chuang-Tzu’s story—an
earth-altar. This was a crude, un-wrought stone upon which people made
sacrifices to the local god who “owned” this piece of land. The symbol of the
earth-altar points to the fact that in order to bring the individuation process
into reality, one must surrender consciously to the power of the unconscious,
instead of thinking in terms of what one should do, or of what is generally
thought right, or of what usually happens. One must simply listen, in order to
learn what the inner totality—the Self—wants one to do here and now in a
particular situation.

Our attitude must be like that of the mountain pine mentioned above: It does
not get annoyed when its growth is obstructed by a stone, nor does it make
plans about how to overcome the obstacles. It merely tries to feel whether it
should grow more toward the left or the right, toward the slope or away from
it. Like the tree, we should give in to this almost imperceptible, yet
powerfully dominating, impulse—an impulse that comes from the urge toward
unique, creative self-realization. And this is a process in which one must
repeatedly seek out and find something that is not yet known to anyone. The
guiding hints or impulses come, not from the ego, but from the totality of the
psyche: the Self.



An earth altar beneath a tree (in a 19th-century Chinese painting). Such round
or square structures usually symbolize the Self, to which the ego must submit
to fulfill the process of individuation.

It is, moreover, useless to cast furtive glances at the way someone else is
developing, because each of us has a unique task of self-realization. Although
many human problems are similar, they are never identical. All pine trees are
very much alike (otherwise we should not recognize them as pines), yet none is
exactly the same as another. Because of these factors of sameness and
difference, it is difficult to summarize the infinite variations of the process
of individuation. The fact is that each person has to do something different,
something that is uniquely his own.

Many people have criticized the Jungian approach for not presenting psychic
material systematically. But these critics forget that the material itself is a
living experience charged with emotion, by nature irrational and ever-changing,
which does not lend itself to systematization except in the most superficial
fashion. Modern depth psychology has here reached the same limits that confront
microphysics. That is, when we are dealing with statistical averages, a
rational and systematic description of the facts is possible. But when we are
attempting to describe a single psychic event, we can do no more than present
an honest picture of it from as many angles as possible. In the same way,
scientists have to admit that they do not know what light is. They can say only
that in certain experimental conditions it seems to consist of particles, while
in other experimental conditions it seems to consist of waves. But what it is
“in itself” is not known. The psychology of the unconscious and any description
of the process of individuation encounter comparable difficulties of
definition. But I will try here to give a sketch of some of their most typical
features.

