# PART 5 - The initial dream
[Metadata]: # {05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
The initial dream
# The initial dream
The day after Henry’s first visit to me, he had the following dream:

I was on an excursion with a group of people I did not know. We were going to
the Zinalrothorn. We had started from Samaden. We only walked about an hour
because we were to camp and have some theatricals. I was not given an active
part. I especially remember one performer—a young woman in a pathetic role
wearing a long flowing robe.

It was midday and I wanted to go on to the pass. As all the others preferred to
remain, I went up alone, leaving my equipment behind. However, I found myself
right back in the valley and completely lost my orientation. I wanted to return
to my party but did not know which mountainside I should climb. I was hesitant
about asking. Finally, an old woman showed me the way I must go.

Then I ascended from a different starting point than our group had used in the
morning. It was a matter of making a turn at the right altitude and then
following the mountain slope to return to the party. I climbed along a
cog-wheel mountain railway on the right side. On my left little cars constantly
passed me, each containing one hidden bloated little man in a blue suit. It is
said they are dead. I was afraid of other cars coming from behind and kept
turning around to look, so as not to be run over. My anxiety was needless.

At the point where I had to turn off to the right, there were people awaiting
me. They took me to an inn. A cloudburst came up. I regretted that my
equipment—my rucksack, and my motor bike—were not there, but I was told not to
get them till next morning. I accepted the advice.

Dr. Jung assigned great importance to the first dream in an analysis, for,
according to him, it often has anticipatory value. A decision to go into
analysis is usually accompanied by an emotional upheaval that disturbs the deep
psychic levels from which archetypal symbols arise. The first dreams therefore
often present “collective images” that provide a perspective for the analysis
as a whole and can give the therapist insight into the dreamer’s psychic
conflicts.

What does the above dream tell us of Henry’s future development? We must first
examine some of the associations that Henry himself supplied. The village of
Samaden had been the home of Jürg Jenatsch, a famous 17th-century Swiss
freedom-fighter. The “theatricals” called up the thought of Goethe’s Wilhelm
Meisters Lehrjahre, which Henry liked very much. In the woman he saw a
resemblance to the figure in a painting called The Island of the Dead by the
19th-century Swiss artist Arnold Böcklin. The “wise old woman,” as he called
her, seemed to be associated on the one hand to his analyst, on the other to
the charwoman in J. B. Priestley’s play They Came to a City. The cog-wheel
railway reminded him of the barn (with battlements) that he had built as a
child.



One of Henry’s childhood memories involved a crescent roll, which he drew (top
left). Center, the same shape on a modern Swiss bakery sign. The crescent shape
has long been linked with the moon and thus with the feminine principle, as in
the crown (left) of the goddess Ishtar of third-century B.C. Babylon.

The dream describes an “excursion” (a sort of “walking tour”), which is a
striking parallel to Henry’s decision to undertake analysis. The individuation
process is often symbolized by a voyage of discovery to unknown lands. Such a
voyage takes place in John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress, or in Dante’s Divina
Commedia. The “traveler” in Dante’s poem, searching for a way, comes to a
mountain that he decides to climb. But because of three strange animals (a
motif that will also appear in one of Henry’s later dreams) he is forced to
descend into the valley and even into hell. (Later he ascends again to
purgatory and finally reaches paradise.) From this parallel one could deduce
that there might be a similar period of disorientation and lonely seeking in
store for Henry. The first part of this life-journey, represented as climbing a
mountain, offers ascent from the unconscious to an elevated point of view of
the ego—i.e., to an increased consciousness.

Samaden is named as the starting point of the excursion. This is where Jenatsch
(whom we may take as embodying the “freedom-seeking” sense within Henry’s
unconscious) started his campaign for the liberation of the Veltlin region of
Switzerland from the French. Jenatsch had other characteristics in common with
Henry: He was a Protestant who fell in love with a Catholic girl; and, like
Henry, whose analysis was to free him from his mother-ties and from fear of
life, Jenatsch also fought for liberation. One could interpret this as a
favorable augury for the success of Henry’s own fight for freedom. The goal of
the excursion is the Zinalrothorn, a mountain in western Switzerland that he
did not know. The word rot (“red”) in Zinalrothorn touches on Henry’s emotional
problem. Red is usually symbolic of feeling or passion; here it points to the
value of the feeling-function, which was insufficiently developed in Henry. And
the word “horn” reminds one of the crescent roll in the baker’s shop of Henry’s
childhood.



Associations produced by Henry to his first dream: above, Island of the Dead by
the 19th-century Swiss artist Arnold Böcklin. Right, a scene from the 1944
London production of J. B. Priestley’s They Came to a City, which concerns the
reactions of a group of people from many walks of life to an “ideal city.” One
of the central characters is a charwoman, left of picture.



After a short walk, a halt is called, and Henry can return to a state of
passivity. This also belongs to his nature. The point is underlined by the
“theatricals.” Attending the theatre (which is an imitation of real life) is a
popular way of evading an active part in life’s drama. The spectator can
identify with the play, yet continue to pander to his fantasies. This kind of
identification permitted the Greeks to experience catharsis, much as the
psycho-drama initiated by the American psychiatrist J. L. Moreno is now used as
a therapeutic aid. Some such process may have enabled Henry to undergo an inner
development when his associations raised memories of Wilhelm Meister, Goethe’s
story of the maturing of a young man.

That Henry should have been impressed by the romantic appearance of a woman is
also not surprising. This figure resembles Henry’s mother and is at the same
time a personification of his own unconscious feminine side. The connection
Henry makes between her and Böcklin’s Island of the Dead points to his
depressive mood, so well expressed by the painting, which shows a white-robed
priestlike figure steering a boat bearing a coffin toward an island. We have
here a significant double paradox: The keel of the boat seems to suggest a
contrary course, away from the island; and the “priest” is a figure of
uncertain sex. In Henry’s associations, this figure is certainly
hermaphroditic. The double paradox coincides with Henry’s ambivalence: The
opposites in his soul are still too undifferentiated to be clearly separated.

After this interlude in the dream, Henry suddenly becomes aware that it is noon
and he must go on. So he again starts for the pass. A mountain pass is a
well-known symbol for a “situation of transition” that leads from an old
attitude of mind to a new one. Henry must go alone; it is essential for his ego
to surmount the test unaided. Thus he leaves his kit behind—an action that
signifies that his mental equipment has become a burden, or that he must change
his normal way of going about things.

But he does not reach the pass. He loses his bearings and finds himself back in
the valley. This failure shows that while Henry’s ego decides on activity, his
other psychic entities (represented by the other members of the party) remain
in the old state of passivity and refuse to accompany the ego. (When the
dreamer himself appears in a dream, he usually represents only his conscious
ego; the other figures stand for his more or less unknown, unconscious
qualities.)

Henry is in a situation where he is helpless, yet ashamed to admit it. At this
moment he meets an old woman who indicates the right way to him. He can do
nothing but accept her advice. The helpful “old woman” is a well-known symbol
in myths and fairy tales for the wisdom of the eternal female nature. The
rationalist Henry hesitates to accept her help because such acceptance requires
a sacrificium intellectus—a sacrifice, or discarding, of a rational way of
thought. (This demand will often be made of Henry in later dreams.) Such a
sacrifice is unavoidable; it applies to his relationship with the analysis as
well as with everyday life.

He associated the figure of the “old woman” to the charwoman in Priestley’s
play about a new “dream” city (perhaps an analogy to the New Jerusalem of the
Apocalypse) into which the characters can enter only after a kind of
initiation. This association seems to show that Henry had intuitively
recognized this confrontation as something decisive for him. The charwoman in
Priestley’s play says that in the city “they have promised me a room of my
own.” There she will be self-reliant and independent, as Henry seeks to be.

If such a technically minded young man as Henry is consciously to choose the
way of psychic development, he must be prepared for a reversal of his old
attitudes. Therefore, on the advice of the woman, he must start his climb from
a different spot. Only then will it be possible for him to judge at what level
he must deviate to reach the group—the other qualities of his psyche—that he
had left behind.

He climbs a cog-wheel railway track (a motif perhaps reflecting his technical
education) and keeps to the right side of the track—which is the conscious
side. (In the history of symbolism, the right side generally represents the
realm of consciousness; the left, the unconscious.) From the left, little cars
are coming down, and in each a little man is hidden. Henry is afraid that an
unnoticed upward-bound car might hit him from the rear. His anxiety proves
groundless, but it reveals that Henry is afraid of what, so to speak, lies
behind his ego.



Left, the Greek maiden Danae, who was impregnated by Zeus in the form of a
shower of gold (from a painting by the 16th-century Flemish artist Jan
Gossaert). Like Henry’s dream, this myth reflects the symbolism of the
cloudburst as a sacred marriage between heaven and earth.



In another of Henry’s dreams a doe appears—an image of shy femininity as is the
fawn in the painting, above, by the 19th-century British artist Edwin Landseer.

The bloated, blue-clothed men might symbolize sterile intellectual thoughts
that are being brought down mechanically. Blue often denotes the function of
thinking. Thus the men might be symbols of ideas or attitudes that have died on
the intellectual heights where the air is too thin. They could also represent
lifeless inner parts of Henry’s psyche.

A comment on these men is made in the dream: “It is said they are dead.” But
Henry is alone. Who makes the statement? It is a voice—and when a voice is
heard in a dream it is a most meaningful occurrence. Dr. Jung identified the
appearance of a voice in dreams with an intervention of the Self. It stands for
a knowledge that has its roots in the collective fundamentals of the psyche.
What the voice says cannot be disputed.

The insight Henry has gained about the “dead” formulas, to which he has been
too committed, marks a turning point in the dream. He has at last reached the
right place for taking a new direction, to the right (the conscious direction),
toward the conscious and the outer world. There he finds the people he left
behind waiting for him; and thus he can become conscious of previously unknown
aspects of his personality. Since his ego has surmounted the dangers it
confronted alone (an accomplishment that could make him more mature and
stable), he can rejoin the group or “collective” and get shelter and food.

Then comes the rain, a cloudburst that relaxes tension and makes the earth
fertile. In mythology, rain was often thought to be a “love-union” between
heaven and earth. In the Eleusinian mysteries, for instance, after everything
had been purified by water, the call went up to heaven: “Let it rain!” and down
to earth: “Be fruitful!” This was understood as a sacred marriage of the gods.
In this way rain can be said to represent a “solution” in the literal sense of
the word.

Coming down, Henry again meets the collective values symbolized by the rucksack
and motorcycle. He has passed through a phase in which he has strengthened his
ego-consciousness by proving he can hold his own, and he has a renewed need for
social contact. However, he accepts the suggestion of his friends that he
should wait and fetch his things the next morning. Thus he submits for the
second time to advice that comes from elsewhere: the first time, to the advice
of the old woman, to a subjective power, an archetypal figure; the second time,
to a collective pattern. With this step Henry has passed a milestone on the
road to maturity.

As an anticipation of the inner development that Henry could hope to achieve
through analysis, this dream was extraordinarily promising. The conflicting
opposites that kept Henry’s soul in tension were impressively symbolized. On
the one hand, there was his conscious urge to ascend, and on the other his
tendency to passive contemplation. Also, the image of the pathetic young woman
in her white robes (representing Henry’s sensitive and romantic feelings)
contrasts with the bloated corpses in blue suits (representing his sterile
intellectual world). However, to overcome these obstacles and bring about a
balance between them would be possible for Henry only after the most severe
trials.

