# PART 5 - The oracle dream
[Metadata]: # {05.06}
[Descriptor]: # {05.06}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
The oracle dream
# The oracle dream
People who rely totally on their rational thinking and dismiss or repress every
manifestation of their psychic life often have an almost inexplicable
inclination to superstition. They listen to oracles and prophecies and can be
easily hoodwinked or influenced by magicians and conjurers. And because dreams
compensate one’s outer life, the emphasis such people put in their intellect is
offset by dreams in which they meet the irrational and cannot escape it.

Henry experienced this phenomenon in the course of his analysis, in an
impressive way. Four extraordinary dreams, based on such irrational themes,
represented decisive milestones in his spiritual development. The first of
these came about 10 weeks after the analysis began. As Henry reported the
dream:

Alone on an adventurous journey through South America I feel, at last, the
desire to return home. In a foreign city situated on a mountain I try to reach
the railway station, which I instinctively suspect to be in the center of the
town at its highest level. I fear I may be too late.

Fortunately, however, a vaulted passage breaks through the row of houses on my
right, built closely together as in the architecture of the Middle Ages,
forming an impenetrable wall behind which the station is probably to be found.
The whole scene offers a very picturesque aspect. I see the sunny, painted
façades of the houses, the dark archway in whose shadowy obscurity four ragged
figures have settled down on the pavement. With a sigh of relief, I hurry
toward the passage—when suddenly a stranger, a trapper-type, appears ahead of
me evidently filled with the same desire to catch the train.

At our approach the four gatekeepers, who turn out to be Chinese, jump up to
prevent our passage. In the ensuing fight my left leg is injured by the long
nails on the left foot of one of the Chinese. An oracle has to decide now
whether the way could be opened to us or whether our lives must be forfeited.

I am the first to be dealt with. While my companion is bound and led aside, the
Chinese consult the oracle by using little ivory sticks. The judgment goes
against me, but I am given another chance. I am fettered and led aside, just as
my companion was, and he now takes my place. In his presence, the oracle has to
decide my fate for the second time. On this occasion it is in my favor. I am
saved.

One immediately notices the singularity and the exceptional meaning of this
dream, its wealth of symbols, and its compactness. However, it seemed as if
Henry’s conscious mind wanted to ignore the dream. Because of his skepticism
toward the products of his unconscious it was important not to expose the dream
to the danger of rationalization, but rather to let it act on him without
interference. So I refrained at first from my interpretation. Instead I offered
only one suggestion: I advised him to read and then to consult (as did the
Chinese figures in his dream) the famous Chinese oracle book, the I Ching.



Left, Henry’s drawing of the sword and helmet that appeared to him in a
fantasy, and that also related to a section of the I Ching—LI, “the clinging,
fire.”

The I Ching, the so-called “Book of Changes,” is a very ancient book of wisdom;
its roots go back to mythical times, and it comes to us in its present form
from 3000 B.C. According to Richard Wilhelm (who translated it into German and
provided an admirable commentary), both of the two main branches of Chinese
philosophy—Taoism and Confucianism—have their common origin in the I Ching. The
book is based on the hypothesis of the oneness of man and the surrounding
cosmos, and of the complementary pairs of opposites Yang and Yin (i.e., the
male and female principles). It consists of 64 “signs” each represented by a
drawing made up of six lines. In these signs are contained all the possible
combinations of Yang and Yin. The straight lines are looked upon as male, the
broken lines as female.

Each sign describes changes in the human or cosmic situation, and each
prescribes, in a pictorial language, the course of action to be followed at
such times. The Chinese consulted this oracle by means that indicated which of
the signs was relevant at a given moment. They did so by using 50 small sticks
in a rather complicated way that yielded a given number. (Incidentally, Henry
said that he had once read—probably in Jung’s commentary on “The Secret of the
Golden Flower”—of a strange game sometimes used by the Chinese to find out
about the future.)

Today the more usual method of consulting the I Ching is to use three coins.
Each throw of the three coins yields one line. “Heads,” which stand for a male
line, count as three; “tails,” a broken female line, count as two. The coins
are thrown six times and the numbers that are produced indicate the sign or
hexagram (i.e., the set of six lines) to be consulted.

But what significance has such “fortune telling” for our own time? Even those
who accept the idea that the I Ching is a storehouse of wisdom will find it
hard to believe that consultation of the oracle is anything more than an
experiment in the occult. It is indeed difficult to grasp that more is
involved, for the ordinary person today consciously dismisses all divining
techniques as archaic nonsense. Yet they are not nonsense. As Dr. Jung has
shown, they are based on what he calls the “principle of synchronicity” (or,
more simply, meaningful coincidence). He has described this difficult new idea
in his essay “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle.” It is based on
the assumption of an inner unconscious knowledge that links a physical event
with a psychic condition, so that a certain event that appears “accidental” or
“coincidental” can in fact be physically meaningful; and its meaning is often
symbolically indicated through dreams that coincide with the event.

Several weeks after having studied the I Ching, Henry followed my suggestion
(with considerable skepticism) and threw the coins. What he found in the book
had a tremendous impact on him. Briefly, the oracle to which he referred bore
several startling references to his dream, and to his psychological condition
generally. By a remarkable “synchronistic” coincidence, the sign that was
indicated by the coin-pattern was called MENG—or “Youthful Folly.” In this
chapter there are several parallels to the dream motifs in question. According
to the text of the I Ching, the three upper lines of this hexagram symbolize a
mountain, and have the meaning of “keeping still”; they can also be interpreted
as a gate. The three lower lines symbolize water, the abyss, and the moon. All
these symbols have occurred in Henry’s previous dreams. Among many other
statements that seemed to apply to Henry was the following warning: “For
youthful folly, it is the most hopeless thing to entangle itself in empty
imaginings. The more obstinately it clings to such unreal fantasies the more
certainly will humiliation overtake it.”

In this and other complex ways, the oracle seemed to be directly relevant to
Henry’s problem. This shook him. At first he tried to suppress its effect by
willpower, but he could not escape it or his dreams. The message of the I Ching
seemed to touch him deeply in spite of the puzzling language in which it was
expressed. He became overpowered by the very irrationality whose existence he
had so long denied. Sometimes silent, sometimes irritated, reading the words
that seemed to coincide so strongly with the symbols in his dreams, he said, “I
must think all this over thoroughly,” and he left before our session was up. He
cancelled his next session by telephone, because of influenza, and did not
reappear. I waited (“keeping still”) because I supposed that he might not yet
have digested the oracle.

A month went by. Finally Henry reappeared, excited and disconcerted, and told
me what had happened in the meantime. Initially his intellect (which he had
until then relied upon so much) had suffered a great shock—and one that he had
at first tried to suppress. However, he soon had to admit that the
communications of the oracle were pursuing him. He had intended to consult the
book again, because in his dream the oracle had been consulted twice. But the
text of the chapter “Youthful Folly” expressly forbids the putting of a second
question. For two nights Henry had tossed sleeplessly in his bed; but on the
third a luminous dream image of great power had suddenly appeared before his
eyes: a helmet with a sword floating in empty space.



Above, a parallel to the gatekeepers of Henry’s “oracle dream”: one of a pair
of sculptures (10th-13th century) that guard the entrance to China’s
Mai-chi-san caves.

Henry immediately took up the I Ching again and opened it at random to a
commentary on Chapter 30, where (to his great surprise) he read the following
passage: “The clinging is fire, it means coats of mail, helmets, it means
lances and weapons.” Now he felt that he understood why a second intentional
consulting of the oracle was forbidden. For in his dream the ego was excluded
from the second question; it was the trapper who had to consult the oracle the
second time. In the same way, it was Henry’s semi-unconscious action that had
unintentionally asked the second question of the I Ching by opening the book at
random and coming upon a symbol that coincided with his nocturnal vision.

Henry was clearly so deeply stirred that it seemed time to try to interpret the
dream that had sparked the transformation. In view of the events of the dream,
it was obvious that the dream-elements should be interpreted as contents of
Henry’s inner personality and the six dream-figures as personification of his
psychic qualities. Such dreams are relatively rare, but when they do occur
their after-affects are all the more powerful. That is why they could be called
“dreams of transformation.”

With dreams of such pictorial power, the dreamer seldom has more than a few
personal associations. All Henry could offer was that he had recently tried for
a job in Chile, and had been refused because they would not employ unmarried
men. He also knew that some Chinese let the nails of their left hand grow as a
sign that instead of working they have given themselves over to meditation.

Henry’s failure (to get a job in South America) was presented to him in the
dream. In it he is transported into a hot southern world—a world that, in
contrast to Europe, he would call primitive, uninhibited, and sensual. It
represents an excellent symbolic picture of the realm of the unconscious.

This realm was the opposite of the cultivated intellect and Swiss puritanism
that ruled Henry’s conscious mind. It was, in fact, his natural “shadow land,”
for which he had longed; but after a while he did not seem to feel too
comfortable there. From the chthonic, dark, maternal powers (symbolized by
South America) he is drawn back in the dream to the light, personal mother and
to his fiancée. He suddenly realizes how far he has gone away from them; he
finds himself alone in a “foreign city.”

This increase in consciousness is symbolized in the dream as a “higher level”;
the city was built on a mountain. So Henry “climbed up” to a greater
consciousness in the “shadow land”; from there he hoped “to find his way home.”
This problem of ascending a mountain had already been put to him in his initial
dream. And, as in the dream of the saint and the prostitute, or in many
mythological tales, a mountain often symbolizes a place of revelation, where
transformation and change may take place.

The “city on the mountain” is also a well-known archetypal symbol that appears
in the history of our culture in many variations. The city, corresponding in
its ground-plan to a mandala, represents that “region of the soul” in the
middle of which the Self (the psyche’s innermost center and totality) has its
abode.

Surprisingly, the seat of the Self is represented in Henry’s dream as a traffic
center of the human collective—a railway station. This may be because the Self
(if the dreamer is young and has a relatively low level of spiritual
development) is usually symbolized by an object from the realm of his personal
experience—often a banal object, which compensates the dreamer’s high
aspirations. Only in the mature person acquainted with the images of his soul
is the Self realized in a symbol that corresponds to its unique value.

Even though Henry does not actually know where the station is, he nevertheless
supposes it to be in the center of the city, on its highest point. Here, as in
earlier dreams, he receives help from his unconscious. Henry’s conscious mind
was identified with his profession as an engineer, so he would also like his
inner world to relate to rational products of civilization, like a railway
station. The dream, however, rejects this attitude and indicates a completely
different way.

The way leads “under” and through a dark arch. An arched gateway is also a
symbol for a threshold, a place where dangers lurk, a place that at the same
time separates and unites. Instead of the railway station that Henry was
looking for, which was to connect uncivilized South America with Europe, Henry
finds himself before a dark arched gateway where four ragged Chinese, stretched
on the ground, block the passage. The dream makes no distinction between them,
so they may be seen as four still undifferentiated aspects of a male totality.
(The number four, a symbol of wholeness and completeness, represents an
archetype that Dr. Jung has discussed at length in his writings.)

The Chinese thus represent unconscious male psychic parts of Henry that he
cannot pass, because the “way to the Self” (i.e., to the psychic center) is
barred by them and must still be opened to him. Until this issue has been
settled he cannot continue his journey.

Still unaware of the impending danger, Henry hurries to the gateway, expecting
at last to reach the station. But on his way he meets his “shadow”—his unlived,
primitive side, which appears in the guise of an earthy, rough trapper. The
appearance of this figure probably means that Henry’s introverted ego has been
joined by his extraverted (compensatory) side, which represents his repressed
emotional and irrational traits. This shadow figure pushes itself past the
conscious ego into the foreground, and, because it personifies the activity and
autonomy of unconscious qualities, it becomes the proper carrier of fate,
through whom everything happens.

The dream moves toward its climax. During the fight between Henry, the trapper,
and the four ragged Chinese, Henry’s left leg is scratched by the long nails on
the left foot of one of the four. (Here, it seems, the European character of
Henry’s conscious ego has collided with a personification of the ancient wisdom
of the East, with the extreme opposite of his ego. The Chinese come from an
entirely different psychic continent, from an “other side” that is still quite
unknown to Henry and that seems dangerous to him.)

The Chinese can also be said to stand for the “yellow earth”; for the Chinese
people are related to the earth as few people are. And it is just this earthy,
chthonic quality that Henry had to accept. The unconscious male totality of his
psyche, which he met in his dream, had a chthonic material aspect that his
intellectual conscious side lacked. Thus the fact that he recognized the four
ragged figures as Chinese shows that Henry had gained an increase of inner
awareness concerning the nature of his adversaries.

Henry had heard that the Chinese sometimes let the nails of their left hands
grow long. But in the dream the nails are on the left foot; they are, so to
speak, claws. This may indicate that the Chinese have a point of view so
different from Henry’s that it injures him. As we know, Henry’s conscious
attitude toward the chthonic and feminine, toward the material depths of his
nature, was most uncertain and ambivalent. This attitude, symbolized by his
“left leg” (the point of view or “standpoint” of his feminine, unconscious side
of which he is still afraid) was harmed by the Chinese.

This “injury,” however, did not itself bring about a change in Henry. Every
transformation demands as its precondition “the ending of a world”—the collapse
of an old philosophy of life. As Dr. Henderson has pointed out earlier in this
book, at ceremonies of initiations a youth must suffer a symbolic death before
he can be reborn as a man and be taken into the tribe as a full member. Thus
the scientific, logical attitude of the engineer must collapse to make room for
a new attitude.

In the psyche of an engineer, everything “irrational” may be repressed, and
therefore often reveals itself in the dramatic paradoxes of the dream-world.
Thus the irrational appeared in Henry’s dream as an “oracle game” of foreign
origin, with a fearful and inexplicable power to decide human destinies.
Henry’s rational ego had no alternative but to surrender unconditionally in a
real sacrificium intellectus.

Yet the conscious mind of such an inexperienced, immature person as Henry is
not sufficiently prepared for such an act. He loses the turn of fortune, and
his life is forfeit. He is caught, unable to go on in his accustomed way or to
return home—to escape his adult responsibilities. (It was this insight for
which Henry had to be prepared by this “great dream.”)

Next, Henry’s conscious, civilized ego is bound and put aside while the
primitive trapper is allowed to take his place and to consult the oracle.
Henry’s life depends on the result. But when the ego is imprisoned in
isolation, those contents of the unconscious that are personified in the
shadow-figure may bring help and solution. This becomes possible when one
recognizes the existence of such contents and has experienced their power. They
can then become our consciously accepted constant companions. Because the
trapper (his shadow) wins the game in his place, Henry is saved.

