# PART 1 - The importance of dreams
[Metadata]: # {01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The importance of dreams
# The importance of dreams
Man uses the spoken or written word to express the meaning of what he wants to
convey. His language is full of symbols, but he also often employs signs or
images that are not strictly descriptive. Some are mere abbreviations or
strings of initials, such as UN, UNICEF, or UNESCO; others are familiar trade
marks, the names of patent medicines, badges, or insignia. Although these are
meaningless in themselves, they have acquired a recognizable meaning through
common usage or deliberate intent. Such things are not symbols. They are signs,
and they do no more than denote the objects to which they are attached.

What we call a symbol is a term, a name, or even a picture that may be familiar
in daily life, yet that possesses specific connotations in addition to its
conventional and obvious meaning. It implies something vague, unknown, or
hidden from us. Many Cretan monuments, for instance, are marked with the design
of the double adze. This is an object that we know, but we do not know its
symbolic implications. For another example, take the case of the Indian who,
after a visit to England, told his friends at home that the English worship
animals, because he had found eagles, lions, and oxen in old churches. He was
not aware (nor are many Christians) that these animals are symbols of the
Evangelists and are derived from the vision of Ezekiel, and that this in turn
has an analogy to the Egyptian sun god Horus and his four sons. There are,
moreover, such objects as the wheel and the cross that are known all over the
world, yet that have a symbolic significance under certain conditions.
Precisely what they symbolize is still a matter for controversial speculation.
Thus a word or an image is symbolic when it implies something more than its
obvious and immediate meaning. It has a wider “unconscious” aspect that is
never precisely defined or fully explained. Nor can one hope to define or
explain it. As the mind explores the symbol, it is led to ideas that lie beyond
the grasp of reason. The wheel may lead our thoughts toward the concept of a
“divine” sun, but at this point reason must admit its incompetence; man is
unable to define a “divine” being. When, with all our intellectual limitations,
we call something “divine,” we have merely given it a name, which may be based
on a creed, but never on factual evidence.

Because there are innumerable things beyond the range of human understanding,
we constantly use symbolic terms to represent concepts that we cannot define or
fully comprehend. This is one reason why all religions employ symbolic language
or images. But this conscious use of symbols is only one aspect of a
psychological fact of great importance: Man also produces symbols unconsciously
and spontaneously, in the form of dreams.

It is not easy to grasp this point. But the point must be grasped if we are to
know more about the ways in which the human mind works. Man, as we realize if
we reflect for a moment, never perceives anything fully or comprehends anything
completely. He can see, hear, touch, and taste; but how far he sees, how well
he hears, what his touch tells him, and what he tastes depend upon the number
and quality of his senses. These limit his perception of the world around him.
By using scientific instruments he can partly compensate for the deficiencies
of his senses. For example, he can extend the range of his vision by binoculars
or of his hearing by electrical amplification. But the most elaborate apparatus
cannot do more than bring distant or small objects within range of his eyes, or
make faint sounds more audible. No matter what instruments he uses, at some
point he reaches the edge of certainty beyond which conscious knowledge cannot
pass.

There are, moreover, unconscious aspects of our perception of reality. The
first is the fact that even when our senses react to real phenomena, sights,
and sounds, they are somehow translated from the realm of reality into that of
the mind. Within the mind they become psychic events, whose ultimate nature is
unknowable (for the psyche cannot know its own psychical substance). Thus every
experience contains an indefinite number of unknown factors, not to speak of
the fact that every concrete object is always unknown in certain respects,
because we cannot know the ultimate nature of matter itself.

Then there are certain events of which we have not consciously taken note; they
have remained, so to speak, below the threshold of consciousness. They have
happened, but they have been absorbed subliminally, without our conscious
knowledge. We can become aware of such happenings only in a moment of intuition
or by a process of profound thought that leads to a later realization that they
must have happened; and though we may have originally ignored their emotional
and vital importance, it later wells up from the unconscious as a sort of
afterthought.

It may appear, for instance, in the form of a dream. As a general rule, the
unconscious aspect of any event is revealed to us in dreams, where it appears
not as a rational thought but as a symbolic image. As a matter of history, it
was the study of dreams that first enabled psychologists to investigate the
unconscious aspect of conscious psychic events.

It is on such evidence that psychologists assume the existence of an
unconscious psyche—though many scientists and philosophers deny its existence.
They argue naïvely that such an assumption implies the existence of two
“subjects,” or (to put it in a common phrase) two personalities within the same
individual. But this is exactly what it does imply—quite correctly. And it is
one of the curses of modern man that many people suffer from this divided
personality. It is by no means a pathological symptom; it is a normal fact that
can be observed at any time and everywhere. It is not merely the neurotic whose
right hand does not know what the left hand is doing. This predicament is a
symptom of a general unconsciousness that is the undeniable common inheritance
of all mankind.



Three of the sons of the Egyptian god Horus are animals (c. 1250 B.C.).
Animals, and groups of four, are universal religious symbols.

Man has developed consciousness slowly and laboriously, in a process that took
untold ages to reach the civilized state (which is arbitrarily dated from the
invention of script in about 4000 B.C.). And this evolution is far from
complete, for large areas of the human mind are still shrouded in darkness.
What we call the “psyche” is by no means identical with our consciousness and
its contents.

Whoever denies the existence of the unconscious is in fact assuming that our
present knowledge of the psyche is total. And this belief is clearly just as
false as the assumption that we know all there is to be known about the natural
universe. Our psyche is part of nature, and its enigma is as limitless. Thus we
cannot define either the psyche or nature. We can merely state what we believe
them to be and describe, as best we can, how they function. Quite apart,
therefore, from the evidence that medical research has accumulated, there are
strong grounds of logic for rejecting statements like “There is no
unconscious.” Those who say such things merely express an age-old “misoneism”—a
fear of the new and the unknown.

There are historical reasons for this resistance to the idea of an unknown part
of the human psyche. Consciousness is a very recent acquisition of nature, and
it is still in an “experimental” state. It is frail, menaced by specific
dangers, and easily injured. As anthropologists have noted, one of the most
common mental derangements that occur among primitive people is what they call
“the loss of a soul”—which means, as the name indicates, a noticeable
disruption (or, more technically, a dissociation) of consciousness.

Among such people, whose consciousness is at a different level of development
from ours, the “soul” (or psyche) is not felt to be a unit. Many primitives
assume that a man has a “bush soul” as well as his own, and that this bush soul
is incarnate in a wild animal or a tree, with which the human individual has
some kind of psychic identity. This is what the distinguished French
ethnologist Lucien Lévy-Brühl called a “mystical participation.” He later
retracted this term under pressure of adverse criticism, but I believe that his
critics were wrong. It is a well-known psychological fact that an individual
may have such an unconscious identity with some other person or object.



“Dissociation” means a splitting in the psyche, causing a neurosis. A famous
fictional example of this state is Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1886) by the Scots
author R. L. Stevenson. In the story Jekyll’s “split” took the form of a
physical change, rather than (as in reality) an inner, psychic state. Above,
Mr. Hyde (from the 1932 film of the story)—Jekyll’s “other half.”

This identity takes a variety of forms among primitives. If the bush soul is
that of an animal, the animal itself is considered as some sort of brother to
the man. A man whose brother is a crocodile, for instance, is supposed to be
safe when swimming a crocodile-infested river. If the bush soul is a tree, the
tree is presumed to have something like parental authority over the individual
concerned. In both cases an injury to the bush soul is interpreted as an injury
to the man.

In some tribes, it is assumed that a man has a number of souls; this belief
expresses the feeling of some primitive individuals that they each consist of
several linked but distinct units. This means that the individual’s psyche is
far from being safely synthesized; on the contrary, it threatens to fragment
only too easily under the onslaught of unchecked emotions.

While this situation is familiar to us from the studies of anthropologists, it
is not so irrelevant to our own advanced civilization as it might seem. We too
can become dissociated and lose our identity. We can be possessed and altered
by moods, or become unreasonable and unable to recall important facts about
ourselves or others, so that people ask: “What the devil has got into you?” We
talk about being able “to control ourselves,” but self-control is a rare and
remarkable virtue. We may think we have ourselves under control; yet a friend
can easily tell us things about ourselves of which we have no knowledge.

Beyond doubt, even in what we call a high level of civilization, human
consciousness has not yet achieved a reasonable degree of continuity. It is
still vulnerable and liable to fragmentation. This capacity to isolate part of
one’s mind, indeed, is a valuable characteristic. It enables us to concentrate
upon one thing at a time, excluding everything else that may claim our
attention. But there is a world of difference between a conscious decision to
split off and temporarily suppress a part of one’s psyche, and a condition in
which this happens spontaneously, without one’s knowledge or consent and even
against one’s intention. The former is a civilized achievement, the latter a
primitive “loss of a soul,” or even the pathological cause of a neurosis.

Thus, even in our day the unity of consciousness is still a doubtful affair; it
can too easily be disrupted. An ability to control one’s emotions that may be
very desirable from one point of view would be a questionable accomplishment
from another, for it would deprive social intercourse of variety, color, and
warmth.

It is against this background that we must review the importance of
dreams—those flimsy, evasive, unreliable, vague, and uncertain fantasies. To
explain my point of view, I would like to describe how it developed over a
period of years, and how I was led to conclude that dreams are the most
frequent and universally accessible source for the investigation of man’s
symbolizing faculty.

Sigmund Freud was the pioneer who first tried to explore empirically the
unconscious background of consciousness. He worked on the general assumption
that dreams are not a matter of chance but are associated with conscious
thoughts and problems. This assumption was not in the least arbitrary. It was
based upon the conclusion of eminent neurologists (for instance, Pierre Janet)
that neurotic symptoms are related to some conscious experience. They even
appear to be split-off areas of the conscious mind, which, at another time and
under different conditions, can be conscious.

Before the beginning of this century, Freud and Josef Breuer had recognized
that neurotic symptoms—hysteria, certain types of pain, and abnormal
behavior—are in fact symbolically meaningful. They are one way in which the
unconscious mind expresses itself, just as it may in dreams; and they are
equally symbolic. A patient, for instance, who is confronted with an
intolerable situation may develop a spasm whenever he tries to swallow: He
“can’t swallow it.” Under similar conditions of psychological stress, another
patient has an attack of asthma: He “can’t breathe the atmosphere at home.” A
third suffers from a peculiar paralysis of the legs: He can’t walk, i.e., “he
can’t go on any more.” A fourth, who vomits when he eats, “cannot digest” some
unpleasant fact. I could cite many examples of this kind, but such physical
reactions are only one form in which the problems that trouble us unconsciously
may express themselves. They more often find expression in our dreams.

Any psychologist who has listened to numbers of people describing their dreams
knows that dream symbols have much greater variety than the physical symptoms
of neurosis. They often consist of elaborate and picturesque fantasies. But if
the analyst who is confronted by this dream material uses Freud’s original
technique of “free association,” he finds that dreams can eventually be reduced
to certain basic patterns. This technique played an important part in the
development of psychoanalysis, for it enabled Freud to use dreams as the
starting point from which the unconscious problem of the patient might be
explored.

Freud made the simple but penetrating observation that if a dreamer is
encouraged to go on talking about his dream images and the thoughts that these
prompt in his mind, he will give himself away and reveal the unconscious
background of his ailments, in both what he says and what he deliberately omits
saying. His ideas may seem irrational and irrelevant, but after a time it
becomes relatively easy to see what it is that he is trying to avoid, what
unpleasant thought or experience he is suppressing. No matter how he tries to
camouflage it, everything he says points to the core of his predicament. A
doctor sees so many things from the seamy side of life that he is seldom far
from the truth when he interprets the hints that his patient produces as signs
of an uneasy conscience. What he eventually discovers, unfortunately, confirms
his expectations. Thus far, nobody can say anything against Freud’s theory of
repression and wish fulfillment as apparent causes of dream symbolism.



The “inkblot” test devised by the Swiss psychiatrist Hermann Rorschach. The
shape of the blot can serve as a stimulus for free association; in fact, almost
any irregular free shape can spark off the associative process. Leonardo da
Vinci wrote in his Notebooks: “It should not be hard for you to stop sometimes
and look into the stains of walls, or ashes of a fire, or clouds, or mud or
like places in which … you may find really marvelous ideas.”

Freud attached particular importance to dreams as the point of departure for a
process of “free association.” But after a time I began to feel that this was a
misleading and inadequate use of the rich fantasies that the unconscious
produces in sleep. My doubts really began when a colleague told me of an
experience he had during the course of a long train journey in Russia. Though
he did not know the language and could not even decipher the Cyrillic script,
he found himself musing over the strange letters in which the railway notices
were written, and he fell into a reverie in which he imagined all sorts of
meanings for them.

One idea led to another, and in his relaxed mood he found that this “free
association” had stirred up many old memories. Among them he was annoyed to
find some long-buried disagreeable topics—things he had wished to forget and
had forgotten consciously. He had in fact arrived at what psychologists would
call his “complexes”—that is, repressed emotional themes than can cause
constant psychological disturbances or even, in many cases, the symptoms of a
neurosis.

This episode opened my eyes to the fact that it was not necessary to use a
dream as the point of departure for the process of “free association” if one
wished to discover the complexes of a patient. It showed me that one can reach
the center directly from any point of the compass. One could begin from
Cyrillic letters, from meditations upon a crystal ball, a prayer wheel, or a
modern painting, or even from casual conversation about some trivial event. The
dream was no more and no less useful in this respect than any other possible
starting point. Nevertheless, dreams have a particular significance, even
though they often arise from an emotional upset in which the habitual complexes
are also involved. (The habitual complexes are the tender spots of the psyche,
which react most quickly to an external stimulus or disturbance.) That is why
free association can lead one from any dream to the critical secret thoughts.

At this point, however, it occurred to me that (if I was right so far) it might
reasonably follow that dreams have some special and more significant function
of their own. Very often dreams have a definite, evidently purposeful
structure, indicating an underlying idea or intention—though, as a rule, the
latter is not immediately comprehensible. I therefore began to consider whether
one should pay more attention to the actual form and content of a dream, rather
than allowing “free” association to lead one off through a train of ideas to
complexes that could as easily be reached by other means.

This new thought was a turning-point in the development of my psychology. It
meant that I gradually gave up following associations that led far away from
the text of a dream. I chose to concentrate rather on the associations to the
dream itself, believing that the latter expressed something specific that the
unconscious was trying to say.

The change in my attitude toward dreams involved a change of method; the new
technique was one that could take account of all the various wider aspects of a
dream. A story told by the conscious mind has a beginning, a development, and
an end, but the same is not true of a dream. Its dimensions in time and space
are quite different; to understand it you must examine it from every
aspect—just as you may take an unknown object in your hands and turn it over
and over until you are familiar with every detail of its shape.

Perhaps I have now said enough to show how I came increasingly to disagree with
“free” association as Freud first employed it: I wanted to keep as close as
possible to the dream itself, and to exclude all the irrelevant ideas and
associations that it might evoke. True, these could lead one toward the
complexes of a patient, but I had a more far-reaching purpose in mind than the
discovery of complexes that cause neurotic disturbances. There are many other
means by which these can be identified: The psychologist, for instance, can get
all the hints he needs by using word-association tests (by asking the patient
what he associates to a given set of words, and by studying his responses). But
to know and understand the psychic life-process of an individual’s whole
personality, it is important to realize that his dreams and their symbolic
images have a much more important role to play.

Almost everyone knows, for example, that there is an enormous variety of images
by which the sexual act can be symbolized (or, one might say, represented in
the form of an allegory). Each of these images can lead, by a process of
association, to the idea of sexual intercourse and to specific complexes that
any individual may have about his own sexual attitudes. But one could just as
well unearth such complexes by day-dreaming on a set of indecipherable Russian
letters. I was thus led to the assumption that a dream can contain some message
other than the sexual allegory, and that it does so for definite reasons. To
illustrate this point:



One of the countless symbolic or allegorical images of the sexual act is a deer
hunt: A detail from a painting by the 16th-century German artist Cranach. The
sexual implication of the deer hunt is underlined by a medieval English folk
song called “The Keeper”:

The first doe that he shot at he missed,

And the second doe he trimmed he kissed,

And the third ran away in a young man’s heart,

She’s amongst the leaves of the green O.

A man may dream of inserting a key in a lock, of wielding a heavy stick, or of
breaking down a door with a battering ram. Each of these can be regarded as a
sexual allegory. But the fact that his unconscious for its own purposes has
chosen one of these specific images—it may be the key, the stick, or the
battering ram—is also of major significance. The real task is to understand why
the key has been preferred to the stick, or the stick to the ram. And sometimes
this might even lead one to discover that it is not the sexual act at all that
is represented, but some quite different psychological point.

From this line of reasoning, I concluded that only the material that is clearly
and visibly part of a dream should be used in interpreting it. The dream has
its own limitation. Its specific form itself tells us what belongs to it and
what leads away from it. While “free” association lures one away from that
material in a kind of zigzag line, the method I evolved is more like a
circumambulation whose center is the dream picture. I work all around the dream
picture and disregard every attempt that the dreamer makes to break away from
it. Time and time again, in my professional work, I have had to repeat the
words: “Let’s get back to your dream. What does the dream say?”

For instance, a patient of mine dreamed of a drunken and disheveled vulgar
woman. In the dream, it seemed that this woman was his wife, though in real
life his wife was totally different. On the surface, therefore, the dream was
shockingly untrue, and the patient immediately rejected it as dream nonsense.
If I, as his doctor, had let him start a process of association, he would
inevitably have tried to get as far away as possible from the unpleasant
suggestion of his dream. In that case, he would have ended with one of his
staple complexes—a complex, possibly, that had nothing to do with his wife—and
we should have learned nothing about the special meaning of this particular
dream.

What then, was his unconscious trying to convey by such an obviously untrue
statement? Clearly it somehow expressed the idea of a degenerate female who was
closely connected with the dreamer’s life; but since the projection of this
image on to his wife was unjustified and factually untrue, I had to look
elsewhere before I found out what this repulsive image represented.

In the Middle Ages, long before the physiologists demonstrated that by reason
of our glandular structure there are both male and female elements in all of
us, it was said that “every man carries a woman within himself.” It is this
female element in every male that I have called the “anima.” This “feminine”
aspect is essentially a certain inferior kind of relatedness to the
surroundings, and particularly to women, which is kept carefully concealed from
others as well as from oneself. In other words, though an individual’s visible
personality may seem quite normal, he may well be concealing from others—or
even from himself—the deplorable condition of “the woman within.”



A key in a lock may be a sexual symbol—but not invariably. A section of an
altarpiece by the 15th-century Flemish artist Campin. The door was intended to
symbolize hope, the lock to symbolize charity, and the key to symbolize the
desire for God.



The “anima” is the female element in the male unconscious. (It and the “animus”
in the female unconscious are discussed in Chapter 3.) This innner duality is
often symbolized by a hermaphroditic figure, like the crowned hermaphrodite,
above, from a 17th-century alchemical manuscript.

That was the case with this particular patient: His female side was not nice.
His dream was actually saying to him: “You are in some respects behaving like a
degenerate female,” and thus gave him an appropriate shock. (An example of this
kind, of course, must not be taken as evidence that the unconscious is
concerned with “moral” injunctions. The dream was not telling the patient to
“behave better,” but was simply trying to balance the lopsided nature of his
conscious mind, which was maintaining the fiction that he was a perfect
gentleman throughout.)

It is easy to understand why dreamers tend to ignore and even deny the message
of their dreams. Consciousness naturally resists anything unconscious and
unknown. I have already pointed out the existence among primitive peoples of
what anthropologists call “misoneism,” a deep and superstitious fear of
novelty. The primitives manifest all the reactions of the wild animal against
untoward events. But “civilized” man reacts to new ideas in much the same way,
erecting psychological barriers to protect himself from the shock of facing
something new. This can easily be observed in any individual’s reaction to his
own dreams when obliged to admit a surprising thought. Many pioneers in
philosophy, science, and even literature have been victims of the innate
conservatism of their contemporaries. Psychology is one of the youngest of the
sciences; because it attempts to deal with the working of the unconscious, it
has inevitably encountered misoneism in an extreme form.

