# PART 1 - The archetype in dream symbolism
[Metadata]: # {01.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.06}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The archetype in dream symbolism
# The archetype in dream symbolism
I have already suggested that dreams serve the purpose of compensation. This
assumption means that the dream is a normal psychic phenomenon that transmits
unconscious reactions or spontaneous impulses to consciousness. Many dreams can
be interpreted with the help of the dreamer, who provides both the associations
to and the context of the dream image, by means of which one can look at all
its aspects.

This method is adequate in all ordinary cases, such as those when a relative, a
friend, or a patient tells you a dream more or less in the course of
conversation. But when it is a matter of obsessive dreaming or of highly
emotional dreams, the personal associations produced by the dreamer do not
usually suffice for a satisfactory interpretation. In such cases, we have to
take into consideration the fact (first observed and commented on by Freud)
that elements often occur in a dream that are not individual and that cannot be
derived from the dreamer’s personal experience. These elements, as I have
previously mentioned, are what Freud called “archaic remnants”—mental forms
whose presence cannot be explained by anything in the individual’s own life and
which seem to be aboriginal, innate, and inherited shapes of the human mind.

Just as the human body represents a whole museum of organs, each with a long
evolutionary history behind it, so we should expect to find that the mind is
organized in a similar way. It can no more be a product without history than is
the body in which it exists. By “history” I do not mean the fact that the mind
builds itself up by conscious reference to the past through language and other
cultural traditions. I am referring to the biological, prehistoric, and
unconscious development of the mind in archaic man, whose psyche was still
close to that of the animal.

This immensely old psyche forms the basis of our mind, just as much as the
structure of our body is based on the general anatomical pattern of the mammal.
The trained eye of the anatomist or the biologist finds many traces of this
original pattern in our bodies. The experienced investigator of the mind can
similarly see the analogies between the dream pictures of modern man and the
products of the primitive mind, its “collective images,” and its mythological
motifs.

Just as the biologist needs the science of comparative anatomy, however, the
psychologist cannot do without a “comparative anatomy of the psyche.” In
practice, to put it differently, the psychologist must not only have a
sufficient experience of dreams and other products of unconscious activity, but
also of mythology in its widest sense. Without this equipment, nobody can spot
the important analogies: it is not possible, for instance, to see the analogy
between a case of compulsion neurosis and that of a classical demonic
possession without a working knowledge of both.

My views about the “archaic remnants,” which I call “archetypes” or “primordial
images,” have been constantly criticized by people who lack a sufficient
knowledge of the psychology of dreams and of mythology. The term “archetype” is
often misunderstood as meaning certain definite mythological images or motifs.
But these are nothing more than conscious representations; it would be absurd
to assume that such variable representations could be inherited.

The archetype is a tendency to form such representations of a
motif—representations that can vary a great deal in detail without losing their
basic pattern. There are, for instance, many representations of the motif of
the hostile brethren, but the motif itself remains the same. My critics have
incorrectly assumed that I am dealing with “inherited representations,” and on
that ground they have dismissed the idea of the archetype as mere superstition.
They have failed to take into account the fact that if archetypes were
representations that originated in our consciousness (or were acquired by
consciousness), we should surely understand them, and not be bewildered and
astonished when they present themselves in our consciousness. They are, indeed,
an instinctive trend, as marked as the impulse of birds to build nests, or ants
to form organized colonies.

Here I must clarify the relation between instincts and archetypes: What we
properly call instincts are physiological urges, and are perceived by the
senses. But at the same time, they also manifest themselves in fantasies and
often reveal their presence only by symbolic images. These manifestations are
what I call the archetypes. They are without known origin; and they reproduce
themselves in any time or in any part of the world—even where transmission by
direct descent or “cross fertilization” through migration must be ruled out.

I can remember many cases of people who have consulted me because they were
baffled by their own dreams or by their children’s. They were at a complete
loss to understand the terms of the dreams. The reason was that the dreams
contained images that they could not relate to anything they could remember or
could have passed on to their children. Yet some of these patients were highly
educated: A few of them were actually psychiatrists themselves.

I vividly recall the case of a professor who had had a sudden vision and
thought he was insane. He came to see me in a state of complete panic. I simply
took a 400-year-old book from the shelf and showed him an old woodcut depicting
his very vision. “There’s no reason for you to believe that you’re insane,” I
said to him. “They knew about your vision 400 years ago.” Whereupon he sat down
entirely deflated, but once more normal.

A very important case came to me from a man who was himself a psychiatrist. One
day he brought me a handwritten booklet he had received as a Christmas present
from his 10-year-old daughter. It contained a whole series of dreams she had
had when she was eight. They made up the weirdest series of dreams that I have
ever seen, and I could well understand why her father was more than just
puzzled by them. Though childlike, they were uncanny, and they contained images
whose origin was wholly incomprehensible to the father. Here are the relevant
motifs from the dreams:

1. “The evil animal,” a snakelike monster with many horns, kills and devours
all other animals. But God comes from the four corners, being in fact four
separate gods, and gives rebirth to all the dead animals.

2. An ascent into heaven, where pagan dances are being celebrated; and a
descent into hell, where angels are doing good deeds.

3. A horde of small animals frightens the dreamer. The animals increase to a
tremendous size, and one of them devours the little girl.

4. A small mouse is penetrated by worms, snakes, fishes, and human beings. Thus
the mouse becomes human. This portrays the four stages of the origin of
mankind.

5. A drop of water is seen, as it appears when looked at through a microscope.
The girl sees that the drop is full of tree branches. This portrays the origin
of the world.

6. A bad boy has a clod of earth and throws bits of it at everyone who passes.
In this way all the passers-by become bad.

7. A drunken woman falls into the water and comes out renewed and sober.

8. The scene is in America, where many people are rolling on an ant heap,
attacked by the ants. The dreamer, in a panic, falls into a river.

9. There is a desert on the moon where the dreamer sinks so deeply into the
ground that she reaches hell.

10. In this dream the girl has a vision of a luminous ball. She touches it.
Vapors emanate from it. A man comes and kills her.

11. The girl dreams she is dangerously ill. Suddenly birds come out of her skin
and cover her completely.

12. Swarms of gnats obscure the sun, the moon, and all the stars, except one.
That one star falls upon the dreamer.

In the unabridged German original, each dream begins with the words of the old
fairy tale: “Once upon a time.…” By these words the little dreamer suggests
that she feels as if each dream were a sort of fairy tale, which she wants to
tell her father as a Christmas present. The father tried to explain the dreams
in terms of their context. But he could not do so, for there seemed to be no
personal associations to them.

The possibility that these dreams were conscious elaborations can of course be
ruled out only by someone who knew the child well enough to be absolutely sure
of her truthfulness. (They would, however, remain a challenge to our
understanding even if they were fantasies.) In this case, the father was
convinced that the dreams were authentic, and I have no reason to doubt it. I
knew the little girl myself, but this was before she gave her dreams to her
father, so that I had no chance to ask her about them. She lived abroad and
died of an infectious disease about a year after that Christmas.

Her dreams have a decidedly peculiar character. Their leading thoughts are
markedly philosophic in concept. The first one, for instance, speaks of an evil
monster killing other animals, but God gives rebirth to them all through a
divine Apokatastasis, or restitution. In the Western world this idea is known
through the Christian tradition. It can be found in the Acts of the Apostles
III:21: “[Christ] whom the heaven must receive until the time of restitution of
all things.…” The early Greek Fathers of the Church (for instance, Origen)
particularly insisted upon the idea that, at the end of time, everything will
be restored by the Redeemer to its original and perfect state. But, according
to St. Matthew XVII:11, there was already an old Jewish tradition that Elias
“truly shall first come, and restore all things.” I Corinthians XV:22 refers to
the same idea in the following words: “For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive.”



The hero-god Raven (of the Haidu Indians of America’s Pacific Coast) in the
belly of a whale—corresponding to the “devouring monster” motif in the girl’s
first dream (this page).

One might guess that the child had encountered this thought in her religious
education. But she had very little religious background. Her parents were
Protestants in name; but in fact they knew the Bible only from hearsay. It is
particularly unlikely that the recondite image of Apokatastasis had been
explained to the girl. Certainly her father had never heard of this mythical
idea.

Nine of the 12 dreams are influenced by the theme of destruction and
restoration. And none of these dreams shows traces of specific Christian
education or influence. On the contrary, they are more closely related to
primitive myths. This relation is corroborated by the other motif—the
“cosmogonic myth” (the creation of the world and of man) that appears in the
fourth and fifth dreams. The same connection is found in I Corinthians XV:22,
which I have just quoted. In this passage too, Adam and Christ (death and
resurrection) are linked together.

The general idea of Christ the Redeemer belongs to the world-wide and
pre-Christ theme of the hero and rescuer who, although he has been devoured by
a monster, appears again in a miraculous way, having overcome whatever monster
it was that swallowed him. When and where such a motif originated nobody knows.
We do not even know how to go about investigating the problem. The one apparent
certainty is that every generation seems to have known it as a tradition handed
down from some preceding time. Thus we can safely assume that it “originated”
at a period when man did not yet know that he possessed a hero myth; in an age,
that is to say, when he did not yet consciously reflect on what he was saying.
The hero figure is an archetype, which has existed since time immemorial.

The production of archetypes by children is especially significant, because one
can sometimes be quite certain that a child has had no direct access to the
tradition concerned. In this case, the girl’s family had no more than a
superficial acquaintance with the Christian tradition. Christian themes may, of
course, be represented by such ideas as God, angels, heaven, hell, and evil.
But the way in which they are treated by this child points to a totally
non-Christian origin.

Let us take the first dream of the God who really consists of four gods coming
from the “four corners.” The corners of what? There is no room mentioned in the
dream. A room would not even fit in with the picture of what is obviously a
cosmic event, in which the Universal Being himself intervenes. The quaternity
(or element of “fourness”) itself is a strange idea, but one that plays a great
role in many religions and philosophies. In the Christian religion, it has been
superseded by the Trinity, a notion that we must assume was known to the child.
But who in an ordinary middle-class family of today would be likely to know of
a divine quaternity? It is an idea that was once fairly familiar among students
of the Hermetic philosophy in the Middle Ages, but it petered out with the
beginning of the 18th century, and it has been entirely obsolete for at least
200 years. Where, then, did the little girl pick it up? From Ezekiel’s vision?
But there is no Christian teaching that identifies the seraphim with God.

The same question may be asked about the horned serpent. In the Bible, it is
true, there are many horned animals—in the Book of Revelation, for instance.
But all these seem to be quadruped, although their overlord is the dragon, the
Greek word for which (drakon) also means serpent. The horned serpent appears in
16th-century Latin alchemy as the quadricornutus serpens (four-horned serpent),
a symbol of Mercury and an antagonist of the Christian Trinity. But this is an
obscure reference. So far as I can discover, it is made by only one author and
this child had no means of knowing it.

In the second dream, a motif appears that is definitely non-Christian and that
contains a reversal of accepted values—for instance, pagan dances by men in
heaven and good deeds by angels in hell. This symbol suggests a relativity of
moral values. Where did the child find such a revolutionary notion, worthy of
Nietzsche’s genius?

These questions lead us to another: What is the compensatory meaning of these
dreams, to which the little girl obviously attributed so much importance that
she presented them to her father as a Christmas present?

If the dreamer had been a primitive medicine man, one could reasonably assume
that they represent variations of the philosophical themes of death, of
resurrection or restitution, of the origin of the world, the creation of man,
and the relativity of values. But one might give up such dreams as hopelessly
difficult if one tried to interpret them from a personal level. They
undoubtedly contain “collective images,” and they are in a way analogous to the
doctrines taught to young people in primitive tribes when they are about to be
initiated as men. At such times they learn about what God, or the gods, or the
“founding” animals have done, how the world and man were created, how the end
of the world will come and the meaning of death. Is there any occasion when we,
in Christian civilization, hand out similar instructions? There is: in
adolescence. But many people begin to think again of things like this in old
age, at the approach of death.

The little girl, as it happened, was in both these situations. She was
approaching puberty and, at the same time, the end of her life. Little or
nothing in the symbolism of her dreams points to the beginning of a normal
adult life, but there are many allusions to destruction and restoration. When I
first read her dreams, indeed, I had the uncanny feeling that they suggested
impending disaster. The reason I felt like that was the peculiar nature of the
compensation that I deduced from the symbolism. It was the opposite of what one
would expect to find in the consciousness of a girl of that age.

These dreams open up a new and rather terrifying aspect of life and death. One
would expect to find such images in an aging person who looks back upon life,
rather than to be given them by a child who would normally be looking forward.
Their atmosphere recalls the old Roman saying, “Life is a short dream,” rather
than the joy and exuberance of its springtime. For this child’s life was like a
ver sacrum vovendum (the vow of a vernal sacrifice), as the Roman poet puts it.
Experience shows that the unknown approach of death casts an adumbratio (an
anticipatory shadow) over the life and dreams of the victim. Even the altar in
Christian churches represents, on the one hand, a tomb and, on the other, a
place of resurrection—the transformation of death into eternal life.

Such are the ideas that the dreams brought home to the child. They were a
preparation for death, expressed through short stories, like the tales told at
primitive initiations or the Koans of Zen Buddhism. This message is unlike the
orthodox Christian doctrine and more like ancient primitive thought. It seems
to have originated outside historical tradition in the long-forgotten psychic
sources that, since prehistoric times, have nourished philosophical and
religious speculations about life and death.

It was as if future events were casting their shadow back by arousing in the
child certain thought forms that, though normally dormant, describe or
accompany the approach of a fatal issue. Although the specific shape in which
they express themselves is more or less personal, their general pattern is
collective. They are found everywhere and at all times, just as animal
instincts vary a good deal in the different species and yet serve the same
general purposes. We do not assume that each new-born animal creates its own
instincts as an individual acquisition, and we must not suppose that human
individuals invent their specific human ways with every new birth. Like the
instincts, the collective thought patterns of the human mind are innate and
inherited. They function, when the occasion arises, in more or less the same
way in all of us.

Emotional manifestations, to which such thought patterns belong, are
recognizably the same all over the earth. We can identify them even in animals,
and the animals themselves understand one another in this respect, even though
they may belong to different species. And what about insects, with their
complicated symbiotic functions? Most of them do not even know their parents
and have nobody to teach them. Why should one assume, then, that man is the
only living being deprived of specific instincts, or that his psyche is devoid
of all traces of its evolution?

Naturally, if you identify the psyche with consciousness, you can easily fall
into the erroneous idea that man comes into the world with a psyche that is
empty, and that in later years it contains nothing more than what it has
learned by individual experience. But the psyche is more than consciousness.
Animals have little consciousness, but many impulses and reactions that denote
the existence of a psyche; and primitives do a lot of things whose meaning is
unknown to them.

You may ask many civilized people in vain for the real meaning of the Christmas
tree or of the Easter egg. The fact is, they do things without knowing why they
do them. I am inclined to the view that things were generally done first and
that it was only a long time afterward that somebody asked why they were done.
The medical psychologist is constantly confronted with otherwise intelligent
patients who behave in a peculiar and unpredictable way and who have no inkling
of what they say or do. They are suddenly caught by unreasonable moods for
which they themselves cannot account.

Superficially, such reactions and impulses seem to be of an intimately personal
nature, and so we dismiss them as idiosyncratic behavior. In fact, they are
based upon a preformed and ever-ready instinctive system that is characteristic
of man. Thought forms, universally understandable gestures, and many attitudes
follow a pattern that was established long before man developed a reflective
consciousness.

It is even conceivable that the early origins of man’s capacity to reflect come
from the painful consequences of violent emotional clashes. Let me take, purely
as an illustration of this point, the bushman who, in a moment of anger and
disappointment at his failure to catch any fish, strangles his much beloved
only son, and is then seized with immense regret as he holds the little dead
body in his arms. Such a man might remember this moment of pain for ever.

We cannot know whether this kind of experience was actually the initial cause
of the development of human consciousness. But there is no doubt that the shock
of a similar emotional experience is often needed to make people wake up and
pay attention to what they are doing. There is the famous case of a
13th-century Spanish hidalgo, Raimon Lull, who finally (after a long chase)
succeeded in meeting the lady he admired at a secret rendezvous. She silently
opened her dress and showed him her breast, rotten with cancer. The shock
changed Lull’s life; he eventually became an eminent theologian and one of the
Church’s greatest missionaries. In the case of such a sudden change one can
often prove that an archetype has been at work for a long time in the
unconscious, skilfully arranging circumstances that will lead to the crisis.

Such experiences seem to show that archetypal forms are not just static
patterns. They are dynamic factors that manifest themselves in impulses, just
as spontaneously as the instincts. Certain dreams, visions, or thoughts can
suddenly appear; and however carefully one investigates, one cannot find out
what causes them. This does not mean that they have no cause; they certainly
have. But it is so remote or obscure that one cannot see what it is. In such a
case, one must wait either until the dream and its meaning are sufficiently
understood, or until some external event occurs that will explain the dream.

At the moment of the dream, this event may still lie in the future. But just as
our conscious thoughts often occupy themselves with the future and its
possibilities, so do the unconscious and its dreams. There has long been a
general belief that the chief function of dreams is prognostication of the
future. In antiquity, and as late as the Middle Ages, dreams played their part
in medical prognosis. I can confirm by a modern dream the element of prognosis
(or precognition) that can be found in an old dream quoted by Artemidorus of
Daldis, in the second century A.D.: A man dreamed that he saw his father die in
the flames of a house on fire. Not long afterward, he himself died in a
phlegmone (fire, or high fever), which I presume was pneumonia.

It so happened that a colleague of mine was once suffering from a deadly
gangrenous fever—in fact, a phlegmone. A former patient of his, who had no
knowledge of the nature of his doctor’s illness, dreamed that the doctor died
in a great fire. At that time the doctor had just entered a hospital and the
disease was only beginning. The dreamer knew nothing but the bare fact that his
doctor was ill and in a hospital. Three weeks later, the doctor died.

As this example shows, dreams may have an anticipatory or prognostic aspect,
and anybody trying to interpret them must take this into consideration,
especially where an obviously meaningful dream does not provide a context
sufficient to explain it. Such a dream often comes right out of the blue, and
one wonders what could have prompted it. Of course, if one knew its ulterior
message, its cause would be clear. For it is only our consciousness that does
not yet know; the unconscious seems already informed, and to have come to a
conclusion that is expressed in the dream. In fact, the unconscious seems to be
able to examine and to draw conclusions from facts, much as consciousness does.
It can even use certain facts, and anticipate their possible results, just
because we are not conscious of them.



In a cartoon by James Thurber, a henpecked husband sees his home and his wife
as the same being.

But as far as one can make out from dreams, the unconscious makes its
deliberations instinctively. The distinction is important. Logical analysis is
the prerogative of consciousness; we select with reason and knowledge. The
unconscious, however, seems to be guided chiefly by instinctive trends,
represented by corresponding thought forms—that is, by the archetypes. A doctor
who is asked to describe the course of an illness will use such rational
concepts as “infection” or “fever.” The dream is more poetic. It presents the
diseased body as a man’s earthly house, and the fever as the fire that is
destroying it.

As the above dream shows, the archetypal mind has handled the situation in the
same way as it did in the time of Artemidorus. Something that is of a more or
less unknown nature has been intuitively grasped by the unconscious and
submitted to an archetypal treatment. This suggests that, instead of the
process of reasoning that conscious thought would have applied, the archetypal
mind has stepped in and taken over the task of prognostication. The archetypes
thus have their own initiative and their own specific energy. These powers
enable them both to produce a meaningful interpretation (in their own symbolic
style) and to interfere in a given situation with their own impulses and their
own thought formations. In this respect, they function like complexes; they
come and go very much as they please, and often they obstruct or modify our
conscious intentions in an embarrassing way.

One can perceive the specific energy of archetypes when we experience the
peculiar fascination that accompanies them. They seem to hold a special spell.
Such a peculiar quality is also characteristic of the personal complexes; and
just as personal complexes have their individual history, so do social
complexes of an archetypal character. But while personal complexes never
produce more than a personal bias, archetypes create myths, religions, and
philosophies that influence and characterize whole nations and epochs of
history. We regard the personal complexes as compensations for one-sided or
faulty attitudes of consciousness; in the same way, myths of a religious nature
can be interpreted as a sort of mental therapy for the sufferings and anxieties
of mankind in general—hunger, war, disease, old age, death.

The universal hero myth, for example, always refers to a powerful man or
god-man who vanquishes evil in the form of dragons, serpents, monsters, demons,
and so on, and who liberates his people from destruction and death. The
narration or ritual repetition of sacred texts and ceremonies, and the worship
of such a figure with dances, music, hymns, prayers, and sacrifices, grip the
audience with numinous emotions (as if with magic spells) and exalt the
individual to an identification with the hero.

If we try to see such a situation with the eyes of the believer, we can perhaps
understand how the ordinary man can be liberated from his personal impotence
and misery and endowed (at least temporarily) with an almost superhuman
quality. Often enough such a conviction will sustain him for a long time and
give a certain style to his life. It may even set the tone of a whole society.
A remarkable instance of this can be found in the Eleusinian mysteries, which
were finally suppressed in the beginning of the seventh century of the
Christian era. They expressed, together with the Delphic oracle, the essence
and spirit of ancient Greece. On a much greater scale, the Christian era itself
owes its name and significance to the antique mystery of the god-man, which has
its roots in the archetypal Osiris-Horus myth of ancient Egypt.

It is commonly assumed that on some given occasion in prehistoric times, the
basic mythological ideas were “invented” by a clever old philosopher or
prophet, and ever afterward “believed” by a credulous and uncritical people. It
is said that stories told by a power-seeking priesthood are not “true,” but
merely “wishful thinking.” But the very word “invent” is derived from the Latin
invenire, and means to “find” and hence to find something by “seeking” it. In
the latter case the word itself hints at some foreknowledge of what you are
going to find.

Let me go back to the strange ideas contained in the dreams of the little girl.
It seems unlikely that she sought them out, since she was surprised to find
them. They occurred to her rather as peculiar and unexpected stories, which
seemed noteworthy enough to be given to her father as a Christmas present. In
doing so, however, she lifted them up into the sphere of our still living
Christian mystery—the birth of our Lord, mixed with the secret of the evergreen
tree that carries the new-born Light. (This is the reference of the fifth
dream.)

Although there is ample historical evidence for the symbolic relation between
Christ and the tree symbol, the little girl’s parents would have been gravely
embarrassed had they been asked to explain exactly what they meant by
decorating a tree with burning candles to celebrate the nativity of Christ.
“Oh, it’s just a Christmas custom!” they would have said. A serious answer
would require a far-reaching dissertation about the antique symbolism of the
dying god, and its relation to the cult of the Great Mother and her symbol, the
tree—to mention only one aspect of this complicated problem.

The further we delve into the origins of a “collective image” (or, to express
it in ecclesiastical language, of a dogma), the more we uncover a seemingly
unending web of archetypal patterns that, before modern times, were never the
object of conscious reflection. Thus, paradoxically enough, we know more about
mythological symbolism than did any generation before our own. The fact is that
in former times men did not reflect upon their symbols; they lived them and
were unconsciously animated by their meaning.

I will illustrate this by an experience I once had with the primitives of Mount
Elgon in Africa. Every morning at dawn, they leave their huts and breathe or
spit into their hands, which they then stretch out to the first rays of the
sun, as if they were offering either their breath or their spittle to the
rising god—to mungu. (This Swahili word, which they used in explaining the
ritual act, is derived from a Polynesian root equivalent to mana or mulungu.
These and similar terms designate a “power” of extraordinary efficiency and
pervasiveness, which we should call divine. Thus the word mungu is their
equivalent for Allah or God.) When I asked them what they meant by this act, or
why they did it, they were completely baffled. They could only say: “We have
always done it. It has always been done when the sun rises.” They laughed at
the obvious conclusion that the sun is mungu. The sun indeed is not mungu when
it is above horizon; mungu is the actual moment of the sunrise.

What they were doing was obvious to me, but not to them; they just did it,
never reflecting on what they did. They were consequently unable to explain
themselves. I concluded that they were offering their souls to mungu, because
the breath (of life) and the spittle mean “soul-substance.” To breathe or spit
upon something conveys a “magical” effect, as, for instance, when Christ used
spittle to cure the blind, or where a son inhales his dying father’s last
breath in order to take over the father’s soul. It is most unlikely that these
Africans ever, even in the remote past, knew any more about the meaning of
their ceremony. In fact, their ancestors probably knew even less, because they
were more profoundly unconscious of their motives and thought less about their
doings.

Goethe’s Faust aptly says: “Im Anfang war die Tat [In the beginning was the
deed].” “Deeds” were never invented, they were done; thoughts, on the other
hand, are a relatively late discovery of man. First he was moved to deeds by
unconscious factors; it was only a long time afterward that he began to reflect
upon the causes that had moved him; and it took him a very long time indeed to
arrive at the preposterous idea that he must have moved himself—his mind being
unable to identify any other motivating force than his own.

We should laugh at the idea of a plant or an animal inventing itself, yet there
are many people who believe that the psyche or mind invented itself and thus
was the creator of its own existence. As a matter of fact, the mind has grown
to its present state of consciousness as an acorn grows into an oak or as
saurians developed into mammals. As it has for so long been developing, so it
still develops, and thus we are moved by forces from within as well as by
stimuli from without.

These inner motives spring from a deep source that is not made by consciousness
and is not under its control. In the mythology of earlier times, these forces
were called mana, or spirits, demons, and gods. They are as active today as
they ever were. If they conform to our wishes, we call them happy hunches or
impulses and pat ourselves on the back for being smart fellows. If they go
against us, then we say that it is just bad luck, or that certain people are
against us, or that the cause of our misfortunes must be pathological. The one
thing we refuse to admit is that we are dependent upon “powers” that are beyond
our control.

It is true, however, that in recent times civilized man has acquired a certain
amount of will power, which he can apply where he pleases. He has learned to do
his work efficiently without having recourse to chanting and drumming to
hypnotize him into the state of doing. He can even dispense with a daily prayer
for divine aid. He can carry out what he proposes to do, and he can apparently
translate his ideas into action without a hitch, whereas the primitive seems to
be hampered at each step by fears, superstitions, and other unseen obstacles to
action. The motto “Where there’s a will, there’s a way” is the superstition of
modern man.

Yet in order to sustain his creed, contemporary man pays the price in a
remarkable lack of introspection. He is blind to the fact that, with all his
rationality and efficiency, he is possessed by “powers” that are beyond his
control. His gods and demons have not disappeared at all; they have merely got
new names. They keep him on the run with restlessness, vague apprehensions,
psychological complications, an insatiable need for pills, alcohol, tobacco,
food—and, above all, a large array of neuroses.

