# PART 2 - Symbols of transcendence
[Metadata]: # {02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 2
Symbols of transcendence
# Symbols of transcendence
The symbols that influence many vary in their purpose. Some men need to be
aroused, and experience their initiation in the violence of a Dionysiac
“thunder rite.” Others need to be subdued, and they are brought to submission
in the ordered design of temple precinct or sacred cave, suggestive of the
Apollonian religion of later Greece. A full initiation embraces both themes, as
we can see when we look either at the material drawn from ancient texts or at
living subjects. But it is quite certain that the fundamental goal of
initiation lies in taming the original Trickster-like wildness of the juvenile
nature. It therefore has a civilizing or spiritualizing purpose, in spite of
the violence of the rites that are required to set this process in motion.

There is, however, another kind of symbolism, belonging to the earliest known
sacred traditions, that is also connected with the periods of transition in a
person’s life. But these symbols do not seek to integrate the initiate with any
religious doctrine or secular group-consciousness. On the contrary, they point
to man’s need for liberation from any state of being that is too immature, too
fixed or final. In other words, they concern man’s release from—or
transcendence of—any confining pattern of existence, as he moves toward a
superior or more mature stage in his development.

A child, as I have said, possesses a sense of completeness, but only before the
initial emergence of his ego-consciousness. In the case of an adult, a sense of
completeness is achieved through a union of the consciousness with the
unconscious contents of the mind. Out of this union arises what Jung called
“the transcendent function of the psyche,” by which a man can achieve his
highest goal: the full realization of the potential of his individual Self.

Thus, what we call “symbols of transcendence” are the symbols that represent
man’s striving to attain this goal. They provide the means by which the
contents of the unconscious can enter the conscious mind, and they also are
themselves an active expression of those contents.

These symbols are manifold in form. Whether we encounter them in history or in
the dreams of contemporary men and women who are at a critical stage in their
lives, we can see their importance. At the most archaic level of this symbolism
we again meet the Trickster theme. But this time he no longer appears as a
lawless would-be hero. He has become the shaman—the medicine man—whose magical
practices and flights of intuition stamp him as a primitive master of
initiation. His power resides in his supposed ability to leave his body and fly
about the universe as a bird.

In this case the bird is the most fitting symbol of transcendence. It
represents the peculiar nature of intuition working through a “medium,” that
is, an individual who is capable of obtaining knowledge of distant events—or
facts of which he consciously knows nothing—by going into a trancelike state.

Evidence of such powers can be found as far back as the paleolithic period of
prehistory, as the American scholar Joseph Campbell has pointed out in
commenting upon one of the famous cave paintings recently discovered in France.
At Lascaux, he writes, “there is a shaman depicted, lying in a trance, wearing
a bird mask with a figure of a bird perched on a staff beside him. The shamans
of Siberia wear such bird costumes to this day, and many are believed to have
been conceived by their mothers from the descent of a bird.… The shaman, then,
is not only a familiar denizen, but even the favored scion of those realms of
power that are invisible to our normal waking consciousness, which all may
visit briefly in vision, but through which he roams, a master.”

At the highest level of this type of initiatory activity, far from those
tricks-of-the-trade by which magic so frequently replaces true spiritual
insight, we find the Hindu master yogis. In their trance states they go far
beyond the normal categories of thought.

One of the commonest dream symbols for this type of release through
transcendence is the theme of the lonely journey or pilgrimage, which somehow
seems to be a spiritual pilgrimage on which the initiate becomes acquainted
with the nature of death. But this is not death as a last judgment or other
initiatory trial of strength: it is a journey of release, renunciation, and
atonement, presided over and fostered by some spirit of compassion. This spirit
is more often represented by a “mistress” rather than a “master” of initiation,
a supreme feminine (i.e., anima) figure such as Kwan-Yin in Chinese Buddhism,
Sophia in the Christian-Gnostic doctrine, or the ancient Greek goddess of
wisdom Pallas Athena.





In myths or dreams, a lonely journey often symbolizes the liberation of
transcendence. Left, a 15th-century painting of the Italian poet Dante holding
his book (the Divine Comedy) which relates his dream of a journey to hell
(lower left of picture), purgatory, and heaven. Lower left, an engraving of the
journey made by the pilgrim in the British author John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s
Progress (1678). (Note that the journey is a circular movement toward an inner
center.) This book, too, is told as a dream; below, the pilgrim dreaming.



Many people may want some change from a containing pattern of life; but the
freedom gained by travel (urged by the “run away to sea” poster), is no
substitute for a true inner liberation.

Not only the flight of birds or the journey into the wilderness represents this
symbolism, but any strong movement exemplifying release. In the first part of
life, when one is still attached to the original family and social group, this
may be experienced as that moment of initiation at which one must learn to take
the decisive steps into life alone. It is the moment that T. S. Eliot describes
in “The Waste Land,” when one faces

The awful daring of a moment’s surrender, which an age of prudence can never
retract.



At a later period of life one may not need to break all ties with the symbols
of meaningful containment. But nonetheless one can be filled with that spirit
of divine discontent which forces all free men to face some new discovery or to
live their lives in a new way. This change may become especially important in
the period between middle age and old age, which is the time in life when so
many people are considering what to do in their retirement—whether to work or
to play, whether to stay at home or to travel.

If their lives have been adventurous, insecure, or full of change, they may
long for a settled life and the consolations of religious certainty. But if
they have lived chiefly within the social pattern in which they were born, they
may desperately need a liberating change. This need may be filled, temporarily,
by a trip around the world, or by nothing more than a move to a smaller house.
But none of these external changes will serve unless there has been some inner
transcendence of old values in creating, not just inventing, a new pattern of
life.

A case of this latter sort is a woman who had lived in a style of life that
she, her family, and friends had long enjoyed because it was so well rooted,
culturally nourishing, and secure from transitory fashions. She had this dream:

I found some strange pieces of wood, not carved but with natural beautiful
shapes. Someone said: “Neanderthal man brought them.” Then I saw at a distance
these Neanderthal men looking like a dark mass, but I could not see one of them
distinctly. I thought I would take back from this place a piece of their wood.

Then I went on, as if on a journey by myself, and I looked down into an
enormous abyss like an extinct volcano. There was water in part of it and there
I expected to see more Neanderthal men. But instead I saw black water pigs that
had come out of the water and were running in and out of the black volcanic
rocks.

In contrast to this woman’s family attachments and her highly cultivated style
of life, the dream takes her to a prehistoric period more primitive than
anything we can visualize. She can find no social group among these ancient
men: She sees them as an embodiment of a truly unconscious, collective “dark
mass” in the distance. Yet they are alive, and she may carry away a piece of
their wood. The dream emphasizes that the wood is natural, not carved;
therefore it comes from a primordial, not a culturally conditioned lever of the
unconscious. The piece of wood, remarkable for its great age, links this
woman’s contemporary experience to the distant origins of human life.

We know from many examples that an ancient tree or plant represents
symbolically the growth and development of psychic life (as distinct from
instinctual life, commonly symbolized by animals). Hence, in this piece of
wood, this woman acquired a symbol of her link with the deepest layers of the
collective unconscious.

Next she speaks of continuing her journey alone. This theme, as I have already
pointed out, symbolizes the need for release as an initiatory experience. So
here we have another symbol of transcendence.

Then, in the dream, she sees a huge crater of an extinct volcano, which has
been the channel for a violent eruption of fire from the deepest layers of the
earth. We can surmise that this refers to a significant memory trace, which
leads back to a traumatic experience. This she associated to a personal
experience early in her life when she had felt the destructive, yet creative,
force of her passions to such an extent that she feared she would go out of her
mind. She had found, in late adolescence, a quite unexpected need to break away
from her family’s excessively conventional social pattern. She had achieved
this break without serious distress, and had been able to return eventually to
make her peace with the family. But there lingered a profound wish to make a
still greater differentiation from her family background and to find freedom
from her own pattern of existence.

This dream recalls another. It came from a young man who had a totally
different problem but who seemed to need a similar type of insight. He too had
the urge to achieve differentiation. He dreamed of a volcano, and from its
crater he saw two birds taking flight as if in fear that the volcano was about
to erupt. This was in a strange, lonely place with a body of water between him
and the volcano. In this case, the dream represented an individual initiation
journey.

It is similar to cases reported among the simple food-gathering tribes, which
are the least family-conscious groups we know. In these societies the young
initiate must take a lonely journey to a sacred place (in Indian cultures of
the North Pacific coast, it may actually be a crater lake) where, in a
visionary or trancelike state, he encounters his “guardian spirit” in the form
of an animal, a bird, or natural object. He closely identifies himself with
this “bush soul” and thereby becomes a man. Without such an experience he is
regarded, as an Achumaui medicine man put it, as “an ordinary Indian, nobody.”

The young man’s dream came at the beginning of his life, and it pointed to his
future independence and identity as a man. The woman I have described was
approaching the end of her life, and she experienced a similar journey and
seemed to need to acquire a similar independence. She could live out the
remainder of her days in harmony with an eternal human law that, by its
antiquity, transcended the known symbols of culture.

But such independence does not end in a state of yogi-like detachment that
would mean a renunciation of the world with all its impurities. In the
otherwise dead and blasted landscape of her dream the woman saw signs of animal
life. These are “water pigs,” unknown to her as a species. They therefore would
carry the meaning of a special type of animal, one that can live in two
environments, in water or on the earth.

This is the universal quality of the animal as a symbol of transcendence. These
creatures, figuratively coming from the depths of the ancient Earth Mother, are
symbolic denizens of the collective unconscious. They bring into the field of
consciousness a special chthonic (underworld) message that is somewhat
different from the spiritual aspirations symbolized by the birds in the young
man’s dream.

Other transcendent symbols of the depths are rodents, lizards, snakes, and
sometimes fish. These are intermediate creatures that combine underwater
activity and the bird-flight with an intermediate terrestrial life. The wild
duck or the swan are cases in point. Perhaps the commonest dream symbol of
transcendence is the snake, as represented by the therapeutic symbol of the
Roman god of medicine Aesculapius, which has survived to modern times as a sign
of the medical profession. This was originally a non-poisonous tree snake; as
we see it, coiled around the staff of the healing god, it seems to embody a
kind of mediation between earth and heaven.





The Greek god Hermes, who was called “psycho-pomp” (soul-guide), had the
function of guiding the dead to the underworld, above, a stone herm, which was
placed at crossroads (symbolizing the god’s role as a mediator between two
worlds). On the side of the herm is a snake twined around a staff; this symbol
(the caduceus) was carried over to the Roman god Mercury (left, a 16th-century
Italian bronze), who also acquired wings, recalling the bird as a symbol of
spiritual transcendence.

A still more important and widespread symbol of chthonic transcendence is the
motif of the two entwined serpents. These are the famous Naga serpents of
ancient India; and we also find them in Greece as the entwined serpents on the
end of the staff belonging to the god Hermes. An early Grecian herm is a stone
pillar with a bust of the god above. On one side are the entwined serpents and
on the other an erect phallus. As the serpents are represented in the act of
sexual union and the erect phallus is unequivocally sexual, we can draw certain
conclusions about the function of the herm as a symbol of fertility.

But we are mistaken if we think this only refers to biological fertility.
Hermes is Trickster in a different role as a messenger, a god of the
cross-roads, and finally the leader of souls to and from the underworld. His
phallus therefore penetrates from the known into the unknown world, seeking a
spiritual message of deliverance and healing.

Originally in Egypt Hermes was known as the ibis-headed god Thoth, and
therefore was conceived as the bird form of the transcendent principle. Again,
in the Olympian period of Greek mythology, Hermes recovered attributes of the
bird life to add to his chthonic nature as serpent. His staff acquired wings
above the serpents, becoming the caduceus or winged staff of Mercury, and the
god himself became the “flying man” with his winged hat and sandals. Here we
see his full power of transcendence, whereby the lower transcendence from
underworld snake-consciousness, passing through the medium of earthly reality,
finally attains transcendence to superhuman or transpersonal reality in its
winged flight.

Such a composite symbol is found in other representations as the winged horse
or winged dragon or other creatures that abound in the artistic expressions of
alchemy, so fully illustrated in Dr. Jung’s classic work on this subject. We
follow the innumerable vicissitudes of these symbols in our work with patients.
They show what our therapy can expect to achieve when it liberates the deeper
psychic contents so that they can become part of our conscious equipment for
understanding life more effectively.

It is not easy for modern man to grasp the significance of the symbols that
come down to us from the past or that appear in our dreams. Nor is it easy to
see how the ancient conflict between symbols of containment and liberation
relates to our own predicament. Yet it becomes easier when we realize it is
only the specific forms of these archaic patterns that change, not their
psychic meaning.

We have been talking of wild birds as symbols of release or liberation. But
today we could as well speak of jet planes and space rockets, for they are the
physical embodiment of the same transcendent principle, freeing us at least
temporarily from gravity. In the same way the ancient symbols of containment,
which once gave stability and protection, now appear in modern man’s search for
economic security and social welfare.

Any of us can see, of course, that there is a conflict in our lives between
adventure and discipline, or evil and virtue, or freedom and security. But
these are only phrases we use to describe an ambivalence that troubles us, and
to which we never seem able to find an answer.

There is an answer. There is a meeting point between containment and
liberation, and we can find it in the rites of initiation that I have been
discussing. They can make it possible for individuals, or whole groups of
people, to unite the opposing forces within themselves and achieve an
equilibrium in their lives.

But the rites do not offer this opportunity invariably, or automatically. They
relate to particular phases in the life of an individual, or of a group, and
unless they are properly understood and translated into a new way of life, the
moment can pass. Initiation is, essentially, a process that begins with a rite
of submission, followed by a period of containment, and then by a further rite
of liberation. In this way every individual can reconcile the conflicting
elements of his personality: He can strike a balance that makes him truly
human, and truly the master of himself.

