# PART 1 - Healing the split
[Metadata]: # {01.09}
[Descriptor]: # {01.09}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
Healing the split
# Healing the split
Our intellect has created a new world that dominates nature, and has populated
it with monstrous machines. The latter are so indubitably useful that we cannot
see even a possibility of getting rid of them or our subservience to them. Man
is bound to follow the adventurous promptings of his scientific and inventive
mind and to admire himself for his splendid achievements. At the same time, his
genius shows the uncanny tendency to invent things that become more and more
dangerous, because they represent better and better means for wholesale
suicide.

In view of the rapidly increasing avalanche of world population, man has
already begun to seek ways and means of keeping the rising flood at bay. But
nature may anticipate all our attempts by turning against man his own creative
mind. The H-bomb, for instance, would put an effective stop to overpopulation.
In spite of our proud domination of nature, we are still her victims, for we
have not even learned to control our own nature. Slowly but, it appears,
inevitably, we are courting disaster.

There are no longer any gods whom we can invoke to help us. The great religions
of the world suffer from increasing anemia, because the helpful numina have
fled from the woods, rivers, and mountains, and from animals, and the god-men
have disappeared underground into the unconscious. There we fool ourselves that
they lead an ignominious existence among the relics of our past. Our present
lives are dominated by the goddess Reason, who is our greatest and most tragic
illusion. By the aid of reason, so we assure ourselves, we have “conquered
nature.”

But this is a mere slogan, for the so-called conquest of nature overwhelms us
with the natural fact of overpopulation and adds to our troubles by our
psychological incapacity to make the necessary political arrangements. It
remains quite natural for men to quarrel and to struggle for superiority over
one another. How then have we “conquered nature”?

As any change must begin somewhere, it is the single individual who will
experience it and carry it through. The change must indeed begin with an
individual; it might be any one of us. Nobody can afford to look round and to
wait for somebody else to do what he is loath to do himself. But since nobody
seems to know what to do, it might be worth while for each of us to ask himself
whether by any chance his or her unconscious may know something that will help
us. Certainly the conscious mind seems unable to do anything useful in this
respect. Man today is painfully aware of the fact that neither his great
religions nor his various philosophies seem to provide him with those powerful
animating ideas that would give him the security he needs in face of the
present condition of the world.

I know what the Buddhists would say: Things would go right if people would only
follow the “noble eightfold path” of the Dharma (doctrine, law) and had true
insight into the Self. The Christian tells us that if only people had faith in
God, we should have a better world. The rationalist insists that if people were
intelligent and reasonable, all our problems would be manageable. The trouble
is that none of them manages to solve these problems himself.

Christians often ask why God does not speak to them, as he is believed to have
done in former days. When I hear such questions, it always makes me think of
the rabbi who was asked how it could be that God often showed himself to people
in the olden days while nowadays nobody ever sees him. The rabbi replied:
“Nowadays there is no longer anybody who can bow low enough.”

This answer hits the nail on the head. We are so captivated by and entangled in
our subjective consciousness that we have forgotten the age-old fact that God
speaks chiefly through dreams and visions. The Buddhist discards the world of
unconscious fantasies as useless illusions; the Christian puts his Church and
his Bible between himself and his unconscious; and the rational intellectual
does not yet know that his consciousness is not his total psyche. This
ignorance persists today in spite of the fact that for more than 70 years the
unconscious has been a basic scientific concept that is indispensable to any
serious psychological investigation.

We can no longer afford to be so God-Almighty-like as to set ourselves up as
judges of the merits or demerits of natural phenomena. We do not base our
botany upon the old-fashioned division into useful and useless plants, or our
zoology upon the naïve distinction between harmless and dangerous animals. But
we still complacently assume that consciousness is sense and the unconscious is
nonsense. In science such an assumption would be laughed out of court. Do
microbes, for instance, make sense or nonsense?

Whatever the unconscious may be, it is a natural phenomenon producing symbols
that prove to be meaningful. We cannot expect someone who has never looked
through a microscope to be an authority on microbes; in the same way, no one
who has not made a serious study of natural symbols can be considered a
competent judge in this matter. But the general undervaluation of the human
soul is so great that neither the great religions nor the philosophies nor
scientific rationalism have been willing to look at it twice.

In spite of the fact that the Catholic Church admits the occurrence of somnia a
Deo missa (dreams sent by God), most of its thinkers make no serious attempt to
understand dreams. I doubt whether there is a Protestant treatise or doctrine
that would stoop so low as to admit the possibility that the vox Dei might be
perceived in a dream. But if a theologian really believes in God, by what
authority does he suggest that God is unable to speak through dreams?

I have spent more than half a century in investigating natural symbols, and I
have come to the conclusion that dreams and their symbols are not stupid and
meaningless. On the contrary, dreams provide the most interesting information
for those who take the trouble to understand their symbols. The results, it is
true, have little to do with such worldly concerns as buying and selling. But
the meaning of life is not exhaustively explained by one’s business life, nor
is the deep desire of the human heart answered by a bank account.

In a period of human history when all available energy is spent in the
investigation of nature, very little attention is paid to the essence of man,
which is his psyche, although many researches are made into its conscious
functions. But the really complex and unfamiliar part of the mind, from which
symbols are produced, is still virtually unexplored. It seems almost incredible
that though we receive signals from it every night, deciphering these
communications seems too tedious for any but a very few people to be bothered
with it. Man’s greatest instrument, his psyche, is little thought of, and it is
often directly mistrusted and despised. “It’s only psychological” too often
means: It is nothing.

Where, exactly, does this immense prejudice come from? We have obviously been
so busy with the question of what we think that we entirely forget to ask what
the unconscious psyche thinks about us. The ideas of Sigmund Freud confirmed
for most people the existing contempt for the psyche. Before him it had been
merely overlooked and neglected; it has now become a dump for moral refuse.

This modern standpoint is surely one-sided and unjust. It does not even accord
with the known facts. Our actual knowledge of the unconscious shows that it is
a natural phenomenon and that, like Nature herself, it is at least neutral. It
contains all aspects of human nature—light and dark, beautiful and ugly, good
and evil, profound and silly. The study of individual, as well as of
collective, symbolism is an enormous task, and one that has not yet been
mastered. But a beginning has been made at last. The early results are
encouraging, and they seem to indicate an answer to many so far unanswered
questions of present-day mankind.

