# PART 4 - The secret soul of things
[Metadata]: # {04.04}
[Descriptor]: # {04.04}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
The secret soul of things
# The secret soul of things
As we have seen, the starting point of “the concrete” was Duchamp’s famous—or
notorious—bottle rack. The bottle rack was not intended to be artistic in
itself. Duchamp called himself an “anti-artist.” But it brought to light an
element that was to mean a great deal to artists for a long time to come. The
name they gave to it was objet trouvé or “ready-made.”

The Spanish painter Joan Miró, for instance, goes to the beach every dawn “to
collect things washed up by the tide. Things lying there, waiting for someone
to discover their personality.” He keeps his finds in his studio. Now and then
he assembles some of them and the most curious compositions result: “The artist
is often surprised himself at the shapes of his own creation.”

As far back as 1912, the Spanish-born artist Pablo Picasso and the French
artist Georges Braque made what they called “collages” from scraps of rubbish.
Max Ernst cut clippings from the illustrated papers of the so-called age of big
business, assembled them as the fancy took him, and so transformed the stuffy
solidity of the bourgeois age into a demonic, dreamlike unreality. The German
painter Kurt Schwitters worked with the contents of his ash can: He used nails,
brown paper, ragged scraps of newspaper, railway tickets, and remnants of
cloth. He succeeded in assembling this rubbish with such seriousness and
freshness that surprising effects of strange beauty came about. In Schwitter’s
obsession with things, however, this manner of composition occasionally became
merely absurd. He made a construction of rubbish that he called “a cathedral
built for things.” Schwitters worked on it for 10 years, and three stories of
his own house had to be demolished to give him the space he needed.

Schwitters’s work, and the magical exaltation of the object, give the first
hint of the place of modern art in the history of the human mind, and of its
symbolic significance. They reveal the tradition that was being unconsciously
perpetuated. It is the tradition of the hermetic Christian brotherhoods of the
Middle Ages, and of the alchemists, who conferred even on matter, the stuff of
the earth, the dignity of their religious contemplation.

Schwitters’s exaltation of the grossest material to the rank of art, to a
“cathedral” (in which the rubbish would leave no room for a human being)
faithfully followed the old alchemical tenet according to which the sought-for
precious object is to be found in filth. Kandinsky expressed the same ideas
when he wrote: “Everything that is dead quivers. Not only the things of poetry,
stars, moon, wood, flowers, but even a white trouser button glittering out of a
puddle in the street.… Everything has a secret soul, which is silent more often
than it speaks.”

What the artists, like the alchemists, probably did not realize was the
psychological fact that they were projecting part of their psyche into matter
or inanimate objects. Hence the “mysterious animation” that entered into such
things, and the great value attached even to rubbish. They projected their own
darkness, their earthly shadow, a psychic content that they and their time had
lost and abandoned.

Unlike the alchemists, however, men like Schwitters were not contained in and
protected by the Christian order. In one sense, Schwitters’s work is opposed to
it: A kind of monomania binds him to matter, while Christianity seeks to
vanquish matter. And yet, paradoxically, it is Schwitters’s monomania that robs
the material in his creations of its inherent significance as concrete reality.
In his pictures, matter is transformed into an “abstract” composition.
Therefore it begins to discard its substantiality, and to dissolve. In that
very process, these pictures become a symbolic expression of our time, which
has seen the concept of the “absolute” concreteness of matter undermined by
modern atomic physics.

Painters began to think about the “magic object” and the “secret soul” of
things. The Italian painter Carlo Carrà wrote: “It is common things that reveal
those forms of simplicity through which we can realize that higher, more
significant condition of being where the whole splendor of art resides.” Paul
Klee said: “The object expands beyond the bounds of its appearance by our
knowledge that the thing is more than its exterior presents to our eyes.” And
Jean Bazaine wrote: “And object awakens our love just because it seems to be
the bearer of powers that are greater than itself.”

Sayings of this kind recall the old alchemical concept of a “spirit in matter,”
believed to be the spirit in and behind inanimate objects like metal or stone.
Psychologically interpreted, this spirit is the unconscious. It always
manifests itself when conscious or rational knowledge has reached its limits
and mystery sets in, for man tends to fill the inexplicable and mysterious with
the contents of his unconscious. He projects them, as it were, into a dark,
empty vessel.

The feeling that the object was “more than met the eye,” which was shared by
many artists, found a most remarkable expression in the work of the Italian
painter Giorgio de Chirico. He was a mystic by temperament, and a tragic seeker
who never found what he sought. On his self-portrait (1908) he wrote: Et quid
amabo nisi quod aenigma est (“And what am I to love if not the enigma?”).

Chirico was the founder of the so-called pittura metafisica. “Every object,” he
wrote, “has two aspects: The common aspect, which is the one we generally see
and which is seen by everyone, and the ghostly and metaphysical aspect, which
only rare individuals see at moments of clairvoyance and metaphysical
meditation. A work of art must relate something that does not appear in its
visible form.”

Chirico’s works reveal this “ghostly aspect” of things. They are dreamlike
transpositions of reality, which arise as visions from the unconscious. But his
“metaphysical abstraction” is expressed in a panic-stricken rigidity, and the
atmosphere of the pictures is one of nightmare and of fathomless melancholy.
The city squares of Italy, the towers and objects, are set in an over-acute
perspective, as if they were in a vacuum, illuminated by a merciless, cold
light from an unseen source. Antique heads or statues of gods conjure up the
classical past.

In one of the most terrifying of his pictures, he has placed beside the marble
head of a goddess a pair of red rubber gloves, a “magic object” in the modern
sense. A green ball on the ground acts as a symbol, uniting the crass
opposites; without it, there would be more than a hint of psychic
disintegration. This picture was clearly not the result of over-sophisticated
deliberation; it must be taken as a dream picture.

Chirico was deeply influenced by the philosophies of Nietzsche and
Schopenhauer. He wrote: “Schopenhauer and Nietzsche were the first to teach the
deep significance of the senselessness of life, and to show how this
senselessness could be transformed into art.… The dreadful void they discovered
is the very soulless and untroubled beauty of matter.” It may be doubted
whether Chirico succeeded in transposing the “dreadful void” into “untroubled
beauty.” Some of his pictures are extremely disturbing; many are as terrifying
as nightmares. But in his effort to find artistic expression for the void, he
penetrated to the core of the existential dilemma of contemporary man.



An example of “surrealist” art: Les Souliers Rouges, by the French painter René
Magritte (born 1896). Much of the disturbing effect of surrealist painting
comes from its association and juxtaposition of unrelated objects—often absurd,
irrational, and dreamlike.

Nietzsche, whom Chirico quotes as his authority, has given a name to the
“dreadful void” in his saying “God is dead.” Without referring to Nietzsche,
Kandinsky wrote in On the Spiritual in Art: “Heaven is empty. God is dead.” A
phrase of this kind may sound abominable. But it is not new. The idea of the
“death of God” and its immediate consequence, the “metaphysical void,” had
troubled the minds of 19th-century poets, especially in France and Germany. It
was a long development that, in the 20th century, reached the stage of open
discussion and found expression in art. The cleavage between modern art and
Christianity was finally accomplished.

Dr. Jung also came to realize that this strange and mysterious phenomenon of
the death of God is a psychic fact of our time. In 1937 he wrote: “I know—and
here I am expressing what countless other people know—that the present time is
the time of God’s disappearance and death.” For years he had observed the
Christian God-image fading in his patients’ dreams—that is, in the unconscious
of modern men. The loss of that image is the loss of the supreme factor that
gives life a meaning.

It must be pointed out, however, that neither Nietzsche’s assertion that God is
dead, nor Chirico’s “metaphysical void,” nor Jung’s deductions from unconscious
images, have anything final to say about the reality and existence of God or of
a transcendental being or not-being. They are human assertions. In each case
they are based, as Jung has shown in Psychology and Religion, on contents of
the unconscious psyche that have entered consciousness in tangible form as
images, dreams, ideas, or intuitions. The origin of these contents, and the
cause of such a transformation (from a living to a dead God), must remain
unknown, on the frontier of mystery.

Chirico never came to a solution of the problem presented to him by the
unconscious. His failure may be seen most clearly in his representation of the
human figure. Given the present religious situation, it is man himself to whom
should be accorded a new, if impersonal, dignity and responsibility. (Jung
described it as a responsibility to consciousness.) But in Chirico’s work, man
is deprived of his soul; he becomes a manichino, a puppet without a face (and
therefore also without consciousness).

In the various versions of his Great Metaphysician, a faceless figure is
enthroned on a pedestal made of rubbish. The figure is a consciously or
unconsciously ironical representation of the man who strives to discover the
“truth” about metaphysics, and at the same time a symbol of ultimate loneliness
and senselessness. Or perhaps the mani-chini (which also haunt the works of
other contemporary artists) are a premonition of the faceless mass man.

When he was 40, Chirico abandoned his pittura meta-fisica; he turned back to
traditional modes, but his work lost depth. Here is certain proof that there is
no “back to where you came from” for the creative mind whose unconscious has
been involved in the fundamental dilemma of modern existence.

A counterpart to Chirico might be seen in the Russian-born painter Marc
Chagall. His quest in his work is also a “mysterious and lonely poetry” and
“the ghostly aspect of things that only rare individuals may see.” But
Chagall’s rich symbolism is rooted in the piety of Eastern Jewish Hassidism and
in a warm feeling for life. He was faced with neither the problem of the void
nor the death of God. He wrote: “Everything may change in our demoralized world
except the heart, man’s love, and his striving to know the divine; Painting,
like all poetry, has its part in the divine; people feel this today just as
much as they used to.”

The British author Sir Herbert Read once wrote of Chagall that he never quite
crossed the threshold into the unconscious, but “has always kept one foot on
the earth that had nourished him.” This is exactly the “right” relation to the
unconscious. It is all the mose important that, as Read emphasizes, “Chagall
has remained one of the most influential artists of our time.”

With the contrast between Chagall and Chirico, a question arises that is
important for the understanding of symbolism in modern art: How does the
relationship between consciousness and the unconscious take shape in the work
of modern artists? Or, to put it another way, where does man stand?

One answer may be found in the movement called surrealism, of which the French
poet André Breton is regarded as the founder. (Chirico too may be described as
a surrealist.) As a student of medicine, Breton had been introduced to the work
of Freud. Thus dreams came to play an important part in his ideas. “Can dreams
not be used to solve the fundamental problems of life?” he wrote. “I believe
that the apparent antagonism between dream and reality will be resolved in a
kind of absolute reality—in surreality.”

Breton grasped the point admirably. What he sought was a reconciliation of the
opposites, consciousness and the unconscious. But the way he took to reach his
goal could only lead him astray. He began to experiment with Freud’s method of
free association as well as with automatic writing, in which the words and
phrases arising from the unconscious are set down without any conscious
control. Breton called it: “thought’s dictation, independent of any aesthetic
or moral preoccupation.”

But that process simply means that the way is opened to the stream of
unconscious images, and the important or even decisive part to be played by
consciousness is ignored. As Dr. Jung has shown in his chapter, it is
consciousness that holds the key to the values of the unconscious, and that
therefore plays the decisive part. Consciousness alone is competent to
determine the meaning of the images and to recognize their significance for man
here and now, in the concrete reality of the present. Only in an interplay of
consciousness and the unconscious can the unconscious prove its value, and
perhaps even show a way to overcome the melancholy of the void. If the
unconscious, once in action, is left to itself, there is a risk that its
contents will become overpowering or will manifest their negative, destructive
side.

If we look at surrealist pictures (like Salvador Dali’s The Burning Giraffe)
with this in mind, we may feel the wealth of their fantasy and the overwhelming
power of their unconscious imagery, but we realize the horror and the symbolism
of the end of all things that speaks from many of them. The unconscious is pure
nature, and, like nature, pours out its gifts in profusion. But left to itself
and without the human response from consciousness, it can (again like nature)
destroy its own gifts and sooner or later sweep them into annihilation.

The question of the role of consciousness in modern painting also arises in
connection with the use of chance as a means of composing paintings. In Beyond
Painting Max Ernst wrote: “The association of a sewing machine and an umbrella
on a surgical table [he is quoting from the poet Lautréamont] is a familiar
example, which has now become classical, of the phenomenon discovered by the
surrealists, that the association of two (or more) apparently alien elements on
a plane alien to both is the most potent ignition of poetry.”

That is probably as difficult for the layman to comprehend as the comment
Breton made to the same effect: “The man who cannot visualize a horse galloping
on a tomato is an idiot.” (We might recall here the “chance” association of a
marble head and red rubber gloves in Chirico’s picture.) Of course, many of
these associations were intended as jokes and nonsense. But most modern artists
have been concerned with something radically different from jokes.

Chance plays a significant part in the work of the French sculptor Jean (or
Hans) Arp. His woodcuts of leaves and other forms, thrown together at random,
were another expression of the quest for, as he put it, “a secret, primal
meaning slumbering beneath the world of appearances.” He called them Leaves
arranged according to the laws of chance and Squares arranged according to the
laws of chance. In these compositions it is chance that gives depth to the work
of art; it points to an unknown but active principle of order and meaning that
becomes manifest in things as their “secret soul.”

It was above all the desire to “make chance essential” (in Paul Klee’s words)
that underlay the surrealists’ efforts to take the grain of wood, cloud
formations, and so on as a starting point for their visionary painting. Max
Ernst, for instance, went back to Leonardo da Vinci, who wrote an essay on
Botticelli’s remark that if you throw a paint-soaked sponge at a wall, in the
splashes it makes you will see heads, animals, landscapes, and a host of other
configurations.

Ernst has described how a vision pursued him in 1925. It forced itself on him
as he was staring at a tiled floor marked by thousands of scratches. “In order
to give foundation to my powers of meditation and hallucination, I made a
series of drawings of the tiles by laying sheets of paper on them at random and
then taking graphite rubbings. When I fixed my eyes on the result, I was
astounded by a suddenly sharpened sense of a hallucinatory series of
contrasting and superposed pictures. I made a collection of the first results
obtained from these ‘frottages’ and called it Histoire Naturelle.”



Above, one of Max Ernst’s frottages (usually rubbings taken from scratches on
tiles), from his Natural History.



Ernst’s Natural History resembles the interest taken in the past in
“accidental” patterns in nature. Above, an engraving of an 18th-century Dutch
museum exhibit that is also a kind of surrealist “natural history” with its
inclusion of coral, stones, and skeletons.



Right, Roman coins Used in places progressively farther away from Rome. On the
last coin (farthest from the controlling center) the face has disintegrated.
This strangely corresponds to the psychic disintegration that such drugs as
LSD-25 can induce. Below, drawings done by an artist who took this drug in a
test held in Germany in 1951. The drawings grow more abstract as conscious
control is overcome by the unconscious.

It is important to note that Ernst placed over or behind some of these
frottages a ring or circle, which gives the picture a peculiar atmosphere and
depth. Here the psychologist can recognize the unconscious drive to oppose the
chaotic hazards of the image’s natural language by the symbol of a
self-contained psychic whole, thus establishing equilibrium. The ring or circle
dominates the picture. Psychic wholeness rules nature, itself meaningful and
giving meaning.

In Max Ernst’s efforts to pursue the secret pattern in things, we may detect an
affinity with the 19th-century Romantics. They spoke of nature’s “handwriting,”
which can be seen everywhere, on wings, eggshells, in clouds, snow, ice,
crystals, and other “strange conjunctions of chance” just as much as in dreams
or visions. They saw everything as the expression of one and the same
“pictorial language of nature.” Thus it was a genuinely romantic gesture when
Max Ernst called the pictures produced by his experiments “natural history.”
And he was right, for the unconscious (which had conjured up the pictures in
the chance configuration of things) is nature.

It is with Ernst’s Natural History or Arp’s compositions of chance that the
reflections of the psychologist begin. He is faced with the question of what
meaning a chance arrangement—wherever and whenever it comes about—can have for
the man who happens on it. With this question, man and consciousness come into
the matter, and with them the possibility of meaning.

The chance-created picture may be beautiful or ugly, harmonious or discordant,
rich or poor in content, well- or ill-painted. These factors determine its
artistic value, but they cannot satisfy the psychologist (often to the distress
of the artist or of anyone who finds supreme satisfaction in the contemplation
of form). The psychologist seeks further and tries to understand the “secret
code” of chance arrangement—in so far as man can decipher it at all. The number
and form of the objects thrown together at random by Arp raise as many
questions as any detail of Ernst’s fantastic frottages. For the psychologist,
they are symbols; and therefore they can not only be felt but (up to a certain
point) can also be interpreted.

The apparent or actual retreat of man from many modern works of art, the lack
of reflection, and the predominance of the unconscious over consciousness offer
critics frequent points of attack. They speak of pathological art or compare it
with pictures by the insane, for it is characteristic of psychosis that
consciousness and the ego-personality are submerged and “drowned” by floods of
contents from the unconscious regions of the psyche.

It is true that the comparison is not so odious today as it was even a
generation ago. When Dr. Jung first pointed out a connection of this kind in
his essay on Picasso (1932), it provoked a storm of indignation. Today, the
catalogue of a well-known Zurich art gallery speaks of the “almost
schizophrenic obsession” of a famous artist, and the German writer Rudolf
Kassner described Georg Trakl as “one of the greatest German poets,”
continuing: “There was something schizophrenic about him. It can be felt in his
work; there is a touch of schizophrenia in it too. Yes, Trakl is a great poet.”

It is now realized that a state of schizophrenia and the artistic vision are
not mutually exclusive. To my mind, the famous experiments with mescalin and
similar drugs have contributed to this change of attitude. These drugs create a
condition accompanied by intense visions of colors and forms—not unlike
schizophrenia. More than one artist of today has sought inspiration in such a
drug.

