# PART 3 - The animus: the man within
[Metadata]: # {03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The animus: the man within
# The animus: the man within
The male personification of the unconscious in woman—the animus—exhibits both
good and bad aspects, as does the anima in man. But the animus does not so
often appear in the form of an erotic fantasy or mood; it is more apt to take
the form of a hidden “sacred” conviction. When such a conviction is preached
with a loud, insistent, masculine voice or imposed on others by means of brutal
emotional scenes, the underlying masculinity in a woman is easily recognized.
However, even in a woman who is outwardly very feminine the animus can be an
equally hard, inexorable power. One may suddenly find oneself up against
something in a woman that is obstinate, cold, and completely inaccessible.

One of the favorite themes that the animus repeats endlessly in the ruminations
of this kind of woman goes like this: “The only thing in the world that I want
is love—and he doesn’t love me”; or “In this situation there are only two
possibilities—and both are equally bad.” (The animus never believes in
exceptions.) One can rarely contradict an animus opinion because it is usually
right in a general way; yet it seldom seems to fit the individual situation. It
is apt to be an opinion that seems reasonable but beside the point.



Heathcliff, the sinister protagonist of the British author Emily Brontë’s
novel, Wuthering Heights (1847), is partly a negative, demonic animus
figure—probably a manifestation of Emily Brontë’s own animus. In the montage
above, Heathcliff (played by Laurence Olivier in the 1939 film) confronts Emily
(a portrait by her brother); in the background, Wuthering Heights as it is
today.

Just as the character of a man’s anima is shaped by his mother, so the animus
is basically influenced by a woman’s father. The father endows his daughter’s
animus with the special coloring of unarguable, incontestably “true”
convictions—convictions that never include the personal reality of the woman
herself as she actually is.

This is why the animus is sometimes, like the anima, a demon of death. For
example, in a gypsy fairy tale a handsome stranger is received by a lonely
woman in spite of the fact that she has had a dream warning her that he is the
king of the dead. After he has been with her for a time, she presses him to
tell her who he really is. At first he refuses, saying that she will die if he
tells her. She insists, however, and suddenly he reveals to her that he is
death himself. The woman immediately dies of fright.



Two examples of dangerous animus figures: Above, an illustration (by the
19th-century French artist Gustave Doré) to the folk tale of Bluebeard. Here
Bluebeard warns his wife against opening a certain door. (Of course, she does
so—and finds the corpses of Bluebeard’s former wives. She is caught, and joins
her predecessors.) Right, a 19th-century painting of the highwayman Claude
Duval, who once robbed a lady traveler but gave his booty back on the condition
that she dance with him by the roadside.



Viewed mythologically, the beautiful stranger is probably a pagan father-image
or god-image, who appears here as king Of the dead (like Hades’s abduction of
Persephone). But psychologically he represents a particular form of the animus
that lures women away from all human relationships and especially from all
contacts with real men. He personifies a cocoon of dreamy thoughts, filled with
desire and judgments about how things “ought to be,” which cut a woman off from
the reality of life.

The negative animus does not appear only as a death-demon. In myths and fairy
tales he plays the role of robber and murderer. One example is Bluebeard, who
secretly kills all his wives in a hidden chamber. In this form the animus
personifies all those semiconscious, cold, destructive reflections that invade
a woman in the small hours, especially when she has failed to realize some
obligation of feeling. It is then that she begins to think about the family
heritage and matters of that kind—a sort of web of calculating thoughts, filled
with malice and intrigue, which get her into a state where she even wishes
death to others. (“When one of us dies, I’ll move to the Riviera,” said a woman
to her husband when she saw the beautiful Mediterranean coast—a thought that
was rendered relatively harmless by reason of the fact that she said it!)

By nursing secret destructive attitudes, a wife can drive her husband, and a
mother her children, into illness, accident, or even death. Or she may decide
to keep the children from marrying—a deeply hidden form of evil that rarely
comes to the surface of the mother’s conscious mind. (A naïve old woman once
said to me, while showing me a picture of her son, who was drowned when he was
27: “I prefer it this way; it’s better than giving him away to another woman.”)

A strange passivity and paralysis of all feeling, or a deep insecurity that can
lead almost to a sense of nullity, may sometimes be the result of an
unconscious animus opinion. In the depths of the woman’s being, the animus
whispers: “You are hopeless. What’s the use of trying? There is no point in
doing anything. Life will never change for the better.”

Unfortunately, whenever one of these personifications of the unconscious takes
possession of our mind, it seems as if we ourselves are having such thoughts
and feelings. The ego identifies with them to the point where it is unable to
detach them and see them for what they are. One is really “possessed” by the
figure from the unconscious. Only after the possession has fallen away does one
realize with horror that one has said and done things diametrically opposed to
one’s real thoughts and feelings—that one has been the prey of an alien psychic
factor.

Like the anima, the animus does not merely consist of negative qualities such
as brutality, recklessness, empty talk, and silent, obstinate, evil ideas. He
too has a very positive and valuable side; he too can build a bridge to the
Self through his creative activity. The following dream of a woman of 45 may
help to illustrate this point:

Two veiled figures climb onto the balcony and into the house. They are swathed
in black hooded coats, and they seem to want to torment me and my sister. She
hides under the bed, but they pull her out with a broom and torture her. Then
it is my turn. The leader of the two pushes me against the wall, making magical
gestures before my face. In the meantime his helper makes a sketch on the wall,
and when I see it, I say (in order to seem friendly), “Oh! But this is well
drawn!” Now suddenly my tormenter has the noble head of an artist, and he says
proudly, “Yes, indeed,” and begins to clean his spectacles.

The sadistic aspect of these two figures was well known to the dreamer, for in
reality she frequently suffered bad attacks of anxiety during which she was
haunted by the thought that people she loved were in great danger—or even that
they were dead. But the fact that the animus figure in the dream is double
suggests that the burglars personify a psychic factor that is dual in its
effect, and that could be something quite different from these tormenting
thoughts. The sister of the dreamer, who runs away from the men, is caught and
tortured. In reality this sister died when fairly young. She had been
artistically gifted, but had made very little use of her talent. Next the dream
reveals that the veiled burglars are actually disguised artists, and that if
the dreamer recognizes their gifts (which are her own), they will give up their
evil intentions.

What is the deeper meaning of the dream? It is that behind the spasms of
anxiety there is indeed a genuine and mortal danger; but there is also a
creative possibility for the dreamer. She, like the sister, had some talent as
a painter, but she doubted whether painting could be a meaningful activity for
her. Now her dream tells her in the most earnest way that she must live out
this talent. If she obeys, the destructive, tormenting animus will be
transformed into a creative and meaningful activity.





Embodiments of the four stages of the animus: First, the wholly physical
man—the fictional jungle hero Tarzan (top left, played by Johnny Weismuller).
Second, the “romantic” man—the 19th-century British poet Shelley (center left);
or the “man of action”—America’s Ernest Hemingway, war hero, hunter, etc.
Third, the bearer of the “word”—Lloyd George, the great political orator.
Fourth, the wise guide to spiritual truth—often projected on to Gandhi (left).

As in this dream, the animus often appears as a group of men. In this way the
unconscious symbolizes the fact that the animus represents a collective rather
than a personal element. Because of this collective-mindedness women habitually
refer (when their animus is speaking through them) to “one” or “they” or
“everybody,” and in such circumstances their speech frequently contains the
words “always” and “should” and “ought.”

A vast number of myths and fairy tales tell of a prince, turned by witchcraft
into a wild animal or monster, who is redeemed by the love of a girl—a process
symbolizing the manner in which the animus becomes conscious. (Dr. Henderson
has commented on the significance of this “Beauty and the Beast” motif in the
preceding chapter.) Very often the heroine is not allowed to ask questions
about her mysterious, unknown lover and husband; or she meets him only in the
dark and may never look at him. The implication is that, by blindly trusting
and loving him, she will be able to redeem her bridegroom. But this never
succeeds. She always breaks her promise and finally finds her lover again only
after a long, difficult quest and much suffering.

The parallel in life is that the conscious attention a woman has to give to her
animus problem takes much time and involves a lot of suffering. But if she
realizes who and what her animus is and what he does to her, and if she faces
these realities instead of allowing herself to be possessed, her animus can
turn into an invaluable inner companion who endows her with the masculine
qualities of initiative, courage, objectivity, and spiritual wisdom.

The animus, just like the anima, exhibits four stages of development. He first
appears as a personification of mere physical power—for instance, as an
athletic champion or “muscle man.” In the next stage he possesses initiative
and the capacity for planned action. In the third phase, the animus becomes the
“word,” often appearing as a professor or clergyman. Finally, in his fourth
manifestation, the animus is the incarnation of meaning. On this highest level
he becomes (like the anima) a mediator of the religious experience whereby life
acquires new meaning. He gives the woman spiritual firmness, an invisible inner
support that compensates for her outer softness. The animus in his most
developed form sometimes connects the woman’s mind with the spiritual evolution
of her age, and can thereby make her even more receptive than a man to new
creative ideas. It is for this reason that in earlier times women were used by
many nations as diviners and seers. The creative boldness of their positive
animus at times expresses thoughts and ideas that stimulate men to new
enterprises.

The “inner man” within a woman’s psyche can lead to marital troubles similar to
those mentioned in the section on the anima. What makes things especially
complicated is the fact that the possession of one partner by the animus (or
anima) may automatically exert such an irritating effect upon the other that he
(or she) becomes possessed too. Animus and anima always tend to drag
conversation down to a very low level and to produce a disagreeable, irascible,
emotional atmosphere.

As I mentioned before, the positive side of the animus can personify an
enterprising spirit, courage, truthfulness, and in the highest form, spiritual
profundity. Through him a woman can experience the underlying processes of her
cultural and personal objective situation, and can find her way to an
intensified spiritual attitude to life. This naturally presupposes that her
animus ceases to represent opinions that are above criticism. The woman must
find the courage and inner broadmindedness to question the sacredness of her
own convictions. Only then will she be able to take in the suggestions of the
unconscious, especially when they contradict her animus opinions. Only then
will the manifestations of the Self get through to her, and will she be able
consciously to understand their meaning.

