# PART 1 - The role of symbols
[Metadata]: # {01.08}
[Descriptor]: # {01.08}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The role of symbols
# The role of symbols
When the medical psychologist takes an interest in symbols, he is primarily
concerned with “natural” symbols, as distinct from “cultural” symbols. The
former are derived from the unconscious contents of the psyche, and they
therefore represent an enormous number of variations on the essential
archetypal images. In many cases they can still be traced back to their archaic
roots—i.e., to ideas and images that we meet in the most ancient records and in
primitive societies. The cultural symbols on the other hand, are those that
have been used to express “eternal truths,” and that are still used in many
religions. They have gone through many transformations and even a long process
of more or less conscious development, and have thus become collective images
accepted by civilized societies.

Such cultural symbols nevertheless retain much of their original numinosity or
“spell.” One is aware that they can evoke a deep emotional response in some
individuals, and this psychic charge makes them function in much the same way
as prejudices. They are a factor with which the psychologist must reckon; it is
folly to dismiss them because, in rational terms, they seem to be absurd or
irrelevant. They are important constituents of our mental makeup and vital
forces in the building up of human society; and they cannot be eradicated
without serious loss. Where they are repressed or neglected, their specific
energy disappears into the unconscious with unaccountable consequences. The
psychic energy that appears to have been lost in this way in fact serves to
revive and intensify whatever is uppermost in the unconscious—tendencies,
perhaps, that have hitherto had no chance to express themselves or at least
have not been allowed an uninhibited existence in our consciousness.

Such tendencies form an ever-present and potentially destructive “shadow” to
our conscious mind. Even tendencies that might in some circumstances be able to
exert a beneficial influence are transformed into demons when they are
repressed. This is why many well-meaning people are understandably afraid of
the unconscious, and incidentally of psychology.

Our times have demonstrated what it means for the gates of the underworld to be
opened. Things whose enormity nobody could have imagined in the idyllic
harmlessness of the first decade of our century have happened and have turned
our world upside down. Ever since, the world has remained in a state of
schizophrenia. Not only has civilized Germany disgorged its terrible
primitivity, but Russia is also ruled by it, and Africa has been set on fire.
No wonder that the Western world feels uneasy.

Modern man does not understand how much his “rationalism” (which has destroyed
his capacity to respond to numinous symbols and ideas) has put him at the mercy
of the psychic “underworld.” He has freed himself from “superstition” (or so he
believes), but in the process he has lost his spiritual values to a positively
dangerous degree. His moral and spiritual tradition has disintegrated, and he
is now paying the price for this break-up in worldwide disorientation and
dissociation.

Anthropologists have often described what happens to a primitive society when
its spiritual values are exposed to the impact of modern civilization. Its
people lose the meaning of their lives, their social organization
disintegrates, and they themselves morally decay. We are now in the same
condition. But we have never really understood what we have lost, for our
spiritual leaders unfortunately were more interested in protecting their
institutions than in understanding the mystery that symbols present. In my
opinion, faith does not exclude thought (which is man’s strongest weapon), but
unfortunately many believers seem to be so afraid of science (and incidentally
of psychology) that they turn a blind eye to the numinous psychic powers that
forever control man’s fate. We have stripped all things of their mystery and
numinosity; nothing is holy any longer.

In earlier ages, as instinctive concepts welled up in the mind of man, his
conscious mind could no doubt integrate them into a coherent psychic pattern.
But the “civilized” man is no longer able to do this. His “advanced”
consciousness has deprived itself of the means by which the auxiliary
contributions of the instincts and the unconscious can be assimilated. These
organs of assimilation and integration were numinous symbols, held holy by
common consent.

Today, for instance, we talk of “matter.” We describe its physical properties.
We conduct laboratory experiments to demonstrate some of its aspects. But the
word “matter” remains a dry, inhuman, and purely intellectual concept, without
any psychic significance for us. How different was the former image of
matter—the Great Mother—that could encompass and express the profound emotional
meaning of Mother Earth. In the same way, what was the spirit is now identified
with intellect and thus ceases to be the Father of All. It has degenerated to
the limited ego-thoughts of man; the immense emotional energy expressed in the
image of “our Father” vanishes into the sand of an intellectual desert.

These two archetypal principles lie at the foundation of the contrasting
systems of East and West. The masses and their leaders do not realize, however,
that there is no substantial difference between calling the world principle
male and a father (spirit), as the West does, or female and a mother (matter),
as the Communists do. Essentially, we know as little of the one as of the
other. In earlier times, these principles were worshiped in all sorts of
rituals, which at least showed the psychic significance they held for man. But
now they have become mere abstract concepts.

As scientific understanding has grown, so our world has become dehumanized. Man
feels himself isolated in the cosmos, because he is no longer involved in
nature and has lost his emotional “unconscious identity” with natural
phenomena. These have slowly lost their symbolic implications. Thunder is no
longer the voice of an angry god, nor is lightning his avenging missile. No
river contains a spirit, no tree is the life principle of a man, no snake the
embodiment of wisdom, no mountain cave the home of a great demon. No voices now
speak to man from stones, plants, and animals, nor does he speak to them
believing they can hear. His contact with nature has gone, and with it has gone
the profound emotional energy that this symbolic connection supplied.

This enormous loss is compensated for by the symbols of our dreams. They bring
up our original nature—its instincts and peculiar thinking. Unfortunately,
however, they express their contents in the language of nature, which is
strange and incomprehensible to us. It therefore confronts us with the task of
translating it into the rational words and concepts of modern speech, which has
liberated itself from its primitive encumbrances—notably from its mystical
participation with the things it describes. Nowadays, when we talk of ghosts
and other numinous figures, we are no longer conjuring them up. The power as
well as the glory is drained out of such once-potent words. We have ceased to
believe in magic formulas; not many taboos and similar restrictions are left;
and our world seems to be disinfected of all such “superstitious” numina as
“witches, warlocks, and worricows,” to say nothing of werewolves, vampires,
bush souls, and all the other bizarre beings that populated the primeval
forest.

To be more accurate, the surface of our world seems to be cleansed of all
superstitious and irrational elements. Whether, however, the real inner human
world (not our wish-fulfilling fiction about it) is also freed from primitivity
is another question. Is the number of 13 not still taboo for many people? Are
there not still many individuals possessed by irrational prejudices,
projections, and childish illusions? A realistic picture of the human mind
reveals many such primitive traits and survivals, which are still playing their
roles just as if nothing had happened during the last 500 years.

It is essential to appreciate this point. Modern man is in fact a curious
mixture of characteristics acquired over the long ages of his mental
development. This mixed-up being is the man and his symbols that we have to
deal with, and we must scrutinize his mental products very carefully indeed.
Skepticism and scientific conviction exist in him side by side with
old-fashioned prejudices, outdated habits of thought and feeling, obstinate
misinterpretations, and blind ignorance.

Such are the contemporary human beings who produce the symbols we psychologists
investigate. In order to explain these symbols and their meaning, it is vital
to learn whether their representations are related to purely personal
experience, or whether they have been chosen by a dream for its particular
purpose from a store of general conscious knowledge.

Take, for instance, a dream in which the number 13 occurs. The question is
whether the dreamer himself habitually believes in the unlucky quality of the
number, or whether the dream merely alludes to people who still indulge in such
superstitions. The answer makes a great difference to the interpretation. In
the former case, you have to reckon with the fact that the individual is still
under the spell of the unlucky 13, and therefore will feel most uncomfortable
in Room 13 in a hotel or sitting at a table with 13 people. In the latter case,
13 may not mean any more than a discourteous or abusive remark. The
“superstitious” dreamer still feels the “spell” of 13; the more “rational”
dreamer has stripped 13 of its original emotional overtones.

This argument illustrates the way in which archetypes appear in practical
experience: They are, at the same time, both images and emotions. One can speak
of an archetype only when these two aspects are simultaneous. When there is
merely the image, then there is simply a word-picture of little consequence.
But by being charged with emotion, the image gains numinosity (or psychic
energy); it becomes dynamic, and consequences of some kind must flow from it.

I am aware that it is difficult to grasp this concept, because I am trying to
use words to describe something whose very nature makes it incapable of precise
definition. But since so many people have chosen to treat archetypes as if they
were part of a mechanical system that can be learned by rote, it is essential
to insist that they are not mere names, or even philosophical concepts. They
are pieces of life itself—images that are integrally connected to the living
individual by the bridge of the emotions. That is why it is impossible to give
an arbitrary (or universal) interpretation of any archetype. It must be
explained in the manner indicated by the whole life-situation of the particular
individual to whom it relates.

Thus, in the case of a devout Christian, the symbol of the cross can be
interpreted only in its Christian context—unless the dream produces a very
strong reason to look beyond it. Even then, the specific Christian meaning
should be kept in mind. But one cannot say that, at all times and in all
circumstances, the symbol of the cross has the same meaning. If that were so,
it would be stripped of its numinosity, lose its vitality, and become a mere
word.

Those who do not realize the special feeling tone of the archetype end with
nothing more than a jumble of mythological concepts, which can be strung
together to show that everything means anything—or nothing at all. All the
corpses in the world are chemically identical, but living individuals are not.
Archetypes come to life only when one patiently tries to discover why and in
what fashion they are meaningful to a living individual.

The mere use of words is futile when you do not know what they stand for. This
is particularly true in psychology, where we speak of archetypes like the anima
and animus, the wise man, the great mother, and so on. You can know all about
the saints, sages, prophets, and other godly men, and all the great mothers of
the world. But if they are mere images whose numinosity you have never
experienced, it will be as if you were talking in a dream, for you will not
know what you are talking about. The mere words you use will be empty and
valueless. They gain life and meaning only when you try to take into account
their numinosity—i.e., their relationship to the living individual. Only then
do you begin to understand that their names mean very little, whereas the way
they are related to you is all-important.

The symbol-producing function of our dreams is thus an attempt to bring the
original mind of man into “advanced” or differentiated consciousness, where it
has never been before and where, therefore, it has never been subjected to
critical self-reflection. For, in ages long past, that original mind was the
whole of man’s personality. As he developed consciousness, so his conscious
mind lost contact with some of that primitive psychic energy. And the conscious
mind has never known that original mind; for it was discarded in the process of
evolving the very differentiated consciousness that alone could be aware of it.

Yet it seems that what we call the unconscious has preserved primitive
characteristics that formed part of the original mind. It is to these
characteristics that the symbols of dreams constantly refer, as if the
unconscious sought to bring back all the old things from which the mind freed
itself as it evolved—illusions, fantasies, archaic thought forms, fundamental
instincts, and so on.

This is what explains the resistance, even fear, that people often experience
in approaching unconscious matters. These relict contents are not merely
neutral or indifferent. On the contrary, they are so highly charged that they
are often more than merely uncomfortable. They can cause real fear. The more
they are repressed, the more they spread through the whole personality in the
form of a neurosis.

It is this psychic energy that gives them such vital importance. It is just as
if a man who has lived through a period of unconsciousness should suddenly
realize that there is a gap in his memory—that important events seem to have
taken place that he cannot remember. In so far as he assumes that the psyche is
an exclusively personal affair (and this is the usual assumption), he will try
to retrieve the apparently lost infantile memories. But the gaps in his
childhood memory are merely the symptoms of a much greater loss—the loss of the
primitive psyche.

As the evolution of the embryonic body repeats its prehistory, so the mind also
develops through a series of prehistoric stages. The main task of dreams is to
bring back a sort of “recollection” of the prehistoric, as well as the
infantile world, right down to the level of the most primitive instincts. Such
recollections can have a remarkably healing effect in certain cases, as Freud
saw long ago. This observation confirms the view that an infantile memory gap
(a so-called amnesia) represents a positive loss and its recovery can bring a
positive increase in life and wellbeing.

Because a child is physically small and its conscious thoughts are scarce and
simple, we do not realize the far-reaching complications of the infantile mind
that are based on its original identity with the perhistoric psyche. That
“original mind” is just as much present and still functioning in the child as
the evolutionary stages of mankind are in its embryonic body. If the reader
remembers what I said earlier about the remarkable dreams of the child who made
a present of her dreams to her father, he will get a good idea of what I mean.

In infantile amnesia, one finds strange mythological fragments that also often
appear in later psychoses. Images of this kind are highly numinous and
therefore very important. If such recollections reappear in adult life, they
may in some cases cause profound psychological disturbance, while in other
people they can produce miracles of healing or religious conversions. Often
they bring back a piece of life, missing for a long time, that gives purpose to
and thus enriches human life.

The recollection of infantile memories and the reproduction of archetypal ways
of psychic behavior can create a wider horizon and a greater extension of
consciousness—on condition that one succeeds in assimilating and integrating in
the conscious mind the lost and regained contents. Since they are not neutral,
their assimilation will modify the personality, just as they themselves will
have to undergo certain alterations. In this part of what is called “the
individuation process” (which Dr. M.-L. von Franz describes in a later section
of this book), the interpretation of symbols plays an important practical role.
For the symbols are natural attempts to reconcile and reunite opposites within
the psyche.

Naturally, just seeing and then brushing aside the symbols would have no such
effect and would merely reestablish the old neurotic condition and destroy the
attempt at a synthesis. But, unfortunately, those rare people who do not deny
the very existence of the archetypes almost invariably treat them as mere words
and forget their living reality. When their numinosity has thus
(illegitimately) been banished, the process of limitless substitution begins—in
other words, one glides easily from archetype to archetype, with everything
meaning everything. It is true enough that the forms of archetypes are to a
considerable extent exchangeable. But their numinosity is and remains a fact,
and represents the value of an archetypal event.

This emotional value must be kept in mind and allowed for throughout the whole
intellectual process of dream interpretation. It is only too easy to lose this
value, because thinking and feeling are so diametrically opposed that thinking
almost automatically throws out feeling values and vice versa. Psychology is
the only science that has to take the factor of value (i.e., feeling) into
account, because it is the link between physical events and life. Psychology is
often accused of not being scientific on this account; but its critics fail to
understand the scientific and practical necessity of giving due consideration
to feeling.

