# PART 5 - Fear of the unconscious
[Metadata]: # {05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
Fear of the unconscious
# Fear of the unconscious
The problems we encountered in Henry’s initial dream showed up in many
others—problems like vacillation between masculine activity and feminine
passivity, or a tendency to hide behind intellectual asceticism. He feared the
world, yet was attracted to it. Fundamentally, he feared the obligations of
marriage, which demanded that he form a responsible relationship with a woman.
Such an ambivalence is not unusual for someone on the threshold of manhood.
Though in terms of age Henry had left that phase behind him, his inner maturity
did not match his years. This problem is often met in the introvert, with his
fear of reality and outer life.

The fourth dream that Henry recounted provided a striking illustration of his
psychological state:



Above, Henry’s drawing of the strange animals of his dream. They are mute and
blind, unable to communicate, and so represent his unconscious state. The
animal on the ground (which he colored green, the color of vegetation and
nature, and in folklore a symbol of hope) hints at possibilities of growth and
a chance of differentiation.



The pig-like animal of the dream connotes bestiality and lustfulness—as in the
myth of Circe, who turned men into swine. Above, from a Greek vase, a pig-man,
Odysseus, and Circe. Below, in one of the cartoons by George Grosz attacking
pre-war German society, a man (with a prostitute) is given a pig’s head to show
his vulgarity.



It seems to me that I have had this dream endless times. Military service,
long-distance race. Alone I go on my way. I never reach the goal. Will I be the
last? The course is well known to me, all of it déjà vu. The start is in a
little wood, and the ground is covered with dry leaves. The terrain slopes
gently to an idyllic little brook that invites one to tarry. Later, there is a
dusty country road. It leads toward Hombrechtikon, a small village near the
upper lake of Zurich. A brook bordered by willows similar to a painting of
Böcklin’s in which a dreamy female figure follows the course of the water.
Night falls. In a village I ask for directions to the road. I am told the road
leads on for seven hours over a pass. I gather myself together and go on.

However, this time the end of the dream differs. After the willow-bordered
brook I get into a wood. There I discover a doe that runs away. I am proud of
this observation. The doe has appeared on the left side and now I turn to the
right. Here I see three strange creatures, half pig, half dog, with the legs of
a kangaroo. The faces are quite undifferentiated, with large drooping dog ears.
Maybe they are costumed people. As a boy, I once masqueraded in the circus
costume of a donkey.

The beginning of the dream is conspicuously like Henry’s initial dream. A
dreamlike female figure again appears, and the setting of the dream is
associated with another painting by Böcklin. This painting, called Autumn
Thoughts, and the dry leaves mentioned earlier in the dream underline the
autumnal mood. A romantic atmosphere also reappears in this dream. Apparently
this inner landscape, representing Henry’s melancholy, is very familiar to him.
Again he is in a collective of people, but this time with military comrades on
a long-distance race.

This whole situation (as the military service also suggests) might be regarded
as a representation of an average man’s fate. Henry himself said: “It’s a
symbol of life.” But the dreamer does not want to adjust to it. He goes on
alone—which was probably always the case with Henry. That is why he has the
impression that everything is déjà vu. His thought (“I never reach the goal”)
indicates strong feelings of inferiority and a belief that he cannot win the
“long-distance race.”

His way leads to Hombrechtikon, a name that reminds him of his secret plans to
break away from home (Hom = home, brechen = to break). But because his breaking
away does not occur, he again (as in the initial dream) loses his sense of
orientation and must ask for directions.

Dreams compensate more or less explicitly for the dreamer’s conscious attitude
of mind. The romantic, maidenly figure of Henry’s conscious ideal is balanced
by the appearance of the strange, female-like animals. Henry’s world of
instincts is symbolized by something feminine. The wood is a symbol of an
unconscious area, a dark place where animals live. At first a doe—a symbol of
shy, fugitive, innocent womanliness—emerges, but only for a moment. Then Henry
sees three mixed-up animals of a strange and repulsive appearance. They seem to
represent undifferentiated instinctuality—a sort of confused mass of his
instincts, containing the raw material for a later development. Their most
striking characteristic is that they are all virtually faceless, and thus
without the slightest glimmerings of consciousness.

In the minds of many people, the pig is closely associated to dirty sexuality.
(Circe, for example, changed the men who desired her into swine.) The dog may
stand for loyalty, but also for promiscuity, because it shows no discrimination
in its choice of partners. The kangaroo, however, is often a symbol for
motherliness and tender carrying capacity.

All these animals present only rudimentary traits, and even these are
senselessly contaminated. In alchemy, the “prime material” was often
represented by such monstrous and fabulous creatures—mixed forms of animals. In
psychological terms, they would probably symbolize the original total
unconsciousness, out of which the individual ego can rise and begin to develop
toward maturity.

Henry’s fear of the monsters becomes evident by his attempt to make them seem
harmless. He wants to convince himself that they are only dressed-up people,
like himself in a boyhood masquerade. His anxiety is natural. A man discovering
such inhuman monsters in his inner self, as symbols of certain traits of his
unconscious, has every reason to be afraid.

Another dream also shows Henry’s fear of the depths of the unconscious:

I am a cabin boy in a sailing boat. Paradoxically, the sails are spread, though
there is a complete calm. My task consists of holding a rope that serves to
fasten a mast. Strangely enough, the railing is a wall covered with stone
slabs. This whole structure lies exactly on the border between the water and
the sailing boat that floats there alone. I hold fast to the rope (not to the
mast) and I am forbidden to look into the water.



Henry’s drawing of the boat of his dream, with a stone wall for a
railing—another image of his introversion and fear of life.

In this dream Henry is in a psychological borderline situation. The railing is
a wall that protects him but at the same time obstructs his view. He is
forbidden to look into the water (where he might discover unknown powers). All
these images reveal his doubt and fear.

The man who fears the communications of his inner depths (like Henry) is as
much afraid of the feminine element in himself as he is of real women. At one
moment he is fascinated by her, at another he tries to escape; fascinated and
terrified, he flees so as not to become her “prey.” He does not dare to
approach a beloved (and therefore idealized) partner with his animal-like
sexuality.

As a typical result of his mother-tie, Henry had difficulty in giving both
feeling and sensuality to the same woman. Again and again his dreams brought
proof of his desire to free himself from this dilemma. In one dream he was a
“monk on a secret mission.” In another, his instincts tempted him into a
brothel:

Together with a military comrade who has had many erotic adventures I find
myself waiting in front of a house on a dark street in an unknown city.
Entrance is permitted only to women. Therefore, in the hall, my friend puts on
a little carnival mask of a woman’s face and goes up the stairs. Possibly I did
the same as he, but I do not remember clearly.

What this dream proposes would satisfy Henry’s curiosity—but only at the price
of a fraud. As a man he lacks the courage to enter the house, which is
obviously a brothel. But if he divests himself of his masculinity, he might
gain an insight into this forbidden world—forbidden by his conscious mind. The
dream, however, does not tell us whether he decides to enter. Henry had not yet
overcome his inhibitions—an understandable failure if we consider the
implications of going into the brothel.

The above dream seemed to me to reveal a homoerotic strain in Henry: He
appeared to feel that a feminine “mask” would make him attractive to men. This
hypothesis was supported by the following dream:

I find myself back in my fifth or sixth year. My playmate of those days tells
me how he participated in an obscene act with the director of a factory. My
friend laid his right hand on the man’s penis to keep it warm and at the same
time to warm his own hand. The director was an intimate friend of my father’s
whom I venerated for his broad and varied interests. But he was laughed at by
us as an “eternal youth.”

For children of that age homoerotic play is not unusual. That Henry still came
to it in his dream suggests that it was loaded with guilt feelings, and
therefore strongly repressed. Such feelings were linked to his deep fear about
forming a lasting tie with a woman. Another dream and its associations
illustrated this conflict:

I take part in the wedding of an unknown couple. At one in the morning the
little wedding party returns from the festivities—the bridal couple, the best
man, and the maid of honor. They enter a large courtyard where I await them. It
seems that the newlyweds have already had a quarrel, as well as the other
couple. They finally find the solution by having the two men and the two women
retire separately.

Henry explained: “You see here the war of the sexes as Giraudoux describes it.”
And then he added: “The palace in Bavaria, where I remember seeing this
dream-courtyard, has until lately been disfigured by emergency housing for poor
people. When I visited there, I asked myself if it would not be preferable to
eke out a poor existence in the ruins of classic beauty than to lead an active
life surrounded by the ugliness of a great city. I also asked myself when I was
a witness at the wedding of a comrade whether his marriage would last, for his
bride made an unfavorable impression on me.”

The longing to withdraw into passivity and introversion, the fear of an
unsuccessful marriage, the dream’s separation of the sexes—all these are
unmistakable symptoms of the sercet doubts hidden beneath Henry’s consciousness.

