# PART 2 - The archetype of initiation
[Metadata]: # {02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 2
The archetype of initiation
# The archetype of initiation
In a psychological sense the hero image is not to be regarded as identical with
the ego proper. It is better described as the symbolic means by which the ego
separates itself from the archetypes evoked by the parental images in early
childhood. Dr. Jung has suggested that each human being has originally a
feeling of wholeness, a powerful and complete sense of the Self. And from the
Self—the totality of the psyche—the individualized ego-consciousness emerges as
the individual grows up.

Within the past few years, the works of certain followers of Jung have begun to
document the series of events by which the individual ego emerges during the
transition from infancy through childhood. This separation can never become
final without severe injury to the original sense of wholeness. And the ego
must continually return to re-establish its relation to the Self in order to
maintain a condition of psychic health.

It would appear from my studies that the hero myth is the first stage in the
differentiation of the psyche. I have suggested that it seems to go through a
fourfold cycle by which the ego seeks to achieve its relative autonomy from the
original condition of wholeness. Unless some degree of autonomy is achieved,
the individual is unable to relate himself to his adult environment. But the
hero myth does not ensure that this liberation will occur. It only shows how it
is possible for it to occur, so that the ego may achieve consciousness. There
remains the problem of maintaining and developing that consciousness in a
meaningful way, so that the individual can live a useful life and can achieve
the necessary sense of self-distinction in society.

Ancient history and the rituals of contemporary primitive societies have
provided us with a wealth of material about myths and rites of initiation,
whereby young men and women are weaned away from their parents and forcibly
made members of their clan or tribe. But in making this break with the
childhood world, the original parent archetype will be injured, and the damage
must be made good by a healing process of assimilation into the life of the
group. (The identity of the group and the individual is often symbolized by a
totem animal.) Thus the group fulfills the claims of the injured archetype and
becomes a kind of second parent to which the young are first symbolically
sacrificed, only to re-emerge into a new life.

In this “drastic ceremony, which looks very like a sacrifice to the powers that
might hold the young man back,” as Dr. Jung has put it, we see how the power of
the original archetype can never be permanently overcome, in the manner
envisaged by the hero-dragon battle, without a crippling sense of alienation
from the fruitful powers of the unconscious. We saw in the myth of the Twins
how their hybris, expressing excessive ego-Self separation, was corrected by
their own fear of the consequences, which forced them back into a harmonious
ego-Self relation.



A primitive tribe’s totem (often an animal) symbolizes each tribesman’s
identity with the tribal unit. An Australian aborigine imitating (in a ritual
dance) his tribe’s totem—an emu.



Many modern groups use totem-like animals as emblems: Above, a heraldic lion
(from the Belgian coat of arms) on a 17th-century allegorical map of Belgium.
Below, the falcon is the mascot of the American Air Force Academy’s football
team.



In tribal societies it is the initiation rite that most effectively solves this
problem. The ritual takes the novice back to the deepest level of original
mother-child identity or ego-Self identity, thus forcing him to experience a
symbolic death. In other words, his identity is temporarily dismembered or
dissolved in the collective unconscious. From this state he is then
ceremonially rescued by the rite of the new birth. This is the first act of
true consolidation of the ego with the larger group, expressed as totem, clan,
or tribe, or all three combined.

The ritual, whether it is found in tribal groups or in more complex societies,
invariably insists upon this rite of death and rebirth, which provides the
novice with a “rite of passage” from one stage of life to the next, whether it
is from early childhood or from early to late adolescence and from then to
maturity.

Initiatory events are not, of course, confined to the psychology of youth.
Every new phase of development throughout an individual’s life is accompanied
by a repetition of the original conflict between the claims of the Self and the
claims of the ego. In fact, this conflict may be expressed more powerfully at
the period of transition from early maturity to middle age (between 35 to 40 in
our society) than at any other time in life. And the transition from middle age
to old age creates again the need for affirmation of the difference between the
ego and the total psyche; the hero receives his last call to action in defense
of ego-consciousness against the approaching dissolution of life in death.

At these critical periods, the archetype of initiation is strongly activated to
provide a meaningful transition that offers something more spiritually
satisfying than the adolescent rites with their strong secular flavor. The
archetypal patterns of initiation in this religious sense—known since ancient
times as “the mysteries”—are woven into the texture of all ecclesiastical
rituals requiring a special manner of worship at the time of birth, marriage,
or death.

As in our study of the hero myth, so in the study of initiation we must look
for examples in the subjective experiences of modern people and especially of
those who have undergone analysis. It is not surprising that there should
appear, in the unconscious of someone who is seeking help from a doctor
specializing in psychic disorders, images that duplicate the major patterns of
initiation as we know them from history.

Perhaps the commonest of these themes to be found in young people is the
ordeal, or trial of strength. This might seem to be identical with what we have
already noticed in modern dreams illustrating the hero myth, such as the sailor
who had to submit to the weather and to beatings, or that proof of fitness
represented in the hike through India of the man without a rainhat. We can also
see this theme of physical suffering carried to its logical end in the first
dream I discussed, when the handsome young man became a human sacrifice on an
altar. This sacrifice resembled the approach to initiation, but its end was
obscured. It seemed to round off the hero cycle, to make way for a new theme.

There is one striking difference between the hero myth and the initiation rite.
The typical hero figures exhaust their efforts in achieving the goal of their
ambitions; in short, they become successful even if immediately afterward they
are punished or killed for their hybris. In contrast to this, the novice for
initiation is called upon to give up willful ambition and all desire and to
submit to the ordeal. He must be willing to experience this trial without hope
of success. In fact, he must be prepared to die; and though the token of his
ordeal may be mild (a period of fasting, the knocking out of a tooth, or
tattooing) or agonizing (the infliction of the wounds of circumcision,
subincision, or other mutilations), the purpose remains always the same: to
create the symbolic mood of death from which may spring the symbolic mood of
rebirth.

A young man of 25 dreamed of climbing a mountain on top of which there was a
kind of altar. Near the altar he sees a sarcophagus with a statue of himself
upon it. Then a veiled priest approaches carrying a staff on which there glows
a living sun-disk. (Discussing the dream later, the young man said that
climbing a mountain reminded him of the effort he was making in his analysis to
achieve self-mastery.) To his surprise, he finds himself, as it were, dead, and
instead of a sense of achievement he feels deprivation and fear. Then comes a
feeling of strength and rejuvenation as he is bathed in the warm rays of the
sun-disk.

This dream shows quite succinctly the distinction we must make between
initiation and the hero myth. The act of climbing the mountain seems to suggest
a trial of strength: It is the will to achieve ego-consciousness in the heroic
phase of adolescent development. The patient had evidently thought that his
approach to therapy would be like his approach to other tests of manhood, which
he had approached in the competitive manner characteristic of young men in our
society. But the scene by the altar corrected this mistaken assumption, showing
him that his task is rather to submit to a power greater than himself. He must
see himself as if he were dead and entombed in a symbolic form (the
sarcophagus) that recalls the archetypal mother as the original container of
all life. Only by such an act of submission can he experience rebirth. An
invigorating ritual brings him to life again as the symbolic son of a Sun
Father.

Here again we might confuse this with a hero cycle—that of the Twins, the
“children of the Sun.” But in this case we have no indication that the initiate
will overreach himself. Instead, he has learned a lesson in humility by
experiencing a rite of death and rebirth that marks his passage from youth to
maturity.

According to his chronological age he should already have made this transition,
but a prolonged period of arrested development has held him back. This delay
had plunged him into a neurosis for which he had come for treatment, and the
dream offers him the same wise counsel that he could have been given by any
good tribal medicine man—that he should give up scaling mountains to prove his
strength and submit to the meaningful ritual of an initiatory change that could
fit him for the new moral responsibilities of manhood.

The theme of submission as an essential attitude toward promotion of the
successful initiation rite can be clearly seen in the case of girls or women.
Their rite of passage initially emphasizes their essential passivity, and this
is reinforced by the physiological limitation on their autonomy imposed by the
menstrual cycle. It has been suggested that the menstrual cycle may actually be
the major part of initiation from a woman’s point of view, since it has the
power to awaken the deepest sense of obedience to life’s creative power over
her. Thus she willingly gives herself to her womanly function, much as a man
gives himself to his assigned role in the community life of his group.

On the other hand, the woman, no less than the man, has her initial trials of
strength that lead to a final sacrifice for the sake of experiencing the new
birth. This sacrifice enables a woman to free herself from the entanglement of
personal relations and fits her for a more conscious role as an individual in
her own right. In contrast, a man’s sacrifice is a surrender of his sacred
independence: He becomes more consciously related to woman.

Here we come to that aspect of initiation which acquaints man with woman and
woman with man in such a way as to correct some sort of original male-female
opposition. Man’s knowledge (Logos) then encounters women’s relatedness (Eros)
and their union is represented as that symbolic ritual of a sacred marriage
which has been at the heart of initiation since its origins in the
mystery-religions of antiquity. But this is exceedingly difficult for modern
people to grasp, and it frequently takes a special crisis in their lives to
make them understand it.

Several patients have told me dreams in which the motif of sacrifice is
combined with the motif of the sacred marriage. One of these was produced by a
young man who had fallen in love but was unwilling to marry for fear that
marriage would become a kind of prison presided over by a powerful mother
figure. His own mother had been a strong influence in his childhood, and his
future mother-in-law presented a similar threat. Would not his wife-to-be
dominate him in the same way these mothers had dominated their children?

In his dream he was engaged in a ritual dance along with another man and two
other women, one of whom was his fiancée. The others were an older man and
wife, who impressed the dreamer because, despite their closeness to each other,
they seemed to have room for their individual differences, and did not appear
to be possessive. These two therefore represented to this young man a married
state that did not impose undue constraint on the development of the individual
nature of the two partners. If it were possible for him to achieve this
condition, marriage would then become acceptable to him.

In the ritual dance each man faced his woman partner, and all four took their
places at the corners of a square dancing ground. As they danced, it became
apparent that this was also a kind of sword dance. Each dancer had in his hand
a short sword with which to perform a difficult arabesque, moving arms and legs
in a series of movements that suggested alternate impulses of aggression and
submission to each other. In the final scene of the dance all four dancers had
to plunge the swords into their own breasts and die. Only the dreamer refused
to accomplish the final suicide, and was left standing alone after the others
had fallen. He felt deeply ashamed of his cowardly failure to sacrifice himself
with the others.

This dream brought home to my patient the fact that he was more than ready to
change his attitude to life. He had been self-centered, seeking the illusory
safety of personal independence but inwardly dominated by the fears caused by
childhood subjection to his mother. He needed a challenge to his manhood in
order to see that unless he sacrificed his childish state of mind he would be
left isolated and ashamed. The dream, and his subsequent insight into its
meaning, dispelled his doubts. He had passed through the symbolic rite by which
a young man gives up his exclusive autonomy and accepts his shared life in a
related, not just heroic, form.

And so he married and found appropriate fulfillment in his relationship with
his wife. Far from impairing his effectiveness in the world, his marriage
actually enhanced it.

Quite apart from the neurotic fear that invisible mothers or fathers may be
lurking behind the marriage veil, even the normal young man has good reason to
feel apprehensive about the wedding ritual. It is essentially a woman’s
initiation rite, in which a man is bound to feel like anything but a conquering
hero. No wonder we find, in tribal societies, such counterphobic rituals as the
abduction or rape of the bride. These enable the man to cling to the remnants
of his heroic role at the very moment that he must submit to his bride and
assume the responsibilities of marriage.

But the theme of marriage is an image of such universality that it also has a
deeper meaning. It is an acceptable, even necessary, symbolic discovery of the
feminine component of a man’s own psyche, just as much as it is the acquisition
of a real wife. So one may encounter this archetype in a man of any age in
response to a suitable stimulus.

Not all women, however, react trustingly to the married state. A woman patient
who had unfulfilled longings for a career, which she had had to give up for a
very difficult and short-lived marriage, dreamed that she was kneeling opposite
a man who was also kneeling. He had a ring that he prepared to put on her
finger, but she stretched out her right-hand ring finger in a tense
manner—evidently resisting this ritual of marital union.

It was easy to point out her significant error. Instead of offering the
left-hand ring finger (by which she could accept a balanced and natural
relation to the masculine principle) she had wrongly assumed that she had to
put her entire conscious (i.e., right-sided) identity in the service of the
man. In fact, marriage required her to share with him only that subliminal,
natural (i.e., left-sided) part of herself in which the principle of union
would have a symbolic, not a literal or absolute meaning. Her fear was the fear
of the woman who dreads to lose her identity in a strongly patriarchal
marriage, which this woman had good reason to resist.

Nevertheless, the sacred marriage as an archetypal form has a particularly
important meaning for the psychology of women, and one for which they are
prepared during their adolescence by many preliminary events of an initiatory
character.

