# INTRODUCTION - John Freeman
[Metadata]: # {00.01}
[Descriptor]: # {00.01}
[Author]: # {Jung}
INTRODUCTION
John Freeman
# John Freeman
The origins of this book are sufficiently unusual to be of interest, and they
bear a direct relation to its contents and what it sets out to do. So let me
tell you just how it came to be written.

One day in the spring of 1959 the British Broadcasting Corporation invited me
to interview for British television Dr. Carl Gustav Jung. The interview was to
be done “in depth.” I knew little enough at that time about Jung and his work,
and I at once went to make his acquaintance at his beautiful lakeside home in
Zurich. That was the beginning of a friendship that meant a great deal to me
and, I hope gave some pleasure to Jung in the last years of his life. The
television interview has no further place in this story, except that it was
accounted successful and that this book is by an odd combination of
circumstances an end-product of that success.

One man who saw Jung on the screen was Wolfgang Foges, managing director of
Aldus Books. Foges had been keenly interested in the development of modern
psychology since his childhood, when he lived near the Freuds in Vienna. And as
he watched Jung talking about his life and work and ideas, Foges suddenly
reflected what a pity it was that, while the general outline of Freud’s work
was well known to educated readers all over the Western world, Jung had never
managed to break through to the general public and was always considered too
difficult for popular reading.

Foges, in fact, is the creator of Man and his Symbols. Having sensed from the
TV screen that a warm personal relation existed between Jung and myself, he
asked me whether I would join him in trying to persuade Jung to set out some of
his more important and basic ideas in language and at a length that would be
intelligible and interesting to non-specialist adult readers. I jumped at the
idea and set off once more to Zurich, determined that I could convince Jung of
the value and importance of such a work. Jung listened to me in his garden for
two hours almost without interruption—and then said no. He said it in the
nicest possible way, but with great firmness; he had never in the past tried to
popularize his work, and he wasn’t sure that he could successfully do so now;
anyway, he was old and rather tired and not keen to take on such a long
commitment about which he had so many doubts.

Jung’s friends will all agree with me that he was a man of most positive
decision. He would weigh up a problem with care and without hurry; but when he
did give his answer, it was usually final. I returned to London greatly
disappointed, but convinced that Jung’s refusal was the end of the matter. So
it might have been, but for two intervening factors that I had not foreseen.

One was the pertinacity of Foges, who insisted on making one more approach to
Jung before accepting defeat. The other was an event that, as I look back on
it, still astonishes me.

The television program was, as I have said, accounted successful. It brought
Jung a great many letters from all sorts of people, many of them ordinary folk
with no medical or psychological training, who had been captivated by the
commanding presence, the humor, and the modest charm of this very great man,
and who had glimpsed in his view of life and human personality something that
could be helpful to them. And Jung was very pleased, not simply at getting
letters (his mail was enormous at all times) but at getting them from people
who would normally have no contact with him.

It was at this moment that he dreamed a dream of the greatest importance to
him. (And as you read this book, you will understand just how important that
can be.) He dreamed that, instead of sitting in his study and talking to the
great doctors and psychiatrists who used to call on him from all over the
world, he was standing in a public place and addressing a multitude of people
who were listening to him with rapt attention and understanding what he said.…

When, a week or two later, Foges renewed his request that Jung should undertake
a new book designed, not for the clinic or the philosopher’s study, but for the
people in the market place, Jung allowed himself to be persuaded. He laid down
two conditions. First, that the book should not be a single-handed book, but
the collective effort of himself and a group of his closest followers, through
whom he had attempted to perpetuate his methods and his teaching. Secondly,
that I should be entrusted with the task of co-ordinating the work and
resolving any problems that might arise between the authors and the publishers.

Lest it should seem that this introduction transgresses the bounds of
reasonable modesty, let me say at once that I was gratified by this second
condition—but within measure. For it very soon came to my knowledge that Jung’s
reason for selecting me was essentially that he regarded me as being of
reasonable, but not exceptional, intelligence and without the slightest serious
knowledge of psychology. Thus I was to Jung the “average reader” of this book;
what I could understand would be intelligible to all who would be interested;
what I boggled at might possibly be too difficult or obscure for some. Not
unduly flattered by this estimate of my role, I have none the less scrupulously
insisted (sometimes, I fear, to the exasperation of the authors) on having
every paragraph written and, if necessary, rewritten to a degree of clarity and
directness that enables me to say with confidence that this book in its
entirety is designed for and addressed to the general reader, and that the
complex subjects it deals with are treated with a rare and encouraging
simplicity.

After much discussion, the comprehensive subject of the book was agreed to be
Man and his Symbols; and Jung himself selected as his collaborators in the work
Dr. Marie-Louise von Franz of Zurch, perhaps his closest professional
confidante and friend; Dr. Joseph L. Henderson of San Francisco, one of the
most prominent and trusted of American Jungians; Mrs. Aniela Jaffé of Zurich,
who, in addition to being an experienced analyst, was Jung’s confidential
private secretary and his biographer; and Dr. Jolande Jacobi, who after Jung
himself is the most experienced author among Jung’s Zurich circle. These four
people were chosen partly because of their skill and experience in the
particular subjects allocated to them and partly because all of them were
completely trusted by Jung to work unselfishly to his instructions as members
of a team. Jung’s personal responsibility was to plan the structure of the
whole book, to supervise and direct the work of his collaborators, and himself
to write the keynote chapter, “Approaching the Unconscious.”

The last year of his life was devoted almost entirely to this book, and when he
died in June 1961, his own section was complete (he finished it, in fact, only
some 10 days before his final illness) and his colleagues’ chapters had all
been approved by him in draft. After his death, Dr. von Franz assumed over-all
responsibility for the completion of the book in accordance with Jung’s express
instructions. The subject matter of Man and his Symbols and its outline were
therefore laid down—and in detail—by Jung. The chapter that bears his name is
his work and (apart from some fairly extensive editing to improve its
intelligibility to the general reader) nobody else’s. It was written,
incidentally, in English. The remaining chapters were written by the various
authors to Jung’s direction and under his supervision. The final editing of the
complete work after Jung’s death has been done by Dr. von Franz with a
patience, understanding, and good humor that leave the publishers and myself
greatly in her debt.

Finally as to the contents of the book itself:

Jung’s thinking has colored the world of modern psychology more than many of
those with casual knowledge realize. Such familiar terms, for instance, as
“extravert,” “introvert,” and “archetype” are all Jungian concepts—borrowed and
sometimes misused by others. But his overwhelming contribution to psychological
understanding is his concept of the unconscious—not (like the “subconscious” of
Freud) merely a sort of glory-hole of repressed desires, but a world that is
just as much a vital and real part of the life of an individual as the
conscious, “cogitating” world of the ego, and infinitely wider and richer. The
language and the “people” of the unconscious are symbols, and the means of
communications dreams.

Thus an examination of Man and his Symbols is in effect an examination of man’s
relation to his own unconscious. And since in Jung’s view the unconscious is
the great guide, friend, and adviser of the conscious, this book is related in
the most direct terms to the study of human beings and their spiritual
problems. We know the unconscious and communicate with it (a two-way service)
principally by dreams; and all through this book (above all in Jung’s own
chapter) you will find a quite remarkable emphasis placed on the importance of
dreaming in the life of the individual.

It would be an impertinence on my part to attempt to interpret Jung’s work to
readers, many of whom will surely be far better qualified to understand it than
I am. My role, remember, was merely to serve as a sort of “intelligibility
filter” and by no means as an interpreter. Nevertheless, I venture to offer two
general points that seem important to me as a layman and that may possibly be
helpful to other non-experts. The first is about dreams. To Jungians the dream
is not a kind of standardized cryptogram that can be decoded by a glossary of
symbol meanings. It is an integral, important, and personal expression of the
individual unconscious. It is just as “real” as any other phenomenon attaching
to the individual. The dreamer’s individual unconscious is communicating with
the dreamer alone and is selecting symbols for its purpose that have meaning to
the dreamer and to nobody else. Thus the interpretation of dreams, whether by
the analyst or by the dreamer himself, is for the Jungian psychologist an
entirely personal and individual business (and sometimes an experimental and
very lengthy one as well) that can by no means be undertaken by rule of thumb.

The converse of this is that the communications of the unconscious are of the
highest importance to the dreamer—naturally so, since the unconscious is at
least half of his total being—and frequently offer him advice or guidance that
could be obtained from no other source. Thus, when I described Jung’s dream
about addressing the multitude, I was not describing a piece of magic or
suggesting that Jung dabbled in fortune telling. I was recounting in the simple
terms of daily experience how Jung was “advised” by his own unconscious to
reconsider an inadequate judgment he had made with the conscious part of his
mind.

Now it follows from this that the dreaming of dreams is not a matter that the
well-adjusted Jungian can regard as simply a matter of chance. On the contrary,
the ability to establish communication with the unconscious is a part of the
whole man, and Jungians “teach” themselves (I can think of no better term) to
be receptive to dreams. When, therefore, Jung himself was faced with the
critical decision whether or not to write this book, he was able to draw on the
resources of both his conscious and his unconscious in making up his mind. And
all through this book you will find the dream treated as a direct, personal,
and meaningful communication to the dreamer—a communication that uses the
symbols common to all mankind, but that uses them on every occasion in an
entirely individual way that can be interpreted only by an entirely individual
“key.”

The second point I wish to make is about a particular characteristic of
argumentative method that is common to all the writers of this book—perhaps of
all Jungians. Those who have limited themselves to living entirely in the world
of the conscious and who reject communication with the unconscious bind
themselves by the laws of conscious, formal life. With the infallible (but
often meaningless) logic of the algebraic equation, they argue from assumed
premises to incontestably deduced conclusions. Jung and his colleagues seem to
me (whether they know it or not) to reject the limitations of this method of
argument. It is not that they ignore logic, but they appear all the time to be
arguing to the unconscious as well as to the conscious. Their dialectical
method is itself symbolic and often devious. They convince not by means of the
narrowly focused spotlight of the syllogism, but by skirting, by repetition, by
presenting a recurring view of the same subject seen each time from a slightly
different angle—until suddenly the reader who has never been aware of a single,
conclusive moment of proof finds that he has unknowingly embraced and taken
into himself some wider truth.

Jung’s arguments (and those of his colleagues) spiral upward over his subject
like a bird circling a tree. At first, near the ground, it sees only a
confusion of leaves and branches. Gradually, as it circles higher and higher,
the recurring aspects of the tree form a wholeness and relate to their
surroundings. Some readers may find this “spiraling” method of argument obscure
or even confusing for a few pages—but not, I think, for long. It is
characteristic of Jung’s method, and very soon the reader will find it carrying
him with it on a persuasive and profoundly absorbing journey.

The different sections of this book speak for themselves and require little
introduction from me. Jung’s own chapter introduces the reader to the
unconscious, to the archetypes and symbols that form its language and to the
dreams by which it communicates. Dr. Henderson in the following chapter
illustrates the appearance of several archetypal patterns in ancient mythology,
folk legend, and primitive ritual. Dr. von Franz, in the chapter entitled “The
Process of Individuation,” describes the process by which the conscious and the
unconscious within an individual learn to know, respect, and accommodate one
another. In a certain sense this chapter contains not only the crux of the
whole book, but perhaps the essence of Jung’s philosophy of life: Man becomes
whole, integrated, calm, fertile, and happy when (and only when) the process of
individuation is complete, when the conscious and the unconscious have learned
to live at peace and to complement one another. Mrs. Jaffé, like Dr. Henderson,
is concerned with demonstrating, in the familiar fabric of the conscious, man’s
recurring interest in—almost obsession with—the symbols of the unconscious.
They have for him a profoundly significant, almost a nourishing and sustaining,
inner attraction—whether they occur in the myths and fairy tales that Dr.
Henderson analyzes or in the visual arts, which, as Mrs. Jaffé shows, satisfy
and delight us by a constant appeal to the unconscious.

Finally I must say a brief word about Dr. Jacobi’s chapter, which is somewhat
separate from the rest of the book. It is in fact an abbreviated case history
of one interesting and successful analysis. The value of such a chapter in a
book like this is obvious; but two words of warning are nevertheless necessary.
First, as Dr. von Franz points out, there is no such thing as a typical Jungian
analysis. There can’t be, because every dream is a private and individual
communication, and no two dreams use the symbols of the unconscious in the same
way. So every Jungian analysis is unique—and it is misleading to consider this
one, taken from Dr. Jacobi’s clinical files (or any other one there has ever
been), as “representative” or “typical.” All one can say of the case of Henry
and his sometimes lurid dreams is that they form one true example of the way in
which the Jungian method may be applied to a particular case. Secondly, the
full history of even a comparatively uncomplicated case would take a whole book
to recount. Inevitably, the story of Henry’s analysis suffers a little in
compression. The references, for instance, to the I Ching have been somewhat
obscured and lent an unnatural (and to me unsatisfactory) flavor of the occult
by being presented out of their full context. Nevertheless, we concluded—and I
am sure the reader will agree—that, with the warnings duly given, the clarity,
to say nothing of the human interest, of Henry’s analysis greatly enriches this
book.

I began by describing how Jung came to write Man and his Symbols. I end by
reminding the reader of what a remarkable—perhaps unique—publication this is.
Carl Gustav Jung was one of the great doctors of all time and one of the great
thinkers of this century. His object always was to help men and women to know
themselves, so that by self-knowledge and thoughtful self-use they could lead
full, rich, and happy lives. At the very end of his own life, which was as
full, rich, and happy as any I have ever encountered, he decided to use the
strength that was left to him to address his message to a wider public than he
had ever tried to reach before. He completed his task and his life in the same
month. This book is his legacy to the broad reading public.





CONTENTS





Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Introduction



PART 1 APPROACHING THE UNCONSCIOUS

Carl G. Jung

PART 2 ANCIENT MYTHS AND MODERN MAN

Joseph L. Henderson

PART 3 THE PROCESS OF INDIVIDUATION

M.-L. von Franz

PART 4 SYMBOLISM IN THE VISUAL ARTS

Aniela Jaffé

PART 5 SYMBOLS IN AN INDIVIDUAL ANALYSIS

Jolande Jacobi

CONCLUSION: SCIENCE AND THE UNCONSCIOUS

M.-L. Franz

NOTES

ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

About the Author

