# PART 3 - The social aspect of the Self
[Metadata]: # {03.08}
[Descriptor]: # {03.08}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The social aspect of the Self
# The social aspect of the Self
Today the enormous growth of population, especially obvious in large cities,
inevitably has a depressing effect on us. We think, “Oh, well, I am only
so-and-so living at such-and-such an address, like thousands of other people.
If a few of them get killed, what difference can it make? There are far too
many people in any case.” And when we read in the paper about the deaths of
innumerable unknown people who personally mean nothing to us, the feeling that
our lives count for nothing is further increased. This is the moment when
attention to the unconscious brings the greatest help, for dreams show the
dreamer how each detail of his life is interwoven with the most significant
realities.

What we all know theoretically—that every thing depends on the
individual—becomes through dreams a alpable fact that everyone can experience
for himself. Sometimes we have a strong feeling that the Great Man wants
something from us and has set us very special tasks. Our response to this
experience can help us to acquire the strength to swim against the stream of
collective prejudice by taking our own soul seriously into account.

Naturally this is not always an agreeable task. For instance, you want to make
a trip with friends next Sunday; then a dream forbids it and demands that you
do some creative work instead. If you listen to your unconscious and obey it,
you must expect constant interference with your conscious plans. Your will is
crossed by other intentions—intentions that you must submit to, or at any rate
must seriously consider. This is partly why the obligation attached to the
process of individuation is often felt to be a burden rather than an immediate
blessing.

St. Christopher, the patron of all travelers, is a fitting symbol for this
experience. According to the legend, he felt an arrogant pride in his
tremendous physical strength, and was willing to serve only the strongest.
First he served a king; but when he saw that the king feared the devil, he left
him and became the devil’s servant. Then one day he discovered that the devil
feared the Crucifix, and so he decided to serve Christ if he could find him. He
followed the advice of a priest who told him to wait for Christ at a ford. In
the years that passed he carried many people across the river. But once, on a
dark, stormy night, a small child called out that he wanted to be carried over
the river. With the greatest ease, St. Christopher lifted the child on to his
shoulders, but he walked more slowly with every step, for his burden became
heavier and heavier. When he arrived in midstream, he felt “as if he carried
the whole universe.” He realized then that he had taken Christ upon his
shoulders—and Christ gave him remission of his sins and eternal life.

This miraculous child is a symbol of the Self that literally “depresses” the
ordinary human being, even though it is the only thing that can redeem him. In
many works of art the Christ child is depicted as, or with, the sphere of the
world, a motif that clearly denotes the Self, for a child and a sphere are both
universal symbols of totality.

When a person tries to obey the unconscious, he will often, as we have seen, be
unable to do just as he pleases. But equally he will often be unable to do what
other people want him to do. It often happens, for instance, that he must
separate from his group—from his family, his partner, or other personal
connections—in order to find himself. That is why it is sometimes said that
attending to the unconscious makes people antisocial and egocentric. As a rule
this is not true, for there is a little-known factor that enters into this
attitude: the collective (or, we could even say, social) aspect of the Self.



The achievement of psychological maturity is an individual task—and so is
increasingly difficult today when man’s individuality is threatened by
widespread conformity. A Swiss athletics display provides an image of mass
regimentation.

From a practical angle this factor reveals itself in that an individual who
follows his dreams for a considerable time will find that they are often
concerned with his relationships with other people. His dreams may warn him
against trusting a certain person too much, or he may dream about a favorable
and agreeable meeting with someone whom he may previously have never
consciously noticed. If a dream does pick up the image of another person for us
in some such fashion, there are two possible interpretations. First, the figure
may be a projection, which means that the dream-image of this person is a
symbol for an inner aspect of the dreamer himself. One dreams, for instance of
a dishonest neighbor, but the neighbor is used by the dream as a picture of
one’s own dishonesty. It is the task of dream interpretation to find out in
which special areas one’s own dishonesty comes into play. (This is called dream
interpretation on the subjective level.)

But it also happens at times that dreams genuinely tell us something about
other people. In this way, the unconscious plays a role that is far from being
fully understood. Like all the higher forms of life, man is in tune with the
living beings around him to a remarkable degree. He perceives their sufferings
and problems, their positive and negative attributes and values,
instinctively—quite independently of his conscious thoughts about other people.

Our dream life allows us to have a look at these subliminal perceptions and
shows us that they have an effect upon us. After having an agreeable dream
about somebody, even without interpreting the dream, I shall involuntarily look
at that person with more interest. The dream image may have deluded me, because
of my projections; or it may have given me objective information. To find out
which is the correct interpretation requires an honest, attentive attitude and
careful thought. But, as is the case with all inner processes, it is ultimately
the Self that orders and regulates one’s human relationships, so long as the
conscious ego takes the trouble to detect the delusive projections and deals
with these inside himself instead of outside. It is in this way that
spiritually attuned and similarly oriented people find their way to one
another, to create a group that cuts across all the usual social and
organizational affiliations of people. Such a group is not in conflict with
others; it is merely different and independent. The consciously realized
process of individuation thus changes a person’s relationships. The familiar
bonds such as kinship or common interests are replaced by a different type of
unity—a bond through the Self.

All activities and obligations that belong exclusively to the outer world do
definite harm to the secret activities of the unconscious. Through these
unconscious ties those who belong together come together. That is one reason
why attempts to influence people by advertisements and political propaganda are
destructive, even when inspired by idealistic motives.

This raises the important question of whether the unconscious part of the human
psyche can be influenced at all. Practical experience and accurate observation
show that one cannot influence one’s own dreams. There are people, it is true,
who assert that they can influence them. But if you look into their dream
material, you find that they do only what I do with my disobedient dog: I order
him to do those things I notice he wants to do anyhow, so that I can preserve
my illusion of authority. Only a long process of interpreting one’s dreams and
confronting himself with what they have to say can gradually transform the
unconscious. And conscious attitudes also must change in this process.

If a man who wants to influence public opinion misuses symbols for this
purpose, they will naturally impress the masses in so far as they are true
symbols, but whether or not the mass unconscious will be emotionally gripped by
them is something that cannot be calculated in advance, something that remains
completely irrational. No music publisher, for instance, can tell in advance
whether a song will become a hit or not, even though it may draw on popular
images and melodies. No deliberate attempts to influence the unconscious have
yet produced any significant results, and it seems that the mass unconscious
preserves its autonomy just as much as the individual unconscious.

At times, in order to express its purpose, the unconscious may use a motif from
our external world and thus may seem to have been influenced by it. For
instance, I have come across many dreams of modern people that have to do with
Berlin. In these dreams Berlin stands as a symbol of the psychic weak spot—the
place of danger—and for this reason is the place where the Self is apt to
appear. It is the point where the dreamer is torn by conflict and where he
might, therefore, be able to unite the inner opposites. I have also encountered
an extraordinary number of dream reactions to the film Hiroshima Mon Amour. In
most of these dreams the idea was expressed that either the two lovers in the
film must unite (which symbolizes the union of inner opposites) or there would
be an atomic explosion (a symbol of complete dissociation, equivalent to
madness).

Only when the manipulators of public opinion add commercial pressure or acts of
violence to their activities do they seem to achieve a temporary success. But
in fact this merely causes a repression of the genuine unconscious reactions.
And mass repression leads to the same result as individual repression; that is,
to neurotic dissociation and psychological illness. All such attempts to
repress the reactions of the unconscious must fail in the long run, for they
are basically opposed to our instincts.

We know from studying the social behavior of the higher animals that small
groups (from approximately 10 to 50 individuals) create the best possible
living conditions for the single animal as well as for the group, and man seems
to be no exception in this respect. His physical well-being, his spiritual
psychic health, and, beyond the animal realm, his cultural efficiency seem to
flourish best in such a social formation. As far as we at present understand
the process of individuation, the Self apparently tends to produce such small
groups by creating at the same time sharply defined ties of feeling between
certain individuals and feelings of relatedness to all people. Only if these
connections are created by the Self can one feel any assurance that envy,
jealousy, fighting, and all manner of negative projections will not break up
the group. Thus an unconditional devotion to one’s own process of individuation
also brings about the best possible social adaptation.

This does not mean, of course, that there will not be collisions of opinion and
conflicting obligations, or disagreement about the “right” way, in the face of
which one must constantly withdraw and listen to one’s inner voice in order to
find the individual standpoint that the Self intends one to have.

Fanatical political activity (but not the performance of essential duties)
seems somehow incompatible with individuation. A man who devoted himself
entirely to freeing his country from foreign occupation had this dream:





As in the dream quoted on this page, positive anima figures often assist and
guide men. Above, from a 10th-century psalter, David inspired by the muse
Melodia. Right, a goddess saves a shipwrecked sailor (in a 16th-century
painting). Left, on an early 20th-century postcard from Monte Carlo, gamblers’
“Lady Luck”—also a helpful anima.



With some of my compatriots I go up a stairway to the attic of a museum, where
there is a hall painted black and looking like a cabin on a ship. A
distinguished looking middle-aged lady opens the door; her name is X, daughter
of X. [X was a famous national hero of the dreamer’s country who attempted some
centuries ago to free it. He might be compared to Joan of Arc or William Tell.
In reality X had no children.] In the hall we see the portraits of two
aristocratic ladies dressed in flowery brocaded garments. While Miss X is
explaining these pictures to us, they suddenly come to life; first the eyes
begin to live, and then the chest seems to breathe. People are surprised and go
to a lecture room where Miss X will speak to them about the phenomenon. She
says that through her intuition and feeling these portraits came alive; but
some of the people are indignant and say that Miss X is mad; some even leave
the lecture room.

The important feature of this dream is that the anima figure, Miss X, is purely
a creation of the dream. She has, however, the name of a famous national
hero-liberator (as if she were, for instance, Wilhelmina Tell, the daughter of
William Tell). By the implications contained in the name, the unconscious is
pointing to the fact that today the dreamer should not try, as X did long ago,
to free his country in an outer way. Now, the dream says, liberation is
accomplished by the anima (by the dreamer’s soul), who accomplishes it by
bringing the images of the unconscious to life.

That the hall in the attic of the museum looks partly like a ship’s cabin
painted black is very meaningful. The black color hints at darkness, night, a
turning inward, and if the hall is a cabin, then the museum is somehow also a
ship. This suggests that when the mainland of collective consciousness becomes
flooded by unconsciousness and barbarism, this museum-ship, filled with living
images, may turn into a saving ark that will carry those who enter it to
another spiritual shore. Portraits hanging in a museum are usually the dead
remains of the past, and often the images of the unconscious are regarded in
the same way until we discover that they are alive and meaningful. When the
anima (who appears here in her rightful role of soul-guide) contemplates the
images with intuition and feeling, they begin to live.

The indignant people in the dream represent the side of the dreamer that is
influenced by collective opinion—something in him that distrusts and rejects
the bringing to life of psychic images. They personify a resistance to the
unconscious that might express itself something like this: “But what if they
begin dropping atom bombs on us? Psychological insight won’t be much help
then!”

This resistant side is unable to free itself from statistical thinking and from
extraverted rational prejudices. The dream, however, points out that in our
time genuine liberation can start only with a psychological transformation. To
what end does one liberate one’s country if afterward there is no meaningful
goal of life—no goal for which it is worthwhile to be free? If man no longer
finds any meaning in his life, it makes no difference whether he wastes away
under a communist or a capitalist regime. Only if he can use his freedom to
create something meaningful is it relevant that he should be free. That is why
finding the inner meaning of life is more important to the individual than
anything else, and why the process of individuation must be given priority.

Attempts to influence public opinion by means of newspapers, radio, television,
and advertising are based on two factors. On the one hand, they rely on
sampling techniques that reveal the trend of “opinion” or “wants”—that is, of
collective attitudes. On the other, they express the prejudices, projections,
and unconscious complexes (mainly the power complex) of those who manipulate
public opinion. But statistics do no justice to the individual. Although the
average size of stones in a heap may be five centimeters, one will find very
few stones of exactly this size in the heap.

That the second factor cannot create anything positive is clear from the start.
But if a single individual devotes himself to individuation, he frequently has
a positive contagious effect on the people around him. It is as if a spark
leaps from one to another. And this usually occurs when one has no intention of
influencing others and often when one uses no words. It is onto this inner path
that Miss X tried to lead the dreamer.

Nearly all religious systems on our planet contain images that symbolize the
process of individuation, or at least some stages of it. In Christian countries
the Self is projected, as I said before, onto the second Adam: Christ. In the
East the relevant figures are those of Krishna and Buddha.

For people who are contained in a religion (that is, who still really believe
in its content and teachings), the psychological regulation of their lives is
effected by religious symbols, and even their dreams often revolve around them.
When the late Pope Pius XII issued the declaration of the Assumption of Mary, a
Catholic woman dreamed, for instance, that she was a Catholic priestess. Her
unconscious seemed to extend the dogma in this way: “If Mary is now almost a
goddess, she should have priestesses.” Another Catholic woman, who had
resistances to some of the minor and outer aspects of her creed, dreamed that
the church of her home city had been pulled down and rebuilt, but that the
tabernacle with the consecrated host and the statue of the Virgin Mary were to
be transferred from the old to the new church. The dream showed her that some
of the man-made aspects of her religion needed renewal, but that its basic
symbols—God’s having become Man, and the Great Mother, the Virgin Mary—would
survive the change.

Such dreams demonstrate the living interest that the unconscious takes in the
conscious religious representations of an individual. This raises the question
whether it is possible to detect a general trend in all the religious dreams of
contemporary people. In the manifestations of the unconscious found in our
modern Christian culture, whether Protestant or Catholic, Dr. Jung often
observed that there is an unconscious tendency at work to round off our
trinitarian formula of the Godhead with a fourth element, which tends to be
feminine, dark, and even evil. Actually this fourth element has always existed
in the realm of our religious representations, but it was separated from the
image of God and became his counterpart, in the form of matter itself (or the
lord of matter—i.e., the devil). Now the unconscious seems to want to reunite
these extremes, the light having become too bright and the darkness too somber.
Naturally it is the central symbol of religion, the image of the Godhead, that
is most exposed to unconscious tendencies toward transformation.

A Tibetan abbot once told Dr. Jung that the most impressive mandalas in Tibet
are built up by imagination, or directed fantasy, when the psychological
balance of the group is disturbed or when a particular thought cannot be
rendered because it is not yet contained in the sacred doctrine and must
therefore be searched for. In these remarks, two equally important basic
aspects of mandala symbolism emerge. The mandala serves a conservative
purpose—namely, to restore a previously existing order. But it also serves the
creative purpose of giving expression and form to something that does not yet
exist, something new and unique. The second aspect is perhaps even more
important than the first, but does not contradict it. For, in most cases, what
restores the old order simultaneously involves some element of new creation. In
the new order the older pattern returns on a higher level. The process is that
of the ascending spiral, which grows upward while simultaneously returning
again and again to the same point.



This 15th-century statue of Mary contains within it images of both God and
Christ—a clear expression of the fact that the Virgin Mary can be said to be a
representation of the “Great Mother” archetype.

A painting by a simple woman who was brought up in Protestant surroundings
shows a mandala in the form of a spiral. In a dream this woman received an
order to paint the Godhead. Later (also in a dream) she saw it in a book. Of
God himself she saw only his wafting cloak, the drapery of which made a
beautiful display of light and shadow. This contrasted impressively with the
stability of the spiral in the deep blue sky. Fascinated by the cloak and the
spiral, the dreamer did not look closely at the other figure on the rocks. When
she awoke and thought about who these divine figures were, she suddenly
realized that it was “God himself.” This gave her a frightful shock, which she
felt for a long time.

Usually the Holy Ghost is represented in Christian art by a fiery wheel or a
dove, but here it has appeared as a spiral. This is a new thought, “not yet
contained in the doctrine,” which has spontaneously arisen from the
unconscious. That the Holy Ghost is the power that works for the further
development of our religious understanding is not a new idea, of course, but
its symbolic representation in the form of a spiral is new.

The same woman then painted a second picture, also inspired by a dream, showing
the dreamer with her positive animus standing above Jerusalem when the wing of
Satan descends to darken the city. The satanic wing strongly reminded her of
the wafting cloak of God in the first painting, but in the former dream the
spectator is high up, somewhere in heaven, and sees in front of her a terrific
split between the rocks. The movement in the cloak of God is an attempt to
reach Christ, the figure on the right, but it does not quite succeed. In the
second painting, the same thing is seen from below—from a human angle. Looking
at it from a higher angle, what is moving and spreading is a part of God; above
that rises the spiral as a symbol of possible further development. But seen
from the basis of our human reality, this same thing in the air is the dark,
uncanny wing of the devil.



Paintings of the dreams discussed on this page: Top right, the spiral (a form
of mandala) represents the Holy Ghost; right, the dark wing of Satan, from the
second dream. Neither motif would be a familiar religious symbol to most people
(nor were they to the dreamer): Each emerged spontaneously from the
unconscious.

In the dreamer’s life these two pictures became real in a way that does not
concern us here, but it is obvious that they also contain a collective meaning
that reaches beyond the personal. They may prophesy the descent of a divine
darkness upon the Christian hemisphere, a darkness that points, however, toward
the possibility of further evolution. Since the axis of the spiral does not
move upward but into the background of the picture, the further evolution will
lead neither to greater spiritual height nor down into the realm of matter, but
to another dimension, probably into the background of these divine figures. And
that means into the unconscious.

When religious symbols that are partly different from those we know emerge from
the unconscious of an individual, it is often feared that these will wrongfully
alter or diminish the officially recognized religious symbols. This fear even
causes many people to reject analytical psychology and the entire unconscious.

If I look at such a resistance from a psychological point of view, I should
have to comment that as far as religion is concerned, human beings can be
divided into three types. First, there are those who still genuinely believe
their religious doctrines, whatever they may be. For these people, the symbols
and doctrines “click” so satisfyingly with what they feel deep inside
themselves that serious doubts have no chance to sneak in. This happens when
the views of consciousness and the unconscious background are in relative
harmony. People of this sort can afford to look at new psychological
discoveries and facts without prejudice and need not fear that they may be
caused to lose their faith. Even if their dreams should bring up some
relatively unorthodox details, these can be integrated into their general view.

The second type consists of those people who have completely lost their faith
and have replaced it with purely conscious, rational opinions. For these
people, depth psychology simply means an introduction into newly discovered
areas of the psyche, and it should cause no trouble when they embark on the new
adventure and investigate their dreams to test the truth of them.

Then there is a third group of people who in one part of themselves (probably
the head) no longer believe in their religious traditions, whereas in some
other part they still do believe. The French philosopher Voltaire is an
illustration of this. He violently attacked the Catholic Church with rational
argument (écrasez l’infâme), but on his deathbed, according to some reports, he
begged for extreme unction. Whether this is true or not, his head was certainly
unreligious, whereas his feelings and emotions seem still to have been
orthodox. Such people remind one of a person getting stuck in the automatic
door of a bus; he can neither get out into free space nor re-enter the bus. Of
course the dreams of such persons could probably help them out of their
dilemma, but such people frequently have trouble turning toward the unconscious
because they themselves do not know what they think and want. To take the
unconscious seriously is ultimately a matter of personal courage and integrity.

The complicated situation of those who are caught in a no man’s land between
the two states of mind is partly created by the fact that all official
religious doctrines actually belong to the collective consciousness (what Freud
called the super-ego); but once, long ago, they sprang from the unconscious.
This is a point that many historians of religion and theologians challenge.
They choose to assume that there was once some sort of “revelation.” I have
searched for many years for concrete evidence for the Jungian hypothesis about
this problem; but it has been difficult to find because most rituals are so old
that one cannot trace their origin. The following example, however, seems to me
to offer a most important clue:

Black Elk, a medicine man of the Ogalala Sioux, who died not long ago, tells us
in his autobiography Black Elk Speaks that, when he was nine years old, he
became seriously ill and during a sort of coma had a tremendous vision. He saw
four groups of beautiful horses coming from the four corners of the world, and
then, seated within a cloud, he saw the Six Grandfathers, the ancestral spirits
of his tribe, “the grandfathers of the whole world.” They gave him six healing
symbols for his people and showed him new ways of life. But when he was 16
years old, he suddenly developed a terrible phobia whenever a thunder storm was
approaching, because he heard “thunder beings” calling to him “to make haste.”
It reminded him of the thundering noise made by the approaching horses in his
vision. An old medicine man explained to him that his fear came from the fact
that he was keeping his vision to himself, and said that he must tell it to his
tribe. He did so, and later he and his people acted out the vision in a ritual,
using real horses. Not merely Black Elk himself, but many other members of his
tribe felt infinitely better after this play. Some were even cured of their
diseases. Black Elk said: “Even the horses seemed to be healthier and happier
after the dance.”

The ritual was not repeated because the tribe was destroyed soon afterward. But
here is a different case in which a ritual still survives. Several Eskimo
tribes living near the Colville River in Alaska explain the origin of their
eagle festival in the following way:

A young hunter shot dead a very unusual eagle and was so impressed by the
beauty of the dead bird that he stuffed and made a fetish of him, honoring him
by sacrifices. One day, when the hunter had traveled far inland during his
hunting, two animal-men suddenly appeared in the role of messengers and led him
to the land of the eagles. There he heard a dark drumming noise, and the
messengers explained that this was the heartbeat of the dead eagle’s mother.
Then the eagle spirit appeared to the hunter as a woman clothed in black. She
asked him to initiate an eagle festival among his people to honor her dead son.
After the eagle people had shown him how to do this, he suddenly found himself,
exhausted, back in the place where he had met the messengers. Returning home,
he taught his people how to perform the great eagle festival—as they have done
faithfully ever since.

From such examples we see how a ritual or religious custom can spring directly
from an unconscious revelation experienced by a single individual. Out of such
beginnings, people living in cultural groups develop their various religious
activities with their enormous influence on the entire life of the society.
During a long process of evolution the original material is shaped and reshaped
by words and actions, is beautified, and acquires increasingly definite forms.
This crystallizing process, however, has a great disadvantage. More and more
people have no personal knowledge of the original experience and can only
believe what their elders and teachers tell them about it. They no longer know
that such happenings are real, and they are of course ignorant about how one
feels during the experience.

In their present forms, worked over and exceedingly aged, such religious
traditions often resist further creative alterations by the unconscious.
Theologians sometimes even defend these “true” religious symbols and symbolic
doctrines against the discovery of a religious function in the unconscious
psyche, forgetting that the values they fight for owe their existence to that
very same function. Without a human psyche to receive divine inspirations and
utter them in words or shape them in art, no religious symbol has ever come
into the reality of our human life. (We need only think of the prophets and the
evangelists.)

If someone objects that there is a religious reality in itself, independent of
the human psyche, I can only answer such a person with this question: “Who says
this, if not a human psyche?” No matter what we assert, we can never get away
from the existence of the psyche—for we are contained within it, and it is the
only means by which we can grasp reality.

Thus the modern discovery of the unconscious shuts one door forever. It
definitely excludes the illusory idea, so favored by some individuals, that a
man can know spiritual reality in itself. In modern physics, too, a door has
been closed by Heisenberg’s “principle of indeterminacy,” shutting out the
delusion that we can comprehend an absolute physical reality. The discovery of
the unconscious, however, compensates for the loss of these beloved illusions
by opening before us an immense and unexplored new field of realizations,
within which objective scientific investigation combines in a strange new way
with personal ethical adventure.

But, as I said at the outset, it is practically impossible to impart the whole
reality of one’s experience in the new field. Much is unique and can be only
partially communicated by language. Here, too, a door is shut against the
illusion that one can completely understand another person and tell him what is
right for him. Once again, however, one can find a compensation for this in the
new realm of experience by the discovery of the social function of the Self,
which works in a hidden way to unite separate individuals who belong together.

Intellectual chit-chat is thus replaced by meaningful events that occur in the
reality of the psyche. Hence, for the individual to enter seriously into the
process of individuation in the way that has been outlined means a completely
new and different orientation toward life. For scientists it also means a new
and different scientific approach to outer facts. How this will work out in the
field of human knowledge and in the social life of human beings cannot be
predicted. But to me it seems certain that Jung’s discovery of the process of
individuation is a fact that future generations will have to take into account
if they want to avoid drifting into a stagnant or even regressive outlook.

