# PART 4 - The retreat from reality
[Metadata]: # {04.05}
[Descriptor]: # {04.05}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
The retreat from reality
# The retreat from reality
Franz Marc once said: “The art that is coming will give formal expression to
our scientific conviction.” This was a truly prophetic saying. We have traced
the influence on artists of Freud’s psychoanalysis and of the discovery (or
rediscovery) of the unconscious in the early years of the 20th century. Another
important point is the connection between modern art and the results of
research in nuclear physics.

To put it in simple, nonscientific terms, nuclear physics has robbed the basic
units of matter of their absolute concreteness. It has made matter mysterious.
Paradoxically, mass and energy, wave and particle, have proved to be
interchangeable. The laws of cause and effect have become valid only up to a
certain point. It does not matter at all that these relativities,
discontinuities, and paradoxes hold good only on the margins of our world—only
for the infinitely small (the atom) and the infinitely great (the cosmos). They
have caused a revolutionary change in the concept of reality, for a new,
totally different, and irrational reality has dawned behind the reality of our
“natural” world, which is ruled by the laws of classical physics.

Corresponding relativities and paradoxes were discovered in the domain of the
psyche. Here, too, another world dawned on the margin of the world of
consciousness, governed by new and hitherto unknown laws that are strangely
akin to the laws of nuclear physics. The parallelism between nuclear physics
and the psychology of the collective unconscious was often a subject of
discussion between Jung and Wolfgang Pauli, the Nobel prizewinner in physics.
The space-time continuum of physics and the collective unconscious can be seen,
so to speak, as the outer and inner aspects of one and the same reality behind
appearances. (The relationship between physics and psychology will be discussed
by Dr. M.-L. von Franz in her concluding essay.)

It is a characteristic of this one world behind the worlds of physics and the
psyche that its laws, processes, and contents are unimaginable. That is a fact
of outstanding importance for the understanding of the art of our time. For the
main subject of modern art is, in a certain sense, unimaginable too. Therefore
much modern art has become “abstract.” The great artists of this century have
sought to give visible form to the “life behind things” and so their works are
a symbolic expression of a world behind consciousness (or, indeed, behind
dreams, for dreams are only rarely non-figurative). Thus they point to the
“one” reality, the “one” life, which seems to be the common background of the
two domains of physical and psychic appearances.

Only a few artists realized the connection between their form of expression and
physics and psychology. Kandinsky is one of the masters who expressed the deep
emotion he felt at the early discoveries of modern physical research. “In my
mind, the collapse of the atom was the collapse of the whole world: Suddenly
the stoutest walls fell. Everything turned unstable, insecure, and soft. I
would not have been surprised if a stone had melted into thin air before my
eyes. Science seemed to have been annihilated.” What resulted from this
disillusion was the artist’s withdrawal from the “realm of nature,” from the
“populous foreground of things.” “It seemed,” Kandinsky added, “as if I saw art
steadily disengaging itself from nature.”



The paintings on these pages, all by Franz Marc (1880–1916), show his gradual
development away from a concern with outward things, toward a more completely
“abstract” art. Above, Blue Horses (1911); right, Roes in a Wood (1913–14);
below, Play of Forms (1914).





This separation from the world of things happened more or less at the same time
to other artists, too. Franz Marc wrote: “Have we not learned from a thousand
years of experience that things cease to speak the more we hold up to them the
visual mirror of their appearance? Appearance is eternally flat.…” For Marc,
the goal of art was “to reveal unearthly life dwelling behind everything, to
break the mirror of life so that we may look being in the face.” Paul Klee
wrote: “The artist does not ascribe to the natural form of appearance the same
convincing significance as the realists who are his critics. He does not feel
so intimately bound to that reality, because he cannot see in the formal
products of nature the essence of the creative process. He is more concerned
with formative powers than with formal products.” Piet Mondrian accused cubism
of not having pursued abstraction to its logical end, “the expression of pure
reality.” That can only be attained by the “creation of pure form,”
unconditioned by subjective feelings and ideas. “Behind changing natural forms
there lies changeless pure reality.”

A great number of artists were seeking to get past appearances into the
“reality” of the background or the “spirit in matter” by a transmutation of
things—through fantasy, surrealism, dream pictures, the use of chance, etc. The
“abstract” artists, however, turned their backs on things. Their paintings
contained no identifiable concrete objects; they were, in Mondrian’s words,
simply “pure form.”

But it must be realized that what these artists were concerned with was
something far greater than a problem of form and the distinction between
“concrete” and “abstract,” figurative and non-figurative. Their goal was the
center of life and things, their changeless background, and an inward
certitude. Art had become mysticism.

The spirit in whose mystery art was submerged was an earthly spirit, which the
medieval alchemists had called Mercurius. He is a symbol of the spirit that
these artists divined or sought behind nature and things, “behind the
appearance of nature.” Their mysticism was alien to Christianity, for that
“Mercurial” spirit is alien to a “heavenly” spirit. Indeed, it was
Christianity’s dark adversary that was forging its way in art. Here we begin to
see the real historical and symbolic significance of “modern art.” Like the
hermetic movements in the Middle Ages, it must be understood as a mysticism of
the spirit of earth, and therefore as an expression of our time compensatory to
Christianity.

No artist sensed this mystic background of art more clearly or spoke of it with
greater passion than Kandin-sky. The importance of the great works of art of
all time did not lie, in his eyes, “on the surface, in externals, but in the
root of all roots—in the mystical content of art.” Therefore he says: “The
artist’s eye should always be turned in upon his inner life, and his ear should
be always alert for the voice of inward necessity. This is the only way of
giving expression to what the mystic vision commands.”

Kandinsky called his pictures a spiritual expression of the cosmos, a music of
the spheres, a harmony of colors and forms. “Form, even if it is quite abstract
and geometrical, has an inward clang; it is a spiritual being with effects that
coincide absolutely with that form.” “The impact of the acute angle of a
triangle on a circle is actually as overwhelming in effect as the finger of God
touching the finger of Adam in Michelangelo.”

In 1914, Franz Marc wrote in his Aphorisms: “Matter is a thing that man can at
best tolerate; he refuses to recognize it. The contemplation of the world has
become the penetration of the world. There is no mystic who, in his moments of
sublimest rapture, ever attained the perfect abstraction of modern thought, or
took his soundings with a deeper plummet.”

Paul Klee, who may be regarded as the poet among modern painters, says: “It is
the artist’s mission to penetrate as far as may be toward that secret ground
where primal law feeds growth. Which artist would not wish to dwell at the
central organ of all motion in space-time (be it the brain or the heart of
creation) from which all functions derive their life? In the womb of nature, in
the primal ground of creation, where the secret key to all things lies hidden?…
Our beating heart drives us downward, far down to the primal ground.” What is
encountered on this journey “must be taken most seriously when it is perfectly
fused with the appropriate artistic means in visible form,” because, as Klee
adds, it is not a question of merely reproducing what is seen; “the secretly
perceived is made visible.” Klee’s work is rooted in that primal ground. “My
hand is entirely the instrument of a more distant sphere. Nor is it my head
that functions in my work; it is something else.…” In his work the spirit of
nature and the spirit of the unconscious became inseparable. They have drawn
him and draw us, the onlookers, into their magic circle.

Klee’s work is the most complex expression—now poetic, now demonic—of the
chthonic spirit. Humor and bizarre ideas build a bridge from the realm of the
dark underworld to the human world; the bond between his fantasy and the earth
is the careful observation of the laws of nature and the love for all
creatures. “For the artist,” he once wrote, “the dialogue with nature is the
conditio sine qua non of his work.”

A different expression of the hidden unconscious spirit can be found in one of
the most notable of the younger “abstract” painters, Jackson Pollock, the
American who was killed in a car accident when he was 44. His work has had a
great influence on the younger artists of our time. In My Painting, he revealed
that he painted in a kind of trance: “When I am in my painting I am not aware
of what I am doing. It is only after a sort of ‘get acquainted’ period that I
see what I have been about. I have no fears about making changes, destroying
the image, etc., because the painting has a life of its own. I try to let it
come through. It is only when I lose contact with the painting that the result
is a mess. Otherwise there is pure harmony, an easy give and take, and the
painting comes out well.”

Pollock’s pictures, which were painted practically unconsciously, are charged
with boundless emotional vehemence. In their lack of structure they are almost
chaotic, a glowing lava stream of colors, lines, planes, and points. They may
be regarded as a parallel to what the alchemists called the massa confusa, the
prima materia, or chaos—all ways of defining the precious prime matter of the
alchemical process, the starting point of the quest for the essence of being.
Pollock’s pictures represent the nothing that is everything—that is, the
unconscious itself. They seem to live in a time before the emergence of
consciousness and being, or to be fantastic landscapes of a time after the
extinction of consciousness and being.



Above, Piet Mondrian’s Painting No. 1—an example of the modern approach to
“pure form” (Mondrian’s term) through the use of wholly abstract, geometrical
shapes.

In the middle of our century, the purely abstract picture without any regular
order of forms and colors has become the most frequent expression in painting.
The deeper the dissolution of “reality,” the more the picture loses its
symbolic content. The reason for this lies in the nature of the symbol and its
function. The symbol is an object of the known world hinting at something
unknown; it is the known expressing the life and sense of the inexpressible.
But in merely abstract paintings, the world of the known has completely
vanished. Nothing is left to form a bridge to the unknown.

On the other hand, these paintings reveal an unexpected background, a hidden
sense. They often turn out to be more or less exact images of nature itself,
showing an astounding similarity with the molecular structure of organic and
inorganic elements of nature. This is a perplexing fact. Pure abstraction has
become an image of concrete nature. But Jung may give us the key to
understanding:

“The deeper layers of the psyche,” he has said, “lose their individual
uniqueness as they retreat farther and farther into darkness. ‘Lower down,’
that is to say, as they approach the autonomous functional systems, they become
increasingly collective until they are universalized and extinguished in the
body’s materiality, i.e. in chemical substances. The body’s carbon is simply
carbon. Hence ‘at bottom’ the psyche is simply ‘world.’ ”

A comparison of abstract paintings and microphoto-graphs show that utter
abstraction of imaginative art has in a secret and surprising way become
“naturalistic,” its subject being elements of matter. The “great abstraction”
and the “great realism,” which parted at the beginning of our century, have
come together again. We remember Kandinsky’s words: “The poles open two paths,
which both lead to one goal at the end.” This “goal,” the point of union, is
reached in modern abstract paintings. But it is attained completely
unconsciously. The artist’s intention plays no part in the process.

This point leads to a most important fact about modern art: The artist is, as
it were, not so free in his creative work as he may think he is. If his work is
performed in a more or less unconscious way, it is controlled by laws of nature
that, on the deepest level, correspond to the laws of the psyche, and vice
versa.

The great pioneers of modern art gave clearest expression to its true aims and
to the depths from which the spirit rose that left its imprint on them. This
point is important, though later artists, who may have failed to realize it,
did not always plumb the same depths. Yet neither Kandinsky, nor Klee, nor any
other of the early masters of modern painting, was ever aware of the grave
psychological danger he was undergoing with the mystical submersion in the
chthonic spirit and the primal ground of nature. That danger must now be
explained.

As a starting point we may take another aspect of abstract art. The German
writer Wilhelm Worringer interpreted abstract art as the expression of a
metaphysical unease and anxiety that seemed to him to be more pronounced among
northern peoples. As he explained, they suffer from reality. The naturalness of
the southern peoples is denied to them and they long for a super-real and
super-sensual world to which they give expression in imaginative or abstract
art.

But, as Sir Herbert Read remarks in his Concise History of Modern Art,
metaphysical anxiety is no longer only Germanic and northern; it now
characterizes the whole of the modern world. Read quotes Klee, who wrote in his
Diary at the beginning of 1915: “The more horrifying this world becomes (as it
is in these days) the more art becomes abstract; while a world at peace
produces realistic art.” To Franz Marc, abstraction offered a refuge from the
evil and ugliness in this world. “Very early in life I felt that man was ugly.
The animals seemed to be more lovely and pure, yet even among them I discovered
so much that was revolting and hideous that my painting became more and more
schematic and abstract.”

A good deal may be learned from a conversation that took place in 1958 between
the Italian sculptor Marino Marini and the writer Edouard Roditi. The dominant
subject that Marini treated for years in many variations is the nude figure of
a youth on a horse. In the early versions, which he described in the
conversation as “symbols of hope and gratitude” (after the end of the Second
World War), the rider sits his horse with outstretched arms, his body bending
slightly backward. In the course of years the treatment of the subject became
more “abstract.” The more or less “classical” form of the rider gradually
dissolved.





The paintings of Jackson Pollock (left, his No. 23) were painted in a trance
(unconsciously) as are the works of other modern artists—such as the French
“action” painter Georges Mathieu (above left). The chaotic but powerful result
may be compared to the massa confusa of alchemy, and strangely resembles the
hitherto hidden forms of matter as revealed in microphotographs. Above, a
similar configuration: a vibration pattern made by sound waves in glycerine.

Speaking of the feeling underlying this change, Marini said: “If you look at my
equestrian statues of the last 12 years in order of time, you will notice that
the animal’s panic steadily increases, but that it is frozen with terror and
stands paralyzed rather than rearing or taking flight. That is all because I
believe that we are approaching the end of the world. In every figure, I strove
to express a deepening fear and despair. In this way I am attempting to
symbolize the last stage of a dying myth, the myth of the individual,
victorious hero, of the humanist’s man of virtue.”

In fairy tale and myth, the “victorious hero” is a symbol of consciousness. His
defeat, as Marini says himself, means the death of the individual, a phenomenon
that appears in a social context as the submergence of the individual in the
mass, and in art as the decline of the human element.

When Roditi asked whether Marini’s style was abandoning the classical canon on
its way to becoming “abstract,” Marini replied, “As soon as art has to express
fear, it must of itself depart from the classical ideal.” He found subjects for
his work in the bodies excavated at Pompeii. Roditi called Marini’s art a
“Hiroshima style,” for it conjures up visions of the end of a world. Marini
admitted it. He felt, he said, as if he had been expelled from an earthly
paradise. “Until recently, the sculptor aimed at full sensual and powerful
forms. But for the last 15 years, sculpture prefers forms in disintegration.”

The conversation between Marini and Roditi explains the transformation of
“sensory” art into abstraction that should be clear to anyone who has ever
walked open-eyed through an exhibition of modern art. However much he may
appreciate or admire its formal qualities, he can scarcely fail to sense the
fear, despair, aggression, and mockery that sounds like a cry from many works.
The “metaphysical anxiety” that is expressed by the distress in these pictures
and sculptures may have arisen from the despair of a doomed world, as it did
with Marini. In other cases, the emphasis may lie on the religious factor, on
the feeling that God is dead. There is a close connection between the two.

At the root of this inner distress lies the defeat (or rather the retreat) of
consciousness. In the upsurge of mystical experience, everything that once
bound man to the human world, to earth, to time and space, to matter and the
natural living of life, has been cast aside or dissolved. But unless the
unconscious is balanced by the experience of consciousness, it will implacably
reveal its contrary or negative aspect. The wealth of creative sound that made
the harmony of the spheres, or the wonderful mysteries of the primal ground,
have yielded to destruction and despair. In more than one case the artist has
become the passive victim of the unconscious.



Marini’s later work was influenced by the equally panic-stricken shapes of
bodies found at Pompeii (above)

In physics, too, the world of the background has revealed its paradoxical
nature; the laws of the inmost elements of nature, the newly discovered
structures and relations in its basic unit, the atom, have become the
scientific foundation for unprecedented weapons of destruction, and opened the
way to annihilation. Ultimate knowledge and the destruction of the world are
the two aspects of the discovery of the primal ground of nature.

Jung, who was as familiar with the dangerous dual nature of the unconscious as
with the importance of human consciousness, could offer mankind only one weapon
against catastrophe; the call for individual consciousness, which seems so
simple and yet is so arduous. Consciousness is not only indispensable as a
counterpoise to the unconscious, and not only gives the possibility of meaning
to life. It has also an eminently practical function. The evil witnessed in the
world outside, in neighbors or neighboring peoples, can be made conscious as
evil contents of our own psyche as well, and this insight would be the first
step to a radical change in our attitude to our neighbors.

Envy, lust, sensuality, lies, and all known vices are the negative, “dark”
aspect of the unconscious, which can manifest itself in two ways. In the
positive sense, it appears as a “spirit of nature,” creatively animating man,
things, and the world. It is the “chthonic spirit” that has been mentioned so
often in this chapter. In the negative sense, the unconscious (that same
spirit) manifests itself as a spirit of evil, as a drive to destroy.

As has already been pointed out, the alchemists personified this spirit as “the
spirit Mercurius” and called it. with good reason, Mercurius duplex (the
two-faced, dual Mercurius). In the religious language of Christianity, it is
called the devil. But, however improbable it may seem, the devil too has a dual
aspect. In the positive sense, he appears as Lucifer—literally, the
light-bringer.

Looked at in the light of these difficult and paradoxical ideas, modern art
(which we have recognized as symbolic of the chthonic spirit) also has a dual
aspect. In the positive sense it is the expression of a mysteriously profound
nature-mysticism; in the negative, it can only be interpreted as the expression
of an evil or destructive spirit. The two sides belong together, for the
paradox is one of the basic qualities of the unconscious and its contents.

To prevent any misunderstanding, it must once more be emphasized that these
considerations have nothing to do with artistic and aesthetic values, but are
solely concerned with the interpretation of modern art as a symbol or our time.

