# PART 4 - Modern painting as a symbol
[Metadata]: # {04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
Modern painting as a symbol
# Modern painting as a symbol
The terms “modern art” and “modern painting” are used in this chapter as the
layman uses them. What I will be dealing with, to use Kühn’s term, is modern
imaginative painting. Pictures of this kind can be “abstract” (or rather
“non-figurative”) but they need not always be so. There will be no attempt to
distinguish among such various forms as fauvism, cubism, expressionism,
futurism, suprematism, constructivism, orphism, and so on. Any specific
allusion to one or the other of these groups will be quite exceptional.

And I am not concerned with an aesthetic differentiation of modern paintings;
nor, above all, with artistic evaluations. Modern imaginative painting is here
taken simply as a phenomenon of our time. That is the only way in which the
question of its symbolic content can be justified and answered. In this brief
chapter it is possible to mention only a very few artists, and to select a few
of their works more or less at random. I must content myself with discussing
modern painting in terms of a small number of its representatives.

My starting point is the psychological fact that the artist has at all times
been the instrument and spokesman of the spirit of his age. His work can be
only partly understood in terms of his personal psychology. Consciously or
unconsciously, the artist gives form to the nature and values of his time,
which in their turn form him.

The modern artist himself often recognizes the interrelation of the work of art
and its time. Thus the French critic and painter Jean Bazaine writes in his
Notes on Contemporary Painting: “Nobody paints as he likes. All a painter can
do is to will with all his might the painting his age is capable of.” The
German artist Franz Marc, who died in the First World War, said: “The great
artists do not seek their forms in the mist of the past, but take the deepest
soundings they can of the genuine, profoundest center of gravity of their age.”
And, as far back as 1911. Kandinsky wrote in his famous essay “Concerning the
Spiritual in Art”: “Every epoch is given its own measure of artistic freedom,
and even the most creative genius may not leap over the boundary of that
freedom.”

For the last 50 years, “modern art” has been a general bone of contention, and
the discussion has lost none of its heat. The “yeas” are as passionate as the
“nays”; yet the reiterated prophecy that “modern” art is finished has never
come true. The new way of expression has been triumphant to an unimagined
degree. If it is threatened at all it will be because it has degenerated into
mannerism and modishness. (In the Soviet Union, where non-figurative art has
often been officially discouraged and produced only in private, figurative art
is threatened by a similar degeneration.)

The general public, in Europe at any rate, is still in the heat of the battle.
The violence of the discussion shows that feeling runs high in both camps. Even
those who are hostile to modern art cannot avoid being impressed by the works
they reject; they are irritated or repelled, but (as the violence of their
feelings shows) they are moved. As a rule, the negative fascination is no less
strong than the positive. The stream of visitors to exhibitions of modern art,
wherever and whenever they take place, testifies to something more than
curiosity. Curiosity would be satisfied sooner. And the fantastic prices that
are paid for works of modern art are a measure of the status conferred upon
them by society.

Fascination arises when the unconscious has been moved. The effect produced by
works of modern art cannot be explained entirely by their visible form. To the
eye trained in “classic” or “sensory” art, they are new and alien. Nothing in
works of non-figurative art reminds the spectator of his own world—no objects
in their own everyday surroundings, no human being or animal that speaks a
familiar language. There is no welcome, no visible accord in the cosmos created
by the artist. And yet, without any question, there is a human bond. It may be
even more intense than in works of sensory art, which make a direct appeal to
feeling and empathy.

It is the aim of the modern artist to give expression to his inner vision of
man, to the spiritual background of life and the world. The modern work of art
has abandoned not only the realm of the concrete, “natural,” sensuous world,
but also that of the individual. It has become highly collective and therefore
(even in the abbreviation of the pictorial hieroglyph) touches not only the few
but the many. What remains individual is the manner of representation, the
style and quality of the modern work of art. It is often difficult for the
layman to recognize whether the artist’s intentions are genuine and his
expressions spontaneous, neither imitated nor aimed at effect. In many cases he
must accustom himself to new kinds of line and color. He must learn them, as he
would learn a foreign language, before he can judge their expressiveness and
quality.

The pioneers of modern art have apparently understood how much they were asking
of the public. Never have artists published so many “manifestoes” and
explanations of their aims as in the 20th century. It is, however, not only to
others that they are striving to explain and justify what they are doing; it is
also to themselves. For the most part, these manifestoes are artistic
confessions of faith—poetic and often confused or self-contradictory attempts
to give clarity to the strange outcome of today’s artistic activities.

What really matters, of course, is (and always has been) the direct encounter
with the work of art. Yet, for the psychologist who is concerned with the
symbolic content of modern art, the study of these writings is most
instructive. For that reason the artists, wherever possible, will be allowed in
the following discussion to speak for themselves.

The beginnings of modern art appeared in the early 1900s. One of the most
impressive personalities of that initiatory phase was Kandinsky, whose
influence is still clearly traceable in the paintings of the second half of the
century. Many of his ideas have proved prophetic. In his essay “Concerning
Form,” he writes: “The art of today embodies the spiritual matured to the point
of revelation. The forms of this embodiment may be arranged between two poles:
(1) great abstraction; (2) great realism. These two poles open two paths, which
both lead to one goal in the end. These two elements have always been present
in art; the first was expressed in the second. Today it looks as if they were
about to carry on separate existences. Art seems to have put an end to the
pleasant completion of the abstract by the concrete, and vice versa.”





Left, a composition by Kurt Schwitters (1887–1948). His kind of imaginative art
uses (and transforms) ordinary things. In a sculpture by Picasso (born 1881),
ordinary objects—leaves—are part of the subject rather than the material.

To illustrate Kandinsky’s point that the two elements of art, the abstract and
the concrete, have parted company: In 1913, the Russian painter Kasimir
Malevich painted a picture that consisted only of a black square on a white
ground. It was perhaps the first purely “abstract” picture ever painted. He
wrote of it: “In my desperate struggle to liberate art from the ballast of the
world of objects, I took refuge in the form of the square.”

A year later, the French painter Marcel Duchamp set up an object chosen at
random (a bottle rack) on a pedestal and exhibited it. Jean Bazaine wrote of
it: “This bottle rack, torn from its utilitarian context and washed up on the
beach, has been invested with the lonely dignity of the derelict. Good for
nothing, there to be used, ready for anything, it is alive. It lives on the
fringe of existence its own disturbing, absurd life. The disturbing object—that
is the first step to art.”

In its weird dignity and abandonment, the object was immeasurably exalted and
given significance that can only be called magical. Hence its “disturbing,
absurd life.” It became an idol and at the same time an object of mockery. Its
intrinsic reality was annihilated.

Both Malevich’s square and Duchamp’s bottle rack were symbolic gestures that
had nothing to do with art in the strict sense of the word. Yet they mark the
two extremes (“great abstraction” and “great realism”) between which the
imaginative art of the succeeding decades may be aligned and understood.

From the psychological standpoint, the two gestures toward the naked object
(matter) and the naked non-object (spirit) point to a collective psychic rift
that created its symbolic expression in the years before the catastrophe of the
First World War. This rift had first appeared in the Renaissance, when it
became manifest as a conflict between knowledge and faith. Meanwhile,
civilization was removing man further and further from his instinctual
foundation, so that a gulf opened between nature and mind, between the
unconscious and consciousness. These opposites characterize the psychic
situation that is seeking expression in modern art.

