# PART 5 - Facing the irrational
[Metadata]: # {05.07}
[Descriptor]: # {05.07}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 5
Facing the irrational
# Facing the irrational
Henry’s subsequent behavior clearly showed that the dream (and the fact that
his dreams and the oracle book of the I Ching had brought him to face deep and
irrational powers within himself) had a very deep effect on him. From then on
he listened eagerly to the communications of his unconscious, and the analysis
took on a more and more agitated character. The tension that until then had
threatened the depths of his psyche with disruption came to the surface.
Nevertheless, he courageously held to the growing hope that a satisfactory
conclusion would be reached.

Barely two weeks after the oracle dream (but before it was discussed and
interpreted), Henry had another dream in which he was once again confronted
with the disturbing problem of the irrational:

Alone in my room. A lot of disgusting black beetles crawl out of a hole and
spread out over my drawing table. I try to drive them back into their hole by
means of some sort of magic. I am successful in this except for four or five
beetles, which leave my table again and spread out into the whole room. I give
up the idea of following them further; they are no longer so disgusting to me.
I set fire to the hiding place. A tall column of flame rises up. I fear my room
might catch fire, but this fear is unfounded.

By this time, Henry had become relatively skilful in the interpretation of his
dreams, so he tried to give this dream an explanation of his own. He said: “The
beetles are my dark qualities. They were awakened by the analysis and come up
now to the surface. There is a danger that they may overflow my professional
work (symbolized by the drawing table). Yet I did not dare to crush the
beetles, which reminded me of a kind of black scarab, with my hand as I first
intended, and therefore had to use ‘magic.’ In setting fire to their hiding
place I, so to speak, call for the collaboration of something divine, as the
upshooting column of flame makes me think of the fire that I associate with the
Ark of the Covenant.”

To go deeper into the symbolism of the dream, we must first of all note that
these beetles are black, which is the color of darkness, depression, and death.
In the dream, Henry is “alone” in his room—a situation that can lead to
introversion and corresponding states of gloom. In mythology, scarab beetles
often appear golden; in Egypt they were sacred animals symbolizing the sun. But
if they are black, they symbolize the opposite side of the sun—something
devilish. Therefore, Henry’s instinct is quite correct in wanting to fight the
beetles with magic.

Though four or five of the beetles remain alive, the decrease in the number of
beetles is enough to free Henry from his fear and disgust. He then tries to
destroy their breeding ground by fire. This is a positive action, because fire
can symbolically lead to transformation and rebirth (as, for instance, it does
in the ancient myth of the phoenix).

In his waking life, Henry now seemed full of enterprising spirit, but
apparently he had not yet learned to use it to the right effect. Therefore, I
want to consider another, later dream that throws an even clearer light on his
problem. This dream presents in symbolic language Henry’s fear of a responsible
relationship with a woman and his tendency to withdraw from the feeling side of
life:

An old man is breathing his last. He is surrounded by his relatives, and I am
among them. More and more people gather in the large room, each one
characterizing himself through precise statements. There are a good 40 persons
present. The old man groans and mutters about “unlived life.” His daughter, who
wants to make his confession easier, asks him in what sense “unlived” is to be
understood; whether cultural or moral. The old man will not answer. His
daughter sends me to a small adjoining room where I am to find the answer by
telling a fortune with cards. The “nine” that I turn up will give the answer,
according to the color.

I expect to turn up a nine at the very beginning, but at first I turn up
various kings and queens. I am disappointed. Now I turn up nothing but scraps
of paper that don’t belong to the game at all. Finally, I discover that there
are no more cards in the deck but only envelopes and other pieces of paper.
Together with my sister, who is also present, I look everywhere for the cards.
Finally I discover one under a textbook or a notebook. It is nine, a nine of
spades. It seems to me that this can only mean one thing: that it was moral
chains that prevented the old man from “living his life.”

The essential message of this strange dream was to warn Henry what awaited him
if he failed to “live his life.” The “old man” probably represents the dying
“ruling principle”—the principle that rules Henry’s consciousness, but whose
nature is unknown to him. The 40 people present symbolize the totality of
Henry’s psychic traits (40 is a number of totality, an elevated form of the
number four). That the old man is dying could be a sign that part of Henry’s
male personality is on the verge of a final transformation.

The daughter’s query about the possible cause of death is the unavoidable and
decisive question. There seems to be an implication that the old man’s
“morality” has prevented him from living out his natural feelings and drives.
Yet the dying man himself is silent. Therefore his daughter (the
personification of the mediating feminine principle, the anima) has to become
active.

She sends Henry to discover the answer from the fortune-telling cards—the
answer that will be given by the color of the first nine turned up. The fortune
telling has to take place in an unused, remote room (revealing how far away
such a happening is from Henry’s conscious attitude).

He is disappointed when at first he uncovers only kings and queens (perhaps
collective images of his youthful veneration for power and wealth). This
disappointment becomes intense when the picture-cards run out, for this shows
that the symbols of the inner world have also been exhausted. Only “scraps of
paper” are left, without any images. Thus the source of pictures dries up in
the dream. Henry then has to accept the help of his feminine side (this time
represented by his sister) to find the last card. Together with her, he finally
finds a card—the nine of spades. It is this card that must serve to indicate by
its color what the phrase “unlived life” meant in the dream. And it is
significant that the card is hidden under a textbook or notebook—which probably
represents the arid intellectual formulas of Henry’s technical interests.

The nine has been a “magic number” for centuries. According to the traditional
symbolism of numbers, it represents the perfect form of the perfected Trinity
in its threefold elevation. And there are endless other meanings associated
with the number nine in various ages and cultures. The color of the nine of
spades is the color of death and of lifelessness. Also, the “spade” image
strongly brings to mind the form of a leaf, and therefore its blackness
emphasizes that instead of being green, vital, and natural it is now dead.
Furthermore, the word “spade” derives from the Italian spada, which means
“sword” or “spear.” Such weapons often symbolize the penetrating, “cutting”
function of the intellect.

Thus the dream makes it clear that it was the “moral bonds” (rather than
“cultural”) that did not allow the old man to “live his life.” In Henry’s case,
these “bonds” probably were his fear of surrendering fully to life, of
accepting responsibilities to a woman and thereby becoming “unfaithful” to his
mother. The dream has declared that the “unlived life” is an illness of which
one can die.

Henry could no longer disregard the message of this dream. He realized that one
needs something more than reason as a helpful compass in the entanglements of
life; it is necessary to seek the guidance of the unconscious powers that
emerge as symbols out of the depths of the psyche. With this recognition, the
goal of this part of his analysis was reached. He now knew that he was finally
expelled from the paradise of an uncommitted life and that he could never
return to it.

