# PART 1 - The soul of man
[Metadata]: # {01.07}
[Descriptor]: # {01.07}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
The soul of man
# The soul of man
What we call civilized consciousness has steadily separated itself from the
basic instincts. But these instincts have not disappeared. They have merely
lost their contact with our consciousness and are thus forced to assert
themselves in an indirect fashion. This may be by means of physical symptoms in
the case of a neurosis, or by means of incidents of various kinds, like
unaccountable moods, unexpected forgetfulness, or mistakes in speech.

A man likes to believe that he is the master of his soul. But as long as he is
unable to control his moods and emotions, or to be conscious of the myriad
secret ways in which unconscious factors insinuate themselves into his
arrangements and decisions, he is certainly not his own master. These
unconscious factors owe their existence to the autonomy of the archetypes.
Modern man protects himself against seeing his own split state by a system of
compartments. Certain areas of outer life and of his own behavior are kept, as
it were, in separate drawers and are never confronted with one another.

As an example of this so-called compartment psychology, I remember the case of
an alcoholic who had come under the laudable influence of a certain religious
movement, and, fascinated by its enthusiasm, had forgotten that he needed a
drink. He was obviously and miraculously cured by Jesus, and he was
correspondingly displayed as a witness to divine grace or to the efficiency of
the said religious organization. But after a few weeks of public confessions,
the novelty began to pale and some alcoholic refreshment seemed to be
indicated, and so he drank again. But this time the helpful organization came
to the conclusion that the case was “pathological” and obviously not suitable
for an intervention by Jesus, so they put him into a clinic to let the doctor
do better than the divine Healer.

This is an aspect of the modern “cultural” mind that is worth looking into. It
shows an alarming degree of dissociation and psychological confusion.

If, for a moment, we regard mankind as one individual, we see that the human
race is like a person carried away by unconscious powers; and the human race
also likes to keep certain problems tucked away in separate drawers. But this
is why we should give a great deal of consideration to what we are doing, for
mankind is now threatened by self-created and deadly dangers that are growing
beyond our control. Our world is, so to speak, dissociated like a neurotic,
with the Iron Curtain marking the symbolic line of division. Western man,
becoming aware of the aggressive will to power of the East, sees himself forced
to take extraordinary measures of defense, at the same time as he prides
himself on his virtue and good intentions.

What he fails to see is that it is his own vices, which he has covered up by
good international manners, that are thrown back in his face by the communist
world, shamelessly and methodically. What the West has tolerated, but secretly
and with a slight sense of shame (the diplomatic lie, systematic deception,
veiled threats), comes back into the open and in full measure from the East and
ties us up in neurotic knots. It is the face of his own evil shadow that grins
at Western man from the other side of the Iron Curtain.

It is this state of affairs that explains the peculiar feeling of helplessness
of so many people in Western societies. They have begun to realize that the
difficulties confronting us are moral problems, and that the attempts to answer
them by a policy of piling up nuclear arms or by economic “competition” is
achieving little, for it cuts both ways. Many of us now understand that moral
and mental means would be more efficient, since they could provide us with
psychic immunity against the ever-increasing infection.

But all such attempts have proved singularly ineffective, and will do so as
long as we try to convince ourselves and the world that it is only they (i.e.,
our opponents) who are wrong. It would be much more to the point for us to make
a serious attempt to recognize our own shadow and its nefarious doings. If we
could see our shadow (the dark side of our nature), we should be immune to any
moral and mental infection and insinuation. As matters now stand, we lay
ourselves open to every infection, because we are really doing practically the
same thing as they. Only we have the additional disadvantage that we neither
see nor want to understand what we ourselves are doing, under the cover of good
manners.

The communist world, it may be noted, has one big myth (which we call an
illusion, in the vain hope that our superior judgment will make it disappear).
It is the time-hallowed archetypal dream of a Golden Age (or Paradise), where
everything is provided in abundance for everyone, and a great, just, and wise
chief rules over a human kindergarten. This powerful archetype in its infantile
form has gripped them, but it will never disappear from the world at the mere
sight of our superior points of view. We even support it by our own
childishness, for our Western civilization is in the grip of the same
mythology. Unconsciously, we cherish the same prejudices, hopes, and
expectations. We too believe in the welfare state, in universal peace, in the
equality of man, in his eternal human rights, in justice, truth, and (do not
say it too loudly) in the Kingdom of God on Earth.



“Our world is dissociated like a neurotic.” The Berlin Wall.

The sad truth is that man’s real life consists of a complex of inexorable
opposites—day and night, birth and death, happiness and misery, good and evil.
We are not even sure that one will prevail against the other, that good will
overcome evil, or joy defeat pain. Life is a battleground. It always has been,
and always will be; and if it were not so, existence would come to an end.

It was precisely this conflict within man that led the early Christians to
expect and hope for an early end to this world, or the Buddhists to reject all
earthly desires and aspirations. These basic answers would be frankly suicidal
if they were not linked up with peculiar mental and moral ideas and practices
that constitute the bulk of both religions and that, to a certain extent,
modify their radical denial of the world.

I stress this point because, in our time, there are millions of people who have
lost faith in any kind of religion. Such people do not understand their
religion any longer. While life runs smoothly without religion, the loss
remains as good as unnoticed. But when suffering comes, it is another matter.
That is when people begin to seek a way out and to reflect about the meaning of
life and its bewildering and painful experiences.

It is significant that the psychological doctor (within my experience) is
consulted more by Jews and Protestants than by Catholics. This might be
expected, for the Catholic Church still feels responsible for the cura animarum
(the care of the soul’s welfare). But in this scientific age, the psychiatrist
is apt to be asked the questions that once belonged in the domain of the
theologian. People feel that it makes, or would make, a great difference if
only they had a positive belief in a meaningful way of life or in God and
immortality. The specter of approaching death often gives a powerful incentive
to such thoughts. From time immemorial, men have had ideas about a Supreme
Being (one or several) and about the Land of the Hereafter. Only today do they
think they can do without such ideas.

Because we cannot discover God’s throne in the sky with a radiotelescope or
establish (for certain) that a beloved father or mother is still about in a
more or less corporeal form, people assume that such ideas are “not true.” I
would rather say that they are not “true” enough, for these are conceptions of
a kind that have accompanied human life from prehistoric times, and that still
break through into consciousness at any provocation.

Modern man may assert that he can dispense with them, and he may bolster his
opinion by insisting that there is no scientific evidence of their truth. Or he
may even regret the loss of his convictions. But since we are dealing with
invisible and unknowable things (for God is beyond human understanding, and
there is no means of proving immortality), why should we bother about evidence?
Even if we did not know by reason our need for salt in our food, we should
nonetheless profit from its use. We might argue that the use of salt is a mere
illusion of taste or a superstition; but it would still contribute to our
well-being. Why, then, should we deprive ourselves of views that would prove
helpful in crises and would give a meaning to our existence?

And how do we know that such ideas are not true? Many people would agree with
me if I stated flatly that such ideas are probably illusions. What they fail to
realize is that the denial is as impossible to “prove” as the assertion of
religious belief. We are entirely free to choose which point of view we take;
it will in any case be an arbitrary decision.

There is, however, a strong empirical reason why we should cultivate thoughts
that can never be proved. It is that they are known to be useful. Man
positively needs general ideas and convictions that will give a meaning to his
life and enable him to find a place for himself in the universe. He can stand
the most incredible hardships when he is convinced that they make sense; he is
crushed when, on top of all his misfortunes, he has to admit that he is taking
part in a “tale told by an idiot.”

It is the role of religious symbols to give a meaning to the life of man. The
Pueblo Indians believe that they are the sons of Father Sun, and this belief
endows their life with a perspective (and a goal) that goes far beyond their
limited existence. It gives them ample space for the unfolding of personality
and permits them a full life as complete persons. Their plight is infinitely
more satisfactory than that of a man in our own civilization who knows that he
is (and will remain) nothing more than an underdog with no inner meaning to his
life.



Every society has its idea of the archetypal paradise or golden age that, it is
believed, once existed and will exist again. A 19th-century American painting
embodies the idea of a past utopia: It shows William Penn’s treaty in 1682 with
the Indians occurring in an ideal setting where all is harmony and peace.



The Garden of Eden, depicted as a walled (and womb-like) garden in the
15th-century French painting, and showing the expulsion of Adam and Eve.

A sense of a wider meaning to one’s existence is what raises a man beyond mere
getting and spending. If he lacks this sense, he is lost and miserable. Had St.
Paul been convinced that he was nothing more than a wandering weaver of
carpets, he certainly would not have been the man he was. His real and
meaningful life lay in the inner certainty that he was the messenger of the
Lord. One may accuse him of suffering from megalomania, but this opinion pales
before the testimony of history and the judgment of subsequent generations. The
myth that took possession of him made him something greater than a mere
craftsman.

Such a myth, however, consists of symbols that have not been invented
consciously. They have happened. It was not the man Jesus who created the myth
of the god-man. It existed for many centuries before his birth. He himself was
seized by this symbolic idea, which, as St. Mark tells us, lifted him out of
the narrow life of the Nazarene carpenter.

Myths go back to the primitive storyteller and his dreams, to men moved by the
stirring of their fantasies. These people were not very different from those
whom later generations have called poets or philosophers. Primitive story
tellers did not concern themselves with the origin of their fantasies; it was
very much later that people began to wonder where a story originated. Yet,
centuries ago, in what we now call “ancient” Greece, men’s minds were advanced
enough to surmise that the tales of the gods were nothing but archaic and
exaggerated traditions of long-buried kings or chieftains. Men already took the
view that the myth was too improbable to mean what it said. They therefore
tried to reduce it to a generally understandable form.

In more recent times, we have seen the same thing happen with dream symbolism.
We became aware, in the years when psychology was in its infancy, that dreams
had some importance. But just as the Greeks persuaded themselves that their
myths were merely elaborations of rational or “normal” history, so some of the
pioneers of psychology came to the conclusion that dreams did not mean what
they appeared to mean. The images or symbols that they presented were dismissed
as bizarre forms in which repressed contents of the psyche appeared to the
conscious mind. It thus came to be taken for granted that a dream meant
something other than its obvious statement.

I have already described my disagreement with this idea—a disagreement that led
me to study the form as well as the content of dreams. Why should they mean
something different from their contents? Is there anything in nature that is
other than it is? The dream is a normal and natural phenomenon, and it does not
mean something it is not. The Talmud even says: “The dream is its own
interpretation.” The confusion arises because the dream’s contents are symbolic
and thus have more than one meaning. The symbols point in different directions
from those we apprehend with the conscious mind; and therefore they relate to
something either unconscious or at least not entirely conscious.



A South American tribe’s ritual boat burial. The dead man, placed in his own
canoe, is given food and clothing for his journey.

To the scientific mind, such phenomena as symbolic ideas are a nuisance because
they cannot be formulated in a way that is satisfactory to intellect and logic.
They are by no means the only case of this kind in psychology. The trouble
begins with the phenomenon of “affect” or emotion, which evades all the
attempts of the psychologist to pin it down with a final definition. The cause
of the difficulty is the same in both cases—the intervention of the
unconscious.

I know enough of the scientific point of view to understand that it is most
annoying to have to deal with facts that cannot be completely or adequately
grasped. The trouble with these phenomena is that the facts are undeniable and
yet cannot be formulated in intellectual terms. For this one would have to be
able to comprehend life itself, for it is life that produces emotions and
symbolic ideas.

The academic psychologist is perfectly free to dismiss the phenomenon of
emotion or the concept of the unconscious (or both) from his consideration. Yet
they remain facts to which the medical psychologist at least has to pay due
attention; for emotional conflicts and the intervention of the unconscious are
the classical features of his science. If he treats a patient at all, he comes
up against these irrationalities as hard facts, irrespective of his ability to
formulate them in intellectual terms. It is, therefore, quite natural that
people who have not had the medical psychologist’s experience find it difficult
to follow what happens when psychology ceases to be a tranquil pursuit for the
scientist in his laboratory and becomes an active part of the adventure of real
life. Target practice on a shooting range is far from the battlefield; the
doctor has to deal with casualties in a genuine war. He must concern himself
with psychic realities, even if he cannot embody them in scientific
definitions. That is why no textbook can teach psychology; one learns only by
actual experience.

We can see this point clearly when we examine certain well-known symbols:

The cross in the Christian religion, for instance, is a meaningful symbol that
expresses a multitude of aspects, ideas, and emotions; but a cross after a name
on a list simply indicates that the individual is dead. The phallus functions
as an all-embracing symbol in the Hindu religion, but if a street urchin draws
one on a wall, it just reflects an interest in his penis. Because infantile and
adolescent fantasies often continue far into adult life, many dreams occur in
which there are unmistakable sexual allusions. It would be absurd to understand
them as anything else. But when a mason speaks of monks and nuns to be laid
upon each other, or an electrician of male plugs and female sockets, it would
be ludicrous to suppose that he is indulging in glowing adolescent fantasies.
He is simply using colorful descriptive names for his materials. When an
educated Hindu talks to you about the Lingam (the phallus that represents the
god Siva in Hindu mythology), you will hear things we Westerns would never
connect with the penis. The Lingam is certainly not an obscene allusion; nor is
the cross merely a sign of death. Much depends upon the maturity of the dreamer
who produces such an image.

The interpretation of dreams and symbols demands intelligence. It cannot be
turned into a mechanical system and then crammed into unimaginative brains. It
demands both an increasing knowledge of the dreamer’s individuality and an
increasing self-awareness on the part of the interpreter. No experienced worker
in this field will deny that there are rules of thumb that can prove helpful,
but they must be applied with prudence and intelligence. One may follow all the
right rules and yet get bogged down in the most appalling nonsense, simply by
overlooking a seemingly unimportant detail that a better intelligence would not
have missed. Even a man of high intellect can go badly astray for lack of
intuition or feeling.

When we attempt to understand symbols, we are not only confronted with the
symbol itself, but we are brought up against the wholeness of the
symbol-producing individual. This includes a study of his cultural background,
and in the process one fills in many gaps in one’s own education. I have made
it a rule myself to consider every case as an entirely new proposition about
which I do not even know the ABC. Routine responses may be practical and useful
while one is dealing with the surface, but as soon as one gets in touch with
the vital problems, life itself takes over and even the most brilliant
theoretical premises become ineffectual words.

Imagination and intuition are vital to our understanding. And though the usual
popular opinion is that they are chiefly valuable to poets and artists (that in
“sensible” matters one should mistrust them), they are in fact equally vital in
all the higher grades of science. Here they play an increasingly important
role, which supplements that of the “rational” intellect and its application to
a specific problem. Even physics, the strictest of all applied sciences,
depends to an astonishing degree upon intuition, which works by way of the
unconscious (although it is possible to demonstrate afterward the logical
procedures that could have led one to the same result as intuition).

Intuition is almost indispensable in the interpretation of symbols, and it can
often ensure that they are immediately understood by the dreamer. But while
such a lucky hunch may be subjectively convincing, it can also be rather
dangerous. It can so easily lead to a false feeling of security. It may, for
instance, seduce both the interpreter and the dreamer into continuing a cosy
and relatively easy relation, which may end in a sort of mutual dream. The safe
basis of real intellectual knowledge and moral understanding gets lost if one
is content with the vague satisfaction of having understood by “hunch.” One can
explain and know only if one has reduced intuitions to an exact knowledge of
facts and their logical connections.

An honest investigator will have to admit that he cannot always do this, but it
would be dishonest not to keep it always in mind. Even a scientist is a human
being. So it is natural for him, like others, to hate the things he cannot
explain. It is a common illusion to believe that what we know today is all we
ever can know. Nothing is more vulnerable than scientific theory, which is an
ephemeral attempt to explain facts and not an everlasting truth in itself.

