# PART 3 - The Self: symbols of totality
[Metadata]: # {03.06}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The Self: symbols of totality
# The Self: symbols of totality
If an individual has wrestled seriously enough and long enough with the anima
(or animus) problem so that he, or she, is no longer partially identified with
it, the unconscious again changes its dominant character and appears in a new
symbolic form, representing the Self, the innermost nucleus of the psyche. In
the dreams of a woman this center is usually personified as a superior female
figure—a priestess, sorceress, earth mother, or goddess of nature or love. In
the case of a man, it manifests itself as a masculine initiator and guardian
(an Indian guru), a wise old man, a spirit of nature, and so forth. Two folk
tales illustrate the role that such a figure can play. The first is an Austrian
tale:

A king has ordered soldiers to keep the night watch beside the corpse of a
black princess, who has been bewitched. Every midnight she rises and kills the
guard. At last one soldier, whose turn it is to stand guard, despairs and runs
away into the woods. There he meets an “old guitarist who is our Lord Himself.”
This old musician tells him where to hide in the church and instructs him on
how to behave so that the black princess cannot get him. With this divine help
the soldier actually manages to redeem the princess and marry her.

Clearly, “the old guitarist who is our Lord Himself” is, in psychological
terms, a symbolic personification of the Self. With his help the ego avoids
destruction and is able to overcome—and even redeem—a highly dangerous aspect
of his anima.

In a woman’s psyche, as I have said, the Self assumes feminine
personifications. This is illustrated in the second story, an Eskimo tale:

A lonely girl who has been disappointed in love meets a wizard traveling in a
copper boat. He is the “Spirit of the Moon,” who has given all the animals to
mankind and who also bestows luck in hunting. He abducts the girl to the
heavenly realm. Once, when the Spirit of the Moon has left her, she visits a
little house near the Moon Ghost’s mansion. There she finds a tiny woman
clothed in the “intestinal membrane of the bearded seal,” who warns the heroine
against the Spirit of the Moon, saying that he plans to kill her. (It appears
that he is a killer of women, a sort of Bluebeard.) The tiny woman fashions a
long rope by means of which the girl can descend to earth at the time of the
new moon, which is the moment when the little woman can weaken the Moon Spirit.
The girl climbs down, but when she arrives on earth, she does not open her eyes
as quickly as the little woman told her to. Because of this, she is turned into
a spider and can never become human again.

As we have noted, the divine musician in the first tale is a representation of
the “wise old man,” a typical personification of the Self. He is akin to the
sorcerer Merlin of medieval legend or to the Greek god Hermes. The little woman
in her strange membrane-clothing is a parallel figure, symbolizing the Self as
it appears in the feminine psyche. The old musician saves the hero from the
destructive anima, and the little woman protects the girl against the Eskimo
“Bluebeard” (who is, in the form of the Moon Spirit, her animus). In this case,
however, things go wrong—a point that I shall take up later.

The Self, however, does not always take the form of a wise old man or wise old
woman. These paradoxical personifications are attempts to express something
that is not entirely contained in time—something simultaneously young and old.
The dream of a middle-aged man shows the Self appearing as a young man:

Coming from the street, a youth rode down into our garden. (There were no
bushes and no fence as there are in real life, and the garden lay open.) I did
not quite know if he came on purpose, or if the horse carried him here against
his will.

I stood on the path that leads to my studio and watched the arrival with great
pleasure. The sight of the boy on his beautiful horse impressed me deeply.

The horse was a small, wild, powerful animal, a symbol of energy (it resembled
a boar), and it had a thick, bristly, silvery-grey coat. The boy rode past me
between the studio and house, jumped off his horse, and led him carefully away
so that he would not trample on the flower bed with its beautiful red and
orange tulips. The flower bed had been newly made and planted by my wife (a
dream occurrence).

This youth signifies the Self, and with it renewal of life, a creative élan
vital, and a new spiritual orientation by means of which everything becomes
full of life and enterprise.

If a man devotes himself to the instructions of his own unconscious, it can
bestow this gift, so that suddenly life, which has been stale and dull, turns
into a rich, unending inner adventure, full of creative possibilities. In a
woman’s psychology, this same youthful personification of the Self can appear
as a supernaturally gifted girl. The dreamer in this instance is a woman in her
late forties:

I stood in front of a church and was washing the pavement with water. Then I
ran down the street just at the moment when the students from the high school
were let out. I came to a stagnant river across which a board or tree trunk had
been laid; but when I was attempting to walk across, a mischievous student
bounced on the board so that it cracked and I nearly fell into the water.
“Idiot!” I yelled out. On the other side of the river three little girls were
playing, and one of them stretched out her hand as if to help me. I thought
that her small hand was not strong enough to help me, but when I took it, she
succeeded, without the slightest effort, in pulling me across and up the bank
on the other side.



Personifications of the Self in men’s dreams often take the form of “wise old
men.” A painting by Dr. Jung of a personification that appeared in one of his
dreams: a winged old man who carried keys and who, Jung says, represented
“superior insight.”

The dreamer is a religious person, but according to her dream she cannot remain
in the Church (Protestant) any longer; in fact, she seems to have lost the
possibility of entering it, although she tries to keep the access to it as
clean as she can. According to the dream, she must now cross a stagnant river,
and this indicates that the flow of life is slowed down because of the
unresolved religious problem. (Crossing a river is a frequent symbolic image
for a fundamental change of attitude.) The student was interpreted by the
dreamer herself as the personification of a thought that she had previously
had—namely, that she might satisfy her spiritual yearning by attending high
school. Obviously the dream does not think much of this plan. When she dares to
cross the river alone, a personification of the Self (the girl), small but
supernaturally powerful, helps her.

But the form of a human being, whether youthful or old, is only one of the many
ways in which the Self can appear in dreams or visions. The various ages it
assumes show not only that it is with us throughout the whole of life, but also
that it exists beyond the consciously realized flow of life—which is what
creates our experience of time.

Just as the Self is not entirely contained in our conscious experience of time
(in our space-time dimension), it is also simultaneously omnipresent. Moreover,
it appears frequently in a form that hints at a special omnipresence; that is,
it manifests itself as a gigantic, symbolic human being who embraces and
contains the whole cosmos. When this image turns up in the dreams of an
individual, we may hope for a creative solution to his conflict, because now
the vital psychic center is activated (i.e., the whole being is condensed into
oneness) in order to overcome the difficulty.

It is no wonder that this figure of the Cosmic Man appears in many myths and
religious teachings. Generally he is described as something helpful and
positive. He appears as Adam, as the Persian Gayomart, or as the Hindu Purusha.
This figure may even be described as the basic principle of the whole world.
The ancient Chinese, for instance, thought that before anything whatever was
created, there was a colossal divine man called P’an Ku who gave heaven and
earth their form. When he cried, his tears made the Yellow River and the
Yangtze River; when he breathed, the wind rose; when he spoke, thunder was
loosed; and when he looked around lightning flashed. If he was in a good mood,
the weather was fine; if he was sad, it clouded over. When he died, he fell
apart, and from his body the five holy mountains of China sprang into
existence. His head became the Tai mountain in the East his trunk became the
Sung mountain in the center, his right arm the Heng mountain in the North, his
left arm the Heng mountain in the South, and his feet the Hua mountain in the
West. His eyes became the sun and moon.





Cosmic Man—the gigantic, all-embracing figure that personifies and contains the
entire universe—is a common representation of the Self in myths and dreams.
Left, the title page of Leviathan, by the 17th-century English philosopher
Thomas Hobbes. The gigantic figure of Leviathan is made up of all the people of
the “commonwealth”—Hobbes’s ideal society, in which the people choose their own
central authority (or “sovereign,” hence Leviathan’s crown, sword, and
scepter). Above, the cosmic figure of ancient China’s P’an Ku—shown covered in
leaves to indicate that Cosmic Man (or First Man) simply existed, like a plant,
grown in nature.

We have already seen that symbolic structures that seem to refer to the process
of individuation tend to be based on the motif of the number four—such as the
four functions of consciousness, or the four stages of the anima or animus. It
reappears here in the cosmic shape of P’an Ku. Only under specific
circumstances do other combinations of numbers appear in the psychic material.
The natural unhampered manifestations of the center are characterized by
fourfoldness—that is to say, by having four divisions, or some other structure
deriving from the numerical series of 4, 8, 16, and so on. Number 16 plays a
particularly important role, since it is composed of four fours.

In our Western civilization, similar ideas of a Cosmic Man have attached
themselves to the symbol of Adam, the First Man. There is a Jewish legend that
when God created Adam, he first gathered red, black, white, and yellow dust
from the four corners of the world, and thus Adam “reached from one end of the
world to the other.” When he bent down, his head was in the East and his feet
in the West. According to another Jewish tradition, the whole of mankind was
contained in Adam from the beginning, which meant the soul of everybody who
would ever be born. The soul of Adam, therefore, was “like the wick of a lamp
composed of innumerable strands.” In this symbol the idea of a total oneness of
all human existence, beyond all individual units, is clearly expressed.

In ancient Persia, the same original First Man—called Gayomart—was depicted as
a huge figure emitting light. When he died, every kind of metal sprang from his
body, and from his soul came gold. His semen fell upon the earth, and from it
came the first human couple in the form of two rhubarb shrubs. It is striking
that the Chinese P’an Ku was also depicted covered by leaves like a plant.
Perhaps this is because the First Man was thought of as a self-grown, living
unit that just existed without any animal impulse or self-will. Among a group
of people who live on the banks of the Tigris, Adam is still, at the present
time, worshiped as the hidden “super-soul” or mystical “protective spirit” of
the entire human race. These people say that he came from a date palm—another
repetition of the plant motif.

In the East, and in some gnostic circles in the West, people soon recognized
that the Cosmic Man was more an inner psychic image than a concrete outer
reality. According to Hindu tradition, for instance, he is something that lives
within the individual human being and is the only part that is immortal. This
inner Great Man redeems the individual by leading him out of creation and its
sufferings, back into his original eternal sphere. But he can do this only if
man recognizes him and rises from his sleep in order to be led. In the symbolic
myths of old India, this figure is known as the Purusha, a name that simply
means “man” or “person.” The Purusha lives within the heart of every
individual, and yet at the same time he fills the entire cosmos.

According to the testimony of many myths, the Cosmic Man is not only the
beginning but also the final goal of all life—of the whole of creation. “All
cereal nature means wheat, all treasure nature means gold, all generation means
man,” says the medieval sage Meister Eckhart. And if one looks at this from a
psychological standpoint, it is certainly so. The whole inner psychic reality
of each individual is ultimately oriented toward this archetypal symbol of the
Self.

In practical terms this means that the existence of human beings will never be
satisfactorily explained in terms of isolated instincts or purposive mechanism
such as hunger, power, sex, survival, perpetuation of the species, and so on.
That is, man’s main purpose is not to eat, drink, etc., but to be human. Above
and beyond these drives, our inner psychic reality serves to manifest a living
mystery that can be expressed only by a symbol, and for its expression the
unconscious often chooses the powerful image of the Cosmic Man.

In our Western civilization the Cosmic Man has been identified to a great
extent with Christ, and in the East with Krishna or with Buddha. In the Old
Testament this same symbolic figure turns up as the “Son of Man” and in later
Jewish mysticism is called Adam Kadmon. Certain religious movements of late
antiquity simply called him Anthropos (the Greek word for man). Like all
symbols this image points to an unknowable secret—to the ultimate unknown
meaning of human existence.

As we have noted, certain traditions assert that the Cosmic Man is the goal of
creation, but the achievement of this should not be understood as a possible
external happening. From the point of view of the Hindu, for example, it is not
so much that the external world will one day dissolve into the original Great
Man, but that the ego’s extraverted orientation toward the external world will
disappear in order to make way for the Cosmic Man. This happens when the ego
merges into the Self. The ego’s discursive flow of representations (which goes
from one thought to another) and its desires (which run from one object to
another) calm down when the Great Man within is encountered. Indeed, we must
never forget that for us outer reality exists only in so far as we perceive it
consciously, and that we cannot prove that it exists “in and by itself.”

The many examples coming from various civilizations and different periods show
the universality of the symbol of the Great Man. His image is present in the
minds of men as a sort of goal or expression of the basic mystery of our life.
Because this symbol represents that which is whole and complete, it is often
conceived of as a bisexual being. In this form the symbol reconciles one of the
most important pairs of psychological opposites—male and female. This union
also appears frequently in dreams as a divine, royal, or otherwise
distinguished couple. The following dream of a man of 47 shows this aspect of
the Self in a dramatic way:

I am on a platform, and below me I see a huge, black, beautiful she-bear with a
rough but well-groomed coat. She is standing on her hind legs, and on a stone
slab she is polishing a flat oval black stone, which becomes increasingly
shiny. Not far away a lioness and her cub do the same thing, but the stones
they are polishing are bigger and round in shape. After a while the she-bear
turns into a fat, naked woman with black hair and dark, fiery eyes. I behave in
an erotically provocative way toward her, and suddenly she moves nearer in
order to catch me. I get frightened and take refuge up on the building of
scaffolding where I was before. Later I am in the midst of many women, half of
whom are primitive and have rich black hair (as if they are transformed from
animals); the other half are our women [of the same nationality as the dreamer]
and have blonde or brown hair. The primitive women sing a very sentimental song
in melancholy, high-pitched voices. Now, in a high elegant carriage, there
comes a young man who wears on his head a royal golden crown, set with shining
rubies—a very beautiful sight. Beside him sits a blonde young woman, probably
his wife, but without a crown. It seems that the lioness and her cub have been
transformed into this couple. They belong to the group of primitives. Now all
the women (the primitives and the others) intone a solemn song, and the royal
carriage slowly travels toward the horizon.

Here the inner nucleus of the dreamer’s psyche shows itself at first in a
temporary vision of the royal couple, which emerges from the depths of his
animal nature and the primitive layer of his unconscious. The she-bear in the
beginning is a sort of mother goddess. (Artemis, for instance, was worshiped in
Greece as a she-bear.) The dark oval stone that she rubs and polishes probably
symbolizes the dreamer’s innermost being, his true personality. Rubbing and
polishing stones is a well-known, exceedingly ancient activity of man. In
Europe “holy” stones, wrapped in bark and hidden in caves, have been found in
many places; as containers of divine powers they were probably kept there by
men of the Stone Age. At the present time some of the Australian aborigines
believe that their dead ancestors continue to exist in stones as virtuous and
divine powers, and that if they rub these stones, the power increases (like
charging them with electricity) for the benefit of both the living and the
dead.

The man who had the dream we are discussing had hitherto refused to accept a
marital bond with a woman. His fear of being caught by this aspect of life
caused him, in the dream, to flee from the bear-woman to the spectator’s
platform where he could passively watch things without becoming entangled.
Through the motif of the stone being rubbed by the bear, the unconscious is
trying to show him that he should let himself come into contact with this side
of life; it is through the frictions of married life that his inner being can
be shaped and polished.

When the stone is polished, it will begin to shine like a mirror so that the
bear can see herself in it; this means that only by accepting earthly contact
and suffering can the human soul be transformed into a mirror in which the
divine powers can perceive themselves. But the dreamer runs away to a higher
place—i.e., into all sorts of reflections by which he can escape the demands of
life. The dream then shows him that if he runs away from the demands of life,
one part of his soul (his anima) will remain undifferentiated, a fact
symbolized by the group of non-descript women that splits apart into a
primitive half and a more civilized one.

The lioness and her son, which then appear on the scene, personify the
mysterious urge toward individuation, indicated by their work at shaping the
round stones. (A round stone is a symbol of the Self.) The lions, a royal
couple, are in themselves a symbol of totality. In medieval symbolism, the
“philosopher’s stone” (a pre-eminent symbol of man’s wholeness) is represented
as a pair of lions or as a human couple riding on lions. Symbolically, this
points to the fact that often the urge toward individuation appears in a veiled
form, hidden in the overwhelming passion one may feel for another person. (In
fact, passion that goes beyond the natural measure of love ultimately aims at
the mystery of becoming whole, and this is why one feels, when one has fallen
passionately in love, that becoming one with the other person is the only
worthwhile goal of one’s life.)



In dreams a mirror can symbolize the power of the unconscious to “mirror” the
individual objectively—giving him a view of himself that he may never have had
before. Only through the unconscious can such a view (which often shocks and
upsets the conscious mind) be obtained—just as in Greek myth the Gorgon Medusa,
whose look turned men to stone, could be gazed upon only in a mirror. Above,
Medusa reflected in a shield (a painting by the 17th-century artist
Caravaggio).

As long as the image of totality in this dream expresses itself in the form of
a pair of lions, it is still contained in some such overwhelming passion. But
when lion and lioness have turned into a king and queen, the urge to
individuate has reached the level of conscious realization, and can now be
understood by the ego as being the real goal of life.

Before the lions had transformed themselves into human beings, it was only the
primitive women who sang, and they did so in a sentimental manner; that is to
say, the feelings of the dreamer remained on a primitive and sentimental level.
But in honor of the humanized lions, both the primitive and the civilized women
chant a common hymn of praise. Their expression of their feelings in a united
form shows that the inner split in the anima has now changed into inner
harmony.

Still another personification of the Self appears in a report of a woman’s
so-called “active imagination.” (Active imagination is a certain way of
meditating imaginatively, by which one may deliberately enter into contact with
the unconscious and make a conscious connection with psychic phenomena. Active
imagination is among the most important of Jung’s discoveries. While it is in a
sense comparable to Eastern forms of meditation, such as the technique of Zen
Buddhism or of Tantric Yoga, or to Western techniques like those of the Jesuit
Exercitia, it is fundamentally different in that the meditator remains
completely devoid of any conscious goal or program. Thus the meditation becomes
the solitary experiment of a free individual, which is the reverse of a guided
attempt to master the unconscious. This, however, is not the place to enter
into a detailed analysis of active imagination; the reader will find one of
Jung’s descriptions of it in his paper on “The Transcendent Function.”)

In the woman’s meditation the Self appeared as a deer, which said to the ego:
“I am your child and your mother. They call me the ‘connecting animal’ because
I connect people, animals, and even stones with one another if I enter them. I
am your fate or the ‘objective I.’ When I appear, I redeem you from the
meaningless hazards of life. The fire burning inside me burns in the whole of
nature. If a man loses it, he becomes egocentric, lonely, disoriented, and
weak.”

The Self is often symbolized as an animal, representing our instinctive nature
and its connectedness with one’s surroundings. (That is why there are so many
helpful animals in myths and fairy tales.) This relation of the Self to all
surrounding nature and even the cosmos probably comes from the fact that the
“nuclear atom” of our psyche is somehow woven into the whole world, both outer
and inner. All the higher manifestations of life are somehow tuned to the
surrounding space-time continuum. Animals, for example, have their own special
foods, their particular home-building materials, and their definite
territories, to all of which their instinctive patterns are exactly tuned and
adapted. Time rhythms also play their part: We have only to think of the fact
that most grass-eating animals have their young at precisely the time of year
when the grass is richest and most abundant. With such considerations in mind,
a well-known zoologist has said that the “inwardness” of each animal reaches
far out into the world around it and “psychifies” time and space.

In ways that are still completely beyond our comprehension, our unconscious is
similarly attuned to our surroundings—to our group, to society in general, and,
beyond these, to the space-time continuum and the whole of nature. Thus the
Great Man of the Naskapi Indians does not merely reveal inner truths; he also
gives hints about where and when to hunt. And so from dreams the Naskapi hunter
evolves the words and melodies of the magical songs with which he attracts the
animals.

But this specific help from the unconscious is not given to primitive man
alone. Jung discovered that dreams can also give civilized man the guidance he
needs in finding his way through the problems of both his inner and his outer
life. Indeed, many of our dreams are concerned with details of our outer life
and our surroundings. Such things as the tree in front of the window, one’s
bicycle or car, or a stone picked up during a walk may be raised to the level
of symbolism through our dream life and become meaningful. If we pay attention
to our dreams, instead of living in a cold, impersonal world of meaningless
chance, we may begin to emerge into a world of our own, full of important and
secretly ordered events.

Our dreams, however, are not as a rule primarily concerned with our adaptation
to outer life. In our civilized world, most dreams have to do with the
development (by the ego) of the “right” inner attitude toward the Self, for
this relationship is far more disturbed in us by modern ways of thinking and
behaving than is the case with primitive people. They generally live directly
from the inner center, but we, with our uprooted consciousness, are so
entangled with external, completely foreign matters that it is very difficult
for the messages of the Self to get through to us. Our conscious mind
continually creates the illusion of a clearly shaped, “rear” outer world that
blocks off many other perceptions. Yet through our unconscious nature we are
inexplicably connected to our psychic and physical environment.

I have already mentioned the fact that the Self is symbolized with special
frequency in the form of a stone, precious or otherwise. We saw an example of
this in the stone that was being polished by the she-bear and the lions. In
many dreams the nuclear center, the Self, also appears as a crystal. The
mathematically precise arrangement of a crystal evokes in us the intuitive
feeling that even in so-called “dead” matter, there is a spiritual ordering
principle at work. Thus the crystal often symbolically stands for the union of
extreme opposites—of matter and spirit.

Perhaps crystals and stones are especially apt symbols of the Self because of
the “just-so-ness” of their nature. Many people cannot refrain from picking up
stones of a slightly unusual color or shape and keeping them, without knowing
why they do this. It is as if the stones held a living mystery that fascinates
them. Men have collected stones since the beginning of time and have apparently
assumed that certain ones were the containers of the life-force with all its
mystery. The ancient Germans, for instance, believed that the spirits of the
dead continued to live in their tombstones. The custom of placing stones on
graves may spring partly from the symbolic idea that something eternal of the
dead person remains, which can be most fittingly represented by a stone. For
while the human being is as different as possible from a stone, yet man’s
innermost center is in a strange and special way akin to it (perhaps because
the stone symbolizes mere existence at the farthest remove from the emotions,
feelings, fantasies, and discursive thinking of ego-consciousness). In this
sense the stone symbolizes what is perhaps the simplest and deepest
experience—the experience of something eternal that man can have in those
moments when he feels immortal and unalterable.



Often the Self is represented as a helpful animal (a symbol of the psyche’s
instinctual basis). Top left, the magic fox of Grimm’s fairy tale “The Golden
Bird.” Left, the Hindu monkey god Hanuman carrying the gods Siva and Parvati in
his heart.



Stones are frequent images of the Self (because they are complete—i.e.,
unchanging—and lasting). Some Hindus pass from father to son stones (above)
believed to to have magical powers.

The urge that we find in practically all civilizations to erect stone monuments
to famous men or on the site of important events probably also stems from this
symbolic meaning of the stone. The stone that Jacob placed on the spot where he
had his famous dream, or certain stones left by simple people on the tombs of
local saints or heroes, show the original nature of the human urge to express
an otherwise inexpressible experience by the stone-symbol. It is no wonder that
many religious cults use a stone to signify God or to mark a place of worship.
The holiest sanctuary of the Islamic world is the Ka’aba, the black stone in
Mecca to which all pious Moslems hope to make their pilgrimage.



According to Christian ecclesiastical symbolism, Christ is “the stone that the
builders rejected,” which became “the head of the corner” (Luke XX: 17).
Alternatively he is called “the spiritual rock from which the water of life
springs” (1 Cor. X:4). Medieval alchemists, who searched for the secret of
matter in a prescientific way, hoping to find God in it, or at least the
working of divine activity, believed that this secret was embodied in their
famous “philosophers’ stone.” But some of the alchemists dimly perceived that
their much-sought-after stone was a symbol of something that can be found only
within the psyche of man. An old Arabian alchemist, Morienus, said: “This thing
[the philosophers’ stone] is extracted from you: you are its mineral, and one
can find it in you; or, to put it more clearly, they [the alchemists] take it
from you. If you recognize this, the love and approbation of the stone will
grow within you. Know that this is true without doubt.”



The “eternal” quality of stones can be seen in pebbles or mountains; Left,
rocks beneath Mt. Williamson, California. Thus stone has always been used for
memorials—like the heads of four U.S. presidents (above) carved in the cliff
face of Mt. Rushmore, South Dakota.

The alchemical stone (the lapis) symbolizes something that can never be lost or
dissolved, something eternal that some alchemists compared to the mystical
experience of God within one’s own soul. It usually takes prolonged suffering
to burn away all the superfluous psychic elements concealing the stone. But
some profound inner experience of the Self does occur to most people at least
once in a lifetime. From the psychological standpoint, a genuinely religious
attitude consists of an effort to discover this unique experience, and
gradually to keep in tune with it (it is relevant that a stone is itself
something permanent), so that the Self becomes an inner partner toward whom
one’s attention is continually turned.

The fact that this highest and most frequent symbol of the Self is an object of
inorganic matter points to yet another field of inquiry and speculation: that
is, the still unknown relationship between what we call the unconscious psyche
and what we call “matter”—a mystery with which psychosomatic medicine endeavors
to grapple. In studying this still undefined and unexplained connection (it may
prove to be that “psyche” and “matter” are actually the same phenomenon, one
observed from “within” and the other from “without”), Dr. Jung put forward a
new concept that he called synchronicity. This term means a “meaningful
coincidence” of outer and inner events that are not themselves casually
connected. The emphasis lies on the word “meaningful.”

If an aircraft crashes before my eyes as I am blowing my nose, this is a
coincidence of events that has no meaning. It is simply a chance occurrence of
a kind that happens all the time. But if I bought a blue frock and, by mistake,
the shop delivered a black one on the day one of my near relatives died, this
would be a meaningful coincidence. The two events are not causally related, but
they are connected by the symbolic meaning that our society gives to the color
black.

Wherever Dr. Jung observed such meaningful coincidences in an individual’s
life, it seemed (as the individual’s dreams revealed) that there was an
archetype activated in the unconscious of the individual concerned. To
illustrate this by my example of the black frock: In such a case the person who
receives the black frock might also have had a dream on the theme of death. It
seems as if the underlying archetype is manifesting itself simultaneously in
inner and external events. The common denominator is a symbolically expressed
message—in this case a message about death.

As soon as we notice that certain types of event “like” to cluster together at
certain times, we begin to understand the attitude of the Chinese, whose
theories of medicine, philosophy, and even building are based on a “science” of
meaningful coincidences. The classical Chinese texts did not ask what causes
what, but rather what “likes” to occur with what. One can see much the same
underlying theme in astrology, and in the way various civilizations have
depended on consulting oracles and paying attention to omens. All of these are
attempts to provide an explanation of coincidence that is different from one
that depends on straightforward cause and effect.

In creating the concept of synchronicity, Dr. Jung sketched a way in which we
might penetrate deeper into the inter-relation of psyche and matter. And it is
precisely toward such a relation that the symbol of the stone seems to point.
But this is still a completely open and insufficiently explored matter, with
which future generations of psychologists and physicists must deal.

It may seem that my discussion of synchronicity has led me away from my main
theme, but I feel it is necessary to make at least a brief introductory
reference to it because it is a Jungian hypothesis that seems to be pregnant
with future possibilities of investigation and application. Synchronistic
events, moreover, almost invariably accompany the crucial phases of the process
of individuation. But too often they pass unnoticed, because the individual has
not learned to watch for such coincidences and to make them meaningful in
relation to the symbolism of his dreams.

