# PART 3 - The realization of the shadow
[Metadata]: # {03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 3
The realization of the shadow
# The realization of the shadow
Whether the unconscious comes up at first in a helpful or a negative form,
after a time the need usually arises to re-adapt the conscious attitude in a
better way to the unconscious factors—therefore to accept what seems to be
“criticism” from the unconscious. Through dreams one becomes acquainted with
aspects of one’s own personality that for various reasons one has preferred not
to look at too closely. This is what Jung called “the realization of the
shadow.” (He used the term “shadow” for this unconscious part of the
personality because it actually often appears in dreams in a personified form.)





Three examples of a “collective infection” that can weld people into an
irrational mob—and to which the shadow (the dark side of the ego-personality)
is vulnerable. Top left, a scene from a 1961 Polish film concerning
17th-century French nuns who were “possessed by the devil.” Lower left, a
drawing by Brueghel depicts the affliction (largely psychosomatic) called “St.
Vitus’ Dance,” which was widespread in the Middle Ages. Above, the fiery-cross
emblem of the Ku Klux Klan, the white supremacy “secret society” of America’s
South whose racial intolerance has often led to acts of mob violence.

The shadow is not the whole of the unconscious personality. It represents
unknown or little-known attributes and qualities of the ego—aspects that mostly
belong to the personal sphere and that could just as well be conscious. In some
aspects, the shadow can also consist of collective factors that stem from a
source outside the individual’s personal life.

When an individual makes an attempt to see his shadow, he becomes aware of (and
often ashamed of) those qualities and impulses he denies in himself but can
plainly see in other people—such things as egotism, mental laziness, and
sloppiness; unreal fantasies, schemes, and plots; carelessness and cowardice;
inordinate love of money and possessions—in short, all the little sins about
which he might previously have told himself: “That doesn’t matter; nobody will
notice it, and in any case other people do it too.”

If you feel an overwhelming rage coming up in you when a friend reproaches you
about a fault, you can be fairly sure that at this point you will find a part
of your shadow, of which you are unconscious. It is, of course, natural to
become annoyed when others who are “no better” criticize you because of shadow
faults. But what can you say if your own dreams—an inner judge in your own
being—reproach you? That is the moment when the ego gets caught, and the result
is usually embarrassed silence. Afterward the painful and lengthy work of
self-education begins—a work, we might say, that is the psychological
equivalent of the labors of Hercules. This unfortunate hero’s first task, you
will remember, was to clean up in one day the Augean Stables, in which hundreds
of cattle had dropped their dung for many decades—a task so enormous that the
ordinary mortal would be overcome by discouragement at the mere thought of it.

The shadow does not consist only of omissions. It shows up just as often in an
impulsive or inadvertent act. Before one has time to think, the evil remark
pops out, the plot is hatched, the wrong decision is made, and one is
confronted with results that were never intended or consciously wanted.
Furthermore, the shadow is exposed to collective infections to a much greater
extent than is the conscious personality. When a man is alone, for instance, he
feels relatively all right; but as soon as “the others” do dark, primitive
things, he begins to fear that if he doesn’t join in, he will be considered a
fool. Thus he gives way to impulses that do not really belong to him at all. It
is particularly in contacts with people of the same sex that one stumbles over
both one’s shadow and those of other people. Although we do see the shadow in a
person of the opposite sex, we are usually much less annoyed by it and can more
easily pardon it.

In dreams and myths, therefore, the shadow appears as a person of the same sex
as that of the dreamer. The following dream may serve as an example. The
dreamer was a man of 48 who tried to live very much for and by himself, working
hard and disciplining himself, repressing pleasure and spontaneity to a far
greater extent than suited his real nature.

I owned and inhabited a very big house in town, and I didn’t yet know all its
different parts. So I took a walk through it and discovered, mainly in the
cellar, several rooms about which I knew nothing and even exits leading into
other cellars or into subterranean streets. I felt uneasy when I found that
several of these exits were not locked and some had no locks at all. Moreover,
there were some laborers at work in the neighborhood who could have sneaked
in.…

When I came up again to the ground floor, I passed a back yard where again I
discovered different exits into the street or into other houses. When I tried
to investigate them more closely, a man came up to me laughing loudly and
calling out that we were old pals from the elementary school. I remembered him
too, and while he was telling me about his life, I walked along with him toward
the exit and strolled with him through the streets.

There was a strange chiaroscuro in the air as we walked through an enormous
circular street and arrived at a green lawn where three galloping horses
suddenly passed us. They were beautiful, strong animals, wild but well-groomed,
and they had no rider with them. (Had they run away from military service?)

The maze of strange passages, chambers, and unlocked exits in the cellar
recalls the old Egyptian representation of the underworld, which is a
well-known symbol of the unconscious with its unknown possibilities. It also
shows how one is “open” to other influences in one’s unconscious shadow side,
and how uncanny and alien elements can break in. The cellar, one can say, is
the basement of the dreamer’s psyche. In the back yard of the strange building
(which represents the still unperceived psychic scope of the dreamer’s
personality) an old school friend suddenly turns up. This person obviously
personifies another aspect of the dreamer himself—an aspect that had been part
of his life as a child but that he had forgotten and lost. It often happens
that a person’s childhood qualities (for instance, gaiety, irascibility, or
perhaps trustfulness) suddenly disappear, and one does not know where or how
they have gone. It is such a lost characteristic of the dreamer that now
returns (from the back yard) and tries to make friends again. This figure
probably stands for the dreamer’s neglected capacity for enjoying life and for
his extraverted shadow side.



Below, Anxious Journey by the modern Italian artist de Chirico. The title and
gloomy passages of the painting express the nature of the first contact with
the unconscious when the individuation process begins. The unconscious is often
symbolized by corridors, labyrinths, or mazes: Right, drawings of three mazes:
top to bottom, a Finnish stone maze (Bronze Age); a 19th-century British turf
maze; and a maze (in tiles) on the floor of Chartres Cathedral (it could be
walked as a symbolic pilgrimage to the Holy Land).



But we soon learn why the dreamer feels “uneasy” just before meeting this
seemingly harmless old friend. When he strolls with him in the street, the
horses break loose. The dreamer thinks they may have escaped from military
service (that is to say, from the conscious discipline that has hitherto
characterized his life). The fact that the horses have no rider shows that
instinctive drives can get away from conscious control. In this old friend, and
in the horses, all the positive force reappears that was lacking before and
that was badly needed by the dreamer.

This is a problem that often comes up when one meets one’s “other side.” The
shadow usually contains values that are needed by consciousness, but that exist
in a form that makes it difficult to integrate them into one’s life. The
passages and the large house in this dream also show that the dreamer does not
yet know his own psychic dimensions and is not yet able to fill them out.

The shadow in this dream is typical for an introvert (a man who tends to retire
too much from outer life). In the case of an extravert, who is turned more
toward outer objects and outer life, the shadow would look quite different.

A young man who had a very lively temperament embarked again and again on
successful enterprises, while at the same time his dreams insisted that he
should finish off a piece of private creative work he had begun. The following
was one of those dreams:

A man is lying on a couch and has pulled the cover over his face. He is a
Frenchman, a desperado who would take on any criminal job. An official is
accompanying me downstairs, and I know that a plot has been made against me:
namely, that the Frenchman should kill me as if by chance. (That is how it
would look from the outside.) He actually sneaks up behind me when we approach
the exit, but I am on my guard. A tall, portly man (rather rich and
influential) suddenly leans against the wall beside me, feeling ill. I quickly
grab the opportunity to kill the official by stabbing his heart. “One only
notices a bit of moisture”—this is said like a comment. Now I am safe, for the
Frenchman won’t attack me since the man who gave him his orders is dead.
(Probably the official and the successful portly man are the same person, the
latter somehow replacing the former.)

The desperado represents the other side of the dreamer—his introversion—which
has reached a completely destitute state. He lies on a couch (i.e., he is
passive) and pulls the cover over his face because he wants to be left alone.
The official, on the other hand, and the prosperous portly man (who are
secretly the same person) personify the dreamer’s successful outer
responsibilities and activities. The sudden illness of the portly man is
connected with the fact that this dreamer had in fact become ill several times
when he had allowed his dynamic energy to explode too forcibly in his external
life. But this successful man has no blood in his veins—only a sort of
moisture—which means that these external ambitious activities of the dreamer
contain no genuine life and no passion, but are bloodless mechanisms. Thus it
would be no real loss if the portly man were killed. At the end of the dream,
the Frenchman is satisfied; he obviously represents a positive shadow figure
who had turned negative and dangerous only because the conscious attitude of
the dreamer did not agree with him.

This dream shows us that the shadow can consist of many different elements—for
instance, of unconscious ambition (the successful portly man) and of
introversion (the Frenchman). This particular dreamer’s association to the
French, moreover, was that they know how to handle love affairs very well.
Therefore the two shadow figures also represent two well-known drives: power
and sex. The power drive appears momentarily in a double form, both as an
official and as a successful man. The official, or civil servant, personifies
collective adaptation, whereas the successful man denotes ambition; but
naturally both serve the power drive. When the dreamer succeeds in stopping
this dangerous inner force, the Frenchman is suddenly no longer hostile. In
other words, the equally dangerous aspect of the sex drive has also
surrendered.

Obviously, the problem of the shadow plays a great role in all political
conflicts. If the man who had this dream had not been sensible about his shadow
problem, he could easily have identified the desperate Frenchman with the
“dangerous Communists” of outer life, or the official plus the prosperous man
with the “grasping capitalists.” In this way he would have avoided seeing that
he had within him such warring elements. If people observe serve their own
unconscious tendencies in other people, this is called a “projection.”
Political agitation in all countries is full of such projections, just as much
as the backyard gossip of little groups and individuals. Projections of all
kinds obscure our view of our fellow men, spoiling its objectivity, and thus
spoiling all possibility of genuine human relationships.



“For over five years this man has been chasing around Europe like a madman in
search of something he could set on fire. Unfortunately he again and again
finds hirelings who open the gates of their country to this international
incendiary.”



Rather than face our defects as revealed by the shadow, we project them on to
others—for instance, on to our political enemies. Left, a poster made for a
parade in Communist China shows America as an evil serpent (bearing Nazi
swastikas) killed by a Chinese hand. Above, Hitler during a speech; the
quotation is his description of Churchill.

And there is an additional disadvantage in projecting our shadow. If we
identify our own shadow with, say, the Communists or the capitalists, a part of
our own personality remains on the opposing side. The result is that we shall
constantly (though involuntarily) do things behind our own backs that support
this other side, and thus we shall unwittingly help our enemy. If, on the
contrary, we realize the projection and can discuss matters without fear or
hostility, dealing with the other person sensibly, then there is a chance of
mutual understanding—or at least of a truce.

Whether the shadow becomes our friend or enemy depends largely upon ourselves.
As the dreams of the unexplored house and the French desperado both show, the
shadow is not necessarily always an opponent. In fact, he is exactly like any
human being with whom one has to get along, sometimes by giving in, sometimes
by resisting, sometimes by giving love—whatever the situation requires. The
shadow becomes hostile only when he is ignored or misunderstood.

Sometimes, though not often, an individual feels impelled to live out the worse
side of his nature and to repress his better side. In such cases the shadow
appears as a positive figure in his dreams. But to a person who lives out his
natural emotions and feelings, the shadow may appear as a cold and negative
intellectual; it then personifies poisonous judgments and negative thoughts
that have been held back. So, whatever form it takes, the function of the
shadow is to represent the opposite side of the ego and to embody just those
qualities that one dislikes most in other people.

It would be relatively easy if one could integrate the shadow into the
conscious personality just by attempting to be honest and to use one’s insight.
But, unfortunately, such an attempt does not always work. There is such a
passionate drive within the shadowy part of oneself that reason may not prevail
against it. A bitter experience coming from the outside may occasionally help;
a brick, so to speak, has to drop on one’s head to put a stop to shadow drives
and impulses. At times a heroic decision may serve to halt them, but such a
superhuman effort is usually possible only if the Great Man within (the Self)
helps the individual to carry it through.

The fact that the shadow contains the overwhelming power of irresistible
impulse does not mean, however, that the drive should always be heroically
repressed. Sometimes the shadow is powerful because the urge of the Self is
pointing in the same direction, and so one does not know whether it is the Self
or the shadow that is behind the inner pressure. In the unconscious, one is
unfortunately in the same situation as in a moonlit landscape. All the contents
are blurred and merge into one another, and one never knows exactly what or
where anything is, or where one thing begins and ends. (This is known as the
“contamination” of unconscious contents.)

When Jung called one aspect of the unconscious personality the shadow, he was
referring to a relatively well-defined factor. But sometimes everything that is
unknown to the ego is mixed up with the shadow, including even the most
valuable and highest forces. Who, for instance, could be quite sure whether the
French desperado in the dream I quoted was a useless tramp or a most valuable
introvert? And the bolting horses of the preceding dream—should they be allowed
to run free or not? In a case when the dream itself does not make things clear,
the conscious personality will have to make the decision.

If the shadow figure contains valuable, vital forces, they ought to be
assimilated into actual experience and not repressed. It is up to the ego to
give up its pride and priggishness and to live out something that seems to be
dark, but actually may not be. This can require a sacrifice just as heroic as
the conquest of passion, but in an opposite sense.

The ethical difficulties that arise when one meets one’s shadow are well
described in the 18th Book of the Koran. In this tale Moses meets Khidr (“the
Green One” or “first angel of God”) in the desert. They wander along together,
and Khidr expresses his fear that Moses will not be able to witness his deeds
without indignation. If Moses cannot bear with him and trust him, Khidr will
have to leave.

Presently Khidr scuttles the fishing boat of some poor villagers. Then, before
Mose’s eyes, he kills a handsome young man, and finally he restores the fallen
wall of a city of unbelievers. Moses cannot help expressing his indignation,
and so Khidr has to leave him. Before his departure, however, he explains his
reasons for his actions: By scuttling the boat he actually saved it for its
owners because pirates were on their way to steal it. As it is, the fishermen
can salvage it. The handsome young man was on his way to commit a crime, and by
killing him Khidr saved his pious parents from infamy. By restoring the wall,
two pious young men were saved from ruin because their treasure was buried
under it. Moses, who had been so morally indignant, saw now (too late) that his
judgment had been too hasty. Khidr’s doings had seemed to be totally evil, but
in fact they were not.

Looking at this story naïvely, one might assume that Khidr is the lawless,
capricious, evil shadow of pious, law-abiding Moses. But this is not the case.
Khidr is much more the personification of some secret creative actions of the
Godhead. (One can find a similar meaning in the famous Indian story of “The
King and the Corpse” as interpreted by Henry Zimmer.) It is no accident that I
have not quoted a dream to illustrate this subtle problem. I have chosen this
well-known story from the Koran because it sums up the experience of a
lifetime, which would very rarely be expressed with such clarity in an
individual dream.

When dark figures turn up in our dreams and seem to want something, we cannot
be sure whether they personify merely a shadowy part of ourselves, or the Self,
or both at the same time. Divining in advance whether our dark partner
symbolizes a shortcoming that we should overcome or a meaningful bit of life
that we should accept—this is one of the most difficult problems that we
encounter on the way to individuation. Moreover, the dream symbols are often so
subtle and complicated that one cannot be sure of their interpretation. In such
a situation all one can do is accept the discomfort of ethical doubt—making no
final decisions or commitments and continuing to watch the dreams. This
resembles the situation of Cinderella when her stepmother threw a heap of good
and bad peas in front of her and asked her to sort them out. Although it seemed
quite hopeless, Cinderella began patiently to sort the peas, and suddenly doves
(or ants, in some versions) came to help her. These creatures symbolize
helpful, deeply unconscious impulses that can only be felt in one’s body, as it
were, and that point to a way out.

Somewhere, right at the bottom of one’s own being, one generally does know
where one should go and what one should do. But there are times when the clown
we call “I” behaves in such a distracting fashion that the inner voice cannot
make its presence felt.

Sometimes all attempts to understand the hints of the unconscious fail, and in
such a difficulty one can only have the courage to do what seems to be right,
while being ready to change course if the suggestions of the unconscious should
suddenly point in another direction. It may also happen (although this is
unusual) that a person will find it better to resist the urge of the
unconscious, even at the price of feeling warped by doing so, rather than
depart too far from the state of being human. (This would be the situation of
people who have to live out a criminal disposition in order to be completely
themselves.)

The strength and inner clarity needed by the ego in order to make such a
decision stem secretly from the Great Man, who apparently does not want to
reveal himself too clearly. It may be that the Self wants the ego to make a
free choice, or it may be that the Self depends on human consciousness and its
decisions to help him to become manifest. When it comes to such difficult
ethical problems, no one can truly judge the deeds of others. Each man has to
look to his own problem and try to determine what is right for himself. As an
old Zen Buddhist Master said, we must follow the example of the cowherd who
watches his ox “with a stick so that it will not graze on other people’s
meadows.”

These new discoveries of depth psychology are bound to make some change in our
collective ethical views, for they will compel us to judge all human actions in
a much more individual and subtle way. The discovery of the unconscious is one
of the most far-reaching discoveries of recent times. But the fact that
recognition of its unconscious reality involves honest self-examination and
reorganization of one’s life causes many people to continue to behave as if
nothing at all has happened. It takes a lot of courage to take the unconscious
seriously and to tackle the problems it raises. Most people are too indolent to
think deeply about even those moral aspects of their behavior of which they are
conscious; they are certainly too lazy to consider how the unconscious affects
them.

