# PART 4 - The symbol of the circle
[Metadata]: # {04.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 4
The symbol of the circle
# The symbol of the circle
Dr. M.-L. von Franz has explained the circle (or sphere) as a symbol of the
Self. It expresses the totality of the psyche in all its aspects, including the
relationship between man and the whole of nature. Whether the symbol of the
circle appears in primitive sun worship or modern religion, in myths or dreams,
in the mandalas drawn by Tibetan monks, in the ground plans of cities, or in
the spherical concepts of early astronomers, it always points to the single
most vital aspect of life—its ultimate wholeness.

An Indian creation myth relates that the god Brahma, standing on a huge,
thousand-petaled lotus, turned his eyes to the four points of the compass. This
fourfold survey from the circle of the lotus was a kind of preliminary
orientation, an indispensable taking of bearings, before he began his work of
creation.

A similar story is told of Buddha. At the moment of his birth, a lotus flower
rose from the earth and he stepped into it to gaze into the 10 directions of
space. (The lotus in this case was eight-rayed; and Buddha also gazed upward
and downward, making 10 directions.) This symbolic gesture of survey was the
most concise method of showing that from the moment of his birth, the Buddha
was a unique personality, predestined to receive illumination. His personality
and his further existence were given the imprint of wholeness.

The spatial orientation performed by Brahma and Buddha may be regarded as
symbolic of the human need for psychic orientation. The four functions of
consciousness described by Dr. Jung in his chapter, p. 61—thought, feeling,
intuition, and sensation—equip man to deal with the impressions of the world he
receives from within and without. It is by means of these functions that he
comprehends and assimilates his experience; it is by means of them that he can
respond. Brahma’s four-fold survey of the universe symbolizes the necessary
integration of these four functions that man must achieve. (In art, the circle
is often eight-rayed. This expresses a reciprocal overlapping of the four
functions of consciousness, so that four further intermediate functions come
about—for instance, thought colored by feeling or intuition, or feeling tending
toward sensation.)

In the visual art of India and the Far East, the four- or eight-rayed circle is
the usual pattern of the religious images that serve as instruments of
meditation. In Tibetan Lamaism especially, richly figured mandalas play an
important part. As a rule, these mandalas represent the cosmos in its relation
to divine powers.

But a great many of the eastern meditation figures are purely geometrical in
design; these are called yantras. Aside from the circle, a very common yantra
motif is formed by two interpenetrating triangles, one point-upward, the other
point-downward. Traditionally, this shape symbolizes the union of Shiva and
Shakti, the male and female divinities, a subject that also appears in
sculpture in countless variations. In terms of psychological symbolism, it
expresses the union of opposites—the union of the personal, temporal world of
the ego with the non-personal, timeless world of the non-ego. Ultimately, this
union is the fulfillment and goal of all religions: It is the union of the soul
with God. The two interpenetrating triangles have a symbolic meaning similar to
that of the more common circular mandala. They represent the wholeness of the
psyche or Self, of which consciousness is just as much a part as the
unconscious.

In both the triangle yantras and the sculptural representations of the union of
Shiva and Shakti, the emphasis lies on a tension between the opposites. Hence
the marked erotic and emotional character of many of them. This dynamic quality
implies a process—the creation, or coming into being, of wholeness—while the
four- or eight-rayed circle represents wholeness as such, as an existing
entity.



A yantra (a form of mandala), composed of nine linked triangles. The mandala,
symbolizing wholeness, is often connected with exceptional beings of myth or
legend.

The abstract circle also figures in Zen painting. Speaking of a picture
entitled The Circle, by the famous Zen priest Sangai, another Zen master
writes: “In the Zen sect, the circle represents enlightenment. It symbolizes
human perfection.”

Abstract mandalas also appear in European Christian art. Some of the most
splendid examples are the rose windows of the cathedrals. These are
representations of the Self of man transposed onto the cosmic plane. (A cosmic
mandala in the shape of a shining white rose was revealed to Dante in a
vision.) We may regard as mandalas the haloes of Christ and the Christian
saints in religious paintings. In many cases, the halo of Christ is alone
divided into four, a significant allusion to his sufferings as the Son of Man
and his death on the Cross, and at the same time a symbol of his differentiated
wholeness. On the walls of early Romanesque churches, abstract circular figures
can sometimes be seen; they may go back to pagan originals.

In non-Christian art, such circles are called “sun wheels.” They appear in rock
engravings that date back to the neolithic epoch before the wheel was invented.
As Jung has pointed out, the term “sun wheel” denotes only the external aspect
of the figure. What really mattered at all times was the experience of an
archetypal, inner image, which Stone Age man rendered in his art as faithfully
as he depicted bulls, gazelles, or wild horses.

Many pictorial mandalas are to be found in Christian art: for example, the
rather rare picture of the Virgin in the center of a circular tree, which is
the God-symbol of the burning bush. The most widely current mandalas in
Christian art are those of Christ surrounded by the four Evangelists. These go
back to the ancient Egyptian representations of the god Horus and his four
sons.

In architecture the mandala also plays an important part—but one that often
passes unnoticed. It forms the ground plan both of secular and sacred buildings
in nearly all civilizations; it enters into classical, medieval, and even
modern town planning. A classical example appears in Plutarch’s account of the
foundation of Rome. According to Plutarch, Romulus sent for builders from
Etruria who instructed him by sacred usages and written rules about all the
ceremonies to be observed—in the same way “as in the mysteries.” First they dug
a round pit where the Comitium, or Court of Assembly, now stands, and into this
pit they threw symbolic offerings of the fruits of the earth. Then each man
took a small piece of earth of the land from which he came, and these were all
thrown into the pit together. The pit was given the name of mundus (which also
meant the cosmos). Round it Romulus drew the boundary of the city in a circle
with a plow drawn by a bull and a cow. Wherever a gate was planned, the
plowshare was taken out and the plow carried over.

The city founded in this solemn ceremony was circular in shape. Yet the old and
famous description of Rome is urbs quadrata, the square city. According to one
theory that attempts to reconcile this contradiction, the word quadrata must be
understood to mean “quadripartite”; that is, the circular city was divided into
four parts by two main arteries running from north to south and west to east.
The point of intersection coincided with the mundus mentioned by Plutarch.



Top of page, an example of the mandala in religious architecture: the Angkor
Wat Buddhist temple in Cambodia, a square building with entrances at the four
corners. Above, the ruins of a fortified camp in Denmark (c. A.D. 1000), which
was laid out in a circle—as is the fortress town (upper right) of Palmanova,
Italy (built in 1593), with its star-shaped fortifications. Right, 10 streets
meet at L’Étoile, Paris, to form a mandala.



According to another theory, the contradiction can be understood only as a
symbol, namely as a visual representation of the mathematically insoluble
problem of the squaring of the circle, which had greatly preoccupied the Greeks
and was to play so great a part in alchemy. Strangely enough, before describing
the circle ceremony of the foundation of the city by Romulus, Plutarch also
speaks of Rome as Roma quadrata, a square city. For him, Rome was both a circle
and a square.

In each theory a true mandala is involved, and that links up with Plutarch’s
statement that the foundation of the city was taught by the Etruscans “as in
the mysteries,” as a secret rite. It was more than a mere outward form. By its
mandala ground plan, the city, with its inhabitants, is exalted above the
purely secular realm. This is further emphasized by the fact that the city has
a center, the mundus, which established the city’s relationship to the “other”
realm, the abode of the ancestral spirits. (The mundus was covered by a great
stone, called the “soul stone.” On certain days the stone was removed, and
then, it was said, the spirits of the dead rose from the shaft.)

A number of medieval cities were founded on the ground plan of a mandala and
were surrounded by an approximately circular wall. In such a city, as in Rome,
two main arteries divided it into “quarters” and led to the four gates. The
church or cathedral stood at the point of intersection of these arteries. The
inspiration of the medieval city with its quarters was the Heavenly Jerusalem
(in the Book of Revelations), which had a square ground plan and walls with
three times four gates. But Jerusalem had no temple at its center, for God’s
immediate presence was the center of it. (The mandala ground plan for a city is
by no means outmoded. A modern example is the city of Washington, D.C.)

Whether in classical or in primitive foundations, the mandala ground plan was
never dictated by considerations of aesthetics or economics. It was a
transformation of the city into an ordered cosmos, a sacred place bound by its
center to the other world. And this transformation accorded with the vital
feelings and needs of religious man.

Every building, sacred or secular, that has a mandala ground plan is the
projection of an archetypal image from within the human unconscious onto the
outer world. The city, the fortress, and the temple become symbols of psychic
wholeness, and in this way exercise a specific influence on the human being who
enters or lives in the place. (It need hardly be emphasized that even in
architecture the projection of the psychic content was a purely unconscious
process. “Such things cannot be thought up,” Dr. Jung has written, “but must
grow again from the forgotten depths if they are to express the deepest
insights of consciousness and the loftiest intuitions of the spirit, thus
amalgamating the uniqueness of present-day consciousness with the age-old past
of humanity.”)

The central symbol of Christian art is not the mandala, but the cross or
crucifix. Up to Carolingian times, the equilateral or Greek cross was the usual
form, and therefore the mandala was indirectly implied. But in the course of
time the center moved upward until the cross took on the Latin form, with the
stake and the crossbeam, that is customary today. This development is important
because it corresponds to the inward development of Christianity up to the high
Middle Ages. In simple terms, it symbolized the tendency to remove the center
of man and his faith from the earth and to “elevate” it into the spiritual
sphere. This tendency sprang from the desire to put into action Christ’s
saying: “My kingdom is not of this world.” Earthly life, the world, and the
body were therefore forces that had to be overcome. Medieval man’s hopes were
thus directed to the beyond, for it was only from paradise that the promise of
fulfillment beckoned.

This endeavor reached its climax in the Middle Ages and in medieval mysticism.
The hopes of the beyond found expression not only in the raising of the center
of the cross; it can also be seen in the increasing height of the Gothic
cathedrals, which seem to set the laws of gravity at defiance. Their cruciform
ground plan is that of the elongated Latin cross (though the baptisteries, with
the font in the center, have a true mandala ground plan.)

With the dawning of the Renaissance, a revolutionary change began to occur in
man’s conception of the world. The “upward” movement (which reached its climax
in the late Middle Ages) went into reverse; man turned back to the earth. He
rediscovered the beauties of nature and the body, began the first
circumnavigation of the globe, and proved the world to be a sphere. The laws of
mechanics and causality became the foundations of science. The world of
religious feeling, of the irrational, and of mysticism, which had played so
great a part in medieval times, was more and more submerged by the triumphs of
logical thought.

Similarly, art became more realistic and sensuous. It broke away from the
religious subjects of the Middle Ages and embraced the whole visible world. It
was overwhelmed by the manifoldness of the earth, by its splendor and horror,
and became what Gothic art had been before it: a true symbol of the spirit of
the age. Thus it can hardly be regarded as accidental that a change also came
over ecclesiastical building. In contrast to the soaring Gothic cathedrals,
there were more circular ground plans. The circle replaced the Latin cross.

This change in form, however—and this is the important point for the history of
symbolism—must be attributed to aesthetic, and not to religious, causes. That
is the only possible explanation for the fact that the center of these round
churches (the truly “holy” place) is empty, and that the altar stands in a
recess in a wall away from the center. For that reason the plan cannot be
described as a true mandala. An important exception is St. Peter’s in Rome,
which was built to the plans of Bramante and Michelangelo. Here the altar
stands in the center. One is tempted, however, to attribute this exception to
the genius of the architects, for great genius is always both of and beyond its
time.



Medieval religious architecture was usually based on the shape of the cross.
Left, a 13th-century church (in Ethiopia) cut from the rock.

In spite of the far-reaching changes in art, philosophy, and science brought
about by the Renaissance, the central symbol of Christianity remained
unchanged. Christ was still represented on the Latin cross, as he is today.
That meant that the center of religious man remained anchored on a higher, more
spiritual plane than that of earthly man, who had turned back to nature. Thus a
rift arose between man’s traditional Christianity and his rational or
intellectual mind. Since that time, these two sides of modern man have never
been brought together. In the course of the centuries, with man’s growing
insight into nature and its laws, this division has gradually grown wider; and
it still splits the psyche of the western Christian in the 20th century.

Of course, the brief historical summary given here has been over-simplified.
Moreover, it omits the secret religious movements within Christianity that took
account, in their beliefs, of what was usually ignored by most Christians: the
question of evil, the chthonic (or earthly) spirit. Such movements were always
in a minority and seldom had any very visible influence, but in their way they
fulfilled the important role of a contrapuntal accompaniment to Christian
spirituality.



Renaissance religious art shows a reorientation to the earth and the body:
Right, a plan for a circular church or basilica based on the body’s
proportions, drawn by the 15th-century Italian artist and architect Francesco
di Giorgio.



Among the many sects and movements that arose about A.D. 1000, the alchemists
played a very important part. They exalted the mysteries of matter and set them
alongside those of the “heavenly” spirit of Christianity. What they sought was
a wholeness of man encompassing mind and body, and they invented a thousand
names and symbols for it. One of their central symbols was the quadratura
circuli (the squaring of the circle), which is no more than the true mandala.



The Renaissance interest in outer reality produced the Copernican sun-centered
universe (left) and turned artists away from “imaginative” art to nature:
Below, Leonardo’s study of the human heart.

The alchemists not only recorded their work in their writings; they created a
wealth of pictures of their dreams and visions—symbolic pictures that are still
as profound as they are baffling. They were inspired by the dark side of
nature—evil, the dream, the spirit of earth. The mode of expression was always
fabulous, dreamlike, and unreal, both in word and picture. The great
15th-century Flemish painter Hieronymus Bosch may be regarded as the most
important representative of this kind of imaginative art.

But at the same time, more typical Renaissance painters (working in the full
light of day, so to speak) were producing the most splendid works of sensuous
art. Their fascination with earth and nature went so deep that it practically
determined the development of visual art for the next five centuries. The last
great representatives of sensuous art, the art of the passing moment, of light
and air, were the 19th-century impressionists.

We may here discriminate between two radically different modes of artistic
representation. Many attempts have been made to define their characteristics.
Recently Herbert Kühn (whose work on the cave-paintings I have already
mentioned) has tried to draw a distinction between what he calls the
“imaginative” and the “sensory” style. The “sensory” style generally depicts a
direct reproduction of nature or of the picture-subject. The “imaginative,” on
the other hand, presents a fantasy or experience of the artist in an
“unrealistic,” even dreamlike, and sometimes “abstract” manner. Kühn’s two
conceptions seem so simple and so clear that I am glad to make use of them.

The first beginnings of imaginative art go back very far in history. In the
Mediterranean basin, its efflorescence dates from the third millenium B.C. It
has only recently been realized that these ancient works of art are not the
results of incompetence or ignorance; they are modes of expression of a
perfectly definite religious and spiritual emotion. And they have a special
appeal today, for, during the last half-century, art has been passing once more
through a phase that can be described by the term “imaginative.”

Today the geometrical, or “abstract,” symbol of the circle has again come to
play a considerable role in painting. But with few exceptions the traditional
mode of representation has undergone a characteristic transformation that
corresponds to the dilemma of modern man’s existence. The circle is no longer a
single meaningful figure that embraces a whole world and dominates the picture.
Sometimes the artist has taken it out of its dominant position, replacing it by
a loosely organized group of circles. Sometimes the plane of the circle is
asymmetrical.

An example of the asymmetrical circular plane may be seen in the famous sun
disks of the French painter Robert Delaunay. A painting by the modern English
painter Ceri Richards, now in Dr. Jung’s collection, contains an entirely
asymmetrical circular plane, while far to the left there appears a very much
smaller and empty circle.

In the French painter Henri Matisse’s Still Life with Vase of Nasturtiums, the
focus of vision is a green sphere on a slanting black beam, which seems to
gather into itself the manifold circles of the nasturtium leaves. The sphere
overlaps a rectangular figure, the top left-hand corner of which is folded
over. Given the artistic perfection of the painting it is easy to forget that
in the past these two abstract figures (the circle and the square) would have
been united, and would have expressed a world of thoughts and feelings. But
anyone who does remember, and raises the question of meaning, will find food
for thought: The two figures that from the beginning of time have formed a
whole are in this painting torn apart or incoherently related. Yet both are
there and are touching each other.

In a picture painted by the Russian-born artist Wassily Kandinsky there is a
loose assembly of colored balls or circles that seem to be drifting like soap
bubbles. They, too, are tenuously connected with a background of one large
rectangle with two small, almost square rectangles contained in it. In another
picture that he called A Few Circles, a dark cloud (or is it a swooping bird?)
again bears a loosely arranged group of bright balls or circles.

Circles often appear in unexpected connections in the mysterious compositions
of the British artist Paul Nash. In the primeval solitude of his landscape
Event on the Downs, a ball lies in the right foreground. Though it is
apparently a tennis ball, the design on its surface forms the Tai-gi-tu, the
Chinese symbol of eternity; thus it opens up a new dimension in the loneliness
of the landscape. Something similar happens in Nash’s Landscape from a Dream.
Balls are rolling out of sight in an infinitely wide mirrored landscape, with a
huge sun visible on the horizon. Another ball lies in the foreground, in front
of the roughly square mirror.



Above, the symbolic alchemical concept of the squared circle—symbol of
wholeness and of the union of opposites (note the male and female figures).
Right, a modern squared circle by the British artist Ben Nicholson (born 1894):
It is a strictly geometrical, empty form possessing aesthetic harmony and
beauty but without symbolic meaning.

In his drawing Limits of Understanding, the Swiss artist Paul Klee places the
simple figure of a sphere or a circle above a complex structure of ladders and
lines. Dr. Jung has pointed out that a true symbol appears only when there is a
need to express what thought cannot think or what is only divined or felt; that
is the purpose of Klee’s simple figure at the “limits of understanding.”



It is important to note that the square, or groups of rectangles and squares,
or rectangles and rhomboids, have appeared in modern art just as often as the
circle. The master of harmonious (indeed, “musical”) compositions with squares
is the Dutch-born artist Piet Mondrian. As a rule there is no actual center in
any of his pictures, yet they form an ordered whole in their own strict, almost
ascetic fashion. Still more common are paintings by other artists with
irregular quaternary compositions, or numerous rectangles combined in more or
less loose groups.



A “sun wheel” in a painting by the modern Japanese artist Sofu Teshigahara
(born 1900) follows the tendency of many modern painters, when using “circular”
shapes, to make them asymmetrical.



Limits of Understanding by Paul Klee (1879–1940)—one 20th-century painting in
which the symbol of the circle retains a dominant position.

The circle is a symbol of the psyche (even Plato described the psyche as a
sphere). The square (and often the rectangle) is a symbol of earthbound matter,
of the body and reality. In most modern art, the connection between these two
primary forms is either nonexistent, or loose and casual. Their separation is
another symbolic expression of the psychic state of 20th-century man: His soul
has lost its roots and he is threatened by dissociation. Even in the world
situation of today (as Dr. Jung pointed out in his opening chapter), this split
has become evident: The Western and Eastern halves of the earth are separated
by an Iron Curtain.

But the frequency with which the square and the circle appear must not be
overlooked. There seems to be an uninterrupted psychic urge to bring into
consciousness the basic factors of life that they symbolize. Also, in certain
abstract pictures of our time (which merely represent a colored structure or a
kind of “primal matter”), these forms occasionally appear as if they were germs
of new growth.



Below, an illustration from a 16th-century German broadsheet of some strange
circular objects seen in the sky—similar to the “flying saucers” that have been
seen in recent years. Jung has suggested that such visions are projections of
the archetype of wholeness.

The symbol of the circle has played a curious part in a very different
phenomenon of the life of our day, and occasionally still does so. In the last
years of the Second World War, there arose the “visionary rumor” of round
flying bodies that became known as “flying saucers” or UFOs (unidentified
flying objects). Jung has explained the UFOs as a projection of a psychic
content (of wholeness) that has at all times been symbolized by the circle. In
other words, this “visionary rumor,” as can also be seen in many dreams of our
time, is an attempt by the unconscious collective psyche to heal the split in
our apocalyptic age by means of the symbol of the circle.

