# PART 2 - Orpheus and the Son of Man
[Metadata]: # {02.05}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 2
Orpheus and the Son of Man
# Orpheus and the Son of Man
“Beauty and the Beast” is a fairy tale with the quality of a wildflower,
appearing so unexpectedly and creating in us such a natural sense of wonder
that we do not notice for the moment that it belongs to a definite class,
genus, and species of plant. The kind of mystery inherent in such a story is
given a universal application not only in a larger historical myth, but also in
the rituals whereby the myth is expressed or from which it may be derived.

The type of ritual and myth appropriately expressing this type of psychological
experience is exemplified in the Greco-Roman religion of Dionysus, and in its
successor, the religion of Orpheus. Both of these religions provided a
significant initiation of the type known as “mysteries.” They brought forth
symbols associated with a god-man of androgynous character who was supposed to
have an intimate understanding of the animal or plant world and to be the
master of initiation into their secrets.

The Dionysiac religion contained orgiastic rites that implied the need for an
initiate to abandon himself to his animal nature and thereby experience the
full fertilizing power of the Earth Mother. The initiating agent for this rite
of passage in the Dionysiac ritual was wine. It was supposed to produce the
symbolic lowering of consciousness necessary to introduce the novice into the
closely guarded secrets of nature, whose essence was expressed by a symbol of
erotic fulfillment: the god Dionysus joined with Ariadne, his consort, in a
sacred marriage ceremony.

In time the rites of Dionysus lost their emotive religious power. There emerged
an almost oriental longing for liberation from their exclusive preoccupation
with the purely natural symbols of life and love. The Dionysiac religion,
shifting constantly from spiritual to physical and back again, perhaps proved
too wild and turbulent for some more ascetic souls. These came to experience
their religious ecstasies inwardly, in the worship of Orpheus.

Orpheus was probably a real man, a singer, prophet, and teacher, who was
martyred and whose tomb became a shrine. No wonder the early Christian church
saw in Orpheus the prototype of Christ. Both religions brought to the
late-Hellenistic world the promise of a future divine life. Because they were
men, yet also mediators of the divine, for the multitudes of the dying Grecian
culture in the days of the Roman Empire they held the longed-for hope of a
future life.

There was, however, one important difference between the religion of Orpheus
and the religion of Christ. Though sublimated into a mystical form, the Orphic
mysteries kept alive the old Dionysiac religion. The spiritual impetus came
from a demi-god, in whom was preserved the most significant quality of a
religion rooted in the art of agriculture. That quality was the old pattern of
the fertility gods who came only for the season—in other words, the eternally
recurrent cycle of birth, growth, fullness, and decay.

Christianity, on the other hand, dispelled the mysteries. Christ was the
product and reformer of a patriarch nomadic, pastoral religion, whose prophets
represented their Messiah as a being of absolutely divine origin. The Son of
Man, though born of a human virgin, had his beginning in heaven, whence he came
in an act of God’s incarnation in man. After his death, he returned to
heaven—but returned once and for all, to reign on the right hand of God until
the Second Coming “when the dead shall arise.”





Left, Orpheus charming the beasts with his song (in a Roman mosaic); above, the
murder of Orpheus by Thracian women (on a Greek vase).



Above, Christ as the Good Shepherd (a sixth-century mosaic). Both Orpheus and
Christ parallel the archetype of the man of nature—also reflected in the
painting by Cranach (below) of “natural man’s” innocence.



Of course the asceticism of early Christianity did not last. The memory of the
cyclic mysteries haunted its followers to the extent that the Church eventually
had to incorporate many practices from the pagan past into its rituals. The
most meaningful of these may be found in the old records of what was done on
Holy Saturday and Easter Sunday in celebration of the resurrection of
Christ—the baptismal service that the medieval church made into a suitable and
deeply meaningful initiation rite. But that ritual has scarcely survived into
modern times, and it is completely absent in Protestantism.

The ritual that has survived much better, and that still contains the meaning
of a central initiation mystery for the devout, is the Catholic practice of the
elevation of the chalice. It has been described by Dr. Jung in his
“Transformation Symbolism in the Mass”:

“The lifting up of the chalice in the air prepares the spiritualization … of
the wine. This is confirmed by the invocation to the Holy Ghost that
immediately follows.… The invocation serves to infuse the wine with the holy
spirit, for it is the Holy Ghost who begets, fulfills, and transforms.… After
the elevation, the chalice was, in former times, set down to the right of the
Host, to correspond with the blood that flowed from the right side of Christ.”

The ritual of communion is everywhere the same, whether it is expressed by
drinking of the cup of Dionysus or of the holy Christian chalice; but the level
of awareness each brings to the individual participant is different. The
Dionysiac participant looks back to the origin of things, to the “storm-birth”
of the god who is blasted from the resistant womb of Mother Earth. In the
frescoes of the Villa de Misteri in Pompeii, the enacted rite evoked the god as
a mask of terror reflected in the cup of Dionysus offered by the priest to the
initiate. Later we find the winnowing basket, with its precious fruits of the
earth, and the phallus as creative symbols of the god’s manifestation as the
principle of breeding and growth.

In contrast to this backward look, with its central focus on nature’s eternal
cycle of birth and death, the Christian mystery points forward to the
initiate’s ultimate hope of union with a transcendent god. Mother Nature, with
all her beautiful seasonal changes, has been left behind, and the central
figure of Christianity offers spiritual certainty, for he is the Son of God in
heaven.

Yet the two somehow fuse in the figure of Orpheus, the god who remembers
Dionysus but looks forward to Christ. The psychological sense of this
intermediate figure has been described by the Swiss author Linda Fierz-David,
in her interpretation of the Orphic rite pictured in the Villa de Misteri:

“Orpheus taught while he sang and played the lyre, and his singing was so
powerful that it mastered all nature; when he sang to his lyre the birds flew
about him, the fish left the water and sprang to him. The wind and the sea
became still, the rivers flowed upward toward him. It did not snow and there
was no hail. Trees and the very stones followed after Orpheus; tiger and lion
lay down near him next to the sheep, and the wolves next to the stag and the
roe. Now what does this mean? It surely means that through a divine insight
into the meaning of natural events … nature’s happenings become harmoniously
ordered from within. Everything becomes light and all creatures are appeased
when the mediator, in the act of worshiping, represents the light of nature.
Orpheus is an embodiment of devotion and piety; he symbolizes the religious
attitude that solves all conflicts, since thereby the whole soul is turned
toward that which lies on the other side of all conflict.… And as he does this,
he is truly Orpheus; that is, a good shepherd, his primitive embodiment.…”

Both as good shepherd and mediator, Orpheus strikes the balance between the
Dionysiac religion and the Christian religion, since we find both Dionysus and
Christ in similar roles, though, as I have said, differently oriented as to
time and direction in space—one a cyclic religion of the nether world, the
other heavenly and eschatological, or final. This series of initiatory events,
drawn from the context of religious history, is repeated endlessly and with
practically every conceivable individual twist of meaning in the dreams and
fantasies of modern people.

In a state of heavy fatigue and depression, a woman undergoing analysis had
this fantasy:

I sit on the side of a long narrow table in a high vaulted room with no window.
My body is hunched over and shrunken. There is nothing over me but a long white
linen cloth that hangs from my shoulders to the floor. Something crucial has
happened to me. There is not much life left in me. Red crosses on gold disks
appear before my eyes. I recall that I have made some sort of commitment a long
time ago and wherever I am now must be part of this. I sit there a long time.

Now I slowly open my eyes and I see a man who sits beside me who is to heal me.
He appears natural and kind and he is talking to me though I don’t hear him. He
seems to know all about where I have been. I am aware that I am very ugly and
that there must be an odor of death around me. I wonder if he will be repelled.
I look at him for a very long time. He does not turn away. I breathe more
easily.

Then I feel a cool breeze, or cool water, pour over my body. I wrap the white
linen cloth across me now and prepare for a natural sleep. The man’s healing
hands are on my shoulders. I recall vaguely that there was a time when there
were wounds there but the pressure of his hands seems to give me strength and
healing.

This woman had previously felt threatened by doubts about her original
religious affiliation. She had been brought up as a devout Catholic of the old
school, but since her youth she had struggled to free herself from the formal
religious conventions followed by her family. Yet the symbolic events of the
church year and the richness of her insight into their meaning remained with
her throughout the process of her psychological change; and in her analysis I
found this working knowledge of religious symbolism most helpful.

The significant elements she singled out of her fantasy were the white cloth,
which she understood as a sacrificial cloth; the vaulted room, which she
considered to be a tomb; and her commitment, which she associated with the
experience of submission. This commitment, as she called it, suggested a ritual
of initiation with a perilous descent into the vault of death, which symbolized
the way she had left church and family to experience God in her own fashion.
She had undergone an “imitation of Christ” in the true symbolic sense, and like
him she had suffered the wounds that preceded his death.

The sacrificial cloth suggests the winding sheet or shroud in which the
crucified Christ was wrapped and then placed in the tomb. The end of the
fantasy introduces the healing figure of a man, loosely associated with me as
her analyst but appearing also in his natural role as a friend fully aware of
her experience. He speaks to her in words she cannot yet hear, but his hands
are reassuring and give a sense of healing. One senses in this figure the touch
and the word of the good shepherd, Orpheus or Christ, as mediator and also, of
course, as healer. He is on the side of life and has to convince her that she
may now come back from the vault of death.

Shall we call this rebirth or resurrection? Both, perhaps, or neither. The
essential rite proclaims itself at the end: The cool breeze or water flowing
over her body is the primordial act of purification or cleansing of the sin of
death, the essence of true baptism.

The same woman had another fantasy in which she felt that her birthday fell
upon the day of Christ’s resurrection. (This was much more meaningful for her
than the memory of her mother, who had never given her the feeling of
reassurance and renewal she so much wished for on her childhood birthdays.) But
this did not mean she identified herself with the figure of Christ. For all his
power and glory, something was lacking; and as she tried to reach him through
prayer, he and his cross were lifted up to heaven out of her human reach.

In this second fantasy she fell back upon the symbol of rebirth as a rising
sun, and a new feminine symbol began to make its appearance. First of all it
appeared as an “embryo in a watery sack.” Then she was carrying an
eight-year-old boy through the water “passing a danger point.” Then a new
movement occurred in which she no longer felt threatened or under the influence
of death. She was “in a forest by a little spring waterfall … green vines grow
all around. In my hands I have a stone bowl in which there is spring water,
some green moss, and violets. I bathe myself under the waterfall. It is golden
and ‘silky’ and I feel like a child.”

The sense of these events is clear, though it is possible to miss the inner
meaning in the cryptic description of so many changing images. Here we have, it
seems, a process of rebirth in which a larger spiritual self is reborn and
baptized in nature as a child. Meanwhile she has rescued an older child who
was, in some way, her own ego at the most traumatic period of her childhood.
She then carried it through water past the danger point, thus indicating her
fear of a paralyzing sense of guilt if she should depart too far from her
family’s conventional religion. But religious symbolism is significant by its
absence. All is in the hands of nature; we are clearly in the realm of the
shepherd Orpheus rather than the risen Christ.

A dream followed this sequence, which brought her to a church resembling the
church in Assisi with Giotto’s frescoes of St. Francis. She felt more at home
here than she would in other churches because St. Francis, like Orpheus, was a
religious man of nature. This revived her feelings about the change in her
religious affiliation that had been so painful to undergo, but now she believed
she could joyfully face the experience, inspired by the light of nature.

The series of dreams ended with a distant echo of the religion of Dionysus.
(One could say that this was a reminder that even Orpheus can at times be a
little too far removed from the fecundating power of the animal-god in man.)
She dreamed that she was leading a fair-haired child by the hand. “We are
happily participating in a festival that includes the sun and the forests and
flowers all around. The child has a little white flower in her hand, and she
places it on the head of a black bull. The bull is part of the festival and is
covered with festive decorations.” This reference recalls the ancient rites
that celebrated Dionysus in the guise of a bull.

But the dream did not end there. The woman added: “Some time later the bull is
pierced by a golden arrow.” Now, besides Dionysus, there is another
pre-Christian rite in which the bull plays a symbolic role. The Persian sun-god
Mithras sacrifices a bull. He, like Orpheus, represents the longing for a life
of the spirit that might triumph over the primitive animal passions of man and,
after a ceremony of initiation, give him peace.

This series of images confirms a suggestion that is found in many fantasy or
dream sequences of this type—that there is no final peace, no resting point. In
their religious quest men and women—especially those who live in modern Western
Christianized societies—are still in the power of those early traditions that
strive within them for supremacy. It is a conflict of pagan or Christian
beliefs, or, one might say, of rebirth or resurrection.



The Persian god Mithras sacrificing the bull. The sacrifice (also part of
Dionysiac rites) can be seen as a symbol of the victory of man’s spiritual
nature over his animality—of which the bull is a common symbol.

A more direct clue to the solution of this dilemma is to be found, in this
woman’s first fantasy, in a curious piece of symbolism that could easily be
overlooked. The woman says that in her death vault she saw before her eyes a
vision of red crosses on gold disks. As became clear later in her analysis, she
was about to experience a profound psychic change and to emerge out of this
“death” into a new kind of life. We might imagine, therefore, that this image,
which came to her in the depth of her despair of life, should in some way
herald her future religious attitude. In her subsequent work she did in fact
produce evidence for thinking that the red crosses represented her devotion to
the Christian attitude, while the gold disks represented her devotion to the
pre-Christian mystery religions. Her vision had told her that she must
reconcile these Christian and pagan elements in the new life that lay ahead.

One last, but important, observation concerns the ancient rites and their
relation to Christianity. The initiation rite celebrated in the Eleusinian
mysteries (the rites of worship of the fertility goddesses Demeter and
Persephone) was not considered appropriate merely for those who sought to live
life more abundantly; it was also used as a preparation for death, as if death
also required an initiatory rite of passage of the same kind.

On a funeral urn found in a Roman grave near the Columbarium on the Esquiline
Hill we find a clear bas-relief representing scenes of the final stage of
initiation where the novice is admitted to the presence and converse of the
goddesses. The rest of the design is devoted to two preliminary ceremonies of
purification—the sacrifice of the “mystic pig,” and a mysticized version of the
sacred marriage. This all points to an initiation into death, but in a form
that lacks the finality of mourning. It hints at that element of the later
mysteries—especially of Orphism—which makes death carry a promise of
immortality. Christianity went even further. It promised something more than
immortality (which in the old sense of the cyclic mysteries might merely mean
reincarnation), for it offered the faithful an everlasting life in heaven.

So we see again, in modern life, the tendency to repeat old patterns. Those who
have to learn to face death may have to relearn the old message that tells us
that death is a mystery for which we must prepare ourselves in the same spirit
of submission and humility as we once learned to prepare ourselves for life.

