# PART 2 - Heroes and hero makers
[Metadata]: # {02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 2
Heroes and hero makers
# Heroes and hero makers
The myth of the hero is the most common and the best known myth in the world.
We find it in the classical mythology of Greece and Rome, in the Middle Ages,
in the Far East, and among contemporary primitive tribes. It also appears in
our dreams. It has an obvious dramatic appeal, and a less obvious, but
nonetheless profound, psychological importance.

These hero myths vary enormously in detail, but the more closely one examines
them the more one sees that structurally they are very similar. They have, that
is to say, a universal pattern, even though they were developed by groups or
individuals without any direct cultural contact with each other—by, for
instance, tribes of Africans or North American Indians, or the Greeks, or the
Incas of Peru. Over and over again one hears a tale describing a hero’s
miraculous but humble birth, his early proof of superhuman strength, his rapid
rise to prominence or power, his triumphant struggle with the forces of evil,
his fallibility to the sin of pride (hybris), and his fall through betrayal or
a “heroic” sacrifice that ends in his death.

I shall later explain in more detail why I believe that this pattern has
psychological meaning both for the individual, who is endeavoring to discover
and assert his personality, and for a whole society, which has an equal need to
establish its collective identity. But another important characteristic of the
hero myth provides a clue. In many of these stories the early weakness of the
hero is balanced by the appearance of strong “tutelary” figures—or
guardians—who enable him to perform the superhuman tasks that he cannot
accomplish unaided. Among the Greek heroes, Theseus had Poseidon, god of the
sea, as his deity; Perseus had Athena; Achilles had Cheiron, the wise centaur,
as his tutor.

These godlike figures are in fact symbolic representatives of the whole psyche,
the larger and more comprehensive identity that supplies the strength that the
personal ego lacks. Their special role suggests that the essential function of
the heroic myth is the development of the individual’s ego-consciousness—his
awareness of his own strengths and weaknesses—in a manner that will equip him
for the arduous tasks with which life confronts him. Once the individual has
passed his initial test and can enter the mature phase of life, the hero myth
loses its relevance. The hero’s symbolic death becomes, as it were, the
achievement of that maturity.



The hero’s early proof of strength occurs in most hero myths. Left, the infant
Hercules killing two serpents. Top, the young King Arthur, alone able to draw a
magic sword from a stone. Middle right, America’s Davy Crockett, who killed a
bear when he was three.

I have so far been referring to the complete hero myth, in which the whole
cycle from birth to death is elaborately described. But it is essential to
recognize that at each of the stages in this cycle there are special forms of
the hero story that apply to the particular point reached by the individual in
the development of his ego-consciousness, and to the specific problem
confronting him at a given moment. That is to say, the image of the hero
evolves in a manner that reflects each stage of the evolution of the human
personality.

This concept can be more easily understood if I present it in what amounts to a
diagram. I take this example from the obscure North American tribe of Winnebago
Indians, because it sets out quite clearly four distinct stages in the
evolution of the hero. In these stories (which Dr. Paul Radin published in 1948
under the title Hero Cycles of the Winnebago) we can see the definite
progression from the most primitive to the most sophisticated concept of the
hero. This progression is characteristic of other hero cycles. Though the
symbolic figures in them naturally have different names, their roles are
similar, and we shall understand them better once we have grasped the point
made by this example.

Dr. Radin noted four distinct cycles in the evolution of the hero myth. He
named them the Trickster cycle, the Hare cycle, the Red Horn cycle, and the
Twin cycle. He correctly perceived the psychology of this evolution when he
said: “It represents our efforts to deal with the problem of growing up, aided
by the illusion of an eternal fiction.”

The Trickster cycle corresponds to the earliest and least developed period of
life. Trickster is a figure whose physical appetites dominate his behavior; he
has the mentality of an infant. Lacking any purpose beyond the gratification of
his primary needs, he is cruel, cynical, and unfeeling. (Our stories of Brer
Rabbit or Reynard the Fox preserve the essentials of the Trickster myth.) This
figure, which at the outset assumes the form of an animal, passes from one
mischievous exploit to another. But, as he does so, a change comes over him. At
the end of his rogue’s progress he is beginning to take on the physical
likeness of a grown man.

The next figure is Hare. He, like Trickster (whose animal traits are often
represented among American Indians by a coyote), also first appears in animal
form. He has not yet attained mature human stature, but all the same he appears
as the founder of human culture—the Transformer. The Winnebago believe that, in
giving them their famous Medicine Rite, he became their savior as well as their
culture-hero. This myth was so powerful, Dr. Radin tells us, that the members
of the Peyote Rite were reluctant to give up Hare when Christianity began to
penetrate the tribe. He became merged with the figure of Christ, and some of
them argued that they had no need of Christ since they already had Hare. This
archetypal figure represents a distinct advance on Trickster: One can see that
he is becoming a socialized being, correcting the instinctual and infantile
urges found in the Trickster cycle.



“Trickster”: the first rudimentary stage in the development of the hero myth,
in which the hero is instinctual, uninhibited, and often childish. Left, the
trouble-making Norse god Loki (a 19th-century sculpture). Right, Charlie
Chaplin creating a disturbance in the 1936 film Modern Times—a 20th-century
trickster.

Red Horn, the third of this series of hero figures, is an ambiguous person,
said to be the youngest of 10 brothers. He meets the requirements of an
archetypal hero by passing such tests as winning a race and by proving himself
in battle. His superhuman power is shown by his ability to defeat giants by
guile (in a game of dice) or by strength (in a wrestling match). He has a
powerful companion in the form of a thunderbird called “Storms-as-he-walks,”
whose strength compensates for whatever weakness Red Horn may display. With Red
Horn we have reached the world of man, though an archaic world, in which the
aid of superhuman powers or tutelary gods is needed to ensure man’s victory
over the evil forces that beset him. Toward the end of the story the hero-god
departs, leaving Red Horn and his sons on earth. The danger to man’s happiness
and security now comes from man himself.



This basic theme (which is repeated in the last cycle, that of the Twins)
raises, in effect, the vital question: How long can human beings be successful
without falling victims to their own pride or, in mythological terms, to the
jealousy of the gods?

Though the Twins are said to be the sons of the Sun, they are essentially human
and together constitute a single person. Originally united in the mother’s
womb, they were forced apart at birth. Yet they belong together, and it is
necessary—though exceedingly difficult—to reunite them. In these two children
we see the two sides of man’s nature. One of them, Flesh, is acquiescent, mild,
and without initiative; the other, Stump, is dynamic and rebellious. In some of
the stories of the Twin Heroes these attitudes are refined to the point where
one figure represents the introvert, whose main strength lies in his powers of
reflection, and the other is an extravert, a man of action who can accomplish
great deeds.

For a long time these two heroes are invincible: Whether they are presented as
two separate figures or as two-in-one, they carry all before them. Yet, like
the warrior gods of Navaho Indian mythology, they eventually sicken from the
abuse of their own power. There are no monsters left in heaven or on earth for
them to overcome, and their consequent wild behavior brings retribution in its
train. The Winnebago say that nothing, in the end, was safe from them—not even
the supports on which the world rests. When the Twins killed one of the four
animals that upheld the earth, they had overstepped all limits, and the time
had come to put a stop to their career. The punishment they deserved was death.

Thus, in both the Red Horn cycle and that of the Twins, we see the theme of
sacrifice or death of the hero as a necessary cure for hybris, the pride that
has over-reached itself. In the primitive societies whose levels of culture
correspond to the Red Horn cycle, it appears that this danger may have been
forestalled by the institution of propitiatory human sacrifice—a theme that has
immense symbolic importance and recurs continually in human history. The
Winnebago, like the Iroquois and a few Algonquin tribes, probably ate human
flesh as a totemic ritual that could tame their individualistic and destructive
impulses.

In the examples of the hero’s betrayal or defeat that occur in European
mythology, the theme of ritual sacrifice is more specifically employed as a
punishment for hybris. But the Winnebago, like the Navaho, do not go so far.
Though the Twins erred, and though the punishment should have been death, they
themselves became so frightened by their irresponsible power that they
consented to live in a state of permanent rest: The conflicting sides of human
nature were again in equilibrium.

I have given this description of the four types of hero at some length because
it provides a clear demonstration of the pattern that occurs both in the
historic myths and in the hero-dreams of contemporary man. With this in mind we
can examine the following dream of a middle-aged patient. The interpretation of
this dream shows how the analytical psychologist can, from his knowledge of
mythology, help his patient find an answer to what might otherwise seem an
insoluble riddle. This man dreamed he was at a theatre, in the role of “an
important spectator whose opinion is respected.” There was an act in which a
white monkey was standing on a pedestal with men around him. In recounting this
dream the man said:

My guide explains the theme to me. It is the ordeal of a young sailor who is
exposed both to the wind and to being beaten up. I begin to object that this
white monkey is not a sailor at all; but just at that moment a young man in
black stands up and I think that he must be the true hero. But another handsome
young man strides toward an altar and stretches himself out on it. They are
making marks on his bare chest as a preparation to offering him as a human
sacrifice.

Then I find myself on a platform with several other people. We could get down
by a small ladder, but I hesitate to do so because there are two young toughs
standing by and I think that they will stop us. But when a woman in the group
uses the ladder unmolested, I see that it is safe and all of us follow the
woman down.

Now a dream of his kind cannot be quickly or simply interpreted. We have to
unravel it carefully in order to show both its relation to the dreamer’s own
life and its wider symbolic implications. The patient who produced it was a man
who had achieved maturity in a physical sense. He was successful in his career,
and he had apparently done pretty well as a husband and father. Yet
psychologically he was still immature, and had not completed his youthful phase
of development. It was his psychic immaturity that expresses itself in his
dreams as different aspects of the hero myth. These images still exerted a
strong attraction for his imagination even though they had long since exhausted
any of their meaning in terms of the reality of his everyday life.

Thus, in this dream, we see a series of figures theatrically presented as
various aspects of a figure that the dreamer keeps expecting will turn out to
be the true hero. The first is a white monkey, the second a sailor, the third a
young man in black, and the last a “handsome young man.” In the early part of
the performance, which is supposed to represent the sailor’s ordeal, the
dreamer sees only the white monkey. The man in black suddenly appears and as
suddenly disappears; he is a new figure who first contrasts with the white
monkey and is then for a moment confused with the hero proper. (Such confusion
in dreams is not unusual. The dreamer is not usually presented with clear
images by the unconscious. He has to puzzle out a meaning from a succession of
contrasts and paradoxes.)

Significantly, these figures appear in the course of a theatrical performance,
and this context seems to be a direct reference by the dreamer to his own
treatment by analysis: The “guide” he mentions is presumably his analyst. Yet
he does not see himself as a patient who is being treated by a doctor but as
“an important spectator whose opinion is respected.” This is the vantage point
from which he sees certain figures whom he associates to the experience of
growing up. The white monkey, for instance, reminds him of the playful and
somewhat lawless behavior of boys between the ages of seven and 12. The sailor
suggests the adventurousness of early adolescence, together with the consequent
punishment by “beating” for irresponsible pranks. The dreamer could offer no
association to the young man in black, but in the handsome young man about to
be sacrificed he saw a reminder of the self-sacrificing idealism of late
adolescence.

At this stage it is possible to put together the historical material (or
archetypal hero images) and the data from the dreamer’s personal experience in
order to see how they corroborate, contradict, or qualify each other.

The first conclusion is that the white monkey seems to represent Trickster—or
at least those traits of personality that the Winnebago attribute to Trickster.
But, to me, the monkey also stands for something that the dreamer has not
personally and adequately experienced for himself—he in fact says that in the
dream he was a spectator. I found out that as a boy he had been excessively
attached to his parents, and that he was naturally introspective. For these
reasons he had never fully developed the boisterous qualities natural to late
childhood; nor had he joined in the games of his schoolfellows. He had not, as
the saying goes, “got up to monkey tricks” or practiced “monkey-shines.” The
saying provides the clue here. The monkey in the dream is in fact a symbolic
form of the Trickster figure.

But why should Trickster appear as a monkey? And why should it be white? As I
have already pointed out, the Winnebago myth tells us that, toward the end of
the cycle, Trickster begins to emerge in the physical likeness of a man. And
here, in the dream, is a monkey—so close to a human being that it is a
laughable and not too dangerous caricature of a man. The dreamer himself could
offer no personal association that could explain why the monkey was white. But
from our knowledge of primitive symbolism we can conjecture that whiteness
lends a special quality of “god-likeness” to this otherwise banal figure. (The
albino is regarded as sacred in many primitive communities.) This fits in quite
well with Trickster’s semi-divine or semi-magical powers.

Thus, it seems, the white monkey symbolizes for the dreamer the positive
quality of childhood playfulness, which he had insufficiently accepted at the
time, and which he now feels called upon to exalt. As the dream tells us, he
places it “on a pedestal,” where it becomes something more than a lost
childhood experience. It is, for the adult man, a symbol of creative
experimentalism.

Next we come to the confusion about the monkey. Is it a monkey, or is it a
sailor who has to put up with beatings? The dreamer’s own associations pointed
to the meaning of this transformation. But in any case the next stage in human
development is one in which the irresponsibility of childhood gives way to a
period of socialization, and that involves submission to painful discipline.
One could say, therefore, that the sailor is an advanced form of Trickster, who
is being changed into a socially responsible person by means of an initiation
ordeal. Drawing on the history of symbolism, we can assume that the wind
represents the natural elements in this process, and the beatings are those
which are humanly induced.

At this point, then, we have a reference to the process that the Winnebago
describe in the Hare cycle, where the culture-hero is a weak yet struggling
figure, ready to sacrifice childishness for the sake of further development.
Once again, in this phase of the dream, the patient is acknowledging his
failure to experience to the full an important aspect of childhood and early
adolescence. He missed out on the playfulness of the child, and also on the
rather more advanced pranks of the young teenager, and he is seeking ways in
which those lost experiences and personal qualities can be rehabilitated.

Next comes a curious change in the dream. The young man in black appears, and
for a moment the dreamer feels that this is the “true hero.” That is all we are
told about the man in black; yet this fleeting glimpse introduces a theme of
profound importance—a theme that occurs frequently in dreams.

This is the concept of the “shadow,” which plays such a vital role in
analytical psychology. Dr. Jung has pointed out that the shadow cast by the
conscious mind of the individual contains the hidden, repressed, and
unfavorable (or nefarious) aspects of the personality. But this darkness is not
just the simple converse of the conscious ego. Just as the ego contains
unfavorable and destructive attitudes, so the shadow has good qualities—normal
instincts and creative impulses. Ego and shadow, indeed, although separate, are
inextricably linked together in much the same way that thought and feeling are
related to each other.

The ego, nevertheless, is in conflict with the shadow, in what Dr. Jung once
called “the battle for deliverance.” In the struggle of primitive man to
achieve consciousness, this conflict is expressed by the contest between the
archetypal hero and the cosmic powers of evil, personified by dragons and other
monsters. In the developing consciousness of the individual the hero figure is
the symbolic means by which the emerging ego overcomes the inertia of the
unconscious mind, and liberates the mature man from a regressive longing to
return to the blissful state of infancy in a world dominated by his mother.

Usually, in mythology, the hero wins his battle against the monster. (I shall
say more about this in a moment.) But there are other hero myths in which the
hero gives in to the monster. A familiar type is that of Jonah and the whale,
in which the hero is swallowed by a sea monster that carries him on a night sea
journey from west to east, thus symbolizing the supposed transit of the sun
from sunset to dawn. The hero goes into darkness, which represents a kind of
death. I have encountered this theme in dreams presented in my own clinical
experience.



A montage of World War I: a call-to-arms poster, infantry, a military cemetery.
Memorials and religious services for soldiers who gave their lives for their
country often reflect the cyclic “death and rebirth” theme of the archetypal
heroic sacrifice. An inscription on one British memorial to the dead of World
War I reads: “At the going down of the sun and in the morning we will remember
them.”

The battle between the hero and the dragon is the more active form of this
myth, and it shows more clearly the archetypal theme of the ego’s triumph over
regressive trends. For most people the dark or negative side of the personality
remains unconscious. The hero, on the contrary, must realize that the shadow
exists and that he can draw strength from it. He must come to terms with its
desructive powers if he is to become sufficiently terrible to overcome the
dragon. I.e., before the ego can triumph, it must master and assimilate the
shadow.

One can see this theme, incidentally, in a well-known literary hero
figure—Goethe’s character of Faust. In accepting the wager of Mephistopheles,
Faust put himself in the power of a “shadow” figure that Goethe describes as
“part of that power which, willing evil, finds the good.” Like the man whose
dream I have been discussing, Faust had failed to live out to the full an
important part of his early life. He was, accordingly, an unreal or incomplete
person who lost himself in a fruitless quest for metaphysical goals that failed
to materialize. He was still unwilling to accept life’s challenge to live both
the good and the bad.

It is to this aspect of the unconscious that the young man in black in my
patient’s dream seems to refer. Such a reminder of the shadow side of his
personality, of its powerful potential and its role in preparing the hero for
the struggles of life, is an essential transition from the earlier parts of the
dream to the theme of the sacrificial hero: the handsome young man who places
himself on an altar. This figure represents the form of heroism that is
commonly associated to the ego-building process of late adolescence. A man
expresses the ideal principles of his life at this time, sensing their power
both to transform himself and to change his relations with others. He is, so to
speak, in the bloom of youth, attractive, full of energy and idealism. Why,
then, does he willingly offer himself as a human sacrifice?

The reason, presumably, is the same as that which made the Twins of the
Winnebago myth give up their power on pain of destruction. The idealism of
youth, which drives one so hard, is bound to lead to over-confidence: The human
ego can be exalted to experience godlike attributes, but only at the cost of
over-reaching itself and falling to disaster. (This is the meaning of the story
of Icarus, the youth who is carried up to heaven on his fragile, humanly
contrived wings, but who flies too close to the sun and plunges to his doom.)
All the same, the youthful ego must always run this risk, for if a young man
does not strive for a higher goal than he can safely reach, he cannot surmount
the obstacles between adolescence and maturity.

So far, I have been talking about the conclusions that, at the level of his
personal associations, my patient could draw from his own dream. Yet there is
an archetypal level of the dream—the mystery of the proffered human sacrifice.
It is precisely because it is a mystery that it is expressed in a ritual act
that, in its symbolism, carries us a long way back into man’s history. Here, as
the man lies stretched out on an altar, we see a reference to an act even more
primitive than those performed on the altar stone in the temple at Stonehenge.
There, as on so many primitive altars, we can imagine a yearly solstice rite
combined with the death and rebirth of a mythological hero.

The ritual has a sorrow about it that is also a kind of joy, an inward
acknowledgment that death also leads to a new life. Whether it is expressed in
the prose epic of the Winnebago Indians, in a lament for the death of Balder in
the Norse sagas, in Walt Whitman’s poems of mourning for Abraham Lincoln, or in
the dream ritual whereby a man returns to his youthful hopes and fears, it is
the same theme—the drama of new birth through death.

The end of the dream brings out a curious epilogue in which the dreamer at last
becomes involved in the action of the dream. He and others are on a platform
from which they have to descend. He does not trust the ladder because of the
possible interference of hoodlums, but a woman encourages him to believe he can
go down safely and this is accomplished. Since I found out from his
associations that the whole performance he witnessed was part of his analysis—a
process of inner change that he was experiencing—he was presumably thinking of
the difficulty of getting back to everyday reality again. His fear of the
“toughs,” as he calls them, suggests his fear that the Trickster archetype may
appear in a collective form.

The saving elements in the dream are the man-made ladder, which here is
probably a symbol of the rational mind, and the presence of the woman who
encourages the dreamer to use it. Her appearance in the final sequence of the
dream points to a psychic need to include a feminine principle as a complement
to all this excessively masculine activity.



Heroes often battle dragons to rescue “damsels in distress” (who symbolize the
anima). In the 1916 film The Great Secret, the dragon has become a locomotive
but the heroic rescue remains the same.

It should not be assumed from what I have said, or from the fact that I have
chosen to use the Winnebago myth to illuminate this particular dream, that one
must seek for complete and wholly mechanical parallels between a dream and the
materials one can find in the history of mythology. Each dream is individual to
the dreamer, and the precise form it takes is determined by his own situation.
What I have sought to show is the manner in which the unconscious draws on this
archetypal material and modifies its patterns to the dreamer’s needs. Thus, in
this particular dream, one must not look for a direct reference to what the
Winnebago describe in the Red Horn or Twin cycles; the reference is rather to
the essence of those two themes—to the sacrificial element in them.

As a general rule it can be said that the need for hero symbols arises when the
ego needs strengthening—when, that is to say, the conscious mind needs
assistance in some task that it cannot accomplish unaided or without drawing on
the sources of strength that lie in the unconscious mind. In the dream I have
been discussing, for instance, there was no reference to one of the more
important aspects of the myth of the typical hero—his capacity to save or
protect beautiful women from terrible danger. (The damsel in distress was a
favorite myth of medieval Europe.) This is one way in which myths or dreams
refer to the “anima”—the feminine element of the male psyche that Goethe called
“the Eternal Feminine.”

The nature and function of this female element will be discussed later in this
book by Dr. von Franz. But its relation to the hero figure can be illustrated
here by a dream produced by another patient, also a man of mature years. He
began by saying:

“I had returned from a long hike through India. A woman had equipped myself and
a friend for the journey, and on my return I reproached her for failing to give
us black rainhats, telling her that through this oversight we had been soaked
by the rain.”

This introduction to the dream, it later emerged, referred to a period in this
man’s youth when he was given to taking “heroic” walks through dangerous
mountain country in company with a college friend. (As he had never been to
India, and in view of his own associations to this dream, I concluded that the
dream journey signified his exploration of a new region—not, that is to say, a
real place but the realm of the unconscious.)

In his dream the patient seems to feel that a woman—presumably a
personification of his anima—has failed to prepare him properly for this
expedition. The lack of a suitable rainhat suggests that he feels in an
unprotected state of mind, in which he is uncomfortably affected by exposure to
new and not altogether pleasant experiences. He believes that the woman should
have provided a rainhat for him, just as his mother provided clothes for him to
wear as a boy. This episode is reminiscent of his early picaresque wanderings,
when he was sustained by the assumption that his mother (the original feminine
image) would protect him against all dangers. As he grew older, he saw that
this was a childish illusion, and he now blames his misfortune on his own
anima, not his mother.

In the next stage of the dream the patient speaks of participating in a hike
with a group of people. He grows tired and returns to an outdoor restaurant
where he finds his raincoat, together with the rainhat that he had missed
earlier. He sits down to rest; and, as he does so, he notices a poster stating
that a local high-school boy is taking the part of Perseus in a play. Then the
boy in question appears—who turns out to be not a boy at all but a husky young
man. He is dressed in grey with a black hat, and he sits down to talk with
another young man dressed in a black suit. Immediately after this scene the
dreamer feels a new vigor, and finds that he is capable of rejoining his party.
They all then climb over the next hill. There, below them, he sees their
destination; it is a lovely harbor town. He feels both heartened and
rejuvenated by the discovery.

Here, in contrast to the restless, uncomfortable, and lonely journey of the
first episode, the dreamer is with a group. The contrast marks a change from an
earlier pattern of isolation and youthful protest to the socializing influence
of a relation to others. Since this implies a new capacity for relatedness, it
suggests that his anima must now be functioning better than it was
before—symbolized by his discovery of the missing hat that the anima figure had
previously failed to provide for him.

But the dreamer is tired, and the scene at the restaurant reflects his need to
look at his earlier attitudes in a new light, with the hope of renewing his
strength by this regression. And so it turns out. What he first sees is a
poster suggesting the enactment of a youthful hero role—a high-school boy
playing the part of Perseus. Then he sees the boy, now a man, with a friend who
makes a sharp contrast to him. The one dressed in light grey, the other in
black, can be recognized, from what I have previously said, as a version of the
Twins. They are hero-figures expressing the opposites of ego and alter-ego,
which, however, appear here in a harmonious and unified relation.

The patient’s associations confirmed this and emphasized that the figure in
grey represents a well-adapted, worldly attitude to life, while the figure in
black represents the spiritual life, in the sense that a clergyman wears black.
That they wore hats (and he now had found his own) points to their having
achieved a relatively mature identity of a kind that he had felt to be severely
lacking in his own earlier adolescent years, when the quality of “Tricksterism”
still clung to him, in spite of his idealistic self-image as a seeker of
wisdom.

His association to the Greek hero Perseus was a curious one, which proved
especially significant because it revealed a glaring inaccuracy. It turned out
that he thought Perseus was the hero who slew the Minotaur and rescued Ariadne
from the Cretan labyrinth. As he wrote the name down for me, he discovered his
mistake—that it was Theseus, not Perseus, who slew the Minotaur—and this
mistake became suddenly meaningful, as such slips often do, by making him
notice what these two heroes had in common. They both had to overcome their
fear of unconscious demonic maternal powers and had to liberate from these
powers a single youthful feminine figure.

Perseus had to cut off the head of the gorgon Medusa, whose horrifying visage
and snaky locks turned all who gazed upon them to stone. He later had to
overcome the dragon that guarded Andromeda. Theseus represented the young
patriarchal spirit of Athens who had to brave the terrors of the Cretan
labyrinth with its monstrous inmate, the Minotaur, which perhaps symbolized the
unhealthy decadence of matriarchal Crete. (In all cultures, the labyrinth has
the meaning of an entangling and confusing representation of the world of
matriarchal consciousness; it can be traversed only by those who are ready for
a special initiation into the mysterious world of the collective unconscious.)
Having overcome this danger, Theseus rescued Ariadne, a maiden in distress.

This rescue symbolizes the liberation of the anima figure from the devouring
aspect of the mother image. Not until this is accomplished can a man achieve
his first true capacity for relatedness to women. The fact that this man had
failed adequately to separate the anima from the mother was emphasized in
another dream, in which he encountered a dragon—a symbolic image for the
“devouring” aspect of his attachment to his mother. This dragon pursued him,
and because he had no weapon he began to get the worst of the struggle.

Significantly, however, his wife appeared in the dream, and her appearance
somehow made the dragon smaller and less threatening. This change in the dream
showed that in his marriage the dreamer was belatedly overcoming the attachment
to his mother. In other words, he had to find a means of freeing the psychic
energy attached to the mother-son relationship, in order to achieve a more
adult relation to women—and, indeed, to adult society as a whole. The
hero-dragon battle was the symbolic expression of this process of “growing up.”

But the hero’s task has an aim that goes beyond biological and marital
adjustment. It is to liberate the anima as that inner component of the psyche
which is necessary for any true creative achievement. In this man’s case we
have to guess the probability of this outcome because it is not directly stated
in the dream of the Indian journey. But I am sure he would confirm my
hypothesis that his journey over the hill and the sight of his goal as a
peaceful harbor town contained the rich promise that he would discover his
authentic anima function. He would thus be cured of his early resentment at not
being given protection (the rainhat) by the woman for his journey through
India. (In dreams, significantly placed towns can often be anima symbols.)

The man had won this promise of security for himself by his contact with the
authentic hero archetype, and had found a new co-operative and related attitude
to the group. His sense of rejuvenation naturally followed. He had drawn on the
inner source of strength that the hero archetype represents; he had clarified
and developed that part of him which was symbolized by the woman; and he had,
by his ego’s heroic act, liberated himself from his mother.

These and many other examples of the hero myth in modern dreams show that the
ego as hero is always essentially a bearer of culture rather than a purely
egocentric exhibitionist. Even Trickster, in his misguided or unpurposive way,
is a contributor to the cosmos as primitive man sees it. In Navaho mythology,
as Coyote, he hurled the stars into the sky as an act of creation, he invented
the necessary contingency of death, and in the myth of emergency he helped lead
the people through the hollow reed whereby they escaped from one world to
another above it where they were safe from the threat of flood.

We have here a reference to that form of creative evolution which evidently
begins on a childlike, preconscious, or animal level of existence. The ego’s
rise to effective conscious action becomes plain in the true culture-hero. In
the same fashion the childish or adolescent ego frees itself from the
oppression of parental expectations and becomes individual. As part of this
rise to consciousness the hero-dragon battle may have to be fought and refought
to liberate energy for the multitude of human tasks that can form a culture
pattern out of chaos.

When this is successful, we see the full hero image emerging as a kind of ego
strength (or, if we are speaking in collective terms, a tribal identity) that
has no further need to overcome the monsters and the giants. It has reached the
point where these deep forces can be personalized. The “feminine element” no
longer appears in dreams as a dragon, but as a woman; similarly, the “shadow”
side of the personality takes on a less menacing form.

This important point is illustrated in the dream of a man nearing 50. All his
life he had suffered from periodic attacks of anxiety associated with fear of
failure (originally engendered by a doubting mother). Yet his actual
achievements, both in his profession and in his personal relations, were well
above average. In his dream his nine-year-old son appeared as a young man of
about 18 or 19, dressed in the shining armor of a medieval knight. The young
man is called upon to fight a host of men in black, which he prepares at first
to do. Then he suddenly removes his helmet, and smiles at the leader of the
menacing host; it is clear that they will not engage in the battle but will
become friends.

The son in the dream is the man’s own youthful ego, which had frequently felt
threatened by the shadow in the form of self-doubt. He had, in a sense, waged a
successful crusade against this adversary all his mature life. Now, partly
through the actual encouragement of seeing his son grow up without such doubts,
but mainly by forming a suitable image of the hero in the form closest to his
own environmental pattern, he finds it no longer necessary to fight the shadow;
he can accept it. That is what is symbolized in the act of friendship. He is no
longer driven to a competitive struggle for individual supremacy, but is
assimilated to the cultural task of forming a democratic sort of community.
Such a conclusion, reached in the fullness of life, goes beyond the heroic task
and leads one to a truly mature attitude.

This change, however, does not take place automatically. It requires a period
of transition, which is expressed in the various forms of the archetype of
initiation.

