# PART 1 - Past and future in the unconscious
[Metadata]: # {01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02}
[Author]: # {Jung}
PART 1
Past and future in the unconscious
# Past and future in the unconscious
So far, I have been sketching some of the principles on which I approached the
problem of dreams, for when we want to investigate man’s faculty to produce
symbols, dreams prove to be the most basic and accessible material for this
purpose. The two fundamental points in dealing with dreams are these: First,
the dream should be treated as a fact, about which one must make no previous
assumption except that it somehow makes sense; and second, the dream is a
specific expression of the unconscious.

One could scarcely put these principles more modestly. No matter how low
anyone’s opinion of the unconscious may be, he must concede that it is worth
investigating; the unconscious is at least on a level with the louse, which,
after all, enjoys the honest interest of the entomologist. If somebody with
little experience and knowledge of dreams thinks that dreams are just chaotic
occurrences without meaning, he is at liberty to do so. But if one assumes that
they are normal events (which, as a matter of fact, they are), one is bound to
consider that they are either causal—i.e., that there is a rational cause for
their existence—or in a certain way purposive, or both.

Let us now look a little more closely at the ways in which the conscious and
unconscious contents of the mind are linked together. Take an example with
which everyone is familiar. Suddenly you find you can’t remember what you were
going to say next, though a moment ago the thought was perfectly clear. Or
perhaps you were about to introduce a friend, and his name escapes you as you
were about to utter it. You say you can’t remember; in fact, though, the
thought has become unconscious, or at least momentarily separated from
consciousness. We find the same phenomenon with our senses. If we listen to a
continuous note on the fringe of audibility, the sound seems to stop at regular
intervals and then start again. Such oscillations are due to a periodic
decrease and increase in one’s attention, not to any change in the note.

But when something slips out of our consciousness it does not cease to exist,
any more than a car that has disappeared round a corner has vanished into thin
air. It is simply out of sight. Just as we may later see the car again, so we
come across thoughts that were temporarily lost to us.

Thus, part of the unconscious consists of a multitude of temporarily obscured
thoughts, impressions, and images that, in spite of being lost, continue to
influence our conscious minds. A man who is distracted or “absent-minded” will
walk across the room to fetch something. He stops, seemingly perplexed; he has
forgotten what he was after. His hands grope about among the objects on the
table as if he were sleepwalking; he is oblivious of his original purpose, yet
he is unconsciously guided by it. Then he realizes what it is that he wants.
His unconscious has prompted him.

If you observe the behavior of a neurotic person, you can see him doing many
things that he appears to be doing consciously and purposefully. Yet if you ask
him about them, you will discover that he is either unconscious of them or has
something quite different in mind. He hears and does not hear; he sees, yet is
blind; he knows and is ignorant. Such examples are so common that the
specialist soon realizes that unconscious contents of the mind behave as if
they were conscious and that you can never be sure, in such cases, whether
thought, speech, or action is conscious or not.

It is this kind of behavior that makes so many physicians dismiss statements by
hysterical patients as utter lies. Such persons certainly produce more untruths
than most of us, but “lie” is scarcely the right word to use. In fact, their
mental state causes an uncertainty of behavior because their consciousness is
liable to unpredictable eclipse by an interference from the unconscious. Even
their skin sensations may reveal similar fluctuations of awareness. At one
moment the hysterical person may feel a needle prick in the arm; at the next it
may pass unnoticed. If his attention can be focused on a certain point, the
whole of his body can be completely anesthetized until the tension that causes
this blackout of the senses has been relaxed. Sense perception is then
immediately restored. All the time, however, he has been unconsciously aware of
what was happening.

The physician can see this process quite clearly when he hypnotizes such a
patient. It is easy to demonstrate that the patient has been aware of every
detail. The prick in the arm or the remark made during an eclipse of
consciousness can be recalled as accurately as if there had been no anesthesia
or “forgetfulness.” I recall a woman who was once admitted to the clinic in a
state of complete stupor. When she recovered consciousness next day, she knew
who she was but did not know where she was, how or why she had come there, or
even the date. Yet after I had hypnotized her, she told me why she had fallen
ill, how she had got to the clinic, and who had admitted her. All these details
could be verified. She was even able to tell the time at which she had been
admitted, because she had seen a clock in the entrance hall. Under hypnosis,
her memory was as clear as if she had been completely conscious all the time.

When we discuss such matters, we usually have to draw on evidence supplied by
clinical observation. For this reason, many critics assume that the unconscious
and all its subtle manifestations belong solely to the sphere of
psychopathology. They consider any expression of the unconscious as something
neurotic or psychotic, which has nothing to do with a normal mental state. But
neurotic phenomena are by no means the products exclusively of disease. They
are in fact no more than pathological exaggerations of normal occurrences; it
is only because they are exaggerations that they are more obvious than their
normal counterparts. Hysterical symptoms can be observed in all normal persons,
but they are so slight that they usually pass unnoticed.

Forgetting, for instance, is a normal process, in which certain conscious ideas
lose their specific energy because one’s attention has been deflected. When
interest turns elsewhere, it leaves in shadow the things with which one was
previously concerned, just as a searchlight lights upon a new area by leaving
another in darkness. This is unavoidable, for consciousness can keep only a few
images in full clarity at one time, and even this clarity fluctuates.

But the forgotten ideas have not ceased to exist. Although they cannot be
reproduced at will, they are present in a subliminal state—just beyond the
threshold of recall—from which they can rise again spontaneously at any time,
often after many years of apparently total oblivion.

I am speaking here of things we have consciously seen or heard, and
subsequently forgotten. But we all see, hear, smell, and taste many things
without noticing them at the time, either because our attention is deflected or
because the stimulus to our senses is too slight to leave a conscious
impression. The unconscious, however, has taken note of them, and such
subliminal sense perceptions play a significant part in our everyday lives.
Without our realizing it, they influence the way in which we react to both
events and people.

An example of this that I found particularly revealing was provided by a
professor who had been walking in the country with one of his pupils, absorbed
in serious conversation. Suddenly he noticed that his thoughts were being
interrupted by an unexpected flow of memories from his early childhood. He
could not account for this distraction. Nothing in what had been said seemed to
have any connection with these memories. On looking back, he saw that he had
been walking past a farm when the first of these childhood recollections had
surged up in his mind. He suggested to his pupil that they should walk back to
the point where the fantasies had begun. Once there, he noticed the smell of
geese, and instantly he realized that it was this smell that had touched off
the flow of memories.



In cases of extreme mass hysteria (which was in the past called “possession”),
the conscious mind and ordinary sense perception seem eclipsed. The frenzy of a
Balinese sword dance causes the dancers to fall into trances and, sometimes, to
turn their weapons against themselves.

In his youth he had lived on a farm where geese were kept, and their
characteristic smell had left a lasting though forgotten impression. As he
passed the farm on his walk, he had noticed the smell subliminally, and this
unconscious perception had called back long-forgotten experiences of his
childhood. The perception was subliminal, because the attention was engaged
elsewhere, and the stimulus was not strong enough to deflect it and to reach
consciousness directly. Yet it had brought up the “forgotten” memories.

Such a “cue” or “trigger” effect can explain the onset of neurotic symptoms as
well as more benign memories when a sight, smell, or sound recalls a
circumstance in the past. A girl, for instance, may be busy in her office,
apparently in good health and spirits. A moment later she develops a blinding
headache and shows other signs of distress. Without consciously noticing it,
she has heard the foghorn of a distant ship, and this has unconsciously
reminded her of an unhappy parting with a lover whom she has been doing her
best to forget.

Aside from normal forgetting, Freud has described several cases that involve
the “forgetting” of disagreeable memories—memories that one is only too ready
to lose. As Nietzsche remarked, where pride is insistent enough, memory prefers
to give way. Thus, among the lost memories, we encounter not a few that owe
their subliminal state (and their incapacity to be voluntarily reproduced) to
their disagreeable and incompatible nature. The psychologist calls these
repressed contents.

A case in point might be that of a secretary who is jealous of one of her
employer’s associates. She habitually forgets to invite this person to
meetings, though the name is clearly marked on the list she is using. But, if
challenged on the point, she simply says she “forgot” or was “interrupted.” She
never admits—not even to herself—the real reason for her omission.

Many people mistakenly overestimate the role of will power and think that
nothing can happen to their minds that they do not decide and intend. But one
must learn to discriminate carefully between intentional and unintentional
contents of the mind. The former are derived from the ego personality; the
latter, however, arise from a source that is not identical with the ego, but is
its “other side.” It is this “other side” that would have made the secretary
forget the invitations.

There are many reasons why we forget things that we have noticed or
experienced; and there are just as many ways in which they may be recalled to
mind. An interesting example is that of cryptomnesia, or “concealed
recollection.” An author may be writing steadily to a preconceived plan,
working out an argument or developing the line of a story, when he suddenly
runs off at a tangent. Perhaps a fresh idea has occurred to him, or a different
image, or a whole new sub-plot. If you ask him what prompted the digression, he
will not be able to tell you. He may not even have noticed the change, though
he has now produced material that is entirely fresh and apparently unknown to
him before. Yet it can sometimes be shown convincingly that what he has written
bears a striking similarity to the work of another author—a work that he
believes he has never seen.



The toy cars forming the Volkswagen trade-mark in this advertisement may have a
“trigger” effect on a reader’s mind, stirring unconscious memories of
childhood. If these memories are pleasant, the pleasure may be associated
(unconsciously) with the product and brand name.

I myself found a fascinating example of this in Nietzsche’s book Thus Spake
Zarathustra, where the author reproduces almost word for word an incident
reported in a ship’s log for the year 1686. By sheer chance I had read this
seaman’s yarn in a book published about 1835 (half a century before Nietzsche
wrote); and when I found the similar passage in Thus Spake Zarathustra, I was
struck by its peculiar style, which was different from Nietzsche’s usual
language. I was convinced that Nietzsche must also have seen the old book,
though he made no reference to it. I wrote to his sister, who was still alive,
and she confirmed that she and her brother had in fact read the book together
when he was 11 years old. I think, from the context, it is inconceivable that
Nietzsche had any idea that he was plagiarizing this story. I believe that
fifty years later it had unexpectedly slipped into focus in his conscious mind.

In this type of case there is genuine, if unrealized, recollection. Much the
same sort of thing may happen to a musician who has heard a peasant tune or
popular song in childhood and finds it cropping up as the theme of a symphonic
movement that he is composing in adult life. An idea or an image has moved back
from the unconscious into the conscious mind.

What I have so far said about the unconscious is no more than a cursory sketch
of the nature and functioning of this complex part of the human psyche. But it
should have indicated the kind of subliminal material from which the symbols of
our dreams may be spontaneously produced. This subliminal material can consist
of all urges, impulses, and intentions; all perceptions and intuitions; all
rational or irrational thoughts, conclusions, inductions, deductions, and
premises; and all varieties of feeling. Any or all of these can take the form
of partial, temporary, or constant unconsciousness.

Such material has mostly become unconscious because—in a manner of
speaking—there is no room for it in the conscious mind. Some of one’s thoughts
lose their emotional energy and become subliminal (that is to say, they no
longer receive so much of our conscious attention) because they have come to
seem uninteresting or irrelevant, or because there is some reason why we wish
to push them out of sight.

It is, in fact, normal and necessary for us to “forget” in this fashion, in
order to make room in our conscious minds for new impressions and ideas. If
this did not happen, everything we experienced would remain above the threshold
of consciousness and our minds would become impossibly cluttered. This
phenomenon is so widely recognized today that most people who know anything
about psychology take it for granted.

But just as conscious contents can vanish into the unconscious, new contents,
which have never yet been conscious, can arise from it. One may have an
inkling, for instance, that something is on the point of breaking into
consciousness—that “something is in the air,” or that one “smells a rat.” The
discovery that the unconscious is no mere depository of the past, but is also
full of germs of future psychic situations and ideas, led me to my own new
approach to psychology. A great deal of controversial discussion has arisen
round this point. But it is a fact that, in addition to memories from a
long-distant conscious past, completely new thoughts and creative ideas can
also present themselves from the unconscious—thoughts and ideas that have never
been conscious before. They grow up from the dark depths of the mind like a
lotus and form a most important part of the subliminal psyche.

We find this in everyday life, where dilemmas are sometimes solved by the most
surprising new propositions; many artists, philosophers, and even scientists
owe some of their best ideas to inspirations that appear suddenly from the
unconscious. The ability to reach a rich vein of such material and to translate
it effectively into philosophy, literature, music, or scientific discovery is
one of the hallmarks of what is commonly called genius.

We can find clear proof of this fact in the history of science itself. For
example, the French mathematician Poincaré and the chemist Kekulé owed
important scientific discoveries (as they themselves admit) to sudden pictorial
“revelations” from the unconscious. The so-called “mystical” experience of the
French philosopher Descartes involved a similar sudden revelation in which he
saw in a flash the “order of all sciences.” The British author Robert Louis
Stevenson had spent years looking for a story that would fit his “strong sense
of man’s double being,” when the plot of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde was suddenly
revealed to him in a dream.

Later I shall describe in more detail how such material arises from the
unconscious, and I shall examine the form in which it is expressed. At the
moment I simply want to point out that the capacity of the human psyche to
produce such new material is particularly significant when one is dealing with
dream symbolism, for I have found again and again in my professional work that
the images and ideas that dreams contain cannot possibly be explained solely in
terms of memory. They express new thoughts that have never yet reached the
threshold of consciousness.



The 19th-century German chemist Kekule, researching into the molecular
structure of benzene, dreamed of a snake with its tail in its mouth. (This is
an age-old symbol: left, a representation of it from a third-century B.C. Greek
manuscript.) He interpreted the dream to mean that the structure was a closed
carbon ring—as on the page above, from his Textbook of Organic Chemistry (1861).

