# Prologue
To whoever may be reading this, I am sorry, your fate is not pretty. But if
what I have witnessed is true, then your lives are of utmost importance.

In an effort to stay true to that which has given me the truth, I will adhere
to his advice as best I can. I was told to only give minimal background of
myself, so that I do here.

---

I opened my eyes, and saw this scene before me. I was standing on a pathway.
This pathway went seemingly forever behind me, but in front of me it split.
Where it split, in the center, was a fountain. This was a typical fountain,
with water flowing from it's center upward, and cascading back down all around
the center. At the peak of this, there was a disc, but more on this later.

The path split, and went each way around this fountain, and rejoined and
continued on the other side.

Everything else around me was like a garden. But there were no walls, or
barriers to this garden, it was as if the entire world might have been a
garden, as if this world that I had somehow woken up in might have just
naturally evolved into a garden. It was as if nature itself, rather than being
a rain forest or a desert or other such structure of our world, it was as if
nature itself was a garden in this world.

One last thing that struck me as well, was that the entire scene was lit,
illuminated, but when I looked into the sky, I could find no sun. Instead, it
was simply the most vivid blue sky you could imagine in every direction. It
was bright, but not blinding. I looked on the ground to try and find my shadow,
but there were no shadows. There was simply light.

Before I had the chance to take in any more, or explore more of this world,
from the other side of the path, coming towards me, on the other side of the
fountain, I saw the shape of a man. This image was entirely hairless, and
naked, but on him I saw no genitals. He was simply like a maniquin in his
perfection, but so unlike a maniquin in his fullness of life. He walked to me,
and in a hurried excited tone began to speak.

"Oh, yes! Yes! It worked. I am so glad it worked. You won't believe how much
trouble I have gone through in order to get you here, like this. Oh, this is so
exciting!"

I was left speechless. The figure walked towards me again.

"Oh, but you must have so many questions for me. So many questions. And I know
you do, you wouldn't be here if you didn't. But stay quiet, I will answer the
questions that need answering, and leave you off. There can be no more. So
listen to me closely, it's very important that you do, and listen, and take it
in, and return and write of everything I tell you. Write it all. But I will
tell you what to write. But first, explanation."

The figure began to walk, and beckoned me to follow him. Unsure of where I was
or what this figure was, it seemed correct to me to walk with him.

"First," the figure began, "I created you. I created your world. I created the
stars, an the oceans, and sun and the moon, and the earth and the fire, all of
the things that you know to be 'real' in the world, I created them.

"This is the universe that I created them from. It would be accurate to say,
your universe was created in mine. This is 'the afterlife', although I must be
clear that this is more than just 'the place you go when you die'. This is,
'the place from which all things originate. That's the best way I can describe
it in your terms.

"The way it works is this. I created you, and I created you in a way so that
you could reproduce. I started with a small population, and then I set you off.
It gets boring here, so I had to find some way to amuse myself, so creating an
entire universe inside of this one was how I chose to pass my time.

"But I didn't do a very good job. I made the universe, and I created the first
humans in various sections of it, but I underestimated the power of that which
I created. I made it so that your soul would flow from one end of this world,
through my universe, and back into this one, but I entirely miscalculated the
fervor of the human spirit that I created. You all have a way of transforming
the soul, and distorting it when it comes back out.

"So before, in this universe, I simply had a flow of souls, like what you would
call the wind, but here they are simply souls, and I decided to place my
universe as a sort of way to capture the souls and then release them back. I
did this for my amusment, it's easy to get bored here, and I am always finding
ways to amuse myself. So I made your universe, to capture the souls, so that
they might have an experience that is something entirely "out of this world"
but only for a breif time, before I would return them back to our world.

"But it went terribly wrong. I made your universe, and at first, the souls
would enter, and live lives in your universe, and then exit out again rather
unphased. But the project started to multiply beyond my expectiations. Your
universe started taking demands on the flow of souls that I didn't expect. The
first humans were rather content, but they sought to reproduce, as I designed
them, but they coninued to do so at such a vigourous rate. You placed quite a
large demand on the number of souls. And well, it will eventually become
unsustainable, you see. Currently, the flow of souls is being exhausted at a
much greater rate then it should, and because of this, some of the most
wretched and twisted souls get sucked up into your universe. And when these
wretched souls find their way in, the souls that come back through end up
beaten and broken. And this isn't what I wanted. I didn't want to take innocent
souls and place them in this universe so that they might come out on this end
lost and confused for eternity. It's a terrible thing, and if I don't do
something about it, it will mean that things here will get a lot worse, for me
and for the souls.

"And I can't just destroy the universe. That's not how things work. There are
so many souls trapped in there now, that to just destroy it would leave such a
void.

"Also, I can't simply manipulate your universe to fix the errors I made.
Unfortantly, with something like this, once it gets going, it really takes a
life of it's own, and to try and tamper with it can only be done with great
caution.

"That's where you come in. You see, what I underestimated was this. When souls
enter your universe, they discover that something isn't quite right. This isn't
the existance that the soul is used to, and it begins to thirst, it thirsts for
knowledge. It sees the world around itself, and it sees that 'there must be
something more than this' and the reason for this thirst is because there is.
That is this world. And in order for the soul to be saved, or at least, to come
back out the other end un-maimed, that thirst must be quenched.

"You are an interesting one. You are a soul, but you are such a unique soul.
You're existance in isolation from all others is magnificent, and it allows to
me extract you to this simulated reality, where we can both exist.

"So I lied to you, this is not the afterlife, rather, this is something of a
simulated universe that is also inside of my universe, a sort of middle ground
between my world and your world, a place where you and I can communicate. I
made it enough like your world that your soul would recognize it, but I made it
enough like my world so that I could inhabit it. And you can mention this
distinction in your writings, but it's wholly unimportant, and you must not
dwell on it.

"So here is my instruction to you. I wish to give you the "theory of
everything." This is the theory that I made up, just for fun, to test it out on
the souls that go through. It is this theory that I created your universe with.
But you wouldn't understand it. The theory of everything is a theory that
exists in my world, but due to the nature of your embedded universe, it doesn't
exist in your world. I know that is quite confusing, but I don't want you to
dwell on the details.

"If I could, I would go back to the start of the creation of my world, and
embue inside of it the theory of everything. This would have solved all of the
issues I am having currently. But I can't do that, and now to try and embue the
theory of everything into the world after it's already started, well, that
would be quite impossible.

"And now, the people of your world, of the world I made, they are starting to
discover some of the nature of their world. But I am afraid that you will
destroy yourself, and that would be very bad. The soul is a beautiful thing,
and it would be so tragic if my universe, I mean the universe I created, were
to destroy itself and all of the souls inside with it. I see you approach this
capability, and it's quite frightning to me.

"So my solution is this. You are to return back into your universe, and you are
to tell of everything that you saw here. Give a little bit of background, of
yourself but keep that breif, and tell a little bit about how you ended up
here, but keep that breif as well.

"After you describe all of these things, you are to draw this symbol," a
symbol, which I have attempted my best to draw, was displayed before me, "to
the best of your ability. You are then to say, exactly, 'there will be wars
fought with the power of the atom'. I wish I could be more descriptive, but
these things haven't happened yet, and I can't be sure on the details.

"Then you are to place all of these things, and you are to preserve them as
best you can, and hide them in your place. Due to the nature of your soul, you
will place them in the correct place, I know that to be true.

"You are then to follow the stream that flows into the great lake. You know the
one I am refering to. Follow it, and there you will find a cave. Enter this
cave, so that your soul may be saved.

"Many years from now, one man will find your writings, and he will contact his
friends. This man, unfortantely will seek this cave and die. No matter what I
tell you, this will be how it happens. But he will have four friends, four that
will meet on that day. These four are to go to the cave, and there I will
display to them the proof they will need.

"You are to follow these instructions exactly. Make these writings, in this
way, and hide them where your soul tells you to. Things must go this way. You
will want to exclaim to the world that you have found the answer, but this
cannot go this way. Things must go like this. I have already tampered with the
world enough.

"I know you have many more questions for me, but I must leave you now. I must
not overfill your soul with so many answers, lest you become overzealous. It
must be this way. Go now, and do as I have commanded."

I had been walking with this figure the entire time, and realized that, even
though we had been going on the straight path, we somehow ended up back at the
fountain. From here, the figure forcefully pushed me in, and I became swept up
in the waters. It was strange, because though I was drowning, I felt no urge to
struggle. The figure held me down in the fountain, until my vision went dark,
and the last thing I remember was letting go, and letting my soul drift up into
the stream and back into the disc that lay there.

The next thing I remember, I woke up. I checked my arm, and there was no snake
bite. These are the documents that I have written, according to what I have
heard. I will now place these documents in the foundation of my cottage, where
I know they will survive the rain and the weather, and I will make my way to
this supposed cave.

If everything is true, and I believe that it is so, I will not return. Whover
is reading this, may your soul guide you to the way that is right.

What is then
going to happen is, many years, perhaps even a century from now, one man is
going to find your work. 

which you are to go and visit the cave at the end of the stream. I know
there is a stream by your hermitage, follow, and there you will find a cave.
There, you will have the proof you need that this experience was genuine.

"
