"That's not how God works though. God doesn't just give His people a sign. I
can't just tell god to move the mountain and have him move it. God works
through the Holy Spirit, that fills all of us. This can't be true. God doesn't
work like this."

"Woman!" Lyse replied, "I don't care one way or the other what you think about
how God should or should not present himself to us. God just presented himself
to us now, and how he did it, well, that's the way he did it. Can you not see
that? Did you have your eyes closed during that entire display? The God of the
bible isn't real. Don't you get that. This is proof. Oh how long I have waited
for this day. I have prayed God give me a sign, but God did not answer, but the
actual creator of the world has shown himself to me, to us, to all of us. This
is the sign that we have been praying for. How do you not accept it?"

"It's not right, this has to be sorcery, we are being tempted by the Devil!
That has to be it. This is not God, but the Devil! He is tempting us. Oh Lyse,
please," she turned to him, her eyes becoming teary, "Don't fall prey to the
temptations of the devil. He is tempting us. This is wrong. This is sorcery."

"You're damned right it's sorcery, it's sorcery, and if that isn't proof that
what we've been reading together isn't real, then I don't know what is. Why,
did not Jesus create wine from water? Yet that you say not is sorcery, but
intsead comes from the power of God. In what way is this different? It is the
sorcery which proves that this comes from our creator. This is undeniable, the
proof is here."

"But the church, the bible, don't you believe in any of it? You told me you
believed, and that you had faith. Was that all a lie? Is everything we read
together, the Rock our Lord on which you and I have built a relationship, is
that all a lie?" Susan was on the verge of collapse, she could barely keep her
voice.

"No, of course not, I never lied to you when I said I had faith in God, but now
things have changed. It's one thing to have a blind faith, a faith in somethnig
that you can't see is there. When you look out into the dark, you can say, 'I
have faith that there is a chair in the dark.' But then when someone turns on
the lights, and you see that it is not a chair but instead a couch, you say,
'Oh, that which I thought was a chair is actually a couch, no longer do I need
faith to believe in the chair, because that faith has been shown to be wrong.
Now in the light, I know there is a couch, and not a chair.' In that way, my
eyes, your eyes, all four of us, all of our eyes have been opened. The lights
are turned on, and that which we had faith in before is now displayed in front
of us. It was different than what we thought, but it is real, it is undeniable.
My faith is gone, and now I have only knowledge. Absolute knowledge!"

"You lying bastard! Everything you said to me was a lie! You never believed in
God! Oh, how you played with me. You manipulated me, you told me you believed
and that you would always believe, and you lied just to get in my pants!
You men are all the same, you're all despicable horrible people! You dishonest
scoundrel!" Susan burst into tears, and ran away.

Lyse looked to his friends and said quickly, "Can you believe this woman?  We
see an undeniable sign from our true creator, I sign from beyond showing us the
nature of the whole universe and how it was created, and all she can think
about is how this impacts our relationship. From where does she derive such
fanciful ideas? Maybe I did exagerate my faith, but how does that matter at
all? We have seen proof of our true god, our creator, this god of the hermit.
This is proof, and in that proof, I will have faith. I will believe in that
which I can see with my own eyes. This is the truth, I will make her see that."

At that he turned and went to chase after Susan.
