# Gerald Orbweaver on:
### The process by which the writer arrives at his words using both free flowing thoght in conjunction with memory recall.
## The joys of writing
Many a reader will sit and read and allow themselves to get swept away in many
kinds of magical fairy worlds and fantasy settings. What might compell a reader
to do such a thing. It seems to me to be the case that the act of reading links
the reader to something which is more than what occurs to the outer appearance.
Because on the outside the image is of a simple woman with her book, but on the
inside there are so many things that could be said about the mental processes
which occur when and individual sits down to read.

These mental process can take many labels, labels like "divine" or "rapturous"
or "cathartic" or even "fullfilling". Regardless of the label used, the point
remains that there is something deeply mystifying and really revaltory that
happens in the person that reads a work of fiction and is so moved by the plot
and the characters that she comes to tears.

As much as the reader goes through these feelings of rapture, the writer must
go over seventy times the experience in order to get there. The truly
sublimated and ever vigilant writer is able to achieve a level of intergration
with his work that must connect himself to the well-spring of all thoughts and
emotions of all human beings (whatever that means) so that he can bring forth
his work in a totally rapturous and zen-like process that can only be sublimed
by those who have experienced it as "one of the most sublime thing a person might
experience.

In reaching these zen-like states, writers will say that they become
"fullfilled" through their work, that they feel as though they have connected
with something deep and meaningful and that their work flows through them as
water might flow through the pipe to bring forth a glorious fountain of
coordinated thought. The rub here is that many people are not able to achieve
these levels of "relaxed excitement" which is required to achieve "zen" and
become frustrated at the endeavor of writing, proclaiming that some people have
it and some people don't and that they don't.

This article is an attempt to show that, while achieving a zen-like writing
state is certainly something that can be inate, it is also something that can
be analyzed and reasoned about. In analyzing it in this way, we aim not to
destroy that feeling of zen (as some would claim) but instead bring forth a new
kind of understanding about it so that others might experience this state on
their own. It is like a muscle that can be trained if only the one with the
muscle knew how. This article is an attempt create a model that will be used to
demonstrate one way this "zen muscle" might be trained.

By understanding this process in an explicit way the writer will be more able
to reach that zen-like state that allows this process to occur more definitely
and in a well-defined way without needlessly sacrificing the rapturous thoughts
that so often elude articulation in-the-moment.

## The quables of writing.

So if the writer is a zen-like machine, a conduit that can connect to the well
spring of all conscious thought and in so doing connect to something more deep
and more visceral them herself or even her immediate network of friends but
instead all the way to the core of how the universe functions, then why doesn't
everyone write? The easy answer, of course (and the only answer we should
really use here) is that writing is a difficult task. Many a great man has
taken up pen to paper and been left with nothing but frustatingly mangled and
ill-formed thoughts. It is a very exhausting process, and sustaining any level
of sublime inspiration is a tricky art to acomplish (as I am sure any sports
psychologist will tell you), especially if one is not the sort to come to an
intuition about such things.

A somewhat naive way to approach this would be to say that the writer should
simply perservere through any hardships, and work his best to make sure that he
is always in an inspired and "writing ready" mood. Such wishes are hopeful, and
seem romantic, but with most visions of this sort it is simply the case that
writing is a much more complicated process that can't simply be "drudged
through" like a bulldozer plows through mud. A lot more goes on in the mind
of the writer than something that could be solved so simply by proclaiming,
"just work harder." Without some direction of the exact way the writer might
work harder, someone might fall in to the trap of writing the same boring drab
story over and over with no proclivitiy for change or growth. This happen to
many an artist who feel their art is growing stale. It is the nature of these
things that the more we do work in a dismissable way (such as writing without
analyzing for a long period of time in the hopes that somehow magically we will
just get better at it) the more this ever growing sense of dread will pervade
our being and such a sesne of dread and nihlism is never productive towards
success in such art forms. Such dread will bring the writer to declare that
"writing isn't worth it" in a fit of discontent and tragically put away then
pen and pad for good.

## The mechanism by which we have experience and how it dictates the way we recall experience.

Having thus discouraged any potential excited young writers out there with this
doom and gloom about the difficulties of writing, what can be said for our
initial claims; namely, that writing is something which connects us as a human
being to that well-spring of thought which pervades all of existance. What
actions might we take to refine our writing process towards this admittadly
naive yet simultaneous "zen-state" that most people have at least some idea of
capability to achieve? How can we move away from thinking in terms of "mindless
drudgery of words and paragraphs" and instead more continually find ourselves
feeling fullfilled and integrated with the way we write?

This article will not attempt to solve this problem completely. However, it
will give a mental picture and a writing model for any aspiring writer (myself
included) to use and be able to create more output which would be considered
worthwhile (in comparison to dismissable output). The mental picture is not
exactly backed by any of the literature of Neuroscience but is in my opinion
still worth bringing forth for its utility. So what is this mental picture? We
will use a story to draw these points.

### The man and the orgasm

Imagine a man. THis man is sitting, and is on the verge of orgasm. His
girlfriend, feeling his penis get especially stiff and feeling also the
perenium tighten up, decides to press gently on the shaft of the penis to
restrict the flow of semen. In so doing, she feels the penis convulse a couple
times in her hand. During these convulsions, the man has a brief thought in his
mind. The thought goes, verbatim, "My penis is like a volcono, waiting to
explode." Of course, such a thought is natural in a man in the heat of orgasm.
As soon as the man has the thought, the girlfriend releases her grip
(coincidentally) and the man spews forth ejaculate forth on to her breasts,
which have been extended out for that purpose. The thought about the volcano
totally went away in those moments, and the man got caught up in the glories of
orgasm.

Now imagine what the man might say in recalling this experience. If the man is
plain he will say something like, "My girlfriend gave me a handjob and I
exploded like a volcano." If the man is synesthetic, he might say something
like, "The orgasm was like a glowing ball of energy wanting to escape a tube,
and when my girlfriend released my penis the energy burst forth in an explosion
of pure gold that slowly subsided as I came back down to earth." Finally, a
poetic man might say something like, "Three times my manliness convulsed and
three times did she contain it \ But on the fourth, unawares to me, I burst
forth, \ Spraying her glorious bosum with my life giving seed."

The point here is that there are many ways that a man might use words to recall
an experience, but during the experience there was only one thought the man
had. That thought, verbatim in the man's mind as he was having the thought, was
exactly, "My penis is like a volcano, waiting to explode."

### Some claims
The point here is that human beings have thoughts. These thoughts occur to us
in the moment, and there is nothing we can do to have them or not have them.
The man literally experienced his inner voice tell him, "Your penis is like a
volcano, waiting to explode" and there was nothing that the man could have done
to change or supress this thought in the moment that he was having it, because
he was already in the act of having the thought. Then, when the sensantions of
orgasm came about him that thought entirely left him in favor of a more
sublimated experience of orgasm.

At the same time, though, while it is the case that in those moments of orgasm
the thought went completely away, the man might, in later recalling the
experience as a series of raws sensations, might remember that he had the out
of place thought about a volcano just before he orgasmed. This is now a memory,
not a thought, yet somehow the man is thinking the memory again.

This gets to the heart of the point we are trying to make. This point is that
there is quite a profound difference between a thought and the memory of that
thought.

We will now make some claims which could be justified but won't be for the
purpose of illustrating the thesis of this article more clearly. The first such
claim is that, during a free-writing session, the writer is able to directly
integrate the thoughts of his mind on to the page, and get out the "raw thought
in his frontal cortex" Whether or not it's actually the literal frontal cortex
where the thought happens is irrelevent. The claim is simply that the thought
occurs, and that in free writing the thought gets directly transfered without
interference on to the page.

The second claim to be made is that many of the thoughts that come to us are
worth preserving. If we are not freewriting when these thoughts occur (or if we
are but the thought isn't well formed enough to present it to the free-writing
author) but we want to write it down later, the attentive and ever vigilent
author must aim to record the memory to be recalled at a later date. When this
happens, the thought leaves the frontal contex and impresses itself on the
memory centers of the brain.

The final claim is that the writer is actually able to "suspend" a thought for
some time, and the amount of time the thought will be suspended has to do with
the author's ability and proclivity towards such things and also his
conditioning in doing so. This is the muscle we were talking about exercising
earlier.

Having made our claims, let us now look at the whole of the model which we will
use to facilitate our writing.

### THe model

The model is actually the simplest part of this whole picture. To distill it
simply, it goes something like this.

A writer has a thought deemed impactful and moving enough to be worth writing
down. If the writer is free-writing she can immediately "suspend" the thought
and write it down and that is all. If the writer is not free-writing, the
writer will place that thought in to memory. Later, when the author is
free-writing, and desires to return to this thought so that it might be
included in the free-writing session, a memory recall process must happen which
brings the memory material from the subconscious back to the frontal cortex
mirror neurons, and from there the mirror neurons stimulate the frontal contex
consciousness centers in a way very similar to the original (but neccesarily
tainted by the inadequecies of memory). Having suspended the memory in
consciousness like so, the free-writing author can now navigate the memory as
if it were a present day thought, and in so doing can get the words of the
thought on to the page.

## The sublimated writer
