So I wanted to try something new with this free writing session. It is the case
that I am getting more and more continually depressed as I sit in my parents
house and contemplate the way that I want to navigate my life from here.

It is so strange to me, that as soon as I had the profound and undeniably real
realization that my introverted attitude was detrimental to my life and that I
needed to expand out in to the world in order to come into myself more fully
and more completely, I was then promptly shunned by all of my friends and fired
from my job. It's such a mis-match of what I feel is the most imporant thing to
think about in life and what actually happens in life that I can't help but be
struck by it.

It's near impossible for me to now rectify this discontinuity of my being. For
in the course of the past six months, I have gone from a wholly depressed and
untrodden individual towards a much more complete and ready to take on the
world kind of being, and now here I sit again with the same level of depressive
attitude towards the world.

Since I have been fired, the circumstances of everything that has happened to
me are rather striking. First, not a single one of my friends accepted me as a
potential roommate as something that could be the thing. They all fled, at
unawares to my newly discovered revaltions, and firewalled themselves from me.
I must take some fault for perhaps exhausting myself too strongly in to their
midst, but at the same time it represents a certain level of utmost and
unmistakable dishonesty in what these friends are. And I am only refering to
one friend in particular, and then a few others that I can think of that I
wouldn't have asked. Actually, two friends, now that I think about it.

So that being said, I must admit that if we were to treat me as a system, that
system has undergone a sort of catastrophic failure on multiple occasions. The
first time this system failed was when my family, being so deplorably

You know what, fuck this, I am going to just fucking vent.

My dad is most certainly the most deprlorable and not worth anything person in
existance. The very fact that he exists and continues to exist is a perpetual
problem that I don't understand why the world has not killed him yet. Luekema
is not enough to take him out, and I see no reason why his continued existance
is so persisted upon by my mother, who the two of them together continue to put
forth a way of navigating the world which is entirely deplorable and
reprehensible.

To further this problem, not only have they brought about a system which is
quite possibly the most disgusting sort of thing that could ever be, they
perpetually cycle their pathological and wholly twisted ways upon their family
members, constantly repressing and supressing things that are important in
favor of showing face and pretending as though they are something that they are
not. It makes me want to vomit in their face. I want to pin my mother down and
vomit in to her mouth, and then force her to swallow it. Then I want to tie my
father down, face down, so that his ass end is exposed, and then I want to
insert myself (not my penis, mind you, but my entire fist) in to his anus, and
then I want to grab the very innards of his anus and rip them out of his body.
Then, when he inevitably screams, I will take my mother, who is still unsure of
what to do with my vomit, and I want to force her foot down his throat so that
he can't scream.

I want my mother to ask me, "Why are you doing this Brett? What possible end
could this entail?" And I will not answer her. Instead, I will take my flacid
penis and shove it forcibly down her throat so that she won't be able to speak.
Once she starts gagging on it as reflex, I will remove and, and take the fist
which went down my fathers anus and I will shove that very same fist in to my
my mothers mouth, making sure to get all of the innard materials of his fecal
matter all the way down her throat. And then I will grab whatever I can grab
with my hands and rip her esophogus out.

How glorious such a scene could be. When my father begs and screams for me to
stop, I will then force his eyes open upon the scene of my mother. She will
ask, "What is the cause of this" and I will still remain silent. I will instead
let her begin to cry, and let her cry and cry and cry until there are no more
tears, and when she has no tears to cry any more, I will take high purpose
superglue and froce her eyes open to the distraught and downtrodden scene of
her my father, with all of his entrials strewn out from his upside down anus.

From there, I will turn my father back right side up, and when I hear him
scream I will press down on his pelvis to aggrivate his already distendend and
wholly distrodden innards. Then, I will slowly stroke his penis so that it will
get hard. Needless to say, it will be difficult to tell when he is fully erect
because his penis will be so small that the differenc between flacid and erect
will be unnoticable, but no matter, I will do it anyway. And when he gets tho
the point that he is about to finish, and spew what small little pittance of
ejactulate that he doesn't have in his body, then I will force my mother upon
him, dry and unprepared to recieve him, and when they are in this position,
being my mother with torn esophogus and my father with torn anus, and each on
top of the other in sexual union, I will use the splayed entrails which have
bloodied and wrought this scene to tie my mother to my father and force his
flacidness to come in to her for the rest of time. They will be unable to
change anything about this situation, and it will be the case that for eternity
their anguish and agony will resound for all to hear.

I will put them in a glass case, and in this glass case I will put a sign, and
the sign will read, "Behold the devout Christians" and from there they will be
displayed in the heights of the tallest steeple of the tallest Church to be
displayed. The glass will be so designed to hold them up, and it will magnify
the heat and the light of the sun to great lengths so as to force upon them an
eternity of anguish and agony in the heat of their crystal temple.

Such is the fate of my parents.

So now that we have that out of the way, let's talk for real. My parents are
awful people.

I'm about ready to collapse. There has been a part of me that wants to just
find an appropiate shoulder to cry on and cry and cry and cry and have that
shoulder just stand there for me to cry on.

I hurt. I don't know where I hurt. I don't have a body part on which to place
my pain. I just hurt, and I know not from where or in what way this is the
case. I need something, anything, to hold on to, and it seems that every time I
find something to grasp on to and say, "This is it! I must grab this and it
will be my anchor and my refuge" it crumbles in my hand, and I fall all the way
back down to the depths from which I came. To dust we will return, but I don't
want to be dust. I can't accept my fate as a meaningless and overall
dismissable member of society. But how is one to be a meaningful member of
society if they constantly dismiss your work and demand more from you? I can't
give you more unless you give me the chance, and they won't give me the chance
unless I give them more.

How tragic is my plight! Woe is me, the privileged and unavowed middle-aged
white male with no goal an no purpose in life. Never have I have gone hungry.
Never have I ever missed shelter. Such things do not happen to me, and so I do
not develop ambition. My needs are always met, and such needs do not become me.

Fuck me. Dude. This is fucking free writing so I will say the word fuck as
mymany god damn times as I want.

Fuck Fuck Fuck Fuck

GOD FUCKING FUCKING WIT. Jesus fucking fuck christ you god damn ape of society.
Such is the wholly deplorable. Wholly deplorable. I am fixated on that word.
Wholly deplorable. I just want to sleep. I want to sleep, and I want to dream,
but I lay down and I can't even do that. I feel tired but I can't sleep. I have
exercised, I have written, and I have done work, and still I lay down and I
can't sleep except at the times when I'm not supposed to, and when I wake up in
the night and have a nocturnal day, I at least have solace in the fact that
nothing will disturb me and that I can waste away like the fuckless piece of
meat that I am.

Is it possible to introduce another in to this horrible mess of a man that I
am? Is it at all possible to mend and repair the terrible and awful things that
the world has done to me? I being so sheltered by my parents am but a 28 year
old babe with no work ethic and no worthwhile achievements to speak of. My
legacy so far is nothing, nothing at all to speak of is redeemable about me.
When you look down in history, there will be nothing except another record of
another man that was born and lived and died. No work to mention of, no written
record, nothing of value, no contributions to society. Even Hitler is
remembered for his deeds, even if he is demonized better to live a demon than
to die a slave.

Better to live as a demon than die as a slave.

Should I take a hit? I am currently on Caffine and Marijuana withdrawal both,
but the Caffine can be remedyed quite easily with water. Marijuana not so much.

See, here is the thing. I sit at the HPB and I think to myself, to what end is
this, and just then a lovely lady walked by. She was probably in her mid
twenties or younger if I had to guess, with wonderfully thick legs that came
forth from short shorts and a crop top, revealing a wondeful abdomen and soft
and ever so elegent curves that made her figure. Her face was entirely cute and
bubbly, and though she walked by with a rather neutral expression on her face,
I know she has an absolutely gorgeous smile, the sort of smile that would take
you to another land and whisk you away to the point where these things don't
matter.

Oh how much I would like to get to know her. But why would she want to know me,
this horrible and grief ridden man. To what end would she want me in her life.
Would it make sense at all for her to go on a date with me, knowing nothing
about me?

For I could put on a mask. I could say that something is something for some
reason. I could put on the greek and noble figure that I know I can put on, and
I could be that shining glorious figure of Apollo for her to be wooed by. And
in so doing, perhaps with enough skill and enough practice I could convince her
that we should go back to hers, and from there we might even have sex.

How funny it is to me how naive of an approach this is. And neccisarily so,
because my mother is equally naive and worked for damn sure to make sure that
her children were just as much. So being the naive, weak, and pitiful man that
thinks he is ready to go in to the world, I somehow or another come at a point
whereby this navity leads to these ridiculous fantasies about how the girl and
I might come to join eachother.

I tire of writing about these things, but don't know what else I would write
about. Should I write about something eles? Does that make any sense at all?
After all, isn't free writing just about letting the thoughts as the y come in
to the mind come in to the mind.

I will try something new now. I will come at a word, some very cool and very
descriptive and meaningful word, and I will fixate on it. But what word would
that be? What word could I possibly conjure up to talk about?

How about conjure, that word seemed to conjure emotions in me. What does it
mean to conjure. How could one conjure something? What does it mean "to
conjure"? Is what I am doing right now "conjuring" in the sense that I take my
thoughts and I find that very base of which they come and I conjure up words in
those thoughts. Conjuration is something that must be wrong, right? Left or
right or right or left, it doesn't matter to me. Something is horribly wrong
here.

Here I am talking about these women that go by, as if I have some claim to them
or some right to them. But what could that be.

I grow so absolutely tired of conjuring words that it is making me even more
distraught than when I began. Is it possible that this version of Brett which
feels as though he must writing in this way is in some way inferior to the
version of Brett that would instead lie on his floor and sleep by himself? I
must find a place to sleep, I must have a dream, because I know there will be a
dream that is had. I am too restless to sleep, and I am too restless to not
have dreams. Let a nightmare come. Better a nightmare than a wholly despicable
existance as this.

Wholly despicable. What a wonderful phrase. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Wholly despicable. Generatingly cross. Forcible manure. Words
on a page, for the sake of words. Do people use these words? Pick a word to
use, and it will come.

I must become better at figuring out words. THis is something I must resolve
myself on.

Words are the cornerstone from which thought comes. When I have a thought, it
is sometimes the case that I require hundreds of words to express it. How
distasteful that is. Nobody would like to read hundreds of words when thousands
will do, and nobody will read thousands of words when millions would suffice.
How backwards my thinking is. For if I could express myself in less than a
thousand words, why do I feel the need to belabor a point over and over until
it comes out as something entirely and indescribalbly pointless and drab. If I
could only beat the horse until the horse were dead, but it always seems as
though the horse reigns and kicks back at me. It's wholly (and I am obssesed
over this word "wholly") despicable. Wholly and holy and holey (as in
hole-ish). How do these things mix. For something that is holy is certainly not
whole, and neither does it have a hole in it. Something that is holy is unknown
to me.

What is holy? Does it make sense to talk of holiness when the tragides of our
plights fall from the greatest of higehts and distraught despair?

Zarathustra, what was it that you saw. What is the glorious abundance that you
must overfill us with. I don not know.

I become cold. Imy bones shivver and I begins to oscilate back and forth to
combat this feelitng of air conditioned air. For fucks sake, what the fuck does
that even mean. I just want to write words. I just want to have information to
say to the softweare of teh mange a of the humor with which I write this shit
down. I am simply taking the words of the Dragons and dice and the attack on
titan which are the words around me whin I dream of the place of HPB that I sit
at this very moment in time. How do the fuckngi helious of the Sargoroth come
to say anything about anything in this wholly despicable place.

Why am I so obsessed with that word. Wholly. It's just a word yet I have to use
it to describe everything around me. It's fucking disgusting. Fuck me.

I'm about ready to end this. I have gone on for too long to reach so little a
point. I feel as though for some reason that I should reach my expected quota,
but I am not going to do that right now I don't think. Let me check.

Yeah, I am at three thousand words right now, and it will take me six hundred
more to get to the point where I feel like I can say that I am satisfied with
myself on this point. To many words and not enough time to say them. It's
awful.

I want to bury my head and cry. I want to plant my head in to the sand and just
exist there, with my ass up, for anyone who wants to fuck it to fuck it, but
nobody will because nobody wants to fuck a mans ass except for those that want
to fuck men, and those men are fucking other men and that is that. It's it,
it's all. Men fucking men, but not even me, because nobody wants to fuck a man
with his head burried in the sand.

Can I not just collapse in a sea of turmoil. CAn I not just dissolve myself in
to the solution which allows me to be nothing? How can one become nothing in
peace? I am not in peace. Peace be with nobody at all, because I am not
restful. I can't even lay down to sleep, yet when I stand up to walk I feel
like I must lay down to sleep. and then when I get the sleep, I don't even
dream. I can't dream, I can't sleep, I can't even say that these things really
deeply bother me. It's awful. I hate it.

I want to stop writing ,but I have no idea what I am going to do when I stop.
Does it make sense to do anything else at all? Am I going to simply go to my
car, and find a good position, and lie there at unawares to anything and
everything which may happen? Does it make sense for me to find solace and
refuge in the depths of my vehicle so that I can hold myself in there and in
some way come to find the sleep which I so desperately need?

Sleep! Dreams! Come to me, please. I need these things to heal my distrodden
and beaten soul. Nothing is expedient in these worlds. Weed is expedient, and
neccesarily so. The expediancy of weed is it's greatest quality, but it
neccisarily defies all sleep.

I think this is my plan, I will put up my device, I will return to my car, and
I will find a place to curl and comfort myself. In the heat of the day I will
find a way to sleep. Either that or I will continue to burden myself with the
tragedies of existance. No matter. No matter at all. If only I could dream. If
only I could have the nightmare of my soul brought forth to me, then maybe I
might be startled so much as to wake up with fear rather than contempt. Much
rather a man be scared of the world than bitter at it, because at least fear
drives one to move.

But where to move and what to do? Nothing at all or everything at once. Either
way man is screwed.

I am going to attempt sleep. So be it.
