It is at this juncture that I find myself at an ends with that which I have set
out to do. On the one hand I have put forth a series of seventeen note cards
detailing the verse of Cain contemplating his lifes journey on his farms for
him to go through two ordeals each in relation to eachother and finally to find
his brother unconscious in the forest at the whimsy of his fleeting ambition
towards Beelzabub. On the other hand I have the utmost impression that my
inspirtation for such a work is fleeting and my ability or inablity as it may
be to come up with words to rhyme with so that the stanzas and chords of the
verse may take form is the limiting factor in my continued endeavor, I find it
a useful exercise to put aside such things for the time being in favor of a
much more rapturous and engage sort of writing expenditure.

Enough ado about that my good sirs.

It becomes time for me to relay those life events which occur to me.

As of this moment I have as of yet to write down precisely what has occured to
me in my termination at Alliant Systems. I hope to give a most complete account
from beginning to end, sparing the reader of the metaphors and otherwise
clouded material and instead giving the account from the first person as I felt
it on those moments.

It becomes difficult for me to simply begin, however, because it is unknown
even to me writing this down right now how far back I want to go in my efforts.
I could of course go all the way back to that fate ful day after memorial when
I volunteered to accept a case on locking, but instead of doing that I will
instead take myself on a trip to the immediate monday before, being the twenty
fourth day of the month of June and attempt to purvey to whomever might read
these words the effects and affects of the doings of myself and those around be
as the insightful event was to occur.

On this Monday I do not remember much except one thing. I remember the weekend
before bothering myself with the continued pressures of emails from my director
supervisor so named Nick Dillon. I remember plaguing myself constantly with the
balance of work and life, continually struggling to accept that the balance
must be strayed in some way towards the "life" side and that my qualms at work
were simply that: my qualms. To bother others be they family members or friends
or co-workers with my inner demons belonging exclusively and forthrightly to me
would have been foolish over that weekend. Instead I delighted myself in a good
relaxing toke I am sure and brought myself to a calm sleep of which I could
satisfactorily recall as not anxious nor calming but simple sleep in its
simplest form.

As I woke that morning of the twenty-fourth I recorded the sun to note the time
of day, and immediately took it upon myself to recieve in to work dreadfully
early as I was beginning to be wont to do in that time. The early bird in me
was understanding the need for continued focus from one moment to another and
in this way I was able to justify myself and my actions my righting a compliant
that management continually had of development. That complaint being, of
course, that we never arrive on time. Whether or not this sudden change from
being always twenty minutes late to suddenly being an entire hour and
twentyfive minutes early could certainly constitute a recent change in
personality, but not one that the Brett of those moments would have concerned
himself with. He was merely concerned with getting in to work so that he might
begin on the project which he was being told needed to get pushed through the
pipeline as quickly as possible.

As soon as this man which I am refering to in the third person as "Brett" but
in true reality really was me just a few weeks ago came to his desk on that
morning, he did a quick analysis of his situation. "The night before I had no
dreams" he began in his early morning journal which he was accustomed to
writing in at the beginning of the day now, "And I woke up with this utmost
feeling of anxiousness. I am not sure where such anxiety may spring if not the
most obvious case of this Locking Project which I so readily volunteered for."

Some such was surely the drabble that this man bored himself with to begin the
day. As he continued to write he continued to place fingers to keyboard, and
in so doing brought himself to arrive at the conclusion that, though it might
seem to him that his world is ending and that if he might be fired if he were
only to relax, such ideas were his anxieties talking and had no justification
in the actual world that this man.

When Brett took objective stock of the situation, he layed out the secenarios
like so. "Over the past week, I have gotten continued feedback from my boss to
hurry up already and get this thing completed. As much as I tried to force
myself to work faster, it simply wasn't possible for me to get through
everything that I needed to in the time he wanted to, but now at this point I
am nearing completion of the project. I have delivered the bulk of it lest it
should be tested and while it is the case that the testers have been
masterbating over the direction their Word document is going to take it is also
the case that I could have been a little bit faster to respond to the growing
erraticism and requests of management. So all things considered, I have made
some mistakes of which I redily admitted and I sought to correct them in that
time. I determined it was wise to let the final piece of the puzzle stew, that
piece being some feauters of the main screen that this project hinged on, and
since it was the last piece that needed to work and the easiest to test, I
determined it to be lower prioity than at least 1 if not lower than 2 or 3 in
that moment.

I know not what the physical sensations of my body were in those moments, but I
was certainly accutely aware of my sitting postition, my legs, and how it all
contributed to my overall well being.

I determined, after I started seeing people come in and wave hello to me, that
it would be wise to start work on my project, get to a point where I felt that
there was something to show Nick when he asked for it, and plan to schedule a
pair programming sessions with Jacob that morning.

I am growing weary of writitng such drabble. This is boring nonsense. No one
wants to read this. It's not worth anything. Everything seems to me to be a lie
right now. I either don't want to go or want to go more. The tragedy of
existance is coming in to myself and I know not how to handle it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Something ought to be said for the style of writing that someone such as myself
would wish to contain. There is a certainly quality of written words that I
feel can only be obtained by removing those doubts that the words you are
writing don't matter and instead placing yourself in the shoes of one that
would seek to cut precisely with his words and reveal the visions of his
rapturous sitting session with utmost clarity. In keeping in tune with the
instrument of the fashions that bring such words in to existance, this author
being so inspired is able to draw as much from the wellspring of tap that he is
able to penetrate in each coming session. Though it is the case that such
measures must be taken against those thoughts that would seek to intrude upon
the general well being of the words that come out of this spirit, it is also
the case that in some scenarios it is correct gently steer the words back to
their orginial intent. It becomes difficult to remmebr that the words that come
in to the mind occur faster than one is able to write them. This discrepency
must always be corrected for, both in faster typing and in looser restrictions
on the quality of words and sentences that eek into the final product of a free
form writing session. The goal of a session such as this is to produce a raw
product that can be molded and shaped to adjust to the goals of the spirit that
wwrites them. In doing this one is able to draw the spirit of a narrator out of
the mind so that the visions of the dreamer may be brought forth in to the
world of the living as such. In this way, the author is able to communicate in
the most pure and honest way those things which he feels must be brought forth
in to some means besides the underworld of his rapturous visions.

The prime difficulty in writing is in actuallity not to do with the words
themselevs that come out of teh author's mind; such things are mere dribble and
drabble in comparison to the true difficulty of the creators role. If the words
are to become impactful, they must in and of themselves be worth reading. It
does not matter the profundity of the visions that the author contains if he is
not able to clearly and lucidly take those visions and bring them forth into
light. It's simply the case that such an author could be classified as an
undignified bafoon. Though some authors (George MacDonald is the first to come
to mind) might get away with some severly profound insight and peer influence
to carry them in to the world of published work, it is generally the case that
those authors that become successful are not so because their words bring
people to a new dimension where they can escape and become a part of a new
world but instead these authors are sucsseful because the words themeslevse
that they use take on a certain tangible quality that could be best described
in food sense as mealy and palpable, so that the interested reader is not only
transformed in to a particular world but is also at extreme unawares to the
true mechanisms by which the authors has achieved such a thing. It is in the
actual text itself that an author should be judged, not upon the supposed
meaning behind those words. It is the role of the everynight dreamer to
experience such things as the phenomena of the dormant subconscious present in
all of us and brought forth in to our conscious mind by those mechanisms that
would be studied by psychologists and philosophers alike; to have such visions
is commonplace. The truly inspiring thing is the ability to capture that vision
in a thought or idea and then transform the words and efforts of the language
of the collective peoples which surround the context of that vision and to
place upon them a unique and memorable set of words that will resonate with
those that read them and bring them to the same utmost and undenably
interesting and profound vision of the world of that which is usually confined
to the unconscious and seratonin drunk mind of the sleeping world.

How is it then that one is to judge a set of words as they come out? If such a
thing is the true measure of the quality of the authors work, if it is to be
the case that we are to measure the abilities of an individual in such a way so
as to label them and assign them these things then we must also come to the
conclusion that such claims can only be made if there is some process which we
can apply to any set of written words and determine their quality based upon
empirical measures. But what would such a set of criteron for judgement look
like? To what end would we place ourselves at this unifying point and take upon
the whole work of a novel to judge it as a simple number on a scale? Is it even
possible to construct a universally accepted measuring rod on which to base our
standards of writing, or is it only possible to measure even the rods against
other barometers and standards? Standards on top of standards; Pah! How
foolish.

Let's not mince our words further and get to the heart of the issue. The
sentence is difficult. There are ways to break a sentence down to it's
constituate parts and take those parts and diagram them in particular ways so
as to analyze whether or not the sentence is well-formed. But even this process
is greatly laborious and the rewards for the labor are small; a diagrammed
sentence is no more meaningful to the author than if each word were marked with
a color to indicate its place in the sentence. Such a configuration of colored
words would eventually simply look like a rainbow when viewed from far away,
and at some point the colors would simply blend in with the rest of the
background and form a general white sense as the coarsness of our application
of analysis reveals itself to be too un-inspired and wholly un-academic.

If not sentence diagrams then by what other means can a work be judged? There
must be some way to measure not necessaryily the well-formed-ness of a sentence
but instead the ability to talk about how much the sentence says. For ever
sentence has two parts. The first is this sort of diagramistic nature, it's
sing-song qualities, which can be looked upon as the mere surface layer or
appearance of our work. Such things are aesthetic, and while aesthetics can be
at times best described as quaint and perhaps interesting, it is undenabile
that the true beauty in writing comes from what is beaneath the words at the
depth, in such a manner of speaking. When the reader takes in a sentence and
immediately understands it and takes it in and lets it alter and steer their
course of being is the effect to be sought after in any good work. Many the
deep-minded thinker (whether he be correct or not in thinking this way is
irrelevent) would say something like "it doesn't matter what the words are as
long as the idea is the same". Or to be more precise, in this way we have
happened upon as if by chance the dual nature of every sentence. Because the
second aspect of the sentence is the complete opposite of it's form; that of
the sentence meaning. Form matters not to meaning, and a meaning will persist
in spite of a change in form. Perhaps the Subject goes before Direct Object in
one phrasing of a particular idea, but in a thoughtful re-imagininging of a
work it might be prudent for the author to place the Direct Object first so as
to create a symettry with other sentences around it; doing such a thing could
be said to be a simple form alteration of a sentence and aims to presereve the
meaning of a sentence.

So now we have our core and underlying maxim from which our problems arise:
Though we have a means by which to judge the form of a sentence to determine
that it is well-formed, there is no means by which to describe the meaning of a
sentence without using sentence themselves. Or in other words, while it is
clear to every reader that there are the words and then there are "what the
words mean" (as if the latter were actually the reality of the work when really
it is quite the opposite), it is the job of the author to be so maticulous with
not the meaning of his words but instead with the words themselves so as to be
sure they form a cohesive and digestable unit for his reader to take in. It
becomes silliness to an author when the enlightened deep-thinker says something
so foolish as "the words in a book don't matter" because to an author the only
thing that does matter is the literal text on teh page. Without that, there is
no means by which the author can communicate his visions or his meaning to
anyone, not even himself. So the studious author concerns himself not with
honing his visions (the visions will take care of themselves and don't require
curating by something so crude as a physical human body) but instead the
attentive and self-aware author should aim to focus on the words themselves, as
building blocks or lego pieces with which he can build his world.

Hopefully by this point the reader is so convinced that the ideas of a work can
only be placed as the mere backdrop for the actuality of the world; that the
book is nothing more than patterns of ink on paper and that such arrangements
only have meaning because of the collective illusion of language so persists
throughout human beings that those patterns take on fantastical and wondrous
meanings. While one may still be inclined to argue the point that the greatest
words of any work can never overcome themselves and alone stand as the only
thing required (as if aesthetics were the only way that the outward appearance
of an inner gem were to manifest itself) if the ideas that form those words are
ill formed, we must at this point concede to whatever qualms we may have at
this point so that we may continue forward to the further thesis of this
particular writing session.

We must ask ourselves: In what way can we create a meter stick to measure the
sentences and paragraphs that come forth on the page. We admit that it is truly
the words that matter, but we have yet to come up with a means by which to
judge empirically (we have ample amounts of subjective experience) the quality
of a piece based merely upon its words.

I am growing ever tired in my pursuits, not only in the figurative sense of
writing a lot of words only to have them orbit the same concentric star for
paragraphs on end but also in the fact that I am growing litearlly tired as the
night wane's on and I must bring myself to bed at some point or another. That
being said, I want to conclude with one final point which is rather obvious but
simultaneously worth saying.

The syntax and structure of a sentence is as much an art as it is a science. It
is important to understand some natural facts that are born and bred in to all
human beings before undertaking an endeavor so bold as "describing what makes a
great sentence great." While such an enthusastic scienctist or mathematician
(or god forbid - an engineer) might come up with some means or algorithm or
formula by which the sentence can stand to be judged and measured through
objective criterion, it is still insufficient (and neccesarily so) for this to
paint the complete picture. For does one listining to the counterpoint of Bach
need to know that the subject is in it's sub-dominant iteration in the alto
voice in order to appreciate the structure of a Bachien fugue? Or is it instead
just enough (and us being artistic beings know it to be so) to say that the
reaction of the listener is enough to judge any sequence of notes, and in a
similar way the immideate rapturousness of well formed thought sohuld also so
govern the ideas expressed in written word? For what is prose if not music
distilled down to a less expressive but ultimately more concrete and
understandable form? Do we not require some means of direct and explicit
communication in favor of rattlings and patterns and rhthyms? Such things are
exciting, captivating, and ultimately entrancing, but there is always the
Socratic spirit which aims to say that trancendantal experence is not enough
and instead we must be brought to reason about those worlds that we choose to
express ourselves in. This Socratic reason finds itself the art of prose and
demands a level of analysis from it, yet at it's core prose is nothing more
than the immediate sensations of trancendental music brought forth in being by
explicit and maticulated means. So in attempting to analyze the structure and
quality of a sentence is remains ever important to remember that every analysis
is neccesarily incomplete and that whatever work should be done attempting to
understand the well constructed sentence should also be done to attempt to
find, as if by complete and mystical coincidence, those forms of writing which
overcome such pervasive need for analysis and instead seek to justify their own
existence by mere justification in itself.
