So right now I am attempting to write some words for Seth and Cain but I am
having some trouble. The words and descriptions are not coming to me. I have
some ideas about what I want the story to look like, but I am having difficulty
in coming up with what words go in what places.

I would say that I have gotten pretty good at taking stream of consciousness
writing, such as this, and getting it on to the page in a one to one manner. A
similar treatment of fiction writing is not treating me so well.

It is as if something is missing. Somehow I need to have the scene in my head
and then from there generate all of the wordls taht I want to say. The process
feels to laborious to me. I have to keep stopping to come up with adjectives
that I wish I could just stop writing words and instead show the reader what it
is I am seeing.

My journeies do not have a conceivable destination, and they do not have a
clear picture, so as a result I am not able to create clear text for what I
want my reader to experince. It is as if my words fall on to hidden ears. The
reader reads, and they say, "okay, I suppose I can get it, but this isn't
partucularly interesting or profound. When do we get to the good part?"

And that is the rub. I am not a master of putting together pacing yet. I have
not yet experimented with different flavors and textures of written word. I
have only my mere descriptions, as a four year old might describe something,
and then I have words like "trancendental" or profound.

But I don't want to tell my reader that "the experience felt like the most
profound thing that Seth had ever felt." Such a principle destroys the "show
don't tell" principle of writing. Instead, I want to expalin just the
experience that Seth feels so that the reader may judge it as the most profound
thing to this point that has been written in the work. But how is such a thing
to be acheived?

Such is the sort of question that keeps me up at night.

I want to try something.

I want to create a screen-play version of the work. Then, when the screen play
is done, I want to convert that in to prose. I think it will be possible, but I
am not sure. The only way to know for sure is to try. So without further ado
(although I do want another cup of coffee) I bring about the screen play
version of the scene that I am trying to write.
