This is the start of the free writing session for this day. I plan to get to my
designated word count, and I will plan to do so in a certain kind of way. This
way is be constantly trying to steer myself to the point that I don't want to
be doing this but that I have thigs in my head that I don't want to get out on
the page but myb y forcing myself to wrok in this way they will come out on the
page.

There is a certain level of trust in the process. The good chirstial would say
this is faith, but it is not faith, it is onmething else.

Whe nietsche fdeclared that god is dead I am not sure exactly what it is
thought of by the people that read it . His declaration seems so obvious to me.
Of course God is dead. Must there be more that needs to be said. God is dead.
Period. End of story.

Yet in the bible belt people still insist otherwise. Their god has died, and
they will blind themselves to it. They obsess over it, and they try and
re-animate him so that they can have a glimpse of his further glory. they
forget that God is dead and from his ashes a much more fuul and much more
interesting life will come out. Death is a natural process of life, and we
should let our God of the bible die. The continued revaltion which occured over
four thousand years ago and has been perpetued until the ultimate mistreatment
of Jesus Christ creates a complete heroic arc. It is from these heroic arcs
that we are left with a new place with which to build our society. Our
collective subconscious has be incarnated, he has been borne, and he has been
condemned to hell with teh angels that he fought so valiently to bring himself
down there. And now with God among the angels people would still think to erect
crosses and display them as if doing so will make everything different. They
deny the truth of the situtation, that god is dead, and in so doing condemn
themselves to die with him. How terrible it is.

But is it really terrible? Perhaps these people deserve to meet God in Hell
where he has died. Such is the fate of such anachronistic people. I abhore
those that would seek to create order out of something other than the true and
eternal light that exists in everyone.

THe rub here is that us humans having rosen up against god and slain him with
our arms, with our knives, with our words, we are the very same people that are
condemned to fall with him. Yet in another way, can we not achieve some level
of glory, some level of synesthetic reality made real in the form of
transcendent and ever powerful art.

What more does need to be said. God is dead. If it were entirely up to the well
tuned and guided and inspired human being we could leave it at this, but it s
not hup to him. It's up to those that used to gain from God being alive. When
god was alive he brought forth a great people that conquered many nations. Now
these people, whithout a god to guide them, seek to reape and pillage not with
the power of god but with the power of spite of those that inevitiably rose up
above even god and conquered him. With the age of enlightenment we have come t
ofind that the aspects of our existance which are above even god can be
actually lived, in the present, on the earth, with the very soil that we have
been born from. Such is the reality as we see it.

It is those that come in to that reality and have no means by which to guide
there ever weary soul out of the drudgery of their existance. Better to have a
fake dream of god than no dream of god, such a poverty ridden soul might say.

But from where does poverty come? Is it from the society that seeks to
impoverish, or is it from the soul who, aspiring to a will to power but being
continually beat down by a more enlightened world, seeks towards anything to
guide them, and so comes upon the dead image of our ancestors in the form of
inspired word.

Such an individual might read the words of the mbilbell and say, "This poetry
is profound, it speaoks to ym weary soul. For I am broken, but God has promised
to make me whole." But such things are lies. God will not do such things. It is
the work of something better than God, centarily, which seeks to grab people
from the ashes of the pligiht of their circumstance and wrest them from it and
bring them to a new glory and a new light, a light apart from God, on top of
the titan of his ashes.

For if god is merely another titan, another pillar on which the world was
built, then what is to be said for the pantheon which will come to overthrow
him? Is it not perpetually the case that those that have the best intentions
(as I am sure many would argue that God had when he created the pre-historic
man) is it not the case that this man is somtehing of akin to a thief, who
seeks to revive his life befyond it's sufgggested span? How deplrorable that
is.

And yet we have these people that still profit from the nstiriving for a dead
god. Televantigists, who turn their houses away from people and need and yet
prejeach about hospitilatiy, who fly around in airplane private and yet speak
of walking on your own two feet to get to where you want to go. Such people
continue to profit on the ashes of their dead god, and as long as they can
reanimate god like a puppet or a hollow shell if its former self there will be
people who are fooled by such light tricks and manipulations of words. Such
acts are deplorable, utterly unfathomable.

The plighht of the enlightened man to see such things! Am I not Cipher, who in
seeing the world outside the matrix, would seek to make a very deal with that
which we know is an illusion if only to go back to by blissful ignorance. This
burden is too much for one human to bear.

But who else is there to bear this burden with me? For is it not the case that
all of those who would re-animate god have also created a new sort of puppet,
an athiest puppet, who drabbles on and on about how God must not exist and how
such and such shows that some specific verse in the bible has a misreading. And
in creating this image of a man that would oppose not god, but the
re-anmitation of god, by creating this contrary image, the puppet of God
becomes stronger. It is the hardened athiest who goes to the top of the
mountains and yells, "GOD DOESNT EXIST" that in so doing creates the sperm or
genesis of a new kind of thought or idea in the individual who would take a
more nuanced approach.

Such things are the doings of even those that killed god. For is it not the
case that the murderer, who not being a murderer before commiting the act,
suddenly and as a entirely new transformation becomes something even more
deplorable than the man who would decide that it might be worthwhile to bring
up his knife to his enemy and kill him for his own selfish and misguided
reasons?

Were we wrong in killing God? Were we too soon in bringing up arms against our
tyrant creator? Such things cannot concern us. We are attempting to come to a
much more full understanding of the universe, and one that starts with the
proclomation that "God is dead" begs a continued narrative about the sort of
thing that will be born out of the soul of the dead ashes of our fallen God. It
is that which we must dwell on. It is that which we must explore.

The man who meditates concerns himself not with these things. Though the
meditator may ask at first what the purpose of such meditation is, it becomes
all to apparent as the man becomes practiced that concerning himself with such
stupid questions as "should we have killed god or did we make a mistake" is
asking the entirely wrong questoin. It was twhe case that we killed god. He is
dead. That is all there is to the story.

Even in our own lives, we can look back at our mistakes and have regrets about
the things we do. But such retrospection cannot provide a complete picture.

It is certainly the case that we can learn from history, lest we be doomed to
repeat it, but at the same time there must be a level of being able to repeat
history and in so doing we connect ourselves to that which is really the most
deep and fundamental essence of our reality.

To become stuck in the past, and to look to the ashes of our dead god and
mourn, even those things have their place in the present. For who would be so
foolish to teel a grieving widow that she must move past the idea of her
husband and stop her tears because no matter how much she cries her husband
will never return? How foolish it would be to say that. For is the feeling of
grief not one of the most profound and connecting and forthrightly unifying
aspects of our being which requires us as human beings to reset ourselves back
to the present and simply observe the reality around us as it is. It is
sometihng about grief which is one of the many things which has not died at the
death of god. Grief remains, but not god. Let us grieve our dead god.

But it is also the case that the widow who overgrieves and continually laments
her dead god is destined to die herself in her old age. She will fall in to the
spiral of grief, and even though she has been able to connect to some portion
of the dead ashes of her dead husband, she has not integrated it well enough to
create anything sustainable, and as such dooms herself to fall in to the same
fate as her husband, where she will aske to be burried in the ground next to
him with her gravestone saying something so pairing and fitting to his.

Such is the grief of a dying kind. These are the Christians of the day. And the
televangists who would profit from these grief stricken and hard-trodden
christians are like the man who abuses an old widow and writes her a will with
many pitfalls so that he might steal this widows inheritence. In so convincing
her that she can bring her husband back to life, he gives her a strange kind of
solace that so posseses her with the idea thta she and her husband can be
together in some sort of imagianary eternity.

Such was the remants of where the concept of grades and degradations of heave
came. Dante wrote about this shit. Before God was dead, we predicted that after
he died there would be those that created fantasies for what would happen to
our souls. We would share in the death of god, and in his death come to an
everlasting heaven. How terrible! It's really quite deploorable.

How does this part go? It seems to me in this moment that even though I have
said some rather interesting things, I am still missing something. Is there
anything in my mind which would spring forth now to say itself, or am I at an
impasse, where I have talked about the simple statement that God is Dead for
much too long now, and I must move on to another topic if anything is to be
gained. Let us not become our grieving widow. Let us instead move on to other
things rather than talk about the dead characters of our remembered past.

So I tried something today which I think worked quite well. I wanted to go on a
meditation session, but I also wanted to go on a jog. So instead of going on
one or the other, I decided to combine the two practices in to one. So I went
for a jog, running two thousand meters in just over ten minutes, and then I
stopped and did three rounds of solar retention breathing. After that (which
took about twenty minutes as my sessions do) I returned to the running and I
ran another two k in the other way back to where I was orginially.

Such was an interseting representation of the heros journey, and I think it was
a great way to demonstrate my method of work ethic. Because it is one thing to
measure your time in terms of you past or expected future performance, but it
is entirely another to compare the running of two sessions back to back with
the hopes of directly invoking the power of the runner twice in a row in a
similar and consistent way.

I really wanted to make sure that my pace on both jogs was about the same. To
do this, I created a benchmark for myself and then compared every four hundred
meter stretch with this benchmark. I was rather consistente with my pace over
each four hundred meters and I was very satisfied that I felt a was very much
in tune with my body and what it was capable of.

The aspect of meditation which is applicabale towards running was huge as well.
Many times when I meditate, I run in to this train of thought whereby I
eventually decide that I shouldn't be meditating but that I should be doing
something else. Then, when I stand up to do this other thing, I remember that
it wasn't really thta important and it very easily could have been left off for
another twenty minutes to finish the session. Of course, such was my previous
plights, and I have worked through my sessions to where this train of thought
doesn't occur to me nearly as stronly as it did before.

Still, there is a point to be made here. The point is that this concept of
wanting to do something other than the thing you are doing in the present,
thereby distracting you from the ability to feel yourself in the present, is a
huge deal. It's something of the worst thing that can happen to any human
being. It is the spawn of depression, of anxiety, and of those two forces which
play in to eachother. Such is the way that people get caught up in the
distraction of busy day to day quabbles.

So in practicing meditation, I have been able to more accutely focus on my
work. But this doesn't always f ind direct application to my life, because in
my life when I am not meditationg it is still the case that that particualr
train of thought will still be there, and in the case of meditation I still
find myself being able to remind myself to return to the present, but when I am
doing other things, like running, I will lose sense of the present and instead
fall back to that weird and abject version of living whereby you think to a
future where "running won't hurt so much" or otherwise "I don't need to be
running, the couch seems like a good idea right now" So these two things are
the ways that I distract myself from running.

But by medititing in the middle of two intervals, I was able to accomplish two
things. Not only was I able to answer the question of "should I medititate or
should I run" by combining both practices in to one, but I was also able to
directly apply the concept of "staying present" which I have achieved quite
well in meditation towards the act of running. In doing so, I was able to make
my ruunning experience more like a meditation experience.

I felt a pain in my calf while I was running. It was the case that it had to do
with a slight error in my gait. I tend to flare my toes when I run (I forget
this word for this. It is called over-proration or something like that.) When I
do this, it breaks a certain aspecwm  t of my chain and causes pain in a
certain way.

When this whas happening, I quickly returned to the present, and judged that
the pain was'nt the kind of pain that should warrent a stoppage of the session,
but instead it was the sort of pain that could be adjusted for. In
re-orginizing my tendency to break my chain by flairngi my feet, I was able to
run with more straight gait and as such I came to the point where my calf did
not hurt anymore, and I was able to continue about my session.

But then, only a few seconds later, I found myself thinking about something
irrelevent. I was thinking about a previous conversaiton I had, or a potential
conversaiton that I will have. It was something like that. I don't really
remember exactly what destracted me but that is irrevlevent. Ther was something
that I had been distracted by, and then I noticed that my gait had fallen back
to it's previous dissarray and poor state.

At this point, I became discouraged. I thought to myself "Am I going to have to
focus so intently on fixing my gait every five seconds like so in this run. How
terrible.

But I had something of a profound moment. I merely recognized my plight as a
projection of my expected result of the run to a future time. That is, I was
able to return to the present and see that not only was my calf hurting in the
way that it was before, but I was also resisting my bad habit of "jumping to
the worst" also. By recognizing that this sort of dread and plight was not my
own, but instead was simply an idle thought that came up in my being for
reasons that are entirely unknown and of their own volition, I was able to
return to the present and evaluate the situation. I corrected my gait again and
correct for my error in the change in my motion.

I was then able to recognize something about my errors. It had to do with the
way I was standing. I was beginning to grow a bit hunched. So I stood tall and
with a certain sense of pride. This was partially paying service to the ego,
but it was more than that. I was able to analyze that by paying a bit of
service to the ego, I would be able to correct my gait again.

So in that way, I was able to directly apply the insights and gainings from
meditation directly to my running session.

And I want to take pause here for a moment. The bafoon might ask (and I used to
be this bafoon so I am not judging the bafoon as inferior but just as what he
is, that is, a bafoon), Why could'nt you just have continued on running and ran
through the pain. You didn't have to connect yourself to this weird notion of
the eternal present in order to fix your gait. There are many other ways you
could have corrected it. What makes this one so profound to you.

Such critics are not without their merit, but the best reply that I have to
such people is that, if you are asking that question, then you don't understand
the sorts of revaltory things that I have discovered, and you should seek to
ask what is in yourself that is hindering you in the present (see, you must
return to the present!) and from their determine if asking the question again
is the correct course of action, or whether by idly observing the reactions
that happen inside of yourself you are able to come by a corrective course for
the way YOU live YOUR life that was a similar corrective course for the way
that I changed my life in my running form.

Because yes, there could have been a different way to figure out a method to
correct my form. It could be argued that the man that looks to the future and
sees himself as a champion of the Crossfit Gamse (or whatever else) would do
well to keep hold of that futuristic vision. And it might even be argued that
he would do better if he did live in the future. But such an argument is not
really well founded when that vision doesn't come to light in the way that the
person has it would say.

Or in other words, the man who lives in the future will neccesariy trip over a
rock or two metaphorically on the way to that vision, and when he does, that
man must return to the present and away from his future vision in order to
correct his course and adjust his gait so as not to fall over on the ground
with ideas of becoming a champion when he is spinning in free fall down to the
earth on which he would so ambitiously fly over. You must spare all of teh
disconnect metaphors. The point is that it is something of a matter of course
that being able to live in the present is the most profound and connected way
that someone can live, and it's not possible to tell that in words. Though the
creader might say that what they read is profound, it is only in the present
that it is profound. When the reader remembers it, it was a recalling of the
memory which brings forth a remnant of that former profundity, and in so doing
something happens.

I have met my quoto I think, for right now, and I am getting sort of
disconnected with my thought. I might think to increase my quota for these
sessions at some point just to see if I can, but for now my brain is telling me
that it's done and that we must return back to a matter of revaltory thought.

In the present I am determining that I am done with this free writing session.
Okay!

3800 words in 49:20 is approximately 75 words per minute.

