Of the world of the ones that have to have the world of the twos we have to
sometimes occasinoally ask ourselves if it is the same thing to say that the
world of the twos is the same as the world of the ones but only if teh ones and
the twos agree that words like  "odd" and "left" are not taboo words but
instead are legitimate and fulfilling states that living beings can sustain
themselves in.

Something is erractic with the way that this whole thing is set up. There are
so many things that are misunderstood by those that would say such things. From
where does the concept of "Free Will" emergy? For what reason is it so
prevalantly agreed upon in our society that such a concept as "Ego" should
govern the behaviors and actions of all of us and everything that we do?

No more of this non-sensicalness. Instead, let us steer ourselves in to the
world of meditation. Let those that would seek to estrange themselves from the
rest of the world be given voluntarily a subscritption to Sam Harris. 

Some say that all we are is nothing and that everything will destroy itself in
the end so we might as well hurry up and get along with it. Others would say
that there is another life similar to this one but which supercedes it in some
way and that the ways that we behave in this world determine in a direct and
one-to-one manner the glory or hell we will receive in the next one. Does this
cycle continue indefinitely? Does one of the world of "Glory" also have another
next life still to concert himself with? Reincarnation comes to mind here also.
For what possible reason could someone legitmaately believe that in some way
the matter and essence which makes up those things which would call itself
"itself" shall go in to the dirt of the ground and from there eventually be
found again in those that are able to conceive of such things and remerege as
an entirely unew kind of living thing. A cow maybe. Or a Flamingo. Such would
be quite the phenomena indeed, if it were only observable or verifiable.

What then, does the layman ask, do we belive in at all? If you are to take away
our reincarnation and you are to take away our afterlife, o great and
enlightened author of the words being written, to what effect would you have
the needs and actions neccesary to justify the lives of these millions and
millions of people?

How about this. The needs and actions of the skin cells and blood cells and
other cells that comprise together to form the unity of what itself and others
would call "Gerald Orbweaver" or some such ridiculous name are simply that,
just the needs and actions of the cells which comp.rise it. If one would like
to understand the whole of something, they must first unterdasnd those elements
which combine together to form the whole, then they must understand the ways
and means by which those units interact. Between those two things one can begin
to make a lucid and coherent picture (or if not picture, perhaps "song" or
"dance" or simply "mind's eye artwork") of the combined and composed series of
events which make up what each individual human would call "their life."

But this does not satisfy most humans. Humans need egos. They need concepts
like "eternity" and "spirituality" in order to justify their own existance. The
devout Christian might say something so silly as "If there isn't something like
god there can be no morality and without morality you can justify murder." Or
the diehard Muslim might say "I would never do it but I believe that the
motivations of the Jihad and ISIS are fully justified because they are
explicitely given the graces of Allah in the Quran." Or perhaps the troubled
athiest says "If there is a God then why is there evil in the world." All of
these people are driven by their own perpetually and societly driven egos. How
sad it is that such a thing would enslave so many minds in the modern day
world.

But if there is no ego then what is there? Another idiotic question similarly
to those phrased above, but this one worth answering perhaps. Here it goes.

It doesn't matter. Let go of the concept that you are you or that the things
that happen to you are yours. The body must be curated and maintained, but it
must not be put subject to these ridiculaous ownership assignments like "Me" or
"Self". Let it simply be. As the body becomes simply a being that exists in
space and time, let us remember that it is even the concepts like "space" and
"time" that also are illusions. Illusions of illusions, yet somehow these
things are more real than the physical pain that the arguing philosopher feels
in his L5 vertebrae lingering after he tried to lift something. Someone might
say that such pain is not real in the same way that Physics is real. Or they
might say that the sensation of touching a chair pales in comparison to the
revalations of the Bible. These people are simply incorrect about the way they
choose to live their lives. Of course, it is impossible to tell them that,
because as soon as you do they fire up a defense network stronger than any
metaphorical "Fort Knox", but at the same time it becomes prudent to say it
anyway so that my metaphorical Gold Smuggler can have practice getting taken
down by the best of the best. These people live their lives under these
illusionvs. Stories and myths that we explicietly made up out of our
imaginations are treated as scientifically verifiable fact. Such nonsens is
patently absurd, even to those that define things like "absurd", yet the world
we live in today is possessed by people with utterly false yet infinitely
defensable ideas that serve only to guard them against the inevitable facts of
life which they find so difficult to address.

Such is teh nature of our existance.


