This is a day of the week of the month of the year of the decade of the milinea
of the century of the gregorion calander accourding to ceasar.

As of this day forth, the man known as Brett webster is no longer a slave to
the idea that he has to take part in some sort of force fed idealogy in order
to exist and instead is a part of a greater whole which seeks to enrich and
fulfill not only that matter which he would so identify as himself but also
with those that would seek to do the same. Such striving is to be sought out
for in life and the seeking for others who seek in similar ways is only
hindered by the barriars to entry that we all place upon oursevls as a defense
mechanism against those predators which would seek to steal and rob from us.

I say let the thief rob you. Let the adulterator adulterate you. Let the man
that would seek to take from you take from you. But always give them something
in return as well. Return a kind gesture with a punch to the stomach. Return an
idle threat with an lacadasiclly minded whimsy. From each accourding to their
kind and to each according to what the giver is willing to give. Let us not
forget that those that seek to better themselves also seek to better others,
but others often times don't seek to be bettered in the same way and as such
can contend with each other. Such is the mentality of tho conservatively
minded Christain upbringing child of Richardson and other similar suburban
areas.

Allow the luxury of an anecdote to allivete ourselves from these dreadful
generalizations. Friday of nine days ago which was August Thirtyfirst of Twenty
Nineteen (being the year 2019 AD) I attended a Magic: The Gathering Standard
Tournament at the LGS on Jupiter. The crowd at this place was rather
diversified. Among them were many well minded and good hearted peaple that have
been torn down by the weight of existance and find solace in the day to day
construction of MTG as a conceivable way to allieviate the suffering of
existance, even if for only three hours and four matches at a time. To these
people I could offer advice. I might tell one that she should consider
divorcing her husband. In my opinion (and if I were in his shoes or hers) they
both feed toxicity to the other. The husband (being a true gambling addict in
the most raw and visceral sense, electing to drain money ment for rent in to the
roulette table with unfavorable odds only to watch it wittle away in to
nothing, leaving his wife to put more money on credit simply to pay back the
landlord) would do good to have to pay for his consequences. The wife would do
good not to rely on the husband for sexual pleasure. They would both do good to
eat a little bit less, to excersize more, and each put themselves on the market
to date other people when they are ready. Such is my opinion of the most
fruitful life for each of these two individuals. However, as I sat there and
listened to this wife tell the tales of her husbands disfunction, I could not
help but think that somehow the life she was living could in some strange way
be considered more interesting than my own suburban upbringing. Is
contemplation of Physics, Mathematics, Philosophy, and Language really going to
bring me the fullfillment taht I believe it will. Such is the troubles in the
desktop mans world. Yet in her world the problems matter. If she does not pay
her rent then they won't have a place to stay unless they ask his in-laws again
which she has decided she has more respect than doing, so instead of stooping
down to the lowest level of failure she rose above and overcame that obstacle.
The ninety and onehundred hour weeks she put in still haunt her to this day,
but those are thing that she overcame and as a result she is stronger in
herself and stronger for her husband. Likewise, though I did not speak with the
man, I presume that the husband is quite profoundly (or if not he should be)
grateful for his wifes continued gererosity and that while it seems that
sometimes the darkness of addiction is too great and that it's impossible to
overcome he at least has the darkest times to look back and and still see that
his wife was with him through all of that so that whatever kind of man he seeks
to become now should aim to be on the level of the woman that he knows must
deeply love him. Such is the way this man should seek to reconcile himself. Yet
listening to the wife speak he was not attempting such a thing. He was not
going to reconcile anything with anything. He was going to let life take its
course, and instead of rising up to the challenge of beating an addiction as
his wife did he instead continues to abuse her loving care for him and acts as
a parasite does to a growing and flourishing garden tree. Yet does this
philosophically inclined and interenally troubled man find any reason to give
this woman my advice? How could such an intrusion in to the outpouring of her
catharsis be helpful to either one of us? For if I preach to her I look like a
hypocrite, and if I make subtle suggestions I look like a manipulator. I am not
going to see this woman again, but if I do it probably won't be in the same
context of her outpouring of a conversation. When a human being outpours, they
allows themselves time to do it and they allow themselves the ear to give it to
but when the outpouring is completed they close back up the wound from which
the pouring flowed and return back to their perhaps mangled and twisted but
ultimately homely and known way of living. The value in a conversation such as
this does not have a dollar sign attached to it. She was simply a human being
sitting in a human being place and I was simply an ear for her to give to. I
received graciously and I facilited her catharsis yet I probably overintruded
myself because we all are imperfect and we all have to continually work to
smooth over and correct for those imperfections.

To what end do I owe these rambling thoughts? Should I burden myself with
thinking about things as if they mattered or didn't matter? To what purpose
does one clack away on the keys of a board in the wee hours of the night only
to sip on one too many cups of coffee and two to many hits of marijuana? Is it
all just a rouse to avoid real work? Should I avoid these outpourings of ideas
as words on to apage simply because I have an strange Animus like projection
intruding in to my day to day living? While it would seem the workings of a
madman to say that he would rather watch me do nothing rather than do anything
at all but at the same time I pity the man that thinks no work that doesn't
earn money is worth doing.

And here we reach an impasse of this free writing session. While on one hand I
feel very strongly that I should keep writing I feel similarly inclined that
such a forray would be foolish if merely undertaken for it's own sake. I should
instead seek to write something that I can keep going. I would like to write a
story, no more than one thousand words. This story would be something to the
effect of a journey in to the world of Seth and Cain and back. It would
represent the travels of teh archangel Gabriel as he broaches the clouds of
heaven and breaks into the world of Seth and Cain. His addition to the story
will not be added to the final copy, but what it does is it gives me a reason
to continue wroting words, and it also gives me a way that I can get to the
point where I am able to put together a choherent narrative from beginning to
end. So here it goes.

By the way, in the mean time, I have decided that it is instead the archangel
Raphael. Boom. Go.

    [Reference github.com/ultimate271/notes/book/SethandCain/practice]


