This free writing session is going to begin with a session that I don't want to
write. It's going to be written anyway though because I do want to write
something but I am not sure what that something is going to be yet so instead
of sitting and pretending like the magical thing that I want to write is just
going to happen instead I am just going to practice the act of writing so that
my fingers and my mind can communicate once again in this harmonious way.

Of course as I say all of this I immediately want to stop and instead go to
youtube. So be it. Let's go to youtube.

I would like to try my hand at poetry. Or poetic form.

[Scene: Clock tower of a bustling city. Enter pedestrians with papers
shuffling. Amongst them, one with a plaid artists hat and trousers stands out.
He turns back to look at the clock tower before facing the audience]

Hustle bustle, weary souls h'rried to the
Prittle prattle of wav'ring figure heads.
Know not these men that they may stop? Come speak.

[He gestures to a pedestrian who merely shakes his head and carries on]

Should I not be taken amongst these men
So busy I may seem? Just'fied they are
Existance known, their purpose is unfeld.
Reason to be, purpose to drive, all go'ers
Go by. And by and by they wont to go
So o'er by they are to find their "Earth Prize".
Mater'al things concern these men; 

A simple reading of this work leads to to conclude that I have much to learn if
I am to become a writer of poetry in this way. Something is most certainly
lacking in my method when it comes to deriving verse.

I have something of a desire to write elegant sentences. There is something
vicerally satisfying about writing a sentence so well constructed that the
reader must stop and read the sentance again just because it was so much a joy
to read the first time that he decided that it would be worth the expediture to
have even a glimpse of that level of joy a second or from there subsequent
iteration. Each word should contribute to the whole of each sentance and every
utterance of speech that goes in the readers mind should speak to him. There
should be no question the validity of the claims made by the inner logic of
that which underlies the construction of the grouping of words that comprises
any individual sentence. It should be absolutely irrefutable to the reader
after reading a sentence what preciesly the author aimed to achieve by ordering
and preparing all of his words just like so. Such a faculty or mastery of
leading the one that would partake in this wild and vulptuous art form is to be
sought after in the exact nature of the way the words flow from the lips of the
readers "mind tongue". The gross redness of the casual readers thought should
be pierced by the growing spire of gleening black that accompanies the ability
of the well-defined sentence to similarly penetrate a clouded and unenlightened
readers thought. In this way, the author is able to intrude himself and his
words to the readers thought so that the reader may sublimate himself to the
authors intentions and as such connect himself to something deep and visceral
that every good author should be able to transmit to his readers.

But how should such an author seek to hone his task? Is it by mere construction
of sentences that he begins to gather a taste for those aspects of sentence
writing which tickle the fancies of the glorified life tongue of the universal
reader, or is there something more, something scientific and repeatable that
the author can do to hope to achieve a certain level of joyful readability? Is
such a sentence construction elusive in this way? Must it be confined to the
realm of those things that no one understands but only a select few are able to
tap in to?

By all means every sane and self-thinking individual would agree that the joy
of reading a well structured and well ordered array of letters can bring some
of the most sublime recogniztion of those rapturous feelings which are usually
confined to the infrequent joys of religious revalation. In discovering a new
sequence of words the individual can be fully transformed by means of thought
transferance from one enlightened individual to another less enlightened but
simultaneously open minded reader so that he becomes not himself but instead a
conglomerated whole of the wellspring of thought which bursts forth from all of
us but to each in it's own unique way. For the reader to grasp the meaning of a
paragraph that previously eluded him can give an indescribable pleasure to his
being that unbenownst to him invokes sublime chemical and measurable reactions
similar to those life experiences which we usually distinguish as "real". Yet
the reality of the written word is just that an author has placed together an
arangement of symbols so agreed upon by the collective humanity to have
particular meaning in certain contexts, particularly the context of the
language those words are written in, and in doing so has allowed the reader the
pleasure of sharing in whatever trancendental experiences the author might have
been caught up in to so inspire him to arrange those words in that way in the
beginning before his thought brought him to put pen to paper.

Yet this joy is fleeting. It does not last. It comes in a single moment when
one finds the deeper and truer meaning of a text once thought to be previously
understood but now much more completely and totally grasped, but flutters away
carelessly as a butterfly might fly from a finger that wiggles suddenly. Such
moments are rare. Most text is simply nothing more than the ink on the
page with but one layer of meaning and no further indication of any meaning
beyond that. Such a form of writing is acceptable, and even desirable in the
case of say a street sign that must simply indicate what the driver is meant to
do (left lane left turn only) and nothing more, but in the case of nuanced
thought and idea such a single layer would be dissatisfactory in and of itself
just as if the entire work were a series of facts like street signs which led
the reader through a rather uninteresting and matter-of-fact account of
whatever well-defined mind-imanges come to the reader in this endeavor. While
such a discovery might be desirable to those that prefer simple language to the
masterful depth of nuanced idea, we discard such simple minded folk as mere
exceptions to the rule that there is joy to be found in discovering the inner
workings of those ways and aspects that one human being may connect in a form
of union with another. The depth of understanding knows know lower bound yet it
becomes difficult for us to find an anchor point to this theoretical depth. The
most obvious form of a union with such depth has to be the sexual bond, being
so strong yet requiring the physical presence of both individuals to be not
only in near vicinity but also for particular aspects of their being to be
literally encapsulated one inside the other so that the physical sensations
that one feels are directly intruded by the doings and workings of the other.
As such the two find harmony in the life essence and energies that they
trasmit towards eachother in this way. It becomes a question of mere rhetoric
to ask if it is possible to facilite such a connection or union between two
individuals at a distance because we already know the answer in the bond and
connection felt in the reading of a deeply woven and masterfully constructed
array of thoughts in a way which brings the reader to suddenly see, not know,
but see, the things which the author saw in the inspiration of the writing.

So the readers job is to read attentively. He must be always cautious of his
author, as the author might be wont to lead him astray. He must be always
critical of the very words put together to bring him to the investment of
probing this new world of "thought-visions" as put forth by the one who puts
together such things. But the reader must always first and foremost be ready to
receive the word of another with utmost openness, because if he does not then
he will never be able to reach in to that vision world that every author must
construct in order to bring himself in to the pattern of creative thought in
the form of words. The reader must allow himself to be taken by the authors
words so that he does not even know why or how he is feeling the things that he
does but instead simply exists in the moment of existance apart from time or
apart from the literal ink or paper used to print the material that brings
itself in to form in the readers mind. The reader must demand a level of clarid
lucidity from his author so that this form may stream un-interupted, and also
so that it may only last as long as is necessary for the reader to know and see
and discover all that the author aimed to show from the outset of his project
all the way to the completed work. Such is the demand of the quality reader,
and such is the requirement of all that take part in this wondrous union of
thought provider and thought reciever.

Yet how does the reader know what to look for in his reading? To what can he
gander when he desires a rapturous revalation as those he has known in the
past? Or is it on the burden of the reader at all? Should instead we look
towards the author, not being any one man but instead being that which aims to
author all? Perhaps it is the author in all of us which demand examination and
repose? For we know the reader as that idle observer that silently judges the
work placed in front of him and reacts to it impartially and without prejudice
diligently and steadfastly as his mind's eye scans the next word after the
previous one. But if this is how we must phrase the reader then must not there
also be a cooresponding writer inside all? While demanding that every Yin have
a Yang is something of a biased and mythopoeic idea in and of itself, when it
screams and curdles at us for neglecting the other side of this theoritical
coin we must give ourselves pause as we perhaps have been to hasty to come to
such a view of the nature of the reading experience.

What then do we say about the reader who would aim to look at not the visions
of the author and not the ethics or the philosophy but instead would aim to
judge the words and letters themselves to grade the work of one who would dare
publish his work. Must we always take a passive role in taking in those words
which come to us from the page? Should we not be more scientific with not only
the way that sentences are constructed but also with the way that they are
read? For if we must demand a level of quality from the point of the view of th
reader in judging an authors word, does it not make sense for the author to
demand a level of linguistic mastery from his audience as well? And if so, what
sort of mastery must we come to in order to rectify this feeling that
everything is ethereal and that nothing can be quantified in this world of
nebulas and metaphors?

Alack, I come to this close of words and have gathered no revelation. I have
merely skirted gracefully around the topic yet not penetrated in to anything
deep or insightful. The reader will read these words and seek for more. He will
guide himself to the ramblings of a madman who is yet unfullfilled in his quest
yet knows not why. The doings of his mind will bring great distraught to his
very being. How can this phenomena be rectified? If only I could write
something that would close these thoughts together. If these words could spring
to me I would only have something to base myself on these things. But I do not,
and so I will leave the article at this. Pray that I allow myself to dream so
that I can complete this wholy incomplete and ultimately insanity driving
endeavor of writing to myself freely. Begone evil demons of unknowing so that I
can go deeper into the abyss of my own thoughts.
