9:32

So for this free writing session, I want to try something new. I have noticed
that, when I have dreams, I have very vivid descriptions about where everthing
is and what everything looks like. In writing out those dreams, often times I
will get to something and say, "If I could draw it, I would draw it" but in the
form of written word that is not the case.

So I want to try to put myself in to a group kind of setting. Perhaps a meeting
between people.

Let's just make up a setting.

Mediaval fantasy is th esetting. The land of Nod is under siege, and the
generals have formed together to develop a battle plan for the attack.

Let's begin.

Rumio stood up with his typical level of straightforwardness. His manner was
always hurried, as if he always had somewhere to be. Even when he didn't have
anywhere to be, and he was just pacing back and forth on the field, it looked
like in his pacing he was always coming to sowewhere. It was with this same
level of hurried tone that he got up out of his chair and approached the table.

"The Roascians are approaching from the north" he began, pointing to the
figurines on the table which the comittee of generals always used to
demonstrate their forces. "And the Barbarians at unawares to themselves have
met them. They will hold them off for some time, but not for long."

Simon sat in his chair examining the table with his usual sullied expression.
Just as the opposite of Rumio, he always seemed to be occupied with something
else, as if the thing he were working on were more imporant than whatever else
anyone might be doing elsewhere.

"It will be a matter of hours before the Roascians are at our walls. We have an
array of archers at the front wall here." Rumio pointed towards the mat on the
table indicating the city walls "But of course archers can only do so much to
hold them off. And from there, once they breach the walls, it's only a matter
of time before the citizens realize what is happening and spread mass panic.
Of course, we must avoid this at all costs."

Jervall sat silently in his corner of the room, looking more furreled than
usual. He wanted to bring himself to say something, but knew not to inturrupt
Rumio in the middle of his speeches.

"We must send out a force of knights to meet their armies before they reach the
archers. It is the only way to thin the forces enough before they reach the
city walls."

"Absolutely not!" Cornelious interjected. "In no world am I sending out the
knights of this city to meet a foe on open battlefield for them to be sent as
lambs to the slaughter when we can fight within the confines of our walls. Are
we sure the Roascians are content on coming this way? In the past they have
made open declarations of war only to back off fleeing as girls do. Who is to
say that the same won't happen again."

"I have seen them." Rumion adjusted his large frame glasses which seemed to
somehow constantly fall down his nose when he was explaining things. "They are
much larger in force than they have ever seen before. Where before they have
sent hundreds of men, this time they send thousands, or even tens of thousands.
Shit, I think they are even recruiting seventeen year old boys to fight for
them this time. Their forces are large, and Bangqo is not one to back off from
a fight when he has this many forces invested in it. We must match might with
might."

Cornelious simply sighed in his chair, his long beard waving at the heat of the
sigh. He had heard this before. It seemed like every time the forces which were
encroaching upon the great city of Bobonia were ten times or a hundred times or
even a million times greater than the last, and every time these general had to
be overhasty with their strategies thinking that they were already lost.

"Yes, might must be met with might, but it is foolish to meet such a large
force with our knights in such open terrain," Cornelious mused. "While I agree
that it is prudent to arrange ourselves with great haste, it is at the same
time foolish to overact in a time of war. It's just as likely that our knights
could fall victim to the great forces from the north and the archers aren't
able to stop the remainder, and then what? The Roascians come in to our city in
full force with no one but women and childern to meet them? This is
foolishness."

"Silly bard." Rumio huffed. "You would presume our knights so worthless that
they could not stop so vile a people as the Roascians? How weak do you think we
have become?"

Cornelious leaned back in his chair, taking great care to measure his next
words. "While I agree that such a course of action could result in an ultimate
victory for the Bobolionians, I do not feel that it is our only course of
action. Our hands are not tied here. It is up to us to fortify, and meet the
enemy on our terms, not on theirs. Yes, our knights could ride out and meet
them, and yes, our men are much smarter and much more cunning than those filthy
peasents that would like to call themselves a nation, but there is no reason to
incurr such costs when alternatives have not been considered."

"What alternatives? The way I see it, the Roascians are coming to our city
doors whether we like it or not. Would you have our city become a battleground
on which our people fight with kitchen knives and fire forks against armed
soldiers. The common civilian is not at all prepared for such a large force to
enter the city. To avoid widespread panic, and to keep appearences of security,
we must go out to meet them."

"But if we go to meet them we will have no defenses for the next attack. Yes,
we will certainly win this battle, but what about the next wave? Would you
prepare an entirely new fleet of knights to meet that wave as well and
sacrifice all in the name of appearences and security? Such talk is madness."

A brief silence filled the air. Rumio broke it. "What would you say Simon, you
have been awfully quiet. Speak so we may no what bemuses you so."

Simon, who had been silent to that point, continued to sit in his chair. If the
generals didn't know better, they might have said that he was paying no
attention to the situation at all, but all the generals knew better. Finally,
simon slowly and methodically stoop up in his chair and spoke.

"Friends."

Just as soon as he said the word, Rumio interjected. "Spare us the pleasentries
and your formalities. This situation calls for haste, not overbearing and over
analyzed words. Get to your point Simon."

Simon ignored the pacing Rumio and continued. "Generals. I see two of us at war
just as our two cities at war. Such a strife cannot continue if we are to have
any chance at facing this ever present and growing threat from the north."

Simon removed his glasses and spoke directly to Conelious. "Cornielous, I take
your side in understanding that our position would be much more strategically
advantagous if we were to garrison our troops in our quarters along the north
wall, and have the enemy meet us in our quarters."

Simon then slowly turned to Rumio, who was still pacing, and said, "Rumio, I
see your side in that, if we do not face this threat head on with our own
advancing armies, it will incite panic and terror in the people, who are so
unaccustomed to war that they would not know which side of a sword to grab."

Rumio was clearly growing annoyed at this laborious kind of speech, buc simply
continued to pace to express his frustration.

"I suppose," Simon mused on, as if indifferent to the fast advancing armies
that were approaching, "It is a matter of diagnosis of our sitauation that we
disagree on. For is it the case that our peaple have grown so soft that war to
them means nothing? If teh common man sits comfortably at his kitchen table,
and reads our inquiries that we are in a time of war, and treats it as a minor
inconvience to his day to day lives, does this not represent a misunderasting
of what war truly means? And also if that same man would have his knights go
out and die so that he could stay safe in his own illusions, could we argue
that we are in no way a better kind of people than these Roascans which we are
fighting against? Who is to say that the soft and contemplative man, ever busy
with his day to day musings, is worth any more than the roascian, who seeing a
turmoil and a plight in their own peoples, and wanting more land and resources
for themselves, would take up arms against those that oppress them and work to
change the world in a way that would seem honorable and noble to those that
would do it? Can we say that our city is any greater if we cannot band together
in time of war?"

"But we can't band together in time of war. We are not prepared for a full on
attack of the city. The people are simply not ready for so sudden a shift in
attitude." Roeun was clearly becomeing greatly annoyed at the old man's speech.
It was hard to tell if it was because he was the sort of person to constantly
be annoyed at a slow-talking old man, or if it was because that old man's
slowing talking was not in favor of his direction. In either case, Roeun face
became red as he became more and more anxious of the growing battles.

"Let us calm ourselves for a moment." Cornelious chimed in. "We are clearly
growing muiddied and buffuddled. A divided nation cannot stand. We must come to
a decision. Let us vote."

"Of course you would bring it to a vote, because you know the favor will come
to your side. Just because you have the majority decision doesn't make you
right to call out a vote."

Simon sat back down in his seat and smiled. "Alas, it is not because it is the
majority decision that it should be done, but because it is the wise thing to
do. We must call up arms in our cities, and we must rally everyone to meet this
threat in the fortitude of or structures. Together we will win this battle, but
divided we will fall. Such has naught to do with qualms about a democratic
system, but instead it must be the case that to band together, a majority rule
must be enforced. And if we are to come to a vote, we all must agree to move
forward with that action, whatever that action may be, so resolved that even if
it is not the correct course of action, it is the cation we should take
none-the-less."

Rumio scoffed at the old mans words. "Foolish old man. The people are not
ready. You will see."

"Let us take a vote, and we will see indeed what the people are or are not
ready for."

Rumio hurridely returned to his chair and sat down. "Well I see no reason to
take a vote now that we have been so resolved, because the majority decision is
already known to the people. Let us just take course in this foolish course of
letting this treacheours peoples just come to our doorstep, and when our city
comes to peril and flees and shouts "bloody murder" at every arrow fired and
every sword strike taken, you will see with your own eyes the foolishness that
you have wrought."

"But we must vote." Cornelious replied. "For voting is not an act to determine
a winner, but instead is a sympblic act by which our people come to unison. And
I hope hope our vote will be unanimous." He addad at the end with a glare to
Rumio.

Rumio sneered at the idea, but was never the less resigned to his fate.

Simon stood up to take the stage. "Will all those in favor of sending our
knights out to meet our foe please raise there hands."

No hands were raised. Rumio felt his left hand quivver a bit, but that was all.

"And will all in favor," Simon continued, "Of fortifying here and meeting this
foe in the realm of our own time please raise their hands."

The entire board room of generals raised their hands.

"Then it is settled." Simon declared. "Generals, gather your men and garrison
them in their stations. We will meet this foe on our terms."

All the generals stood in their seats and took a salute. With a unifying "Aye"
each one left their post and made way to their particular units. Only one
remained standing.

"Rumio." Simon paused as he saw that the stubbon man was still saluting the
empyt air. "I would appreciate if you would attend to your battilion and
garrison them in our cities. I will make sure the townspeople are made full
aware of teh stituation, and of our bearings. Johani will rouse the people. He
is very good at doing that. I will attend to the masses of the east while he
rises our more..." Simon turned his gaze in to a resolute stare as he watched a
still stubborn Rumio continue to remain saluted, "Unenlightened western
quarters to gather themselevs, and whatever weapons they have, and come to the
walls where they can garrison.

"Our peoples have not fought in many a year, but now is the time for them to
stand up against this rising threat. Better to die a man than to live blind to
the threats which rise up against us. Surely you must be able to understand the
spirit in which I speak?"

"Aye. Sir." Rumio finally relieved his salute and worked towards the door where
he was to prepare his squadran. "Just remember, the next time a proposition
comes through that needs a majority vote, which way my vote will turn."

"It saddens me." Simon replied, on his way out the southern door opposite the
room where Rumio was exiting, "That you consider war a matter of politics,
general. So be it."

With that Simon walked out of the door and moved to his battilion.

Rumio stood outside his, with one last resolute footstep, before stepping out
in to the world.

9:32 - 10:17 = 2500 words in 45 minutes. Approx 55 WPM

