So today I have been much delayed in getting to this task of freewriting. It
seems only an hour ago that I innocently decided to begin upon this endeavor,
only to have myself at disarrays with the Windows Updater, who so imposing
itself, decided that now was not the time for free writing, but instead was the
time for windows updating.

Of course, I am not usually one to complain about such things, but this
particular update took over forty five minutes to complete. From the time I
said "restart" to the time I was back in windows, the whole thing had taken
about twenty five some minutes (if I had to guess. Give or take some, clearly,
but you get the point) So here we are now, inspiration to talk about anything
or eveyrthing completly gone now, and we have to ask ourselves, is it the case
that Brett really has anything interesting to say during these sessions?

Of course, I continually remind myself that the point of these sessions is not
to get out anythnig that is worth getting out, but is instead to train and
pratice myself upon staying fast on the words that I am writing so that from
beginning to end my prose is interseting even if it is only because the
sentences structrue and thought flows that come out of them are intereting in
and of themselves. That is, I have no qualms if I am writing along and I have
this block of writing as if I don't know what to say. I can put words there to
say something in the space with which I don't know what to say in the hopes
that whatever words go there will provoke some further and more intersetnig
thought which I can then bring forth on to the page from the depths of my mind.

Such is the nature of the typing right now, for I do not have much interesting
to say.

However, it is the case that there is something interesting to sayt hat I would
like to try soon. This is something that I have said for some time that I would
like to try but have yet to attempt, so let us rememdy that by detailing out
exactly the nature in which this idea will come forth.

I speak of this idea that I have which is to be called "dual writing". I want,
on one page, to have complete commentary about my work. I want analysis,
numbers, factoids, and so on, about what it is that I am writing. I also want
any spurious thoughts which are thoughts ABOUT the work rather than the work
itself to go here.

Let me demonstrate myself with a concrete example.

Suppose I am writing a short story. We don't have to concern ourselves with
what exactly this short story is about, just that I am writing it and that it
is my goal to create something of an interesting story. We will say that this
particualar short story is about a monkey, and in going through the woods he
comes upon a monkey tribe (or something equally ridiculous) and as such has to
integrate his own understanding of the world in to the likes of those that
would call themselves "monkey king".

Such a story has a narrative arc and structure, but so far that is all. We have
not established if this is prose or poetry, if some new form of writing is to
be tried and experimented with in this work, if it is to contain mythological
elements; none of these things are known at all at this point.

But this does not stop me, the over zealous writer, from beginning to write the
story. I begin with some sentence which I am rather well proud of and I feel
serves as an excellent hook to the story. And then I come up with a sentence
after it which introduces our main character, the so aforementioned monkey, who
has been cleaverly revealed in the symettry of my words to be a rather upright
and upstanding monkey of the days and as such the reader has a pretty good idea
about what to think of this particular protagonist.

As we continue, however, I get to a point. I want the monkey to explore the
forest (say) but as I have him step up to the trees, I'm not sure how I want to
proceed. I ask myself internally, "Is this the sort of story where we try and
come up with vivid imagary for the trees, and talk about details like the
placment of the leaves and other such things, or is this the sort of story
where it simply suffices to say that the monkey delved through the trees and
leave the rest as a mere inkling of the idle readers whimsical fancies"

We might come upon an answer to this question right away. We might immediately
decide that this is the sort of work we want the reader to "get caught up in"
and as such it is redeemable in this story to come about some descriptions of
the trees and the creeks and the forests of our particular story. In so doing
we are able to bring the reader in to more immersive of a world, and we decide
that this is our course of action for this particular work.

But then we come upon something unexpected (or much expected rather, but our
zealous author brain would have us think that we should expect no delays. How
Naive!) We start to describe some of the trees of the forest and the sounds of
the creek and so forth, and we start to realize that it is quite drab and dull.
None of the descriptive words pop, the paragraph is coming out to be dreadfully
uninteresting, and it turns out that there really isn't much in our imagination
about this forest save for a few forgetable images that would be mere backdrops
on an otherwise interesting landscape.

So now we must stop again and re-evalutae. Do we go back and try and fan
through the paragraph that came out so drab and dull, or do we continue on with
the concept that perhaps we already wrote the most interesting bit of the
entire work and that it can only go up from here.

So here is where we get to the demontstration of the method of scratch paper.
It is at this point that we should mark this paragraph with a number (ideally
it should be a numebr in sequential order, but I am not going to be one to
force such things upon my writers mind). Once the number is placed upon the
page just before the paragraph surrounded in square brackets, then a
corresponding number identical to this one should be placed upon the
corresponding "scratch work" page. In order to ease facilitation of this system
it could be the case that both of these pages are open on the same window of
vim in different vertical split buffers.

When it has been decided that the scratch work is what is going in to the work
right now, all freedom has been placed now to analyze the shit out of whatever
mental image is appearing right now.

I might first start to ask myself where the forest comes from? So I write in
the scratch side of things "From where in my mind does this forest come? Why is
my protagonist walking in to a forest? What might that represent psychologcally
to me in this moment?" Having written down all of these questions now, I might
seek to answer some of them. "The monkey is entering the forest to represent
his transformation as a hapless victim to the surround tribes to invoke his
curiousity for things unknown to him."

Having thus begun to ask ourslevs these things, I can this ask myself "What
effect should this paragraph have on the reader?" I realize straight away that
my error in attempting to describe this forest in a very rote and mechanical
way is that I did not let the reader experience the monkey's point of view when
going in. I merely said that there was a stream, and that the sound of the
water hitting the rocks creating a roaring sound. Having now the luxury of
stepping out of the tone, texture, and mode of my short story (which shall
become a published work at some point) I am able to more freely dance about the
thoughts which are coming in to me.

Perhaps the monkeys background is such that the stream represents some youthful
energy in himself. Or maybe the monkey in feeling the rustling of the leaves is
able to connect the concept of the forest with the concept of unity. I start to
figure out all the ways that my writing form and texture became "drab and dull"
as I so diagnosed earlier and in so doing I am able to create a critique for my
past self as far as why he was inadequete for coming up with a good reason of
story for that upbringing.

Having analyzed thus, I will start to free write on the scratch paper, and in
so doing I will "re hit" upon the ispiration that started the story. Being well
versed and well-educated and well-practiced in the art of getting my pure
thoughts on to the page, I am able to immediately switch back to "writing mode"
so that I can re-enter the original sperm and germ of idea which spawned this
original short story.

At least, such is the theory, and I don't know if such a theory, when put in to
practice, will be a conductive towards inspired writing as I would hope.

Let us do a brief analysis of my words here in this free writing session.

I would say that it is the case right now that I am not sure what more to write
about. This is nothing new, but I do want to say that I feel as though I have
lost myself.

The biggest qualm I have about this system is that it will be exhausting to
maintain. It is something taht I feel will ghave too much scratch work for not
enough finished work, and I would say that it is the case that the finished
work will not resemble the work of something that I want to say, but intsead is
just a finisehd work that is too polished and too refined for it's own good.

So perhaps, as I go in to this for the first time, I can tell myself that it is
for the good of all parties involved that I remind myself that this sort of
practice (right now that is ) of continuing to write my thoughts even when I
don't want to is actually an entirly constructive thing. In other words, as
much as the words will first appear to me to be divinly inspired, and then I
will reliaze that as the heat of my inspiration dies down I am left with
something more akin to the ashes of a phoenix than the soaring eagle of
success, I become discouraged. I think this method is a way whereby I can
iteratively (and the iteration aspect of it is key) come upon a more and more
satisfactory picture of the whole thing and in so doing arrive at something
which is worth doing.

So I am at an impasse here. I want to keep writing, but I think I am done
writing about the double writing method that I plan to propose. If I were to do
such a thing on the past one hundred lines or so I would probably come up with
a reason to mix about certain aspects. However, I would be more inclined to say
that such editting is explicitely not the purpose of this sort of writing
(although it might make sense to leave in places in the scratch where I go back
and re-organize some things as I decide to). Instead, the purpose is to be a
step above free-writing in demanding a certain level of quality and uniformity
in the finished work, but at the same time allows me to rapturously and without
regard come up with a complete picture of the whole thing none the less.

I am still at an impasse though. I am not sure what much more to write about.
It seems to me that there was something I wanted to say about my dad, but I
don't want to totally derail myself from the current mode of thought. I am
currently just letting the words come over me and typing them as quickly as
possible for the express purpose of getting my words per minute up. Whether or
not such a thing is advisable or not, I do not know, but I am advising myself
to do it because I think it only makes sense that a writer should be able to
write, and that in practicing writing it can't hurt that one must become
stronger and more endurable in the long hours that a writer must undergo.

And I mean long hours in the deepest sens of the word. I mean it in the sense
that the hours will start to feel way longer than they actually are. I just
looked down to my watch and so far I have only been going for a half an hour,
and I still have many many words to go before I hit my designated free writing
goal. So I mean in some way the elongation of time stretches itself out for the
writer.

So I have words I want to say about this time thing, but it seems imprudent to
say such things. Instead, I just want to say that I am gaining some solace in
the fact that I am becoming better at letting myself make a paragraph even when
I don't want to.

Take this paragraph for instance. I had no idea that I was going to start a
paragraph with the sentence "Take this paragraph for insteance" when I started
this paragraph, yet somehow, at this moment, those words have been written, and
there they are, on the page, for anyone who would so desire to read back to
themselves as they pleased.

I was not aware that that paragraph was going to come in to existance before I
wrote it, but looknig back on it, I can see that it is five lines long and has
some semblance of a coherent thought behind it.

Something I need to remember as I write is that the writer himself goes through
many thoughts in his head as he writes his words, and that many of the htoughts
get lost in the ethos of the writers mind. Because the writer is not able to
write all of his thought straight away on to the page and also because the
writer is not always able to translate the raw, visceral thoughts in to
appropiate english words, it becomes often the case that the write does not
write nearly as much as he thought he did, and in so doing will come upon a
written word whereby everything that was written is not written very well, and
the vivid mental picture that the author thought he had in his head turned in
to one that became lost on someone.

I am really struggling to continue to find things to write about. I could write
about my Monte Carlo simulator, and how I decided to get that going but then
immeditaley decided that it wasn't worth my time and here it sits now as
nothing more than a design document and a dream. Of course, I could make that
dream a reality by simply ceasing this free-writing session and moving over
there, but we are not going to do that. Instead, we are going to keep writing
in this session because that is what we set out to do. We set out to get a
certain number of words on to the page and by damn we will get to that number
of written words.

I am always amazed at myself when I am able to write about something for more
than 800 lines. I think that is the gold standard for a well-formed idea. If
the rapturous thoughts can capture me for the multiple hours required in order
to get 800 lines on there, and if I continually have to remind myself to stop
doing that so that I can get to a certain point, than I can do that, but it is
rare that I have such rapturous things in my mind.

I am thinking back to some of the dreams I would have at alliant. Not only was
going through those dreams an entirely explosive process whereby the words just
simply came in to themselves under my fingers (much like these words are
becoming me now, but in a much more streamlined and conductive way) but also it
was the case that I became very noticable upset about any inturrpution by
anyone during the whole process. It was quite remarkable to me just how much I
was so convinced that I needed to write all of this shit down. In so doing, I
was  able to come in to myself as a creative writer. By writing my dreams I
gained the understanding of how dream images work, how they funciton.

I am derailing the discussion. I am not sure what more ta talk about. I am
generally speaking becoming a little bit sore when it comes to this writing
session. My fingers are starting to grow weary and my mind is starting to
become dull, I can feel it. There is not really much that I want to free-write
about right now that I would consider interseting.

Something earlier today that I was thinking about was my termination from
Alliant. I have recently realized that I have not written out that whole
experinece. There are a few reasons for this, but I do not even feel like going
through those reasons. I have developed a sort of defense mechanism against my
inculpable parents so that I might abuse their hospitality further.

The foremost reason, I just realized, that I don't want to talk about this is
because I am still not able to talk about it without resort to angry ramblings.
This problem has become exasperbated by my parents... how would you call it
without succumbing to that very anger that I am talking about now ...
stupidity? ... that is too harsh a word and shows the markings of a man upset
by his parents moronicism. But regardless, the point remains that my parents
are wholly bumbling morons when it comes to dreams and dream rules, and as such
it becomes impossible to talk to them about any of the thing which I find so
dear to myself. It is quite astonishing that so many people, my parents first
and foremost included in my mind, but I think this is a general trend of the
entirely mediocre generation before us, are so misguided when it comes to the
rules of the spritual realm.

I said that I wasn't going to devolve in to this sort of discussion, but I
really don't know what I am going to talk about for now. All I want to say I
guess is that Christianity is really a neat sort of thing, but it is most
definitely outdated by at least a few centuries if not more. The continued
revelation of the bible from the Garden of Eden thorugh Moses and in to David
and the Prophets towards Jesus and then the Revelation of John I think is not
where the story should end. Milton belongs and Dante belongs and Shakespeare
belongs. These people continued to reveal the nature of the dream world to us
in a way that the bible was inadequete to do. Yet the bible is still the core
of that foundation, but only out of neccesity. Because it has been the book
that has been used by so many for so many years to lead and guide themselevs in
their lives, it is also the case that it has become stale in some sense.

I am losing myself here. This is the part where I am not so sure if this is
worth doing in this way. I am simply writing now to get a quota. Is this sort
of quota writing worth it? It certainly can't hurt. But as soon as I typed
that, I got the impression that maybe somehow it could hurt. No matter. I am
not concerned.

In fact, I have to remember the outset of this goal. To get to something like
3600 words in as short of a time that I can, and to also make sure that the
sentences are well formed and that the paragraphs are interseting enoguht. That
is all that needs to happen; no more. If something more is expected of these
sessions than it means that I have lost sight of what they are meant to be for.

These sessions are meant to get the ideas from the mind on to the page in as
seamless a way as they can. I am meant to stop at a paragraph, and create a new
one, and practice doing this over and over so that the paragraphs can just flow
on to the page. I am to remind myself that the whole point is so that the words
can happen, and that I don't have to concern myself with things like rhythm and
meter. When I am in the heat of inspired writing, I don't want quabbles such as
my typing form to get in the way of the rapturous flow of writing which must
occur. But the only way such a flow state can be achieved is if it is
practiced. Only if it is practiced against the odds will someone such as me be
able to become something more than his parents would have him be.

See, I promised not to derail myself in to loathful conversations about my
parents, but here we are again. Seriously, this is fucked up. Fuck them both.
Especially my father.

Okay, I am done. Signing out.

3800 words in 48 minutes.
