So this is my attempt at writing to pass the time. I have my eyes closed,
listening to some ambient nonsense on youtube, and I am typin with slow and
deliberate strokes, not ever tying too fast, and always having a smooth flow
from one letter to the next. I like the way this fieels under my fingers. It is
relaxing, rather than stressful. I can write something, and Ias I am writing
it, I can think about exactly whatever it is that I want to write about netxt.
From there, I can just let myself write as I feel free to. I don't have to
wrory about soying the write thing in the rwrong place, or I don't have to
think about saying the wrong thing in the right place. I don't have to worry
baout what I say at all. I just have to write and relax, and let my firngers
become something like machines on their own.

It's quite nice to be able to do this. Everything feel so clear and consics
when it comes out into thoughts that can be written in this way. It becomes
trickey to say what I should do in cases like this one, meaning, a case
whereI'm not suer what to say, and therefore I'm not sure what to type. There
are mabye a few things that could be done for cases like this. The first thing
that could be done for cases like this is to write soemthing laborious or
tiresome so that it doesn't seem like you are stuck on your writing. Really,
what is happening is that you are just writing a bunch of stuff inth e generall
dircetion of where you want to go with the hopes that eit eventually hooks. Of
course, this is not neccesarily the best way to go about transitioning from one
point to another, but it certainly works. Another thing that you could do inthe
case where you feel like you want to write something, but you're not sure what,
and you want to keep writing words in case you do, is you can go back and try
and re-read things that you have already written.

One last thing that you could do when you're writing like this is just to mke
note of the things that you see. Of course, there will be all sorts of trains
of thought associated withevery image, but it's important to follow those
tranis of thought. In fact, in writing, we could perhaps start to see where
these tranins of thought that lead to certain symbols come from.

Ideally, we wcould get ot apoint where we have some symbol, whatever it may
maen to us, and wel will be able to take something of an inverse of that
symbol, into the domain of our orginal space. Of course, the relation between
dream symbols and psychic thoughts is not one to one in the slightest, but it
is, by it's very nature, surjective.

So in doing this, I want to begin to attempt to have an active imagintion, and
just let my thoughts come out as they may.

Cerruently the music just changed for me. I was listenting to one track, and
now it just changed to antoher track. This track is very mellow and somber. It
reminds me of the color blue. I don't know whaty it reminds me of that, but it
does. I see something of a full blue background in my vision, with white
sparkes, like white fire, coming out of various parts in the gorund. It is like
I ma looking at a blue wall. Ther e is a gate in this wall as well. That is all
I see right now.

The music isn't doing much to change the picure. The sounds are such tahtt it's
mostly just very vague guitar notes here and there, so really all I see change
is the lighting on the wall changes a bit when the note changes.

My vision just shifted to a different sort of musical visualizer. Of course,
since I am listenting to music, if I pay close enough attention to the music
itself, something like that is bound to come up.

It's hard to say what else my imagination is conjuring. With the music being so
prominent as it is, it is difficult to see where these images might be comeing
from or going towards if there wasn't music. I am very tempted to turn the
muscic off.

Okay, that music was great, but it's off now. I like that better. I am able to
much more succintly get my shit togethre as far as what I see and what I am
thinking.

So I want to rite out of some of the things of my active imagination.

The first thing I see is a hill, and on the top of teh hill is a rock. The rock
is shaped like a square, something likea  ceube. On this rock there is perched
a man. THis man is something of a jester. He has a foot up on the rock, and is
point out into the city. "Oh oh oh! he said, "Over their your burden awaits.
"Oh oh oh!"<" He thought it was all quite funny.

I recognize that when I look at myself, I am walking by a donkey that is
burndened with ym belongings. We are walking side by side, and going past this
jester. I zoom out of the view to see a city inside of a pit in the ground. The
pit is probably, at it's otselt, eighty by one sixty feet in area, but the city
cgoes on for quite a bit behind it.

It's hard to know exactly what is going on in this scity. I am tempted to go in
there, but I'm afraid it will be too much work for my brain to do. I would much
rather go somehwhere else.

In fact, I have decided that I am tired, and Iwould like to take a rest.I
contune on past the jester, and past the city, and I find myself a little tree.
I sit under the tree, and I rest my head on it. Thie place is something like a
desert, but it's rather cold, so I tuck myself up under a blanket from eth
donkey, and adjeust meself to get comfortable on the desert frloor.


