So the words begin. They flow out of the mind and in to the fingers.

The thoughts flow through me. I am become something of a closed eyed moster,
unaware at the words that he types. This and that and other words. Does it
matter what form they take. I am merely taking in the htoughts and letting them
come in to my being.

Life, death, and circles. This images are difficult to describe and I could
spend some time to do so.  Howevenr, I would say that it is more important that
other things happen. It is by some other mechanism that something is brought
forth in to life.

Bring this forth to lifee. Teell me oh muse what my troubles lie.

In typing in this black eyed way I am able to see upyon something entirely new.
The minds eye is able to morph and twist in to something completely different
than that of waking and seeing thought. It becomes a life in and of itself.

It presents itself before me as a ball of lifght, but cicling itself. It is as
if it is made up of many ringing of different sizes but each with the same
centery. Some of these reings are horzontal to the horizon but others a
askchewed in various wasy. In this way the entire sphere is made up an an
entirely concetoted and intricately woven series of rings.

To what do we owe the distingishement of theis sphere of rings if not a ball of
yarn? Is it in the ball of yarn which the readr will so imagien that this ball
loses its luster. No mind.Let the reader think of things as silly as a ball of
yarn. Let his fancies take hime to o wordl where fyarn is the most interesting
thing he can think of when I descibe these visions. "How, I know what that it,
it is not a michotlgical concetp.t, silly writer, but instead a real object
that exkxists in the treal word for us all to feel and see and touch and
interact with as we do other rearl things. Though you might want to talk about
things like spheres of bracelysts of gold with concentric and aschehewed
cirtcles, no matter, I arlready undersatnd all there is to know about such
things.

Let me cut your tongue off so you can no slonger speak such absurdities. As the
blashmeber annonces his words he is immediately silenced so as to never speak
again. To ignore his words is a mere impossiblityty, it's something that simlp
y cannot and should not be done. The gtreue and great magician, the weaver of
orbs, does not care for the criticsism for so short minded and so abvers little
men. Cut of their tonguse lest you cut off anything else. Their penis is
allowed to remain dntacet lest they rape the ears of their maindens in so
glorusious an obstruction of truthity.

But what do we come ujkp onte? the scene is set, the orb of glorious and ever
concentric light looms above, almost as if asking us for what reason we defile
the tongue of so simple a mind. Does this orb speak to us? Or is it our own
guilt at cutting the tnogu of a fellow man that we bring orselves.

Looking out to the horizon we see the landscape of a lake in teh center of a
city. The lake itself reflects the moonlight in evervencent glory, much like
the real moon reflects off of a truly gorgeous lake. Our orb remains, above us
rather than out towards the moon, and much nearer, yet it'ts light only comes
from itself. It glows, but we know not what to do about this glowing. We are
too busy silencing dissenters to understand what is going on with the gloruious
orb.

This is a town. Perhaps we should ask. Maybe some would know what there is to
know about the orb. Is there no other, the murderer of tongues asks himself in
the night, who would seek to simply bask in the glory of this orb for hours on
end. Is there something to be said for seeing something so beautiful as an orb
and allowing yourself to be taken up in it. There must be others, I reason. I
am in no way special, lest I call myself Crhriset and nail myself to a cross to
make a point. Each of us is just as the other, Human, no less, and no more and
in that way what I see and what I feel muchst be somehow similar to what others
asee and what others feel. So there must be others who see what I see and feel
what I feel, and I must find thiese people,. These people are to be my refuge,
my hideout. These people are to be those that I turn to when all is lost and
onothing is to be found. In the desert I will crawl to these people, in hopes
that some day my own senes of being will be rectified in the life of another.
If only I could share what I have seen with others, but I am not worthy.

No matter this bafoon and his tongue. I have other boaffoons and other tongues
to listen to. His was clearyl not yeilding fritut. Let us move on to tohre
things.

And so we the magician go. Perhaps to find another to share in our glory. But
we take pause.

We know not way. the orb becons to us again. It wans us, it needs us. If only
we could touch it and receive of it as will. But we can, we have only but to
reach out and touch with outr hands and be swept away in to a new land.

But this land is good. It is not ready to be gone. There is more to describe,
more to deiscover. The blashemer should not taint our want to exlpore this
word. So let us not reach out. Let us not go forth. Not yet. Lest the orb fail
us, and we determine that in this dying breath it might fall from us forever,
let us instead remember that this orb is so glorious that not even the light of
the forgetten sun can take it from us. We must become as prat of the orb, and
the orb as part of us, we must take it in to ourslevs and let the glowing of it
make us in to new men.

But we need others, others to help us. Others to tell us that we are okay, that
what we are doing is for the good of others, truly, and not just the good of
ourselves. We must self introspect, and we must find that within orselves which
is able to connect to that orb.

Yes, in going under, we can find that which revelas and reflects itself as the
over. Just as the reflection of cthe moon in the lake shivnes deepest when you
focus towards the very botty of the lakee, so too does the orb of evervesencet
light shine greatest when focused on the deepest well-springs whith our souls.

We must walk.

And so we walk, we take the stape along the paveement by which we reside,
Something propels us forward, we lose our fotting for a moment only to find
theat the ground we walk ion ins undestady.

Yet this shall not stop jkus, we must walk upon undestad ground with the
resolute feeling that we must find others that can bask in this glory.

But in this place there seem not to be others. Behind, a woman with groceries
walks by. Does she want to concern herself with the "wiled ravings of a mad
man" as I even so self describe myself.

No of course not. For she has a vagina, and she understands that if she gives
in to these fanciys there is the distinct possiblity that this man, no matter
how unjustified she might be in thinking so, could want to put his penis
isnside of that vagina. It is unfortante that so tarnished a first impression I
give whin it comes to talking about thises things. Does not the woman want to
discuss her sexual urges with others. And not simply for the purpose of
informing him of those things which she finds deplorable in herself but she
likes awnayway, but also those things that she would never tell anyone lest
they treat her as a monster and a ridiculer.

But I do not belienve she thinks these things. She holds groceries and keeps to
herslf not out of any seort of need but because she does not want to fget
caught up in the fancies of a whimsical man. This man has fond something, and
let him keep it for himself. For though he might think that what he has found
belings to everyone and should be sought after and cherished by all, it is also
the case that he makes me uncomfortable, and discomforte is the bane of the
human in todays world.

Oh, great discomfort. You are like a seductress, a demon lady with claws for
talons. You tear you nails in to the back of our animus and you rip the flesh
as you do. You tear yourself in to the very being that we call our own and in
so doing connect to evyrthing entiry point that you can know.

How this brings so much pleasure I do not know. Alas, we must admit the
masochist inside of ourselves as being a demon and a demon of nothing less.

But is it right to confine our demons to hell? Should we not break free of such
things and scream to the world that the demons exist as they do and that it's
simply the case that they are this way and that there is no other way that they
could be?  For when we resign our peoples to hell they only seek to escape. And
the weakest ones of them do not escape, for they are weak and you must be
strong to get out of the grasps of the dead and dying souls that wail in pain
in suffering. Much better to join that sufferening and wail and moan than
overcome with strength and defeat your plight.

 But instead of wailing, instead of meaning, can we not entwine ourselves with
 this seductress. Pain, torment, insufferage. This mistreess knows no cease.
 For she persists even in those times when she does' not want to. She is there,
 always present. Is it not better to embrace her and take her in to yourself
 willingly than to let her rip her clatws in to you? Would you rather come
 about this foul play and terrible endenturture than come about an emasculated
 and ridpped apart man, castrated and shaved with no penis to become erect
 again? Would such a thing become a man.

 Rathe, fuck your demons. Become erect and insert your penis in to her. So that
 when she inserts her nails you will have struct the first blow. Do not give
 her your seed, make her beg and pelad for it. Tell you you will only give it
 to her if she only would dig more and deeper. Tell her you will only release
 when she says that she can give no more and that she is no longer want to
 ekxidst. Bring yourself to the points that you know you can go if aonly to
 stay inside her for just a moment more. In and out you go, excersize,
 sexuality, diet, asleep, and all otherr mtwhings. Feed the mistreess of
 discomforte, for she will sucumb to you and not the other way. Let er not drag
 you to hell, but together, two as one, can you both arise anew as a soul
 possesed with demon to become something different and something more, the so
 called intergretad human?

We are half way through this session, I am growing a bit weary of this scene
but feel it is prudent to continue on. This mistress, she is coming in to me. I
am feeling the discomfortae of my tidings. I am feeling wthe wave of feeling
come over me. My meditation does not last so long. I am not want to be able to
sit for so still a time and recite with rote the thoughts as they arise in my
head. This is something I must become stronger at. In tyranny I find miyself
panting in tiredness. Want to stop but not want to feel the pain of sloth.

For If one were to choose, be taken to hell on silver-laid and exquisite bat
and come upon a mistress of our thoughts, how micht she choose the ways in
which she comes in to yourself. For ecah of these mistress is jealous, and
thought might leave one satisfied you must ont ever negletct all the rest that
would seek to come in to their being.

And what of the A:nima? Does she still dwell in her cave surrounded by those
gutless christians that would seek to crucify anyone that comes near. How could
any woman ever meet oto the standard of this anima? Her shi is in her encasing
of glass, ready to be awoken. But she is not ready.

How can such things be. Here we are again at this strange and remote desolate
location with the people surrounding again. Do not come in tot them, for they
are again blasphemers.

Take your knife and cut them. When you cut one the others will swarm. Cut them
too. Kill them, every last one. They are unarmed and not dangerous. They are
not skilled in any of the arts, least of all the martial arts varisety. They
are uncouth and work in masses. They each have a strength as being a memober of
a whole, and by being a whole they become something worse than the sum of its
parts. They become a cult, a gang, a unity of thoughts and ideas all working
towards the perverted and twested purspsoe of bringing about a mistress and
keeping her in her cave. Their intentions are good but their essence is evil.
They are the must vile kind of scum that can exist under the underplating of
the colarl reefs of teh earth. Something allows us to go, and we must stop and
say that what is going is not what is, and what is is ont what is going.

Ther e is something deep at work here. There is something ever flowing.

Al through this time the orb remains steady above. Should we consult it? Are we
to be mistaken about the clarity with which we orginally saw such things.? We
have taken mistress, and maid in to ourselves. We have become entangeled in the
affairs of the glorious devillry of life. These things are great, and they are
yfull. They deliver promise of somethingmuch more and ever present than this
silly orb.

But blashemer I fear I will become let I speak such things. Demans I must come
in to, but not at the const of losing the vision. The vision must stay. By the
vision we will live and by the vision we will become the people that we strive
to be.

For how can we sustain this vision. Only in the act of meditation does one come
to the understanding that eveyrthing in the universe is true and real and that
these visions are also in the same way the same exact kind of true and real.
Yet somehow people soeem not to understand. They say these weird and obtuste
things. These basphemers have their words that they feel they must say, and
nothing tehy have to do with the visions of all those things that everyone
knews is worth more than eveyrthing in thhis busy modern day world.

So let me reach, let me touch. I need not to saty here any longer. The depths
of hell avail me not, thought there might be one such as me who would seek to
understand the meanings  behind the orbs of light that encompass this all, I
perhaps in the only one here because thi s is the realm of those that have been
defeatd. They are lost. I am looknig for champions on a losers battleground. So
let us avail not these fancies any mor. Let us reach out and touch this orb so
that it may take us to a new setting and anew landcscape.

So in touching the orb immediately we see upon ourselves a new kind of light.
We let this light flow over us, and  we remind ourselves that the mbeody wmust
likn to the mind. The body and the mind come togethre to form a new union. Not
of seductress and man but instead of God and Angel. Together these angels and
beings form to create the most comlplee and most pure sexual union. In what way
does this prepresent my own involmentent with the mistress of discomfort? How
in so doing am I to let go of this orginial sin and see these things not a
perveresions but insetad as the image through which all life comes in to being.
All ambition, all drive, all wille to powre comes from this image, and here my
eyes adulterabted by the mistresses of the underwarld can only see it as
sexuallity.

Woe is me, let me pruf ify my mind.

And as I said such things, an angel came from her uninion with the other
angels, wrapped in nudity and flyers embrace, and reached down to me and placed
her hand over my lifps. From the heath she took a log, and with this log she
placed it on the floor.So sat upon her well-placed log, she beconed me to sit
with her so she might tell me those things whech she has seen.

I listened to her speak of all the things. Worry not yourr heart she said, Do
not tire of your forgetful plysghts. Man is such a base thing, always
concenrnved about not being worthy Rather be not worthy than not-worthy and
continually remind us. Instead, aim to be worthy in all that you do,. Go in to
the world, not the world of the underswaorld but the world of the living,
whereby you might find others who would see such as you and think such as you.
You are not to beling here. This is not yqur homee Go elsewhere, for it is not
here for you to saty. For even the angels do not stay here. This is much to
glorous a place to behold all to much. But always remind yourself to visit
here, because it is a nice place.

Look! She said. The image of a small babe, infant youngling, came forth in to
view. She started as an emerging seed but greew before my eyes in to a living
goddess, a sean nympth of sorts with young and growing wings and anked form
before as innocent as a child might display herself to a doctor. She came up to
me and asked me "Mister, Why do you have a penis?" I would like to know what
you would do with such a thing?"

I was not in the right mind to tell her about the act of sexuality. I wanted to
tell her of all the other things that icanbe done witbeing a man such as
myself, but I could not think of anything. Only my inadecacy to describe to
this innocent girl young angel that she was that the penis was a device by
which the man creates life, II could not seem to show myself.

Yet on this she grew curious, and asked how something so simple and so
lightened could create life. And I wwanted to show her, but felt in to my place
to intrude. But the angel behnind, now without wings because she had rectracted
them and instead the full image of a naked lady, urged me forward. I suddenly
found myself completyl nakend before this girl, and I instructed her to follow
my lead.

I told her to not be afraid, for my interntions were pure , and though it might
seem uncomfortable at first (ther is that mistress again! How she pevades
hersef, but no matter) she must crontinje on withe thie trust and understanding
that she was to understand how the penis could create life. And so I gently
grabbed her hand and placed it in my own, and then I reached down to my own
erect shaft and I placed her hand genltly upon it. Her hand felt as thought it
sent a thousand surges of sexual pleasure all thougrgh my being, and ain that
moment I nerealy ejaculated; however, I contained myself, and continued on with
my explanations.

I gently showed her to theway to stroke, so that it might become laroger in her
hands. She began to tache on, and without my guidance she was able to stroke
itit in a way to pleasure me as I would do to myself but now this angel was
here and doing it for me. As she did, I explained to her thus: that the penis
contained the sexual energy of man, and that in giving that energy to a womean
she is able to recieve the spern m and take it in herself to create new life.

"Is it not the woman woh gives new life then, and not the peniis." At this
again, I felt the serene innocence of youth in her voice. I knew not how to
react, for my own base descired simply wanted to enjoy myself and enjoy the
moment.

But I genetly remided myself where ia was, and continued on. Both: I explained:
ar e neccesary comp,ontents to the sexual ceration of new life.

And what does the woman have to express her sexual energy.

I closed my eyes as she asked the question. She was still idly stroking the
shaft of my penis as she did, and I let the sensations folw over me for a
moment, and then, with eyes still closed, I grabbed her by the wrist, and
reeled her arm in towrasd me as a sailor reels in a large and heaft rope. Yet
her arm was not like a rope, but instead soft and delitace to the touch. The
bone of the forearmm fit perfectly in the flesh of her skyin, which glowed in a
sort of manner that gave my basely manish desires great plasure. But aas  I
reealed her in she became close to me, so that our bodies were touching. Her
bosom against mine I felt, and her hand still connected to my penis, I bagan to
explare my cgaze down hto here erogienous regions. Gently at first I found
myself ctrawiling from the center of her bosom and down to her belly. The
button of her belly was not there. Such was I remembind that this nympth was
not one of this world. But I move d down anyway, not stopping but moving at a
stead pyace, until I found the bulge of her energies, already emerging and
growing swollen at the excitements that I felt must have been created doue to
the sexual energies that we were feeilng. I allowed yself the luxuary of tease
for a moment. I nkew not how much this angel would care for the sexual union of
herself with a man, but if she carred even an ounce of it for the seconds that
I did, she would appreciate the playful evenegry of sexual teasing.

And with that underway, I slowely continued to lower my finegres ever down in
to herself. I felt her lips fold underder the pressures of my hand. The fingers
became seperated by little grooves of flesh which must have represented tho
shape of her genetials. I felt the regian for the clitoris, and began to rub.
When I did, I felt her come to the tip of my penis and rub herself even
further. Somehow she knew that her own penis and my own vagina were connected
as one in the same thing in that  moment. The innocent youthful enegryg of a
newly born angel was now fully captiveated in the discovery that her egenitals
matched mine, and in pleasuring herself she was also pleasuring me.

Such was the day that i came upon myself with her glory. We entered eathother.
The feeling of orgasm overcame me, but no semen came out. Nothing spewed forth.
Instead, the ever growing and ever ample feeling of life and youthful energy
came over me aas her and I became literally as one mind inside of the cosmos of
all.

Such was my journey into the sphere. Let those that call it worthless continue
on with their drabbles. I will cut off the blasphemers tongues not out of
spite, but because I know these blasphemers mean disrespect to these beautiful
and glorious angels. So be the doings of this one lonely and terrified magician
as he journies back to the underworld with again the understanding of the
wellspring of all life in the joys of the orb of all.

4200 words in 56 minutes. Seventy five words per minute
