So at this point I want to say something that I find a little bit interesting.

So to briefly recap what my life is like right now (as if anyone reading this
would give a flying fuck about what my schedule looks like, but no matter) I
have become essentially nocturnal in my sleeping patterns. Or rather, that is
just not true. It would be more accurate to say that I have extended my
sleeping patterns out over a twenty eight or so hour period, but in doing so
have come at unawares to the myriad of sleeping problems that come with that
such as peculiar nap times and strange tiredness at points. So with that all
being said, my dreams have turned very much greatly in to dream fragments, and
the obsession of these fragments represents my own obsession with where I am in
my life right now, notably, living back at my parents with the resolve to get
the fuck out.

So all of that to say, my dreaming patterns have become very irregular since I
was let go from Alliant. But lets not talk about then.

Instead, all I was trying to get to was that I got something of a four hour nap
in earlier today in the afternoon, and during this nap I recieved something of
a dream fragment.

The fragment consisted of the floating image of a circle, like a gaussian curve
in space, which was horizontal to the floor on which I was standing and which
overlayed itself on top of a MTG game I was playing. The circle was about one
meter in radius meaning and overlapped myself and my opponent (who I could not
describe in detail even if I made it up).

It was very clear to me in the dream fragment that this circle represented the
execution process of a game of magic. It contained something of a "slider" on
it. It was akin to those "Bead and Wire" toys at the pediatricians office (and
probably in the insane asylum) which give children the ablility to move objects
(beads) through complex pathways (the wire) with the understanding that they
don't have to fully understand the twists and turns of the wire in order to get
a bead from one side to the other.

So this bead on the wire (which was more like a polar coordinate angle
represented as a small star on the Gaussian Curve of the execution path) was on
the stage which represented my Main Phase 2 and in the dream I remember playing
a card to advance the bead further along the path.

But as soon as I played the card, I knew it wasn't the correct move. Immeditaly
I requested to rewind that move and did so without receiving feedback from my
opponent. So, having advanced the bead of light approximately thirty degrees on
the pathway it was to follow on the execution path by simply playing my card,
so too was I able to retract the position of the bead of light by invoking the
rewind process (which is a well-formed and well-behaved process of computation
in the MTG ruleset).

This was all that there was to the initial part of the fragment. It was this
image that caused the dream to become lucid.

In the dream at this point then, I grew a sense of profound realization at this
image, and my dreamer wanted to try it multiple times in order to get the
attention of my waking self. So the dreamer played the card again and rewound
again multiple times in a row to make the image concrete in my head.

I woke up with the vague understanding that something with this had to do with
magic, and another part of it had to do with circles. It was quite a strange
sort of waking moment, because I was so excited about a dream fragment as I
haven't been arguably since my termination from Alliant, but at the same time I
wasn't sure what was going on with the fragment.

What was really great to me about this particular dream was that I was able to
use the "realization" that I gathered as soon as I awoke to "get to" the actual
dream material. That is, when I woke, I knew the concept of "rewind" as it
pertained to the hero's journey was what I found profound in that moment, but
more than that I was able to use the revalatory aspects of the dream which
pertained with me even when the dream images were fleeting at best, and by
holding on to that revaltion, I was able to "rewind" back in to the dream
images and in so doing come back out this end with a much clearer picture of
what the dreamer was so excited to show me.

So I think that is more or less all I wanted to say about that. I treat this
section as a sort of warm up now.

The greatest revalation here is in understanding how I can apply the concept of
the rewind directly to my work. In connecting my current "flow of thought" to
my previous flow, I am able to re-enter the original flow. Yes, work is
duplicated, but that is partially the whole point of this thing. Work must be
duplicated if any redeeming qualities are to be found in a novel of length of
sixty thousand some words (which has been the latest number I am telling myself
by the way). Duplicating work in the way that I can rewind and return to the
place where the reader must be if he is to be reading the work in one sitting
(which is how I feel any form of art should be undertaken). In doing this, I
will be able to go back to the place where "something is wrong" (akin to the
misplaced magic spell that I cast in the fragment) and rewind my work to that
point, and then with fresh eyes and fresh mind determine what is redeemable
about my current work and what might need to be sought after if anything is to
happen.

So enough on that. I have since re-read my archetype place and am prepared to
continue from the point of the myth.

So at this point, in our last lecture, we started upon the myth of creation,
and came up with a manner through which we might start to form the basis of the
rest of our mythological archetypes. I want to take pause at this point and
rewind to the point where we cerated the myth, but with some axioms layed
forth.

Firstly, I want to very clearly emphasize that this myth is not and should not
be taken as any sort of claims about the objective reality of the world. In
fact, I know I have mistakes in my understanding of relativity. Some of the
things that I have described are literally false and I know it. The point I am
trying to get at here (and perhaps I am not doing a good job of it) is that
literaly truthity of my myth is not what is relevent. Instead, we must realize
that the myth is exactly that and nothing more, a myth, a story, a fiction
created out of the mind of a troubled twenty eight year old. It was created as
myths are created (through the dreams and visions of those that would burden
themselves to orate such things) and should be judged as myths are judged. It
would be a great travesty if people were to read this myth and then look
through their history books and claim that there is nothing in them to support
the claims I am making. To these I would say, Of course not! I made it all up,
it came out of my mind, and whatever may be said about a collective unconscious
aside, it would be foolish to treat this myth as anything more than a myth as
such.

The second thing I want to touch on before I continue on to begin again with
the myth is that the names I am assigning certain features of the myth are so
pre-arranged so as to connect the myth to those things which I (Brett Webster
the man with all of his imperfections and false opinion) consider to be some of
the most fundamental things that others have already hit on and have been
hitting on for some multiple thousands of years. In other words, I am stealing
away the terminology that the Eastern's use in order to describe those aspects
of my conception of the big bang because it would be silly to come up with
arbitrary labels for things that already have labels which I consider quite
similar on a deeply resonating way to thing I would like to talk about. In
other words, when I talk about the Nothingness that existed before concepts
like even existance did, and then I label that the Yin, I am explicitely doing
this in this order. It is intentional for me to first define something, and
then assign the label to it, rather than the other way around. This way,
instead of carrying around all of the pre-conceived notions about these
concepts and burdening our myth with the background and history of all of
philosophy, instead I would like to start with the philosophy part (that is the
actual thinking about the universe around us) and then attach those
philosophical concepts that we come up with (such as the Nothingness before
Anything) with those things which many people are already familiar (being
explicitely the Yin and Yang as expressed in the Tao Te Ching and other such
works).

In doing so, it can become difficult to remember and easy to forget that in
this context, the context of any one man's vision brought to life in the form
of fiction, we must remind ourselves that these extra inferences which occur to
us by the coincidence of the naming conventions used by the author of the
fiction and the collective authors of myth are just that; inferences. When
asking questions about such things which might be puzzling in the fiction, or
when aspects of the fiction begin to be discussed and criticized as any good
fiction should be, such inferences will only carry there weight in as much as
the inferences coincide with the text of the fiction itself. So we must look to
the words of the author, and not what we suppose they might mean, in order to
reason about the fiction that the author creates.

I want to make one more qualification before I just go in to writing the
fiction again (and notice how I am calling it fiction now rather than myth.
Interesting how such small things make a huge difference!). That is to say that
I am still discovering the best version of this myth (and will likely always be
in a continual process of discovery, such is the nature of these things) and as
such am going to make claims as if they are truth value claims even if I have
no justification or no backing for them. So I might write down something that
sounds simply absurd and might invoke a feeling of "what the fuck is this guy
talking about" but I want the reader to be aware of the fact that I am
knowingly and wittingly doing such things because this is a discovery session
rather than a recap session. In some sense this notion of "discovery" versus
"recap" plays in to the rewind nature of my most recent revaltory dream
fragment, but more I just want to put it out front that I am in some sense
making everything up as I go, and that even if there is a level of deep
revaltory thought that I am in some way tapping, I am also simply writing words
for the sake of getting the thoughts that do arise at unawares in to my head on
to the page for them to be later evaluted and judged by an impartial mind as to
whether or not that thought was well-formed enough to be preserved, or whether
it was just a happenstance of thought that was written down and can be easily
dismissed as something auxillary to the words that should go in the "final
product" of the fiction. Such things will be judged later. For now we must
indulge in to the youthful and childlike attitude that comes from speaking
your mind without restraint.

So to begin the myth.

To facilitate the origin and spawn of this creation story as it has continued
to come to me and reveal itself, we must ask ourselves as human beings what it
is that we truly know about the world. When everything get's distilled down to
it's most base and most untramelled form, we come to the conclusion that the
only thing that can be said to exist irrefutbally in spite of anything else is
consciousness and its contents.

The purpose of detailing this finding from agnostic philosophy is not to rehash
the arguments that the world and the objects of the world don't exist in the
same way that the feeling of pain in a stubbed toe exists (that is, that they
both exist but in very different ways) but instead to lay out a concept that
has troubled many a weary philosopher. This concept is the concept of what it
means for something to exist without consciousness.

But what does it even mean for us to attempt to describe something that exists
apart from conscisosness? Because in describing this something, do we not
understand that whatever we describe neccesarily came up in our conscious
contents, and as such CANNOT be (by definition) apart from consciousness? To
circumvent this paradox of reality we could take many routes. There are many
ways we could justify the existence of the objective form of reality which
would rectify itself with those things that we observe in the contents of our
consciousenss, but this gets to the heart of the agnostic's dilema. If there
are many equivelent ways where by somebody might arrive at a near identical
result, which way should we choose?

Instead of dwelling on this dilema for it's own sake, we will instead charge
through it and create a route which is sufficient enough to work in to what it
is that we are trying to work through. THere is an element of trust on the part
of the reader that they believe that the direction and route that I am going to
take has redeeming qualities, but it is also the case that this has nothing to
do with trust and has everything to do with looking deeply in to your own
outlook of consciousness and determining how much your own "youthful explorer
of the mind" agree with the things that this fiction could guide you towards.

So to start our creation myth, we must first start with a particular route
which answers the question put forth previously, namely, that we must ask
ourselves what it is that we know must exist. After we get past the fact that
consciousness does exist irrefutably (I think therefore I am) we then start to
ask ourselves what else might exist.

So what else might exist? Many things might exist besides consciousness. But
what basis do we have to believe in such things? Only the facts that we
experience these other things in the framework of consciousness. So even as we
try and extend our range of things that exist beyond consciousness, we have no
means of justifying our claims with anything but what we as human beings
experience collectively in our conscious lives.

So instead of picking a route out of the myriad multitudes of "Somethings"
which might exist beyond our notions of consciousness, we will instead take the
route of the "Nothingness" which could also exist as something apart from
consciousness.

How paradoxical an idea though! In attempting to describe something other than
and apart from consciousness that exists, we something so absurd as "Lack
of Existance exists" which when put forth in such a way immediately invokes a
feeling of meaninglessness to the rational mind. But we are better than a
rational mind, for the rational mind is only a concept that has come forth to
us in our understanding of the conscious world. Rationality, we come to now
understand, is another concept which could be said to exist apart from our
conscious minds, and could be a different basis on which we could begin our
fiction. But (and for the reason that rationality is one of the myriads of
"Somethings" that might exist) we decide instead to start with something other
than rationality, and that something we have said, paradoxically, is nothing.

One might ask me at this juncture to spell this out in a more explicit way. And
to those people who might ask such things I urge you to truly deeply think
about what I am saying. Suppose you are a man, and that you are sitting alone
in your room. You close your eyes, and you hear the sounds of the room and you
feel the temperature of the room and you say that these things envelope your
entire essence of conscious life. Being such a man, you argue that
consciousness must exist. And being inquizative as men tend to be, we then ask
ourselves if anything other than consciousness exists or if it is really the
case that we are operating as brains which create their own realities. We feel
as though there must be something which exists seperate from consciousness, yet
in thinking about the nature and form of what might exist apart from
consciousness, we continually fall in to the trap that as soon as we utter the
words that some particualr thing whatever it may be exists, we have brought
that thing in to our thoughts and our minds and as such have seen that it is
impossible to understand any aspect of the world without first viewing it in
the lens of conscious being. So instead of claiming that the starting point for
existance is something else apart from consciousness that exists, we say that
there is Nothing that exists apart from consciousness. It must be a paradox! It
couldn't be any other way but a paradox, because we are asking ourselves to
answer a paradoxical question. In fact (and I say this with much humor in my
tone!) it would be much more strange and alarming if we had a non-paradoxical
answer to our paradoxical question rather than a paradox. It becomes more
reasonable to answer a paradox with a paradox, even though paradox's defy
reason. How fun it is to think in this way!

Having thus claimed that nothingness exists, the being then decides that a
label must be made for this nothingness. He decides on a pure whimsy to label
the nothingness Yin.

Having such found a starting point for our creation myth (the nothingness that
we imagine must exist if conciousness were to be entirely removed from the
universe) and labeled as Yin, we must then riddle ourselves out of the dilema
we created for ourselves. If the concept of Nothingness is the origin of our
creation, how come it is the case that there is something?

It is in this question that we derive a new concept. There must be some quality
about the universe, the mechanism by which is here-to-for unknown by conscious
beings, which is able to make "something" out of Nothing.

But how could such a thing be possible. If nothing is presumed to be the
origin, then how could something emerge out of this?

It is in this vein that we argue that the something which emerges out of
nothing is an entirely different concept than the nothing it emerges out of. It
is a very subtle distinction, but a crucial one if we are to make any progress.

So from here it must be argued that there is something that exists as also the
origin of all things that could be said to be "something" rather than
"nothing". This thing we will call Yang.

And of course, we must point out that the Yin and Yang described here, though
named after and inspired from the concepts of Yin and Yang in Daoism, are
entirely seperate things in this concept. At any point down the line of our
thoughts, if we get tangled up in the concept of Yin followed by Yang, we must
step back and look at the ways which the Eastern daoist concepts might be
unwillfully and forcefully interjecting themselves in to our thought in a way
that flows contrary to the fiction we are writing. We must take caution not to
over abuse our abuse of notation.

It is at this point that we reach an impasse. We have said that nothing exists,
and that out of it, something comes forth. At this point though, we must begin
to ask ourselves what form any of this takes. We understand the form of
"Nothing" of course (it has no form because there is nothing which can take
form) but we do not understand using just the fiction we have made so far what
form the something will take. We know the something must take some form
(because if it didn't take any form than it would be nothing rather than
something) but using only the information we have layed out so far we cannot
determine what form that might be.

So instead of stumbling over ourselves and falling in to the trap of the weary
philosopher who says "I'm tired of thinking, let's say it's all pointless and
move on with our lives" we will instead write in a new concept which must
follow forth from what we have written so far. We argue that, because the
something that exists takes a form, it would make sense to label a third thing
as "that which gives form to things" and call it the Dao.

Again, we must caution ourselves from conflating the Dao as I have labeled it
here with the concept of Dao that the easterns have come up with, but it is
clear that this explanation comes forth out of my own understanding of what the
dao must mean. The Dao (in eastern world) is that which is most often
translated in English as "the flow of the world". Everything that exists is in
the dao and of the dao and is shaped by the dao, and by becoming in tune with
the nature of the dao we start to realize that we as conscious beings are too
so swept up in the doings and natures of "the flow of the universe".

Such poetic notions, though, while they help us understand that which is
difficult to grasp (being human beings well beyond the simplicities of the
world which we are establishing as the creation myth), must not be the origin
or germ of thought which we consider to be the most core of these concepts.
That is, at this juncture, we must take great care so as not to anthromorphize
these things. It is tempting to already begin to talk of archetypes and human
forms and other frivialities, and we must remember that to do something like
this is a human characteristic. It is very much the case (as evidenced by the
whole host of words that I feel compelled to write about this very topic) that
we as human beings simply do not understand everything that the world has to
offer, and because of this and in order to seek to understand we create
archetypical figures which are projections from our own lives and we place
these anthromorphized beings (is God really "the Father" or did Moses just have
daddy issues?) on a pedastal and forget that it was the concept that came
before the anthromorphization which is important rather than the concept that
comes after.  While framing something like Allah (to steer away from any one
particular dogma) in terms of a wise and hardened old man that seeks to judge
mankind and redeem them to glory (or whatever else a member of Islam would say
about Allah) can help those that do not understand what all the Muslims are on
about understand how a member of Islam sees the concept of Allah, it is also a
characteristic of such anthromorphizations that the concept which was
anthromorphized becomes lost in the degrees of psychological projection which
took place in order to arrive at the lucid and coherent explanation of an
ultimately nebulous and ethereal concept. In other words, it is a feature of
these concepts that they neccesarily take non-human form, yet we as humans have
a need to humanize things so that we can understand them better. The mind does
this so effortlessly and so seamlessly that it becomes difficult for many to
even realize the mind is anthormorphizing, perhaps even to the extreme
detrimant of the mind so possessed by these doings. So let us take our current
creation myth at face value and avoid comparing the Yin and Yang and Dao as we
have defined them above to the anthromorphized and poetic notions which are
usually associated with these things. Such forms can only serve to distract us
in this moment from what we are saying.
