So I have obviously been a little bit lacking on keeping up with the
freewriting as of late, and I have decided that it is for a few reasons. The
first reason is because I have been a little bit too stringent, in my opinion,
on forcing myself to continue to write words even when I don't want to write
words, and such an activity I believe is exhausting. The level to which I
exhaust my brain at those points has contributed to the second point, which is
that I have been feeling quite depressed lately, in swings, and so the level of
exhaustion that such a form of free writing provides in no way compensates for
the amount gained out of it, and the depression on top of that merely
contributes to that feeling of dread which results out of undertaking such a
thing.

To remedy this, I have decided that I will attempt free writing with the intent
of writing words as much as I can, but if I get to a point where I don't know
what to write, I will allow myself to simply stop and figure out what direction
it is I want to go rather than mindlessly forcing myself to write down whatever
words conjure up in my brain.

Also, I have decided that I will not so much force myself to meet particular
kinds of quotas. As informative as it is to say that I can write three thousand
words at eighty words per minute, or whatever other benchmarks, I think it is
much more benefeicial to just have the words written with the express intent of
attempting to remain free and open with the pace at which they are written, and
not to force myself to think so much about the particulars of how much "umph" I
am putting in to getting the words out of my brain. I will be much more
satisfied if I am able to step away from a free writing session feeling as
though I have satisfactorily gotten everything written, and from there I think
it makes sense for me to stay diligent with the practice. After all, the whole
point of this is to get in the regular habit of sitting down and forcing myself
to write even when I don't want to, and putting extra demands on something like
that is certainly not beneficial to the whole process.

So right now I want to talk a little bit of analysis about my life. I want to
try to express the ways in which I am happy with the state of my being at the
moment, and also the ways in which I think I could work to improve my day to
day habits and forms.

To start, let's go over the things I think I am doing well.

So the first thing is that I have continued to keep the attitude that life is
worth living and that there is something to look upwards towards that is worth
pursuing. I am quite determined to make it happen one way or another, and I am
able to bring myself to look upwards towards that whenever I do that.

In contrast to that statement, I will say the exact opposite in that I have hit
points where I feel woefully depressed, and I have had particular thought
trains that lead down to a nihilistic route that cannot be healthy in any way
shape or form. For example, just earlier this morning when I was trying to wake
up, I kept telling myself that all I needed to do was make one small motion
towards waking up, but I knew that the small motion would lead to a bigger
motion, and unless I did the whole she-bang of the waking process that I would
feel as though it was pointless to even do the baby step, so I layed down on
the floor for an extra three hours or so. Such an activity is certainly not
healthy, but at the same time it felt so damned good to lay there and do
nothing and tell myself that I wasn't obligated to anyone, not even myself, to
do anything except lay there. While such a thing can certainly be justified,
looking back on it in retrospect, I must say that it indicates that I am not
nearly as healthy as I should be when it comes to sticking myself to a sleeping
schedule.

Now, to go back to the good things about where I am right now, as soon as I got
up I proceeded to run five kilos in under thirty minutes, it was twenty seven
fifteen to be exact, which to me is a great step towards the level of
consistency that I want to get to. Say what you will about running, but I
actually really love that I get to see the world, I get to feel the weather, I
get to go on something of a journey with it, and I don't really give a shit
what someone might say about beating away at my knees or ruining my strength
gains or anything else. I love the process of running, and I think it's very
healthy for me to outlet myself in to that sort of avenue on a regular basis.

Something also that I would say is that, as much as I don't want to do it, I am
doing my best to get some amount of "networking" in every day for the past few
days. I think the first day that I decided to do only five minutes of
networking every day was wednesday. Since then, every day except Saturday
(where I went out to BJJ class for the first time in a while) I have either
worked on my resume (just barely tweaking some things here and there) or I have
called the UTD Career Counselling center to try and set up an appointment. I am
a bit disappointed that I have not heard back from them yet, but I am getting
much better at the concept of just getting on the phone with someone, and
getting over my phone anxiety as a result.

Again, to say the contrary element of that, many people would look at my
present situation and say that it has been over ninety days since I was let go
(or over two months since I was officially off the payroll) and the fact that I
am only just now working on my networking skills and attempting to develop
consistent habits around such things is rather pathetic. To speak contrary to
those people, networking has been something that in the past I have associated
with a sense of extreme dread and anxiety, and the fact that I am working ever
so slowly to get through that kind of anxiety is a huge plus towards what I
want to do with my life.

Also, I think to continue along this kind of positive thinking, I am getting to
a point where I am feeling much more comfortable with my narrative with what
happened with Alliant. I have two versions of what happened there which I have
decided I will go with with different crowds. The first version is more honest
in that I actually go over what went on with the fact that I was let go, and
the second is less honest but still close enough to the actual truth for me to
put it within my capability to say that it is honest enough for the level of
honesty that I am willing to bear at the moment.

To briefly go over what is common with both narratives though, I do want to say
that I have come upon something that looks like a greatly positive thing to the
right people, and advertises myself as something of not a "sour grapes" kind of
person, but instead acurately demonstrates what I felt was my disatisfaction
with the company. I am trying to think of the most concise way to put what
happened with the company.

The company culture at Alliant was such that when we were given what we called
"cases" (which would be anything from a bug fix to a feature enhancment to a
full on project) we would be expect to recieve the project, read the
description of it, and then go in to our cubicle and work on it on our own.
There was no system in place to work as a team at all. At first I thought I
liked this because it gave us a level of individual autonomy, but at the same
time I grew more and more discontent with this because there was no sense that
there was a teamwork aspect of it. If I were ever stuck on something, it was
not encouraged to ask for help from another developer to bounce ideas, and
there was no immediate feedback on the quality of work I was getting. I asked
my boss multiple time what sorts of things he could tell me when it came to
feed back on the work I was doing, and he always just gave me the line "if it
works then I don't care how you do it." I can understand the reasoning for
this, being that the business model of Alliant was entirely client driven and
if the client payed for it and the client was happy then there was no reason to
change anything, but at the same time, due to the "lone wolf" nature of the way
everyone worked, there was a lot of inconsistencies in the code base which
continued to cause a lot of problems. I started to realize that a lot of the
bugs and other errors that I was working on were the direct result of the fact
that there was no real coding standards that had to be maintained. I proposed
to my boss a few times to put in place a system whereby we talked about the
things we were going to work on, and then we would work on them, and then we
could review the code to have some constructive criticism about eachothers
work so that we could all become better programmers as a result, but in general
these sorts of ideas were met with the same feedback which was, "that sounds
great, but that's not the way we do things here." Eventually (And this is where
the two stories diverge) when I started to realize that this company was really
set in there ways I decided it was time to put my two weeks in and attempt to
move on. This sort of feeling coincided with some family issues (my dad was
diagnosed with Luekemia and the whole of the burden was placed squarely on my
mother) I decided that the stresses of the job on top of the stresses of my
fathers disease was too much for me to address both problems at once, and so I
decided to step down from the position to help out with the family situation.
My dad is recovering well now, to the point that he is not in the hospital for
days or weeks at a time, and so it's now time for me to reach out again and
look for another position. The more honest version, of course, is the case
where I don't talk about the family situation, and instead I mention that I
wanted to pick up a larger project to begin to demonstrate the kinds of things
that I was proposing first hand. Instead of taking a project and immediately
hacking and slashing away at code with the intent of deliving a sphegheti
product to the client, I wanted to put together a process whereby I did some
research and design before I touched the code. My boss and I put together a
four week timeline for me to work on that, and for two weeks I spent a good
amount of time doing research for this project (because it was the sort of
project which touched and redesigned a lot of the core aspects of our project,
so I wanted to be methodical with it) and then I created some use case design
documents, as well as some hand drawn diagrams showing how I wanted the front
end to operate, along with what pieces in the backend those buttons and forms
and other such things would connect with that front end design. For those two
weeks I was giving my boss regular status updates on what I was working on, but
then for the third week I started getting very erratic feedback from him about
how he was disappointed about how it was taking so long and so forth. I later
realized in hindsight that there was pressure from the top down (the top being
the client towards the service side of management) to get this project pushed
through, and I responded by saying that I thought it was entirely ridiculous to
cut this timeline short on something that I felt I was doing right for the
first time in my time there. I was told that the four week timeline had to be
thrown out the window and that I had to deliver whatever I could hack together
as soon as possible. Again, there is something of a fork in the process here.
On the one direction I could say that I swallowed my ego and put it together
rushed as best I could, and delivered what I considered to be a vastly inferior
end result that was put quite simply a rush job, or I could say that when I
wasn't able to deliver it in time, they let me go. I think in the second
situation I should definitely say something like, "I was probably a bit too
stubborn when it came to pushing back against this erratic shift in time line,
and being able to see the entire thing with 20/20 hindsight I can see how it
had to be the case that me, being at the bottom of the totem pole, was the
person who had to be made an example of in this particular instance.

In any case, the core point of this narrative is that I growing more and more
disatisfied with the "lone wolf" nature of the company culture, and then from
there I need to fill in a few points about why there is a gap in my resume.
I think I also want to say that networking is not one of my strongest points,
but I think that only really exists in the case where I go the most honest
route of the fact that I was terminated without cause.

So that all is a very long way to go about it, but I do believe that it's
something that, in an interview situation, I can condense down to five minutes.
I can practice that narrative in front of the mirror and come about a way that
I can rehearse it not verbatim, but just practice it like that for the
interview kind of situation.

So this is the sort of juncture that I was talking about at the beginning of
this session. I am not sure what I want to talk about now, but I don't want to
just keep writing words for the sake of writing words. I could write something
like, "I don't know what to write about now" for eight sentences on end, but I
don't want to do that right now.

I think I want to talk about greek tragedy for a moment. There is something
about Sophocles in particular that speaks to my soul. There are a few things
about him that I find so joyfully wonderful. The first is that I really love
the way that he uses poetic dialogue along with more colloquial dialouge all in
the same play. For instance, I am thinking about when Oedipus and Creon are
discussing all of the stuff with the oracle, and what the oracle said, and so
forth, and when Creon will say something that is somewhat cryptic, Oedipus will
reply with something like, "Oh, how so?" I love this because it really gives a
kind of human nature to it all. It's playful. The dialoge is like the
conversation between two men, and sometimes when people speak, one of them will
say something, and the other will reply, and there is a back and forth kind of
way of going about it. It's absolutely delightful, and I certainly want to make
sure I capture some of that playfulness in the dialogues that I end up writing.

However, there is something else about Sophocles that really speaks to my soul,
and I can't really put my finger on what it is exactly. The best way I can
attempt to get at it is by talking about the nature of Oedipus fall. When he is
looking to find the person that murdered the former king Liaus, he declares
that he will hunt this man down, and will exact upon him exile for his crimes
at any cost. And he lets everyone know that if they speak now, he will be
gracious to them, but if they remain silent, they will undergo the worst kind
of punishment. It is then when Oedipus starts to realize that he is indeed the
person that is causing the plague and strife on all of the peoples that he then
has to enact that same kind of punishment on everyone. As I was reading it, I
couldn't help but feel deeply connected to Oedipus on a visceral level. I wish
I could explain it.

This is something that will be harder to capture in my own writing first for
the reason that it is not neccesarily something that should exist in all
writing, but more so for the reason that I'm not exactly sure what "it" is yet.

I suppose it has to do with the tragic element of everything involved. How
deeply, emotionally, tragic it is for these charcaters to undergo these kinds
of things. It's truly heartwrenching to hear the story of Oedipus.

Something I guess that I never really understood about Oedipus was that he was
actually a really great man, and he never intended to do harm to his father or
lay with his mother. It was not until afterwards, that he began to understand
the nature of his plights, that we see his inevitable downfall.

Another thing that strikes me about the tragidies of the greeks is that it is
always the gods that have their says about these things. It is the oracle of
Apollo who prophecies Oedipus's doom, and it is in the prophecy which is
self-fullfilling that Oedipus eventually is led to the doom that was predicted.

I'm not sure if there is much more for me to write about on this topic. My
thoughts are clearly not well formed enough to speak more to it at this point.
It's really just a tribute to how inspired the greeks were that I man like
Sophocles was able to understand the tragic nature of the great mythological
heroes and capture that tragic element in his work. It's quite amazing.

I suppose the last things that I want to write about before I sign off for this
session is that I feel as though I am better at getting my work ethic up. I am
always so deeply commited to the things that I feel strongly about, but when it
comes to things that I don't feel strongly about, I tend to let those things
fall by the wayside. I am getting to the point where, even though I have always
known intellectually about this sort of plight and misgiving of myself, I am
also deeply aware of the fact that such a misgiving is entirely unhealthy, and
that I need to work to correct those things in my life which are feeding myself
toxicity.

I have in my mind tomorrow that I will spend some time making phone calls to
various counsellers and see what they have to say. Such an act is certainly
worthwhile to me, and it is also a great way for me to get over my phone
anxiety. In doing this, I will aim to work to get that out of the way. I just
want ta make sure that I do so in a methodical way, as I determine myself to do
everything else that I set out to do.

I think to close I want to continue with an analysis of my week. I have not
looked back at any of my journals, but I think this week has been something of
a good turning point for me as far as getting myself more arranged and together
in terms of my life and what I want to accomplish with my life. I really feel a
lot better when it comes to all of this, and though I am still having pangs of
deep and disturbing depression, not all monsters have physical form, and this
is certainly the kind of monster that I must overcome. I must remember that my
pains and my plights are a lot of my own doing, or even if they are not my own
doing and they really are the doings of my parents (which might be the case or
it might not) the point is that I am who I am now, and it doesn't matter if it
was my parents or myself or Christianity or anyone elses fault, I must work
with the broken and mangled form that I have, and I must work with one piece at
a time diligently to get that form back to the working and sublimated order
that I know and have seen that it can be. Say what you will about my latest
psychedelic revelation and how impactful that was or was not for me, at the
very least it has given me a goal to aspire to and something to look towards as
an upward vision of a direction I can apply myself. I just need to make sure
that the ways in which that goes is wholly positive from this point forward.

I need to get some sleep, and this computer screen is really wearing on my
eyes, so I will put it away and call myself a good nights rest.
