So I want to begin this session by saying that I think I have come upon a
method by which I may come to more greatly understand everything that goes on
in the completed work of a novel. Of course, there will be some subtleties that
have to be worked out and other notions that surely are not as complete as my
ever reacher engineering mind would like to think, but what I like about my
method is that is uses the concept of the spacial capacity of the human brain
and its ability to put things together as a means of organizing and thinking
about a novel or novella or any other such work with some sort of clarity. That
is, in other words, the method that I have come up with (hither-to to be
explained) is sufficiently maliable enough to allow for changes at a moments
notice yet rigid enough to be placed in to a novel in a definite order and told
that this order is the "correct" way that it should go.

At this juncture it seems prudent to cease this needless beating around the
bush and instead get to the method itself so that I don't have to keep telling
you about it and instead can show it to you and let you judge for yourself
whether or not it stands up to the scrutiny that I have placed upon it.

So with that being said, and without further ado, I bring you the method of
writing that I have worked on tonight and think is probably a pretty good
method (and now writing out with all of the qualifications I am more hesitant
to stand behind it so vehemently as I am but we are already this far commited
and it can't hurt to continue)

The method is something like this. Decide for yourself the sperm or the
spawning point of what you want your novel to be. And I don't mean something so
simple as "I want to write a sci-fi thriller" because that is much to generic
to feed your inner soul and make you want to really write about it. No, instead
do this. Come up with some inner visions about what your novel would look like
if it were represented as a movie. If your novel sticks with a reader, why
should it stick? It is almost always a few scenes that really stay with the
audience even long after they have forgetten trivial things like the plot of
the movie or how many characters there were. Take 2001 (which is lately
becoming my favorite example of how to judge art as art). What are the most
memorable scenes? It has been over eight years since I have viewed the film,
but I can say for certain that there are monkies dancing around an obelisk,
that the computer tried to kill them in space, and that it was "full of stars"
when he finally made it in to "the anomoly". So that is really the core and
essence of what Clarke might have wanted us to remember when he wrote his work.

We could go on and talk about all of the other things that surely went in to
the making of that movie. We could talk about finer points of the structure and
how the overall arc follows a prototypical hereos journey by matching it in a
near one-to-one correspondance with some ancient myth that has been around for
milinea. We could do such things. But we will not because that is not the point
of what we want to say right now. What was the point, if we can bother
ourselves to remember it? It was that the for any work, the most important
thing to start with is some memorable or "visceral" scenes or otherwise
impactful moments that will be left with the consumer for years after they
watch your work.

Look at me, the careless artist going on and on about various gems and sperms
of other peoples work instead of simply getting to the point of how my method
works. But the truth of the matter is that I don't know if my method works yet.
I suspect it does, but I must put it to the test.

In order to stop myself from getting caught in this contiunal loop of
pretending as though my method has already gone through a full cycle of testing
and has come out on the other end with some success, I will instead say what I
think has been a sucess and reverse-engineer from there.

Earlier this evening I wrote out approximately seventy 3x5 index cards. The
first twenty eight of them were detailing out the scenes. Each one contained at
the top row the scene name (Act 1 Scene 5) and also had a line count in the top
right (just because I like having statistics). On the left column of the card a
list of characters, in order of appearance, is written out, and on the right
column a brief description of the setting of the scene is displayed. Then on
the back end (and this bit has yet to be done, but we can pretend for the sake
of completion that it has) a brief synopsis of what happens during that scene
is written out. This creates a complete list of twenty eight cards generated
independently but being put together in Shakespearean order, representing
twenty eight events that happen in the course of Macbeth. Some of them are more
significant than others (as they sohuld be; no novel is meant to be monotone)
and some of them could certainly be reordered or rearranged if desired
(although I would have qualms about anyone who criticizes anything shakespeare
did without due justification), but they all represent 28 different scenes in
Macbeth.

[I am at a crossroads here. There are two directions I need to go, and I don't
know which to take first. I will take the route where I continue on with my
method, detailing character cards, and then I will work out an explanation of
how something like this could be used to create a novel.]

Once all of these scene (or event, or chapter, or whatever else, they don't
have to be scenes) have been put forth, each one needs to be filled in with
some details. In almost every case, scenes will have characters. If they do not
have characters, there should be a very very good reason why an empty backdrop
is being described. It should have artistic purpose if a scene doesn't have
characters. But as a general rule, every one of these scenes should have a list
of characters. As the scenes are iterated it is pretty easy in the case of
Shakespeare to figure out who speaks when (because it says it in the text
itself on the left column if you follow that), but in other works some
deductive reasoning must be applied to figure out who the appropiate characetrs
should be.

As the scenes are filled out with characetrs, cooresponding character cards are
created. These have a name (representing the characeter) and then on the left
column they will have a list of scenes that they go in. This reference the
scene cards.

I am having a hard time articulating just how awesome I think this process is,
so I will detail out exactly what I did and then attempt to continue to
describe how awesome it is in this drawn out long form text kind of way. But
before I do the long form (or continue it) I will instead revert to a short
form kind of writing, detailing the process of scraping through a shakespearean
play as I did in a sort of algorithm.

    Step one is to read the play without prejudice.
    Step two is to open the play with a stack of index cards and prepare to enter
focus mode for some time.
    Step three is to begin with a general information card. Good things to write
down would be the number of scenes, the number of acts, which play
chronolgically is it, and whatever other metadata (the name of the play comes
to mind) that might be relevent.
    Step four is to write out the title of each scene (A1SIV for Act 1 Scene 5) on
top of each index card.
    Step five is to number the bottom right of each index card in order.
    Step six is to go through each scene and write down the left column the
characters that speak in that scene. It is tempting to get distracted at this
step, but focus must be maintained if progress is to be acheived.
    Step seven is now to discard the text itself (the words of shakespeare) and
just focus now on creating character cards. Begin with the first scene, and
create the first set of character card based upon the characters that appear in
the first scene. To create a character card, mark the name of the characetr in
the heading and mark the bottom right with a number (ideally in order, but hey,
it's your life). When you are completed, the first scene card should have
marked with red numbers along the right end of the characters, indicating which
character card number you can reference to find more information about those
characeters.
    Step eight is to do this for scene two, and then subsequent scenes. The only
difference between Step 8 and Step 7 is that for Step 8 you do not create a new
card if a character from a previous scene reapears.
    Step nine is to audit your work. Start at character 1 (marked as C.1 in the bottom
right of your character card) this is the very first person in the play. The
left column of the characetr card will have a list of scene references where
that character took place in a scene. Check through the whole of the scene
cards to make sure that the character is referenced on every card and none
more. Do this for every character.
    Step nine point one (if you choose to be anal about it) is to do a similar auditing
process from scene to character. So start at scene 1, and go through all of the
character cards making sure that scene 1 appears on every character card that
it should reference and only those character cards that it does reference.
    Step ten is then to fill in whatever more information on the back of each card.
So for the scenes, it might be wise to give a brief summary of the action that
takes place in the scene. For a character, it might make sense to detail out
why this character is important and what role they fill in the work.

So that is the steps of the method. Of course, ten steps is quite a lot, and I
feel I can be more compact with the way I put it. So let us attempt to do that.
I will be more compact now.

First, read the text.
Second, open the text with blank 3x5 cards, ready to get to work.
Third, create a general information card
Fourth, create many scene (or event) cards.
Fifth, number the scene cards with (S.#)
Sixth, list the characters in order along the left column of each scene.
Seventh, create character cards for a scene.
Eight, stamp (cross-verify) character cards with scenes.
    Repaet Seven and Eight for every scene
Nine, audit your work (check every character to make sure the scenes are sane)
Ten, fill in exemplary information.

With this layed out in such a concise manner, hopefully the reader can now
visualize the quality of such a method of configuring thought.

While something like this is mere mindless labor when it comes to creating
cards for a shakespearean play, I believe it will be invaluble when it comes to
creating original work. Here are some reason I think this method is so
powerful.

First, it allows you to take you most important parts of a novel (the scenes
that the audience might remember or "take away" from the work, like the skull
in Hamlet or the Obelisk in 2001) and create cards for them right away. The
index cards themselves can be created indepentently. But simultaneously,
everything is created in service to a whole. In a completed work, it seems
foolish to move around who exists in what scene. But in a WIP, it is usually
unclear to the author how many characters there should be, or in which scenes
they should go. By making cards in this way, it is possible to arrive at a way
of coming up with a set of index cards which might be well formed, but yet have
been derived in a direction that is entirely independent of the outline method
I detailed above. Or in other words, it is possible to know something obscure
like, "I want there to be a scene where the main character faces off against a
great enemy" but the author might not even be sure yet who the great enemy
should be, and in what capacity the confrontation should pivot against. Instead
of feeling decision paralysis on being not sure of the finer details, it is
possible instead for the author to just create a partial 3x5 card for the
moment that contains only as much information as he is willing to put forth at
that moment. Then the author can move on to more important things. The author
can fill in the gaps of completed scenes with scenes that "he knows needs to be
there" but are not as concrete in his head. The author can look at a sequence
and say something to the effect of "I don't know how to connect Point A and
Point B and Point C all together, but at the very least I know what they all
look like each in and of themselves". This is a powerful thing for an author to
be able to do. So often times an author gets lost in the minutia of his words
that it becomes easy to forget that the words go in a part of a larger work
which is to be consumed at a much faster pace then the artist created it. The
author gets slogged down in writing words that he forgets that there is an
entire structure to the reason behind each and every word that gets put in the
final published product. With the ability to sectionize and then aggregate in
such a spatial and methodical way, the author is able to keep sight of the top
down overarching view that makes the novel so inspiration to anyone that may
read it. At least, that is how I feel such an endeavor must happen. It unlocked
an entirely new understanding of shakespeare for me, so I can only imagine how
it will aid me as a writer.

To conclude this free-writing session, I just want to go through a concrete
example of what this might look like.

... Begin! ...

I as an author decide that I want to create a new work. It is this obscure idea
I had in a wierd kind of half dream half vision that has to do with some
character and something else. I'm not really sure yet but I know it's
interesting at the very least so I decide it's worth opening a project for.

After some amount of free writing just to make sure that the ideas and visions
can be made in to some written word without much ado or mental barrier, I
decide to start forming a much greater picture for how this thing is going to
look.

I start with the scene that is most well formed in my head. This scene has some
number of characters (for this sake of this example we will say it has four
characters and a fifth concept that is so prevalant throughout the work that it
should be considered a character), five characters to be exact, and it involves
them each discovering a new phenomenon in their own way.

We can quabble about the corniness of such a scene or about the un-orginallity
of it, but such quabbles are mere hindrances that we put in place when we want
ourselves to slow down and evaluate if our work is good or not. As an author,
in order to complete our work, we must convince ourselves that it is worth
doing in advance. We put our mental energy on credit, and in so doing we trust
ourselves that our visions and dreams are well formed enough to be worth
sacrificing these quabbles in these ways.

So once our original scene is created with our five characters, it only makes
sense to create some character cards. So now we have six cards created, those
being the first scene on one 3x5 card, and five character cards, each stamped
with that event scene on it.

Once we get to this point, we decide that it's important for one of the
characters to have a former relationship with a seductress that went horribly
wrong. So we create a seductress. We also decide that this point is sufficient
enough to have that be the germinating scene which "prepares" this character
for our main scene. Now we have a new character (this seductress) and a scene
(the germinating scene of one of our original five characters) to add to our
set of cards.

Now we decide, for the sake of symetry, that every one of these characters
should have some sort of germinating scene. In this moment to us it seems
correct to say that each one of these original five characters should have a
germinating scene which occurs independently of the others. So we create five
scene cards, each representing some sort of germination of each of the
characters.

Now, from these scene cards, we start to come to an impasse. It feels as though
we have maybe been to rigid now in our creation. Do we really need all of this
germination for our main scene (the original dream and vision which started
this whole damn project) to have the impact that we want it to? As I start to
create the cards, a couple of them speak to me (we will say for the sake of
argument that three of the five germination scenes make sense to me and should
probably go in at least a draft) and the rest I decide to discard. Now we have
our original scene, our five core characters, and three more scenes each which
created some more characters for it.

One can see how this process might continue. For the sake of keeping myself
sane I will stop here before I speak for thousands and thousands of words about
writing without actually producing any of the output which I am talking about.
The point is that it is very possible to see how such a system might be put in
place to come about a well formed and well paced novel.

I want to close on the note that I find it interesting that it could be just as
instructive to work the other way. That is, it might make sense to rapturously
and without regard for the greater plot point just start writing about
something and towards the end of it consider it as it's own "short story" but
with the understanding that it will, in some capacity, go in to whatever draft
iteration the novel is at at that moment. When it is completed, more characters
may spring to mind. Suddenly you might know which direction the next scene just
absolutely must go, so you write that scene, and then you understand at that
point that you are on a roll and you just keep going with it, almost
discovering your world more than you are creating it, and you just let the free
fingers flow and you find yourself writing and writing and writing without
regard for where the words go and you just get caught up in the bliss and joy
of bringing to life something from your mind on to the written word and you
don't care if you repeat yourself or if it makes sense within the greater
scheme of things or anything else. You are just writing, and you are doing it
without regard for anything besides the fact that you can put words on pages
and get something out.

But then when you are done doing that, you read it back and you say to
yoruself, "Well, it's clear that whover wrote this was excited about something,
but now as a reader I can't quite tell exactly where the author thought he was
going with all of these disconnected ideas."

So now we take a step back and analyze our written work like we would analyze
shakespeare. We create some event cards. We create some character cards. We
create some theme cards. And as we do all of this, we start to see the error in
our ways. It is patholgical for this character to behave in this way, that is
why it felt strange when my hero started suddenly encountering these sorts of
problem. Or maybe we realize that we have been missing a certain archetype, a
form of character which must exist in order for the main character to discover
some quality of himself. We see it so plainly that we can't even fathom how we
forgot this character the first time around. But it's okay, because now that we
see it so plainly, we can simply make a 3x5 card for him and start to write him
in to the rest of the scenes in our well formed way.

In some sense we act as an account. A fundamental premise of accounting is that
every increase in assets must have a corresponding decrease in net value
(whether that is a coorsponding decrease in another asset such as paying for
machinery with money, or if that is an increase in a liability such as putting
an invoince on accounts payable to be payed at a later date is irrelvent as
long as it represents a net decrease). Likewise, a fundamental principle of our
system is a wellformedness of the concepts and ideas. Every scene has some
characters in it, so we list the characters on the scene. Every character is in
some scenes, so we list the scenes that a character is in on the character
cards. If at any point we have a character card that lists spurious scenes, or
we have a scene that lists spurious characters, we know somewhere in the
process our thoughts and ideas got befuddled. When things get befuddled, it is
an indicator that some meditation must be sought after on those befuddled ideas
to rectify them out and see what needs to be altered in order to get something
more complete and more well-formed in to the completed work.

So enough on that. 3x5 cards rock is really the bottom line. That is all.
