So we meet again, demon of my thoughts. To what pleasure do I owe this
matriminous occasion? For insight? For pleasure? Does the Dionesian pleasure of
mere existance satisfy you truly? Or is it a mere longing for some imagined
past that could be seen as somehow greater than that which we are in and about
of right now.

But enough of these silly words. I have an exercise for you. I would like you
construct an epic poem in verse. To what extent this poem should tell a story I
do not know. What I do know is that it should have some words and that those
words should be meaningful.

I want to create a rhyming poem, but I want to write it in reverse. In other
words, instead of attempting to arrive at the rhymes as if in some sort of
rapturous mastery of spontaeous "muse"-ical thought, let instead the concepts
and ideas of the work (the argument, as so called in past works) come forth as
the outset of the meaning of what ought be said and then let the spirit of the
poet take on a near and entirely distinguished form.

And so the young fawn begins.

There are many things that I have in the past thought to write a poem about.
Right now, however, I am getting the notion that I want to frame Cain as a mere
mad man of mad thoughts and that something about his notions of words must
portray that. This allows me to begin with some rather verbostious words and
then work out from there.

At the outset of this free writing session let me begin with that which could
be said to be the destruction of creative thought; let me explain myself fully
so that the focus can be on the actual poetic form itself and not on the text
or feeling that I am trying to get out of it.

In order to effect this, the feeling needs to be expressed outrightly, in
whatever words come to the author so that he may pick and chose those words
that so tightly cling on to his very essence. Rapturous thoughts must overtake
us, yet these thought must not consolidate or reconcile us completely but
instead bring us to the point where symbols and knowledge and otherwise
concordently true and universally verifiable facts of the nature of our
existance come to light not as falsities but instead as triffles of those
things which previously concerned us but now see to be a mere background noise
to the presence of our mind's eye.

Of course, I must not fool myself in to thinking that simply because I come at
big words means I am being productive in my free writing session. After all,
the purpose of this section of the free writing is not so much to come up the
adequete words that will literally be injected to the actual text of the poetry
which is to come (although this is certainly a desired outcome of the practice)
we instead more would wish to focus our attention to the feelings and emotions
that our characters are going to feel in their monologues.

So that is the first boring scientific fact to get out of the way. This work is
a Soliloquy by Cain just before he saves his brother. It is unknown whether or
not this work will see the light of day. If it is to go in the final published
product then it would be recognized as a sort of spoiler to Seth's arrival
towards Cain's dwellings.

So here are some things firstly that I need to get straight in my head. The
physical scene of the work is not known to me insofaras it extends beyond the
very concrete map I have in my head about the nature of the farms and the way
that the alter and the cave conjoin eachother.

As we seek to navigate the world of Cain's being, let us thing to some things
that must be true of it. Firstly, Cain's alter is elevated to the highest point
of the mountain of eternal suffering (as Cain calls it, and I don't care enough
to relate this mountain to any mountain in the bible) and cascades downwardly
in marble slabs and vines and other such clearly manmade objects. However, this
is not the scene where the poem takes place. That alter is on the other side of
the Eastern Mountains in the land tha Cain calls "Babylon". On the Western side
of those mountains, where the alter is not visible, Cain has cultivated the
spawn of the Land of Nod as so called in the bible.

A rather crucial component of this land of Nod is that Cain is able to agrigate
the crops from all of the doings of the mountains, and he is able to use
gravity in such a way to create automatically harvesting machines and
otherwise automated equimpent. Cain has attached blades to gears and gears to
devices to creaete fully automatic (not gas or electricity powered) equipment
for his farms.

There are two dwelling places to take note of. Firstly and most obviously is
the place where Cain takes the spawning point of his new birth. This place is
going to have to be assigned a name. Regardless, this place is the place where
Narä stays and looks after the family that Cain and her and attempting to
build. As a brief aside, I want to attempt to make sure that the relationship
between Cain and Narä is seen as almost the completely rectified and most
satisfying result that can come out of the broken and scarred upbringing that
Narä had in relation to her father Adam. It must be seen as the most healthy
and even the most profoundly loving relationship throughout the novel.

The second dwelling place to note is the one containing the Eternal Tree. I
have a few mind pictures in my head that I want to lay out and then decide
between.

The first mind picture for this place comes from my first draft of the work. In
this version the shanty is tucked away in the back of a swamp and it is half
built and half un built intentionally so that the facilitation of the Tree
containing the Mushrooms was entirely brought forth into being. This version of
the shanty appeals to me for its sentimental aspects, as well as for the fact
that it is the most concrete version of what this place looks like in the
navigcations of my minds eye and as such it seems foolish to abandon so
concrete of a vision. Simultaneously though I feel as though my vision itself
is not so beautiful as much as it is my own for some reason and as such I feel
as though I should abandon it in favor of a more elegent solution to the
problem of what this dwelling should be.

The second is that Cain found the "Tree of Eternity" quite by accident. I can
have a story about how Bealzabub the goat led him to the place after he had
already made his dwelling in the spawning point place. Such a story would be
just fantastic, but what I am more concerned about now is the nature of the
place.

I want the dwelling to be a hollowed out tree trunk. I want Cain to describe
the process by which he created a hollowed out hole like a hallway all the way
through this particular tree, and in doing so was able to create a foster care
of growth in the nursery of his new protected place. From there, I want there
to be a door which leads to an underground facility. I have not been here
before and my actions are entirely new, but I feel as though there has to be a
sort of sewage system or otherwise underground water system which Cain or
someone before him (in the vain of Babylon also) has hallowed out for the
purpose of fashioning mills and running water to irrigate all of the land and
otherwise facilite the growth of such things.

Likewise, as you return up from this dwelling place, you come up upon a
differnt area of the hallowed out tree which leads to the forest. Immediately
upon exiting it is seen a trail which leads East directly from the roots of the
hallowed out tree and towards this Eastern light can be seen clearly glowing in
the sunrise the "Tree of Knowledge" where Cain cultivates his mushrooms.

I very much am fond of this second picture for two reasons, and these two
reason are actually very intimately linked so they might morph in to one
reason. In any case, firstly, I like it because it allows the reader to be
taken on a journey to an entirely new world that is to be explored. It is a
world that is entirely believable yet simultaneously fantastical, psychedelic,
and symbolic. Secondly, and forthrightly, I like this version because it is not
Cain's building which brought this in to existance, it is instead pre-existing
as a precursor to the development of human thought. In other words, I like this
version because the narrative and story that Cain must give to explain to Seth
the revalations he must reveal throughout the story fits more neatly with a
back drop that is clearly man driven and entirely irrefutable designed and
engineered by centuries of prior labor and intensive toil.

Having rambled thus I believe I am now more aptly equiped to bring forth into
the world the wellspring of music as born out of consciousness in the form of
poetry. Here is the argument.

---

_Argument:_ Cain having cultivated his crops looks over the Western plains of
his fields and admires his lifes work to this point. Some themes will be the
birth of new life out of tragedy (but inexplicit as to what that tragedy was)
and also the toils of labors work. The central theme will be a nagging
sensation in the depths of his being that urge him toward some enterprise which
he is as yet not able to understand or pinpoint, and as he is wresting himself
with such things he sees Beelzabub in the distance. Upon investigation Cain
finds an unconscious body and determines it to be his younger brother based
upon a birthmark he has on his left hip which mirrors his own but on the right
hip.

The overall narrative arc of the work will follow as such. The initial thrust
of the work will be Cain's deliberate hike through the mountains. He will first
muse rather idly about the nature of his crops in this season of fall and speak
of the harvest as if he were the reaper of his toils. Darkness and death
imagary I want to be prevalent, but always with an answer or return that brings
some sort of uplifting question or otherwise upward turn of metaphorical
thought whith a simultaneous upward trend in rhthmical form. I would like
Cain's attention to then turn to more philosophical things as he contemplates
the myths of his Father's teaching and ponders over not so much the myths
themslevse but instead his own fascination with them. I want this section to be
somewhat repressed and stilted to indicate that Cain has gone over this sort of
philosophical exercise mavy times and continually arrives at the same
conclusion, leading to a sort of weary tiredness of contemplation of the same
point to no seeming end or avail. Yet always there should intrude itself
something that brings Cain to remember his own truth. I have in my head right
now a lingering branch or otherwise faltering crop that Cain has to bring
himself to fix. In doing so, Cain will create yet another analogy of his
thoughts with his actions, and again come to the conclusion that he is wearing
himself dry with such parallels and longs for a new sort of excitement of his
life. I want Cain to contrast the setting Sun to the West which comes down
along his Right side as he strolls with his opposite feeling of wanting the sun
to come up from that side and set on the other. As the sun inevitably sets as
it always does (perhaps with some words here to indicate that Cain has found
some peace and solace in his end of day maintainance through the farms) Cain
should see in the distance his friend being the goat Beelzabub. After perhaps
some deliberation of whether or not to follow him, I want Cain to inevitably
bring himself to the goat and find in the forest the unconscious body of the
one he knows must be his brother. Cain should suddenly become excited but
quickly check himself to his own devices. He resolves not to act out of pure
dionysian pleasure but instead with the resolve of a man who feels as though he
finally knows what he must do. I want Cain to proceed to have grandiose visions
of the life he will plan to lead with his brother, but always with a lingering
feeling that he must contain himself lest he overstep his ambitions. With this
he carries Seth under the night sky of the new moon towards the "Haven of the
Stars" where he will bring Seth back to life.



[Todo: Give Cain's spawning point a name]
