8:39

So to start this session, I tried something interesting. I read my previous
entry back and it struck me as something as interesting. Because as I was
writing it, I know what sort of things I felt, and now reading it back, in a
state wholly less distraught and more satisfied about the tragidies of
existance, I can't help but feel as though somehow, in some way, the nature in
which I write is something of the best quality that a man can have. It's
something of the case that , while I certainly don't want to have my thoughts
riddled constantly with plagues of woefull doubt, it is lalso the case that
there is something to be said for speaking your mind however your mind chooses
to speak, and from there letting the thoughts flow.

I take for instance my tyraid in to the plight of my parents, and how I wanted
to have them fuck for eternity and take their ridden together parts and tie
them together and put them on top of the highest point of the highest steeple.
So distasteful that segment was, but somehow also very and utmostly beautiful.
There is something that resonates with me in that image. In putting that image
in to words, I not only was able to relieve myself in that moment with a sort
of minitature catharsis, but I was able to read it back and feel a profound
sense of what it was I was feeling in that moment, but from the outside looking
in.

What sort of Brett was that? How is it that the man who feels the way I do
right now (and we can go in to how I feel right now but I would argue that it
is much less interesting than I felt yesterday as I wrote) how does the man who
feels like I do right now come from the man that wrote those wholly despicable
words. It's really quite astonishing to me that someone like me can have so
varied an emotional framework in so short a time. Is it really the case that I
am so temperate of a man? I suppose so.

But here we get to the point of things. I suppose it is something of a misnomer
to say that I am content with my life right now, because I am certainly not,
but today I have taken it upon myself to write about certain things, and live
my life in a certain way. I am attempting my very best to get myself on to a
schedule whereby I do my work, and have the things I can do for the purpose of
exercise (which is just another form of work) and in doing all of these things,
I can convince myself they are worth doing if only for the sake of having
dreams. But then the dreams don't come, but I tell myself that they are worth
pursuing anyway.

Something like that.

I really don't know what I want to talk about right now. I could talk about my
day, about what I did today and how I felt it was great steps towards a level
of productivity and solace of being in and of itself that it was really
something quite profound to feel the difference between disparity personality
and resolved personality, but even that I don't want to write about.

I could do some riffing on Seth and Cain and talk about how I feel as though
the character of Seth and the character of Cain are really coming to light in
how they interact with eachother. I feel I am beginning to capture the way in
which tehy meet, and the way that they come to be. But at the same time, I
already talked about all of that shit, and I don't really feel like talking
about it anymore.

I could talk about free-will and how it is an illusion, but I have alreday
belabored that topic in my head. It might be the case that in the future I will
have something more to say about the philosophy of it all and I might want to
talk about how this all connects. But no matter. I don't really want to concern
myself with such things right now.

But what do I want to concern myself with? Just the writing of words. Just the
writing of words. That is all. Nothing else. Just putting words on a page for
the sake of doing it.

I have to remind myself that these rape fantasies are fantasies that have
lasted for me for many kinds of years now. Before I even felt distraught at my
parents inability to grasp the simple mathematical fact that point nine
recurring equals one, I have had these sort fo fantasies. I abhor authority,
and I have never liked police. They are never my friends, and now, especially
in the world where I can kill someone with my hands, I am not at all fond of
them in any way.

I would not go as hastily as to say thta we should expell the police force. For
what denizen would we have against the open willingness to do violence to
others if there were not the ever present system in place to put those violence
seekers in cages and keep them there for life or longer. What would be the
cause of this.

So I am going to try something different now. I will just say the words that
come to me as they come, and I will not concern myself with ay semblance of
thought from one word to the next. I will connect myself to the wellsprigng of
thought that occurs in the mind, and in so doing, I will just become better at
writing. Words, and pages, and pages and words. How this stuff happens. In
writing words in the s way, I am able to become a much better writiner.

If onelly I had something to write about.

Damien sat in the study of his room and said something to somenoen. WWhat did
he say? Did eh even know who wals in the room with him.? Where is he. 

The branches of his thought came back to him. The remebreence of Brett's
visions was arrived to him and he forget that he remember that there was acve,
and in that cave there was a miricle, nto a faocke an d bogus miricle like
,"Thie miricle of life"< as some say it, but a true, honest to God, (although
now he know irrefutably that God didn't exist, but no matter) honest to god
miricle, . The twigs  ecoem alive. They speoke to the four of them, and all
four of them corraborated the sctory.

Perhaps it was a shared hallucination. But does that happen No, that is not how
it works. There i ss osmetihng else that must have been going on. Some other
factors at work. 

Could it have been smoke and mirrors. No, of course not again. MSmoke and
mimrrors dont allow one to interact with it inthe way that they did. Something
else truly astonishing is at work there. Something that Damien could'nt or
wouldn't ror shouldn't understand. This is the way of things, Damien thought.
It's how the world, it. I must just accept that this is the rality of the
world, and I must understand how to proceed from here.

How could he get back. What if he did'n'nt want to do his charge? could he go
back to the supernatural being that brought them all ot the special place in
heaven where they were, and could he go and reason with him. Such was the
meaning of life, but suddenly he felt as though life shouldn't have a meaning
again. Because at least when life had no meaning he could spend his hours
finding a menaing to the life but now that life had a meaning he was burdende
with carrying it thourgh. And for what end? The meaning doesn't have a heaven
associated with it. There is no promise of a better life elsewhere. He simply
had to trust that this demi god that they all met in this wierd cave place had
noble intentions somehow. He just had to say to himself that such things
mattered, that there was nothing he courld do to understadning was was going
on, and theate he just had to accept it for what it was.

But waht was it? Was there really anything that he had to gain? Now that he
found th emeaning of likee (or more like the meainng of life was thrust uponhim
through now volition of his own) did he really have an obsligation to follow
through with it? After all, now that he knew there was a purpose and a meaning
to life, could he not defy that meaning.

Alas, that could be come his meaning To defi the very meaning that he did not
want to undetake. How much more fun that would be thatn acting as a slave to
this jubilant and hasty demigod.

Because how silly was it. for this god supposedly to make a world before he had
the concepts like Quantum mechanics figured out. He made a mistake, and now the
beings of the world have to fix that mistake. But if the god who made tho wrold
was wroing in making the world, who was to say he was correct in trying to fix
it now. Maybe I am smarter than him? Maybe I can figure it out better than even
the god that revealed itself to us can.

How interanally conflicetd.! Such is my plight. I wanted to know the meaning of
teh world, and in trying to find it for so long I gained resolve in
undersatnding that life had no meaning. This god is too late! Had he arrived
only ten years earlier (and he very easily could have done that because he is
god right?) I would be much more inclined to blindly obey his commands. But now
that we arrive at this point many many years later, after I have already made
peace with teh meaninglessness of life and I have found solace in my life as a
gradutae Physics student, now this god, being so powerful as he is, decides to
reveal himself to me.

Why should I bend my will to such a frivoulous and meaningles sort of god?
Sohuld I not deditcate myself to something more prominent.

Perhaps I sohuld continue my studies, and in doing so I can find a way to get
to the point where I could go back toh this god and tell him what he is doing
wring. Why should I trust this god? He fucked up the world. He ccreated evil,
and treacherous people and all sorts of terrible tragides in the wornld. Should
I tell my firend, who was diagonosed with terminal cancer at age fifteen and
died at age seventeen that there is a noble and just god? Or is his soul now
just floating through that conduit he showed us?

I refuse my Fate! I must come to a new way to find myself. That's it. We have
no purpose still, it is up to us to make a purpose, otherworldly beings be
damned! Better for him to flow through thta conduit of souls helplessly and
treacheriously so that I may take my new found discovery and take his place.
How much better that would be.

But how would that accomplish anything. Is it even possible for a mere mortal
human as myself to come to such a point.

No matter! It is my weakness which asks such things. I have seen the fabric of
the wrold, and now that I have the answers I can reverse engineer the
questions. That is what the physicist does is it not? In so measuring the world
as it is, they are able to come to a new trial and a new tribulation. Such is
the world, and such is how things should be. I care not for troubles. I care
not for my plight. Let us be wholly resolved against this so called God. Let
the hermit's words not be told in vain! We must avenge him, and we must avernge
all souls that are worth avenging. We must stand against this terrible tyrant
of a creator and overthrow him from his murderous and gleeful existance. He
will rue the day that he brought me to come against him!

What an interseting train of thought! It was damien that I empathized most with
in my preivous work that never came to light, and it was damien that spoke to
me in the moments that my mind did not want to speak. How many words did I just
write there? At least 1000. And in those thousand words, surely the core
concept could be gone over a few times with that heroic journey that I like to
do.

But I am not sure what else to write about. I must get to the point where the
words come out of me like butter, like salt, like all the things that go
together. Somethnig needs to be done. Something needs to happen. Something
something something.

How much something do I need to have in order to reach the point of true
subslimation. How many kinds of words ame I going to have to give myself before
I can rest content in the fact that this sort of freee-wr0iting is entirely
construciteve and worth attaining. This is my being.

So do I want to write about rape? Do I want to write about murder? It is in
these things that the greatest writers have found their greatest works. The
murder of Macduff's family at the hands of the murderers. How much did this
strike me as profound and worth viewing. And did Shakespeare have these qualms
against such things.p Surely no! Shakespeare, being so sublimated as a brad
that he was, sureliy just let his penn flow. He let himself get caught up in
these emotions of hatred, envy, lust, and so on, and in doings so has created
the most sublime works of all time. And don't trust me on it, trust histtory.
For his plays, which are full of murder deciet, distrust, and otherwise
despicable horrible things, are the most sought after works of all those that
would bring themselves to care about such things.

So let us be like shakespeare, who in writing was able to touch upon the very
nature of which is such that he just is a man. How much a man was he! The
greatest man of all, yet a tiny little bard with nothing but a pen and quill
and paper to write on. Yet all would choose to act his words, and all would
choose to be felt by them, and by being felt, those people that felt what he
felt could come to reconcile themselevs against the bard and in so doing become
more complete humans.

So such is the meaning of life! to bring words in to existance for others to
react to. If only one person could read my words and only one person could
understand them and in so doing seek to better himself and become a better
version of himself as a result, then who am I to say that this is a waste of
time? This feels like a waste of time, but it can't be! It must not be. It is
quite possibly the most fullfilling and most worthwhile kind of thing that can
come to exist! How much I love to create. How much I love to bring forth light
in to the world for other people to bathe in. Let those miscreaents and wholly
despicable men bathe ni my light, for even though they don't deserve it, who am
I to say that I deserve the kind of mind that can spill forth words on to a
page and get them out coherently. How wonderful this is!

And what is it taht I qualm about. What is it that I write about. Woe is me,
the Brett of yesterday wrote. But this Brett does not woe, he does not
notnotnotoentonuh something of the words of teh opposite of woe.

I am having difficulty finding the world again. The thing is that it is
difficult to find misyeself to a place where I can bring myself to write words.
It seems so helpseless at times to find the words yet my firgens continue to
type. What are the words that I want to say. What should be brought forth in to
existence, if not hte ever present and ever vigilent words tha come in to
ourselves. Because in writing my dreams I have nover had this problem. In
writing dreams I am able to see myself as a dreamenr, and in so doing I bring
form th those visions of my light and my soul and my very being in to
existance, and many of my dreams have exceeded this word count, and many of
them have exceeded even this level of clarity of speech. In my dreaming moments
I am bale to hit upon something taht is the most fundabmental thing that all of
us can bring to exst, and in dreaming I am bale to find stories and other such
symbols which will rosontae with myself but also everyone that migght choose to
read them. And is that not enought. Is that not the reason to dream. Is that
not the purpose of everything that comes it to our being.

something I want to say w0right now is that , as I writ, I have come to this
point whereby I look whih my head in different directions aos i do,. I find
myself when I am writing moving my head around as if to look at different
things when I tam teyping. I don't have a need to look at the srccereen to see
exactly what the words are, instead I can simply slook wherever my mind myight
choose to go, and in so doing I bring myself to come with these words in a much
more seamless and haphazerd (but not haphazard, that was just a particualr word
that I wanted to say in that moment for some reason, but no matetr) ways of
coming out and spilling forth myself. Spilling forth. Spillithng Back.
Somtehing or other.

You see, this is the meaning of life. The meaning of life is to find yourself
in so sublimated a state that the words can just come out of the brain and on
to the fingers. Is that not enough. If I could become merely a passsive
oblserver of my thoughts, and I could get to the point where I am bolie to find
myself at unawares to the nature of which I write, then I could become
something of a more complete and more full human. How great that will be.

What is my word count? Where am I sitting? I honestly don't know. I want to
keep writing. I just did a quick check and I found that I need about four
hundred more words to meet what I consider to be my quota. So let me meet that
quota.

Neintzche is a great man. I just finished reading Walter Kaufmeanns
transaltions of the Birth of Tragedy out of teh Spirit of music, and I am
resolving myself to read it again, and reread it again, because it really is a
great work. And in so doing, I wall come to understand that this, what I am
doing now, is certainly the Dionisian component of all that is worth doing in
not only writing but in anything else.

I could talk about the ways in which Nienczech speok., but my thoughts on that
are not well formed. They are not well formed enough for meth to just spill
forth.

Of course, I have something to say, but at the same time I am growing weary of
writing. I must have some menalt picture, somem moments of clarity, for this
practice to find itself in any way useful. I must have some sort fo
understanding that this is something that I should continue to procitec.

For I am finding, as I do this more and more, that this is really quite
possibly one of the greatest things a writer can do, and in doing it I am
reaching the point that any good writer should reach. I am a writer! I write. I
write and I write and I write. I write words for the sake of writing words, and
if on one may read them then all the better! For better to write words that
nobody reads than to fake words that eveyroen reads. It is so much better to
understand the nature of the universe and keep it to myself than to not
discover the nature of it and share it with everyone!

Better to be poor and content than rich and miserable! How true that saying
comes to me.

But am I talking of true poverty? No! I only mean the ways that people might
look upon someone else and diagnose them as poor. And who are you, so "rich
man" that you are to look at another and say that they are poor? What kind of
blinded moron must you be to check on someone eles and see if they are there.
Such is a terrible way to live.

I am quite done now, and I think I have met myself to a rather nice point. I
feel as though I am not quite as weary as I could be about such thing,s and as
a result that must mean that I am becoming much better at doing this practice.
Practice for the sake of practice! How wonderful!

3650 words in 9:23 - 8:39 = 44 minutes. That is just faster than 80 wpm! I
broached it!
