Criticism of readers:

It seems unfair at the outset of any work to immeditally blame the reader for
their insufficiencies. Yet at the same time it seems prudent to me to lay out
those reasons why such things fail to capture me. Here it goes.

There is a quality of good work, great work in fact, that totally siezes upon
you and brings your very essence in to being. In some way the person who
watches a particularly rapturous movie for the first time (and it matters not
what particular movie as long as it is in some way well-formed) dismisses the
experience as mere "falsity of the film" or otherwise insignifies the feelings
he feels when he reacts in the most human and most basic sense to that which
happens around him and through him as a result of the process and ritual of
filmwatching. I will spare myself the exercise of describing certain family
rituals surrounding various film media; needless to say, there are countless
ways people can interact in terms of a movie be it Force Family Fun (as my
family liked to call it) where ever so often my mother would require us all to
sit through the latest disney flick or some new romatic comedy she wanted to
watch and prepare popcorn and likewise bribe us all each to our own desires (my
father included) so that we might all sit together as a family and enjoy film
together... or be it netflix and chill whereby new dates entirely strangers to
eachother only some minutes before have found eachother through the services of
todays modern prostitution network and cuddle together on an ikea couch as they
watch some porn-ridden faux tragedy like Game of Thrones together and in so
doing convince eachother that they really do have the hots for eachother and
can fornicate now. Whatever the means by which an individuals convince
themselves that they must watch a movie in order to feel satisfied or complete
is entirely illusory to the typical member of todays soceity but to the one who
sees with his eyes woken up instead brings himself to understand that there is
something deeply and truly vicerally fundamental in what people experience when
they consume the medias of today.

Unfortunately, as tenuous as that former description was of trying to capture
the essence of what a movie can make a man feel, it is to the woes of the great
engineer inside all of us that we are not able to encapsulate the meaning of a
work of art in words. The only words some people have for some works of are are
things like "timeless" and "ethereal" which are in themselves rather ethereal
and timeless ways to describe something. I am attempting to describe something
different. When the layman sees the mountains and looks out and sees the snow,
he might convince himself that the snow gods have been kind to him today and he
can go out and get some fresh powder on the slopes. Such is the way that we
describe movies. Yet would it not be much wiser to look out the window and see
not abstract things like "opporutinity" or "optimism" but instead see it for
what it is; that is, the colors and sensations of light that meet our eyes. The
immediate reaction of that light could be as our skier friend; we might decide
that it is a great day to hit the slopes and begin preparations for such an
endeavor. But another reaction might be to simply bask in the mere beauty of
the light that hits our eyes. We don't have to even recognize it as a
perceivable shape. If only the vision of the light could just take us and we
could only see it for the thing that it is in and of itself without the mars of
imperfection that human perception constantly interjects into itself. Such is
how I would like to describe a movie, not in terms of abstract words like
"profound" or "rapturous", but instead in terms of that which the movie
actually invokes inside of ourselves. How is it that we are able to feel the
pain of Oedipus' tragedy? Is it because we in some way are able to connect to
something more deep inside of ourselves, find the Oedipus of our situation, and
as a result gain new insight in to the relationship that we have as would be
kings to our own lives if only we were not doomed from birth by the great
Oracle of Apollo himself that we might reek the greatest of crimes, so being
Paracide and Maternal Incest, and that our tragedy comes not from Apollo but in
our own denial of Apollo's words? What is it we feel when we first realize
this?

Filmakers attempt to describe a movie in the way that I am saying. They compose
story structures, outlines, criticisms, plot structures, and so forth. All of
these things have the similar quality that there is a specific process whereby
the individual is able to, apart from artistic inspiration or insight,
nevertheless come by a finished product which aims to get to the heart of the
reason certain kinds of art come in to themselves in specific ways. Such aims
much closer at the sort of description of individualless rapture one can feel
when consuming a work of art. Yet something is still lacking. These methods
(outlines, critiques, etc.) are in some sense merely describing the scene
outside the window (to use our old analogy) as one might map out a
topographical spectrum of the light and record it in a precise and transferable
way and then recreate that scene on a computer for the whole world to see. Yet
there is still something missing here. Is there not something wholly unique
about stepping up to a window, being in the physical proximity to a mountain,
and taking in the light from the window in and of itself as simple light and
nothing more, knowing full well that this moment is just this moment and that
none like it will ever happen again? Of course, there will be moments like the
moment you just felt (as you were looking out the window still, of course); for
instance, it might be the case that a few days later you wake up at a similar
time and the weather is moving in a similar way so as to create a very likewise
scene to the original which we are comparing and in this way it can grow to be
mundane. Yet I am talking against mundanities. I am speaking instead of the
fact that every moment has a quality in and of itself, and such a quality can
be captured in a photograph, but only in a counterfiet way. The photograph
creates a new kind of moment, a moment of being able to record a snapshot in
space and bring it to others and show it to them so that they might react to
the light that bounces off the paper of the photograph, but no matter the
mechanism it is nevertheless a new kind of thing very unlike being at a
physical location. It is as if the human being has found a way to imitate the
glory of what one "should" experience in seeing a mountain and captures it in a
photograph, but when he shows that photograph to another being, they are not
struck in awe in the same way they would be if they were there in person to see
the mountain with "their own two eyes" (to use a common euphanism) and instead
dismiss the photograph. But Why? the engineer in us demands. Is it not the
exact same pattern of light? Do photons not entirely describe the experience of
looking out the window after all?

This gets to the rub of it all. Because we aren't talking about the experience
of processing photons in to a visual image which is displayed in the minds eye.
Such things and processes are for Neuroscientists. No, we are talking about
something else entirely. We are talking about the chills and goosebumps an
excited skiier might feel in seeing a fresh coat of powder on an untrampled
morning slope. We are talking about the surge of power that is felt when (for
instance) our protagonist bests his computer foe in 2001: A Space Odeyssey and
discovers himself in the wormhole exclaiming "It's full of stars!" These
feelings do not need analyzing; at least, not in the sense that the one
experienceing these tingly sensations feels the need to justify himself in
feeling them. Even the most couragous of men will sucumb themselves just for a
simple still moment in whatever vortex of their existance when they rise up in
the morning to find a sunrise so gorgeous that it takes in their very being and
lifts them up out of their own physical body even if just for a moment as they
forget whatever rabble and troubles were bothering them and instead remember
that they can just be, just exist, now, in this moment, and none other, just so
that they can appreciate the sensations of the rising sun on a cool weathered
morning.

But still we continue to come upon examples by which an individual might come
to discover "that feeling" (call it "the buzz" for now because I am tired of
refering to it as "it") without describing what "the buzz" actually is. For in
the case of our minds eye we can create a bitmap of the light that hits the
windown and redisplay that bitmap on a computer. The degree to which our minds
eye works to create the images to our projected consicousness in a similar way
is again up for the neourscientists to decide, but to the 21st century idiot
who doesn't know the mechanism by which his phone connects to a cell tower yet
still complains when he doesn't have 100% complete service such an analogy is
complete enough for our purposes. We can map out the physical process of
photons on to a bitmap which sufficiently enough demystifies the process by
which the brain takes the photons which hit the ideas and create a similar kind
of image in our minds eye. The question then become; is it possible to create a
similar kind of "bitmap" for "the buzz"? Is there a way that it could be
recreated so that when everyone viewed the recreation they would undeniably and
irrefutablly say "yes, that is what I felt in those moments of rapturous
experience".

Of course we have not created such an experience. We can only approximate it by
means of the movie, and even though what allows one person to experience such
things is not universally accepted to allow all people to experience the
similar thing. Our ability to reason about and communicate these things is
insufficient (or it might be more accurate to say, the layman cannot
communicate such things even if the acedemics would argue that we are well past
the issues there). Is it possible to merely explain something in terms of
something else to get to the heart of what is going on?

In this case we seem totally helpless. Rapturous thoughts are growing more and
more rare in our society today, and such things are considered patholglogical
to those that have repressed them. And of course they are. What good is
watching the sunrise and feeling content about the world? That doesn't put food
on the table. You can't build a shelter with the feel good feeling of a warmy
day. Such things require work. They require perserverance. They don't require
the trappings of an "escapist" (what a silly word, as if the artist were trying
to escape himself when really he is trying to re-enter that which everyone else
chooses to escape) to make a days meal with a days work. These are the issues
of the troubled artist, the repressed and disattisfied individual who has
always felt that he should have aspried to be more yet somehow landed near the
middle and is no longer happy with it. These are the kinds of things that
strong men seek to weed out of their lives because they feel it makes them
weak. And is it reasonable for someone to say that they are wrong for doing so?
Should not the great "burly burl" man of the twenty first century working world
wake up and instead of "gawk" (see how we continue to transform the words we
use to describe the mear act of experiencing the world) at the sunrise instead
immediately gather our boots and eat our breakfast and do all of these things
while the lonely romantic over there bothers himself with staring out to the
horizon. Do such things even require our attention?

Such questions seem fanciful. They seem lofty and illustrious. "Just like the
physilopher," the working man scoffs, "To not only waste his time in watching
the sunrise but also waste his time in TALKING about watching the sunrise. What
a silly and pointless man." And to some degree the hurly burly man is correct;
such things can be trappings. But we arrive again to the heart of teh issue.
The problem is in communicate our experiences to others. We trust (silly
philosophical thought experiements about color put aside for teh moment) that
when we say "I saw the sky and it was blue" that people understand that what we
are talking about is visual perception received by our optics nerves in such a
way to be interpreted by the brain as the color blue. Such ability to
have the feeling (that is, looking up at the sky with physical eyeballs and
letting the lens of the eyes take in the photons and receive the packets of
frequency as "blue light") versus the ability to communicate the feeling (by
using the simple word "blue" which every english proficient speaker will
understand) are one-to-one. Sure, there might be cases where the subtlety of a
color is lost on our ability to explain it and we have to say something like "A
mix between burgandy and maroon" or otherwise mince around a color sensation
which is not well segmentende in the common everyday human vernacular. But we
have an entirely different difficulty when it comes to describing religious
experience to others. Because as of yet I have still only described physical
things. Mountains with snow outside of windows, or the first viewing of 2001 at
a mature age, or the sensations of tinglyness during a poignent crecendo of
music. All of these things are phenomenon that happen to us and can be
described in physical ways, ways that a computer might understand if a
developer so inclined were to be able to provide a human interface device
sufficient enough to define such things as the timeline of an experience. Yet
the words we use to describe those innermost and inner-tugging feelings that
steer and guide us through our day to day lives is ever illusive. Someone might
say every day that they find solace in seeing the light of god. While the
person who would say such a thing has a very specific concept in mind when they
say such things, it is lost on the person who has had a different context built
around god. With something like the color blue, the concept of color and the
naming and labeling of blue things as "blue" has taken place for countless
years and is universally accepted as the way to describe the sensation of
experienceing things of that particual color. However, as much as some would
like to argue otherwise, there is not standard or universal by which someone
can say they experience "God" (and we are bringing god in to the discussion now
hopefully without much pomp, I don't want to devolve this conversation in to
one about organized religion or any other such boring topic) and instead each
individual is forced to make an approximation as to what someone might mean
when they say they had a truly "revaltory" experience.

I am growing weary of typing such things at the moment, so I will leave with
one final ponit. That is that this "revaltion" I am talking about is so easily
misunderstood. It is difficult for one that has not had a truly revalotory
experience to entirely grasp the complete and utter difference one feels after
having one. All too often someone reads something out of a self-help book or
gathers some profound quote from Shakespeare or other revered author of days
yore and takes from it some sort of feeling of "Rapture" which they then feel
transforms their life right then and there. Such things are mere triffles and
play things. But still (and I suppose this must become the point of the
article) the ability to define these things are illusive. I just must emphasize
before I sign out that it is very possible for some one to have a these sorts
of experiences that I am talking about from reading a self help book or from
gathering a quote that inspires them. The problem is entirely based upon the
fact that the vocabulary we use to describe such experiences is so lost on the
culture of today that, because the accounts vary wildly when it comes to these
things, we illigitmize it when it truly does occur, and because it becomes
shunned away like this and repressed as an impulse reaction, it happens less
and less and becomes talked about less and less and those people that
experience such things grow more and more doubtful of themselves that these
such feeling are truly what does matter.

But to someone that is able to watch the sunrise and see it for what it is and
let themselves be caught up in the glory of just being a human being in the
moment of a scene as magnificent as that, I salute you. May we all aspire to
such rapturous connection. If only we might be able to talk about what is
really going on might we begin to further understand out general
dissatisfaction with what we are as a species.
