So at this point I am writing simply for the sake of writing.

I am extremely depressed. It's hard for me to think through what happened to me
since memorial day, which as I think about it was over five months ago.

I want to cry but I can't. I have cried a few times, but that was just a few
times, and nothing really came of it. I don't want to write words. I just want
to curl up in my little ball and just fall asleep, maybe forever. It seems like
that would be the best option.

Of course, that is a tendancy towards suicide. I feel like this shit is just
getting worse. Like, I had two years where I worked, I had my own apartment, I
did things and I was coming in to myself. Then I was fired, I was ostracized,
and I don't know what to do anymore.

Wow, I have never really free written this drab and bleak of thoughts before.
It feels really exhausting to even write words on this page. I don't want to do
anything. I want to lay back down and watch a youtube video of someone saying
something, or someone not saying something, or whatever.

I didn't work out yesterday. Perhaps that is the problem. Or perhaps it is
something in my diet? I don't really know.

I hate this shit.

I can't even think properly. I'm not even tired. I just feel as though there is
a cloud of thought in my mind.

I want to try something called progressive imagination. For some time, I will
close my eyes, and I will observe the thoughts and feelings that I feel. I have
done this before. It is like dreaming, in a sense, but with the imagination. 

Okay, so these visions started in a black area, as they always do. As the
vision continued, I started to come across a spinning wheel, and in each circle
of the wheel was a new kind of landscape. One of them was a mountainous
landscape.

I flew through that and ended up in a mountain range. There was not much to say
about the mountains other than that they were mountains. On the left side they
were protruding up, and on the left was where the valley was, although the
valley was deep enough that I didn't really see the bottom of it.

I then decided to look back through the spinning circles and find another
location. This location was in the desert. I want to this place to see what
there was to see.

In the desert, there was an oasis. The oasis was small, a single tree, and for
great stretches of miles were just more desert. As I was sitting there I
realized that my mother and father were also both there, and were each sitting
on the oasis with me. My dad had been previously putting up some sort of
barrier to make the desert bearable, but now that he has been sick he is unable
to do that anymore.

I then saw a giant desert worm sinking in and out of the sand, circling around.
I realized that with its circles it was getting tighter and tighter around the
oasis. I thought about going out to fight it, but I quickly realized that I
didn't know how I was to do that, and that it was inevitably going to swallow
us. It did, and I remembered from my other skunk demon dream that we might be
more safe if my mother was not with us. However, by the time I thought of this,
the demon was already quite intent on swallowing us, and all I succeeded in
doing was pushing my mother out of it's gulp.

I then simply embraced the swallowing. The black tunnel grew around us, and my
father and I could see the walls and such moving past us as we went deeper and
deeper in to this worm. I thought that perhaps eventually we would come out the
other side. But instead the tunnel stopped, and we started to become surrounded
by thorns. The thorns were sparse at first, but began to grow in magnitude.
Eventually, I was entirely covered in these thorns.

I tried a few things to get myself untrapped by these thorns. At first I just
wanted to attempt to keep moving through them, but that was no avail. Then I
decided to pull my knife ands start cutting them. I used a lightsaber like
knife as in other dreams, but that seemed wrong, so I switched back to my
actual physical knife. I then cut some of the thorns around my left hand, but
when I did, they regrew rapidly and with multilpe more strands and attached
themselves quite aggressively on to my arm.

I then simply lay still and let the thorns cover me. They were finding roots in
my back and into my ribcage. By this point I had been entirely removed from my
father.

I woke up with a different sort of vision, but I don't remember what that was.
I will now attempt to re-enter the dream space again.

This time I started emerging from an ocean. On the horizon I could see land,
but instead of exploring taht, I instead decided to go under and explore the
floor of the ocean.

As I started looking through the different coral, I found some different color
coral. I pull on one of the leaves, and to the root of it was a sort of plushie
like doll. I then realzide that a lot of these were similar. I then decdided to
poke my head through the mud. When I did I saw that the whole of the sky was on
the other side of the mud.

I pulled more and more of these coral dolls (which were alive and entirely
simple creatures) and found that I could combine them in a certain way to
create an upward vortex. After this vortex was created, I started to swim up in
to it, out of the ocean and in to space. I remember then just being in space.

I know more happens from here, but I don't remember what. I will attempt to
find this dream space again.


