This is free writing it is about as free as it is going to get.

I like typing at this speed. it is a good speed to type. Any other speed would
be utter ridiculousness. Just utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousenss. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter ridiculousness. Utter
ridiculousness.

This is silly. I shouldn't be typing in so fixated a direction. Something like
that would be utter riduclousness. Instead it just makes sense to try and work
the phrase like "Utter ridiclousness" into common vernacular. I ought to just
use it with the other words I use. To do anything else would be utter
ridiculousness.

Of course, I am using the phrase "Utter ridiculousness" it contexts which would
not normally apply, just because it would be utter ridiculousness not to do
something like that. Still, the point is that the fact that I am fixated on the
word or phrase utter or ridiculous is truly utter ridiculousness in my mind. Of
course, my mind isn't the only mind that could concern itself with such things,
and as such it only makes sense for the mind to be something else entirely. It
is utter ridiculousness, that past sentence is. And the previous sentance to
this one is simply utter ridiculousness also because it uses Yoda speak instead
of regular human speech. That is what makes that particular sentence utter
riduclousness.

I am now tired of typnig the phrase "Utter ridiculousness" I think it is utter
riduclousness that I should be expected to type it over and over like this and
over and under like that anywher and everywhere that I do it. It just is utter
ridiculousness to think that any such arrangement is ideal for anyone involved,
because it clearly is not. Such a notion would be utter ridiculousness.

In all seriousness though, this whole thing is utter ridiculousness. From the
sheer number of times that utter ridiculousness has been written, it is safe to
say that the fact that one man may be fixated on one phrase for such an
extended period of writing is utter ridiculousness.

Utter ridiclousness. Oh how I hold you dear.

Utter ridiculousness. Oh how I wish you were near.

Utter ridiculousness. The sun is arisen again.

Utter ridiculousness. The sun will go set aloss.

Oh this whole thing is utter ridiculousness. In fact, the first phrase of every
line is utter ridiculousness. That is, the literal phrase "utter ridiculous" is
the opening rhthym of each line. From there we have rhyming patterns and rhythm
patterns to go on, so we go off of those to go on about something else. Utter
ridiculousness I tell you.

So I notice that as I type for an extended period of time some of the tendons
in my right fingers, notably my right pinky and my right ring finger, start to
become tense. I also just noticed a strange phenomenon whereby my left ring
finger became impelled to touch the comma key, and when my brain withheld the
finger from doing such a thing, it became irritated and nearly acted
independently to the rest of the brain to get the comma printed. Utter
ridiculousness I tell you. Utter ridiculousness.

Now that we are done with the phrase of utter ridiculousness let us begin anew
on a journey to a new horizen.

That is, this utter ridiculous journey has led us no where, so instead of doing
anything let us continue on with this utterly ridiculous path of utter
ridiculousness.

So on with the next thing to say then.

Something about the ocean.

That's about it.

really, that's it. Stop reading. There is nothing more to say. The ocean.
Period. End of story.

I don't think you get it. You are one of those stubborn ones that stays reading
even when the text itself is telling you not to read anymore.

It's just the ocean.

Stop reading.

Seriously.

Utter ridiculousness. Just utter ridiculousness man.

So for real though, the ocean is an interesting place to set a novel. I know
there have been novels that have been set in the ocean but I think such a thing
is more of a gimmick then anything else.

For instance, I think that there is somethnig to say for having a story go in
to the ocean, but with a very specific guideline in mind. For instance, a story
I think which handles this well is both Pirates of the Caribean and Final
Fantasy. Each of these stories depicts the notion of ocean travel without
resorting to utter ridiculousness. In my humble opinion, the utter
ridiculousness of most sea faring based novels detracts much to greatly from
their overall appeal for me to justify myself spending the time and energy to
read such a thing. Utter ridiculousness I tell you.

So I am still using the words utter and ridiculousness excesively. Excessively.
Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively.
Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively.
Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively. Excessively.

Utter ridiculousness. Excessively. Utter ridiculousness. Excessively. Utter
ridiculousness. Excessively. Utter ridiculousness. Excessively. Utter
ridiculousness. Excessively.

So I am done typing this nonsense. I want to move on to typing more interesting
bits. Lets do it.


