This free writing session begins at 2217 of the actual solar time of the day.
Or rather, it is that time of the previous day, but I am beginning work on my
three thousand words today.

So there is something I want to say at the outset about this thing that I want
to make clear. The true goal of writing three thousand words of free writing a
day along with at least three thousand words of backstory for Seth and Cain
every day is to get in to the habit of producing work. I am not under any
illusions about whether or not any of the things that I am writing are worth
writing down. Many of them are not. As such, they will be discarded in the
final draft. More what this is for is, to reiterate the point made last night
during this very session, that the fingers need to get used to seamlessly and
effortlessly taking words and thought directly from the wellspring of emotions
and feelings which come forth and taking them and placing them upon the page so
that it might become an entirely painless and rewarding process for me in the
end to reap the results of being able to provide such lucid imagary on my very
own.

Something I want to say that I have thought recently is that all writing is in
some sense "Train of Consciousness" writing. I have differentied this sort of
writing from other sorts of writing, such as technical writing or otherwise
demanding writing, but in reality the only difference between these modes of
writing are firstly that the expected audience and the background that they
have is different in both cases but more relevent to the discussion at hand is
that the other forms of writing require the thought and foresight of the
concept that the train of consciousness has been well condensed and well
editted in to a rigourous and digestable medium where as the fiction writer is
more honest about the fact that such editing qualms are mere illusions and
fancys which are not about teh core of the work but instead get to what I feel
is the heart of why writing is in some way always "free flow writing."

I am not making my point clearly, so let me attempt to step back for a moment
and come at this thing from a different angle. There is the sort of writing
that one would say this is. That is, I, the narrator, am very clearly speaking
to an intended audience, namely the reader. This form of writing has the
distinct advantage that whatever words and thoughts come in the writers head as
he is writing his thoughts are the words and literal sentences that should be
put forth on the page. To think otherwise would be silly and contrary to the
very thesis of free writing. That is, the whole point of free writing is to not
concern yourself with the rules or the outlines of what it is that you are
trying to write and instead just let the sentences as you choose to write them
come out as written word. Such is the way of things.

After this process is rectified, however, it remains clear that the work that
comes out of a free-writing session is wholly a different kind of beast than
the work that comes out of a condensed research paper. The manner in which to
consume a research paper is at whatever pace one allows oneself to come to
comprehend the point and the thesis of the reasons and findings of the person
who originally put it together. In other words, the way a reader is meant to
read a reasearch article is in the whole. There are no concepts of "spoilers"
the reader does not want to "go on a journey" with the writer and there is no
sense that the writer is "creating a world for the reader to explore" or any
such fanciful ideas about the reasons people pick up a fiction novel.

The reason most read an article written with such a purpose is because they
have a question in their life that needs answering, and through the resources
of those people (librarians namely) that decide to bring it upon themselves to
enumerate and shelve such things, the man who has the question is able to find
(hopefully) a well written and well-formed article which answers that question
or a deeply related question to the satisfaction of the man who might seek to
understand it.

In this way, the relationship between reader and writer in the form of research
documents and scientific articles is something to be examined in this coming
paragraph. What might we say about the reader? What we have already said (that
he is intending to read the work because of the information in it and nothing
else) but in adition to what we have already said we want to also say that he
is willing enough to put forth the effort requried neccesary to understand and
comprehend the answer to his question.

This brings us some of the motivation of the writer. I am not one to presume
what another man might feel in the heat of his work, but I can conjecture using
my own experience in doing such things what a man that compells himself to
write a scientific article as he does.

I believe probably the main motivations of the writer are the same as the
reader; namely, that he has a problem that he feels has a solution and seeks to
find someone that has discovered that solution so that he might read it and
understand it and have a solution to whatever it was the faced him. The
difference between writer and reader in this case, of course, is that the
writer having gone through such avenues is not met by a librarian who can hand
him an article with the answers but instead by the professor who also professes
that he has a similar sort of problem and would very much like for someone by
this point to come up with the answer.

So the writer then concerns himself with the problem, knowing full well that
there is not literature directly pertaining to this problem that has occured to
him, and decides to take it upon himself to solve this problem in a
satisfactory way and then condense his work in coming up with that solution
towards the form of the written scientific article so that it might be
published in to those system which previously failed him (the sysetm of the
collections and maintainence of all past works of great men so called the
"library" by the modern tongue). In this way, he hopes that other people, when
brought upon by whatever calamaty orginially overcame him may upon discoving
his work not be forced through the same process of deliberation and findings
and testing and analysis that so bothers the scientific man and instead can get
straight to the heart of the solution to his probelm and use the findings of
the writer to aid whatever qualms the reader had.

So the writer hopes someone else will read his work, and he hopes that person
will be in some way a better person after having read it.

It is at this point that we must take pause and ask ourselves in what
subtleties we must say that the writer of scientific articles differs from the
writter of mythology or other fiction. What might compell someone to create an
entire fantasy world with backdrops and climates and political motions and
otherwise fanciful claims of serious whimsical fancy and then proceed to write
it down on a page for someone else to consume? The answer here is not near as
straight forward as in the case of our scientist. There was no problem, at
least not consciously, that needed to be answered. Many times the inspiration
for a piece of fiction comes from a mere happenstance. Many the author will
proclaim that they were thinking about what their next work should be about,
and as they were contemplating such things they came upon a sight which to them
seemed so hilarious that they decided that something about that sight must be
captured in thier work. Or perhaps a busy man of todays busy world as he is
doing busy things decides to take the time out of his day to begin to read some
of those "old worthless fiction stories" that he has heard some of his friends
talk about, and in reading the Lord of the Rings for the first time he decides
that maybe the fiction isn't so worthless at all and that maybe he can try his
hand at it. We can continue on with speculations about what might inspire a
writer to write his work, but I think it is entirely safe to presume before we
step on less safe ground that every writer of fiction has generally speaking a
unique reason why they choose to sit and put words on a page and that not much
can be said generally about the reasons that a writer sits down and does so
other than that all writers have a sort of "need" to do so, even if the concept
of where that need originates from is not always known.

So here we are. We have said a lot of twhings to have said so little. It seems
as though we need to get to the point where we are able to draw comparisons
betweeen scientific articles and otherwise fictionally or spiritually or
mythologically inclined work to see in what straightforwardities of the
scientific world might apply to the ever shifting and ever efervescent world
of the fiction writer.

Of this point so far we can make a conclusion which is at the very least a
non-obvious fact of the writings that we have written to hence forth. While it
is not a straightforward in the case of fiction that the writer has a problem
that they need to solve and they then seek a solution and not finding it
decides to write an article to publish it, I do believe that there is something
deeply and fundamentally true, at least on a subteranian level, about this way
of thinking about the relationship between the author and the reader.

Because it is the author that is so compelled to trouble himself to bring an
image he has in his mind on to a page. Such is my understanding of how the
fiction writer operates. I do not have the data to back a claim such as this
except my own anecdotal claims about how my fictions are produced. What is it
that troubles the writer so? We have agreed that every writer has his own
motivation for sitting down and writing at all and that such details should not
attempt to be narrow down except at our own caution. Well, we are fortunate
because we do not have to look any further than we have so far in making this
claim; that the author feels as though there is some sort of "problem" (and the
word "problem" in this case in problematic but we will use it as a placeholder
for a better word with the understanding that "problem" is a pretty all right
label for the concept we are trying to label and understand) in the author's
life that he has continually been plagued with for some time. The problem has
become so inherent in his life that it begins to grow in to dreams and visions.
It is many times the case that these dreams and visions which spawn out of the
disfunctions and irregularities of life can take on fantastical forms of
rectifications of a problem in a way that is often times näive but also
simultaneously somehow "wise beyond the persons understanding". It is certainly
a point of philosophical debate what is actually occuring to create such dream
images in an invidual, but for our purposes we will use the theory which we are
lying out in front of ourselves now. The images the author sees are the dream
representations of some recurrent pattern in his life. In taking apart the
dream image (whether or not the dream image orginated from waking life or
dreaming life is irrelevent) the author begins to discover that not only is
there something beautiful or glorious or other wise "problem-solving" (to again
burden ourselves using labels that are insufficient) in the image of the dream
in and of itself, but also that the more the author seeks to dissect the image
and divide it in to its constituant parts, the more he begins to continue to be
fed this gloriousness in the "depth of knowledge" contained in the works of the
dream image.

Most dreamers of this nature have ways and means by which they rectify the
dream images that occur in their fanciful moments with the seriousness of
everyday life. The carpenter might have a dream that an angel comes down from
an opening in the clouds and constructs a perfect cube of marble. Upon waking,
the carpenter might seek to rectify this dream image by paying a little extra
close attention to the edges of his desks so as to make sure the hand carved
product that he is creating is better. The carpenter is a practical man though,
and this practice of squaring edges is sufficent for him to feel as though he
has "satisfied" the dream image and as such feels content in his work and
allows himself to dream of different dreams the night following.

The author (and I suppose this must be the point arrived at by this freewriting
session) instead finds contiued well spring of information in attempting to
describe what this dream image means to others. That is, in describing what he
saw in his dream, the author is more able to fully understand the dream itself,
and gains rectification in the understanding that the dream continues to speak
unto the authors true thoughts, and if only he could figure out something about
the things which he sees in his mind would he be able to balance those aspects
in his life which are so unbalanced as to produce a dream image.

It is those greatest and deepest problems of life by which the author is able
to bring about a dream image that resounds deeply not only with himself but
also his reader. If the dream image is divine enough, the manner in which the
image speaks to the author and the manner in which the author remembers the
importance of the dream will be relevent to the reader also, who might not have
the exact same circumstances and dreams as the author but has similar enough
problem with similar enough dream images to decide that it is worth his time to
go through the idle train of thought of the visions of an author to see if the
author was able to come by something in attempting to rectify his visions that
comes about as a solution, however heuristic that solution may be, to his
problem.

Such is the nature of the author. The problem became so big that it morphed in
to a vision, and that vision became so profound and unworked that the author
decided he must write it down. In so doing, he presents the written form to the
reader, so that they might undergo some process whereby the experience a
similar feeling to the author. When such a feeling matches and aligns with the
typcical thoughts and feelings that the reader as an individual acting in the
world might go through, the reader decides that it his worth his while to go
through the trouble of parsing out the authors words so that he might see how
the vision came to light in the author and what the author sought out as the
means to rectify the image in to a completed saga. If the reader is able to
find out the author's opinion of how such things might be resolved and
rectified and if the reader is also able to find resonance with the author on
the level that he trusts the author whereever she may take her, then and only
then at that point will the reader be able to leave the work feeling in some
way satisfied and otherwise contented in the doings findings of the authors
findings of the "problem" which he originally faced.

Such is my understanding of the way that readers and authors interact.

I am not quite yet at three thousand words, so I will continue my train of
thought from here in an entirely different direction for the rest of the
session. One is allowed to steer the train of thought in whatever direction
during a free-writing session, and for right now I want to direct my thought
towards a mathematical scale which I find extremely useful in not only
understanding numbers on a time scale (because the scale is made for use in the
sixty second minutes and the sixty minute hours which we have so defined) but
also on a scale that all numbers can be placed on and used to determine (I
suspect but want to be certain of) logarithms, multiplication, division, trig
functions, and other such mental arithmatic. This scale is the "Tachymeter".

A tachymeter functions as a simple multiplication table. There is one scale
which is considered the "upswing" (as I like to think about it) and another
scale which we will call the opposite. The upswing begins at the literal number
1 and asks the question "What number do I need to multiply this number by to
get 3600"? Then it goes to two and asks the same question. Then it continues on
in such a way, labeling all of the numbers that have integral answers and
placing them on each scale as it goes from one to thirty six hundred and
likewise back from thirty six hundred to one.

Now, all of this is great, but the utility in this is not in talking about how
it "can be" used to compute logarithms, but instead it is in the practical
aspect of entirely transforming the way numbers are reasoned about. Because of
course I could start with the number seventy two and by proccess of long
division take seventy two sized "chunks" out of the large number of three
thousand six hundred and arrive at the conclusion that it takes exactly fifty
such chunks to arrive at the aforementioned large number. It is possible to
compute such a question by long division, but long division is to general for
the purposes of "quick and dirty mental math". We want our quick and dirty
mental math to seem very close and direct towards the exact number that we
would like to hone on, and we would also like our processes to "hone in on" the
exact number that we are trying to reach at in an organic and natural way. Long
division, though useful in it generality, is not specific enough to hone in the
day to day numbers we encounter in our world.

For instance, suppose I am going down the highway at exactly eighty miles per
hour. I look on my GPS and it says that in thirteen miles I must exit. What is
the fastest way to come at the idea of how many minutes it will take to get to
that exit?

The naive approach would be to use simple division. Eighty miles per hour
divided by thirteen miles will get us to the recipricol of the result in hours.
When we perform the division using whatever process of division we choose (pick
and guess would work best here) we come up with an answer which is quite
archaic to us. Thirteen divided by eighty is a troublesome kind of process
whereby we must extend out the thirteen to multiple places of decimal before we
hone in to an answer which begins to make sense to us. And even then, in our
plights, we have realized that we are expressing our answer in fractional
hours, which is certainly a correct answer that we could get but again doesn't
mean much to us. We would much prefer if there was a way to convert eighty
miles per hour to a simpler and more relavent kind of number for our purposes
such as seconds per mile. There is another way to arrive at the answer besides
laboring yourself with all of these conversions every time you encounter
something such as this.

This way is to know that eighty is opposite forty five on the 3600 tachymeter
scale. We multiply (not divide) forty five by thirteen to arrive at our answer,
which is 9:45.

The thought process by which we arrived at this answer, when spelled out with
dreadful explicitivity is something like this. We begin with our speed, being
eighty miles per hour. We also know that we must travel thirteen miles. Thus,
we have in our head two numbers which are "sacred". That is, no matter how our
train of thought goes from here, we want to keep the idea of "80 miles per
hour" and "13 miles" as concepts in our mind. No matter how much we zoom in to
the treacheries of detailed and maticulaous mathematics, we must remember that
we are doing this to make these concepts more visible and more prevalent in our
mind.

So with these two facts having been established as such, we must determine a
method whereby we arrive at the ammount of time it will take to arrive at our
destination which we remind ourselves is thirteen miles away.

If this were a 60 mph sort of situation we would just say the number of miles
is equal to the number of minutes and relay the answer directly. Since it is
not 60 and instead 80 we resort to the Tachymeter (which we have memorized for
80 to our great convience).

We start with the number "80" and look at it's opposite on the Tachymeter of
our minds. We see on the other end the number "45". We know (because we have
worked through Tachymeters before and don't have remind ourselves of
irrefutable mathematical fact) that this means a speed of 80 mph corresponds to
a benchmark of 45 seconds per mile.

Knowing this, we can take our distance number (13) and say "how long will it
take to reach thirteen miles if we set our benchmark for each mile to be
fortyfive seconds?"

We notice that this is a much easier problem then our original one (which would
have naively involved division if we were not careful) in that thirteen is a
rather reasonable number, and multiplying it in to forty five is useful in that
the way we count minutes makes this forty five second benchmark in to a three
quarters sort of endeavor. We say that for every three minues we go four miles.
Which then means that if multiply both ends by three we go twelve miles in nine
minutes (assuming we made our benchmark at a steady forty five seconds per
mile for all thirteen of the miles, which must be the case if our speedometer
reads a constant 80 miles per hour) and then to add another mile to the end so
that we calculate not twelve miles but thirteen, which was our noted distance.
We tack on this forty five second mile to our nine minute twelve mile route to
get our grand total of 9:45.

At any moment we could have lost sight of the fact of what (for instance) our
45 number represented. Or perhaps in the case of compliing a mental image for
our completed result, we told ourselves three minutes for every four miles but
then we got that befuddled with the concept of thirteen miles and so now we
have four times thirteen in our heads for some reason and we get out 52 and we
ask ourselves "to what do I owe this fifty two floating in my head at this
moment"

This is why it was important to establish at the beginning that there were
certain numbers that were "sacred" for the mental mathematical problem. It was
just simply the case that these sacred numbers were more important that the
other numbers we came to, and as such we must remember that when we get lost we
can always erase our work, start over mentally, and draw out the process again
by which we arrive at our answer.

In using a tachymeter in this way, it gives the mental mathematician the means
by which he can reason about things like speed distance and time in a totally
unique and different way than the standard rote method of general application.
In specifying some initial conditions (the 3600 ratios which both the
tachymeter and our time keeping systems are built on) we are able to create a
more efficient and more streamlined process by which we solve problems of this
nature.

And to the poor lost soul who says something to the effect of "why should I
concern myself with math when a computer will do this for me" I pity you.
Seriously, go to your fucking hole and die with your stupid questions. I do
believe in stupid questions, and that is certainly one of them. Enqugh of that.

2333 just before the midnight of the next day, the day this session was
"supposed to" take place.

4300 words. 76 minutes taken place.


