So at this point I would like to do some free writing.

Of course, it doesn't matter whether I would like to do it or not. I am simply
going to do it and that is going to be that.

I would like to first start with the idea that I have gotten to the point or
rather perhaps it would be better to say that I have acquired a sort of
understanding about the value of free-writing to the point that I have been
able to see some tangible benefit from it.

Yesterday I went to sleep and I had a dream and I woke up and I wrote the dream
down, becuause I had been free writing the words came to me much more
tnaturally, and it only took me a short time to write out the two thousand
words, at very little expense to my own energy. So it is the case that this is
diefinitely helping.

Now, the rub to this whole thing is that it might also be the case that there
are much better ways to get better at typing than simply just speaking your
mind but at the same time, what is writing if not speaking the mind. Is int
anything else besides that.

When you get down to it, you could say that writing is the process of getting
thoughts from the mind out on to paper, but then from that paper yu must make
edits and other revisions to the words as is seeen fit by the so called
"editor" of the work, but I do believe that this editor is a diffgerent person
then tha writer, and that it should be the case that they are developed as
seperate entities.

The thing is, in order for the editor to develop, there must be some material
on which he can edit, and if th ewriter is undeveloped, the editor will so to
be similarly under-developed.

An idea that sprang to me is to edit othe peoples work and save it as my own
editted work. Of course this reeks as plagerism but I don't really think it is.

What I am considering is one of two things.

The first is thhat I would like to translate Shakespeare in some way. I have
been reading Shakespeare for quite a bit now and have a distinct impression
that each of his plays is worth reading and also worth writing about, so I am
at this juncture where I want to read his plays and then write about them.

But thene there is another thing. I think it is the case that Shakespeare is
worth reading not only for himself, but also to tell stories to other people
about Shakespeare. When you say something like "Have you read Shakespeare's
Macbeth" and people tell you that they haven't (Because most people don't
bother themselves with such thingns as trivial as shakespeare. Then you arrive
at this impasse where you have two options. Either you can say "never-mind" and
be don with it, or you can go on to detail out the play of Macbeth to them in
whatever level of detail is appropiate.

So the point of these articles, these analysis, and other such things is
twofold. The first and naive reason to read shakespeare and understand it is
because it provides a sort of escapist outlet for me. This is the unhealthy
side of things. That is, I don't want to waste away in to nothing reading the
words of shakespeare until the end of eternity when I die. That would suck. But
there is something elese here. It is that in these moments there would be a
vast majority of people who would recommentd me nto avoid reading Shakespeare
for theis very reason, that it can represent an unhealthy sort of outlet, and
that I should really be concerning myself with other things like how to get a
job or how to bprovide a living for myself.

And to these people I argue the second point. That in understanding
shakespeare, I am will more abel to frame things that I encounter in my life in
pursuit of those highest and noble aims more quickly, so I can correct course
in a seamless and transistionalyr yway,. So not only will the utility in
shakespeare be such that I will be able to gain some solace in the divine words
of the bard, (as if the words of any one man can be divine, but no matter) but
it is also the case that I will be able to navigate my own life in a much more
coherent and successuful way.

So the second point is what I want to elaborate on right now. THe second point
is that there is osmething quite fundamental abou Shakespeare, and if you are
able to quickly and efficientyl go through a story such as Macbeth and convince
someone through th ewords of some point, that is one of the highest levels of
soceal utility. That is, Shakespeare is like a knife which can cut straight to
a point.

Because there are times in my life when I know one thing to be correct, but
everyone else would say that something else is correct. This has been a common
theme in my life. I don't say that I am correct very often, because when I am
correct I am definitely and irrefutably correct. It is just true that this is
so. So when I know this to be true, and I have to try and convince something of
someone that I know is correct, I can look immideately to my background of
Shakespeare knowledge to come up with a play that demonstrates this on a level
not of intellectual understanding, but of an understanding which is much deeper
and much more viscerally real than anything they might have otherwised reasoned
about themselves.

Because I think that is a lot of the reason why I find a lot of rub with
people. It's not because people suck or because they are stupid, but I think it
is more because, in the trappings of my own intellect, I have found certain
things to me that seem just inherently unerrable, things like mathematical
theorems and so forth, and while I have developed to hold such irredffutability
very near and dear to my heart, other people have these strange notions that
irrefutable topics should be refuted, much to their own downfall.

So what is there to speakk of this downfall? How can someone, having computed a
mathematical theorem, decide that the theorem is still worth arguing about? It
makes no sense to me. But the reason it makes no sense to me is because I have
a very unique upbringing and I was brought up in a very strange way. My mother
had sex with my father, and then they wanted to bring up the kids but they
did'nt want much to do with them. Except my mother who wants everything to do
with them, and my father who is filling out some sort of ridiculous fantasy of
fullfillment of something he didn't have as a child. Both my mother and my
father are quite evil and tyranical people, but they don't show that outwardly,
so I have lived my entire life in a silver spoon kind of lie.

When your entire life is a lie like this, there are two things that become
imporant to hold on to, which are the two things that I have held on to. The
first is that the concept of irrefucatbility as described above is perhaps the
most sacred of aims, and the second is that honesty in all things is the
fundamental network through which human beings should be judged. If a man is
dishonest then he might as well be a pig or a bafoon, and if a man does not
value those facts about the world which are irrefutable and instead put
something else first as the most important thing, then anything this man has to
say about anything is entirely and utterly just meaningless.

Having been brought up in this unique kind of position, I am something of a
intellecutal slave as a result. I value the workings of science and the
findings of mathematices above all else, because those are the ways that we
reason about and think about the world, resepctively, and both of them are
extremely well-formed and rigourous systems that can't be argued against.

Yet people would argue against them. These people do not have the same kind of
intellectual capacity that I have. They don't have the same pathologies that
have brought me to the understanding that the most real and most evervesence
nature of reality is found in directly experiencing it. They let other people
tell them what they should believe about reality, and it is neccisarily the
case that these people have evil or dastardly intentions, even if not
subconsciously, but entirely of themselves. My father is such a person. He did
not consciously steer my down a path of misery and despair, but he did it none
the less, and when I told him about the levels of depression that I was feeling
and the thoughts of suicuide, instead of correcting course, he doubled down and
continued to feed my his visicous and unassuming lies about th eworld. It's
awful. These evil people tell naive and innocent souls evil things, and as a
result, instead of treating something like the value of mathamatics or the
utilatiy of science as the most sacred and noble aim, they take whatever view
of th eworld these evil people would say.

To make this more explicit of what I mean by evil people, let us take the
businsess slave, who being a slave for some amount of time has risen up to the
point of exective manager or something equally ridiculaous sounding. When this
exective manager is managing his executives or whatever it is that such people
do (which I am not convinced is exactly honest work in any case, but I digress)
he might be interviewing a prospective employee. When he sees this employee,
the exective manager is merely thinking about his own gain. What sort of work
will this employee give me, and what sort of other things can he do to do the
things taht he is (i am losing my train of thought but don't want to stop free
writing, what was my train of thought, whtat was it I was talking aobut. The
manage will say something to the employyee. Let us paint the picture.

So the man is a man, and we will call him man, and the manager is a manager,
and we will call him evil. So evil talks to man, and says something like "tell
me about yourself" and then the man says, "Well, X and Y and Z and so on" and
the manager will evealutate this at face value and see that the man is
worthwhile to him. But he can also tell that the man is apprehensive about
joining his company. Perhaps he is talking about other companies that he is
considering. Or perhaps he is going on and on about something this or that or
the other, and the manager decides to tell him a lie. He says, "Good men like
you and me only have to grind in orde to work. The apprehensions you have about
my company, let me tell you, are really just figments of your imaginiation, and
really we are just and noble just like you want." So the man, being a little
bit lost and needing guidance, accepts this managers guidance.

But at what cost. He has taken guidance from someone else to steer his
decision. He is not making the choice for himself to provide work for this
company, he is trusting the manager of the exectives (who has such a wonderful
title!) to manage him and execute him. In what way is my train of thought
leading.

I was talking about Shakespeare and then we got derailed. Let's bring it back.

So this the thing that we arrive at right now. I feel as though I have already
made my point, but I have not. Am I talking about the man or the evil? I am not
sure which.

When I am talking to the man about something, the man who has been decieved by
this exective not through any sort of rigourous framework, but by trappings of
cleverness and tyranny (both of which these exective managers are so good at
talking around) it is the case that there is something to be said for the ways
in which this goes. We talk about all of the things as if they are something
real, something tangible, but really just don't have to do anything. We just
have to sit here and say that something is wrong.

To me, if this man is sitting across the table from me, telling me about his
job and why he hates it, but also why he feels like he has to do it, I get to
the heart of the issue. I figure out (with my amazing intellect, just how smart
I am!) that the source of his problems is that he has been decieved by this
exective, but that he has been decieved so reditly that he actually believes
something about the world that this manager told him without realizing it. He
accepted a lie, and though it set off his "bullshit meter" the first time it
was told to him, he has repressed and suppressed that bullshit meter so that it
no longer works properly, so now this lie of dishonesty is eating him up from
the inside, and he has no idea where it is coming from.

Enter Shakespeare. From this pqint, I could go on about how intellectually this
doesn't make sense, and how he should take X or Y or Z course of action, and
that in so doing he comes to an understanding of what the lies is from himself.
But he can't do that. He does'nt have my background. He doesn't have my resolve
in mathematics. He just simply can't wrap his head around the things that he is
experience, so he shuts down, no longer a man but some sort of crippled mess of
bones and flesh, as if the utterances of his mouth mean anything except they
don't because he is not a man anymore but he is instead a pulp that has been
ground down by the tyranny of those that lied to him.

Since we can't talk intellectually, I must instead find a way that I can make
this point so that he can understand it. I must tell him the story of Macbeth,
how Macbeth was a great genearl under the king of denmark (whose name is
escaping me right now) and that it was told by the witches that he would be
king. So Mackbeth and his wife invited the king to their castle, killed him,
and framed others for the deed. Then, after everythnig goes by, and Banquo who
also had to be killed because he knew to much, reveals himself to Macbeth, and
in so doing, Macbeth aims to simply fight as best he can. But it's not enough,
because even though Macbeth tries to kill Macduff to cover up his tracks, the
murderers he hired were only able to get the family in time in the meanwhile
Macduff flew to england to gather troops, and in gettnig troops come to the
dwelling of Macbeth and confront him. And then Macduff and Macbeth fight in
single combat and Macduff slays Macbeth and takes his head on a platter, holds
it up by the hair, and in front of everyone proclaims "Behold your king"

In these moments, I can invoke chills in the person. That story speaks deeply
to the soul. In demonstrating this story to them (and it is crucial to tell the
story in an honest way, but also in a way thta is truly beneficial) there is
something taht is to be said for the way in which it deeply impacts the soul.
It speaks beyond belief. It speaks beyond faith. It speaks to the very thing
that makes us human, and shakes it to its core. It's in this way, not through
trappings of intellectual soundness and rigourous speech, but instead through
those things which make us remember the revaltory and chilling nature of
certain aspects of our reality that the man might hope to be able to see the
error in his ways.

Because if he cannot relate himself to Macbeth in a tangible way, something is
wrong. If he reads th estory of Macbeth and reacts with something like "that is
great but it's not true so what does it matter" then he is entirely lost. He is
fallen victim to some great and deep demon that infects all of our society. If
he is not able to find in the core of his being some aspcet of himself which
relates to Macbeth (or Banquo, or Macduff, or Duncan, or whomever, but in this
case we will say Macbeth) and instead simply sees the image of Macduff holding
up the head of Macbeth triumphantly, he is entirely without cause.

It is in speaking to these primordial stories that we are able to truly see the
nature of not only how we ended up here, but also see the trappings of how
these great men (Macbeth was the greatest general of his king) tragically fell
from the highest of hieghts. We have to find some solace in our ability to
relate to these stories, because these stories are like hooks which touch upon
the fundamental nature of the reason our reality is as it is.

So that is the justification for my understanding Shakespeare. I have chills
write now just thinking about it. The ways thet Macbeth might relate to my
situation, or to someone elses, and the way that someone could be steered and
guided not in a revolutionary way, but in a silght corrective course that could
take him to a new direction. It's magnificent how such a thing could be.

It is possible to do. It is possible to undestand things like philosophy on
such a level that you can utilize it as a warrior might utilize his sword, or
how a computer programmer might utilize his keyborad. It is through these
devices that we are able to connect on a deep and fundamental way to the
workings of the world.

And it is by this point that people are able to transcende their trappings.

Could it be argued that there are other ways than Shakespeare or Sophocles or
Aeschelchus to arrive at this kind of understanding? Of course! In fact, I have
come to these understandings in other ways myself. In understanding the works
of Einstien on the level that I do (meaning, on a very base and elementary way,
but still in a way that is much stronger than most) I have come to undestand
something deep and meaningful about the world.

Yet simultaneously, there is something to be said for being able to find these
things from multiple vantage points. For while Einstien definitely hit upon
something deeply meaningful about the universe with his theories, it is also
the case that there are some things in life where the precepts of relativity
don't need to be applied, and that relativity neccesarily falls short. For
instance, the distraught ex-wife who doesn't know at what point in the
relationship everything went catastrophically wrong doesn't need a concept from
relativity. We could tell her something like, "It's important to remember that
the time dilation of moving bodies is proportianal to a square factor which is
then taken a square root" and maybe that could connect her to something more
visceral and real than her current narrsistic struggles, but I think everyone
can agree that another vantage point could be taken to arrive at wahtever
similar result that we were trying to achieve with relativety. For this wife, I
am sure there is a play that involves heartbreak and tragedy that could be
pointed to. Not Romeo and Juliet, but you get the idea.

So I think that is all there is to say on that. It's imporatnt to have multiple
entry points to this transcendent and worth experiencing tragedy of our lives,
and the act of reading, analyzing, and other wise making the course of
Shakespeare is certainly one of them. Along with the other myths and great
plays of our day, it is in this sort of fullness of life that we are able to
understand ourselves. That is all.

3450 words in 49 minutes. Approx 72 WPM
