To begin with, this free writing session will be more about the qualms of the
everyday ever yearning soul than anything else. That is because the part of me
that wants to get some of my thoughts on to paper right now in a free kind of
way can't bother to concern himself with creating fantastical worlds to keep
its image on. Right now I would much rather take the time to take out some of
those things from Shakespeare that I think are worthy take aways.

So the first thing to remember about shakespeare (as if there were a first
thing because already so many things come in to my mind as the first thing to
talk about shakespeare, but none-the-less we will resume on as if this really
were the first thing to consider about Shakespeare) is that he wrote for the
practical performance of actors on a stage. In other words, he wrote to amuse
an audience. If the audience was not satisfied with his work, no matter how
elegant or how profound it might be, Shakespeare would have failed.

The thing to note about Shakespeare on this point is that it very much IS the
case that many of his plays are simply infereior to others. That is, we need to
get this notion out of our heads that things like "profundity" can't be
measured; at the very least, inside each and every one of us, it is possible to
create an arbitrary scale labeling the experiences we have from the bottom most
mundane tasks as brushing the teeth mindlessly as the weary body goes to bed
without awareness of itself as if on autopilot to the most profound things and
experiences that a man can have. Say what you will about being let go from a
position, but being one that has now been let go suddenly from a job that I
thought was secure at unawares to myself, I now see that there is some level of
profundity about some expreiences over others. How could any man argue that the
mindless automaton who brushes his teeth is in any way or capacity more
profound than the man who, in that same three minutes, learned that his entire
job was being lost and that he would have no idea what he was going to do to
make money from that moment on. Of course, you could say that the second
experience was in some way "negative" in the sense that many would have taken
that with the anxieties and qualms that come with it, but "heroic attitudes"
aside it is near in-arguable (in my mind at least) that the experience of
getting fired is definitely more profound and more worth writing about than the
experience of brushing ones teeth in the morning.

I am merely using this example to demonstrate a broader point. That point is
that the profundity (which most un-enlightened and un-creative members of our
soceity would claim is "immessurable") of an experience can actually truly be
measured on some kind of scale.

"But how do we build such a scale?" the enraged dramatist asks of the
scientist. "You would presume to measure human emotion?"

While I bawk at the short-sightedness of anyone that would raise such an
objection, it is certainly an objection that seems as though it must be raised.
Because it is an open-question as far as what kind of measurement scale we
should such an abstract thought as "profundity" as I have described.

But if we are not able to create objective scales, I argue we should at least
admit to ourselves that some form of objective scale must exist, and that until
we understand the way in that it does, we must use our own subjective scales as
the best alternative to put forth. This is an inadequecy in the general
knowledge of humanity that we do not know how to precisely and with reliability
measure the range of emotions of a human being. However, the medatitive mind,
impartial to the whimseys of what might be a "good" feeling and what might be a
"bad" feeling and instead only concerns itself with exactly what the feeling is
that it is feeling at that moment might say that it is very clear that some
experiences must be placed on an order of magnitude higher than other
experiences.

Have thus armed ourselves with such a subjective scale, and also armed ourself
with justification for using one for the time being (until humanity becomes
more intellegent so as to place a satisfactory objective scale for us), we can
now begin to ask ourselves questions such as "which of Shakespeares plays is
most profound?"

But already we have another problem. As I have said, the first thing to
remember about Shakespeare is that he wrote for an audience. He didn't write to
be profound. So we must caution ourselves at even creating scales in this
measure. In some way, our measurement scales are subject to Heisenberg's
uncertain principle by analogy. That is, the more we can say about the
profundity of a play, the less we can say about some other dimension on which
we would choose to measure it. Or in other words, by putting a scale by which
we measure plays over something, we neccesarily dictate that the way we view
that play or work of art will shift to accomadate that scale. Or in still other
words, we could say that by attempting to place a multifaceted and
multidimensional work of art that is a Shakespearen play on to a scale which is
insufficient for measuring such things, we distort the work in our minds, and
create a scale which bends to the will of the poet in all of us, rather than
the other way around.

Of course, many of these qualms are the qualms of anyone who seeks to judge and
analyze such things. It is always the case (at least it seems to me) that the
people that would seek to measure something as illsory as "the value of art"
seem to be destined to fail in spectacular fashion.

So we must remind ourselves of something that this is not. That is, we are not
looking to judge Shakespeare upon these scales such as "profundity" "sadness"
"timelessness" "joviality" and so forth just for the sake of doing so. Rather,
we do this so that we can get an idea of which plays invoke which emotions in
us.

So to zoom out even further so as to make this point abundently clear; We
create arbitrary scales (subjectively) so that we may lay the works of
Shakespeare (and whomever else we would deem worthy to judge amosngst such
ranks; Goethe immediately comes to mind) over these scales and determine what
aspects of Shakespeares plays brings about what effect, psychologically or
analytically.

To be even more concrete, the great epic suicide at the end of Hamlet could be
seen as something of a wish fullfillment on the part of all those who "suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous forturne" that everyone involved in such
nonsense be killed in a glorious display of forgotten poisons and sharp tipped
blades. For how else might Hamlet, the man who learned that his Fathers Brother
killed his own brother so that he might lie with his Sister in Law being
Hamlet's mother and be king of the land? Hamlet learns of these things through
the spirit of his dead father, who yearns from the grave as Abel did when Cain
slew him and found his son so that he might tell him of the wrongs which
occured. In such a world, is there any other outcome than the death of all
those involved? Save Horatio, of course, so that he can tell of the tragedy of
what happened so that none may ever befall it again? Is there not something in
that story which can be connected to the irrefutable and experiment verified
laws of chemistry, whereby substances disolve completely in to theri solvents
save for one catalyst which lives to tell the tale? Or perhaps I am already
jumping to far ahead of ourselves. We must at least admit that the tale of
Hamlet can be told in many different guises. We see the nature of Oedipus in
the character of Hamlet, we get glimpse of the Evil Emporer in the Uncle. The
mother takes the form of the disinterested female, caught up in the whimseys of
men. All of these characters are archetypes, and each resounds and remains with
the person who feels Hamlet and understands his plights. We feel as though in
some way Shakespeare has hit upon some fundamental resource about life, some
deep truth about the nature in which tragedy may occur, and in bringing it to
text and to lines in the case of Hamlet he is able to act as that Horatio which
sees the tragedy of life and tells those that may listen the tale so that none
may befall such tragedy again. And yet Horatio's voice will be lost on some,
and they will be destined to create a new Hamlet, with a new tragic element,
and a new resolvation. But still, in these repeated cycles, we are always able
to create archetypes which relate back to the characters of Hamlet. The
continued revaltion must take many revolutions before the spiral of the heroes
journey may break free from the terrible plights of existance. But even then,
we have only found ourselves upon a new spiral, a new mode of being, for all
who care to take part in find still some of the strings, and musings, of our
fate beriddled and life-stricken Hamlet.

Of course, I have taken many liberties in the previous paragraph taking myself
away in the fancical whimseys of Hamlet. Such is the abstract nature of the
play. The point here (no matter how much I dreadfully failed to make it) is
that such analysis becomes Hamlet. People feel a need, an urge, perhaps
measurable but at the very least observable, to talk about the Tragedy of
Hamlet. Since it's inception from Shakespeare's mind, there has been no
shortage of professors and enlightened scholars who would give their own two
cents about what something in the play might mean. Because of this, it is
neccesarily the case that Shakespeare hit upon something timeless when he
arrived upon the tragedy of Hamlet. Though many would say so base and naive
things as "you can't measure the value of true art" at the very least we CAN
measure the number of articles written about something like Hamlet since it
came in to being. That number of articles of criticism must neccesarily and
without doubt indicate that Hamlet in some way should be measured as a truely
profound work of art. To say otherwise would be utter ridiculousness. How could
one argue against the fact that learned men of many generations have talked
about the play of Hamlet? How could you say that such a thing can't be
measured?

Have people talked about on the same degree the works of other playrights of
the time? Who else existed in the time of Shakespeare that was worth talking
about? Could it ever be argued that, even if we do concede to so narrow-minded
individuals that something like "The profundity of Hamlet" cannot be measured,
at the very least there is something _more profound_ about Hamlet than some
other disposable play from that same time period. It simply seems to be absurd
to say contrary. For how could a work, being more profound than Hamlet, not
garner as much talk about the town as Hamlet did? Is this not metric by which
we define profundity? For if fewer people talk about it, how could it be more
profound?

So many objections can I hear from this uneducated and doubtless hopeless man.
Of course the more a play is talked about, the more profound it must be. How
could it be any different?

But still, we feel inadequete. For truly what we are measuring is not
profundity (at least, not as I defined it above before we went off on Hamlet)
but instead it is simply the facts of the impact of the work on the academic
whole of the community. And I do see an argument for seperating the idea of
"talked about by acedimics" with "profound". Because perhaps a work could be
profound to one individual, because it speaks to him on a level that is unique
to his genetics and his upbringing, yet not garner the respect amongst acedemic
circles to be talked about.

So at this point, I must conceded that we have not found an reasonable
objective metric on which to base our notions of "profundity". Yet still, we
have certainly made some basis on which something might be measured. Because
though the profundity of a work might not be in one-to-one correlation with
something like the academic impact that the work has had, it could still
none the less be the case that the academic impact of a work is one of the
metrics by which we might devise a formula to measure the profunity of a work.

And we must remind ourselves also that profundity is not the only thing by
which we can measure a work. We can also measure the "hilarty" of a comedy.

For in a similar way to the tragedy, the member watching the comedy of modern
day (immeditaly comes to mind some awful Adam Sandler flick, but no matter) is
left the theater with a notably different feeling than when they went in.
Perhaps they went in with the expectation that they weren't going to
particularly care for this particular work, based upon what they saw in say the
trailers for the film, but then upon viewing it they laughed at little at the
funny parts and cried a little at the sad parts and laughed again when the sad
parts transformed back in to funny parts. Such is the nature of the comedy.

So now how does one mesaure the "comedyness" of a comedy. Should it be simply
measured in "laughs per minute" and some number of laughs across an audience
could be measured and maintained as a sort of baseline level of laughter, and
then the roars of laughter when the actor quips a snark one-liner could be
analyzed on a spectrograph to determine how funny a certain line was. Something
like this could be thought to be devised to measure laughter.

But the objection is again raised by the devils advocate (and oh how this
advocate realizes not how much he truly obstructs the understanding of art and
how it functions. No matter!). This devils advocate tells us that surely the
joy one feels when one truly lets go of ones cares and anxieties and lets
themselves be caught up in the cares and characters of the big theater screen
and lets themselves laugh when the actors laugh and cry when the actors cry;
surely such feeling and emotion can't be measured!

To this man I say, Listen to your own Words, Damn it! You said how you can
measure it and then in the same breathe directly lied about being able to
measure it. You measure the sad moments by how much the population comes to
tears and you measure the funny bits by how much the population comes to laugh.
Of course this is how you measure such things. Measure funniness with laughter
and measure sadness with tears!

Again the objection is raised that for a comedy to be well organized and well
put together, the laughing bits and the crying bits must be organized just so
in a particular kind of framework and pattern, and that these bits can't just
be "sliced out" of the whole of the work and measured on their own.

And to this man I say, "Yes, you are correct. One cannot remove a funny part
from the context around it and still expect it to be the same level of funny.
But that has nothing to do with the ability to measure how funny a moment is."

The whole point is that the direct reacitons of the people viewing such things,
as their emotional recations outwardly expressed in some form or another, is
the best way through which we can come to measure a work of art. At this point
it is eager for this complete and utter bumbling bafoon who we have been making
the devil's advocate must ask (to again the detrimate of all art but he is
allowed to ask these stupid questions) "Okay, so perhaps we can use laughter
as a measure of funny and tears as a measure of sadness, but what say you about
these things to judge whether or not a work be good or bad? Must we define and
grade these things? By defining and grading, do we not terrorize the value of
the art in and of itself?"

This bumbling idiot! Always with his objections and points! Does he not
understand? He must not get the point of the words I am saying if he is still
saying such stupid and nonsensical things!

But no matter. If what this man says is indeed so stupid and nonsensical, we
should be able to knock some sense in to him with our own words that we contend
back towards him as if arms and swords on which we create our battleground.

So to respond to this man, we remind him that the notions of "good" and "bad"
are not base things. They are not things that can be measured directly with a
meter stick. These are things that each person has a scale of within themselves
that they use to judge the world. To talk of "good" and "bad" before talking
about any of the other emotions that humans have would be like talking about
"potential energy" or "quantum state fields" before we have even introduced the
basics notions of "how to measure space and time". Our bumbling fool is like
the person who asks the physicist in the heat of his work, "For what purpose do
you measure your distances with a meter stick? Can you not see that energy and
distance seem not to obey a direct correlation?" The physicist says, "Yes, of
course energy and distance do not obey a direct correlation. Because they do
not, I am attempting to find out, through experiment, what sort of correlation,
if any, that these two concepts have. But first let us establish, before we try
and define what something so esoteric as "potential energy" might mean, what it
means for one thing to be some number of meters from another. For if we cannot
measure something so simple as distance, how will we ever be able to measure
something like energy?"

Then the bumbling fool says that physics was hard for him in high school and
that he wants me to explain it in terms he can understand. And to this man (who
would so disdainfully call himself an adult, not even being able to comprehend
the basic notions of physics!) I say, return to your own moronic day to day
living. I have no concern for your dredgerry of existance. I pity you. Fuck off
with your objections because you clearly are not intelligent enough for this
discussion.

And so we come at the thesis of our point, without the bumbling fool anymore.
We say to ourselves... Something like "profundity" can be measured! It can be
measured along side things like "comedy" and "tragedy" and "tearful sadness"
and "jubilant joy"! All these things can be measured. And though we know not in
what way they form to create a coherent "theory of the mind" we can at least
say that in measuring them, we arrive at a much more actuallized and complete
form of understanding what it means to exist as a human being in this tumultous
world. I gain solace in this, and this alone. Let us measure the world!
Blasphemers and adulterers of the basic precepts of observation and analysis
may have thier penis chopped off so that these rapists of ideas can no longer
fornicate. Let us not let allow them to reproduce, because their idiocy knows
no bounds!

Come forth to the worderful world of a measured and analyzed Shakespeare. This
is the Shadow. Vader awaits you at the edge of the Dark Side! We have cookies!
Welcome!

