This is the beginning of my daily freewriting session. This is the beginning of
my daily freewriting session. This is the beginninging of my daily freewriting
session.

It becomes easy to forget and difficult to remember that the purpose of writing
is to be free with the writing. In other words, sometimes it is easy to forget
that writing text should have a similar cadence and rythym as reading text
does. For this reason, the author should keep in his head some sort of
"obligatory reader" or some such interested party that is concerned about
things such as whether or not the chapters will be too long (because I only
have twenty minutes a day to read this book, and would prefer not to cut
chapters) or if any particular sentence gets too long (such as this one might
be). As the author, we get so accustomed to splicing, editting, rethinking, and
otherwise mangling our own free form work that we forget that the reader is not
near as interested (nor should he be) in divulging himself to the whimseys and
fancy's of an authors fancys. The reader is much more concerned about what the
experenience of reading is going to be like for herself and as such does not
care by what method the author is able to take her "in to a fantasy world" and
instead just wants to be swept away with the author by ways she knows not how
and cares not how.

So with all of this being said, where does this leave me with this free writing
session? Is there anything more to be asaid about the topic above on reading
and writing or should we just continue on to the next thing and talk about
something else? We probably want to talk about something else know, but I am
not sure what. So let us just start talking about something I know I can talk
about and see where it goes from there.

Seth and Cain is a book I am working on. It is turning in to a novel. Everytime
I sit down to work on it, the scope of it keeps getting bigger, and I have to
reign it in. I have created 3x5 cards for the work which I think pretty fully
captures the overall arc that I want the story to take. It resembles something
of a shakespearean play, so it might be the case that it makes sense for me to
first write it as a screen play in the vein of Faust (fictional theater as I am
now labeling the style) and see if that in itself is worth publishing, or if it
will be worth publishing once I convert that from it's form in to prose.

In either case, I have reasoned that I am pretty well certain about who does
what and when. I have three by five cards that detail out most of the events as
they have to take place. Since the last time I have spoken about the novel in
this way, here are some game time decisions that I have made about some of the
characters.

Firstly, I have added an older (being the oldest child of Adam and Eve) sister
Narä and a younger sister Mary (to be born in the course of the novel). These
two characters give me a way for Seth to understand that his mothers perverted
views of sexuality are hindering him from discovering a deep well spring within
himself (or some such alchemical symbolism as you can imagine it going here)
and by connecting himself sexually with his sister he is able to see the
"truthity" of his mothers words on sexuality are inherently warped and twisted
in their own way and should in no way resemble divine inspiritation. Or
something to that effect. Again, I am not a psychologist nor am I hermitic
scientist so I do not understand such things. But I believe these two
characters can help resolve some of Seth's patholgies in relation to his anima.

Likewise, to fullfill the role of the rectification of the Animus, I have added
a character on Cain's side of the story whom I have named Lucifer. He is
actually (and I am still unsure how much should be known about this character
to the reader, if even his name should be known) the Son of Lucifer but he is
also called Lucifer. He is "Lucifer the Second" so to speak but Lucifer and his
son don't see the need for such distinction and each will respond to "Lucifer".

I love that backdrop because it is so hard to explain yet it is so simple [just
as an aside]. I can imagine a coversation with someone who doesn't understand.
I tell them, "This is the whole truth of the situation. Lucifer had a son and
named him Lucifer. It is this son of Lucifer that is the Lucifer in the story.
However, this background is not known to any of the characters except for Cain
and Narä and it's not communicated to the reader. So as far as Seth knows, the
Lucifer that was killed (because that is going to happen certainly in the
novel) is not "the Lucifer" but is instead the "Son of Lucifer" of which he had
many. Not withstanding the fact that all of the sons of Lucifer are named
Lucifer, so we have to make a distinction that this son was not a special one
but instead one of the children in the middle.

Regardless of any of that, we just name him Lucifer in the novel with the
understanding that he is the Son of Lucifer. Whew.

So at this point I am still in the middle of the freewriting session. I want to
keep my fingers going just for the sake of keeping my fingers going. It is the
case that I want to say words for the sake of saying words. The reason is
because the purpose of this entire God-Damned session is to Fucking put words
on a page. The better I become at that the better I will be as a productive
writer. By writing words and composing them in to sentences and then taking
those sentences and composing them in to paragraphs and then creating
paragraph breaks when it seems like a good idea and then stepping back and
reading the whole of a work as if it were a whole and not a sub-sequence of
terrible paragraphs and judging the work as it is without prejudice and
deciding where the different things need edititng; this sort of thing is the
reason it is responsible for good authors to practice free-writing.

Because it is one thing to be an author that creates good books, and it is
another for an author to simply have the time and the space to do such
ridiculous things such as take a ride on a bike or go on a walk. And when the
author does these things, he has all of these ideas about what should or should
not go on to paper, and in writing them down he is able to take what he
remembers and glorify it in the written word. It is a pale imatation of the
original, but sometimes men must be glorifed and awed by pale imitations.

Here we go talking about the value of art in our world again. I feel it is
incorrect to feel as though creation of art is unjustified as long as you have
food in your belly and people around you who consider you an upstanding member
of society.

How strange is it that the biological footprint of the individual is so small
yet the ability to feed those humans that come in to existence is a continuing
problem in the world today? What more do humans need if not food? Shelter?
Provided. But again, what more could the human desire? To what end does the
human exist? Is there more than food? More than shelter?

But of course! The adventurer says. There must be more than the simple day to
day churnings of the farm wheels and the growing corn. We must go out. We must
discover!

And so the artist and the adventurer go hand in hand.

Something about free writing goes here.

What the fuck do I want to write.

Okay, I am done for real for right now. I need to take a break.

And we're back. I have now had the following idea which I will place forth as a
proposal towards those people that read such things (being God who doesn't even
exist and myself who God knows will probably never read back these exact words
but who cares about such things)

So now that we have that out of the way, we will now dribble on with the
express and written concern that we need to get to 3000 words by the end of
this session. Right now I am at a certain word count, but I have taken a long
break. This time, I will seek to begin again and this time I will make it to
3000 words. Let us begin from this point forward at the turn of 0145 ben
franklin time.

---

This is the start of a brand new free writing session. In this session I hope
to achieve the result of three thousand words, and I also want to see more so
than that first thing in what capacity and pace I am able to type out such
things. For if it is much faster than what I can do in typeracer than that will
be interesting but if it is much slower that will be interesting though
expected. Never the less it is the case that I will find the means by which my
brain can fathom the thought of non-stop writing for this amount of time.

The first concern that comes to mind is the stress placed upon the fingers in
undertaking such an endeavor. I am using the dvorak keyboard layout but in so
doing I have noticed that my right hand becomes more dominant than my left.
Although I rather quite like the feel of dvorak. The Right Hand places forth
the hard sounds of the word, and the Left hand takes in the softer sounds,
being the vowels, and each contribituing it's own sort of yin and yang to the
process am I able to balance myself in such a way. The left hand also takes the
form of the bass in my piano playing ablity. Or rather, it is the case that the
left hand takes the form of the bass in this capacity as well.

I am stumbling over my words now. This is one of those things that I just want
to get over with. But why do I want to get it over with? Is it because it is
boring. Is it because it feels like a waste of time. Surely the practice of
writing for the sake of writing is not a waste of time. Ideas can surely flow
from the stresses placed upon oneself by measuring such a task.

We must strain ourselves to remember that the purpose of writing should be to
connect to a sort of "flow" state within one self. By setting up the
environment just so and letting the weight of the fingers rest on the keyboard
in just the most sanctimonious way is the writer able to connect to that thing
that no one has words for yet some seem to have the ability to orbit and dance
around. I am talking about the "knack" for writing as some people call it.

While such a Knack is usually refered to by those without it as that envious
thing that those with it possess, in reality all it is is an incessent need to
take things apart and put them back together. The writer can have this knack
just as much as the engineer does, but the writer becomes more troubled with it
than the engineer because the engineer at least has something physical to take
apart and put back together and say "this is my work. I have fixed it." But teh
writer has no such object except the object of the hearts and minds of those
that would bother themselevse to take time out of their day to dedicate to
reading the writers words. Such people bore themselves with schedules and
timelines and deadlines and other such things, and seek to escape that world,
if only for a moment, to indulge the world of written fantasy. Who is to say
what goes on in the readers mind when he is reading other than the exact
literal process of scanning word symbols and turning pages?

It is difficult to say what takes place in a reader when they read a work of
fiction that they would consider worthwhile. We can quabble about what we mean
when  we say the word "worthwhile" but for now we will simply express the fact
that worthwhile things are worthwhile and leave it at that. When the reader
reads something and says, "That was worth my read" and walk away from a book
satisfied, what went on differently in that readers head as opposed to the
other reader who read the book under similar conditions and walked away from it
saying "that was not worth my time"? Are these two readers made to be compared
against. What did the first reader experience that the second did not?

The difficulty in answering that questions has numerous reasons. One of the
most prevalent reasons this question is difficult is because the readers
themseleves are perhaps (in some cases certainly although it could be argue in
every case but we will leave that to the philosophers) unreliable sources for
the reasons why the enjoyed a work. When you ask someone why they disliked a
particular work, they might say something vague like, "Oh, I just don't really
read that much and I thought that maybe I should quit soon and her book just
happened to be the book where I decided that for myself." And when a reader
says this we must raise our eyebrows and say, "Was there something written in
that book which made the reader feel that way?" and when we examine more
closely, it is impossible to determine whether the readers words are true in
and of themselves or if there really was something deeply troubling and
psychological that the writer hit upon that disturbed the reader enough to give
this false narrative (subconsciously even to the one expressing that narraitve)
and in so doing the reader has created a defense mechanism against those
thoughts and ideas put forth by the author.

Of course, we could continue to trouble ourselves with such thought
experiments, but the point is that the reader is not an accurate source of
information when it comes to why someone might dislike a work. Unless the
reader himself is well versed in himself (as some philsopher once said in latin
"Know thyself") to know why he will like or dislike certain works, we cannot
gain accurate information from him about what he doesn't like in a work. In
fact, many times we cannot get accurate information from them about why they
like a work either. Many a time someone will express that they read a book at a
certain age, and that they loved it. They look back on it with fond memories
and think back to everythnig that it represented to them in that time. Even
when they go back to re-read it with fresh and more wizened eyes, many times
people will continue to blind themselves to the atrocities of the book
(whatever they may be) in favor of it's strengths simply because those
strengths so resonate with that particular reader and have and will continue to
throughout their life. Yet when confronted about the true and underlying
reasoning for their fondness of a particular work (no, Dickens was not a good
writer, although he was a very profusely imaganivitve storyteller) they will
continue to give falsities and lies. I will give a concrete example from my own
life.

I love the Foundation Series by Isaac Asimov. Because I love it so much, I must
always tell people that Asimov himself was not really a writer but made his
living instead as a professor of bio-chemistry. As a result, his writing style,
though lucid and enjoyable enough to read, reads as a streaming train of
consciousness of a man that could not turn his faucet off. As a result, there
is an entire host of work done by Isaac Asimov which is just garbage (or at
least, entirely disposable) and as a result one must be careful when judging
any one of his works as something more than it is.

All of those things being said, one gets the impression that I love Asimov not
in spite of these things but because of them. It is because he was a professor
of Bio-Chemistry at such and such university is the reason I love him, but I
must spin this as a negative to counterbalance my own biases. I (in an ever
vain attempt to know myself) have at least gotten to the point where I
understand in what my biases lie, and though I try and correct for them I am
still cognicent of the fact that I am spreading my love for Asimov even in my
negative things about him.

So now imagine that I was not this self-aware. Suppose I were just gushing
about Asimov and the world he created to a helpless passerby who knows nothing
about Science fiction but is too nice to shrug me off and tell me to go
elsewhere with my excess of knowledge. Suppose I just sang his praises to the
moon and back wihtout care for whether or not a space elavator made sense and
instead I said that I wanted to create a space elevator because Asimov
predicted that in the year 2019 we would have Space Elevators and that they
would be a feasable thing and that something or some other such thing about how
awesome Asimov was. And suppose, when confronted with criticism about Asimov,
instead of responding as a reasonable man might, I just continued to
gerrimander the questions so as te only highlight those aspects of Asimov's
writing which were considered well formed and well constructed.

So now that we have gotten to this point, I have hopefully illustrated that,
even in my own case where I have much deliberation about the ways and process
that I like to use to curate and form my thoughts, I have also not constructed
my opinion about Isaac Asimov in a well formed enough way to give an un-biased
and objective viewpoint about his work and what it represents. All of this to
simply say that the reader is not to be judged on the reasons why he enjoys a
particular work.

So now, I think in writing all of these things out in the way that I have, I
think I have come upos something of a reason why reading and writing bring
about the thoughts and sensations that they do.

As a writer, I feel that the thoughts and ideas that allow me to get in to a
mode to become a writer in twhe way that I am right now is something of a
tribute to the thoughts and processes which should go in to our everyday lives.
So in some way, by an author arranging the words of his novel in to sentences,
he is able to create well formed mind pictures and thought trains. These
thought trains build on each other to form a complete picture. When the author
is able to construct that picture in a certain way, he is able to bring a story
to life in a way that an artist (drawing artist specifically is who I have in
mind right now) cannot. That is, the drawing artist works best in an
environment where the reader (spectator in the case of the artist) is able to
step back and see the work of the whole. So, in the case of cross-hatching to
take an easy example, there is a process whereby the artist subjects himself to
tedious work, laying out rulers, hatching lines, moving the ruler, hatching
more lines, and so forth for hours ad nauseum. The reader cannot bring himself
to do this (or maybe in the case of the fellow artist he is, but that is a
minorty case). The typical examiner of such works does not know the pains and
difficulties placed in doing such tedious work. But if the work is well formed,
then the process of being maticulous with your work will show through. The
reader does not have to know how many hours were placed in drawing rulers and
hatching lines, all they have to do is examine the work up close and see the
uneveness of teh lines arranged in just the perfect way to create the finished
product. It is not so much the finished product itself that is profound
(although that is certainly an important and crucial piece of what makes a
profound work profound) but instead it has more to do with the understanding
that a particular kind of process went in to creating the work. The reader,
being uneducated in a certain kind of way (we are presuming that the majority
reader is uneducated when it comes to the processes whereby an artist achieves
his art) sees in the art the results of a particular kind of work. That is, the
reader is able to see the lines, to see the rular marks, and to see in what
patterns and methods the artist used. In seeing this, the reader is able to
understand something about the process that went in to the maticulous work. But
the reader of the artwork has an advantage. That reader can take a literal step
back. That reader can go all the way back so that the whole of the work is
within the field of view. And now, not being close enough to see the individual
markings and lines anymore, sees intsead tho whole of the work in one fell
swoop. They are able to see the backdrops and images that the artist wanted to
bring to life with his work and his process. The image, which the reader
presumes is an image that is dear to the artist in some way, is shown lucidly
to the reader for him to react to. Many a time one can catch the passerby stop
and admire a work of art. They first catch eye of it, and stop their hurried
pace to take a step back and turn towards it and examine further. They will
almost always make an initial impression. Then, when their initial impression
is gained, they will look to the details of the work to see whereby the
delicacies and intricacies of what when in to making this work of art speak to
the reader in this way. The more the reader wants to know these things, the
more the reader can zoom in. The reader can even create art inspired directly
from this art. The reader can use the process that they found embedded within
the art itself and take that process and use it for themselves to cerate their
own inspired art. Such is the goal of the artist. Such is the ideal reaction of
any reader.

But let us not forget what we are doing. We are drawing an anology. Just as the
reader of the art is able to step back and see the work as a whole, so the
reader of the novel is able to step back and see the work as a whole. The
difference is that the reader does not have the whole of the picture up front.
They must go through the process whereby they take a book, sit down with it
next to a light, open it up, start at page one, and begin a process of parsing
words. When they parse the words they start to form sentences, and when the
sentences start to form the reader passes over paragraphs. When the paragraphs
become consumed the reader finished chapters, and when the chapters are done
the reader has finished the book. When the book is done, the reader closes it
(or reads the rest of the books if the work is a novel) and then sits and
contemplates the words he just read. While such a description may not be the
complete and total description of eveyrthing that takes place in the mind of
the reader, it is at least close enough to the truth to use as our example
here. Just as we have produced a prototypical art viewer we have also so
produced our prototypical reader.

So what can we say about such a reader of words as compared to art? The most
striking difference is the first impression. WHile the art viewer has the
pleasure of seeing the whole of a work from the outset, the reader must work
through a process of iteration and parsing before he can begin to form a mental
picture of what the vision of a book may be. While the painter has the
advantage of being able to literally display the images he has in his mind
directly to the viewer, even if he is imperfect with the process it is still
difficult for others to argue that the painter saw something different than
what is on the page when he made it. However, the writer has no such luxury.
Unless he illustrates his work (which is indeed possible but rare in the world
of modern fiction) it is usually the case that, aesthetically speaking, the
writer is at the whims of a typer and a formatter and a publisher and a bunch
of middle men. While it should be noted that such things as typesetting do
matter, it would be strange to discount an authors work simply because some
publisher along the way became overzealous and typeset it on something that
simply doesn't match the text.

We are getting distracted though. Let us return to the point. The reader takes
the bottom up approach. As such, it is important to remember, as a writer, that
from the bottom up is where the reader will read things, and no matter how well
formed your work is from the top down (which is the lasting impression that the
reader will gleen from your work) if it is not at least a conductive experience
for them to gather and align themselevs with the thought of the nitty gritty
details of sentence lengethe and lyrical style, the reader will not make it to
the point where they have a lasting impression of your work because they will
become to bothered by it to leave themselves with it.

As such, it is important for us as authors to remember that our work is always
treated from two angles. The first angle is the top down, where by the author
has a vision and decides to create characters, ideas, places, and plot-arcs to
bring those visions to life. The second angle is the bottom up. From this angle
we look not to the lasting impressions of a satisfied reader but instead from
the prospective of the most criticle eye. This reader is finding every reason
to put down the work. At a moments notice, if the author expresses a thought
which goes against something the reader believes, they may decide that the work
simply isn't worth their time anymore and put it down forever. No matter how
well formed the rest of the work is, this is a fact about readers. Readers want
the thought coming from an author to fall in line with their own. They want to
find the germ of the authors thoughts and get swept away in it. This starts at
the first sentence, whereby they take that sentence and let it take them to a
new place. Once they are in that place, they let the next sentence tell them
something about why they are in that palce, and who is in there with them. If
the author has been interesting enough to this point, the reader will want to
know more about the people that are in this place with them. If the author is
good, he will be able to reveal that information to the reader when the reader
wants it.

As such, I think I am arriving at a sort of maxim by which I can end this
particular free writing session. This session has been instructive to me not
for the reason that the finished product itself says anything in it for real,
but instead because I think I have come by a sort of feature of writing which
must be maintained if anything of value is to be put forth.

The effort that is put in to a work, expressed not as hours done or words
written but instead as that etheral concept that I only know how to describe
right now as "deliberate and inspired work", has the quality that the method by
which the work came in to being is perhaps just as inspriational if not more so
than the work that is in being itself. Or in other words, I think it is the
case that if the author is not enjoying himself in discovering the world of his
own thoughts and then as seamlessly as possible tranmitting them on to the page
for the reader to consume at the pace the reader is willing, then the reader
will not certainly not enjoy the process of reading.

Now, we must remind ourselves that the converse is not true. That is, if the
writer goes through a process of complete reconciliation in completing a work,
it is not always the case that the reader will treat it with a similar level of
profound realization. These things, though they seem like they must align, do
not always. In fact, the opposite could be said to be true. Many times the work
that an author is somewhat ashamed of and thinks will be recieved poorly is
often times the work that propels them on to the scene and places them on the
podiums of other great members of their genre.

In any case, I want to conclude by saying that I believe that one of the core
aspcets of writing is not only the fact that the ideas and visions of the
writer must be well-formed and well-thought-out much in advance and with great
tribulation, it must also be the case (and perhaps more importantly but at
least on the same level of importance) that the author enjoys the process of
bringing that vision to life. Of course, the level of enthusiasm that the
author feels about putting in long hours for something that he himself doesn't
neccesarily believe in but at the same time has told himself that he will put
forth anyway could wane and wax like anything else, as long as the process is
sound and as long as the author is able to continually remind himself of what
is important with his work, it will be the process that comes out and shines
through as the crowning gem even if the reader will be unable to say why it is
that one work is preferred over another. The vision will be what the reader
remembers, but that vision is brought about by the process of reading. It is in
the process of linking the way that readers read with the way tha writer write
that we are able to create something which trancendes our understanding of what
is possible in the world.

Or something like that, I really don't know. How many words is this. I'm
fucking done.

It just hit 0238 by BFT (ben franklin time) which means that it took me 53
minutes to write three thousand eight hundred words. I also just spent
seventeen minutes to read the whole of the work (which contains 5350 words).

This means that I am able to write at approximately 72 words per minute and
then read it back at around 318 words per minute. This means that my writing
speed is approximately on a 12:52 6:26 3:13 pace. It is just over four to one.
We will say that it is the case that I can read approximately four and a third
times as quickly as I can write. So be it.
