So right now I am at the point where I feel like I might want to write
something out, but I'm not sure what. So let's see.

I have just finished watching the matrix reloaded and the matrix revolutions
another time, and I must say that I watch them with a new perspective every
time. I like these works, although I will say that they are overly somber, and
take themselves too seriously. This is espcially true in Revolutions.

I don't want to talk so much about the Matrix, though. I want to talk about
something else. So lets get to talking about something else then, shall we.

I want to get this out there, not because I think it represents some
fundamental and universal truth about the human condition, but because these
ideas have helped me cope with things such as nihilism and the oedeopus
complex, I think that it is at least some what useful to spell them out and
detail in what ways I have come to view the world so that I can hopefully
become a productive and worthwhile human being.

So I think the best way to start about this is to first talk about the need for
a point of view such as mine. Someone out there might be reading this, saying,
"oh, well I have my point of view on the universe, and my point of view is
perfectly valid, and my point of view does not require me to force it upon
others, so I don't and I am perfectly content with that." To these people I
say this; keep your point of view. It is because I did not have one that I had
to construct this one. Know that your point of view can be captured in mine (as
I will demonstrate by the end of this essay), but you do not have to accept
anything about my point of view in order for it to be useful. In fact, that is
why it is my point of view, because it's the point of view that I have found
most helpful in navigating the landmine terrain that is a mother with Jocastic
tendencies that is also possessed with Christian idealougues.

In my life I have two options (of course, there are more, but we will look at
two for now). I can reject my mother, tell her that I renounce her way of
seeing the world because I think it is naive and frankly just a little bit
silly, or I can integrate myself in to some sort of world view that allows me
to accept my mothers way of seeing the world.

Of course, I do want to make one point clear. At no point did I warp or twist
my world view to align it with my mothers, or my own, or any other way of
looking at the world. My way of seeing the world does not require one to have
any preconceived notion about what the world is. Christians would call what I
am calling a preconception a "leap of faith." Well, Christians may enjoy
partaking in such things, but I demand more from the lens through which I will
view literally every action I will take in my life time. My way of thinking
does not require faith, all that it requires is that one be open to accepting
the fact that we truly don't know at the core what the human condition is like.

So with that sort of preamble out of the way, I want to get in to the
description of what my point of view entials. I am hoping for this essay to be
something of a reference essay, and until I find better words for these things,
I will make up the words I have, and use those.

So the fact that you are reading these words right now means that there has
been some course of events in your life which has led you to sit wherever you
are sitting, with this particular text in front of your vision. The fact that
you are doing this means that you are a human being (I suspect) who is looking
for useful insight in to the inner workings of our mind and consciousness.

Perhaps you have tried to answer questions like, "What is the soul, and does it
exist?" and you research various scholars on the subject, and find that every
religion has their own opinion about whether or not the soul exists. This
leaves you confused and lost, you would like if someone could give you a
reasonable answer to lifes problems, but it seems like every time you get an
answer, it's never the case that the answer is absolute, and you can see valid
arguments on both sides of many issues.

But instead of asking ourselves "What is the soul?" we are going to ask
ourselves, "What can we know for sure?" It is from this question that we will
spawn the kernal of what I believe should be everyones most fundamental lens
for viewing and perceiving the world.

The question is simple enough, as such questions usually are, but before we can
attempt to formulate a coherent answer, we must first ask some questions about
teh question. So the first thing to ask is, "What does it mean to know
something?"

Most people would say that to know something would mean that you have the
ability to bring to your memory that thing. But this has more to do with memory
than it does knowledge. For instance, I could have a sixteen digit sequence of
numbers memorized, but without information about what those sixteen digits
might represent, I have no further knowledege with which to use whatever
information is encoded in these numbers.

The simplest way to talk about knowledge would be to create a model of the
world where there is a duality of understanding about the universe. This
dualistic understanding of the world means that there is a "real world" that we
all live and exist in, and in this real world, there are individual humans, and
we each say things like "I thought I saw a ghost, but when I looked again it
was gone." The world where we see a ghost is the other side of this duality.

So this dualistic approach is how we are going to talk about knowledge.

(I also want to make an aside and note here that we do not have to begin with a
sense of what the duality of the world means to talk about what we can
absolutely know, but because this duality is so intutitive, and will save me a
lot of typing, we are going to use it)

So using this dualistic approach, we could say that I human's knowledge is the
set of all things that exist in his memory banks that also coincide with
something in the real world. For instance, if the sixteen digit number we
talked about earlier corresponded to a credit card number, and the man had the
correlation in his head, then we could say that the man "knows" his credit card
number.

So having defined knowledge, let us return to our original inquiry. "What can
we know absolutely, if anything?"

So let's take of the "if anything" portion. I argue, and this is something that
I would consider to be the most self-evident statement that I will make in this
entire essay, that the fact that we experience anything at all means that, at
the very least, we can know that our perception of the universe exists.

Since we know that our perception of the universe exists, it seems only
reasonable to take the next step and say also that the universe actually
exists, but this is not neccesary. All that matters is that we have found a
statement that we can know absolutely, and that is that we, as human beings,
perceive reality.

So now we want to ask ourselves, is there anything more that we can know
absolutely? And it is at this point that we could run in to some contention.
Some might argue that "yes" you can know more things about the universe
absolutely. To these people, I only say this. If you think that something like
"freedom" or "liberty" or "justice" or "patriotism" are things that you can
know absolutely, then I think we are thinking differently about what "absolute
knowledge" means.

I also want to stop and make the point that, just because we have absolute
knowedge of the fact that we have perceptions of the universe, we have made no
claims whatsoever about the legitimacy of these perceptions. For all we know,
we could be hallucinating our entire exist, and really, we are living in a
virtual reality world where we are being fed experiences to our neurons
directly. Of course, such a scenario is unlikely, but that's why it makes for
interesting cinema, ala, the matrix.

So I want to argue that the fact that we have experience (and more, the
experiences that we actually have) indicates to me that, to the extent that we
can at least say that something is going on, we can say that we are having
experineces that seem to coincide with something like a "real world".

And to me, the most logical next step in our argument is to say now, "The only
thing that we have absolute knowledge of is our own perception of the
universe."

This, to me, I think is the most profound statement that could be stated about
the human condition. It says that the only thing we know for certain is that we
are conscious creatures, and we can know how we perceive the contents of our
consciousness, and from that, we argue that if anything else existed that we
could know with that same level of absolute certainty, then that other thing
would have to be a part of our own perception. Because, unless it some how goes
through our perception, we would never have the ability to know that it exists.
And if we don't know that it exists, there is no way we can even think to have
absolute knowledge that it exists, or absolute knowledge over what it is like.

So at this point, I want to give a name to the Kaliedoscope of feelings and
emotions and experiences that any human being is subjected to at any moment in
time. I call this Kaliedoscope, "The inner". I call it this for no other reason
than that it seemed to be the most appropiate name for that thing.

The whole point of this article, remember, is to give ourselves a foothold on
which to build a world view. If anything, some thing (and I argue, the only
thing) that we can have absolute knowledge of seems to be a pretty good place
to start with building a world view. So lets begin with the simple statement.

> The inner exists, and it is the only thing we have absolute knowledge of.

From this point, we are tempted to say, "We're done, we did, we figured out the
world view. But all we have done is merely state the existance of something. We
have not said anything about the nature or the kind of experience that the
inner is subjected to. We only said that it exists.

This is the mechanism by which a world view comes out of this realization. When
someone realizes that their own experiences are the only things that they know
for certain, and that everythnig else in their life must be questioned, at
first it may be very disconcerting, especially if that person has been living
to that point with the assumption that there is something more absolute than
"our thoughts and feelings."

But after you overcome this feeling of lostness, what this allows is for one to
use something like the scientific method on ones own life. With this way of
looking at the world, I can take a sample of how I am feeling in the present
moment, I can conduct an experiment of whatever nature, and then I can take a
new sample of how I feel in that moment, and then I can compare the two
samples, and see what changed between them.

One can approach problems with a kind of "refined openness". When one is born,
everything that is encountered is something new. It is not until we exist in
the world for some years that things start to seem mundane and boring, because
we are used to them. When this happens for too long, we start to become closed
off to new ways of living in the world, because we have already carved
ourselves a rut to remain comfortable in. But if we allow ourselves to be open
to all of the experiences that this life has to offer us, we can approach
unknown and scary problems with a sort of innocent but hardened curiousity,
letting ourselves merely experience the things that happen to us, either
pleasent or not, with the sort indifference that only comes in someone who is
constantly working to be aware of the sensations and feelings that come in go
in the day to day doings of everyday life.

I think, also, this view has most implications in the realm of what most would
consider "agnosticism." While it is true that the view as I have presented it
is something very like an agnostic viewpoint, I want to caution the reader in
pidgeonholing an idea and then believing that one understands all the nuance of
the idea after it is tucked away. You may know the nuance of the pidgeon hole,
but every pidgeon placed in it is different in it's own way.

But the way that my view of the inner as the most fundamental and knowable
building block leads to very similar conclusions about the nature of the
universe as the agnostics. For instance, I would say that every religion is
simply the mechanism by which people communicate the stories and tales that
allow people to cooperate in teh world. Each religion, in my view, becomes
something like a lens taht you can place over the things taht happen to you,
and when viewed through that lens, you are given vocabulary and meaning to the
events and circumstances that occur in your life.

This is very similar to the agnostic point of view that "all religion is
right". But again, we must remember that my view does not state that all
religion is right, but instead that all religion is a member of the same
family, the family of things that we can use to analyze and help ourselves
understand the world around us.

In a similar way, something like mathematics is a language and a method of
reasoning about the things that happen to us in the world around us.
Mathematics does not exist any more than the idea of "blue" exists, but, like
religion, it can be a useful tool, that our inner can harness to use to parse
and more deeply understand the experiences that happen.

So I think taht about summarizes my view on the issue. I would say, it seems
pretty self-evident to me that we have absoulte knowledge of our experiences,
and it also seems reasonable to make the jump to say that our experiences are
the only thing we can have absoulte knowledge of. From there, this allows us to
reason about those things that happen to us with a sort of "inner" view and a
"lens" view, where the inner is simply the raw experience as they happen, and
the "lens" is how we parse, preceive, and analyze the information that we are
being fed.

It is with this understanding that we can all hopefully come to have a much
deeper and more complete vision of how we should aim to perceive the world.
