I find myself at here upon wondering what it is that are the most fundamental
of the archetypes. At first plundering along, much to my own amazement, I began
to realize that for all that I understand about different archetypes, I am not
able to label them and generate them in my minds eye. That is, the archetypes
that I know of are always generated from the turmoil of the divine unconscious.
Other archetypes I have fooled myself in to seeing, but the point remains that
I have as yet to come up with some method whereby a story will become enhanced
through the addition of certain characters from the heirachy of archetypes.

So without much ado, I want to take two approaches to this. Firstly, I want to
form a sort of free association whereby I label each of the archetypes that
seems first and foremost to me to be most prevalent in all stories, and then I
want to explain a bit some examples, some characteristics, and other such
things about these characters. The second way that i want to go about it is to
detail out the creation story as I understand it.

I want to elaborate on that second point for a brief moment before I start
labeling archetypes. Firstly, I would say that it certainly is the case that
there are many different creation myths, so it is unclear in saying "the
creation myth as I understand it" what I might mean. I do not mean to
regurgitate any previously known and well established myths. I also do not wish
simply to tell another version of all these myths which might be novel or
original but simultaneously born and bred in something pre-existing. Instead, I
will say that there is something of a story about how everything emerged from
the singularity of the big bang and that I am able to very deeply
psychologically project it in to a sort of creation story. I hesitate to
elaborate further on this point before telling the story, so we will holster
this idea for now and resume to our first point, so being the explicit labeling
of archetypes which seem to exist in "the eternal play" most prominently.

So the first archetype I thought of earlier as I was thinking about these
things was the Evil Emporerer. Of course, this is not the most fundamental
archetype, but I think it finds its place at the forefront of my mind in a sort
of amusing way. Still, I do think it is the case that every good story has an
evil emporerer of some sort. In the most obvious cases like Star Wars the evil
emporerer is well known from the outset. Some other works of fantasy have a
very clear ominous presence.

The most notable thing about the evil emporerer is that he lives and dies by
his warped and twisted code of ethics, but at the same time there is always
benevolent intention. I think in the case of the Star Wars Palpetine (Darth
Sideous) that the emporerer is bent to the wills that something great must be
gotten from the force. I don't want to go deeply in to the nature of Starwars
and it's mythology here, but suffice it to say that the Sith meant to rise up
against the jedi because they believed that the jedi code of ethics was
fundamentally flawed but that the jedi were so rigorous and caught up in their
own ways that the only way they might listen to the Sith was if the Sith
rebelled. Something of that nature.

In another example, I am thinking of the evil Jafar from Aladdin. His rule and
ethos is to have all the power in the world. To become that which is the
greatest in the world, the genie. Such intentions are not evil in and of
themselves, and in fact one could very easily imagine a version of Jafar which
was seeking to become like a genie so that he might embue riches and wealth
upon the peoples that were hurting. However, what makes Jafar and those like
him an evil emporerer archetype is through the actions that they take. Their
intentions (usually to strive to some sort of higher mode of being) could be
thought of as in actuality pure and noble intentions, but these characters have
been so far astrayed from whatever might have been pure in their original aim
and so hardened and molded by the world in to their twisted perversion of it
that they act out aggresively and tyranically and will continue to do so until
the end of their days.

It is almost always a trope of charceters in this archetype to fall victim to
their own fanciful visions. In striving to become something greater, they blind
themselves to those aspects of life which would compell them otherwise,
necessarily so as a defense mechanism, and in so blinding themselves they often
get caught an unawares in their blind spot and meet a dubious demise, falling
so far from the greatest which they thought they were so close too.

The next archetype (or archetype pair, but we will treat them seperately) is
the Antagonist. This character is usually in some way aligned with the evil
emporer but has his own motivations and his own reasons for behaving in the way
he does. These characters usually have some sort of tragic upbringing which has
brought them to the point where they will sell their soul to the emporer, and
justify themselves through the efficiency with which they are able to do work.
In other words, these characters are almost always a boy tragically transformed
in to man, unable to go back to what happened, and so resolved as the
antagonist of the story, take on their mask (antagonists can often times have
literal masks) and through integration of the shadow achieve things that they
never thought possible before.

The dual of this archetype, as the reader will probably guess, is the hero. The
hero is most notably characterized by their ability to take a shitty situation
and through an elaborate journey come out the other end with themselevs and
everyone around them somehow in a better state of being. The hero is the person
that we should all identify with, as that which seeks to take on the calamaty
of life and through a process which is deeply fundamental to the way human life
functions be able to in some way positively resolve elements in to something
glorious and worth ataining.

The most primary function of the hero archetype is the "hero's journey" which
is the process by which the hero undergoes himself and those around him to seek
to align those thing that are misaligned in the world back in to alignment so
that they may become something of a glowing beacon that becomes more in tune
with the ways of the Dao. The hero's journey consists of an entire spiral
which, in the most complete kind of heroic arc, places the hero back on a place
of the known, but having changed in some deeply profound and fundamental way.
This brings to light what is the primary function of story, and the reason that
story is important; in identifing with the hero of a story one becames more
ably equipped to navigate the space of ones own life. Or in other words, by
understanding how the hero of a story is able to navigate a treachorous
situation with the highest of stakes (because stories usually have high stakes)
gives us a means and a method of navigating our own stories and our own lives.

The next archetype to talk about is certainly the Hero's Anima. I use this
phrasology to indicate some character which acts as the aspect of the Hero
which would be considered his "opposite" in whatever way makes sense for the
story and is able to show the hero through their methods a way that, by working
together, they can each achieve their own goals in a mutally beneficial way.

Many times this character is a love interest of the hero, but it doesn't have
to be. It is also not neccesarily the case that this character has the same
goals or ambitions of the hero. The most important thing in identifying the
anima is to ask in what way the hero is "misshapen" and then ask how a mirror
character might show the hero his mishappen ways and work through (in a process
sometimes involving sexual union, but always involving some sort of pleasure on
the part of both parties) those pathologies to bring about a more full and more
capable hero.

Another archetype is the Wise Old Man. This archetype is characterized by
someone who is usually difficult to understand but also who protrays great
wisdom to hero. Many times the wise old man was involved in the tragedy that
brought about the protagonist, but sometimes the wise old man is just a man in
a rocking chair smoking on his pipe. The point is, this man, in his years, has
acquired a certain level of wisdom that must be given to the hero if he is to
avoid the dangers of his being.

So far we have five archetypes. To add a sixth (and then I believe that I have
exhausted my brain of such things for the time being) I will include the daring
trickster. This is a Han Solo like character. This character usually has
something to offer the hero in the way of practical services, but at the same
time has his own motivations for doing what he does. This character, while
usually in some way connected to the character, doesn't have to be. That is,
sometimes this character is a childhood friend that has grown up with the hero,
and other times it's just someone who randomly shows up in the story; this
archetype is somewhat flexible in this way.

I also believe I have lied. I have a seventh archetype in my mind right now
that should be written down. This archetype is the messenger.

The messenger almost always has the characteristic that he is fast. Whether
this means literal speed (the boots of hermes) or if it just means that he
takes haste in his work when others move more slowly is not particularly
relevent. What is the case is that this character is generally somewhat
impartial to the doings of everyone involved. This character is extremely
loyal, and usually has some sort of allegiance to a higher power of some sort.

I suppose I have missed another archetype, and that is the Animus. I am not so
sure about the animus archetype yet and how it fits, but I am generally
inclined to think that the animus is generally a character that is in alignment
with the main character in some way and through that is able to augment or
otherwise inject himself in to the hero to aid him. I am imagining right now
the Hephastus to Achilles, or the Zeus to Athena. This archetype seems to
usually take the role as the father of the hero, but by no means in this a
requisite.

So, to summarize before I begin to go in to the creation myth, we have eight
archetypes. These are...

    Hero
    Antagonist
    Evil Emporerer
    Anima
    Wise Old Man
    Animus
    Messenger
    Trickster/Sidekick

Without these elements I don't believe that a story can have much weight. That
is a rather bold claim, and not one I am prepared to make.

So now, as promised, let us go in to the second aspect with which I would like
to tackle this lack of Archetypes. This aspect is, of course, spelling out with
perhaps un-nuanced (but in my opinion neccesary) explicivity the creation myth
as I undestand it.

So to elaborate on the point that I feel needs elaborating at this juncture, I
must describe what I mean by "as I understand it".

I feel that there is something in everyone (whether they have repressed it or
not is a different story) that speaks to them as that aspect of experience
which they feel is the very core of existence. The nature in which someone
comes to articulate this thing varies, but I believe it exists in all of us as
something of a seed at first, and then as we grow these seed also begins to
spread in our words and our actions and it gets molded and shaped by the way we
live our lives and then becomes something like, "That which we most
fundamentally believe about the world." I believe something like this exists
within everyone and that it is possible for everyone to grasp towards it if
they so choose.

In many people, the stories and myths of the world infect their minds and
attach on to this germ so that what comes to grow is not an aspect of their own
genetics and their own divinity but becomes instead a counterfeit version of
the stories that are told throughout our societies. While there is nothing
particularly deplorable about such a man that becomes infected as such, I do
also believe it is the case that whatever profundity this man will find is
always on a much lower order of magnitude than the levels of existance that a
man who develops this seed for himself and by himself will achieve. Or perhaps
a better way to put it is with the simple maxim "The unexamined life is not
worth living." So the man that unexamines the fundamental nature of existance
and instead allows whatever flavor of the month religious dogma to infiltrate
this aspect of his being falls victim to being the man with the unexamined
life, and if we believe that the unexamined life is not worth living then if we
find ourselves becoming this machine of a man we must step back and remind
ourselves that all aspects of our life our worth examining just because there
is no other greater cause for us to pursue.

But enough of that. Let's move on to the myth.

I hope to tell the myth not in a poetic or even a prose form. I would like to
tell it as if I were giving a lecture. I would like to interject my own voice
as narrator as often as neccesary to clarify any points which may seem
confusing to the cautioned reader.

Let us begin.

So the origin of this particular creation myth is directly inspired by my
understanding of relativity and how it relates to the big bang. So before we
can talk about the concepts that I want to really get to, I must first lay out
my understanding of the world as we see it and extrapolate back to show the
reader the inspiration for constructing my creation myth as I did.

As I understand it, relativity is a rectification of a mistaken idea that there
is something so profound as "the most essential place in the universe". In
other words, the concept of Einstein's relativity came about when, being so
readily equipped with the emerging discoveries of electricity and magnetism, we
were able to engineer new and fantastic things unheard of before by men of
previous generations. Such was the power of our discoveries; but of course
there was a catch. This catch was that the concept of electricity and
magnetism, as we understood it, must coorespond directly to the concept of
light as an electromagnetic wave. Though previously we had attempted to measure
the speed of light, we never came up with a truly palpable theory about _why_
light has the speed that it does. The only thing we knew was that light did
have a certain speed.

However, in discovering the connection of charged particles and their
oscillations to photons and light phenomenon, we also discovered an entirely
different way to reason about the speed of light. After doing some calculations
and setting up some clever thought experiments, one can arrive at a formula
where by the speed of light must be determined by two numbers, being the
permitivvity and permeability of free space. In other words, the electic and
magnitic constants (so constructed by measuring how strong an electric or
magnetic field is under known conditions) which remain constant determine the
speed of electromagnetic waves, and by proxy determine the speed of light.

So this is great. We now have a means by which we can take two constants which
we know how to measure to great precision, and then come up with a third
constant which must be determined by the values of the first two. The
scientific world is blown away by this discovery.

But the more clever in the scientific community found a flaw in this theory.
They said, "If a man were to take a light on a train and shine it forward, how
fast would the light be going to the observer on the ground?" If we call "c"
the speed of light, then those that take a photon based approach to the speed
of light would probably say that the resulting speed observed by our stationary
ground observer is whatever the speed of light is according to the man with the
laser pointer plus a correcting speed determined by the speed of the train.
After all, this is how we measure moving objects thrown from moving platforms
(inertia is the term for those who remember their high school physics) so it
only makes sense that the same rules might apply to light.

But then we remember what we have just discovered, that the speed of light can
be determined by measuring the electric and magnetic constants, constants which
presume to be fundamental to the universe and not determined by things so
trivial as your speed relative to an observer. So the man newly enlightened by
the discovery and understanding of Maxwell's equations will determine that the
speed that the man on the ground observes MUST be the same speed as what is
measured by the man on the train. The math determines it so.

So there was a paradox in the theory, yet the theory of Electromagnitism was
producing so much output that it couldn't just simply be wrong. Physicists
decided that they must live with this paradox, because the results of both
theories (being Newtons laws of inertia and Maxwell's equations of
Electromagnetism) have proven to be sound, and the intersection of these two
things (how often do we really need to calculate the speed of light emerging
off of a moving vehicle? Can we not just all agree that the answer is "really
fucking fast" and move on with our lives?) was fringe enough to be put aside
for future physicists to deal with.

For many years physicists would come back to this paradox. Many devised
theories where by all of the cosmos was enveloped in an "ether" and it was in
this ether that electricity and magnitism flowed. They argued that it would be
possible to measure the absolute speed of the earth relative to the Ether and
that they could do so through experiment to demonstrate the reasons why light
didn't behave like other objects (which contain mass) in the case of inertia.
They argued that it was because of this Ether, which is considered the absolute
and constant "life network" of the world, that light must obey the rules of
electromagnetic waves.

Such is a great resolution to the paradox! Physicists celebrated, having a
complete theory of the world which was paradox free and also contained
everything discovered up to that point. Life was good.

The only problem with it all was that it was experimentally shown that Ether
didn't exist. Physcists (being some of the most clever individuals humanity has
to offer) came up with a way to measure the speed of light in one direction as
it becomes orthoganal to another. Or in other words, they created a device
which would fire out one pulse of light, split it in to two directions, and
redirect it back so that the pulses coincide, and by measuring the distorted
frequency of the light which went "cross-longitudanally" to the Ether which had
in theory a different speed than the original beam we could find the speed by
which the earth moved in relation to this ether.

So the physicists created their box and concluded that the Ether coincided with
the Earth. In other words, for the Ether theory to be correct, it must be the
case that we were motionless in relation to it. While the flat earthers among
you would agree that this makes sense, those of us that understand the earth to
be a spinning ball of mass rotating a sun are hesitant to believe that the
Ether, thought to be independent of any one mass, was in some way linked to the
motion of the earth. This is called "Reducto Ad Absurdum" in mathematical
circles; As such, Ether is shown to be something that doesn't exist.

Einstein (among others of course) came at this from a different direction. He
said that time, like space, should change when we change our reference frames.
In other words, not only do we have to correct for the relative movement of one
body with another when comparing observations, but we also have to correct for
phenemonon (heretofor unmeasured, but so was Ether) which must occur called
Time Dilation and Length Contraction. So the moving observer fires his beam of
light and measures the time it takes to hit the target, and the observer on the
ground says that according to his observations the light went the same speed
(the speed of light) to hit the target but was able to do so in a sane way
because the train literally and actually in reality became shorter when it came
up to speed. In other words, Length Contraction is the mechanism by which the
universe behaves, but such phenomenon only become measurable at speeds which
approach the speed of light (and not even linerally but quadratically, so you
REALLY have to approach the speed of light to notice anything) so it seems
counter-intuititve to our Newtonian minded brains. But such is how things must
be, Einstien argued.

And it turns out, that's how things are. Things become shorter when they become
fast moving objects. It's just what happens when we observe the world.

So Einstein, having come about an entirely elegent and dasterdly brilliant
rectification of the paradoxs which we faced at the time, decided that instead
of resting on his laurels and going down in history as the one who
revolutionized the way we think about the world, decided to go a step further
and apply his theory to a more general case. He constructed a man that lived in
a black box elevator, with no light, no sound, nothing, interfering the man
from the outside, so that the only thing that this man knew was the
observations that he could make from within the elevator. Then Einstien
proposed two scenarios, one whereby the elevator is accelerated upwards at a
certain known rate, and another whereby the elavator is set to no amount of
acceleration and instead is set in the presence of a gravatational field. The
core observation is that what the man experiences in each case is
indistinguishable to each man. Or in other words, the man in Case 1 does
experiments inside of his black box elavator and records his results and from
them comes up with the physical laws of his black box, and the man in Elevator
2 does the exact same thing. Einsteins observation was that each man would come
up with identical rules for governing how their black box system behaved even
though each box from the outside undergoes a very different kind of behavior;
the internal workings of the universe are the same in both cases.

From this, we are able to derive (with the usage of some rather ingenious but
admittidely difficult thought experiments) the rules by which one member in ANY
sort of black box system might compare his findings with another member in any
other black box system and in every case the man inside the black box will come
up with the same rules. It's quite profound just how far physicists were able
to take this concept.

So now, the concept of gravity which was previously known to obey certain rules
known by Newton and Kepler, could instead be framed in this new conception as
the manifold by which space and time create a reimannian curvature to alter the
trajectory of moving bodies in a way which must adhere to the general principle
that no one particular black box is special.

Such a theory seems as absurd as Ether! While something like Length Contraction
is easy enough to understand and verified by experiement, this notion that
gravity is nothing more than the tendency of mass to bend space in a specific
and well known way (which must be the case if we are to take Einstiens
suppostions seriously) becomes impalpable until we start to create experiments
to measure these things.

Again, the cleverest of physiscts enter the scene and again they come up with a
specific kind of box to measure the effects of gravity on light. During a Solar
eclipse, it is possible for telescopes to pick up the locations of certain
stars which would normally be drowned out by the light of the sun. By looking
in to a telescope at the place where we knew that the star must appear to be if
light really did bend around space and time in the way that Einstein said, we
were able to tell that light DID bend around the sun in a specific way, and
that the measurements were within as precise alignment as modern scientific
technology allows to show that Einstiens theories were able to correctly
predict the exact magnitude with which the light bent. In other words, it seems
all to prudent to get this point.

Again the world of science rejoiced! An entirly new era of understand was
emerging, ripe to be explored. The possiblities were abundant, and the
emergence of new technologies and understandings about our universe were sure
to take place.

But again we have a paradox! For observable in the skys are phenemonon known as
black holes. These things are celestially bodies which we know to contain more
mass densely packed in so tight an array as to create a curvature of space and
time so intense that even light cannot escape. While Einstien's theories are
well-formed in all the places that space bends towards the speed of light, we
truely have no idea what happens when the curvature of space extends BEYOND the
speed of light in this way. The only way we would be able to form any sort of
basis for what might happen at such a point (called a singularity) would be to
make observations about what happens at that point. The problem with that is
that while those observations might be recordable and known by the person that
observes them, it would be impossible for that person to relay the information
in any way to anyone. It would be impossible to escape the singularity of the
black hole (or at least we think) and because of this it's impossible for us to
know in what way these singularity points behave.

So at this point, we must remind ourselves of what the physicist did when they
found this paradox with electromagnetism. They took each theory on it's own and
decided to live with the paradox. So to must we do the same.

So the thing that we need to get to (and the whole point of why I recaped the
brief but rich history of relativity) is the understanding of the fact that a
singularity point in the context of the "space-time manifold" which pervades
these theories is that not only do these singularities have a position in space
to indicate where they are, but they must also necessarily have a position IN
TIME as well if we are to make any sort of tangible sense out of the
mathematics which goes in to relativity. Or in other words, while it is typical
for us to point at the sky and say, "this star is at this position relative to
earth" we must also burden ourselves to say, if we are to take Einstiens
theories to heart, "this star also exists at this location IN TIME relative to
earth."

What this means is, not only do singularities exist as a place by which the
curvature of space-time "goes under" the glass floor of our known speed limit
(being the speed of light), but there also must be a singularity which can be
solved if we go back far enough on the dimension of time. Or in other words (I
have grown a liking to this phrase here it seems), since we are able to measure
the speed at which the universe is expanding, we should also be able to
extrapolate that speed back all the way to a point where there must have been
enough mass to create a singularity. Or still in other words, when you begin to
view the universe not as "a river of time through which all things move" but
instead as simply the static expression of one well-defined "space time"
manifold, and you ask yourself the locations where this manifold curves beyond
the speed of light and as such creates a singularity, you find that you can
label all of the black holes as such locations, but you also find that the
entire manifold "reduces to" or "becomes solved to" a sigularity if you
restrict yourself to talking about a time distant enough in the past.

How distant in the past? Well, this is where we come to this number of 11
billion years or so. By using our observations of the known universe (red-shift
in particular) we are able to see in what way the universe must be expanding.
By turning this in reverse and solving Einstiens Field Equations using these
boundary conditions, we see that it must be the case that something like a
singualrity must have existed sufficently far in the past. It is from this
singularity that we have come up with our myth of "the big bang".

It is from this concept that I have born out my own myth of creation. It is
very well known what sort of tumultuous time must have taken place after the
big bang, but we really have no idea what the universe must have been like
before the big bang. For what reason did a singularity exist in the first
place? It is quesitons like these which are not and should not be the aim of
science. These are the questions of philosophy.

So without any further introduction, this is how the myth goes.

When we bring our mind's eye all the way to something like the conditions for
which our initial singularity might have formed, we begin to see ourselves in
something of a vast expanse of nothing. It is tempting to think of this nothing
as empty space in a three-dimensional void, and while such a prospect seems
hauntingly empty, the nothingness we are talking about here is even more
nothingness than that. It is simply the lack of existance of anything. Not even
an idea of a singularity coming in to existance is thought of here.

This concept of the nothingness that exists while there is nothing (what a
gleefully paradoxical idea!) we are going to assign the name of Yin. So it
might be said (if we must phrase such things in terms of time, even though we
know time to be a concept which doesn't exist in this vast concept of
nothingness) that before anything existed, there was only Yin.

It is tempting to anthromorphize the Yin, but I must warn everyone that we do
so (at least at this point in the story) at our peril. Because the Yin has been
so defined as "the Nothingness that existed Before Anything at all" or
something like that (it is impossible to describe the Yin in any way but as a
paradox, so we must come to accept paradoxes and embrace them if we are to be
able to navigate this story with any semblance of understanding) it is
important to rememeber that any anthromorphization of the Yin is neccesarly NOT
yin for the very reason that we have defined Yin as that which does not have
any other meaning.

So in this framing of the universe we have the Nothingness on which everything
must be based.

While it might seems as though we might stop here, it is neccesarily the case
(as evidenced by the very fact that there is a "you" who is reading this) that
something else existed also with the Yin in the "times" when nothing existed.

We will call this the Yang. The Yang is that spirit which lie dormant within
the Yin so as to spring itself forward at unawares to the Yin and force the
everglowing presence of non-being to in some way create being. If we were to
(in our human need to perfect and over-analyze everything) call the yin
undisturbed and entirely uniform fabric of existence, we would call the Yang
the propensity of that fabric to wrinkle.

Having discovered these two things, we talk now about something which will be
known as the Dao. The Dao springs forth at this moment as a neccesary component
to complete the picture of the Yang emerging from the Yin. For without the Dao,
the Yang can only create chaos, but through the Dao with which all things flow
the Yin is able to correct the Yang and the Yang is able to feed the Yin to
create something that is more than simple nothingness.

So the Yin is "that which existed before existance" and the Yang is "that which
seeks to bring itself forth in to existance" and the Dao would have to be the
manner in which the Yin and the Yang both might be steered and guided in a
tangible way. To go back to our fabric analogy, the Dao is the rhyme and reason
behind the patterns that spring forth out of the interplay of the Yin and the
Yang.

Both Yin and Yang exist as part of the Dao, yet it is still the case that first
the Yin of something must be understood and then the Yang of something will
spring forth and out of these two things will come the complete understanding
of the Dao.

The first singularity which was to come to be the big bang would be like the
white dot on the sea of blackness which is the Yin and the propensity of all
things to return to a state of lowest energy (Entropy) would be the black dot
on the while frame of existance.

From this framework comes the birth of the universe throught he big bang.

It is at this point that the myth is known. Beyond this point I feel it would
be foolish to continue writing. Not only have I written way to many words for
my liking at the moment, but I have also not a very clear picture of the
archetypes which must spring forth from here. It must be the topic of a future
free-writing session.

So with that, I will sign out. Peace and Love!
-Gerald Orbweaver


