Today I find myself not wanting to free write so much just because in the fast
few sessions I have really emphasized doing it quickly and without break or
pause in my stream of consciousness, and while I am certainly convinced that
such an act of perserverence is surely desired on some degree, it is also the
case that I believe I will wipe myself out doing this too often. Such is the
manner of things.

As a result, for this session, I will make more of an attempt to keep my train
of thought flowing, as I always do in these free writing sessions, but to do so
in a more elegent and calculated way. That is, I want to practice my form, I
want to practice my touch. The goal of writing is not the speed by which you
get words on a page (although practicing such things is surely helpful just as
practicing scales and arpeggios at varying speeds will inevitably lead to
increased piano ability.). I want to remind myself in this session that writing
is something that ought to be savored. Every moment that I am writing I should
remind myself the joys of taking visions from my mind and aimlessly creating
words for them in the hopes that these words will be read back by someone,
maybe me or maybe someone else I don't really care, and that the person that
reads the words back gains a little bit of fortitude in the wars that are amiss
in our 21st century world.

So to return now to the point of this session, having had that brief foray for
other things, I want to attempt something of an idea that I had. Something
about this method reminds me of the drawing methods that I have taken up. It is
an iterative approach to drawing.

So I want to take a scene, a scene that I know how to write. I need first to
think of such a scene. But once I write it, I want to go back over it and read
it, and then I want to take a stab at writing it again, again from memory, and
again with the intent of getting back to the point.

I'm not going to concern myself with trivial details or belabor myself with the
full thing. But instead I am just going to get there, and see what I can see.

--

Cain couldn't help but feel apprehensive as he walked through the marble
blocks. Just moments before he was telling his brother about the wonders of
babylon, and now he was walking through those very same blocks in order to
beckon and call upon his master.

"I am the master of my fate" Cain hopelessly reminded himself as he vaulted
another one of the slabs to take a more direct route to his destination.

Why must he always be so dramatic, Cain wondered to himself as he continued
along. Lucifer always wanted to meet Cain at the top of the alter; never would
it be the case that Lucifer and Cain could just "have a chat" as they said they
would when they first became business partners.

--

So already I am going to pause. The first thing to note here is that I felt the
need to inject Lucifer in to the discussion right away. That was wrong. There
must be some astrolgogical significance to this portion. I like the concept of
a fully waning moon. I want to try a technique of writing that I will call
"mantra injection" whereby the characters complete trains of thought get
transmitted to the reader.

--

_Left, Right, Right, Forward, Left, Forward, Forward_

Cain reminded himself of the route he needed to take from this point in the
maze of the Hanging Gardens. Cain had only the very sliver of the waning moon
as light with which to guide him; besides that he was moving purely on
instinct.

--

So I am again running in to the trouble that I feel the need to bring up
Lucifer. I believe it is because Cain will be thinking about lucifer during
this scene, so it seems disengenuous to reveal things to the reader that Seth
doesn't know yet. That is why I am having trouble writing this scene.

So let us take this from another angle. I want to begin from Seth's point of
view. The "immersive voice" will be the rumblings he hears as he follows Cain
through the Gardens.

Let's begin again, from Seth's point of view. Let us simply work from the place
where Seth lies down after helping Cain around the farms to Seth deciding to
investigate the noises he hears.

--

Seth startled himself awake from a dream. He tried to remember the dream but
couldn't. It was the sort of dream that during it everything feels so vivid and
real but as soon as you wake it's impossible to remember anything about what
was happening. Seth had experienced a few such dreams before, and always
thought lightly of them. This was no exception.

Seth tried to relax in his bed. Shifting his position still hurt his hip, much
to his dismay. Seth had wanted to forget all about that injury, yet it
persisted here to remind him of the dangers and faced. Seth put the pain in his
hip out of his mind.

The moon shone over the small covering that Cain had built out in the outskirts
of Babylon. The light of the moon felt calming to Seth somehow, it always did,
but especially so in this moment. Seth recognized the moon as waning towards a
new moon. Would it be better to clasify this moon as a very old moon, or a moon
so young that it was waiting to be new? Seth didn't know which was the correct
way to think about it nor did he truly care. Seth simply looked on the moon
with the gentle satisfaction that of all things, the celestial bodies would
stay in their place.

Seth turned over towards the fire that Cain had extinguished the night before.
In the gentle moonlight Seth could see the remnants of the logs that Cain had
used to keep them warm. Seth was about to remenisce on the stories Cain told
Seth. Could they be true? Was father's story all a myth? But before Seth could
lose himself too deep in thought, he heard the stirrings of leaves in the
corner of his ear.

Seth turned to the place that he heard the leaves. At first he saw nothing, and
figured it was simply wind stirring about the ground. But then Seth turned
again and saw a small light in the distance. It was visible at first quite well
against the backdrop of off-black that the near new moon provided but then
shrank in size until it disappeared behind one of the pillars that led to the
Garden.

_Light's don't just move and disappear._

Seth removed his gaze from the light to scan for his brother. From his current
vantage, he wouldn't be able to see his brothers bedding, it was on the other
side of the shade tent that was set up.

Seth brought his hand under the cloth that draped down from the wire frame
guard that 

--

Okay, so I want to stop now. I have hit upon some pretty good flow, but already
I am getting to a point of contention. Let me read back so far and create a
commentary on what is working and what is not.

So first, I like the fact that Seth has a dream but can't remember it. This
sets teh stage for the reader to expect some dream like archetypes. This excuse
is perfect to have a sort of "dreamy sleepwalky" landscape, whihc is perfect
for what this scene is to be.

The wordings of the paragraph could use some work. However, I do believe that
the general length of the paragraph is good. The comment I would make the most
prevalent is that the dream is simultaneous thought of as important yet not
important at all, and too quicly dismissed. Is it important or not? As the
writer, is it even clear that I knew what the dream was?

So there is something quite prevalent in this paragraph which I can't put my
finger on. It is as if the dream is important, and the fact that Seth can't
remember the dream is important, but then to service the dialogue I have to
come up with a contrived reason why Seth has to dismiss the dream.

I think it would be better if Seth strains himself to remember the dream, and
in doing so reminds himself of the pain in his hip.

So the thing to say about this paragraph is that the pain is not very vivid. It
is just enough to remind the reader about it, but not enough to really invoke
good imagary. It's a forgetable paragraph. In order to rememdy this, I might
have to create a card for "Seth injury to his hip" and anthromorphize it
somewhat. It is obviously linked to Beelzabub but I am not sure how else to do
this. I will think about it.

It needs a better word than "pain in his hip". Gouge is a good work.
Impalement. Seth was impaled. Gaping hole. Dressed wound. These are much better
descriptive words than "pain in the hip" and I think it is prudent for me to
use something better as than this. I must come up with some way to describe
this injury in more vivid and more sythesthitic ways.

Is it possible to do this though? I could make the point of Seth's pathology at
play here. I could create a method whereby Seth believes that Satan is entering
through the pain, and that because of this he must repress it.

In fact, the idea of making Seth a raging Schizophrenic is a rather good one, I
think. It is those schizophrenic ideas of his father taht allow him to do this.

So I will have Seth attribute the pain in his hip to "the spawn of Satan
through his denizen Beelzabub."

At this point I must also decide to what capacity Seth trusts Cain. To this
point, I do not want Cain to reveal the nature of his past. In fact, I don't
want it to be brought up at all. I want the nature of Cain's past to be brought
about through sprinkles where he is forced against his will to conjure up such
things. Abel should only be alluded to, and only quite deliberately.

So the biggest point here is, a missing piece of this whole puzzle is that Seth
should be deeply anthromophizing his pain in the form of the "spawn of Satan"
or some such drabble. In openning up the wound, Seth decides to continue to
block out the "indulgance of Satan" or something like that.

I am undecided how I feel about this next paragraph about the moon. I want
Seth's understanding of astronomy to be a rather prevalent piece throughout
this work. But I also want it to be thought of as sacriligous by Seth to
conflate God the father with the shining image of the sun. But I need Seth to
discover that rather organically throughout the work.

So in this moment, as Seth wonders idly about the moon, I get the impression
that my thoughts are sort of everywhere with what exactly I want Seth to
realize about the moon. The details about pre-new-moon vs very-old-moon are
quaint at best, but not really substantive as true revalation.

At the same time I feel it quite important for Seth to have these idle thoughts
about the astronomical bodies. Something about them must be talked about in the
novel, and paragraphs will be devoted to them, sprinkled throughout the work.

Perhaps it would be wise to think about the ways in which the moon acts as its
own character throughout the novel. I could talk about the literal timeline of
the story, which takes places over many months, and from there use the moon,
the sun, and the seasons as a means to hint at various events in the novel. But
the important thing is, and the trickiest part to pull off well, will be to be
able to put every paragraph which is about the moon, and every paragraph which
is about the sun, and so forth, in order, you would have a very interesting
progression of understanding and revalation about them.

That is, if you were to extract out only those paragraphs which dealt with
astronomical bodies, and took the places where characters remenisced on them
like this, you could show a new independent work, almost interesting enough in
and of itself to take it's place as part of the novel.

But since this is a novel, it will be up to the reader (and the Orbweaver of
course) to balance and discover such things.

So I feel that some paragraph about the moon must go here, but that this
particular paragraph about the moon is somewhat lacking.

So this next paragraph about the fire Cain had extinguished the night before is
pretty well done in my opinion. It is, how should you say, a complete paragraph
in every sense. In fact, it might be too complete. It might be prudent to have
Seth wonder a little more about Cain's stories. It feels as though as soon as
the reader might get caught up in thinking about Cain's stories themselves, it
is all too soon that the leaves stir in the back. Perhaps it is something about
Cain's stories that will leave Seth to contemplate something he doesn't
understand. Then, somehow, in that moment, the Deus Ex Machina of the rustling
in the leaves appears to give both Seth and the reader something new to
explore.

So this next paragraph I feel is good to go here. It is natural for Seth to
want to investigate the things that he sees. I like that the light shrinks and
then disappears. That creates a very vivid image in the reader. The writer
knows that Cain has taken a torch and lit it and gone in to the distance, and
the reader is able to discover this with the same kind of curiosity that Seth
might feel. I like this point.

At this point where I stopped, I had the problem of not quite explaining the
wire guard correctly. Let me do some quick brainstorming as to why this might
be.

Firstly, the biggest problem is that I want to use modern day framing. I want
to say that it is a grid of rebar. But where did this rebar come from? So it is
not rebar then. I suppose I have not fully described the scene that Seth is
laying.

So the Alcove (and that is a great word for this entire thing) sits in its
place. It is within the rolling hills of the outskirts of babylon. On these
hills there are places where there are trees and such, but there are also hills
and mounds that can be climbed to get gorgeous landscapes.

Seth's Alcove (the alcove where Cain stays when he comes to maintain Babylon),
is on the side of one of these hills. It faces to the East, on the inside of
the mountains which somewhat surround the city.
