So right now I have a few ideas about what I want to do for this free writing
session. At this moment, though, I will attempt to enter something of the zen
state that I can get to whereby all of teh words in my head just appear to me
and I only have to write them in order for them to be on the page.

So the first thing I was thinking about some time ago was the fact that
something ahhppens with something about the way that something oges in a circle
with something else. Clearly I had an idea in my mind but could't write it down
fast enough. So there is an concept that I want to write but it is not coming
out.

This is the idea that something can be an idea or a thought in your head and we
tcan start to talk about thoughts per minute.

So this is the tihng. When you are thinking, and meditating in particular,
there is a certian kind of "nowness" quality ot everywhing. The sounds you are
hearing are the literal sounds you are hearing, the voices in your head are
just your thoughts as they come and go. There is no need to force anything or
effect anything. You just simply exist in a certain kind of state of
consciousness and that allows you to just "be" in the world.

In the same way, we can obselrve the breathe and focus on it and let that
particular aspect of our being just be as if it were an involuntary process
(and we can do the same thing for pretty much any other muscle in the body that
is connect to our motor neurons) I would say that it is simply just the case
that it is sometimes the case that something is there, and I am having trouble
getting it out. The idea of something coming out of all these words is silly to
me.

So the thoughts we have happen very quickly in relation to our written speed
THat is the whole point. So when we write something, it is a thought. After it
is a thought, it must be articulated in some way. This is either in the case of
our minds voice which is a similar concept to the minds eye or it could also
bet the case that we speak it yout loud and literally hear our own viec  with
our ears.

In either case, it is the case that the thought ids articularetd in to the
language from which we boren all the thoughts of our mind. Then, when it is
that, there is antother thing that must go here and I don't remember what it
is. This is the case that this thought is not coming on teo the paper in a very
nice way.

So when we have a thought, it is usually the case that the thought goes by, it
occurs, and then it goes. And the process by which that occurs happens very
very fast. In the case of something like the sudden realization that you are
about to have an orgasm and theere is nothing you can do to stop it, the
thought might be something to the effect of "this is like a volcano that is
going to erupt" or something equally absurd. But in order to have that thought,
it must have come from somewhere. The person having that thought, being in the
middle of the orgasm, quickly becomes enveloped in a surge of "feel goodiness"
that we call neurotransmitter functions but is really just that part of the
orgasm which is orgasmic, and from there after the persosn has the orgasm they
can talk about it as if it were a memory.

So this is the thing. During the orgasm, everything is well known to the person
having the orgasm. In other words, at any point in the orgasm, the person could
very explicitely say what it is that they are feeling if only they were given
unlimited time to write it all down. But they don't have unlimited time to
write it all down, so instead the brain takes in the experience, and
considering vast and interesting enough to keep, decides to put it in the
storage centers.

So now we have two different concepts. If we remember, during the orgasm our
subject expressed the concept that he had the thought that his penis was like a
volcanoing eruption that was in the process of occurring, and that they quickly
supressed this thought as the orgasm came on simply because they wanted to
enjoy the feeling of orgasm. So there is that thought, but then there is also
all the little aspects of the orgasm which are in memory which the person could
say.

So they might articulate it literally, and say something like, "My penis
convulsed at a regular frequency. At first my girlfriend held on to the shaft
very tightly and pressed in the prenemuim of the penis to prevent the flow of
semen, but then when she timed it just right, the next convulsion let out of
flood of ejaculate which came bursting forth out of the tip of my penis and on
to her lovely and presenting breasts which she so gleefully pressed out forward
for my own enjoyment." This could be th eliteral interpretation of the orgasm.

If the man is synesthetic (as I tend to so often be, such is my life) he might
say that the orgasm felt as though his core and essence were like a ball of
light that was attached to a tube, and that the valve on the tube was released,
but as soon as that happen the semen met the ever strong and ever present
hindrance of my girlfriends fingers and in doing so created a resonant glow
about my very essence that made me feel entirely encapsulated by the
overbearing energy of orgasm that was cyclingi through my nerves. As she let
go, the pulsing directied it bright golden energy out of the pipe, and it burst
forth and I watched the energy fly out in to the area that would be the stars
but felt as simple as pure and ever-loving blackness to me. I then looked down
to my girlfriend, who had her tits gleefully pressed forward to me, and as the
color of the glowing energy that represented my ejaculate turned from a bright
glowing orange to a more soft color, I brought her skin in to focus to find
that her and her flesh was the true essence of my sexual energy.

We could continue on with another way that this man could talk about orgasm.
But that is not the point. The point is, the orgasm itself happened in a series
of about twenty five to thirty three seconds (precisely somewhere in that
range, the man said with his tongue deeply rooted in his cheek) yet somehow the
man is able to recall the experience from memory, and create a word picture of
what happened based upon the memory and by doing so allow others to empathise
with him.

So it is at this point that we make our distinctions. The literal thought that
the man had in the heat of orgasm (It's like a volcano!) was a literal thought
that the man had. If he would have been wanting to write down his thoughts as
seamlessly as possible in that moment he would not have been able to because as
soon as he had that thought it became overwhelmed by the sensation of orgasm
that the man was in some sense helpless to the raptures of our day to day
lives.

We have made the distinction. We have made the distinction. We have made the
distinction. I am to a point right now where I know I worte some stuff and that
it was about orgasms, but I don't remember what exactly the train of thought
was going to do. It was something about how orgasms are a thing that is a thing
that people do, but I din't remember why I went off on orgasmes . I think it
was to make some sort of dsitinction. But what was that. Was it the distinciton
that all men are created equal and that onne shall preish at the hands of the
lord. No it wasn't that. Was it the realziation that god is holy and that he
should be reveredd? Nope, not that either. Was it the idea that the desk on
which I am writing is in some way more important the n the hands that write on
it.? That seems closer to what I was writing about but not really.

I find this much intriguing. In the act of free writing and making myself
continue to write even when I would have the inclination to go back and read my
words to continue is a good tribute to the ability to have a continuous flow of
thouggts is the writing prosscesss.

The lake of editting gives me pause, however,. How much is this something that
just needs to "get out there" and how much should I delimberate over aevery
word? I think it is the case genar9ally speaking that every writing sessions
should have a purpose, and the way in which that purpose is achieved is
acomlished through whatever system the writer decides to put in place for
himself.

So this is the system that I want to put in place. When we have thoughts, the
thoughts occur to us. Some thoughts we can preserve as soon as we have them. In
other words, the words that I am writing at this moment I am using some sorct
of active part of my brain to suspend the image of the words as they apperan in
to my minds eye for just long enough to get them to my fingers, but then when
it is in the fingers I am attempting to do my best to just continue to write
the words as they appear. This is very different theen the memory writing I was
talking about wih the guy and the orgasms, With that the man who seeks to write
about his orgasm in such a way is doing something totally different. Because
it's not really possible to "suspend" something so fundamental as an orgasm so
that you can wtaoke the time to wriet about. Something else has to happen. The
experience has to be presenced in some way in what we call memore. Memorey is
nothing more than a space in the neurons in our brain which would seek to be
"recalled" and in being recalled protray to our minds eye not what we are
feeling in the currecnt moment in the meditative sense, but it alllows us to
"play back" the exact firing of the nuerons. But the process where by this
happens in memmory is something totally different then the way this happens in
rapturous suspenisos ( as I just so named it. Look at me, naming things. Pah!)
andway.

I forget waht I was talking about. Was there a reason to what I was talking
about. It had something to do with writing. It had to do with the fact that
wirting is somethnig that I find difficltt to do sometimes, and there is a
process whereby I am amble to take certain aspetts from memory and put them in
to words. I am very good at taking momerise and spelling them out, working over
them, polishing them, and sanding them to the point where they are beyond
recognition. I am also able to to some stream of consciousness philossohpy
(which is what I am doing now) but the reason I started going off on all of
this nonsens is that, while I have some tase for good fiction when I read, I
don't have so much of  a good tase for fiction when I am writing. In other
words, I am my owwn worst critc for some reason when it comes to fiction but
not with non-fiction or memory recal (like dreams) so there is always something
to be said for the ablitiy to write down things and just have them be the
things thta you wrote down. 

I am lost again. I am not sure what I was talking about or where I was headed.
I am in sort of a state of bewilderment. Something seemed so prevalent just
moments ago that I thought I must write it down, but dnow suddenly my brain is
sending me the signal that I should stop this and do something les. From where
does this signal arise. Why am I giving it credence. Is there osmething more to
what I am trying to accomplish here beyond just simple words per minuet.

I find it so strange that I was working on a train of thought and so quckly
derailed it. how does something like this happen? Where was that rapturous
train of thought that I was so convivnced that I was on the ride of.

Is there osme way I can rectify this. Must I go back and talk about the man
with the argasm again. It had to do with the fact that the way he orgasmed and
the way he remembrers the orgasm are different.

It's the case that memory is much less vivid than the true memory.

So here is how things work as I understand it. Something happens ot us. We get
a signal. That signal will sometimes come to our consciousness and sometimes to
our subconsciouns. In the case that it comes to our consciousness, it will be
the case that we will have some sort of experience, no matter how fleeting or
insignificant, that represents that event that happened to us. For isntance, we
might take notice as someone walks behind us and we feel their hair brush over
our own. While such a thing is not exactly memorable (there isn't even a story
there beyond  , one person was sitting and another walked behind her) I am lost
again, I was haivng a train of thought and its gone.

Oh tragedy. Why was there somenoe walking behind us. No matter how fleeting a
moment is, it is always tho case that it should be taken as a fleeting moment
as something that happened in the course of consciousness and its contents. So
there is something to be said for the things that happen to us.

Now if something happens to us that we feel is profound or is in some way worth
preserving, the brain has a mechanism by which it takes those experiences and
preserves them in a different part of the brain than the brain that has the
experiences. THis part of th ebrain is the part of th ebrain we call memory.

So at some point, when the stearm of consciousness is going on again, the brain
will have something happen to it, and it will be something likea  hardware
inturrupt that interjects itself in to its thought and says, There was a momery
which would be useful heree, and we should recall it. So it takes the preserved
image of the memory, whatever form that memory and preserved space takes, and
then it feeds those signals back to the forefront of the brain where they
occured the first time, In soo doing the brain is able to create a memeory
recall mode" which is neccesarily less rich and less involved than the ever
present and ever glovwing field of conscious view, but it is tstill the case
that this memory recall mode is a state in conscious vieww.

From this mode the writeer is then able to do his best to project the image of
the memory quite literally in to his minds eye. It is usually important that
the image be the most important thing, because I have tended to notice that
most memeroies take the form of images in some way in my brain. I don't know if
that is neccisarily the case, but I think it was worth writing down so I did.
In fact, it came to the forefront of my consciousness and as such I felt a I
hod to write it downa nd so I did.

How how my train of thought contiunally leaves me. It was something about the
way something ahppens in something else. Consciousness is a hard word to type,
and it is one that I should practice more. In factt, I think it might be fun to
praticet typing certain words, especially those that I like.

to complete the metntal picture that I am getting at, wonce the writer is able
to porject mental images on the mthe current stae of the dulled versoin of
consciousness, it is able to project those images for periouds of time
determined by the strength of the processes which do such thing.s. These
processes can be excersized and maintained like a muscele, and doing this
allows you to get to the point where doing what I am doing is fraught with
fewer pointless inturruptinons and instead is something of an art whereby the
author is able to  just write what comes to his mmind and in so doing create a
coherent flow for the reader to follow. It's such a great and wonderous way of
getting things from the thought in to the paper.

So the whole image looks like this (to recap here at the end in this final
paragraph). The experienc happens. After it happens, and the author has decided
that tit is worth preserving, a preservation process happens (and this
proservation process is some means by which more imporntant memorise are
preserved more tightly and more redialy accesable. Once the memory is
preserved, the augthor can safetly forget about it and rest assured that it
exists in the subconscious.

Later, when the atuhor is writing, tey can invoke a sort of "recall element" to
that particular memor and in so doing enact the mirror nuerons to fire in
jconjucngtion with the frontal cortex neurons to tcerate something of a
"remembered expeirence" or something ilkeu this. The better the experience was,
the more profound or the more inlspriationall or anything else, the more
seamless this process is going to be. Once the fleeting experience now takes
the form of a vivid and remembered image, the author can now suspend this image
and experience in his mind and in so doing write what he sees literally in tho
way that I am doing now. I have hit a state whereby all the words that come to
the forefront of my conscciousness just come out in to my fingers in a way that
I have no conctrol over. It is really quite profound how this works. I am just
writing, yet the words that are coming out are the words that the writer in me
would agree are the correct word,s but at the same time it is just the words I
am writing in the moment. When the reader reasds this back, I believe it will
be the case that he thinks this is the correct thing forme to say here, that
this bit fits and and thenre was maybe some other way this could have been
written but that this way was certanalily amicable enough and fit with the
nature of th erest of the ssios.

I am getting to the point wherI  believe I have exhausted myself on this point.
The whole thing is that in bpractinging word reacl and immediate writing of the
words that are recalled, we are maable to minimize the degree to which a
particualr dream image or memory has to be suspended in order to get it out. In
other words, the better we are able to navigate the world of our own thoughts,
and the better we are able to pause, rewaind, fastforawrd, and otherwise
manipulate a dream image through time, the better we will be able to fully
intergrate ourselves with the transcendent reality. Such is how it is.
