So wanted to talk about the next story that I want to re write. Or rather, I
want to start telling stories from my perspective. The first one I have re
written is first the Adam and Eve story, and also the Seth and Cain story. From
there, I want to mention the story of Oedoupus.

In fact, I want to give a go at the story of Oedoupus right now.

So this story begins in a time when there was a clear distinction between
individiuals. There were the farming class, and then there was the royalty
class. In this system, both parties are in theory satisfied with teh
realitonship. The farmers provide food, and bear simple, stress free lives, and
royalty gets first take of the food and in turn manages the affairs both
internal and external of those things that the farmers would not like to deal
with.

So in this story, we are living in an ideal version of that society. The
farmers are perfectly happy doing what they do. They sit in pleasure for
multiple hours a day, tending to their farms, and when they are not tending to
the farms, they are either relaxing, or pursuing some other hobby. Maybe they
want to practice juggling. Or maybe the farmers are able to play an instrument,
like a lyre, so they spend their free time practicing that.

Regardless, the point is, the farmers are content with their situation, and teh
politicians and generals are content with theirs. It's a mutually beneficial
society.

In this society, a child came of age to a shepard in the outskirts of Thebes.
This childs name was Oedoupus. The shepard was very old, and told the child.
"Child, I am your father. Let me teach you the ways of the world." And so,
Oedoupus and the shepard grew close as father and son might, and Oedoupus grew
up knowing only that the Shepard was his father.

The shepard was going to tell Oedoupus about his biological parents, but never
mustered up the courage to do so. Oedoupus grew to be sixteen years of age
ignorant to even the idea that this Shepard was not his father.

When Oedoupus turned 16, as was custom for Shepard sons of the day to do, he
would enter a sort of "rite of passage" amongst those of the culture. It's a
celebration at the temple to the gods for your successful upbringing into
culture. It comes with a free reading from the delphi oracle and all.

And, as an aside about the oracle at Delphi, in our universe, we are living in
a place that is not so pure as to have an actual oracle to the gods. Mind you,
the oracle claimed lineage back to the original Oracle at Delphi, who made his
earth shattering precitions about the state of Greece many centuries before,
but really, you knew what was happening was that people were putting in hard
earned silver coins to get their "fortune" told by some twenty two year old
priest who went through "Delphi Training". Still, they offered their services
for free to all men coming to the age of 16, and women coming to the age of 14.

So naturally, when Oedoupus turned 16, he went to the oracle at Delphi to
redeem his free fortune telling.

When Oedoupus gets to the Oracle, the Oracle says to him, "Oh, my dear
Oedoupus, tragic is your fate. You will kill your father, and lie with your
mother."

Oedoupus, rather skeptical of this supposed Oracle, said, "Listen man, I love
my father and would never kill him, and my mother is already dead, so there is
no way I can lie with her."

The oracle said notihng more, and ushered in the next customer.

Oedoupus thought this whole thing was rather stupid. Still, going through the
whole process of the 16 year old 'rite of passage' package got him to thinking
that maybe he could live some sort of life as something other than a shepard.
Maybe he could go out and see the world, become a soldier, fight for his
people, go out and see the world. Oedoupus told this idea to his father, and
his father said, "Listen, son, go out, I will not stop you from going where you
want to go. You are your own man, and you will come to be an excellent man if I
allow you to spread your wings as you may. Go, my son. Be what you want to be."

And with that, Oedoupus set on his journey to Thebes. There was a famous Theban
university there, very prestigous, and it was the place where all of the old,
famous philosophers had taught many centuries before.

On your way to Thebes, though, you run across a crazed man. He runs to you,
sword drawn, and says, "Have you seen the Sphinx?" He is very shaken, and very
on edge. He is pointing his sword towards you as if would be ready to lunge at
the wrong move.

Oedoupus, being very taken aback by this man, drew his own sword, and said,
"Sir, if you have a quarell with me, let us fight eachother, but do not draw a
sword behind my back."

"No, no," the crazed man sheathed his sword. "The sphinx is ravaging the town.
Have you not seen him? You must be free of his curse then."

Oedoupus was very confused. "First you draw your sword towards me, and now you
tell me that there is some sort of demonic sphinx terrorizing your town. Take
me to the sphinx! I will take care of it for you."

The crazed man then turned his sword back on Oedoupus and said, "NO! Only the
servents of the Sphinx would asked to be taken to the sphinx. Die you cur!" The
crazed man drew his sword again, and lunged an attack at Oedoupus. Oedoupus,
being on his toes and anticipating such a move, sidestepped the swipe, drew his
own sword, and sliced the crazed man on the neck. Oedoupus was merely acting in
self-defense, but realized that he hit an artery. The man would bleed out in
seconds, and there was nothing Oedoupus could do. So he dragged the bleeding
out corpse to the side of the road, and he left it there. He then continued on
to the town.

What was the sphinx that the man was talking about? Oedoupus wasn't sure what
that was all about. It would seem strange to him if an actual sphinx were
rumaging through the town. That was something of a mythology, that wasn't
something that actuallly happened. He continued on his way to Thebes with
caution.

When he arrived at Thebes, he went to the central government building of
thebes, their town square, he went inside and asked about a sphinx. The woman
in fact, did confirm that there had been a sphinx attack on the village.
Oedoupus asked what she meant. She said, "There was a group of lions in the
outskirts of our village. There were about 100 of them. We call it a "sphinx
attack." It's as if the lions are cursed, and hunt humans for the mear purpose
of invoking terror in all of us. It's a terrible thing to happen to our
village.

And Oedoupus said, "And if I were to go out and hunt these lions, what would be
my reward?"

And the lady said, "Oh, dear, if you were to hunt them and slay them, we would
be ever grateful for your heroic deeds. You would be taking off a great burden
from our village. But it would be quite dangerous. The riddle of the Sphinx
attack has not been solved."

"The riddel of the Sphinx attack?" Oedoupus had never heard of such a thing.

"Yes," the lady answered, "It's an unsolved problem in animal psychology. How
is it that over one hundred crazed lions can act in unison? We don't understand
how this riddle can be solved. If we could only solve that riddle, we could
understand what we need to do in order to stop it."

Oedoupus spent the next four years getting a degree in biology, then the next
two years doing doctorate work in psychology. He then continued on his academic
research, and after many years he was able to solve the riddle of the sphinx.

Of course, he got many prizes and acolades. 

