So this is something taht I enjoy doing from time to time. I like to simply
write a bunch of words all in a row without regard to what the words say and
what they may mean. You see, right now there  is nothing in my head, and it
makes mefeel strange.

I have a couple things that are premiere distractions for me. For instance, I
have two letters that I need to mail, and another form I need to print out
before I leave work, but all of those things can happen in time.

I am also anxious because I have a few hanging conversations with some other
people, and I don't like it. In fact, I don't like it enough that I went on to
the internet to fulfill what those conversation were meant to fulfill. I am
being vague for simply legal reasons, but in general I think it is correct to
say that I am most definitely relaxed and at ease with myself at the moment.

You see, there are times when it's right to freak out about things, and there
are times when it is not right to freak out about tihngs. This is one of those
times where it is not right to freak out about things. Life is good. I honestly
and truely believe that. It's such a magnificent thing to take part in, and I
get to do it. It's amazing. I get to do things like typing on a keyboard
indefinitely while I pretend to be working on something important.

That's another thing as well. Right now at work, I have three things hanging
that I would like to get at least two of them completely tied up, and the third
I would like to get close to tied up at least.

I just feel so at peace. I put on some sort of "ambient/chillstep" mix and I am
really chilling out to that. It's quite amazing how comfortable I am right now.
The music, on top of the keyboard, the monitor in front of my screen, all of it
lets me sit at ease with myself and maintain a level of composure in my
situation that I would not be able to maintain otherwise.

Oh, how foolish I must be at times, such that I do not organize my life to
maintain this level of calmness and oneness with everything in my life. To
fight on the edge of two precipices requires concentraction only on the fact
that one is prepared to fight.

I landed a rear naked choke on Jake at open mat for lunch today. I just
practiced many reps with Nujan a couple days earlier, and so I was able to
apply some of the muscle memory from that to my experience today. We started
from the feet, but I was able to spin around to the back, I forget how, and
when I landed there, I saw the neck was exposed so I took it.

The finish was actually difficult, and he did a good job at holding on. It was
not near deep enough to get a complete grip on it, but I was able to get it
pretty deep, deep enough that he tapped eventually.

There is not much more to say about the choke that I got. Quite honestly, I
feel as though there is not much to say in general, but I don't want to stop.

It's interesting that I find this okay. One would not think this is okay. In
fact, this seems pretty far from okay. It's one thing when I have something
really deep and profound on my mind, and I feel as though I must release that
thing out on to some sort of medium in order to feel okay again, as if I have
something that must be let go of, and the only way my brain will allow me to
let go of it is by writing it out. It's one thing when that happens. But in
this case, I don't have anything. There is nothing that I want to say, or feel
like I need to say. In fact, just coming up with the next words to type is a
rather laborious process right now. I am painfully conjuring up the words for
my fingers to spell out on to the keyboard so that I can have something on the
page.

But let's say for a moment that this wasn't the case. Instead of that, what we
are going to say is that I am at a point where I am having to write the words
that just come into my head. Purple elephant. See, that is something that might
happen on this part of the journey into the mind. Why did I think of purple
elephants? Why did I not think of the Eiffal tower, or Spain, or Peurto Rico?
Of all things, why did the first ridiculaous thing that came in to my head have
to be purple elephants?

Of course, I think the reason is because it is the canonical example of
something ridiculous that must be put into the space of the brain to reveal the
paradox of thinking too deeply about attempting to not think abotu something.
Purple elephants are always the absurd thing that participants in this
experiment are told not to think about, and of course, as the trial goes, the
patient will reveal that they are having a difficult time getting purple
elephents out of their mind.

So something that I do want to say about this sort of thouht experiment is that
I'm not entirely sure for how long the patient will be inclined to think about
purple elephants from the moment he is told to not think about them. How many
seconds does it take for the endless train of the mind to return to a state
where it is spewing non-purple elephant related things back at the active
participant of consciousness? And is this amount of time dependent on the
qualities of the patient? Do active meditators have an easier time dispelling
purple elephants from their mind, or is that not even a factor in the entire
process. Perhaps all that could be said is that active meditators will be
acutely aware of the unpleasent fact that purple elephants cloud their mind and
their thoughts.

Of course, for all people, the amount of time it takes to resume regular,
non-purple elephant, thought is going to be some finite number, almost
certainly less than a day, and most likely less than even an hour. In fact, I
would be willing to postulate that the amount of time is no more than ten to
fifteen minutes for even the most experienced meditators to maintain the image
of a purple elephant in their head. Of course, if they are being constantly
reminded by an external stimuli that they should not think about purple
elephants, that is a different story, but if they are only probe once and told
to eridicate purple elephants from their mind, at some point the purple
elephant will erode, and the patient will move on to thinking about something
else, like his taxes, or whether or not the thing he said to his sister was
assholish or not.

Once this lost train of thought is gathered again, purple elephants might
reenter the mind of their own accord. In fact, it is very likely, especially in
the case that the patient is truly a subject of legitamate psychological study,
that he will have moments later in life where he is reminded of this purple
elephant problem and will be inclined to remember it again. But the point is,
there will be a point where purple elephants are eradicated from the mind of
the patient again, and the returning of the purple elephant again will be due
to some other stimulus apart from the patients own control. It will be
something external which gives the patient at this point the image of the
purple elephant in his mind's eye.

So the amount of time it takes for the patient to eradicate the memory or image
of purple elephants from his mind will be, in my estimation, a rather small
amount of time, and I would say it is reasonable to think that it's possible
for someone to learn that power.
