So right now I am not sure exactly what I want to write about, so I am going to
talking about a particular experience I had in BJJ today.

First of all, I have gotten much better at resolving myself to work through my
depression and get to the point where I can do work for myself even when I
don't want to. The way I have decided to do this is like so. Something is wrong
here. I am writing and I don't want to write.

Okay, let's start over. This session I really want to close my eyes and write.
It has been a long while since I have dosen something like thins, so I will sit
down and resolve myself to do this like I am doing right now.

So the thing is, I don't know what to write about, but I just want to pratice
the act of typing, so I am doing the. I have had some licideous thoughts
likely. That is not true. Actually, I did have so me sicideous thoughts. I am
having them right now. I want my erection to come in to itself. In order to
8combat this, I wlill go out after sundown. The sun is at the moment almost
down, and I will work on some yoga. After the yoga, I might decide to
eventually perform some tantric exercise. I want to watch something like Hegre
again, and do a legit process of tantric exercise. After such a thing, I feel I
will be able to get to bed.

So I have decided that I want to be one of those people that attempts to go to
bed really early and gets up really early. I would love to wake up before the
sunrise, and use the sunrise during my morning jog to really get my day going.
That is somtheing that I think I can accopmplish, if only I could bring myself
to get to bed at a reasonable time.

So the thing about it is this. I have always been th esort of person that has
put off things unite they need to be done. I don't want to clean the house. And
I have justification for this. That is, when I put them off, and I finially do
get to them, I distinctly notice the difference, and that gives me sexual
pleasure. And I mean sexual pleasure in that sense of th eword. It gives the
intesnes desire of an orgasm when I do something that has been put off and
needs to be done.

Right now I am thinking of brushing my teeth. When I put that kind of thing
off, and I really feel the film of bacterioa or whatever else build up on my
teeth, and then I am able to put in my mouth the toochpast e and really have a
go at it, there i s something that really deeply gives me pleause. Such is the
nature of my procrastination. It feels good to put something off, and then when
it gets disgusting and gross, I am able to fix it, and in so doing I gann a
certain level of satisfaction

Of course, such a thing is something of a new revaltaiton to me. Much like
everything else that is in my life that I have gone through to try and crorect,
the sexual element of my procrastinatory elements are wwhat I am very good at.

And I am not even, as some people have said, I productive procrastinator. I
would much rather lay down while something needs to be done and not do the
thing that needs to be done, and let it be not happening than actually do the
thing. It's exciting. It's really really exciting. I love it.

So I need to figure out a way to force myself (and preshap the word force is
not the right way to look at it.) Actually, lets stop that train of thaught. I
need to find a way to gain the sexual pleasure of putting things off in a
different way. In other words, I don't like having completed work. I like
having work hanging over me not being don. I like having something that needs
to b edone, and not a thing to do with it.

Right now I am very sexually charged, I have realized. The thought of even
touching my penis in an intimate way excites me. I am so exctied for tonight,
because I will give myself tsome time to wactch some erotic nude art and
arrouse myself for some time. It is something that I think should happen with
me right now. I want to do it so much.

There is something about the way that you can sustain yourself for such a long
time. I love having a fully erect and throbbing penis, and continually telling
myself not to cum. I want to just hold it there, in that position, and do the
kegals and aother exercises to train it and wield it for my devices. This is
something that I want to be good at. It is something that I need to make sure
to practice. And it's something that, when I do it, I really want to make sure
that it's something that I do in a well formed and a healthy way. Because in
praticing this sort of erectile stamina like this, I am practicing the kinds of
things that would make me a very valuable man in the bedroom and for another
girl. It's really quite amazing to think how I can pleasure another woman for
so long. How many orgasms could her and I both have in th etime that I could
keep myself erect. It's so wonderful to think. That her and I might stay erect
together, her being moist, and me being erect, and the esxuality flowing, and
the natures and cares of eachothers bodyies being taken care of. It's  A truely
siblim e experience, and one that I want ot practice.

But I have promised myself that I will go outside and pracitec some yoga first.
I am not surie exactly what sort of yogaa I want to practice, but I am tempted
to just simply go through the bixram poswures. However, this seems wrong. Right
now, I feel like doing some more standing sort of meditation, and I want to
think about the ways in which my erect penis will be presperesented by my whole
body. In practicing erection with my spine, I am also practicing erection with
my body, and my penis I love the way that these two things connect. It is truly
the most fascintaing thing.

Right now I see a glorous tree. The tree is growing out of the ground, and it
is presenting itself before me. The triee is planted in a hill. So far, as much
as I think about it, it is just this tree in the scene, and to the right is the
rising sun. It is definitely setting istnead of rising now that I think about
it. So the tree is on the hill, and the sun is setting. As I look around, there
are some sempblance of civilatiozation in the distance, but nothing that is
there in compalrison to this one tree. It's a glorusious tree. Wonderfull to
behold. very full in the top, and the root structure takes up tho wheole of the
structure of the underground structure that encompasses the very essence of the
tree.

I want to find myself under the ground so that I can become one with the tree.
I find myself sinking under the ground, and coming in to the tree, and through
this I am able to see that the tree represents myself, not only my erection and
my fruit of my seed, but also in the way that my erection becomes full and full
of fruit of the tree so to the tree produces the furit of the life which
sustains the living beings of all. And I must say, that I must become like this
tree.

How much I would like to become the tree. In producing fruit I am able to see
th way in which the tree gives to those around it. It gives and accepts nothing
in return, but we as humans must welcom these trees and treat them as something
most devine. The trees that are worth presenrving must be preserved.

And the wood of the tree represents the wood of ourselves. And the carpenter,
and taking of the wood of the tree, is able to make among himslf the
rperesentation of his sexual energy in th eform of his work. He can make
anything, from dice, to boxes to clocks to all sorts of magnifincentst and
wonderful things. And the mushrooms that grow in the tree, which would be like
spores or germs of the tree, are connectied to everything around them. The
mushromms which are born of the earth fulfuill us and make us whole and
compleet in all things. It is in this mushroom trip that I want Seth to find
himsellf as a sexual being. I want him to find his godess, and I want him to
see the nature in which the ever lasting and etrernal form of his femenine
image is brought forth.

I feel as though I am not givng credence at all to thing the things I feel
right now. I am very much lost in the wonders and joys of sexual pleasure that
I cannot even come up with the words as they present themselves before me. The
underground nature of the tree has glawing and evervecent balls of organge,
glowing out of and among the roots of th etrees, and Seth is able to reach out
and grab these thingls, but he is awlways feeling as though he is lost in
grabbing them. I can't bring myself to find what it is that I am trying to say.

Something is missing. Something is woefully and terribly missing. My gaia, my
Nara, my someone to show me the ways of the life and everlasting glory of
sexual union. How I thirst for it. IHow I long for it. If there were only a
woman who would let me show them what I hav e to otffer them sexually. It would
be so glorious to pleasure a woman for the sake of having her pleasure. It
would be so transcendent and absolutely breathtaking to become a part of the
wamons body, and to feel her, and to feel her needs, and to become entwined
with her, and to link myself with here in dna like sexual union, twisting and
molding ourselves to eachother. How much this would be so wonderful.

Yet I am but a man, sitting here as I type, with not a woman to pleasure in
this way. It isso much my plight that I must find this woman, and become a part
of her. Yet this wordld has wrought away the stars. We have wrought away th
egloruious and wonderous things that we can explore together. Too many people
try and take too much for themselves. And how much is it the case that we are
to be frought with such things. We are to come to understand that it is the
world that is harsh, and not the woman, but the world, who in being formed grew
in such a way as to have living things upon it. And it did not ask for such
things. It did not breed such things by it's own will, but instead as a part of
the ever glowing and ever wonderful doings of all that is to be in this world.
And though we are but simple apes and monekxeyies floating on a ball of rock, I
do whole heartedly and deeply feel that what we are doing here is the most
important thing that anyone on any planet has ever done in any way. 

Woe are the people who look at the stars and imagine that we are somehow alien
to those thingswhich might be out there. We are each and every one of us a part
of our own universe, and by connecting ourselves, we will be able to see the
universe in a much more complete and a much more fullfilling way. But it is
difficutly to do, and it is difficut0ly to get past all of those things which
we have overcome. We have built ourselves houses and roads, and in so doing we
have imagined that we have overcome the disasteres and tumultious desires of
the wrold, but we must also remember that it is those sosrts of disasteres and
tragedies taht allowed us to come to be here at all.

It is in the storm of our lives, and in those ways that our lives have most
neccesarily come to be that we can understand that we are something bigger and
better and glourious and filled with all of the light that mikes our lives
complete. We are each that shining light, if only we let ourselves be a vessel
for the world to take ourselevs in.

But by becoming a vessel, we also become a vessel for thorns. We become a
vessel for all sorts of evil and artificial things. But in the glory of the
sun, and in the glory of the moon, and in the glory of all the light that we
can still just parely see through the pollution and despair that we will come
to recognize that when we look up at the stars and become filled with awe, it
is not the stars that are awe-inspired but ourselves, who would look up and be
taken away by the entire picutre of how we came to be.

How magnificent our story is! How magnificent. If only there were a word I
could use to describe what I am feeling right now, but there isn't! I want to
describe it, but every time I attempt to, I lose myself in the rapturous
visions that overtake me. How could I describe this any more than as I light
that fills us and makes us whole and complete. And in bursting forth out of
this glowing light, we are to become more than human, but at the same time only
human, in the deepest and most tragically sorroful yet worderfully mystical
kind of ways.

Fill me with your light! I need that light so taht I might become complet. I
feel like a man trapped in the body that must refine itself to burst forth as
the ever glowing gold that I know that is with all of us.

The E-Major hit of intersteller is all I can feel right now! The glorious
resonance that is in all of us of a wenderous E-major chord! Let me be that
E-major chord!
