So right now I want to write, but I don't know what to write about. This is
usually the starting off point for these articles. I think it is something that
I should put at the top of every free writing session I have. I should make my
own little manual for how to have a free writing session. And it would start
with "Step 1: Literally right the words 'I want to write, but I don't know what
I want to write about' at the top." Subsequent steps would then have something
to do with continuing to write even if you don't want to write, and then not
forcing yourself into some notion of doing things correct or not.

For instance, in writing the previous paragraph, I paused at a few points to
figure out exactly what the words were that I wanted to say. It was not
particularly imperitive that I do, because in fact I could have just kept
writing on without regard to what I was doing, but such is the case that I felt
it correct to pause, and so I did.

I think there should be a general rule that you should be writing more often
over not writing. Like for instance, in this one paragraph, I have had most of
what I want the paragraph to say in my head the entire time I was writing it.
So it is generally more often the case that there is more in your head than you
can write out all at once. Interesting.

So I don't particularly want to write any more about the process of wirting
itself. Instead I would like to talk something about Seth and Cain.

So Seth and Cain. There is something interesting that has emerged from my
latest taking up of my project. I use the term "taking up" loosly because I am
not at all resolved to see this project through to any sort of modicum of
completion. Regardless, perhaps it would be more accurate to say that I have
started doing things on the project again. I suppose that is taking up, and I
suppose I have already said enough in that I use that term loosly. I am
repeating myself.

Start over. The thing it is that I have noticed, in particular when writing out
the dialogue that Seth and Cain have when Cain relates the story of Abel to
him, is that I have projected, quite strongly, the emotions the characters feel
from my own emotions.

THere is a distinction to be made here, I think. This was almost an entirely
deliberate process. The process for re-writing this portion of the story has
been somewhat different than it was on the first time around. The first time, I
felt I needed to say something, and whatever emotion that came out was simply
projected out from whatever it was that I felt needed to be said. It was a much
more subconscious degree of understanding.

But this time it was something different. First, in talking about the process
itself, it was much more deliberate than it was before. In other words, usually
when I write, I just get the words out on to the page without much regard for
what they read back like. It's just not the way I usually write. However, this
time when writing the thing, I have been quite deliberate in actually reading
them back and attempting to get a feel for how the pacing of it all goes. That
being said, it was quite difficult in priming this sort of engine so to speak,
but certainaly after the initial priming, the pacing is actually something that
I am quite proud of.

But more so than that, there was something else which started to come out of
me, something which I hadn't quite experienced before. As I was writing the
characetrs and their dialogue, I took great pains to descirbe their sitting
posture and other facets of the emotinos and their responses to those emotions
as physical manifestations, and as I was doing this I noticed in myself a sort
of mirroring of my own physical posture. And as I was doing this, I would
actually attempt to provoke those sorts of thoughts in me, and see how I
reacted.

I want to use an example to make this more concrete. So for instance, I have a
moment where, when Cain gets to a particularly painful part of the story, the
part of the story where he is about to go in to the actual action of the
process that spins in to the KJV account of Cain and Abel, he opens his eyes,
and looks directly at Seth.

So there are two things to note about what happened here. Usually, since I tend
to empathize with the character of Cain more, I don't take it so much as
seriously when it comes to flesh out the character of Seth. I feel quite
unconnected to Seth. So when Cain opens his eyes, and stares somewhat
forthrightly at Seth, I was not sure how Seth was to react. So at that point, I
paused for some time, and attempted to empathize with Seth and his character.
After all, Seth is nothing more than a projection of the aspect of me which is
entirely naive to the existance of Cain. He represents an aspect of me which is
the me that was growing up. As a result, I ought to be able to find that part
of me and figure out how he might react. And as I did that, I noticed that the
reaction was one quite different than the reaction taht I had written out of
instinct. There was quite something else which emerged. So it was then my duty
to take that and rework it entirely. Which is where the deliberation came in.

The second thing to note is that I noticed that the sort of interplay which was
happening was almost entirely the interplay that was happening in my own mind.
It was as if there was something of a transcription taking place, where I was
saying the things that I wanted to say to those parts of my subconscious mind,
and it just so turned out that such a thing was exactly what I wanted my
characters to say.

I suppose this goes in to the greater point that I find about movies and
literature in general. There is something I believe quite firmly, which is
worth writing down. It is this: Any work of fiction is a story about the
interplay between subconscious objects at work. The degree to which a story of
fiction resonates with someone represents the accuracy of the workings of the
subconsious elements.

This statement is something that certainly requires unpacking.

So I think the first thing to unpack is the first notion being proposed.
Namely, that all fiction is a story about the interplay of subconscious
elements.

This is quite different than what one might usually say about what a movie
represents. I think a more pedestrian view of a movie would be to say that, in
the movie, the audience empathizes with one character, the characetr which is
usually labeled as a protagonist, and then from letting themselves become that
character, they are then able to learn something about how to navigate the
world of other characters that exist.

So this is something of a usual designation, and at face value there is nothing
wrong with it. In fact, I would even say on a deeper level, it still works
quite well. For instance, in the Matrix we are meant to empathize with Neo, and
as Neo meets Morpheous, we might think about how this is similar to one of our
superiors in a company, who as a result of some sort of schism which has taken
place within the company has had to make his presence known to us. We can than
see the interplay between Neo and Morpheous as something as anagolous to our
relationship with this person. This is a perfectly valid way to view a movie.

I am talking about something different. I believe movies have something of a
correcting quality. All of us are set up in a certain way. We all have parts
and archetypes, different kinds of the "us" that we identify with when we say
"I am." Probably the best way to say this is, the self is an illusion, but none
the less it is an illusion that can be analyzed and studied. And when we look
in to this illusion and attempt to study it, we see that there are different
versions of "us" that exist.

So the protaginist in this sense is the "germ of the self" or perhaps "the part
of the self which is most identified with being called the self" or something
like that. It is an emergent property of being a human being that we all have
this part of ourselves which call itself the personality.

Already I am having difficult differentiating some things. Because of the
illusory nature of this, I must take great pain in truly differentiating what
it is that I want to write.

I think I want to take this from a different angle.

So in our brains we have a bunch of wiring. There are synapses that fire and
certain neural pathways which find themselves having a particular kind of route
and motion through the brain.

The complicated degree to which all of these synapses compose themselves is
near impossible to discern, and so it is useful to subdivide them into various
kinds of forms. It is this kind of subdivision to which I am refering when I
say that there is an illusion of self which can be observed. It is not that
there is a self which can be examined, but rather that these kinds of pathways
can be sub-deliniated, and in these sub-deliniations emmerge various kinds of
phenomenon which the consious being doing the observing of them all would call
"myself."

So now that we have this, we can see that there is a whole network of these
neural pathways. Some of them are like cities, in the sense that they are each
in and of themseleves something of a node worth observing on their own.
Meanwhile, there are other pathways which serve more as something of an
interconnect phenomenon. So for instance, it might be useful to talk about how
a hand moves, but it does'nt really make sense to consider the motion of the
hand without also considering the motion of the arm and the motion of the
shoulders, and so forth. And then there is also the complication of the fact
that the person with the hand might be running. It would be quite a different
thing if the hand was moving from one location to the other without the rest of
the body, that would imply that some psychopath has severed your hand and is
taking it with him to his psychopath lair. So all of that to say, there are
parts of the self which can be seen as something of their own unit, but to
describe them entirely on their own would be anachornistic.

So now to return to the topic of the movie. In the movie, what I am proposing
is that each character in the movie corresponds to some particular arrangement
of neurons and synapses, and that the degree to which any character of the
movie will resonate with an individual will have to do with how well that
character matches the pattern of the nerve firings of an individual.

So already, without even talking about the movie at all, we are already getting
to some sort of understanding of what it means to create a psychological analog
of a characeter to a particular subset of the "self" as such. We just mean that
the pattern of neurons and sysnapses which happens to fire in a particular
pattern matches the kinds of neurons and synapses which fire in an individual,
and the closer these two things relate, the more an audience member will relate
with a character on screen.

Now I want to take a brief intermission here to point out that all of this is
entirely romantic in its presentation. In other words, I am not creating any
sort of rigourous framework on which to say that, if we had the technology, we
would be able to take patterns from a character in a movie and map them on to
some sort of "neural pattern" and that we could anaylize that pattern with an
AI and see how much of a match that pattern would have with some MRI data about
the synapse firing of the brain of the observer. As much as that would be awe
inspiring and infinitely interestnig to do, not only does the technology not
exist, now or potentially ever, to perform such a kind of upper level analysis,
but I am not convinced that even if it did that this would entierly match up in
the way that I am describing. Instead, I think moreso what needs to be
emphasized is that I am using this sort of analogy from "character patterns"
matching "thought patterns" to illustrate the greater point that I am making.

As a sort of side bar, this is why I believe music is so critical in movies. In
thinking about things in these terms, it is easy to see that music in this
sense represents another sort of "thought pattern" which is present in the
mind. Except the thing about music is that it doesn't really have a mapping on
to any part of the mind that would be called "the self" in any kind of form.
Moreso, music has the quality of something like a "catalyzing agent". That is,
it is something that allows the mind to maintain itself upon a much more
primitive understanding. Something like this. I find myself really wanting to
find something of a musical analog which hones in on exactly the point I want
to make, but I find myself unable to do so, and as such I will move on.

Regardless of any of that, this gets to the point of what I am trying to do. In
our lives, our brains have extremely complicated and interwoven behavior. It is
so complicated, in fact, that most of our awareness of consciousness isn't able
to receive it at all, and a lot of it's doings take place in the subconscious
mind. As such, the understanding of how these different interplays of different
kinds of "selves" operate is little known to us. Because of this, it might be
the case that we go along in our lives, and something comes about which our
particular kinds of neural patterns goes in a way which is entirely
sub-optimal. Things can go astray, different internal conflicts can arise, and
in the worst case a full psychosis can occur.

The role of the movie is twofold. First, if the movie is well constructed, it
is simply a sort of demonstration. It says, "this is how these different kind
of neural patterns interact." We, as humans, can watch this and gather new
levels of understanding of how our own internal process work.

More than this, though, or perhaps as something which follows after this
process of simple understanding, is something quite deeper. It is something of
a "reorganizing process" which takes place.

Without the movie, our different neural pathways will behave and align however
they may. We go about our lives, and things play out however they may. With the
movie, however, a transformation process occurs, however mild or drastic it may
be. In watching the movie, the various neural pathways which correspond most
closely with that of the characters and other patterns that emerge out of the
movie will recognize the patterns that occur. In doing this, they alter
themselves on a sort of corrective behavior. The pathways which become
activated become activated in a condensed and compressed way. The action of a
movie often takes place over the course of many days, if not weeks or months or
years. As a result, the pathways which connect to the movie, which might not
correspond to the exact patterns which emerge out of the movie, will be able to
see how, if they were to match more with the movie, how they might interact in
a way which more closely resembles the movie.

I am getting lost a little bit. I am having difficulty in find the words to
describe the phenomenon which I am trying to describe. It is interesting to me
that I am having something of a block here. The sorts of things that I am
attempting to describe are very clear in my mind, but they are not translating
in to words to my satisfaction.

I think I am quite exhausted of writing now for the moment, and as such I will
stop for now. I will read this back and see if there is anything that emerges
out of the reading, but if not, I will just end it here.

I think honestly I have said most of what needs to be said. Mostly it is just
that I feel my "movie as a correcting agent" point hasn't been fully made, but
I'm not sure what about it hasn't been fully made. It's mostly just the exact
crystallization of words which hasn't quite been formed yet. Maybe it will come
to me, maybe not, but I'm done writing for now.
