So some time ago, and I'm not sure how long ago this was, and I don't care to
look right now because I am writing and I just don't want to look get off my
back about it, I began writing about my criticism of therapy. I got as far as
detailing out my expectations about the whole thing, as well as talking a
little bit about my own experiences before I had to stop. I would like to
continue that stream of discussion here.

The first thing I want to do to kick off this session is to go over some of
the things that I ended my last session with, only this time I want to say them
in a way that doesn't drag in a ton of personal stuff. It might be the case
that such dragging in will happen (in fact it's almost garunteed to be this
way) but I want to attempt to divorce my comments from my own personal shit.

Where I left off was speaking on my experience with Richard Edwards (or Edward
Richards, again, I don't remember and I could look it up but I'm not going to
because get all the way off my back about it). The high points to note about
that experience are as such.

Firstly, I was rather continually flabergasted at how often my train of thought
would get inturrupted by his own questions and interjections. It was a
continual struggle to attempt to express my train of thought because of just
how frequently this was occuring. Another point of note is that I felt there
were a ton of mind games being played. I could never tell if a comment on his
end was being made out of genuine intent or if it was meant to somehow
destabalize me and subvert my conscious intentions as a means of infiltrating
my subconscious. Lastly, the final point to note is that I became increasingly
uncomfortable expressing my actual feelings in the moment. On my last session
when I mentioned that for the previous week I had become increasingly depressed
to the point of near paralysis, he seemed to take this as something I was
intentionly inflicting upon myself, which is true to some extent but also just
simply a consequence of everything that was going on in my life as well as a
frustration at the lack of anything useful happening in therapy. Towards the
end when I expressed that I wasn't sure what was to be gained by sitting in a
room and talking to someone, he took this in the direction saying that I didn't
want to see him again, which isn't at all what I was trying to direct the
conversation to, and so after this I went to my car and cried for a solid hour
and a half straight, which is atypical for me as a whole but not atypical for
where I was in that time of my life.

Now I would like to continue by talking about what happened next. I had a
conversation with my mom literally after I got home. She intruded herself into
my state of terrifyingly deep depression and asked me if I would like to have a
conversation, a conversation that she and dad were continuing to put off for
the past six weeks. I decided to muster my inner "give a fuck" and we sat down
and discussed the next steps. After that discussion she did some research and
told me to investigate an outpatient treatment center called i360 which she had
heard of from some time ago. I called them and I met with Amy and Ryan who
spoke about their process.

They returned with an entire conglomeration of plans for myself. There were
many facets to their treatment, which I will subdivide into different sections.

The most stark thing to note about their treatment was that, in thier speaking
to us about how they operate, they mentioned how much they were like a team in
their processes. Everyone would talk to everyone, people would communicate
different ideas and findings based upon their time with me, and I was told that
I would be able to avoid the "tell me what brings you here" conversation after
I gave it to them initially.

This was clearly a lie. People amongst their different faculties and divisions
had very little idea of what was taking place amongst the other faculties, and
with each new person that I met I would have to introduce myself as if they
knew nothing about me. I got sick of answering the "tell me about yourself"
question.

So lets now subdivide these different faculties and discuss them individually.

Firstly and easiest to talk about were those things that were acquired for the
clear intention of placing them in my case file. This were things like "life
story to this point" "family geneology" and a questionairre that I filled out.
All of these things took some time, but something that struck me in these
things was the sheer superficiality of the comments which were being made. When
I finished my "life story to this point" I was asked to draw various squares
and circles which represented different aspects of my life, and to put them in
various places around myself which was to be placed at the center. I drew a
triangle with "depression" circumscribed around the circle of the self, and
when I handed the paper back, the dickwad who took it had the nerve to say,
"Well it looks like depression is the biggest thing to work on here." Like, no
fucking shit sherlock, that's why I drew it in the center of the paper. You got
degree to provide that supremely deep and thought provoking analysis. This was
quite a five head moment here. A likewise example was after I provided a sort
of diagram detailing out my family tree, I was asked, "How does this make you
feel?" It's such a superficial question to ask here. It makes me feel like we
just spent some time drawing a family tree.

This segways quite nicely into my talk therapy with Amy. Amy seemed rather new
to her practice, and I felt quite a lot as though she didn't have much
significant experience in working in this domain. I could be off base here, but
I'm not sure. Anyway, the most significant thing I noticed when working with
talk therapy with her, and also with Lori in family therapy (which was also
talk oriented) was that often times the things that the therapists would say
would be something that I had expressed only minutes before in the same
session. In some cases these things are brought up across sessions, which is
also somewhat transparent to my mind, but it's especially so when it's
literally in the same god damn session. For instance, something I mentioned
about my relationship with university was that it was very unchallenging, and
that was a source of a lot of frustration for me, as I felt I wasn't truly
learning anything useful (which I really wasn't). Then, not ten minutes later
in the session, Amy comes back and says, "I think you should take up a board
game like Go again, I seems to me that you need to challenge yourself and that
would be a way to do it." It was so transparently asanine for two reasons,
firstly for the reason that she was simply reflecting what I told her directly
back at me with absolutely no regard for providing any sort of unique or novel
perspective, and also because taking up the board game of Go is something that
I know can become an obsession of mine, and it could very easily consume my
life if I just haphazardly took it up. I couldn't "half ass" something like
playing Go, because with a game like that, it's entirely antithical to the
point of playing the game in the first place if you're not going to take it
seriously. So not only was that piece of "insight" entirely a superficial
reflection of something I had just said, but it was also most certainly the
wrong sort of advice. I could provide other examples of this with both Amy and
Lori, but I think this suffices.

Something else to note about talk therapy, which I have noticed with Amy and
Ryan and Lori all is that there seems to be a complete lack of any cohesion on
the part of the therapist to maintain an orderly or otherwise structured
continuty both from session to session and also with regards the generalized
goal of what exactly is supposed to be happening. It is rather unclear to me
still to this day, even having talked in this mode with various therapists for
over a year now, exactly what is meant to be accomplished here.

I make an analogy to meditation. In some sense, meditation is not a
goal-oriented practice. However, that being said, it is still the case that
there are measurable benefits from maintaining a practice as such. While it is
not the case that meditation is something of an "exective stress ball" as some
might like to think, it is the case that a meditative practice could be used to
come to accept and feel the stress of life in a present and aware state.
Regulation of emotions and emotional responses becomes much more guided and
honed to an experienced meditator compared with who that person might be
without meditation. It's also the case that meditation provides a sort of habit
of taking time to regulate the health of the body and mind, a habit which is
meant to puncuate and bleed in to all aspects of a person, so that on the whole
they can become a the most healthy version of the person that they can aim to
be. All of these things are tangible benefits of meditation, and I am still
left with a discontinuous sense of this kind of understanding of the tangible
effects that can come from talk therapy.

I would now like to touch briefly on what was phrased as "life development"
here. This was a complete waste of time and money. Twice a week, I would meet
with people and they would take me bowling, or they might take me to play disc
golf. I spent one four hour session literally going to some campus and walking
around. Another session we literally went to a movie and came back. It was
absolutely disgusting the abuse of money expenditure that took place here. I
really don't want to go much more into detail here, because to do so would drag
in personal things which I mentioned at the outset that I don't want to do.

The last thing I would like to mention is Story therapy. This form of therapy I
actually have very little to criticize about. It matched almost exactly what my
realistic expectation of therapy was. In the beginning we talked some about
some things in terms of forming a timeline of my life, and likewise there were
activites which had to do with honing in various archetypes and structures of
my personality. Such was the nature of these things. It was very much centered
around thereputic exercises in the form of drawing diagrams and arranged 3x5
cards and such which matched what I thought therapy should be. It was also the
case that there was a definite timeline to the whole thing, such that there was
not open ended sort of notion of what was happening. I have very little to
criticize about Story therapy, besides maybe that I left it feeling as though
there wasn't much gained in terms of actual insight. I certainly had one
insight which I might not have had, but the entire thing felt as though I was
giving the therapists information about me, and then there was nothing
particularly useful about the feedback which was received.

So I suppose here is the point where I ought to compile all of this information
into a concise form.

The greatest criticsm I have about therapy in general is that I have a general
over arching feeling that nothing is being returned in any way. To make an
analogy to physics. Suppose that I had a system. For instance, there might
levers and pullies and so forth that are all rigged up into some sort of
apparatus. Now, I might talk to a physicist to give me some insights to how the
mechanics of this system work. So upon seeing the physicst, I would tell him
about the various levers and pullies, and he might then inquire to some of the
things which I might be neglecting. After doing this, either on his own or with
me, the physicist would then be able to give insight about the forces at work.
He would show me equations of statics, he could talk about various shear forces
and tensile forces, we could look at this in terms of various potential
energies and maybe even heat transfers and so forth if maybe an engine is
involved. After all of this we could even talk about various ways that the
system could be constructed in a more consistent manner, although this might be
more the job of an engineer. Still, there would be a consistent process of
providing input, and then receiving output. In therapy, I feel that all of the
work to this point has been in the "providing input" domain, and there is very
little that is happening about the "receiving analysis" domain.

Beyond that, I would say the primary other form of criticism would come in the
sense I get that the whole thing really does resemble in a not insignificant
way the first form of cynical expectation about the endeavor of therapy. It
seems that quite a lot of time is spent with me just expressing my unfiltered
thoughts and emotions, and the probing and such by the therapist aims to simply
hold this kind of mode in a way which just indulges the individual to
narcissitcally go on talking about themselves in a way which isn't really
possible when typical social standards apply. Such a thing reinforces the idea
provided at the outset that therapy is for "weak minded individuals that just
want to rant about thier dysfunctional lives and patterns."

Then lastly, I have had a complete lack of feeling of structure with regards to
the actual aims or goals of therapy. I am willing to accept that, like
meditation, a goal oriented approach is not the correct way to come at the
problem, but it is still the case that the result of the practice should meet
some level of goals, and therapy is not meeting those goals. The best way to
phrase this would be with the analogy that the goals are like the inforometers
of the practice. The practice is not centered around changing these metrics in
a direct way (which would be akin to smashing a thermometer and turning the
lever to whatever temperature you want it to be, which obviously does nothing
to affect the actual temperature the thermometer is measuring) but when these
dials don't move to indicate that some sort of progress is being made on this
front, it represents that the practice needs to somehow be adjusted. So not
only are the dials not being truly effected by the action of therapy, but even
the notion of explicitly defining the dials or even defining the actions which
take place to move these dials is not taking place.

Finally, I want to express a final thing which hasn't been touched on to this
point. I believe that anything that has been found useful in therapy has been
things that I have brought to the table. Now, I want to express the inherent
bias that exists in this kind of dynamic. As best I understand, the therapists
role is not "take charge of the wheel" but instead it is meant to help the
driver understand how to guide the wheel himself. As a result, the therapists
job can be seen as an inherently thankless by design, as any insights into the
dysfunctions of the driver and any solutions provided to alter those insights
are meant to be derived from the driver himself. Still, even with this inherent
bias being made explicit, I feel quite deeply that many of the things that I am
working through myself would have been worked through without the aid of a
therapist, and any insights I would attribute to therapy are in a lot of ways
mostly insignificant. The register on which I can say that therapy has helped
me is on the way of mostly trivial in nature.

I think that is all I want to say on this topic here.
