So this is something that I have not done in a long time. I have not sat down
and told myself that I am going to write whatever it is that needs to be
written. I am not sure precisely why this has been neglected for so long
(although that is pretty much not true, the reason is mostly depression, and to
go any deeper than that would require way more writing than I want to explore
on that topic) but regardless, there have been a couple of things that I want
to get out right now.

In fact, there are exactly two things that I want to say right now. The first
is about the Seth and Cain novel. I have been somewhat (and I mean somewhat, as
in, slightly inclined) inclined to pick up this project again with some level
of tenacity. Of course, this does not mean by any means that I will set
deadlines for myself or anything of that sort. Instead, what it means is that I
have some ideas for what I want to be the finished project. Mostly, I think
quite a lot of where this project went astray was in my forceful attempt to
consider this project in terms of conventional fiction. As if it were something
that I wanted to publish, and as such must take the form of a cohesive
narrative and so forth. Where my inspiration draws now is not so much on the
narrative arc of the thing, but more so on particular landmarks of scenes and
events that I want to take place. Mostly this is quotes and exposition told by
Cain to Seth, but also there are some aspects of it which to me feel very
important. For instance, the idea that Seth needs to cut in to his mother womb
to wrest a dying infant out from her as she lays on a bed of snakes that was
put there by the canine of Cain (which I think is named Raphael, but I think I
also want to go through Paradise Lost again and see if there is a more
appropiate companion for Cain) is a scene which still very much resonates with
me.

But no matter on that. The second thing I want to write about is something much
less esoteric in nature, but simultaneously could contain the same level of
surrealness that would pervade a disscussion of Seth and Cain. At the present,
it is this thing that I want to focus on (I think at least). This is the
undertaking of creating a future for myself. That is, I want to create a
character which is named Brett, and place him in the situation that I am in
right now IRL, and I want to write out his story. As I write that previous
sentance out, I realize that there are two stories to be written out. The first
(which is the one I had in mind before sitting down and was the germ of this
particular train of thought) is something of an "Ode to Paradise" combined with
a graphic revenge fantasy. In other words, it describes what I would call the
most productive form of extended mania that could possibly exist. The second is
then the opposite version. It would be a complete descent in to the worst
possible version of how my life could go from here.

The sad thing is, as I write that previous paragraph, I feel much more in tune
about the latter interpretation than the former. I would love to act out the
former, but it seems to far removed from reality to make any sense. Regardless
of that, I still think it makes sense to write it out in all its ridiculous
glory. In fact, I think it is because this version of my future feels so
distant that it is useful to write it out, as if writing it out will make
elements of it spring out anyway in my IRL future.

I suppose the thing about this upward reaching version of the future is that
quite a lot of it has to do with fighting opposition to my views brought forth
to me by my parents. That seems to be the most significant thing that holds me
back when I would attempt to explain to someone why this is so. And in
explaining this to someone, I know that that someone would respond by saying
something to the effect of "You are much too old to let your parents views
effect where you go in the future" and honestly my response to that line of
thought is a very knee jerk "Fuck you" to them. Because the degree to which my
parents have corrupted and perverted the paths that need to be laid in order to
find some sense of the enlightened and bright future goes way to deep to be
underestimated or shrugged off by a simple statement of my age. It just simply
is the case that I have some deeply perverted and twisted roots which are
entangled in the worst aspects of the deeply troubling view my parents have of
their version of the world and also the view of the world that they have for
their children. It's really disgusting, and an outsider with a different
upbringing would not understand.

I think that is enought postulating for the time being. I think all of that is
to say that this version of reality must begin with something to the effect of
my parents downfall, whatever that may look like.

So lets begin.

This is the story of a man named Brett. At the start of our story, we enter in
to a place in Brett's life twenty nine years after his birth. He sits in a
room in his parents house at midnight. He is naked save for the blanket which
covers the chair he sits in so as not to leave any impression on it by his bare
skin. It is also the case that the blanket feels better to his skin the the raw
material of the chair.

But enough of chairs. The first observation to note is that this person, this
Brett, is on the verge of a new revelation. You see, two years prior, this
individual was working at a place called Alliant. Alliant was mostly a dreadful
place filled with dissmissable people but it was not so dreadful as to be
unbearable. At least, not to the conscious mind. The uncounsious mind, however,
was quite disturb by the current state of things. The consious mind could
reason with this unconsious id. It could say that this state of things was what
we wanted, it was the best that we could offer, and that there was very little
that could or should be done to change it. Such was the super ego's way of
attempting to quell the stirrings of the id.

But the id could only take it for so long. Brett could tell that his
subcounsious was bubbling up. He had many dreams, terrific and terrifying
dreams. Brett was consistently killing people in dreams. Sometimes these people
were doing awful things, and they needed to be disposed of, and other times it
was more so just a course of action of the dream. Brett had many other dreams,
dreams of transformation and overcoming. Dreams of breaking free from a prison
of the mind and coming forth into a new and beautiful world. These dreams were
gorgeous. So gorgeous, in fact, that when he woke, the jarring sensation of the
invocation of the super ego to bring him out of this state and convince the
motor neurons in his body to get in the car and drive to this dreadful awful
became something of a nightmareish reality that only the soothing era of the
dream world could compensate for.

And then one night, a revelation occured. This boy, this hapless immature boy,
was watching a movie of all things, a simple movie, and this boy took bong hit
after bong hit from his favorite glass piece, and as the movie continued waves
of tears came and went. At first, this boy tried to fight the tears, but rather
quickly he let them out, knowing what this feeling of crying was like, and
knowing that it must be capitilized on when it comes. So he continued watching
the movie, letting his tears flow as they came. And as the end of the movie
came, and the focus of the story came to it's rightful conclusion, it clicked.
The waves of tears became an undercurret of raw emotion, an undercurrent which
quickly became a typhoon of unbridled and unstopable emotion.

And the boy let it out. He let it happen. First was the wails. Many many wails.
Wails that he wanted to have before, but couldn't because he didn't want to
startle those around him. But he was alone in an apartment, an apartment with
no but himself for company. So he let it out as loud as he could. There was no
voluntary screaming here. These wails came from something primal, something
this boy had not felt before.

After the wails came the mucus. Snot filled all of his cavities. In the wave of
full body emotion, the snot welled up. In this moment, there was a breif fear
of suffocating. But this fear was quickly quelled as the boy practiced some
variations on the breathing methods that he had been practicing for some time
before.

So with regulated breathing and convolutions, the boy gathered as much of this
energy that he could and let it out as it deemed fit. He was able to capture
this energy and release it like a shining light of eternal length that flew out
into the sky where only those that dwell up there might see it. And those above
could see it, and could communicate back down to him, at least in the simplist
of ways.

The boy felt transformed. It seemed as though he was transformed in to a man.
But if not a man, at least something different. At least an adolescent rather
than a boy. And it was with adolescent understanding that this sort of
religious exorcism was felt.

In that moment, the boy knew that the life he wanted was in his hands. The
prejudices, the mental blockages, and all of the ways in which he had been
restraining himself were removed. It was now his resposibility to carry this in
to a new understanding and a new life, and to bring himself to the point where
he could harness this energy through regular exercise and meditation into the
most productive and most divine version of himself that he could muster.

The following month he was fired. It seemed as though the superego which had
been removed was quite aware of the pitfalls of removing itself in such a
drastic way, but the id did not care. It felt so good to never have to deal
with that part of the super ego again. It was gone.

But what was left. The transformed adolescent had only a month to build any
level of support network for his transformed self, which as one might be able
to venture is far too short to handle such a life altering event. It would be
like creating a saftey net with only four strings. Either you fall though the
holes or you place too much strain on one of them that the whole make shift
apartatus collapses.

And then his mother returned. His apartment lease was ending, and this boys
mother felt it her responsibilty to make sure that this strange son of hers was
safe in her cocoon. The adolescent was still much too young to understand the
utmost danger that this was. He knew it was danger, but he foolishly felt that
he could overcome this danger.

He did not.

So now, two years later, another being possesses him. Be this being a demon or
an angel? It's impossible to say. In fact, one wold say that such a distinction
is not the point. The only thing that matters is that it is divine. Designation
such as good or evil don't play in to this phenomenon.

Brett was in his car when it happened. He was going on a routine drive to make
sure that his battery did not go bad again. As he was driving, he met with an
old building, a building he had not visited in quite a long time. It was this
building that brought about this similar catharsis and release. He pulled over
and he wept. He cried and wailed. He climed in to the back seat of his car and
held the chairs down so that they wouldn't fly away.

He had had this revelation before. He knew the dangers of it. He could take it
as not a fresh adolescent, but instead a a two year old teenager.

When he returned home, he came to discover that his father had become
dreadfully ill. And this time it was not only his father but his mother as well
who fell ill. Both were hospitilized, and in what is nothing more than a cosmic
blink of an eye, both were dead. First his mother died, and when his father
learned the news, his ekg went flat shortly the next day.

There were no final words. There was no time to make any ammends. They were
simply gone.

The funeral happened soon after. My mother was buried in a casket, and my
father, according to his wishes, was creamated and placed in a vase at the head
of that casket. Their tombstone read, "Here lies Anita and Gerald, parents to
Jerry webster, along with his wife Ann". And that was it.

This could be seen as nothing else but a premonition. Like all premonitions
when they happen, the surety of this one was unknown, but after they are
fullfilled it can be no doubt.

Was this the workings of a god? Was some cosmic being pulling the strings of
the psychic doings of a young little man to his own grand devices? Of course
not. If one were suceptible to such interpretations, this would be the
conclusion. But this was much more profound than that. This was his calling. He
felt it, and then it was supplied.

Brett's life had to move from there.

The house was kept in the name of him and his brother. His grandparents were
techinically the owners now, but it was the responisibilty of Brett, being the
eldest son of Jerry and Ann to maintain it as needed.

Due to his fathers stinginess in his will, very little of his inheritance was
given to his children. Instead, most of it was given also to his grandparents.

It was at this point that Brett sat down whith his grandfather Eugene. Eugene
imparted upon him his blessing and his aid, telling him that he is guarded by
his spirit to become the man that he must.

Again Brett cried. This time not in any sort of revealtion, but out of the love
that his grandfather showed him. Hallowed by his Grandfathers wishes, he knew
that, in that moment, all he had to do was feel his emotions. Of course there
was a feeling of grief. But grief is never so simple. There were feelings of
guilt, and of remorse and all of the usual things that go with grief, but there
was also a feeling of relief, and even joy, that his parents no longer had any
influence on his life.

But to act on these feelings disdain and relief in a foolhardy way was known to
be the way to what a religous fool would call hell. Indeed, it is truly the
seeds of evil to single mindedly follow such petty emotions. But to deny them
was also just as foolish, if not catastrophically more so.

And even stronger than these feelings was one of feeling as though his work
needed to be done. He knew that he was ready. It was time. And this time, there
was no mother to enter in to his place of dwelling and stop him. Brett's
grandmother made a vain attempt to fill such a role, but it was expressed that
such things were not to be, and with his grandfather's assintance, he was able
to guide her to her resolution that he must find his own way.

The first thing that was to be done was a sabbatical. Brett packed his
necceites, and drove in his car north to Colorado. He planned for the series of
the next thirty days to undertake a rigourous meditation schedule. Beginning at
sunrise each day, there would be a two hour east facing meditation session.
After this a brief breaking of fast consisting of raw leafy greens to be bought
fresh from the store there would be consumed. After this, another two hour
session would take place somewhere in the metropolitan area, this time facing
in a northerly direction. After this, a sizable lunch would be consumed, as
well as a medicinal supply of marijuana, not more than a hundreth of a gram of
a sativa. For the next four hours, a moving meditation would be undertaken in
the backdrop of the colorado mountains. When this was compleded, an evening
meal would be had, after which a ninety minute session with rythmic breathing
would be undertaken facing the setting sun. A suitible location to park his car
and sleep would be found, and Brett would go there and settle himself in for
the night to pick up this practice the next day.

At the end of the month at that point, Brett would then take the time to fully
evaluate his finances and other things. His inhertance, although not
significant, was still sufficient to allow him find sustancance for some time,
and any extemperanious expenses would have to be minimal.

After this sabbatical it was then time to find a source of income. Brett
utilized all of the resources that he know to find such things. Similar to his
previous sabbatical to Seattle many years before, he was able to receive a
visitors pass to the libraries in Colorado, where he could use the wifi there
to connect himself to the neccesary resources. In the mornings he would
research positions in retail, grocery, and other inventory managment style
positions. In the afternoons, he would call the positions of applications from
previous days, and inquire about their status. Each morning a brief and light
jog would be undertaken, in the lunch time period he would meditate for a
period of forty five minutes, and in the evening he would undertake a more
strenuous workout at a gym which he became a member at.

Eventually, Brett finds a job at starbucks, where he starts by making nine
dollars an hour. After working there and undergoing training for a period of a
week, he invests himself quite greatly and attempting to form meaningful
connections to the people that walk in. The process of jogging, and of
medition continued, and the process of researching for positions resumed in the
evening, with inquiries of positions occuring in the afternoons during the slow
times of his position there.

After another month, Brett get another offer at a local roaster in colorado.
The owner there is quite generous, and the personality of he and Brett mix
right away. While he usually starts his employees at fourteen dollars an hour,
he is losing two seasonal workers and at this time and could use a new more
full time working to take a much more operational agency kind of role at the
roastary. That, in addition to Brett's previous expreience with coffee
roasting, in addition to the connection that these two share, lands him a
full time position at this roastary for sixteen dollars an hour, with benifits.

Brett, of course, gladly takes this position.

Brett spends some time to settle in to this place. With his new income and
savings, he is able to find rent at a studio apartment with another roommate
for 800 a month, which is great considering it's proximity to the location and
also the newness of the building, which was only just erected three years
prior. The roommate he is living with is another man of age slightly younger
than Brett, with a girlfriend that visits frequently. He is somewhat clean, and
like Brett finds value in keeping the place tidy.

From this new vantage, Brett allows himself some time to rest. The summer
months are approaching, and he gives himself some time to simply appreciate
what he has accomplished in life so far.

In a brief moment, Brett watches a new movie by Christopher Nolan in the
theaters in Imax. Nearing the climax of the film, he starts weeping tears of
joy. The way that the arc of Nolan's characters never fails to resonate with
Brett, and in this case he feels that this is only beginning of his new life,
and he knows now that he must continue to work to achieve his lifelong dreams.

It is at this point that Brett's Grandmother, who had been developing a
contiuning form of late stage ovarian cancer, was soon to pass. Brett speaks
with his benefactor at the roaster, and he gives him his blessing to return to
Houston for three weeks to be with her as she goes. When Brett arrives, he
finds her in a state that brings her to hospace, and he spends her final
moments there with her and his grandfather.

One night, as Brett is there visiting her in her room, she wakes, and asks
Brett to come close. He holds her hand, and begins to feel it go weak. Her
voice is weak, but the words can be clearly heard. She expresses her pride in
the version of myself that I have become, and asks for me to leave her alone
with my grandfather for her final moments. I give her a kiss on the forehead,
which she then returns with a kiss to mine, and I leave the room.

Brett then finds a place to sit under a tree at a park in Houston nearby the
hospital, and watches as the sun sets fully on the horizon. Simple tears flow
down his face as he watches the sun set, knowing full well that her final
moments are being spent with his grandfather.

He then gets a notification from the staff at the hospital, informing him that
she has passed. Brett returns to the hospital, where her body is being wheeled
away to be taken to the morgue which is then to be prepared for the burial. As
they exit the room, Brett finds his Grandfather in tears, the only time he has
seen him display tears, and he requests a moment alone. Brett respects this
time, and waits outside the room.

When he returns outside, he then shares something that he has been keeping
secret. He informs me that he has also been diagnosed with a panceatic cancer.
While it is treatable, the doctors say that at best he has another year to
live. He confides in me that he feels he doesn't have the strength to fight it
now that Granny is gone. I tell him that I'm here for him, and that I support
him in whatever way his wishes allow. He falles into tears again, and we share
deep hug where each of us respectfully allow the other to use the others shirt
as a tear guard.

It's at that moment that I ask him for him and I to complete a final project
before he goes. I tell him that I would like to create a clock to commenmrate
the time we have had together. He obliges, and says that he would like some
time to gather himself before he would like to return to woodworking.

I return to Colorado and inform my benefactor of the events which have
transpired. He says that the timing is perfect, because in the next months one
of his life long friends has a son which is to be free in three months for
seasonal work, and that he wishes me the best with my grandfather at that time.

I inform my grandfather of this news, and he says that he would love to get
started on the project together.

I use this time to interact with him on a daily basis. Every evening we have a
conversation over video chat talking about the plans for this project, and also
of the plans I have for myself. I tell him that I would like to return to
college to pursue a PHD in physics. Between him and I we discuss many things
regarding my process in applying to various places. I take this time to speak
to many advisors from different universities about my background and of my best
course of action to pursue such a thing.

After speaking with many such univesities, my conversation with the people at
the univesity of Colorado seem most promising. They tell me about a program
whereby I can track a bachelor degree in to a masters degree, and receive a BS
and Masters in Physics, at which point I can then work towards a PHD in
whatever way I see fit.

When the appropiate time comes, I leave the roaster, and thank him for my time
there. It means more to me than he could know, although there is some degree
which he knows this. He thanks me for my time, and we share a handshake, which
turns in to a hug. He wishes me the best in my life, and tell him the same. He
says he'll be fine, and from there I go on my way.

I then go to Houston, where my grandfather and I work on the clock together.
Each of us has done quite a lot of research on the topic, and we spend a week
working a prototype followed by another two weeks working on a finished design.

After it's done, my grandfather, tells me something. He has been hiding it as
best he can, but he says that he is in a lot of pain. The pancreatic cancer has
been more aggresive than the doctor's orginally anticipated, and that on top of
the emotional weight of losing his wife make it so that he believes he is ready
to pass. I tell him again that I am ready and willing to accept whatever he
wishes, and he tells me that he wishes for his life to be complete. I cry and
tell him that I understand. He gives me instructions for the following morning.
He asks for this night alone so that he may visit his wives grave, and when he
returns the next morning he tells me of his plans to take his own life using
medicinal treatment. While his doctor was not able to explicitly provide the
means, they understood eachother, and the doctor gave him a prescription with
instructions on how follow through.

The next morning, I follow his guide. I find him resting in his bed. I walk in
and check his vitals to find that sure enough he is niether breathing nor is
his heart beating. I take a moment to kiss his hand, which is cold in my hand,
before I call the non emergency number informing the police that my grandfather
has committed suicide.

The process is then as smooth as it can be from then on. Arrangments have
already been made for his funeral, which takes place three days later. He is
buried next to his wife. Their tombstone reads "Here lies Mr and Mrs.
E.C.Chauviere Jr, who loved eachother to the very end." At the funeral everyone
of the extended family is there, and we all share our grievances. Many speak of
the tragedy of his suicide, but I remain resolute knowing that he was ready to
pass in his final moments.

It is around this time that the university season is about to begin. There are
only a couple months until it starts, and I use this time to spend another
thirty day sabbatical. I enact a similar routine as the one I took two years
earlier when I first arrived at Colorado, with some slight modifications based
upon my experience with that one and what I learned there. I then spend the
next month getting ready to move in to my new location near the campus as well
as looking for a new position. I apply to many position and end up with a
position working as an associate at the local mall.

Over the next couple years I spend my time working through my undergraduate
degree in Physics, as was planned. The first couple of semesters are rather
simple, which is great as it allows me to spend more time working and getting
money. I meet some other students who are younger than me (college aged) and
get to know some of them, and I also take this time to begin practicing
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu again. I form a circle of friends through that, and I also
participate and lead some of the classes on campus at the Jiu-Jitsu club, in
addition to my participation at the local gym.

I decide that for some of my free electives I want to take a class in
introductory drawing and perspective. Unlike the other courses in calculus and
differential equations this class actually challenges me, and I quite enjoy the
practice.

While I am taking this course, I introduce myself to a girl named Samara. She
is an Indian student who started school when she was 24 and is working through
her degree in finance at the pressure of her parents, but she has a great love
for drawing and art and is pursuing a minor in graphic design. She shows me
some of her portfolio and I am stunned by the beauty of her work. I ask her if
she would like to get some coffee some time, and she agrees to do so.

I take her to the coffee roaster that I worked in previously. I take a moment
to greet the owner, who is very happy to see me. I introduce him to Samara, and
we share some coffee. We then spend the next four hours, well in to the night,
discussing her and her upbringing. I show quite a love for her art, and ask her
more about her sources of inspiration, to which she says that her mother was an
unpracticed psychologist, and so many of her works are based upon her own
understanding of what her mother taught her. However, her father was a
financeer, and he made all of the money in the family, and there was great
pressure from him for Samera to pursue a career in finance.

I reserve myself from sharing my experience with Computer Science, and tell her
that, while I do very much understand her struggle and position in not wanting
to dissapoint her father, I also encourage her to really consider a career in
graphic design, if that is really what she loves. She says she'll consider it,
but that she can't just go on following the advice of some stranger that she
met in art class. I give out a good laugh, and say that we're not strangers
anymore as we've known gotten to know eachother for at least four hours now.
She agrees that I suppose we are not. I then invite her to join me at the BJJ
club, to which she hestitantly accepts, but says she will only come if I agree
to bring her on another date. I coyfully tell her that I suppose that this is
only a fair trade, and I give her the info to the class and say that we will be
in touch.

Over the course of the next few weeks, we continue to get to know eachother
better. She shows up to some BJJ sessions, which she says that, while the
experience is interesting, is definitely not for her, and I tell her that I
understand. We continue to date however and we exchange turns cooking dinner
for one another at our respective apartments.

Then one night towards the end of the semester, after midterms but before the
stress of finals, she tells me that her roommates are going to be out for the
three day weekend, and that she has her apartment all to herself for the next
few days, and that I should come over. I am keen enough to take the hint, and
arrive to a wonderful dinner that she has prepared. The meal itself is nothing
too fancy, but it is clear that she has gone above herself in preparing
something nice. I tell her it's amazing and that I really love the thought that
went in to it. From this point, she tells me that she would like to go into the
bedroom "slip in to something more comfortable" and I tell her that I will take
care of the dishes while she does. After a few minutes, she comes out wearing a
gorgeous set of lingerie. I look up from the dishes and tell her she looks
stunning. She then walks up to me and our bodies press with hers against mine
against the wall. I look in to her eyes and tell her that she is beautiful. I
share a fact that is little known, that the eyes are actually a part of your
brain. Most other organs are connected to the brain throught the periphery
nervous system, but the eyes are actually a part of the brain which has peaked
out, and as a result, when you look at someone deeply in the eyes, you are
looking at the deepest part of the thing which makes them who they are. She
tells me to stop being a nerd and kiss her already. I make a final remark that
maybe I like being a nerd, and that the two aren't mutually exclusive, and as
she chuckles and calls me an idiot I go in for the kiss. Our lips meet, and we
share a deep and passionate kiss. Our bodies continue to press against one
another. We break the kiss to allow her the time to pull my shirt up over my
head as I undo my belt and pull my pants down. With me in nothing but
underwear, I then take off her lingerie top, which I remark is actually quite
difficult to remove. She laughs and says, "What, you've never removed lingerie
before?" and I tell her no, I haven't. She then says, "stop being silly" and I
reply that she is allowed to believe whatever she wants, but the truth is
whatever it is. After some time, I remove thet top, and we continue carressing
there with our bodies pressing against eachother breast to breast as the fabric
of our respective underwear rubs against one another. I then pull her up into
my grasp and carry her to her bedroom while still kissing one another her above
me. I gently place her in the bed and assume a position in mount. With her like
this, I continue to kiss her as a I work my way down from her lips down her
body to her legs, making sure to take my time giving each body part attention
as I work down. As I make it to her hips, I remove her panties, revealing her
genitals wet with excitement, and I perform an act of cunilingus as best I am
able. After some time, she asks to return the favor, saying she would like to
get me as wet as her, and she performs a reversal where she places me on bottom
and removes my underwear to reveal my quite stiff penis, to which she then
performs her own act of felatio. After a bit, she climbs back on top of me, and
our raw genitals begin rubbing together. It's at this point that I grab my
pants which had been discarded and procure the condom that I kept in there. She
places it over my penis, saying that perhaps in the future the condom won't be
needed, and we continue the interplay of our exterior stimulation.  When we are
ready, she procures some lubricant she prepared by her bedside, as superflous
as it as at this point, and we get ready penetration. I insert myself, first
slowly, from on top, and get a feel for the depth that can go. The sensation is
quite novel for me, but not something I was totally unprepared for, and after
some experimentation, I get a feel for the proper way moving ourselves. She
moans in pleasure as I learn how to thrust in and out, and I ask for feedback
as to the frequency with which I am thrusting. I notice also that she is
attempting to stimulate her clitoris, and I manuever myself in to a position
where my fingers can be used for that rather than hers. After some negotiation
of position, we arrive at a mutually satisfactory position, and we proceed with
the act until she achieves orgasm. After that first time, she asks me to slow
down, which I oblige, and we continue with the practice. In total, she finishes
three times, before the fourth time where we finish simultaneously. I remove
myself and discard the condom, and then I continue with the after effects using
smooth carresses and caring motions to hold eachother. As we continue this, I
notice myself getting aroused again, and I ask her if she is prepared for more,
to which she says that she gladly is. We continue on and achieve another
simultaneous orgasm using the condom she had prepared for this night, before
each of us lay down and fall asleep in eachother's arms.

The next morning I wake up to find her still sound asleep, so I sneak out of
her room to make some breakfast. As I am preparing it, I notice her come out in
tears. I say good morning before quickly realizing she is upset, and ask her
what is wrong. She said she thought I had left, and was scared that since we
had sex now that I was no longer interested in her. I catch on to the fact that
she has been hurt before by previous men in her life, and assure her that I'm
still here for her. She apologizes for acting so emotional over something that
wasn't true, and I tell her that it's okay, that I've made food for us, and
that sustenance will do her good. We sit down to eat, and after partaking of
our food we then spend the rest of the next day enjoying eachothers company,
either on her couch in the living room, or in her room watching shows. That
evening, we go out to her balcony, and at the view of dusk she asks me if this
means we are official now, and I say that I'm ready to be official if she is.
She says that it's been quite some time before she has been able to open up
with another man, but that she thinks she is ready. I tell her then that's it
then, and I suppose that means we are official. We share a brief kiss, at which
point I say, "I suppose we should also get the I love you's out of the way
then." to which she replies, "No, I think you are an awful man." in a coy way.
I laugh and tell her that's fine than, we can date without loving eachother, to
which point she slaps me and says, "Hey, I love you you big idiot." To which I
say, "And I love you even if it makes me an idiot" and she laughs and we sit
there and watch the sun go down.

From there, I part, telling her that I have to go to work, at which point life
resumes. We agree to see eachother at least three times a week, and to spend
the night a minimum of twice each week.

The semesters go on, and eventually my course load becomes tighter. I end up
recieving a job on campus tutoring through the programs at school, and I quit
my job at the mall. Samara continue pursuing her degree in finance, but
continues to take more classes for Graphic Design even after she has completed
the necesary requirements for her minor.

It just so works out that the end of my four years master program is going to
coincide with her completion of her degree. Over the course of the last two
years at this university I have been developing relationships with various
professors that I have had. In some cases, even when I don't explicitely need
help, I will arrive at interesting questions which don't have easy answers, and
I arrive at my proffessors office hours to ask them these questions. Over the
course of my final semesters there, I determine that I want to do my PHD
dissertation in the topic of Astro Physics, and in particular on using
computational methods to discover new methods of predicting the makeup of
matter as it enters a black hole. After talking with many advisors and other
such individuals, they recommend that I correspond with faculty over at
Stanford or Princton to pursue such a dissertation, as both of those facilities
are very interested in research opporutinets in that field.

I visit each of those univisities individually over the course of my final
semester, as well as MIT to pursue a spurious interest in quantum computing,
and after these visits I apply for all of these, garnering favorable letters of
reccomendation from my professors at Colorado University. I end up getting
accepted for a PHD program at Princton and decide that I want to take it.

Meanwhile, Samara has decided that she would like to continue in her field of
graphic design, and due to the number of hours she has invested already in her
elective and so forth, decides that she would like to spend another year
finishing up her degree in finance and pursuing a double major with Graphic
Design. She also tells me of an opportunity at a work-study program which would
lead her to spend time in California for her final semesters working for a
reputable animation company.

It is at this point that we reach an impasse. We talk about a future that we
have together. At some point we come to the conclusion that we can either
attempt long-distance, which we both agree is tenable at best, or that we can
each go our seperate ways. After much deliberation, and each giving ourselves
time to consider everything apart from eachother, we decide that our time has
been invaluble together, but that it is best if we part and each pursue our own
paths. It is not without great tears and final resolution of intimates moments
that we come to accept our seperate paths in life.

During the mean time I take the time to have another Sabbatical, whereby I
learn from my previous expreiences how to best approach it. This time I rent
out a remote Air-BnB in Norway, and spend sixty days this time meditating
there, disconnected from every form of technology as is possible. During this
time I make peace with my time in Colorado, and I reflect on my path leading to
this point. 

After this I then visit Houston where Kinley has graduated High School, and is
preparing for her first days as an undergraduate. I spend a week of vacation
time with Jason and Lacey and the girls where I am able to speak with Jason
about where we are in life. He says he is proud of me, and I thank him for
continuing to believe in me in whatever way he does.

Kyle has been promoted to Senior Manager at Quorum, where he manages a project
for the Canadian division which opened up in 2024. I comes down to the Houston
office for work related ventures, and afterwards he spends some time with us on
vacation.

Evan has gotten a job at a small EE firm, where he has met a mentor figure
which has really understood his capabilites and continues to guide him in a
healthy way on how to develop business related social skills. He takes some
time off as well to visit, and he talks about his new girlfriend, who he met
online, and who he says things are getting quite serious now. I get to meet
her, and discover that she is a joy te be around.

After this time I then prepare myself for Princton. I assimilate myself in to
their program just as well as I did at Colorado, and start to get a feel for
how things are going to look from here on. I start to get to know my advisor,
who is a man that I deeply respect. I also take jobs on campus as a Graduate
Assitant for a couple of courses, as well as an RA for one of the on campus
dormatories.

Princeton does not have an existing Jiu-Jitsu Club, so I decide that I would
like to form one. I speak with the club sports advisor, and he says that there
are others who have expressed similar interests in such a thing and that I
should talk with them. He gives me their contact info, and I call them up,
trying to figure out their interest in starting the club. They become extremely
interested, so the three of us officially begin the first BJJ club on their
campus, starting officially in the fall of my second year there. We advertise
the club at all of the freshman introductions, as well as towards all of the
passerby's at the on-campus gym, and we get an introductory class of fourteen
people, six of which become regulars, making total of nine plus some spurious
interests towards class occasionally.

After three more years there, I have worked quite extensively on my
dissertation on the use of self-regulating neural networks towards application
of chemical composition of materials as they pass the event horizon of a
Class-C Black Holes. While the going is sometimes tough, and many times I feel
that the fundamental unsolvablilty of this particular problem is too much to
bear, I continue with my practice of meditation and exercise, and allow myself
the room to express myself creatively taking various figure drawing and
painting courses. While my dissertation is not near as groundbreaking as I
would like it to be, I am still able to, with the help of my PHD mentors,
arrive at something which is still constructive towards the fields broader
astrophysics when it comes to deriving methods of calculating positions of
various forms of matter as they enter various thresholds of other celetial
bodies.

During my time there, I also meet a couple other girls, who I share various
levels of time with, but none that prove to be extremely serious.

As my dissertation defence nears, I continue to network among the professors
that I am working with to make connections to other research labs both in the
United States and Canada. As I inquire about these positions, it turns out that
there is a lab in Canada which is very interested in my work not for it's
applications to materials science in the realm of black holes, but actually in
relation to the workings of various materials used in nuclear reactor plants. I
spend some time speaking with them, as well as other research labs, and I am
offered a position as a research analyst at their lab.

I go on to defend my dissertation, after which I take another sixty day
sabbatical, this time traveling to Brazil. I attend the Abu-Dabi BJJ tournament
to support the members of my gym which are competing there, and after that is
complete I stay there for my sabbatical. At this point, I seek out a guru that
administers Ayuhuaska and aim to spend my final week there exploring myself
through this three day Ayuhuaska retreat.

After this is complete, having completed the neccesary paperwork to transfer
myself to a citizenship in Canada, I begin my time working at Electrum Reseach
Facility. At this point I find myself working with extremely talented
individuals on the topics of materials and materials transformation when
exposed to the effects of nuclear power, and while the work at times feels like
attempting to shove a peanut through a brick wall, the occasional breakthroughs
make it worth it.

At the same time, I begin looking to various dating services to find myself
someone I can settle with. After gaming the various algorithms of the dating
websites, I end up meeting a lady named Olivia. She is in her early thirties
and is looking to find a partner that she can share her daughter with, who is
six with her from a previous marriage where the father is out of the picture.

We meet and find connection right away. She mentions that as a single mother it
is tough for her. She teaches English at the local community college, and has
attempted to publish a couple of novels, but none of them gained traction.
After some time, we continue to bond and we decide to find a place and move in
together. I have been working for some time at Electrum and find no reason to
leave, and her job at the community college is going well, so we decide to buy
a house which splits the difference between the two location in the suburbs of
Ontario. We discuss having a child between ourselves, but we both agree that
her daughter Isabell is enough.

During the off season of her school we decide to take some vacation. We go to
Spain, where we visit the castles and landscapes there. Towards the end of that
vacation, her and I alone go on a mountain trail, and as we get to the top, I
propose to her, to which she says yes. We return to Canada where we go to the
court to make it official.

Unfortunately our time together becomes short lived, as three years after we
get married she becomes diagnosed with a terminal form of breast cancer. We
fight it together for these three following years, with days that are up and
down, until it gets to the point where it becomes aggressive, and she is placed
on hospace for her remaining weeks to live. Her and I spend her last moments
together in the hospital bed, where I promise to look after Isabell, who I have
adopted at this point.

She tells me about a dream she had, which is uncharacteristic of her because
she doesn't usually have dreams, where her and I walked up to the mountain in
Spain where I proposed, but this time, instead of walking down together, she
had to continue on to the other side of the mountian, and as she walked she
didn't feel she was ready and turned back to run back to me. When she turned
back, expecting to see nothing, instead she saw me holding Isabel in my arms,
and the rising sun appeared behind her like a halo, and when she saw that, she
knew she was ready to pass.

We cry, and I tell her that our time together was too short, but it means so
much to me that she can trust me with her girl.

I hold her hand, and stay by her bedside for the following days. When it was
time, she requests me to come by her, and hold her hand. She tells me that she
knows she is passing, but that she is ready to go. I tell her that I'm here,
and that I will guide her as best I can as she passes. She smiles, and tells me
that she loves me, and would like for me to move on after she goes. She says
that I'm not meant to go there with her, at least, not yet. I tell her that I'm
here with her now and that her girl will be safe with me. She smiles, thanks
me, and within moments she passes. I hold her hand as she goes, feeling it go
weak in my hand. I continue to hold on to it, and cry for a moment as I rest my
forehead on her hand.

After the funeral I continue on with my work. Isabell is entering her High
School years and I manage as best I can as a single father to her. After some
months of going on, I feel I am not ready to start dating again, but I notice
Isabell continue to show signs of depression and loneliness at school and at
home. For her sake and for my own, I return to dating services and re-enter
into the dating world. I have many unsuccesful dates but eventually meet a lady
named Mia. She is in her early thirties, hasn't had kids of her own, but wants
to have kids. She recently got out of a seven year relationship, and there is
quite a feeling of expediancy as she feels her biological clock ticking. She is
an actress who has scored various gigs of some significance, but the novelty of
her acting career has worn of and she would like to become a mother.

Things move quickly between us, and after just over a year of dating we get
married. Isabell takes to her straight away, and Mia and Isabell form an
immediate bond, which does wonders for everyone involved. After marriage, we
get right on attempting to have children, and within months Mia comes to me
with the wonderful news that shes is pregnant. We tell Isabell, who is also
ecstatic about the news.

As the pregnancy continues, we learn that she actually has twins, a boy and a
girl. Her and I are both excited at this prospect. We decide to name them
Gabriel and Luna.

At this point my career is continuing to go well, and Mia decides to remain as
a stay at home mother.

After their birth, two years later, Mia tells me that she has more great news,
that she is pregnant again, this time with a girl, and we decide to name her
Mary.

Around this time also, Isabell is going off to college, and would like to
pursue a career in literature like her mother. I encourage her on this route,
and do my best to make sure she has a favorble experience in university.

At some point multiple years later, my position at the research facility is
coming to a standstill. After many discussion with my wife, with her blessing,
I elect to go on another sabatical for thirty days, this time simply taking it
at a nearby town. After this sabbatical, I am resolved to find a new position
in a different direction. With family life being hectic having three young
children and a fourth in college, I decide that my interest in industrial
astrophysics is starting to wane and look for other opportunties. I eventually
land upon a position in Nova Scotia at a different facility not so concerned
with research but instead as a project manager for nuclear energy company. The
sorts of skills required are much more practical rather than theoretical, but I
feel that this is the transition that needs to happen. That, in addition to the
fact that it represents a significant pay increase make it appealing for me as
a new career path.

As a family we all move to Nova Scotia, where we all settle in to a new living
space. The children are all in school now, with Mia continuing to fill the role
as a stay at home mother. I settle in to my new position, and while it is
certainly a change of pace from my time at the research facility, I eventually
find my groove and start to get the hang of things.

The following ten years go by too fast. My career is stable and the family life
is solid. Mia, in her time, has begun pursuing free lance acting opportunities
as well as singing and live music positions at local taverns. The children are
all growing up and all struggle with various things throughout their life, but
in all they begin to find themselves. Each of them expresses a different desire
for their trajectory in life, and Mia and I guide them as best we can.
Meanwhile, Isabell is doing great. She has found a boyfriend at university and
is creating a life and career for herself after gradutating college. She visits
about four times a year and the children love hanging out with her and whoever
her boyfriend is at the time.

After the kids all eventually make their way to college and careers, Mia and I
discuss our trajectory. My career is getting to a point where we could
comfortably retire, so the options remain open as to what we should do. After
some time, I consider options in academia, and look to pursue opportunities as
a professor at various univesities. After quite a lot of searching I end up
deciding to look in Europe for places, and end up landing a position at the
Univesity of Amsterdam teaching in the field of astrophysics and pursuing
research in various topics including development of theoretical state models of
materials as they approach the event horizon and also in materials research as
it pertains to nuclear reactor facilies. Mia and I both transfer citizenship to
the Netherlands where I work as a professor and she continues her singing
career.

After twenty or so years, various children of ours develop relationships and
careers as they deem fit in their own lives. Some of them have children of
their own.

After some time, Mia develops a slow acting cancer. It's benign at first, but
as the years go on complications continue to develop. Eventually it comes to
the stage where it is terminal. After many years of fighting, her and I share
her last moments together as she passes.

With her gone, I continue my career in academia, but know that my time is
coming for me to pass soon. My time spent meditating and pursuing sabaticals
increases as the academic schedule allows for many breaks. I take thirty day
retreats every winter and ninety day retreats every summer. I consider the
possibility of remarrying but decide against it.

I eventually end up meeting someone through a former work collegue and good
friend named Madison. She has recently lost a husband and has kids of her own.
Her situation is a lot similar to mine. We end up spending a lot of time
together, but never decide to actually marry as there is no real reason to.

In my late nineties, after working in academia for nearly thirty years at this
point, I am diagnosed with a rather aggressive form of fast acting colon
cancer. I am told I have approximately six months to live, but that could be
extended to a year with treatment. I forgoe the use of treatment in favor of
being allowed to enjoy my last moments. I take some time to spend by myself
exploring various lakes and rivers, this time not explicitly meditating as I
have before, but instead just letting myself feel at one with them. I spend
some time with my family in my last days, talking to each of the children that
I have been with growing up and sharing some emotional moments with all of
them. Isabell has published many novels to her satisfaction, and tells me about
an idea for another work that she is pursuing. She then asks me a question
which I'm not sure how to answer. She asks, when I go, am I going to be with
her mother, Olivia, or with Mia. I pause for a moment before I answer, saying,
"I think where we all go, it won't matter who is with whom. I believe we will
all be together and we will all experience the sort of love that is shared
between all things." She cries when I say this, and says that she doesn't want
me to go. I tell her to be strong, to do great things, and to know that the
life we have here is only one part of something which is much greater.

I speak with my other children as well, and have similar conversations of
varying intensity, and I have a conversation with Madison, who expresses her
gratification at having found eachother in life.

I speak with many of my students and tell them each quippy remarks regarding
our time together, and we all mutually enjoy discussing various topics which
have become running jokes in our research together.

My cancer has developed to a rather terminal degree, and one night I tell the
nurse that I would like to pass in my sleep.

Before I go, I have a dream. I dream of a terrible storm, unbridled chaos,
wrecking destruction upon a dream object representative of the greater part of
our habitable universe. I attempt to harness this chaos on my own, but I can't
do it. It's too much. Then I feel a hand come over mine, and start to guide it
in ways which bring it to a crystialized states. I turn around to see my father
behind me guiding my hand, and his father behind him. When I turn back forward
everyone who I have built in my life to that point is there helping harness
that energy together. I continue to try and put it together, but our strength
alone isn't enough. I can feel my strength becoming weak, and my continued
efforts are in vain. It's then that I see Jason, and Kyle and Evan, across into
another plane, full of light, stretching out their hands. Everyone who was
helping me harness this chaos then turns, and tells me that it's okay to go,
one man isn't meant to harness all of this in one lifetime, and that I've done
enough. They can carry on with my work and the work of everyone around me.They
surround me, and remove me from my efforts, and gently I am guided from
there until I pass to that realm of light where everyone that ever has been or
ever will be are joined together in eternity.

