So today I am at a point. I have somewhat decided that I want to spend some
amount of time each day (in the past it has been an hour, so there is no reason
to think it should be anything but an hour, but perhaps I might decide
something else) writing. I am not so convinced that I want to do this at this
point, as this is only day two of where I am right now, but regardless, I think
it is a good place to start.

So, with that being written, I am not exactly sure what it is that I want to
write about. The thing is, there is some degree that I want to write about
something about Seth and Cain, but at the same time that feels somewhat forced.

Instead, I think I will write about something else, which is my most recent
sort of resolve (however resolved this sort of this thing is, as I have become
skeptical of myself by this point) to become more contientious in particular
ways.

I find myself to be concrete in this way. It's interesting because I find
myself being resistant to this level of concreteness, and I think that is
because of a particular distinction that needs to be made. In the past, when I
have found this sort of concreteitude in becoming more aware of the deliberate
schedules and such that I proceed through throughout the day, there is always a
sort of forward looking approach. To expand on what is meant by this, I am
saying that the way this typically goes is in the following. First, there is
some course of habit or otherwise typical mode of being. As a result of this,
there is some amount of the day to day life that gets attended to. I eat, I
sleep, I do some school or work or whatever, I play games, I work out, and etc.
Something that happens as a result of my lackluster attendence to a strict
schedule, or at least what I percieve to be a result of my lack of scheduling
sort of mode of being, comes up. Mostly what this comes to is a lack of getting
any kind of good sleep when I have to wake up at a particular time of the
morning. Either that, or I become continually ground down by the expectation of
society for work to happen at a particular time of day. When this thing becomes
unaddressed or unattended for too long, it begins to have profound negative
consequences on my mental and emotional well being. I start to focus on the
meaning of life, on the futility of everything, and I begin to develop an
unhealthy level of cynicism to a wide variety of activities as a whole. After
these things build up to an unbearable degree, I then decide that it is time to
enact some level of contientiosness to my scheduling regimen. I will deterimine
that I will do things at particular times, I will stick to a rigid schedule of
waking sleeping, and I will perform either some sort of premptive or proactive
level of time and schedule keeping, either keeping a journal as a sort of log
of how I do things, or vice versa in enacting a scheduler to determine when
things are going to be done.

This forward way of enacting contientiosness has failed in the past. It is
almost always the case that, at first I become excited at the prospects of this
new sort of way of doing things. I feel excited that I will be able to remedy
whatever ailment of being has overcome me, and I pursue my new course of
keeping track of journals or enacting a deliberate and orderly method of doing
things with a childlike level of excitement. This initial honeymoon period
lasts for a few weeks until the initial excitement wears off. Then a few things
happen. Firstly, the levels of cynicism, resentment, or otherwise just general
unhappiness start to bleed in to the contientious behavior. While this point is
not worth neglecting, it is certainly not the biggest thing. At worst, it is
simply just continuation of the bleeding that is already taking place. Moreso
what happens is, I begin to notice that, not only is nothing changing in the
way of enacting any degree of reasonable sleep schedule, nor is there any
difference in the sorts of ways that a lack of contientiousness could help me
(for instance, in enacting a system of regular grocery shopping along with a
tupperware container system of keeping track of the meals I eat throughout the
day) but it actually gets quite a lot worse. For instance, in this sort of
tuppaware container system, I will determine that perhaps I want to have some
number of calories at particular points throughout the day, so I will make
certain kinds of meals with different sorts of makeups, put them in these
containers, and then I will eat them at these points throughout the day. What
happens is, I see no perceptible gain from the enaction of proceeding with this
sort of schedule, and on top of that my intellectual capacities are inadequte
in determining the hormonal signal which takes place within the gut and the
human body. So not only is nothing being gained, but on top of that my natural
human systems get neglected. It's a twofold measure of downward destructiveness
that is made worse by an attempt to become contiensious about it.

Similarly with the concept of sleeping. Not only is it not the case that am I
getting to bed and having better sleep when under a strict waking schedule like
this, but I wake up before my body is ready, I have to painfully and
tyrannically convince myself that what I'm doing is worth doing (which
eventually becomes unconvincing) and I have a terrible time operating
throughout the day.

After some time of applying a force of will to stick to these kinds of
schedules (because after all, it's possible to reason that there is some kind
of "growing pains" sort of aspect to this and that it will get better
eventually even though its getting worse) I give up on my efforts entirely. I
will sleep whenever I want, I will eat whatever I want, I will work out
whenever I want, and I will procrasinate whatever I want in all of the ways
that I was doing before. Immediately I feel better. I sleep in, and I wake up
thinking, "Jesus Christ, I am so glad I got some extra sleep, fuck whatever
possessed me to think that forcing myself to wake up early was a good idea. And
fuck whoever would force me to do otherwise." Then it will come time to the
appropiate gym time, but maybe I am not in any mood to will myself to action on
this front, so I will say, "I am so glad I don't have to force myself to the
gym, I will go later when I feel like it." And then I might play some games, or
browse some of the internet, or some other mindless activity, and at some point
during that, I will find that I am ready to go to the gym, and I will go then.
Then the mind thought conversation goes something like, "See, you will go to
the gym when you are ready, the body knows how to regulate these things. Your
hormonal system is actually quite good at regulating itself in this way. Just
let it do its thing."

So this is the forward way of looking at things.

Now lets look a little bit about what I am saying is the backward way of doing
things now.

I guess to start, I suppose it isn't entirely a backwards way of doing things.
In other words, I don't really think this is entirely the "opposite" way of
doing things the forward way. Perhaps it would make more sense to say that it
is a reordering of priorities when thinking about how this sort of application
of contientiousness goes. So instead of sequencing things in an A then B then C
order we order them in a B then C then A order (or whatever such order
applies). A B and C in this case are just placeholders.

So what is this other way of thinking to which I am referring right now?

I suppose this is what it is that I am trying to work out. Let me give myself a
moment to work this out.

So it's not worked out, but I want to start writing. There is a strong feeling
that I have that there is a fundamental correlation with how I feel literally
right now as I type and how I have felt in the past about these things.

In fact, at this very moment, I am feeling something of a level of annoyance,
the exact same level of annoyance that I have felt in the past which leads to
me giving up on these endeavors. So that is not that this piece has been
removed somehow.

Something about this fundamental difference has to do with how I am handling
this kind of annoyance. There was certainly another part of me that wanted to
incline myself to stop writing this right now and entirely give up on the idea
of writing as a whole. But even still, this intuition tells me that it has
nothing to do with this annoyance at all.

I think it is something like this. I have started a practice of working out and
meditation which has persisted throughout the past few months. In this
practice, it has come to be more and more the case that it has resembled
something of a rigid and scheduled task. But this has happened as a result of
my instincts and my emotions. It has nothing to do with some kind of grand
decision I made some time ago about forcing myself to take up these practices.

This is I think the huge distinction. Contientiousness in this case is
something that has come up as a way of enhancing a habit which I have already
started doing. The habit is not something that I feel needs to be done for the
sake of contientiousness at all.

So now that this has been something that I have been doing, I am now starting
to apply some level of contientiousness to it. For instance, at this point I
have decided to see what it is like to run more in the morning with a light
jog, and then meditate or work out in the evening as usual. I am making
adjustments in contientiousness only when they align with the hormonal cycles
and sequences that the body goes through.

This is the reversal of ordering that I am refering to.

Now, when it is written out like this, I am still not convinced that anything
truly fundamental has changed. That is, I do firmly believe that this is at the
root of the fundamental shift of what I believe has taken place, but I don't
believe I have succeeded entirely in bringing that into words.

Perhaps there might be some way to express it in terms of what I am feeling
right now. Because I think what this still fails to neglect is that feeling of
annoyance at the counterproductivity of adhering to a contientiousness (which I
do believe still exists even in this sort of "transformed" view).

So right now I feel as though I am approaching a mental blockage of some sort.
There is something that I want to say, and I can feel it, but it's not emerging
to my conscious mind.

I suppose this is the rub, is that this sort of transformative view most
certainly has to do with the sort of transformative experience that I had
during my viewing of Intersteller so many years ago. It has to do with the
hero's journey. In some level, what is happening here is that there is
something in my subconscious that I want to acquire, some gem or treasure or
other sort of good, and in order to get it, I have to navigate the traps and
trappings of the subconscious mind. There's snakes and dragons and shit down
there.

Ideally, things down there would be put in order in such a way that I would be
able to access this sort of subconscious element without so much deliberation
or danger, but it's not the case that this is how it works, and it is almost
always the case that the things most worth acquiring down there are going to be
difficult to find and return with.

And that is partly what I am feeling. This concept of reversing the role of
habits into contientiousness as opposed to forcing contientiousness onto my
habits, this reversal almost gets to the heart of what I am trying to say, but
this would be like going down and acquiring some bronze when there is still a
nugget of gold to be found.

I suppose some of the difference, then, is the belief that there is actually a
nugget of gold to be found there. It's something of the belief (or as a
Christian might call faith) that there is some kind of gold to be found. And it
is contientiousness which allows one to continue to get at that gold. Or
something (this heavy handed analysis leaves something of a bad taste in my
mouth).

Something I suppose is that, certainly in the case of these psychological
processes, I am imagining as if there is someone else who is coming to me. They
are saying, "Hey Brett, I have this problem of contientiousness as well. I have
tried to enact some degree of habits and schedule keeping to myself for many of
the same reason that you have described, and I have also failed for the same
reasons that you have. But now I see that, not only have you reached a
different level of being able to ascribe to these things, I can also see that
your life, your affect, and your mental well being are actually better off with
them, rather than at constant battle with them. I am curious what you might say
to me about how you might have achieved this, and what I might do to achieve
this. Or maybe it doesn't have anything to do with what I might do, but I am
curious about the reframing of your mind which took place in order for you to
achieve this new level of healthy behavior."

I then imagine that, too this imaginary person, if I were to say that all that
was needed was to rethink this sort of thing in terms of habits following into
contientiousness rather than contientiousness forcibly shoehorning itself into
your habits, not only would it leave something to be desired in the person
doing the asking, but it would also feel like I was leaving out some critical
information.

And I think the thing is that there is some sort of character or quality about
it that is still yet to be found. Perhaps, if this sort of thing is the great
ring of Kalmaladesh (or wherever the fuck you want to call it in a mythological
world), I have found one of the rubies that is inscribe on the ring, but the
ring itself is still missing in that cavern down there. I think this is
probably the best way to describe.

So I think that is where I leave this particular session. At the very least, I
think the degree to which the contientiousness compontent of my life is
reaching a new degree of palpability is undeniable, and I do strongly feel that
there is some gem of distinction to be made here. However, it is also the case
that the hero can only go on his journey whenever it is ready, and so I must
find myself on some level content with having gone down to some degree and
found this order of operations distinction, which is by no means insignificant,
and leave the finding or the articulating the rest of this gem for some other
time.

Still though, I do feel very much the case that allowing habits to flow into
contientious (and probably also something to do with an understanding of the
crucial importance of habits) definitely hits on quite a lot of what there is
to be said on this topic.

That is all for now.
