So today I actually do have some idea of what I want to write about. I would
like to compile some of my thoughts around therapy. I suppose the way to go
about this would be to transition some of my own thoughts around my
expectations around what therapy was going to be, how that compares to what my
actual experience is from a purely factual kind of view, and then finally what
my starkest criticisms of the whole thing are.

So to go no the first point, name, what my expectations were of therapy as I
was going in to it. There are two main ways in which I think this is relevant.

The first, and less interesting way of going about this is to speak firstly on
the cynical side of my approach to therapy. This side of me originated entirely
I think out of popular culture. I very much had the sense that therapy was
something of a self indulgent activity of weak minded individuals. I have this
picture in my head of fragile women who have very little say in whatever kinds
of relationships they are a part of, be those romantic or personal or even
professional, and these women instead of looking towards themselves for ways in
which they can improve the way they approach the world would instead enroll in
a therepy practice whereby they unload all of their pent of anxieties and
troubles of the world into their therapist. The image in my head is of a woman
who just was in some sort of relationship with a guy, and this guy has broken
up with them. Their response is then to go talk with a therapist about how much
this guy was an asshole, about how the way he did something or another was just
ridiculous, and in doing so they would allow themselves to cry in a way which
they would feel would justify their feelings. This kind of idea even applies in
the case where there hasn't been an inciting incident. An illustration of this
idea would be if a co-worker one day asks you to pick up some of their work,
and you agree to do so. There is a lot of two-facedness that I feel in this
kind of thing. I imagine women who are consistently passive aggressive in their
approach to life, they are entirely lost in whatever their own thoughts and
feelings are in the moment, and they constantly put on a face to be nice to
everyone in a terrible pathological way (at least, pathological to my mind, I
cannot empathize with this way of living at all and believe not only is it
antithical to my beliefs but I believe it is actually creating a perpetual
negative energy in the world to a terrifing degree, but I don't want to be
overly philosophical here). These people then need to just rant about how
"Susan is such a bitch, like the other day she messaged me a thing, and it said
one thing, but I could tell that she meant something else, and then I had to do
X Y or Z in order to compensate for that thing," and so on.

I had this view of therapy for quite a long time. Adjacent to this idea is also
the popular view of therapy in movies in such. In other words, I have this
notion of someone resting in a chair, facing away from the therapist, and the
therapist asks a series of questions from a script, and from there they
continue to go on about something in their life, and then eventually the script
gets to some sort of point where they realize something about their life, and
a sort of epiphany is invoked which leaves them in tears and they have a
complete transformation to an extreme degree.

Both of these ways of thinking about therapy I think are mostly derivative to
what I would say are my much healthier kinds of expectations about therapy, but
they are still worth pointing out because I know I have brought some of these
expectiations in to my own personal experience with therapy, so its at least
worth noting.

The second way in which I have made expectaitions about therapy has mostly to
do with my introduction to Jordan Peterson. I have listened to many of his
lectures that he put online, in addition to his more popular material such as
interviews and podcasts that he has been featured in, and I have gathered some
inkling of what therapy looks like from that perspective as well. I have not
entirely extrapolated the direct things from his lectures, but rather I have
gleaned from a variety of his comments some of the things which I suspected
could be some of the seeds of what therapy has.

So to speak on some of those tidbits, I mostly got an impression that I would
say is procedural in nature. Something Peterson put out there as a kind of
platform that he was creating was what he called the "future authoring
program". In this, he talks about how he has put together some prompts for
people to spend some time writing in their own way about, and through these
prompts they will create a model of the world speaking on where they are going
and what the highest aim they would find there, and then conversely they would
be asked to describe a lowest aim, something that would actually scare you, and
then from there would be prompts asking about what sorts of things you could
change about the habits and framings in your life which would lead you to that
higher aim. So in effect, to me this seems a sort of procedural kind of
process. I got some idea that therapy was about combing through the kinds of
habits and thoughts that someone has, determining which of those thoughts and
habits fit into certain categories, and then making lists and other such
tangible material which spells out in detail what sorts of steps could be taken
to adjust things in a tangible way. This was something of my expectation of
what a therapy session might look like.

I think this latter point is mostly what I truly expected about therapy going
in. Of course, I still had the former expectation of therapy being a clinicly
induced circle jerk of venting and forming tears, but only as a sort of hazard
that I deeply wanted to avoid and analyze various therapists if I felt we were
approaching this sort of ridiculousness. Mostly, though, I was open to whatever
it was that it had to offer, still with cynicism intact, but what a similar
kind of understanding that I have not been with therapy in any realized or
tangible degree.

So the next thing to talk about then is what sort of experince I have actually
had with therapy.

Some prelimanary remarks here. There are a lot of things I could go into with
my own life circumstance which could get intimately tangled up with my
experience with therapy, but I think instead of laying out my whole life story
leading up to things, I will just touch on the most relevant points.

So the most relevant point is that I had just been fired from a position which
I had for two years. During that position I was arrested for possesion of
marijuana. Also, during that position, I was having increasing troubling
dreams. The level of discontment grew to a point of unbearable explosion. An
explosion then did happen in the form of an extremely violent catharsis, a
catharsis which I would say if I didn't know better felt like an exorcism in
its nature. After this, I felt amazing, and started working towards finding
ways to improve my life and its structures in such a way as to work to
alliveate the discontentment I was feeling. Then I was fired for it. My
apartment lease was ending simultaneously, and my mother insisted I return
home. I attempted to have a conversation with them telling them about how, if I
stayed there for any period of time it would not end well, but they continued
to put it off for no insignificant amount of time. Eventually I felt my typical
baseline of rather high levels of chronic depression kicking in, and I fought
it for a long time before I decided that my parents didn't deserve me moving
out of their house. It's around this point that I decided that I should find
someone to talk to about all of this.

I went on to Psychology Today and searched in my area for a therapist to make
an appointment with. After browsing through the various entries I narrowed
myself in to someone named Edward Richards (or was it Richard Edwards, I don't
remember). I made an appointment with him, and went in to his office.

In our first session I mostly went over the circumstances which seemed relevent
to the first question, which was something along the lines of "what brought you
in today". The most prevalent thing I remember from that was perpetually being
inturrupted in the middle of what I was saying, inturrupted in ways which to me
felt abnoxious and intrusive to the things I was responding to. For instance, I
remember him asking what I evaluated some of my faults to be, and I remember
talking about patience being one of my primary faults, and I said that its
something that I have always known about myself and that I have to perpetually
work on. The question was "how are you working on it." I replied saying that I
just have the awareness that I am prone to having a hot-temper about things,
and when I recognize this temper I remind myself to keep an even head about
whatever it is that prompted it. I also remember talking about some of the ways
in which I was trying to improve my work environment, and I don't remember what
was being interjected in those moments but I consistently felt annoyed that I
couldn't even finish a question of his without being inturrupted by another
question. This left me in a state of sort of confusion. I remember thinking,
"Is he really asking these questions because he doesn't know, or is he trying
to play some sort of mind games on me?"

During my second session we talked about what my future trajectory might look
like. I remember talking about Crossfit, and how I had considered becoming a
trainer in that domain. I explained to him certifacation process there as best
I understood it. We also talked about Grad school, about the process of taking
the GRE and so forth, and what sorts of things would be required there. He then
challenged me to look in to both of those things, being CF cert and GRE test
prep, and pursue looking in to both of those things.

I remember at the end of the session feeling something of a resolve to follow
through on these things, but rather immediately after stepping out of his
office the reality rushed back to me. These were already things that I had
thought about, things that I knew were not things that I would follow through
on, and now on top of everything eles that I was feeling I now had a feeling
that I didn't want to do things just because some guy I just met literally a
week ago was telling me to. It felt so ridiculous.

I then attempted to express this in our next session. I told him how ridiculous
I felt and how I felt that his contribution was adding to my feelings of
confusion around what to do. As I entered his office and told him that I was
feeling dreadfully depressed that week, I remember him responding by telling me
that this wasn't good, and asking me why I felt that way. This flabergasted me.
As if it were something that I decided to do. We continued on to talk about who
the fuck knows what. I remember most of that session just wanting to express
something but my intention around what I wanted to express was consistently
being subverted. The level of mind games I felt were being played here made me
continually frustrated, until I explicitely decided to just flat out say what
it was that I wanted, that I totally didn't understand the purpose of sitting
in a room and talking to someone like this, and that the whole endeavor
bewildered me entirely. His response was then to mention that perhaps it wasn't
a good therapist fit, and that if I didn't want to talk with him that perhaps I
should consider to talk to someone else. This was not at all my intention in
why I brought this up. I wanted to ask about the mechanics of what he was
doing, and I wanted to attempt to understand how this would help at all. I
didn't want to fire him. But after he took it that way, I remember thinking
fuck it, we were at the end of our session anyway, and I really did feel as
though sitting in a room and talking to someone wasn't a way to accomplish
anything.

After this, I remember going in to my car and crying, legitimately crying, for
about an hour and a half. I was curled up in a ball in the parking garage just
hoping that no one would knock on the door and ask if anyone was being tortured
in the car. I reasoned that the insulation of the car was enough that I don't
think anyone heard.

I went home, and as if there was some sort of cosmic irony, my mom decides to
inject herself in to my life as she is so terribly apt to do and asked me how
my therapy session went. I told her that I'm not going to see him anymore,
rather bluntly. I think I was laying down, and didn't even bother to move my
head to turn to her. I felt dead. She then said that we should have a talk. I
remember saying, "Oh, now we're ready to have this conversation? You are way to
fucking late" Or something to that effect. But simultaneously I remember
invoking myself a desire to be a better man than my juvevile parents were, so I
got up and spoke with them.

I am catching myself getting in to the personal aspects, which I told myself I
wouldn't do. I would like to take a break now and regather myself. I will pause
here.

