So last night I know I had a dream, and for a moment in my pre-waking waking
period I remembered what it was, but now I do not, so instead I am here and I
am going to be writing whatever it is that I don't know what I want to write
about.

I think what I want to write about here is my experience of yesterday speaking
with various graduate school advisors. The experience that I had was mostly one
of playing corperate telephone.

I did end up speaking with a very helpful lady from OSU who walked me through
some of the difficulties I might face if I were to pursue a second
undergraduate degree in Physics. She told me that it is certainly not unheard
of for people to puruse a second undergraduate and that it is something that is
doable. She then went on to say that, when it comes to financial aid and
federal grants as well as scholarships, those things are off the table when it
comes to a second degree, so the only available option is to speak with either
student loan offices or to fund it out of my own pocket (or some linear
combination of the two).

As of this point, I have gathered from most of the graduate admissions that I
will certainly require more coursework for a degree in physics, but I have yet
to speak with someone about what might be the best way to acquire that
coursework.

I suppose the reason I am writing here now in this sort of mode is to recognize
that this sort of path is one that I have to take charge of. I find myself
wanting to lean on a mentor figure, someone that can tell me I should first do
this, apply to these schools as an undergraduate with the expectation of
meeting faculty and such, and then proceeding to apply to graduate schools with
the typical practice.

I suppose what is missing for me here is two things.

Firstly, when people say that I should treat finding a job like a treat a job,
I think this sort of advice applies to people who know what it is like to treat
a job with a certain kind of respect. I remember, for instance, when Tall-e was
playing ultimate he had to leave a certain kind of open practice because he had
a shift where he was working, and I remember thinking "is that really
neccesary? Is his role there really that mission critical?" He was a waiter at
a restaurant somewhere. This I think is a reflection of my own lack of
experience when it comes to the "making money" department.

Secondly, the thing that is missing is the fact that I really don't have the
capability to focus on anything for more than an hour to an hour and a half at
a time. The only exception to this that I know of is in two places. Ultimate
tournaments I would play for eight hours times two days on the weekend. This is
certainly an exception to the "hour at a time" rule, but not an exception to
the "five days a week every week" kind of idea. The other and more relevant
exception to this is with FFXIV. I would play that game for upwards of 10 to 12
to even 14 or more hours a day, and I would go to sleep and wake up and
continue to play the game to the point where I accumulated well over 4000 hours
on only one account (I had a second account that probably had at least 1000
hours on it) over the course of two years. So what is it about these things
that allowed me to put so many hours in on a consistent basis that I could not
do for pretty much anything else?

I think, firstly, the kind of progession which took place in the game was one
that was well defined and layed out. You start at a certain level, and you can
either perform quests, run dungeons, or perform otherwise certain kinds of
tasks to proceed along the level path to the level that you wanted. This, on
top of the fact that there were something like thirteen seperate classes to
level, and the ammount of time to do so was rather large, not to mention the
robust crafting system, made the idea of grinding and completion a rather
tangible one that I could see well layed out from the outset.

I am not entirely convinced about this being the only factor, however. For
instance, I could see myself say, stocking sheleves at walmart, or being a
personal shopper at Target, or whatever else, and not feeling this same kind of
gratification of "leveling up" that existed in an MMO.

I think one of the key observations here is that, in the MMO, everything was
broken in to thirty minute chunks. If I wanted to do a dungeon, I could join
the queue by simply navigating the menu and pressing the "join dungeon" button
and waiting for a couple minutes while it populated the dungeon. Then I would
perform the task, in which case I would get the reward, and from there I could
either join another queue, or I could decide to take a break.

In the working world it does not work like this. I cannot just join the "stock
shelves at wal-mart" queue and perform that task for thirty minutes, get ten
dollars for my work there, and then either decide or not decide to do that
again. Likewise, there is no "fix a bug" queue that I could decide to join, fix
a bug in some arbitrary system, gather my commision of 80 dollars or whatever,
and go on about my day. So a lot of it has to do with the commitment to doing
this whether I want to or not. And I think the crucial point here is that, even
if I am willing accept the fact that I could reframe any commited job in to a
"queue like" system with the acknowledgement that if it were a queue I would
probably be hitting the queue for eight to fourteen hours a day of my own
volition even if I were not obligated to, I am still entirely obligated to
perform this kind of work at a specific time and for a specific timeframe on a
regular basis.

In the mmo, I would say, "I want to get my Monk class up to level 60" and at
the start I would go through the neccesary pains to begin the leveling process
from level 1. But eventually, I might be doing this process for say six hours a
day out of my fourteen hour mmo play time, and after a few days of getting up
to level forty, say, I would get entirely tired of the entire process and leave
him at level forty for a few days with absolutely no obligation to continue
leveling him. And then, whenever I felt like picking up that endeavor again
(which would inevitably happen) I could just pick up where I left off.

And the thing is, hitting this sort of mode was not something I had any
control over whatever, and forcibly pushing myself to continue along this
endeavor was profoundly unhealthy and counter-productive to the ends of that
goal.

So I suppose the trick here is to find a way to reframe my discontented moods
in a way to re-orient my thinking such that, in those cases where I feel burned
out about my current work and feel as though if only I could just take some
sort of break from this and "queue up" later I would feel much healthier about
the whole endeavor, I need to find some way of approaching this which would
lead me to the understanding that this sort of mood is something that is an
occurance in my own psyche which represents a sort of resistance, a resistance
which is born out of childhood habits and patterns which were entirely
dysfunctial to the ways in which the world operates at large, and that it is
because of the minds propensity to resist fundamental (and coincidentally
healthy) change in habits which is at play here, and that to some extent this
feeling of discontement becomes something of a challenge to myself to re-orient
myself away from my childhood dysfunction and more towards an adult re-tuning
of the underlying operating system functionalties of the brain.

Something else to take here is that, even in the case of the mmo, I was never
doing this on just one dimension. On the concept of leveling up my monk, I
would queue up dungeons and complete them (which when taken as a whole would
represent a shift of work in queueing up and completing say eight dungeons in a
row) but after that I would continue to play the game in different ways, say
looking in to party finder to farm primals with others (networking in MMO
terms), or otherwise occuping myself with social FC endeavors or things of that
sort. In other words, there is a dichotamy here of firstly the roles of any job
which has been commited to, and also with the sort of "work that must be
treated like work" of continuing to look for positions even when you have a
position and also calling around and pursing, say, academic endeavors.

All of this is great and all, but certainly without the action which has to
take place this is all emptiness.

That is all for now.
