So today I don't know what I want to write about, but I'm going to write
anyway.

That's not actually true. There are a couple of things that I want to write
about.

Firstly, I think I want to say something that struck me as I went back and
read my previous freewriting sessions. My stream of consciousness was rather
imprecise. I consistently went in circuitous and non-sequitar points. Such is
the nature of my brain, but holy shit. The biggest thing I noticed was that I
always felt I had to qualify everything I said with, "I think that" or "It
seems to me that" and so on. On some degree, this makes sense, as a lot of the
topics which were being discussed in what I was reading were things where there
wasn't a lot of source for. When speaking about my personal beliefs about the
nature of consiousness, it is going to be the case that a lot of the things
that are said are mostly speculation, and much less in the way of actuallized
scientific information. However, the amount of superfluous information in those
sessions was rather alarming.

A different approach would be to start from a place of knowing what I am
saying. After all, there is really nothing that one can be more sure of than
what their subjective experience is like. Even in the case of someone whose
subjective experience is divorced from reality in alarming ways, such as a
pathologically schizophrenic individual, it is still the case that the reports
he gives of whatever demon spawn from hell that he regularly hears from on a
regular basis are exactly what his subjective experience has to offer. As such,
when it has been broached that such is the topic of conversation, it really is
the case that there is no need to continually add such qualifications; such
things are implicit in the fact that we are talking about first hand
experience.

A counterpoint to this argument would have to go along the lines of being
unsure about ones subjective experience. And this is certainly the case. I
would argue though that this is not the case for me, especially not in those
freewriting sessions. It is usually quite clear that there is something in my
head that I want to say, so the nature of the fact that I am not able to
clearly and concisely say them represents a sort of pathology in my
development. When I introspect upon myself and genuinely ask why this is the
case, I most certainly come up with a deeply Freudian response. I was ill
listened to in any legitamate sense, and was even deliberatly misunderstood and
corrected in obtuse ways by my parents, and as such I developed speech and
thought patterns which feel a need to incessantly repeat themselves to
compensate for this childhood trauma. Of course, the word trauma here
represents a loose sense of the word, but it is the appropiate word in this
case.

Enough of this.

Something else I want to say is that, earlier this morning, I began an MIT
opencourse work on the topic of Quantum Mechanics. I am quite fascinated by
this topic, and it is most certainly the most glaring hole in my admittedly
coloquial view of physics. I understand at the undergraduate level the function
of Mechanics and also of Electromagnitism (that is to say, most of the
functions of classical physics) and when it comes to more modern concepts I
would say that my grasp of Special Relativity is definitely above the norm for
people that broach that particular topic. However, my understanding of Quantum
Mechanics is only at the level that would be called pedestrian. I could say
very little more about the fundamental principles of QM than a typical reader
of Niel Degrass Tyson or Stephen Hawking would, which is to say, it's a very
cursory and often misunderstood position. I think the primary difference in my
case is that I have something of a greater understanding of what it is exactly
that I don't know, where as a pedestrian view is more the simple minded "it's
all so crazy man!" which I really find off putting on quite a disturbing level.
These things, while they are profoundly beautiful, are not inaccesable, and by
delegating them to the realm of "absolutely mind-boggling" we incorperate a
sort of gate-keeping element which is antithecal to the whole endeavor.

At this point I would like to recap to some extent the degree to which I
understood the first lecture.

So one of the primary things that the professor went over was speaking on the
terms of behavior that a wave function, and subsequently the Schodinger
equation, exhibit. Namely, the linearity of these things.

I remembered something about linearity being important when speaking about
operators in Linear Algebra, and I knew it had to do with adding and
multiplying scalars to the thing being operated on, and having those operation
being invariant to something, but I was glad when he went over it explicitely.
In brief, a linear equation is one framed in a way that has a linear operator
applied to some unknown variable, and the result of this operation is zero.
Then, if you have two solutions to this equation, you know that the sum of
these two solutions is also a solution to the equation, and likewise a scalar
multiplied by any solution to the equation is also a solution.

The next thing mentioned was that the Schrodinger equation was itself a linear
equation. The unknown in the schrodinger equation is a complex function called
the "Wave Function" (aka a "Quantum State" or "Quantum Vector") and the linear
operator in this case is a Hamiltonian operator minus the partial time
derivative operator multiplied by the reduced plancks constant and the
imaginary constant i. More explictely, Lu = 0 where u is the wave function
(expressed as a function of space and time) and L is (H - i * hbar * d/dt).

My memory of what a Hamiltonian linear operator is illudes me. I seem to recall
that it has something to do with the subset of linear operators which are
invariant upon some sort of linear operation, but that is something of a stab.

What also illudes me is what form this opeartor will take. It seems to me to be
the case that there is something like a "family" of schordinger equations,
expressed on the space of all Hamiltonian operators. As I type that out, my
mind immediately jumps to a phrase taht I know which is "Hilbert space"
although as I type that term out I wish to recede my connection as relevent,
because I believe these things refer to entirely different sorts of tertiarily
related concepts which are only superfically related by the fact that
"Hamiltonian" and "Hilbert" are rather similar words.

Still, I liken as something similar to classical equations which have to do
with a "Potential space". This was an example used in the lecture, to
demonstrate a system which is non-linear. In classical mechanics, mass times
the second time derivative of the position of any partical is equal to the
negative of the first derivative (with respect to its argument) of the
potential field V, where V can be any arbitrary field, which is governed by the
setup of whatever system is put in place.

My suspician is that this Hamiltonian operator will play a similar role as this
potential field in that it will be some property which changes depending on the
setup of the quantum system, although this could be entirely off base.

The next thing which was discussed was the illusory nature of the physical
meaning of a quantum state. It was even the case that when Schrodinger first
wrote down his equation, even he did not know how this corresponded to the
things that we would care about a quantum object. He just knew that this was
the way that quantum systems needed to behave in order to follow the
implications of the experiments which were taking place. Which is really quite
astonishing to me. I suppose this shouldn't be so surprising, considering the
Lorentz transformation had a similar origin, and it wasn't until Einstein
really came up with his theory of relativity that we really understood the
physical implication of what was being stated.

Even though it was the case that Schordinger didn't understand the physical
implications of what this wave function represented in a physical system, we
now understand that the norm of the wave function represents a probability
distribution of the possible results of a observation on a system. So if you
were to take a particlar electron, solve for it's wave function, and then take
the norm of this wave function, you would end up with a probability
distribution which shows the likelyhood of possiblities for where the electron
could be in space. I am still not very confident of the details which take
place here (after all, any probability distribution must be integrated to a
value of one across all of space, and I'm not sure what garuntees this result
within the schordinger equation. Perhaps it is the nature of Hamiltonian
operators?). Still, I believe I mostly have the jist of what is being stated.

Beyond this, I am mostly still at odds with the rest of quantum mechanics.

The final thing that was discuss was two results which are something like the
prototypcial examples of QM. The first was in talking about light polirazation.
The main point here is that, when a photon is passed through a polarizing
material at an angle, it is not the case that the light partially transfers
through the material, but instead that the full of the photon will either pass
through or it will not pass through, and the probability of this photon passing
through has to do with the corresponding angle at which the light is being
polarized.

I have actually seen this in practice, and it is quite remarkable. In the video
I watched I remember someone have three surfaces of polarization. When two of
these surfaces are placed through parallel to eachother, it is transparent;
i.e. all of the light passes through. As he turned one of the surfaces so that
it became ninety degrees to the other, the ammount of light transitioned from
brightness to complete darkness.

The fascinating thing is that then the third polarizing material was placed
between the other two. When this material was parallel with either of the
orginal two surfaces, there was still darkness, but when this in-between
surface was angled at a forty-five degree with between the other two, light
actually shone through. This demonstrates the quantum nature of the
polarization. For the first surface, only the light which was polarized in the
first direction gets through, then for the middle surface, some percantage gets
through based on the angle (which in this case is pi over four, the cosine of
which is root 2 over 2) and then likewise for the final surface, another
percantage gets through by the same root 2 over 2 ratio.

As I think about this now, I am not sure if this is only the case because of
the quantum nature of the system, or if it is simply a strange peculiarity in
the behavior of polarizing materials. Perhaps this is not so profound as I
thought it was at first.

Regardless, the second prototypical example shown was of a beam splitter. An
apparatus was constructed using two beam splitters and two mirrors, along with
two light detectors. I am not sure exactly what the punchline here is going to
be, but it was used to show the strange nature of quantum superposition.

The nature of superposition is as such. When a photon is given by a certain
wave function, a wave function which satisfies the Schordinger equation,
certain things can be measured about it. Next is to consider a linear
combination of two such wave functions. The question then is to ask about the
concrete thing which is measured about this new wave function. It turns out to
be the case that this concrete thing will either be the result on the first
wave function or the result on the second one. You don't know which one it is
going to be, but you can express the probability of which one it will be.

Of course, all of this is quite strange, but I do firmly believe that I am
gathering quite a solid cursory understanding so that when the complicated math
starts getting involved, I will be able to grasp it rather than become lost in
it. I would say that is where my understanding of the whole thing sits at this
junture.

That is all for now.
