So I don't know what to write about but I am going to write anyway.

I think in this case I do have some idea about what I want to write about.

In some of my past free writing experiences I have spoken about my experience
with therapy. As of this moment I believe I have hit the straw that broke the
camels back. In fact, I don't know if that is the way to put it. This straw
didn't break the camel's back. Instead, it was something of like a particular
kind of intuition around the fact that I ought to change therapists.

With my present therapist, it seems as though, at least twice a month (and we
only meet four times a month) he has to change the time that we meet. This is
fine, except for the fact that this time he mentioned it on the Wednesday
evening before. I checked my phone on Wednesday afternoon, and didn't check it
on Thursday, and then when Friday rolled around, I noticed as he didn't appear
in our teletherapy session that I had a missing message from him, to which
point I replied and we have yet to reschedule the appointment.

This feels utterly ridiculous to me. Especially in the case where the primary
work that the therapist and I are working through is my re-introduction back in
to the working world, and a lot of the things we talk about pass by on their
orbit the sorts of things about the business world that I don't like, in
addition to maintaining a certain degree of contiencousness around my daily
habits and routines, my cynicism around maintaining a consistent schedule is
routinely subverted. It's ironic at best. (That sentence was a mess, but the
main thrust of it is that there seems to be a lacking of the "practice what you
preach" motif in our work.)

So I would like to inquire about new therapists. Yesterday I went on to
Psychology Today and went to the "find a therapist" section to begin to look
for a new therapist in the Richardson area. I have compiled a list of four
therapists that I would like to talk to. At this point, I would like to compile
something of a script around the things that I would like to mention about
myself in the initial consultation, along with some notes that I want to make
about what kind of impression I get.

The first thing to do along this endeavor is to create a list anticipating the
sorts of things that I am going to be asked about in the initial phone
conversation. Off the top of my head I get the following.

    1) Tell me about yourself/what brings you to therapy?
    2) What sorts of therapy treatment have you had before?
    3) What is your drug history?
    4) What is your family history in relation to mental illness.
    4a) What is your experience with mental illness?
    5) What sorts of abuse or trauma have you been exposed to?

I feel as though there is perhaps a fifth question that I am missing, but
nothing comes to me in the immediate. Addendum: I have now thought of the fifth
point and it put above.

The thing I want to be sure of is that I am brief and concise with my answers.
Something I know about myself is that I have a tendency go on to various
tangents and spurious points when I am asked simple questions, and I would like
to avoid that as much as possible.

In the spirit of that conciseness, I would now like to go in to some answers to
these questions.

1) Tell me about yourself.

Right. So I don't want to go in to my entire life story, but just to give you
something of the flavor in which my life trajectory has gone. Pretty much since
I was 16 I have had a very erratic and directionless drive towards a kind of
life that I want to live. This first manifested itself as an extended
existential crisis which began before I went to college and persisted through
much of my college experience. I finished my degree in Computer Science, but as
I progressed through this degree I grew continually more distraught and
dissatisfied with the sort of work that programming and Computer Science would
entail. This, in addition to some particularly sour experiences related to some
of the projects that I worked on led to a rather alarming degree of resentment.
Perhaps childishly, after I graduated I refused to pursue a career in this
field, and found myself entierly lost as to what sort of means I might pursue
to support myself. I took something of an extended adventure to Seattle at that
point where I lived in my car and found myself day to day, which I would
certainly say on the whole was quite a nice change of pace in the sense that I
felt I was in control of my life to some degree. Due to various circumstances
which I could get in to eventually but don't want to now for the interest of
time, I found myself living back at home, and my parents were entirely
terrified at the prospect of their son being a homeless vagabond on the street,
and I entered a sort of "dark ages" of my life where lived with my parents who
enabled me to coast professionless while I played an MMO for three years years.
Eventually around 2016 I got a job at a coffee roaster which was quite healthy
for me, and during this position I pursued opportunities towards a job in my
field of study. I ended up getting a position in summer of 2017 at a place
called Alliant systems. I was able to withstand (and I use the word withstand
quite deliberately here with all of its implications) that position for two
years, during which I had continually profound and magnificent dreams which
continued to wear on me until the summer of 2019 when I had quite a violent and
involuntary catharsis which filled me with a new sort of drive and tenacity to
work towards finding healthy ways to attempt to steer my life in a more
positive direction. A month after this experience I was fired, which certainly
was not a coincidence, which coincided with my apartment lease ending. I looked
towards various friends to see if I could live with them for a time so I might
get back on my feet, but all of them basically said that I was on my own, to
which point the only saftey net available to me was my parents place. The
reintroduction back to their place followed by a rather extreme level of
depression, a sort of depression that I had not experienced to that point,
which then led me to seek out therapy. I tried one therapist which was clearly
not a good therapist fit, and after this my parents offered to allow me to
continue to seek therapy on their budget. The next forray in to therapy was
through an organization called Innovation 360 where they had a variety of
different theraputic approaches, which helped to some degree but also in my
mind mostly was not helpful towards rectifying my underlying dysfunction. I
have since discharged from their organization, and was at least on a path
towards finding a job in a retail space as a means of getting out of the house
and pursuing at least some form of integrating myself in to the working world,
but right as I got to that point progress in that direction came to a sort of
stall when the pandemic hit. My father at this point is definitely in a
immuno-compromised position meaning that any job in a public space is
essentially off limits, so for the past six months or so I've been a sort of
holding pattern. I have continued to have weekly talk therapy sessions with one
of the therapists from innovation 360, and while I would say it is the case
that I feel comfortable speaking with him and sharing vulnerable aspects of my
life with him, I feel continually as though the experience with him is that we
essentially have typical conversations which I enjoy, but don't really get to
the heart of what I feel therapy ought to be (not that I presume to be an
expert of therapy, but instead in the sense I certainly feel something is
missing in our time together). That is now the place that I come to search for
a new therapist.

So I have rehearsed this to varying degrees a couple of times now, and the
timing of what I say has come out to ten minutes or more, so I would like to
condense some of the more finer points down. I think the best way to do this
would just be to write it out again.

So tell me about yourself? What brings you to therapy now?

Right. So I have a tendency to be verbose when it comes to this question, so I
would like to give you something of a flavor of my life to this point without
going in to much detail for the interest of our time here. So the most
prevalent undertone of my life, at least when it comes to the piece that is
most relevent towards talking about a theraputic relationship, has been a
consistent feeling of directionlessness and internal conflict with where it is
that I want to go in my life. The first manifested itself at quite a young age,
I would say to at least 16 if not younger, as existantial dread which has
morphed and manifested itself in this directionlessness in various ways over
the past decade (I am currently 29). To speak on the high points of this
directionlessness, as I was pursuing my degree in Computer Science I grew more
and more discontented with the kind of future that I saw in exploring that
domain, and this on top of some particularly sour experineces with projects
that I was working on left me in an alarmingly nihilistic state by the time I
graduated school. After school I quite immaturly refused to pursue a career and
decided that I would take an extended adventure living in my car and travelling
to Seattle. Eventually, due to happenings that I could get in to but won't for
the interest of time, I found myself living with my parents again, and they
were utmostly terrified at the idea of their darling son being homeless that
they enabled me to fall in to something of a "dark ages" of my life which in
combination with depression brought me to play video games without regard for
life situation for three years. In 2016 I got a job at a coffee roaster, which
was healthy for me, and in 2017 I felt as though I could take a more mature
approach to pursuing a carreer in the field of my degree, being Computer
Science as I said. I got job summer of 2017 at a place called Alliant systems
as a devoloper, and at first I was okay witht he job but again found myself
becoming increasingly discontented with the position. This culmintated in to
something of a sudden and involuntary cathartic experience where I felt a need
to make adjustments to my working life which I felt would take steps to having
a healthier relationship with my work and my direction. A month after this
experience I was fired. This coincided with my lease ending, and I spoke with
multiple friends about leaning on them for some time as a safety net, but in
general they essentially said, "your on your own" to which my only real net was
my parents. The reintroduction back in to my parents house was a terrbily
volitile one in various degrees, which led to some of the deepest depression I
ever felt in my life. This was around September 2019. At this point I decided
to pursue therapy. The first therapist I talked to was most certainly a
therapist mismatch, and after my utmost failure with him my parents offered to
pay for whatever subsequent therapy I could pursue from there. We went to a
place called Innovation 360 which advertised themselves as something of a team
atmosphere where multiple kinds of modalities of therapy were used, ranging
from typical talk therapy, family therapy, something called story therapy, and
something they called life development. I was rather unimpressed with most of
their system, and I had gotten to a point where I was looking for positions in
retail positions and such, and quite unfortunately this improvment along that
spectrum was somewhat stifled by the pandemic. I continued to talk with one of
the therapists who I met there. I enjoy talking with him, but after some six to
eight months of talking with him I have felt that something is missing in our
relationship. I can be vulnerable with him and share my more intimate side but
I continually feel as though there ought to be something else which is being
neglected in our work. So its from this angle that I have decided to pursue
another therapist.

So I have found that I am not able to condense this down to anything below the
ten minute mark, which I suppose is okay, but is somewhat dissapointing. I
suppose some consolation is that this covers both questions 1 and 2 above, so
in some ways it encapsulates both of those things.

What is your relationship with substance?

So I have never had a relationship with any substances of abuse except for
Cannabis. It's difficult to say how much this is a substance of abuse but I
think the best thing to say is that I have certainly abused it in a way in the
past. However, I do want to note that when I decide to I very easily am able to
step away from it for extended periods of time. So the bottom line here is that
while there are times in my life where I have smoked significant ammounts of
marijuana I have been able to step away from it. And in relation to the present
moment and my current outlook of my future, I see myself abstaining from any
marijuana consumption for quite some time, at least for quite some number of
years from here, and I don't anticipate any hardships when it comes to
maintaining that relationship with the plant.

In relation to alcohol, my only relationship to that substance mostly lies in
my college years. I would indulge in what I would call "party drinking" where I
would consume significant ammounts of alcohol in a college party, playing games
like flipcup, beer pong, taking shots, and other college activities, but apart
from the social aspect of it I have never consumed it alone nor has chronic
consumption ever seemed appealing to me. And to this point, it's been at least
two years since I have consumed any alcohol, and the last time I did drink any
I really felt like it was something that I just don't want to do anymore.

Beyond that, the only thing to mention is that I have had some relationship
with psychedelics in the form of two psylocibin mushroom trips in my college
days. Those experiences were each quite profound in their own right, and
certainly were significant life experiences for me, but I know myself well
enough to know that taking these things chronically in terms of "microdosing"
which is popular in certain kinds of circles is something I should avoid, and
likewise, similar to my current relationship with marijuana, I don't see myself
taking any psychedelics in the near or even distant future. At some point I am
sure that I will find the life circumstance where I would want to explore the
psychedelic realm again, but certainly not where I am now and probably not for
a long time from now.

In terms of prescription, I spoke with a psychiatrist through i360 and have
tried various anti-depressents and mood stabilazers and have honed in on
Lamicthal as a stable prescription medication. I would say it has done a decent
job of regulating the most extreme sorts of moods that I am liable to have in
terms of both depression and mania, and I forsee myself continuing to take it
for perhaps the rest of my adult life. I have tried other SSRI's like Zoloft
and Welbutrin with minimal degrees of success. I would say that this medication
is useful, but obvously not a panacea, and there is still a lot of work which
needs to be done in terms of honing in on my sense of direction in life.

What is your family history with mental illness.

So I don't know terribly much about my father's side of the family except that
his father (so my grandfather) was deeply alcoholic and a chain smoker. He died
of lung cancer in 1980 which was over ten years before I was born.

On my moms side there is quite a decent family history of depression. Her
father has not struggled with these things, but I know many of his brothers (so
my mothers uncles and my great uncles) have had a variety of forms of mental
illness ranging from depression to bipolar disorder. It seems as though my
mother and her mother both struggle with anxiety to some degree, and my mom has
also expressed a struggle with depression, but in both my grandmothers case and
my mothers I am only speaking anecdotely. I don't think either has sought
therapy or other forms of medical treatment for these things. But certainly in
the case of my great uncles there is a clear pattern of depression.

What is your relationship with mental illness?

So as I mentioned in my life story I have had a quite substantial degree of
underlying depression existing from my teenage years to the present. As I
talked with the psychiatrist when it came to these things I also told him about
some of the experiences I have had which I suspected resembled mania, and he
concured that I definetely exhibited many symptoms of mania and said that a
diganosis of Bipolar II was most relevant, and so we started treatment on that
basis. When it comes to anxiety I would say that in general I do not suffer
from that except in cases which would represent a healthy level of nervousness,
for instance in the kinds of ways that you feel when having to give a
presentation and such. I have never had a panic attack or anything of that
sort. In that domain though, something I think which we could maybe drill down
on is that I am susseptible to experiences a rather large degree of dread
around certain kinds of things, in particular when it comes to attempting to
navigate our established institutions. For instance, I absolutely loath having
to call someone like insurance to talk about a claim, and I really am not
comfortable in calling up doctors. As a more recent example, I had to change
the battery in my car recently because it wasn't holding a charge anymore, and
I absolutely dreaded the idea of calling a dealership to attempt to follow
through on the warranty which I knew my car to still be under, so eventually I
ended up just going to autozone and buying a battery and changing it myself. I
only mention this because, while interanally to me this anxiety and dread seem
like very distinct and seperate emotions, from the outside the behaviors it
causes me to exhibit resemble the same behaviors that someone who would say
that they have anxiety have. So take from that what you will.

Do you have any relationship with abuse or trauma?

So the short answer to this question is no. My parents never abused me, and I
have not had any experience with physical trauma. The only reason I give pause
here is that, if we allow ourselves to relax the terms "abuse" and "trauma"
which are both rather strong words and instead allow ourselves to think of
these things on something of a spectrum, there are definitely ways in which we
could talk that place various instances on this spectrum. So while my
relationship with my father was certainly not abusive in the strictest sense,
it is certainly toxic, which I would say fits on the spectrum as a milder form
of abuse. We could maybe drill down on this but I don't think it's particularly
neccesary, at least not right now. Likewise, when it comes to trauma, there are
a few experiences that come to mind not as strictly traumatic but certainly fit
on that spectrum. For instance I was arrested in April of 2018 for possession
of marijuana. I have sense gotten those charges dismissed and expunged so that
they no longer exist within any of the judicial records, but while that was
occuring it definitely caused a great deal of emotional distress. Likewise,
getting fired was something that also fits on this spectrum, and the aftermath
of that entire experience would fit somewhere in this realm of elevated
emotional distress.

I do want to add the caveat here that I am hesitant to even mention these
things, as I definetely don't want to adopt a victimhood mindset around my
life. I don't want to pretend as though I'm just a precious snowflake that has
been battered by the world and I don't want to reinforce that identity. I just
mention these things because they are quite significant events in my life that
at least belong on this spectrum to whatever degree is appropiate.

What questions do you have for me?

Yeah, so I have a question which can be approached from two different angles
and I'd like to hear it from these angles, so I will ask it from both of those
angles at once. This question is: firstly, what is your approach to therapy,
and then secondly from a different angle, what would you say are the
"mechanics" or "inner workings" of how therapy is meant to operate from a
analytical point of view. Feel free to answer however seems appropiate.
