So I want to write this as a sort of free form response to a podcast between
Peterson and Harris, a podcast that has become somewhat infamous as of late,
where Harris and Peterson famously got into a quabble over the definition of
truth.

In a nutshell, their conversation came to talking about two different ways of
defining truth. These two have since continued on talking about their
differeneces, and have had many discussions about this topic to the point where
they have at least been able to understand their disagreement, even if they
haven't come to any sort of consensus about the heart of what has the deepest
meaning to them.

But the seed of this discussion is me taking the place of Harris in their
discussion. There is a point that Harris seemed to begin to make, that I want
to elaborate on, and where I want to draw what I consider a rather large
realization for me about my understanding of the relationship of myth and
material fact, and in this discussion, it leads to this realization. There is
almost certainly a better way of coming to this realization, but this is the
way that I have come to it, and it's the way that I want to get to it again,
and when it comes out this way, I may come, in the future, to talk about it
again.

So the core of their disagreement came down to the talking about truth. Jordan
took the position of what was later termed by Bret Weinstien as Metaphorical
Truth. Metaphorical truths are those truths which, when the recipiant believes
this truth, give them a greater level of fitness than those that do not believe
these truths.

The best example I have of a metaphorical truth, or at least, the most clear
cut and uncontroversial example that gets at the distinction between these two
truths, is an example that has been used to talk about gun safety.

Imagine there is some individual from Mars. He grew up on Mars, and developed
in Mars, and now, for whatever reason, he has come to the Earth and wants to
learn about the doings of the Earthmen. Now, suppose he wants to learn about
guns. He knows nothing about guns, and nothing about how guns are used in our
society, so it's our job to educate him on everything he needs to know about
guns.

So the pure materialist would hand the Martian a gun, and then proceed to give
a lecture about the different workings of the gun. He would say that the gun is
made of a handle, with a trigger, and he would talk about the spring mechanisms
that go into the trigger, about the firing mechanism of the hammer onto the
firing powder, he would talk about the use of magazines, he would describe the
function of the safety switch, and if everything is grasped by the Martian to
this point, he might go on about the physics of air pressure, thermodynamics,
and related phenomenon that actually allow the bullet to be fired from the gun.
All of these things would be considered all of the facts about the gun as an
objective entity.

So now, at this point, we have to ask ourselves, has the Martian learned
everything we know about the gun? The answer to this seems like an almost
certain no. We haven't taught the Martian about proper gun firing techniques,
we haven't warned him about gun safety, we haven't told him about the way that
a gun should be held, or the best way to aim the gun. We have only told him the
facts about the objects of the gun.

Now, it could be argued that the Martian, equipped with some level of deductive
reasoning, could derive these sorts of things that we haven't told him based
upon solely the objective facts of the gun. It is unclear whether or not this
is possible. But even suppossing that this sort of analytical train of ideas is
entirely possible, the Martian needs something else besides the facts about the
gun to be able to derive these facts about how to use the gun. There are still
some other facts that we need to give the Martian, whether those facts are
about deductive reasoning, or whether those facts are the conclusions of that
reasoning, in order for him to convey to him our entirety of knowledge about
the gun. By only giving him just the objective elements of the shape and makeup
of the gun, we have only given him part of our knowledge about guns, and
something more must be added to this in order to give our complete knowledge,
something that cannot be added just by describing the totality of objective
facts about the gun.

It also could be argued, and this is the argument that Peterson I believe was
attempting to arrive at, that these metaphorical truths about the gun are more
important than the objective facts about the gun. That is, for our Martian,
it's more important that he learn gun safety and gun usage than he learn the
mechanism by which the hammer strikes the bullet. The notion of thermodynamics
is certainly not the most essential piece of knowledge that we would like to
protray to the Martian about the gun. So it is in this way that we talk about a
sort of revaluation of the word truth. We say, since the objective facts about
the makeup of the gun are not at all the most important things that could be
said about it, it is then appropiate to define truth in such a way to give
those facts which have the most importance to the Martian as the "most true"
facts about the gun.

This argument seems appealing, and I am not arguing that these metaphorical or
"Darwinian" truths are not the most important truths. I'm not arguing the
converse either, because it could very easily be argued that there are some
contexts in which the objective facts about the gun are the most important
things. For instance, an engineer would want to know about the force with which
the hammer needs to strike the bullet in order for there to be an actuating
force, and to calculate the distance and force that the hammer needs to travel
to reach that terminal point would require that he understand and grasp all of
the objective facts about the gun, and of all of the ways in which the
mechanisms of the gun behave in the context of Newtonian physics. In this
context, the objective facts about the gun are the most important things to
talk about. My point here is, I am not trying to make an argument that certain
kinds of truths are more important than others in whatever context, that notion
is seperate to the notion of our definition of what truth should mean.

So to re-evaluate truth this way seems in a way appropiate. The maxim here
which I think best illustrates the metaphorical truth of the gun is that "every
gun is loaded."

Now, there are a few ways that you could present this truth. This way is one of
the strongest ways that it can be presented. A stronger version might be "every
gun is always loaded all the time no matter how much you think it's not," and a
weaker way would be to say "treat every gun as if it is loaded." What this does
is it talks about the level on which you should believe this fact.

Now, we can talk about the utility of this statement. It's rather clear that
those that would believe this to be true would be more fit in a darwinian
sense than those that would not take this belief. It would be quite dangerous
for two people to play cops and robbers with real firearms, even if they had
examined them beforehand, because it's always possible that someone made a
mistake. So the belief that "every gun is loaded" would prohibit someone from
playing this game. Because every gun is loaded, someone might argue, when you
fire, it will fire at the person. Therefore, you should not play this game.

It's also not entirely clear at what level of belief is correct here. For
instance, it seems to me that the actual belief that there is a bullet in the
chamber would be a stronger belief than the belief that "you should treat it as
if", because the latter belief would allow room for the justification of "I
know I should treat it as if it is loaded, but I know it's not so it's okay."
But I think you can dictate yourself at this level of belief, as long as you
have the discipline to stick to the belief. To have a strong conviction that
you should act as if every gun is loaded no matter how much you are sure that
it is not seems to me to give the same level of darwinian fitness as the actual
beleif that the gun is loaded.

Regardless of what form of the statement "treat every gun as if it is loaded"
we want to take, we still have the question of what level of truth this
statement falls under. How true is it? It's certainly true in the sense that a
person who believes this statement is true would have a darwinian advantage
over someone that didn't, but should we redefine truth like this?

An argument for this would be to start with a statement like "Man should aspire
to learn and live by the highest truth." And in this way, it would be argued
that man should look to live by those truths which make him the fittest
possible version of himself that he can possibly become, and therefore should
accept the definition of truth which allows him to pursue the truth in light of
this goal.

This seems all well and good, and it's entirely harmless when taken in a vacuum
like this. It seems like a rather straightforward way of defining your terms
and living by those terms.

But then we run into a problem. By redefining truth in this way, we are allowed
to say statements that, under this redefinition, make sense, but would be
thought of as absurd when said otherwise.

Take the example of a married couple. Suppose the husband is getting suspicious
of his wife. His suspicion is that his wife is seeing another man and cheating
on him without his knowledge, and that goes against the vows that they have
told eachother. So the man hires a private investigator to see what might be
going on. The private investigator tails the wife, and after a couple weeks,
comes back to the man with what he has gathered. The PI shows the man
photographs of his wife being courted by another man, being led into a hotel
holding hands, being taken to a restaurant, and all sorts of other such
dishonest acts. He shows the man the photos of this happening. The husband,
being so overcome with grief, begins to drink himself in a stupor. As he is
going through the case file, and thinking through everything that led to this
happening, that night, he decides to kill himself.

So now, it is very clear in this situation that the man knowing about his wife
cheating on him did not make him more fit in a Darwinian sense. But under our
new defintion of truth, it could be argued that "It wasn't true that the wife
was cheating on her husband."

Now, this is a very complicated situation. Any relationship, especially an
intimate one, involves layers of interaction. For the sake of the discussion,
we can abstract this scenario and reframe it whatever way seems most appropiate
for the thought experiment. We can make the evidence of the PI as sufficient as
we would like, we can reframe the background of their marraige and alter the
level of dishonesty that the wife was injecting into the relationship, we can
adjust the emotional stability of the husband and reformulate his reaction to
the news, and we can alter any of the finer details to illustrate the point
that we are trying to make here. That point is, we can frame this in a way
where, from a darwinian point of view, it could be the fittest case for the
husband not to know about the affair, because his knowledge of the affair would
send him in such a downward spiral that he would be so unable to recover from.
We could even raise the stakes, and say that perhaps the husband is working on
some cure for a disasterous disease, and we can say that, as long as his
marraige remains stable, or as long as he perceives his marraige as stable, he
will discover a cure which will save thousands of lives, but when his marriage
collapses his genious and motivation dwindle and he no longer develops the
cure.

The point here is, we can retell this thought experiment in a way where it
would undeniably correct for the husband not to see the evidence of his wife
cheating and he and humanity would be better off if he was not aware of what
was going on. But to re-evaluate truth in this darwinian way would allow the
wife, when asked by the husband, "Is it true that you are cheating on me" to
say something like, "It is more true that I am not cheating on you than I am."

Of course, this sort of statement is absurd, and the husband would say, "Don't
beat around the bush, are you cheating on me or not." And the wife would be
justified, under this darwinian version of truth, to say, "It is not true that
I am cheating on you."

So in this way, we can talk about truth as something that allows us to think
about how we should act in the world, but I think it is very misleading to
attempt to redefine truth in this way.

Now this all sounds like a rather contrived thought experiment. You could argue
that this sort of situation is something of an anachronism, and for something
like this special case, we need to frame our sentences better than simply
saying that something is true or not.

But I argue that this case isn't really a special case. There is actually a
much larger discussion at hand here when we talk about truth. This discussion
is about religion, and the existance of god.

So before we go into this discussion here, we need to talk about two levels of
existance. Because in order to talk about the existance of god, we need to talk
about what it means for something to exist. Now, these two levels of existance
are very similar to the two levels of truth that we have talked about so far.
There is what I would consider the more convential way of saying that something
like the book and pages in your hand exists, or the chair you are sitting on
exists, as the actual thing that you can feel and touch. This is the first way
of thinking about existance.

The second way something can exist is something like the character of Hamlet.
Hamlet was not a real person that existed as the prince of Denmark at any time.
There may be some person of history which gave the inspiration of teh character
of Hamlet for Shakespeare, but Hamlet does not (or did not) exist in the same
way that a true historical figure like Ceasar existed. Ceasar was a man with
flesh and blood and bones that was alive for a time, at least, as far as we can
derive based on the historical evidence that we have. Hamlet was not.

But it would still be intuitive to say that Hamlet exists. You would say that
he exists as a character in a Shakespeare play, but he still exists. When
asked, "Is it true that Hamlet killed Polonious?" I would say, "Yes, that is a
true statement." But all the while it is clear that we are refering to the
character of Hamlet in Shakespeares play.

You can see there is something of a parallel here. Something can exist in the
flesh and blood, and something can exist as a pattern of thought. Numbers are
the same. Numbers do not exist, but they exist as something of a pattern of
thought which is how we interpret the world. So they exist as an idea, but they
don't exist in the sense that we can touch them.

One point to clear up here, is that it is possible for something to exist on
both levels. Ceasar was a man, and he existed in the first sense, but also, the
idea of Ceasar also exists. The myth of Ceasar is something that is still
talked about. Whether or not Ceasar actually uttered the Latin phrase Et Tu
Brutus? when he was killed or not, it is still widely held as being true in the
mythological sense.

Another point to clear up here is that, in defining the first sense of truth as
the observable and material world, we don't confine ourselves to only the
things that we as human beings can see and feel and touch. You can imagine a
cave that you have never been to, and you could ask "do bat's exist in this
cave" and you could argue that no, there are no bats in the cave. But then when
you visit the cave, you see that there are bats in the cave. Now, the bats,
under this first level of existance, didn't magically apperate into existance
when you went and gained the knowledge of them, instead, it is more appropiate
to say that they always existed, and that we were mistaken about them existing.
Likewise, in this first level of existance, we could ask whether or not some
planet orbiting some star exists on a galaxy trillions of lightyears away. Even
if we could never observe, such a question of the existance of such a planet
has a definite answer, but it's just the case that we don't know and, to our
present level of technological advancement, have no way of knowing, whether
such a planet exists. So with existance here, we are refering to those things
which exist even if we don't perceive them to.

Now, we must take caution here, because we are making presumptions about the
nature of reality. In other words, we never get to come into contact with the
naked truth of reality, but here we are claiming that such a naked truth
exists. We are making the distinction between our knowledge of this naked
truth, and the naked truth itself. This sort of discussion is tangent to the
discussion at hand, but this aside is still neccesary.

So to return back to our discussion of religion and the existance of god, we
have now set the framework with which we can discuss whether or not god exists.

So it's rather clear to say that god exists as an idea. He is very clearly
something that exists as a character in the bible, similar to the way tha
Hamlet is a character in the play of Hamlet. That's undeniable. But saying that
he exists in this way says nothing about whether or not something like god
exists in the first sense. It could be that the way that we derived the second
sense of the existance of god is because he exists in the first sense, or it
could be the case that he exists as an idea that was inspired by the events and
doings of the people that wrote about him, similar to the way that Hamlet was
inspired.

Now, we have to ask ourselves then, supposing that God does exist in this
first, literal and material, sense, in what sort of capacity does he exist?
Many people would make the claim that he does exist "in reality." But in order
to make that claim, and to attempt to justify it, we are left with something of
a difficulty.

It's not clear where we can go to see or feel or touch "the actual diety of
god." We don't have a way of scientifically determining things like the mass of
god, or his position in space-time, or anything like that. Our usual methods of
making observiation on the observable world seem to leave something to be
desired. The scientfic method of observing and drawing conclusions is lacking
in this department of observing the nature of god. We can create rules about
how a ball in freefall will behave, but we cannot make similar rules about how
god acts in our lives.

So in order to justify the claim that god exists in this first, actual and
material, sense, many people have to make a jump. They will claim that, in our
universe, there exists something of an "otherworld" or "other realm". This
other realm, which we cannot come to or arrive at from our universe, does not
obey the laws of space and time, it does not obey the laws of our universe, and
it is not possible to observe it, at least not by convential means, in our
universe. None the less, it is argued that this alternate realm exists, that
it's divided into heaven and hell, that it's the place from which all souls
came, and it's the place where all souls will go, and in this realm, God exists
as a diety, in whatever form is appropiate for dieties in the otherrealm. It's
argued that, from this otherrealm, god created our universe, and he created man
and woman, in his image, and set everything into motion. Further, it is argued,
that this God continues to influence our realm throughout time, and that his
presence can be felt through deep understanding of him and through religious
experience. He is able to touch us in vague and mysterious ways through the
two realms, and his presence pervades and permeates everything that exists.

Now, at this point, we want to ask ourselves, whether or not this god exists.
This is the point where it's vitally crucial that we understand the meanings of
the terms truth and existance.

It could very easily be argued that belief in God allows for greater fitness in
the Darwinian sense. God certainly gives the human something of an anchor to
hold on to in times of trouble. The knowledge that there is a supreme being
that exists above us, that he is in control of everything, and that the aspects
of our lives that are not in our control are in his hands gives a mental
picture that allows for someone to adapt a behavioral attitude which could
benefit them greatly in navigating difficult circumstances.


