# 20181024
So I want to get back to my journal today. I want to continue on with my
philosphical positions. I am not well read, but I think a lot, and I would
like, to some degree, whether my position is at all original, or whether it's
really just the claims of philosophers before me and reincarnated through my
understanding of the world, I want to get out what I see as some of the most
interesting questions that one can ask in the world, and that one can ask of
philosophy. So let's skip the ado and dive in, because fuck the ado.

There are two troubles of philosophy, as I see it, in using it as a way to
think about the world. The first is, the philosophical claims of one individual
can only be tested against the reaction to them by others who would
philosophize. That is, there is no meter stick with which to measure a
philosophical claim.

The second trouble, is that the definitions that a philosopher might use to
describe a certain concept could be somehow different than the definition
another philosopher would use to talk about a similar topic. One philospher
might say that something is true, while another would say that the same thing
is not true, but actually is a fact, and still another might say something that
the reality of the truth of a fact is unreal in the sense that facts cannot
make claims about truth. Of course, I am being coy, but the point remains, that
a sentence about the claims cannot be unpacked without a rubric with which to
unpack them, and as yet, while certain philosophers might lay out with great
clarity what they may mean by using certain terms, there is no universally
accepted notion of these terms and ideas that trancendes the individual
philosopher. Or rather, there might be, but that universally accepted notion
does not have an agreed upon nomenclature, and can lead to great confusion, at
least at the level of the philosophy student who has not yet worked out what
the nomenclature looks like.

So in talking about philosophy, where should I start? Should I simply start
making claims, with no meter stick to measure them and with no nomenclature to
ground my terms? How absurd that would be.

So how do we find these things? What is the meter stick that can be used to
measure a philosophical theory? What is the basis to concretely define a
philosophical concept? Can we start anywhere, or do we have to just pick a
place and create a path? Might we say "Let's not get bogged down in this notion
of beginning, and just define our beginning for the reader to accept for the
purpose of making discussion."

Indeed, this is what mathematics does. Mathematics does not ever make absolute
claims of truth, it only makes contextual claims of truth. Mathematics says,
"given some defintion of a concept, and given this claim, or set of claims,
that we call axioms, let us then go on to discover the nature in which this
structure behaves." So in a sense, mathematics is the most arbitrary of all
philosophical endevors. A young student of mathematics would ask, "but why do
we make these claims to be the bottom most of our understand? Why do we use
these atoms to create the building blocks of our structure? Is this not all
just arbitrary? Could we not make a different claim of an axiom, and come up
with a different mathematical theory, and could it all be just as valid?"

The foolish mathematician, the mathematical dogmatist, would respond and say,
"But these are the claims that mathematics begins on, they are the most
fundamental claims about the nature of our world. You cannot change them or
alter them. They are revealed to be the most indivisable truths. Accept them,
or perish at your own risk."

But this is folly. This mathematician is slave to the mathematicians before
him. This mathematician is slave to any other mathematician he may read. He
reads Euler and says, "This man is a prophet, by the miraculousness of his
divinity, he has revealed the irrefutable truth of mathematics. Behold, I will
place my head at this man's feet and worship him. I am subserviant to him."

And indeed, in this way dogmatist can acheive much. Is it wise for the common
man, the mediocre fool, to question the words of those who are much greater
than he? For this man, subserviance to the giant of his intellect is desirable
to the master of his foolishness. For him it is better to serve in heaven than
reign in hell.

But his subserviance blinds him. Still he says, "I would rather be blind and
follow than awake and lost. My blindness gives me the ground on which I stand,
and my subserviance gives me that which I cannot give myself."

But the wise student still keeps to his claim. He says, "These axioms are
indeed arbitrary, but they must have come from somewhere. Where is this
somewhere that they came?"

It is in their utility that they come. A problem needed to be solved, and so,
a mathematical framework was created to fit on top of the problem. And if the
problem fits the framework, the framework can solve the problem. Generations of
fitting frameworks to problems generated the axioms with which the framework is
predicated. It takes a giant of thought to say, "All of these problems can fit
into a class defined by these axioms, behold, I have discovered the axioms with
which we can reveal many multitude of problems in the world."

But then the student says "But these axioms are still abirtrary, I could indeed
come up with another set of axioms and create another mathematical framework."
And to this, the giant of mathematics would say, "Yes, you can, but can your
framework lie on top of all the problems that mine does and solve them like
mine does? The value in your mathematics is only as worthwhile as the problems
that you can lay it on top of."

So enough of mathematics. The claims of mathematics always have a starting
point. The claim is, "Given these axioms, this theorem is true." So any problem
which fits into this model can be understood within this model, and the theorem
of the model will also apply to the problem which is mapped onto the model.

My point in all of this is, I do not want to make a claim that the starting
point I choose is in some way the only starting point. My starting point is the
one that seems the most fitting to me, but it could be the case that some other
starting point is more interesting than the one I choose. It's up to the reader
to judge if my thoughts are profound enough to warrent my own use of this
starting point, or if I would be better served to be subserviant to the giants
before me. But suppose I do enslave myself. To what master should I give my
service to? Perhaps my striving for philosophy in this way is only the manner
in which I discover my subserviance. But regardless of whether this is journey
of freedom or a journey of enslavement, in either case some starting point is
neccessary. So where I want to start is in defining the terms that I want to
use.

What is the best manner to go about this? I could present a term, and then
present the definition of that term, and do this for all of the terms that I
want to use. This has the benefit of being succint, but has the danger, best I
can see, of being still ambiguous. It's also dreadfully boring, and I am of the
opinion that philosophy fails if the one partaking in the philosophy becomes
bored.

So, I want to explore the concepts of being that we as humans all share, and I
want to label the concepts that we discover along the way with terms that,
hopefully, most closely resemble those concepts. I want to do it in this way to
remain as unambiguous as possible. I want to lead a journey that goes through
the realm of our existance, an inward journey that can be followed as
unambiguously as possible, and when a certain idea or concept comes up, an
idea or concept which will be hopefully shared by those who might go along with
this journey, I want to label that concept, so that the label can be used from
then on to talk about that concept. In this way I hope to be less ambiguous,
and also I hope to be more interesting. Because what is the purpose of
philosophy if the philosopher does not provoke thought?  From this, we can then
go on to talk about the philosphical ideas, with little in the way of confusion
about what exactly is meant by the idea.

So what does this journey look like? What sort of journey to I wish to partake
in?

To answer that, let's ask a bit about the reason someone might come to
philosophy. For what reason might someone sit down and think about something?

The answer is usually this. There is something disconcordant with an
individuals understanding of some aspect of the world. Such a disconcordance
usually takes the form of a question. Usually the question is one of ethics, or
it is one of reality. A famous ethical question is the Trolley experiment, and
all of it's iterations. A famous question about reality is the question of the
existance of God.

Both of these sorts of questions are the things that people will turn to
philosophy for. But philosophy does not (or should not, in my opinion) seek to
provide answers to these questions, but instead, it should seek to provide a
means by which someone could think about these questions, and through this
line, come up with an answer for themself.

But these questions are not the starting point of our journey. Rather, this is
simply a bit of preamble for the journey we are to take. We keep these two
sorts of questions in mind as a justification for undertaking what is a rather
abstract and potentially meaningless journey through the human experience. The
promise of a means with which to start a mode of thought that could lead to a
greater understanding of these sorts of questions is the justification of what
is to come.

So I want to try and begin our journey, and to find the beginning of the
journey, I want to ask a question which to me seems to hit the best place to
begin.

What do we know?

Now, at this point, we have already run into a problem. What is meant by "know"
and even still, what is meant by "we" or "I"? This is the issue of definitions
that I am quite honestly not truly able to get around. Even before the starting
point of our journey, we have to define a term before we can experience that
term. But enough. Let's instead try and answer that question, and in this way
we can get to our starting point.

So many people would claim to know a multitude of things. They know that the
world is round they know their name, what country they live in, and what year
it is. These are things that, when you ask a four year old if she knows how old
she is, she will hold up four fingers and say "I'm four" in a potentially
adorable voice.  This is not the sort of knowledge I wish to talk. These are
the sorts of things that we know "beyond a reasonable doubt", to use law
terminology. I instead ask the question, what do we know within the reasonable
doubt?

I want to make the distinction about which way I am going here. A Chirstian in
his kitchen would know beyond a reasonable doubt that the pot he is holding is
made of cast iron. But he might say, "I know that Jesus Christ is my savior and
lord." But this is more of a claim of belief. The knowledge of the cast iron
pan is more concrete than the belief of Christ.

I wish to go the other way. I wish to say, "is there something that is greater
than your knowledge that the pan is made of cast iron? Is there something you
can say that you have knowledge of more than you have knowledge of the
existance of the pan in your hand?"

This seems like a trivial question. What is more real than the real thing in
your hand. But this is the point I am trying to get at.

Most reader will be familiar with the "Brain in a Vat" experiment. This thought
experiment says that, it's entirely possible that the world we experience is
not the real world, but is instead some sort of elaborate virtual simulation
that we take part in, that our existance is really that we are a brain in a
vat that is hooked up to some electrodes which feed input and receive output,
and that the world we are experiences is merely an artificial construction of
this virtual simulated world. When I place my hand on the table, I am not
feeling the table because there is an actual real world where there is a real
table, but instead, the simulated reality that is being fed to my brain is
manipulating my senses in such an exact way as to create a sensation of
resistance and the image of a table when I place my hand on it.

Most, when they hear about such an experiment say, "That's absurd, what a
crackpot idea that is." And to that I say, "I agree". But instead, I use this
experiment to make my point about "reasonable doubt." It could be said that,
beyond a reasonable doubt, we are not living in a simulated reality. But within
the reasonable doubt is the possiblity that we truly are brains living in vats
and that we are being fed lies about our perception.

This is the reason I want to be very careful about where I start. I want to go
on a journey, a journey of knowledge, but I want to be sure that we start that
journey of knowledge in a place that is inside the space where we can cast
reasonable doubts, if such a place exists. To this point, I have not made any
claim about such a place existing, but I want to rule out the possiblity of
such a place existing before I start with something that can be reasonably
doubted.

And at this point, there might be an objection. You might say, "I would like to
start in a place that can be reasonably doubted." Perhaps you even have some
place in mind. To this I then have to ask, why? If we can start in a place that
cannot be reasonably doubted, why would you suppose that we start in the place
that can be reasonably doubted? Are you afraid that starting in a different
place will invalidate your reasonable doubt?  Your resistance to this idea is
your own prejudice. Let us not have prejudice, as best we can being prejudiced
creatures that we are, and instead seek to find something that can somehow
resonate wholly with the human experience, so that when our arguments reduce to
absurdity, we can work back to the point where things became absurd. But if our
initial supposition can be reasonably doubted, it's possible that even our
starting point can be reduced to absurdity, and then we are just as lost as
when we started, having gained only the journey of folly. Let us rather find a
place beyond the reasonable doubt to start, and work with more and more doubt
as we come out from that point. Would we not rather find a place that could
somehow be universally fundamental to our thought?

So the question than becomes, "Is there such a thing as knowledge beyond a
reasonable doubt?" In other words, is it possible to ever truly know something?

Now, if the answer is no, then I would have taken you along this path for
nothing, and we would then have to find a new place to try and begin our
conversation. But on this journey, I think I do want to say that I think there
is one thing that it is possible to truly know. This thing is captured in this
statement.

"I have experience"

Now, I must clarify some things about this statement, because if I am making
the claim that this is somehow the most fundamental knowledge that a human can
have, we must both clarify and scrutinize the statement for flaws. We also must
know just exactly what is meant by this statement.

So I will start by saying what this claim is not making. And I want to say that
these negatives of the claim are not unreasonable. In fact, many are rather
reasonable things to say. However, reasonable though they may be, they are not
what the claim "I have experience" is trying to say.

This claim is not stating anything about the origin of where experience comes
from. The claim is not the statement that there is a real world, and
interaction with the real world provides this experience. It is not that.

This claim is also not making any claims about the nature of the experience. We
are not stating that there is such a thing as happy or sad, or that there is
such a thing as hot or cold. The sensation of hot or cold is part of the
experience, but we are not trying to describe the nature of the experience. We
are merely making a statement of it's existance.

We are also not making any sort of metaphysical claims. We are not saying that
the experience is a part of the soul, and that there is an otherworld that
provides the soul with it's experience. While that could be an explanation for
the form of existance, we are not making any claims about form in this claim.

We are also not making any claims about the validity of experience. That is to
say, things like hallucinations, premonitions, deja vu, religious experience,
and other things of that sort are all part of experience, along with the more
contemparary notion that "I put my hand on the hot stove and it felt hot", but
just because they all fall under experience does not speak to the validity of
the experience. I feel this point is a little tricky, because then it begs the
question, what does it mean to have a valid experience vs an invalid
experience? But that is my whole point. I am not making any sort of claim to
the validity of the experience, merely that the experience exists. Validity is
a different notion, one that is inside the reasonable doubt.

One last notion is that this statement does not include any claim about our
ability to control or manipulate this experience. I am not saying that our
experience is controled by our "free will" and that through the application of
this free will, we are able to influence the experience that we have. The "I
have experience" claim has no bearing on the claim that free will exists. We
are not, at this starting point, making any claim about free will, but instead
making claims about the existance of experience.

So now that we have made some negative claims about this assertion of
experience, I want to talk about what exactly is meant by this claim of
experience. This is best talking about in showing all the ways in which people
have experience.

The first and most obvious notion of "experience" is talking about the
sensations of the senses. This example has the benefit of being the easiest to
understand, but it is also the easiest to misunderstand as well. This notion of
experience is the simply observation that, when you put your hand into some
warm water, your hand feels warm. The hand feeling warm is a part of the
experience.

So here is where I don't want to be misunderstood. This does not suppose that
since the hand feels warm, there must be a pot, and it must have warm water in
it, and the warmness of the water is being transfered into the nerve endings of
the hand, and that's where the sensation of warmness comes from. It is possible
to say, going back to the brain in a vat experiment, that really there is a
simulated world that is feeding the feeling of warmth from the water of the pot
to your brain, and that if so programmed, it could perhaps supply a different
sensation to your brain when you place your hand in the warm water, but it
wasn't programmed like that so you feel the warmth of it.

But that's the whole point. The point is, in either case, in the more sane
sense of thinking about the world as something "real" and then in the contrary
case of the world being virtual, there is a sense of warmth that is being
experienced. The experience of the hand being warm is what I mean when I say
that "there is experience", namely, in this case, the experience of the hand
being warm.

Now, I want to talk about other examples of experience, because while the
experience of physical sensation is one of the more promonent ways in which
this experience is felt, there are other things as well.

The sort of dual example of this is the dream. When someone sleeps at night,
they may act out any variety of dreams. They could be falling, they could be
flying, running from someone who wants to kill them, or running to try and kill
someone. The locale could be anything from a familiar house to an entire
landscape that the dreamer has never been before. The basis in reality could be
the most real, or the most fantastic. Regardless of the exact nature of the
dream, the experience of the dream is something that you can point to and say,
"that is an experience."

Again, I am not making any claim about the origin of the dream. Certain Greek's
in Hellenic times may have supposed that their dreams were visions sent by
Zeus or Apollo, and that the gods were attempting to give them some omen
through the vision of the dream. It has also been said that the dream is simply
the brains way of responding to random firings of neurons in the night. I am
not making any sort of claim one way or the other about the nature of where the
dream comes from, in the same way that I am not make a claim about where the
warmth of the water comes from. I am simply saying that the experience of the
dream exists.

One last example, one that is useful for thought experiments down the line, is
the notion of the sensory deprivation chamber. A sensory deprivation chamber is
a chamber that is so designed to remove an sensory input to a human being. In
this chamber, one does not experience light, or sound, or heat, or taste. It
could be argued that one feels the water, and any noise the water may make, but
this a flaw of the chamber. The point is, one can imagine the most well
constructed sensory deprivation chamber, one that perfectly supresses all
sensory input. In such a chamber, the mind is allowed to wander. People might
have hallucinations, visual or otherwise, and the experince one has in there
would be a part of this experience I am talking about. Someone could imagine a
world as fantastic as they can imagine, with fantastic fairy tale beasts with
dieties and gods, and one could imagine themself walking through this world as
if it were true. They could go into imagined houses, and talk to imagined
residents of those houses. The limit to experience here is only up to the
creative capacity of the person who partakes in this experience.

This fantastical world is a part of the experience. Again, we are not making
the claim that this world is in any way "real" or "valid", but we are merely
saying that, when someone gets into that chamber, they have these experiences.

Another example similar to this one is the use of psychodelics. Under the
influence of Psilocybin, or DMT, or any other psychoactive substance, one could
have any number of trancendent or otherwise mind altering experiences. Now,
there could be many theories about what is actually happening there, whether or
not there is an actual soul that is somehow being transported to an actual
"otherworld", or whether or not such experiences are the result of neurons
being fired in reaction to the effects of the psychoactive chemicals. Whatever
the source of the experience is, it is still a fact that "something is being
experienced"

So again, I want to emphasize, the fact there is such a thing as human
experince does not indicate anything about what the human experience is nested
in, if anything. But it is at this point, at this statement, that "experience
exists".

Before we go on, I want to mention one last thing about this human experience,
and that has to do with the conception of what it means with it's relation to
time.

So to this point, we have not talked about time, and in fact, similar to the
notion of free will, the notion of "I have experience" and rather, what that
experience is, does not insist upon any notion of time. However, what I do want
to say is, it might be more accurate, in some sense, to say something like, "I
have experience of the present moment". Of course, this requires further
understanding of what "the present moment" means, but what I am getting at is
this. Suppose you had the experience of placing your hand in the warm water,
and then you took your hand out of the warm water. Then you get out of the
kitchen, sit in your chair, and you think about what that felt like. Well, at
this present moment, your experience has to do with the recollection of the
experience of placing your hand in the warm water. Your experience is the
recollection. So in that sense, it is no longer correct to say that "I have the
experience of placing my hand in the warm water." It is only correct to say,
"Right now, my experience is the process of remembering the placement of my
hand in the warm water."

This goes back to the point about the validity of experience. I am not making a
claim about the validity of the memory, I am only making a claim that the
experience of recollection exists. And as such, I am not making any claim about
time existing, in the same way I am not making any claim about space existing,
or even a material world. All I am saying with this statement is that the
fundamental starting point that I want to start our journey at is that "there
is experience."

So the first thing to talk about is what we should call this human experience.
There are many things that we could use to talk about it. Knowledge, feeling,
consciousness, awareness, and I'm sure many others. But all of these things
can have some sort of a priori meaning attached to them. When talking about
Consciousness, many people will give some sort of supernatural origin to it,
and think about it in those terms. When talking about awareness, we talk about
that aspect of our experience that has to do with being alert of our
surroundings.

I think, there is no word which talks about this notion of the "experience that
we have even with the reasonable doubt." The experience that, no matter what
else we have in the world, exists. Even the word "experience" is too much,
because the notion of experience is tied up with the concept of "having
experience" or "being experienced" in something. An experienced athelete is a
different notion of the word "experience" then the one I am trying to use.

Some other notions about experience, perhaps more ethereal in nature, are thing
such as the "soul" or the "spirit" or the "body" or the "mind". All of these
things are interconnected, but they all have the problem that in one context,
in one way of framing the world, the soul will mean one thing, and in another
way of framing the world, the soul will mean something else, something that
contradicts the first one. It gets to the point that using any of these words
without the proper framing of what you mean when you use it could mean so many
different and contradicting things that you really can't mean anything by using
the words alone and you must supply the context for your use of these words.

It goes even deeper than that though, because many feel so strongly about what
these words mean to them, that even if the context is supplied for one persons
meaning and use of a certain word, the other will still apply the context that
they wish to apply to it, and in this way, the distinctions and points that
the first is trying to make will be lost despite his best efforts to make
himself unambiguously clear. I may say, "Using this definiton of the soul, I
argue that the soul is something that we have absolute knowledge of." But then
an athiest will come along and say, "but the soul doesn't exist," to which I
will say, "you are using a different defintion for the word soul." To which he
might rightly argue, "But why are you revalutating the defintion for the word
soul in this way? You are asking to be misunderstood." And on that point, he is
correct. To use the word soul to describe this concept would be asking to be
misunderstood.

There's a part of me that wants to make up a word for this notion that I am
talking about. It seems peculiar to me that this concept that seems to me to be
at the very center of any sane way of thinking about the world as we know it
doesn't have an unambiguous name. It's perhaps even tragic, that the thing that
is the only thing that we can truely know doesn't have a name which is
unambiguous.

So this is the terminology that I use, and that I think is the most fitting. I
call this thing, the thing that we have described so far as "human experience",
that exists irrespective of how it gets created, and that we have absolute
knowledge of, I call, the "Inner".

Now, of course, giving it a name like "Inner" is leading. It suggests that
there must be an "Outer". And it does suggest that, and indeed, that is the
next thing to talk about. But I want to pump the brakes here for a moment.

The reason I call this the "Inner" is because it is, to me, best what
represents this notion of "the only true knowledge". And it could be argued
that this is the introverted perspective, and that the bias of the introvert is
speaking when it calls the "Inner" the only true knowledge. But again, I must
emphasize, we are merely saying that the Inner exists, and such a supposition
seems to me to be the most sure supposition that anyone could make. There are
other supposistions that could be made, something about the nature of reality,
or something about the origin of our existance, or any other starting off
point, but I want to make this one because, beyond any doubt, it is known that
the human being has experience.

But I must be clear. To say that the Inner is the only really true knowledge
can be dreadfully misleading. I must give this word of caution at this point.
Such a notion can lead a man to insanity. To think that "Diving inward" is the
only way to discover what is "entirely true" is supremely misguided. I only
call this thing the "inner" to give it a name which seems most appropiate to
me. To draw the association between "inner" and "the only undeniable knowledge"
and then to try and explore the inner to attempt to discover knowledge is using
again the a priori notion of inner and knowledge to this notion. It's a
prejudiced understanding of whatever other associations a human might have with
the word knowledge that seeks to discover something more here. I merely use
these words as terms to describe the concepts that we have so far.

So we have this thing now, this inner. I want to make some clarifications.

It could be argued that the inner is not something that we have absolute
knowledge of. But I've already adressed this point in detailing the fact that I
am not making any claim about the validity of the inner, only that the inner
exists. But someone may argue, "I don't have an inner."

How interesting that would be if someone made that point. Indeed, this touches
on the question about what it means to be conscious. Would an AI that is smart
enough to have a discussion with someone about these points be able to
justifiably argue about the fact that it (the AI) doesn't experience an inner?

It's certainly an interesting question to dwell on, but it's not one that I
want to get caught up in. This article is for those that would be able to agree
with me that the inner exists, and for those that experience that inner.
Perhaps I am missing the correct starting point, in that I would not be able to
relate to a silicon AI that would argue that it does not experience an inner in
the way I have described it. But it's the best that I can do. While it is a
thought provoking question whether or not an AI would experience this "inner"
in the way I have described it, I instead want to make this starting point for
those being that can agree with me that there exists, with absolute certainty,
the concept of experience. The question of whether or not some system that has
the capability to grasp the inner as I am describing it must "have" the inner
is another topic for another article.

Another clafication I want to make is this. I am not defining the inner as "the
whole set of things that we have absolute knowledge of." In other words, I
don't want to say, "aha, we found something else that we have absolute
knowledge of (I don't know what that may be, but suppose that it exsits,
whatever it looks like), and so this thing is part of the inner." This is not
what we are doing. Instead, I am defining the inner as "the human experience,"
and I am defining absolute knowledge as, "The things we can know, even when
taking in reasonable doubt" and making the claim, "the human has absolute
knowledge of the inner." It's a tricky distinction, because in talking about
the inner, it is tempting to describe it as "those things which we have
absolute knowledge of" but I don't want to define it this way. Instead, I want
to define it as the concept of human experience, and then I want to make claim
we have absoulte knowledge of the inner." So it's a definition, and then a
claim. And I hope I am doing a good job in justifying that claim. I wish to
bring up all objections to that claim, and clarify that the objections either
miss the mark on what is meant by inner, or miss the mark in that they are not
actually objections to the claim but misunderstandings about the scope of the
claim. But still, my whole point with this clarification is that the inner is a
concept, and absolute knowledge is a concept, and I am making a claim that has
to be justified about the inner and our absolute knowledge of it.

So I have labeled what I am calling the "inner" as the sort of kaleidoscope of
experince that any human being will have at any moment in time. It's the thing
that someone can point to and say, "I cannot be absolutely sure about
some things, but I am sure of the fact that I have experience, and I choose to
call that thing the inner".

So the question now is, are there other things to which any human being can
have absolute knowledge? We have ruled out the possiblity that "there is a real
world" as some sort of absolute knowledge, because the brain in a vat
experiment could discredit that. And it's also not just the brain in a vat
experiment that discredit's the absolute certianty of that, also. It is also
entirely possible that our entire experience is like some highly potent and
highly engaging hallucination. It's possible that everything we experience is
the result of some dis illusioned mental disorder that we have, and that
everything we think is real is really some sort of elaborate dream world.
Again, similar to the brain in the vat, this notion is rather absurd, and
should not be taken to be a substitute for the sense of a "real world," but it
illustrates the point that there is some possiblity that there is something
other than the real world.

So at this point, we have defined what I mean by "inner", and we have made a
statement about the absolute knowledge of the existance of the inner. So here I
wish to make another statement, and then go on further to justify this
statement.

The only thing we can have absolute knowledge of is the inner.

Now, this statement is a little stronger than the original statement, but we
have less confidence in it. Our first claim, "I have experience" makes a claim
about the existance of something with which we have absolute knowledge. This
claim is stronger, it makes a claim about the uniqueness of the things we have
absolute knowledge of.

Now, at this point, I can see a reason to object to this claim. In fact, I want
to make a very clear objection to this claim myself because I want to go about
treading as carefully as we can in this most precious domain. This objection
is, how can we make a claim about the uniqueness of the things we have absolute
knowledge of? We can get behind the idea that the inner is a thing with which
we have absolute knowledge, and we can use that as our irrefutable starting
point, a claim with which we can have absolute confidence, but the only way to
determine that it's the only thing that we have absolute knowledge of would
mean that one would have to scrape through all of the things that it's possible
to have knowledge of, and determine that each of of the things that isn't the
inner is not absolute. And since there are some level of infinite number of
things that are knowable, and we don't have a way to classify them in some sort
of rigourous framework, then we must raise the objection that we can never
prove the fact that this inner is the only thing that we have absolute
knowledge of. In other words, we have less confidence in our statement about
the uniqueness of the inner as our only absolute knowledge.

So I pause at this point, and raise this objection here, because this is how I
wish to continue talking about these topics. This is the next "stop" on our
journey. We begin with the inner as our nucleous, as our most confident
statement, first defining it then making the claim that we have absolute
knowledge of it's existance. In the way that I have defined inner, and the way
we think about absolute knowledge, and as far as I can tell this is the most
irrefutable claim that we can make. But the next claim, the claim about the
uniqueness of the inner as the only thing that we have absolute knowledge of,
is something of an extension out from that. It says, "this is how I wish to
proceed with our thinking. This is our next stop on the journey"

So, to raise the confidence in our uniqueness claim, I wish to make the
opposite claim, that "there is something else besides the inner that we can
have absolute knowledge of," and see where that takes us. Mathemeticians will
recognize the "reducto ad absurdum" and I wish to use this thinking. But I do
want to be clear, I am not being mathematically rigourous, I am only using this
way of thinking to increase our confidence in our uniqueness claim. That is,
the more absurd it seems to take the opposite claim, the more confidence we
gain in our uniqueness claim, but I am not suggesting that this is any sort of
proof of correctness. I am merely doing this as an exercise to justify our
uniqueness claim as the next stop on our journey.

So first let's return to the example of placing your hand on the stove, and
feeling heat. One may argue, "When I place my hand on the stove, I feel "the
heat of the inner", which must mean that there is some "outer notion" of that
heat." So we are claiming that the "real heat" is something that we have
absolute knowledge of.

So now at this point, we have to ask, what is real heat? In what way are we
going to define "real heat?" that is seperate from the "inner (perceived) heat"

From a raw physics perspective, we can use at least two (and definitely more,
but lets stick to two for now) models for defining what this "real heat" is. We
could say, Temperature is represnted as a field, where every point in space
and time is given a numeric value. Heat is represented by the gradient (the
sharpness to which the temperature changes when you move across space) of that
temperature. When there is a high enough change in the temperature between my
hand and the stove, my nerves are able to detect that, and then they send that
information as "heat sensation" to the inner. In this way, we have defined what
"real heat" is.

The second way to look at this is to talk about the atom theory of
thermodynamics. The atom theory says that there are atoms that are in constant
motion. Every atoms position across time can be given by a parametric equation
that, given an exact moment in time, gives the location of the atom. From these
parametric equations, we can determine the kinetic energy of the stove atoms,
and the kinetic energy of the hand atoms. When the stove atoms collide with the
hand atoms, the difference in the kinetic energy of the these two types of
atoms is felt by the nerves in the hand, and through the increase of the
kinetic energy of the hand atoms, the heat is felt and experienced by the
inner. In this way, we have defined what "real heat" is.

Now, I must ask, which of these two theories is correct? This question
illustrates the point. In both theories, to the extent that we are able to make
measurements with thermometers and such, we have equivelent ways of measuring
the experience of the heat on the hand.

One may argue, "One of the theories must be correct, and the other must be
wrong." But how do we determine which theroy is correct and which one is wrong?
You say, "We perform experiment and test which one holds the most true." But,
and I hate that I keep coming back to this point, who is to say that we aren't
performing the experiment in a virtual world. Another perfectly valid theory
is, "When you place your hand on the stove, a goblin turns a "heat" knob on the
brain in the vat module, and this goblin is so good at doing this, that your
feeling of the heat always comes at the exact time that you place the hand on
the stove."

So essentially, I am simply hammering the same point. We can come up with many
theroies about where the heat comes from, but the only thing we can know for
certian is the experience of feeling heat, and then later, the memory of that
perception.

And at this point, you may argue, "but there is a correct notion of heat, but
we just can't know it." But then I say, "How do you know that there is a
correct notion of heat?" I'm not making the opposite claim, I am not saying
that there is no correct notion of heat (and the usage of all the negatives
makes me really have to double check my words). But I am saying that we don't
know, without prejudice, whether there is or isn't a "correct" notion of the
way to think about "real heat". If we take the stance that, "There is no
correct notion of heat," then we are done and we say that we don't have
absolute knowledge about the "real heat", and if we take the stance that "There
is a correct notion of heat, but we just can't know it," then we don't have
absolute knowledge of what the heat is, because that is built in to the
statement. In both cases, there is something that we don't have absolute
knowledge of about the heat that we perhaps suppose that we have absolute
knowledge of. And notice, I don't have to choose which choice I took, I only
had to show that in both cases, we don't have absolute knowledge about the
"real heat"

And there still might be more objection to the second clause of the claim.
Someone might want to say, "There is a correct notion of heat, and we can
know it." To that I say, "Okay, how can we know it?" Everything we know about
the heat, to this point, has to do with our experience with heat through the
senses. Reading a thermometer has to do with seeing light with the eyes, and
the experience of seeing has to do with the inner. Feeling the heat with the
hand has to do with perceiving the sensation in our experience, so that has to
do with the inner. As of this moment in time, human beings have only been able
to experience the world as the inner, and we have already talked about the
potential, as absurd as it may be, that the inner does not represent what we
think it does. So until some way is discovered to experience the world beyond
the experience of our inner (and what a strange notion that is), we can't
really say that we know what the correct notion of heat is (if there is such a
thing as correct).

And I also would like to add, I think this notion that "there is a correct
version of real heat, and it can be absolutely known by humans" is something of
a prejudice. I say, the only thing we ever know about anything is through the
senses. To claim that you have superceded the senses in your knowledge of the
world is rather absurd, but I would very much like to know how you did it and
how it could be reproduced.

But still, even if that could be done, it would still be a part of the human
experience. So now that "supreceding the senses and becoming aware of naked
reality" is just a part of the inner. So in this sense, the absolute knowledge
of the external heat would be a part of the inner in this (rather implausible
and hitherto un-actualized) model of the world. We really have reduced our
point to the absurd.

So enough on the hand on the stove. We have argued the point that we can't
have absolute knowledge about the existance of an external heat. Either there
is no such thing as absolute external heat, or we have no way of knowing what
the absolute external heat is. We have an absolute knowledge about the internal
perception of the heat, but we cannot have absolute knowledge about the
external existance of the heat.

So let's talk about something else that some may consider to be absolute
knowledge.

Many might argue, "The principles of mathematics are something that one can
have absolute knowledge of."

Now, this is a much trickier notion to unpack. First, it's important to
distinguish what we mean when we say "the principles of mathematics."

Many people talk about the basic tenets of mathematics by saying, "Say I have
two apples in my left and, and two apples in my right hand. If I throw all of
the apples in a basket, then there will always be four apples in the basket."

So there are two concepts at play here. The first notion, and the one that we
don't mean when we say "the principles of mathematics," is the notion of the
actual apples in the actual basket. This is the same thing as not having
absolute knowledge of the "external world." We can't have absolute knowledge
about the four apples in the basket, so we can't make a claim about the
absolute knowledge of this way of thinking about mathematics.

But, some may argue, Mathematics is an abstract concept. You say, "We might not
have absolute knowledge about the four apples in the basket, but we do have
absolute knowledge about the fact that two of something plus two of something
is four of something. That's an abstract concept, it doesn't have anything to
do with the real world, so you can't use the brain in the vat to explain this
one away."

And to that I say, no I can't. But I also say, "What is an abstract concept?"
Or in other words, "Are "abstract concepts" really different than the inner?"

This is actually a rather tricky question. In fact, I wish to hold on unpacking
this whole concept until we get further down in all of this. The short answer
here is, abstract concepts are those notions of the inner which help us make
sense of what happens in the outer. But we haven't talked about the outer yet,
and to flesh out that discussion here would be a duplication of effort. So we
will leave it at that for now.

But I think we can unpack this in a way without resorting to the concept of the
outer (which is something we should be able to do if this is really the correct
progression of steps along our journey). We could go back to the sensory
deprivation chamber again. We could generate a math problem, go into the
deprivation chamber, sort out the math problem in our head, apart from any
external influence, and emerge with an answer. Now, it's not exactly clear what
is going on when one "sorts through a math problem in a sensory deprivation
chamber," but in some degree, it is similar to "creating a fantastical world
with fantastical creatures and navigating this world in the creativity of the
mind" and we have already defined that as part of the inner. In the same way
that the fantastical fairy world is a part of the experience of the human
being, the working out of the math problem is also a part of the experience of
the human being.

But many might argue that math is something that exists even without the human
to think it up. But would you also say that the fairy world exists apart from
the human experience? For the latter, I would think not. So why would
mathematics exist apart from someone to think about it?

To illustrate my point, there are at least two (and many more) ways of
structurally generating the natural numbers.

The first is the set theoretic encoding of the natural numbers. Set theory
starts with notions of the existance of things such as the null set, and then
things such as "if A is a set, then there is a set that contains A as it's sole
element." Then there are also axioms pertaining to things like set union and
set intersection. With these axioms, we are able to rigourously and
unambiguously define the rules for creating sets.

With this set theory, we can now encode the natural numbers. We can say, "There
are a lot of sets, let's try and make some sense of some of them by applying
labels to them." So we start by labeling the null set 0. Then, we use the
"contains" axiom to say, "another set is the set containing the null set". We
label this set 1.

From here, we then say, the set containing 0 and 1 we will call 2. And the set
containing 0 and 1 and 2 we will call 3. And so on. In order to continue this
processes, we will define a SUCC function that takes a set like this, and
generates the next set. SUCC will be the union of all the elements of a set
with the set itself. So SUCC({0,1}) = {0,1,{0,1}} = {0,1,2} = 3.

Defining sets in this way, we have now encoded what we consider the "intuitive"
definition of the natural numbers within the rigourous bounds of set theory. We
could then come up with defintions of addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and so on, which would be set theoretic notions, but defined in a way to be
consistent with how our intuition for how numbers should behave would go. 

So if mathematics is real, or not part of the inner, this would be the way of
defining numbers.

But then we have another way of describing numbers. We can use the lambda
calculus to encode the real numbers.

We can define a lambda to be one of three things. It can be either a free
variable, the function from one variable to a lambda, or application of one
lambda to another. Using this, and a notion of what it means to "apply an
expression to a function" (beta reduction, in lambda calculus terms), we can
create an encoding of the natural numbers.

So we can say "give me a function f, and a variable x, and I will apply that
function to x 0 times." We will label this lambda experssion (\f -> \x -> x) 0.
Then, we will have another expression, being "give me a function f and a
variable x and apply f to x 1 time" (\f -> \x -> f x) to be the definiton of 1.
Then two would be (\f -> \x -> f (f x)). We can define a SUCC function as the
lambda (\n -> \f -> \x -> f (n f x)) or "the function that takes a church
lambda and applies (f x) n times, before defining f one more time"

We can then define lambda's for things like addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and etc, in the ways that cause the labels of the lambda's to
make intuitive sense.

In this way, if numbers are real, they would be encoded in the lambda calculus
in this way.

The point I am making here is, if you were to take the notion that numbers are
somehow not part fo the inner, you would be faced with the conundrum that there
are many equivilent ways to define them. And at this point, we have a similar
argument about external heat. We could say, "Numbers are a part of the inner,"
and so, numbers are not our counterexample to the claim about the uniqueness of
the inner, or we could say, "Numbers are not part of the inner" but then we
can't have absolute knowledge about which representation of numbers is the
correct one, so again they are not a counter example to the claim about the
uniqueness of the inner.

Now, as I said, I do not have a rigorous proof about the claim of uniqueness of
the inner as absolute knowledge, but these examples I think show that we can
accept this claim with confidence. It could be left as an exercise to the
reader to find examples more things that could be considered "not inner" and
"absolutely knowable."

So let's recap what we have worked through so far.

We want to go on a philosophical journey, in hope of discovering something
perhaps useful about "truth" or "ethics". In deciding a starting point for that
journey, we want to pick the place that we can be most sure of. It seems that
the place that we can be most sure of is that there is such a thing as human
experience, and that the human has absolute knowledge of it. We call this the
"inner" and it is the nucleous of our journey. The first stop out from this
nucleous is the claim that the inner is the only thing that we can have
absolute knowledge of. Our confidence in this claim is a degree off of the
absoluteness of our first claim, but still seems reasonable.
