# COMPARISON OF TIMOLEON WITH AEMILIUS PAULUS

Such being the story of these two great men's lives, without doubt in the
comparison very little difference will be found between them.  They made
war with two powerful enemies: the one against the Macedonians, and the
other with the Carthaginians; and the success was in both cases glorious.
One conquered Macedon from the seventh succeeding heir of Antigonus; the
other freed Sicily from usurping tyrants, and restored the island to its
former liberty.  Unless, indeed, it be made a point on Aemilius's side,
that he engaged with Perseus when his forces were entire, and composed of
men that had often successfully fought with the Romans; whereas, Timoleon
found Dionysius in a despairing condition, his affairs being reduced to
the last extremity: or, on the contrary, it be urged in favor of
Timoleon, that he vanquished several tyrants, and a powerful Carthaginian
army, with an inconsiderable number of men gathered together from all
parts, not with such an army as Aemilius had, of well disciplined
soldiers, experienced in war, and accustomed to obey; but with such as
through the hopes of gain resorted to him, unskilled in fighting and
ungovernable.  And when actions are equally glorious, and the means to
compass them unequal, the greatest esteem is certainly due to that
general who conquers with the smaller power.

Both have the reputation of having behaved themselves with an uncorrupted
integrity, in all the affairs they managed:  but Aemilius had the
advantage of being, from his infancy, by the laws and customs of his
country, brought up to the proper management of public affairs, which
Timoleon brought himself to by his own efforts.  And this is plain; for
at that time all the Romans were uniformly orderly and obedient,
respectful to the laws and to their fellow-citizens: whereas it is
remarkable, that not one of the Greek generals commanding in Sicily,
could keep himself uncorrupted, except Dion, and of him many entertained
a jealousy that he would establish a monarchy there, after the
Lacedaemonian manner.  Timaeus writes, that the Syracusans sent even
Gylippus home dishonorably, and with a reputation lost by the unsatiable
covetousness he displayed when he commanded the army.  And numerous
historians tell us of the wicked and perfidious acts committed by Pharax
the Spartan, and Callippus the Athenian, with the view of making
themselves kings of Sicily.  Yet what were these men, and what strength
had they, to entertain such a thought?  The first of them was a follower
of Dionysius, when he was expelled from Syracuse, and the other a hired
captain of foot under Dion, and came into Sicily with him.  But Timoleon
at the request and prayers of the Syracusans, was sent to be their
general, and had no need to seek for power, but had a perfect title,
founded on their own offers, to hold it; and yet no sooner had he freed
Sicily from her oppressors, but he willingly surrendered it.

It is truly worthy our admiration in Aemilius, that, though he conquered
so great and so rich a realm as that of Macedon, yet he would not touch,
nor see any of the money, nor did he advantage himself one farthing by
it, though he was very generous of his own to others.  I would not intend
any reflection on Timoleon, for accepting of a house and handsome estate
in the country, which the Syracusans presented him with; there is no
dishonor in accepting; but yet there is greater glory in a refusal, and
the supremest virtue is shown in not wanting what it might fairly take.
And as that body is, without doubt, the most strong and healthful, which
can the easiest support extreme cold and excessive heat in the change of
seasons, and that the most firm and collected mind which is not puffed up
with prosperity, nor dejected with adversity; so the virtue of Aemilius
was eminently seen in his countenance and behavior continuing as noble
and lofty upon the loss of two dear sons, as when he achieved his
greatest victories and triumphs.  But Timoleon, after he had justly
punished his brother, a truly heroic action, let his reason yield to a
causeless sorrow, and, humiliated with grief and remorse, forbore for
twenty years to appear in any public place, or meddle with any affairs of
the commonwealth.  It is truly very commendable to abhor and shun the
doing any base action; but to stand in fear of every kind of censure or
disrepute, may argue a gentle and open-hearted, but not a heroic temper.



