# POMPEY

The people of Rome seem to have entertained for Pompey from his
childhood, the same affection that Prometheus in the tragedy of
Aeschylus expresses for Hercules, speaking of him as the author
of his deliverance, in these words,

Ah cruel Sire!  how dear thy son to me!
The generous offspring of my enemy!

For on the one hand, never did the Romans give such
demonstrations of a vehement and fierce hatred against any of
their generals, as they did against Strabo, the father of
Pompey; during whose lifetime, it is true, they stood in awe of
his military power, as indeed he was a formidable warrior, but
immediately upon his death, which happened by a stroke of
thunder, they treated him with the utmost contumely, dragging
his corpse from the bier, as it was carried to his funeral.  On
the other side, never had any Roman the people's good-will and
devotion more zealous throughout all the changes of fortune,
more early in its first springing up, or more steadily rising
with his prosperity, or more constant in his adversity, than
Pompey had.  In Strabo, there was one great cause of their
hatred, his insatiable covetousness; in Pompey, there were many
that helped to make him the object of their love; his
temperance, his skill, and exercise in war, his eloquence of
speech, integrity of mind and affability in conversation and
address; insomuch that no man ever asked a favor with less
offense, or conferred one with a better grace.  When he gave,
it was without assumption, when he received, it was with
dignity and honor.

In his youth, his countenance pleaded for him, seeming to
anticipate his eloquence, and win upon the affections of the
people before he spoke.  His beauty even in his bloom of youth
had something in it at once of gentleness and dignity; and
when his prime of manhood came, the majesty kingliness of his
character at once became visible in it.  His hair sat somewhat
hollow or rising a little; and this, with the languishing
motion of his eyes, seemed to form a resemblance in his face,
though perhaps more talked of than really apparent, to the
statues of king Alexander.  And because many applied that name
to him in his youth, Pompey himself did not decline it,
insomuch that some called him so in derision.  And Lucius
Philippus, a man of consular dignity, when he was pleading in
favor of him, thought it not unfit to say, that people could
not be surprised if Philip was a lover of Alexander.

It is related of Flora, the courtesan, that when she was now
pretty old; she took great delight in speaking of her early
familiarity with Pompey, and was wont to say, that she could
never part after being with him without a bite.  She would
further tell, that Geminius, a companion of Pompey's, fell in
love with her, and made his court with great importunity; and
on her refusing, and telling him, however her inclinations
were, yet she could not gratify his desires for Pompey's sake,
he therefore made his request to Pompey, and Pompey frankly
gave his consent, but never afterwards would have any converse
with her, notwithstanding, that he seemed to have a great
passion for her; and Flora, on this occasion, showed none of
the levity that might have been expected of her, but languished
for some time after under a sickness brought on by grief and
desire.  This Flora, we are told, was such a celebrated beauty,
that Caecilius Metellus, when he adorned the temple of Castor
and Pollux with paintings and statues, among the rest dedicated
hers for her singular beauty.  In his conduct also to the wife
of Demetrius, his freed servant, (who had great influence with
him in his lifetime, and left an estate of four thousand
talents,) Pompey acted contrary to his usual habits, not quite
fairly or generously, fearing lest he should fall under the
common censure of being enamored and charmed with her beauty,
which was irresistible, and became famous everywhere.
Nevertheless, though he seemed to be so extremely circumspect
and cautious, yet even in matters of this nature, he could not
avoid the calumnies of his enemies, but upon the score of
married women, they accused him, as if he had connived at many
things, and embezzled the public revenue to gratify their
luxury.

Of his easiness of temper and plainness, in what related to
eating and drinking, the story is told, that once in a
sickness, when his stomach nauseated common meats, his
physician prescribed him a thrush to eat; but upon search,
there was none to be bought, for they were not then in season,
and one telling him they were to be had at Lucullus's, who kept
them all the year round, "So then," said he, "if it were not
for Lucullus's luxury, Pompey should not live;" and thereupon
not minding the prescription of the physician, he contented
himself with such meat as could easily be procured.  But this
was at a later time.

Being as yet a very young man, and upon an expedition in which
his father was commanding against Cinna, he had in his tent
with him one Lucius Terentius, as his companion and comrade,
who, being corrupted by Cinna, entered into an engagement to
kill Pompey, as others had done, to set the general's tent on
fire.  This conspiracy being discovered to Pompey at supper, he
showed no discomposure at it, but on the contrary drank more
liberally than usual, and expressed great kindness to
Terentius; but about bedtime, pretending to go to his repose,
he stole away secretly out of the tent, and setting a guard
about his father, quietly expected the event.  Terentius, when
he thought the proper time come, rose with his naked sword, and
coming to Pompey's bedside, stabbed several strokes through the
bedclothes, as if he were lying there.  Immediately after this
there was a great uproar throughout all the camp, arising from
the hatred they bore to the general, and a universal movement
of the soldiers to revolt, all tearing down their tents, and
betaking themselves to their arms.  The general himself all
this while durst not venture out because of the tumult; but
Pompey, going about in the midst of them, besought them with
tears; and at last threw himself prostrate upon his face before
the gate of the camp, and lay there in the passage at their
feet, shedding tears, and bidding those that were marching off,
if they would go, trample upon him.  Upon which, none could
help going back again, and all, except eight hundred, either
through shame or compassion, repented, and were reconciled to
the general.

Immediately upon the death of Strabo, there was an action
commenced against Pompey, as his heir, for that his father had
embezzled the public treasure.  But Pompey, having traced the
principal thefts, charged them upon one Alexander, a freed
slave of his father's, and proved before the judges that he
had been the appropriator.  But he himself was accused of
having in his possession some hunting tackle, and books, that
were taken at Asculum.  To this he confessed thus far, that he
received them from his father when he took Asculum, but pleaded
further, that he had lost them since, upon Cinna's return to
Rome when his home was broken open and plundered by Cinna's
guards.  In this cause he had a great many preparatory
pleadings against his accuser, in which he showed an activity
and steadfastness beyond his years, and gained great reputation
and favor; insomuch that Antistius, the praetor and judge of
the cause, took a great liking to him, and offered him his
daughter in marriage, having had some communications with his
friends about it.  Pompey accepted the proposal, and they were
privately contracted; however, the secret was not so closely
kept as to escape the multitude, but it was discernible enough
from the favor shown him by Antistius in his cause.  And at
last, when Antistius pronounced the absolutory sentence of the
judges, the people, as if it had been upon a signal given, made
the acclamation used according to ancient custom, at marriages,
Talasio.  The origin of which custom is related to be this.  At
the time when the daughters of the Sabines came to Rome, to see
the shows and sports there, and were violently seized upon by
the most distinguished and bravest of the Romans for wives, it
happened that some goatswains and herdsmen of the meaner rank
were carrying off a beautiful and tall maiden; and lest any of
their betters should meet them, and take her away, as they ran,
they cried out with one voice, Talasio, Talasius being a
well-known and popular person among them, insomuch that all
that heard the name, clapped their hands for joy, and joined
with them in the shout, as applauding and congratulating the
chance.  Now, say they, because this proved a fortunate match
to Talasius, hence it is that this acclamation is sportively
used as a nuptial cry at all weddings.  This is the most
credible of the accounts that are given of the Talasio.  And
some few days after this judgment, Pompey married Antistia.

After this he went to Cinna's camp, where finding some false
suggestions and calumnies prevailing against him, he began to
be afraid and presently withdrew himself secretly; which sudden
disappearance occasioned great suspicion.  And there went a
rumor and speech through all the camp, that Cinna had murdered
the young man; upon which all that had been anyways disobliged,
and bore any malice to him, resolved to make an assault upon
him.  He, endeavoring to make his escape, was seized by a
centurion, who pursued him with his naked sword.  Cinna, in
this distress, fell upon his knees, and offered him his
seal-ring, of great value, for his ransom; but the centurion
repulsed him insolently, saying, "I did not come to seal a
covenant, but to be revenged upon a lawless and wicked tyrant;"
and so dispatched him immediately.

Thus Cinna being slain, Carbo, a tyrant yet more senseless than
he, took the command and exercised it, while Sylla meantime was
approaching, much to the joy and satisfaction of most people,
who in their present evils were ready to find some comfort if
it were but in the exchange of a master.  For the city was
brought to that pass by oppression and calamities, that being
utterly in despair of liberty, men were only anxious for the
mildest and most tolerable bondage.  At that time Pompey was in
Picenum in Italy, where he spent some time amusing himself, as
he had estates in the country there, though the chief motive of
his stay was the liking he felt for the towns of that district,
which all regarded him with hereditary feelings of kindness and
attachment.  But when he now saw that the noblest and best of
the city began to forsake their homes and property, and fly
from all quarters to Sylla's camp, as to their haven, he
likewise was desirous to go; not, however, as a fugitive, alone
and with nothing to offer, but as a friend rather than a
suppliant, in a way that would gain him honor, bringing help
along with him, and at the head of a body of troops.
Accordingly he solicited the Picentines for their assistance,
who as cordially embraced his motion, and rejected the
messengers sent from Carbo; insomuch that a certain Vindius
taking upon him to say, that Pompey was come from the
school-room to put himself at the head of the people, they
were so incensed that they fell forthwith upon this Vindius and
killed him.  From henceforward Pompey, finding a spirit of
government upon him, though not above twenty-three years of
age, nor deriving, an authority by commission from any man,
took the privilege to grant himself full power, and causing a
tribunal to be erected in the market-place of Auximum, a
populous city, expelled two of their principal men, brothers,
of the name of Ventidius, who were acting against him in
Carbo's interest, commanding them by a public edict to depart
the city; and then proceeded to levy soldiers, issuing out
commissions to centurions, and other officers, according to the
form of military discipline.  And in this manner he went round
all the rest of the cities in the district.  So that those of
Carbo's faction flying, and all others cheerfully submitting to
his command, in a little time he mustered three entire legions,
having supplied himself beside with all manner of provisions,
beasts of burden, carriages, and other necessaries of war.  And
with this equipage he set forward on his march towards Sylla,
not as if he were in haste, or desirous of escaping
observation, but by small journeys, making several halts upon
the road, to distress and annoy the enemy, and exerting himself
to detach from Carbo's interest every part of Italy that he
passed through.

Three commanders of the enemy encountered him at once, Carinna,
Cloelius, and Brutus, and drew up their forces, not all in the
front, nor yet together on any one part, but encamping three
several armies in a circle about him, they resolved to
encompass and overpower him.  Pompey was no way alarmed at
this, but collecting all his troops into one body, and placing
his horse in the front of the battle, where he himself was in
person, he singled out and bent all his forces against Brutus,
and when the Celtic horsemen from the enemy's side rode out to
meet him, Pompey himself encountering hand to hand with the
foremost and stoutest among them, killed him with his spear.
The rest seeing this turned their backs, and fled, and breaking
the ranks of their own foot, presently caused a general rout;
whereupon the commanders fell out among themselves, and marched
off, some one way, some another, as their fortunes led them,
and the towns round about came in and surrendered themselves to
Pompey, concluding that the enemy was dispersed for fear.  Next
after these, Scipio, the consul, came to attack him, and with
as little success; for before the armies could join, or be
within the throw of their javelins, Scipio's soldiers saluted
Pompey's, and came over to them, while Scipio made his escape
by flight.  Last of all, Carbo himself sent down several troops
of horse against him by the river Arsis, which Pompey assailed
with the same courage and success as before; and having routed
and put them to flight, he forced them in the pursuit into
difficult ground, unpassable for horse, where seeing no hopes
of escape, they yielded themselves with their horses and armor,
all to his mercy.

Sylla was hitherto unacquainted with all these actions; and on
the first intelligence he received of his movements was in
great anxiety about him, fearing lest he should be cut off
among so many and such experienced commanders of the enemy, and
marched therefore with all speed to his aid.  Now Pompey,
having advice of his approach, sent out orders to his officers,
to marshal and draw up all his forces in full array, that they
might make the finest and noblest appearance before the
commander-in-chief; for he expected indeed great honors from
him, but met with even greater.  For as soon as Sylla saw him
thus advancing, his army so well appointed, his men so young
and strong, and their spirits so high and hopeful with their
successes, he alighted from his horse, and being first, as was
his due, saluted by them with the title of Imperator, he
returned the salutation upon Pompey, in the same term and style
of Imperator, which might well cause surprise, as none could
have ever anticipated that he would have imparted, to one so
young in years and not yet a senator, a title which was the
object of contention between him and the Scipios and Marii.
And indeed all the rest of his deportment was agreeable to this
first compliment; whenever Pompey came into his presence, he
paid some sort of respect to him, either in rising and being
uncovered, or the like, which he was rarely seen to do to
anyone else, notwithstanding that there were many about him of
great rank and honor.  Yet Pompey was not puffed up at all, or
exalted with these favors.  And when Sylla would have sent him
with all expedition into Gaul, a province in which it was
thought Metellus who commanded in it had done nothing worthy of
the large forces at his disposal, Pompey urged, that it could
not be fair or honorable for him, to take a province out of the
hands of his senior in command and superior in reputation;
however, if Metellus were willing, and should request his
service, he should be very ready to accompany and assist him in
the war.  Which when Metellus came to understand, he approved
of the proposal, and invited him over by letter.  And on this
Pompey fell immediately into Gaul, where he not only achieved
wonderful exploits of himself, but also fired up and kindled
again that bold and warlike spirit, which old age had in a
manner extinguished in Metellus, into a new heat; just as
molten copper, they say, when poured upon that which is cold
and solid, will dissolve and melt it faster than fire itself.
But as when a famous wrestler has gained the first place among
men, and borne away the prizes at all the games, it is not
usual to take account of his victories as a boy, or to enter
them upon record among the rest; so with the exploits of Pompey
in his youth, though they were extraordinary in themselves, yet
because they were obscured and buried in the multitude and
greatness of his later wars and conquests, I dare not be
particular in them, lest, by trifling away time in the lesser
moments of his youth, we should be driven to omit those greater
actions and fortunes which best illustrate his character.

Now, when Sylla had brought all Italy under his dominion, and
was proclaimed dictator, he began to reward the rest of his
followers, by giving them wealth, appointing them to offices in
the State, and granting them freely and without restriction any
favors they asked for.  But as for Pompey, admiring his valor
and conduct, and thinking that he might prove a great stay and
support to him hereafter in his affairs, he sought means to
attach him to himself by some personal alliance, and his wife
Metella joining in his wishes, they two persuaded Pompey to put
away Antistia, and marry Aemilia, the step-daughter of Sylla,
borne by Metella to Scaurus her former husband, she being at
that very time the wife of another man, living with him, and
with child by him.  These were the very tyrannies of marriage,
and much more agreeable to the times under Sylla, than to the
nature and habits of Pompey; that Aemilia great with child
should be, as it were, ravished from the embraces of another
for him, and that Antistia should be divorced with dishonor and
misery by him, for whose sake she had been but just before
bereft of her father.  For Antistius was murdered in the
senate, because he was suspected to be a favorer of Sylla for
Pompey's sake; and her mother, likewise, after she had seen all
these indignities, made away with herself; a new calamity to be
added to the tragic accompaniments of this marriage, and that
there might be nothing wanting to complete them, Aemilia
herself died, almost immediately after entering Pompey's house,
in childbed.

About this time news came to Sylla, that Perpenna was
fortifying himself in Sicily, that the island was now become a
refuge and receptacle for the relics of the adverse party; that
Carbo was hovering about those seas with a navy, that Domitius
had fallen in upon Africa and that many of the exiled men of
note who had escaped from the proscriptions were daily flocking
into those parts.  Against these, therefore, Pompey was sent
with a large force; and no sooner was he arrived in Sicily but
Perpenna immediately departed, leaving the whole island to him.
Pompey received the distressed cities into favor, and treated
all with great humanity, except the Mamertines in Messena; for
when they protested against his court and jurisdiction,
alleging their privilege and exemption founded upon an ancient
charter or grant of the Romans, he replied sharply, "What!
will you never cease prating of laws to us that have swords by
our sides?"  It was thought, likewise, that he showed some
inhumanity to Carbo, seeming rather to insult over his
misfortunes, than to chastise his crimes.  For if there had
been a necessity, as perhaps there was, that he should be taken
off, that might have been done at first, as soon as he was
taken prisoner, for then it would have been the act of him that
commanded it.  But here Pompey commended a man that had been
thrice consul of Rome, to be brought in fetters to stand at the
bar, he himself sitting upon the bench in judgment, examining
the cause with the formalities of law, to the offense and
indignation of all that were present, and afterwards ordered
him to be taken away and put to death.  It is related, by the
way, of Carbo, that as soon as he was brought to the place, and
saw the sword drawn for execution, he was suddenly seized with
a looseness or pain in his bowels, and desired a little
respite of the executioner, and a convenient place to relieve
himself.  And yet further, Caius Oppius, the friend of Caesar,
tells us, that Pompey dealt cruelly with Quintus Valerius, a
man of singular learning and science.  For when he was brought
to him, he walked aside, and drew him into conversation, and
after putting a variety of questions to him, and receiving
answers from him, he ordered his officers to take him away, and
put him to death.  But we must not be too credulous in the case
of narratives told by Oppius, especially when he undertakes to
relate anything touching the friends or foes of Caesar.  This
is certain, that there lay a necessity upon Pompey to be severe
upon many of Sylla's enemies, those at least that were eminent
persons in themselves, and notoriously known to be taken; but
for the rest, he acted with all the clemency possible for him,
conniving at the concealment of some, and himself being the
instrument in the escape of others.  So in the case of the
Himeraeans; for when Pompey had determined on severely
punishing their city, as they had been abettors of the enemy,
Sthenis, the leader of the people there, craving liberty of
speech, told him, that what he was about to do was not at all
consistent with justice, for that he would pass by the guilty,
and destroy the innocent; and on Pompey demanding, who that
guilty person was that would assume the offenses of them all,
Sthenis replied, it was himself, who had engaged his friends by
persuasion to what they had done, and his enemies by force;
whereupon Pompey being much taken with the frank speech and
noble spirit of the man, first forgave his crime, and then
pardoned all the rest of the Himeraeans.  Hearing, likewise,
that his soldiers were very disorderly their march, doing
violence upon the roads, he ordered their swords to be sealed
up in their scabbards, and whosoever kept them not so, were
severely punished.

Whilst Pompey was thus busy in the affairs and government of
Sicily, he received a decree of the senate, and a commission
from Sylla, commanding him forthwith to sail into Africa, and
make war upon Domitius with all his forces:  for Domitius had
rallied up a far greater army than Marius had had not long
since, when he sailed out of Africa into Italy, and caused a
revolution in Rome, and himself, of a fugitive outlaw, became a
tyrant.  Pompey, therefore, having prepared everything with the
utmost speed, left Memmius, his sister's husband, governor of
Sicily, and set sail with one hundred and twenty galleys, and
eight hundred other vessels laden with provisions, money,
ammunition, and engines of battery.  He arrived with his fleet,
part at the port of Utica, part at Carthage; and no sooner was
he landed, but seven thousand of the enemy revolted and came
over to him, while his own forces that he brought with him
consisted of six entire legions.  Here they tell us of a
pleasant incident that happened to him at his first arrival.
For some of his soldiers having by accident stumbled upon a
treasure, by which they got a good sum of money, the rest of
the army hearing this, began to fancy that the field was full of
gold and silver, which had been hid there of old by the
Carthaginians in the time of their calamities, and thereupon
fell to work, so that the army was useless to Pompey for many
days, being totally engaged in digging for the fancied
treasure, he himself all the while walking up and down only,
and laughing to see so many thousands together, digging and
turning up the earth.  Until at last, growing weary and
hopeless, they came to themselves, and returned to their
general, begging him to lead them where he pleased, for that
they had already received the punishment of their folly.  By
this time Domitius had prepared himself; and drawn out his army
in array against Pompey; but there was a watercourse betwixt
them, craggy, and difficult to pass over; and this, together
with a great storm of wind and rain pouring down even from
break of day, seemed to leave but little possibility of their
coming together, so that Domitius, not expecting any engagement
that day, commanded his forces to draw off and retire to the
camp.  Now Pompey, who was watchful upon every occasion, making
use of the opportunity, ordered a march forthwith, and having
passed over the torrent, fell in immediately upon their
quarters.  The enemy was in a great disorder and tumult, and in
that confusion attempted a resistance; but they neither were
all there, nor supported one another; besides, the wind having
veered about, beat the rain full in their faces.  Neither
indeed was the storm less troublesome to the Romans, for that
they could not clearly discern one another, insomuch that even
Pompey himself, being unknown, escaped narrowly; for when one
of his soldiers demanded of him the word of battle, it happened
that he was somewhat slow in his answer, which might have cost
him his life.

The enemy being routed with a great slaughter, (for it is said,
that of twenty thousand there escaped but three thousand,) the
army saluted Pompey by the name of Imperator; but he declined
it, telling them, that he could not by any means accept of that
title, as long as he saw the camp of the enemy standing; but if
they designed to make him worthy of the honor, they must first
demolish that.  The soldiers on hearing this, went at once and
made an assault upon the works and trenches, and there Pompey
fought without his helmet, in memory of his former danger, and
to avoid the like.  The camp was thus taken by storm, and among
the rest, Domitius was slain.  After that overthrow, the cities
of the country thereabouts were all either secured by
surrender, or taken by storm.  King Iarbas, likewise, a
confederate and auxiliary of Domitius, was taken prisoner, and
his kingdom was given to Hiempsal.

Pompey could not rest here, but being ambitious to follow the
good fortune and use the valor of his army, entered Numidia;
and marching forward many days' journey up into the country, he
conquered all wherever he came.  And having revived the terror
of the Roman power, which was now almost obliterated among the
barbarous nations, he said likewise, that the wild beasts of
Africa ought not to be left without some experience of the
courage and success of the Romans; and therefore he bestowed
some few days in hunting lions and elephants.  And it is said,
that it was not above the space of forty days at the utmost, in
which he gave a total overthrow to the enemy, reduced Africa,
and established the affairs of the kings and kingdoms of all
that country, being then in the twenty-fourth year of his age.

When Pompey returned back to the city of Utica, there were
presented to him letters and orders from Sylla, commanding him
to disband the rest of his army, and himself with one legion
only to wait there the coming of another general, to succeed
him in the government.  This, inwardly, was extremely grievous
to Pompey, though he made no show of it.  But the army resented
it openly, and when Pompey besought them to depart and go home
before him, they began to revile Sylla, and declared broadly,
that they were resolved not to forsake him, neither did they
think it safe for him to trust the tyrant.  Pompey at first
endeavored to appease and pacify them by fair speeches; but
when he saw that his persuasions were vain, he left the bench,
and retired to his tent with tears in his eyes.  But the
soldiers followed him, and seizing upon him, by force brought
him again, and placed him in his tribunal; where great part of
that day was spent in dispute, they on their part persuading
him to stay and command them, he, on the other side, pressing
upon them obedience, and the danger of mutiny.  At last, when
they grew yet more importunate and clamorous, he swore that he
would kill himself if they attempted to force him; and scarcely
even thus appeased them.  Nevertheless, the first tidings
brought to Sylla were, that Pompey was up in rebellion; on
which he remarked to some of his friends, "I see, then, it is
my destiny to contend with children in my old age;" alluding at
the same time to Marius, who, being but a mere youth, had given
him great trouble, and brought him into extreme danger.  But
being undeceived afterwards by better intelligence, and finding
the whole city prepared to meet Pompey, and receive him with
every display of kindness and honor, he resolved to exceed them
all.  And, therefore, going out foremost to meet him, and
embracing him with great cordiality, he gave him his welcome
aloud in the title of Magnus, or the Great, and bade all that
were present call him by that name.  Others say that he had
this title first given him by a general acclamation of all the
army in Africa, but that it was fixed upon him by this
ratification of Sylla.  It is certain that he himself was the
last that owned the title; for it was a long time after, when
he was sent proconsul into Spain against Sertorius, that he
began to write himself in his letters and commissions by the
name of Pompeius Magnus; common and familiar use having then
worn off the invidiousness of the title.  And one cannot but
accord respect and admiration to the ancient Romans, who did
not reward the successes of action and conduct in war alone
with such honorable titles, but adorned likewise the virtues
and services of eminent men in civil government with the same
distinctions and marks of honor.  Two persons received from the
people the name of Maximus, or the Greatest, Valerius, for
reconciling the senate and people, and Fabius Rullus, because
he put out of the senate certain sons of freed slaves who had
been admitted into it because of their wealth.

Pompey now desired the honor of a triumph, which Sylla opposed,
alleging that the law allowed that honor to none but consuls
and praetors, and therefore Scipio the elder, who subdued the
Carthaginians in Spain in far greater and nobler conflicts,
never petitioned for a triumph, because he had never been
consul or praetor; and if Pompey, who had scarcely yet fully
grown a beard, and was not of age to be a senator, should enter
the city in triumph, what a weight of envy would it bring, he
said, at once upon his government and Pompey's honor.  This was
his language to Pompey, intimating that he could not by any
means yield to his request, but if he would persist in his
ambition, that he was resolved to interpose his power to humble
him.  Pompey, however, was not daunted; but bade Sylla
recollect, that more worshiped the rising than the setting sun;
as if to tell him that his power was increasing, and Sylla's in
the wane.  Sylla did not perfectly hear the words, but
observing a sort of amazement and wonder in the looks and
gestures of those that did hear them, he asked what it was that
he said.  When it was told him, he seemed astounded at Pompey's
boldness, and cried out twice together, "Let him triumph," and
when others began to show their disapprobation and offense at
it, Pompey, it is said, to gall and vex them the more, designed
to have his triumphant chariot drawn with four elephants,
(having brought over several which belonged to the African
kings,) but the gates of the city being too narrow, he was
forced to desist from that project, and be content with horses.
And when his soldiers, who had not received as large rewards as
they had expected, began to clamor, and interrupt the triumph,
Pompey regarded these as little as the rest, and plainly told
them that he had rather lose the honor of his triumph, than
flatter them.  Upon which Servilius, a man of great
distinction, and at first one of the chief opposers of Pompey's
triumph, said, he now perceived that Pompey was truly great and
worthy of a triumph.  It is clear that he might easily have
been a senator, also, if he had wished, but he did not sue for
that, being ambitious, it seems, only of unusual honors.  For
what wonder had it been for Pompey, to sit in the senate before
his time?  But to triumph before he was in the senate, was
really an excess of glory.

And moreover, it did not a little ingratiate him with the
people; who were much pleased to see him after his triumph take
his place again among the Roman knights.  On the other side, it
was no less distasteful to Sylla to see how fast he came on,
and to what a height of glory and power he was advancing; yet
being ashamed to hinder him, he kept quiet.  But when, against
his direct wishes, Pompey got Lepidus made consul, having
openly joined in the canvass and, by the good-will the people
felt for himself, conciliated their favor for Lepidus, Sylla
could forbear no longer; but when he saw him coming away from
the election through the forum with a great train after him,
cried out to him, "Well, young man, I see you rejoice in your
victory.  And, indeed, is it not a most generous and worthy
act, that the consulship should be given to Lepidus, the vilest
of men, in preference to Catulus, the best and most deserving
in the city, and all by your influence with the people?  It
will be well, however, for you to be wakeful and look to your
interests; as you have been making your enemy stronger than
yourself."  But that which gave the clearest demonstration of
Sylla's ill-will to Pompey, was his last will and testament;
for whereas he had bequeathed several legacies to all the rest
of his friends, and appointed some of them guardians to his
eon, he passed by Pompey without the least remembrance.
However, Pompey bore this with great moderation and temper; and
when Lepidus and others were disposed to obstruct his interment
in the Campus Martius, and to prevent any public funeral taking
place, came forward in support of it, and saw his obsequies
performed with all honor and security.

Shortly after the death of Sylla, his prophetic words were
fulfilled; and Lepidus proposing to be the successor to all his
power and authority, without any ambiguities or pretences,
immediately appeared in arms, rousing once more and gathering
about him all the long dangerous remains of the old factions,
which had escaped the hand of Sylla.  Catulus, his colleague,
who was followed by the sounder part of the senate and people,
was a man of the greatest esteem among the Romans for wisdom
and justice; but his talent lay in the government of the city
rather than the camp, whereas the exigency required the skill
of Pompey.  Pompey, therefore, was not long in suspense which
way to dispose of himself, but joining with the nobility, was
presently appointed general of the army against Lepidus, who
had already raised up war in great part of Italy, and held
Cisalpine Gaul in subjection with an army under Brutus.  As for
the rest of his garrisons, Pompey subdued them with ease in his
march, but Mutina in Gaul resisted in a formal siege, and he
lay here a long time encamped against Brutus.  In the meantime
Lepidus marched in all haste against Rome, and sitting down
before it with a crowd of followers, to the terror of those
within, demanded a second consulship.  But that fear quickly
vanished upon letters sent from Pompey, announcing that he had
ended the war without a battle; for Brutus, either betraying
his army, or being betrayed by their revolt, surrendered
himself to Pompey, and receiving a guard of horse, was
conducted to a little town upon the river Po; where he was
slain the next day by Geminius, in execution of Pompey's
commands.  And for this Pompey was much censured; for, having
at the beginning of the revolt written to the senate that
Brutus had voluntarily surrendered himself, immediately
afterward he sent other letters, with matter of accusation
against the man, after he was taken off.  Brutus, who with
Cassius slew Caesar, was son to this Brutus; neither in war nor
in his death like his father, as appears at large in his life.
Lepidus upon this being driven out of Italy, fled to Sardinia,
where he fell sick and died of sorrow, not for his public
misfortunes, as they say, but, upon the discovery of a letter,
proving his wife to have been unfaithful to him.

There yet remained Sertorius, a very different general from
Lepidus, in possession of Spain, and making himself formidable
to Rome; the final disease, as it were, in which the scattered
evils of the civil wars had now collected.  He had already cut
off various inferior commanders, and was at this time coping
with Metellus Pius, a man of repute and a good soldier, though
perhaps he might now seem too slow, by reason of his age, to
second and improve the happier moments of war, and might be
sometimes wanting to those advantages which Sertorius by his
quickness and dexterity would wrest out of his hands.  For
Sertorius was always hovering about, and coming upon him
unawares, like a captain of thieves rather than soldiers,
disturbing him perpetually with ambuscades and light
skirmishes; whereas Metellus was accustomed to regular conduct,
and fighting in battle array with full-armed soldiers.  Pompey,
therefore, keeping his army in readiness, made it his object to
be sent in aid to Metellus; neither would he be induced to
disband his forces, notwithstanding that Catulus called upon
him to do so, but by some colorable device or other he still
kept them in arms about the city, until the senate at last
thought fit, upon the report of Lucius Philippus, to decree him
that government.  At that time, they say, one of the senators
there expressing his wonder and demanding of Philippus whether
his meaning was that Pompey should be sent into Spain as
proconsul, "No," replied Philippus, "but as proconsuls," as if
both consuls for that year were in his opinion wholly useless.

When Pompey was arrived in Spain, as is usual upon the fame of
a new leader, men began to be inspired with new hopes, and
those nations that had not entered into a very strict alliance
with Sertorius, began to waver and revolt; whereupon Sertorius
uttered various arrogant and scornful speeches against Pompey,
saying in derision, that he should want no other weapon but a
ferula and rod to chastise this boy with, if he were not afraid
of that old woman, meaning Metellus.  Yet in deed and reality
he stood in awe of Pompey, and kept on his guard against him,
as appeared by his whole management of the war, which he was
observed to conduct much more warily than before; for Metellus,
which one would not have imagined, was grown excessively
luxurious in his habits having given himself over to
self-indulgence and pleasure, and from a moderate and
temperate, became suddenly a sumptuous and ostentatious liver,
so that this very thing gained Pompey great reputation and
goodwill, as he made himself somewhat specially an example of
frugality, although that virtue was habitual in him, and
required no great industry to exercise it, as he was naturally
inclined to temperance, and no ways inordinate in his desires.
The fortune of the war was very various; nothing however
annoyed Pompey so much as the taking of the town of Lauron by
Sertorius.  For when Pompey thought he had him safe inclosed,
and had boasted somewhat largely of raising the siege, he found
himself all of a sudden encompassed; insomuch that he durst not
move out of his camp, but was forced to sit still whilst the
city was taken and burnt before his face.  However, afterwards
in a battle near Valentia, he gave great defeat to Herennius
and Perpenna, two commanders among the refugees who had fled to
Sertorius, and now lieutenants under him, in which he slew
above ten thousand men.

Pompey, being elated and filled with confidence by this
victory, made all haste to engage Sertorius himself, and the
rather lest Metellus should come in for a share in the honor of
the victory.  Late in the day, towards sunset, they joined
battle near the river Sucro, both being in fear lest Metellus
should come; Pompey, that he might engage alone, Sertorius,
that he might have one alone to engage with.  The issue of the
battle proved doubtful, for a wing of each side had the better;
but of the generals, Sertorius had the greater honor, for that
he maintained his post, having put to flight the entire
division that was opposed to him, whereas Pompey was himself
almost made a prisoner; for being set upon by a strong man at
arms that fought on foot, (he being on horseback,) as they were
closely engaged hand to hand, the strokes of their swords
chanced to light upon their hands, but with a different
success; for Pompey's was a slight wound only, whereas he cut
off the other's hand.  However, it happened so, that many now
falling upon Pompey together, and his own forces there being
put to the rout, he made his escape beyond expectation, by
quitting his horse, and turning him out among the enemy.  For
the horse being richly adorned with golden trappings, and
having a caparison of great value, the soldiers quarreled among
themselves for the booty, so that while they were fighting with
one another, and dividing the spoil, Pompey made his escape.
By break of day the next morning, each drew out his forces into
the field to claim the victory; but Metellus coming up,
Sertorius vanished, having broken up and dispersed his army.
For this was the way in which he used to raise and disband his
armies, so that sometimes he would be wandering up and down all
alone, and at other times again he would come pouring into the
field at the head of no less than one hundred and fifty
thousand fighting-men, swelling of a sudden like a winter
torrent.

When Pompey was going after the battle to meet and welcome
Metellus, and when they were near one another, he commanded his
attendants to lower their rods in honor of Metellus, as his
senior and superior.  But Metellus on the other side forbade
it, and behaved himself in general very obligingly to him, not
claiming any prerogative either in respect of his consular rank
or seniority; excepting only that when they encamped together,
the watchword was given to the whole camp by Metellus.  But
generally they had their camps asunder, being divided and
distracted by the enemy, who took all shapes, and being always
in motion, would by some skillful artifice appear in a variety
of places almost in the same instant, drawing them from one
attack to another, and at last keeping them from foraging,
wasting the country, and holding the dominion of the sea,
Sertorius drove them both out of that part of Spain which was
under his control, and forced them for want of necessaries to
retreat into provinces that did not belong to them.

Pompey, having made use of and expended the greatest part of
his own private revenues upon the war, sent and demanded moneys
of the senate, adding, that in case they did not furnish him
speedily, he should be forced to return into Italy with his
army.  Lucullus being consul at that time, though at variance
with Pompey, yet in consideration that he himself was a
candidate for the command against Mithridates, procured and
hastened these supplies, fearing lest there should be any
presence or occasion given to Pompey of returning home, who of
himself was no less desirous of leaving Sertorius, and of
undertaking the war against Mithridates, as an enterprise which
by all appearance would prove much more honorable and not so
dangerous.  In the meantime Sertorius died, being
treacherously murdered by some of his own party; and Perpenna,
the chief among them, took the command, and attempted to carry
on the same enterprises with Sertorius, having indeed the same
forces and the same means, only wanting the same skill and
conduct in the use of them.  Pompey therefore marched directly
against, Perpenna, and finding him acting merely at random in
his affairs, had a decoy ready for him, and sent out a
detachment of ten cohorts into the level country with orders to
range up and down and disperse themselves abroad.  The bait
took accordingly, and no sooner had Perpenna turned upon the
prey and had them in chase, but Pompey appeared suddenly with
all his army and joining battle, gave him a total overthrow.
Most of his officers were slain in the field, and he himself
being brought prisoner to Pompey, was by his order put to
death.  Neither was Pompey guilty in this of ingratitude or
unmindfulness of what had occurred in Sicily, which some have
laid to his charge, but was guided by a high minded policy and
a deliberate counsel for the security of his country.  For
Perpenna, having in his custody all Sertorius's papers, offered
to produce several letters from the greatest men in Rome, who,
desirous of a change and subversion of the government, had
invited Sertorius into Italy.  And Pompey, fearing that these
might be the occasion of worse wars than those which were now
ended, thought it advisable to put Perpenna to death, and burnt
the letters without reading them.

Pompey continued in Spain after this so long a time as was
necessary for the suppression of all the greatest disorders in
the province; and after moderating and allaying the more
violent heats of affairs there, returned with his army into
Italy, where he arrived, as chance would have it, in the height
of the servile war.  Accordingly, upon his arrival, Crassus,
the commander in that war, at some hazard precipitated a
battle, in which he had great success, and slew upon the place
twelve thousand three hundred of the insurgents.  Nor yet was
he so quick, but that fortune reserved to Pompey some share of
honor in the success of this war, for five thousand of those
that had escaped out of the battle fell into his hands; and
when he had totally cut them off, he wrote to the senate, that
Crassus had overthrown the slaves in battle, but that he had
plucked up the whole war by the roots.  And it was agreeable to
the people in Rome both thus to say, and thus to hear said,
because of the general favor of Pompey.  But of the Spanish war
and the conquest of Sertorius, no one, even in jest, could have
ascribed the honor to anyone else.  Nevertheless, all this
high respect for him, and this desire to see him come home,
were not unmixed with apprehensions and suspicions that he
might perhaps not disband his army, but take his way by the
force of arms and a supreme command to the seat of Sylla.  And
so in the number of all those that ran out to meet him and
congratulate his return, as many went out of fear as affection.
But after Pompey had removed this alarm, by declaring
beforehand that he would discharge the army after his triumph,
those that envied him could now only complain that he affected
popularity, courting the common people more than the nobility,
and that whereas Sylla had abolished the tribuneship of the
people, he designed to gratify the people by restoring that
office, which was indeed the fact.  For there was not any one
thing that the people of Rome were more wildly eager for, or
more passionately desired, than the restoration of that office,
insomuch that Pompey thought himself extremely fortunate in
this opportunity, despairing (if he were anticipated by
someone else in this) of ever meeting with any other sufficient
means of expressing his gratitude for the favors which he had
received from the people.

Though a second triumph was decreed him, and he was declared
consul, yet all these honors did not seem so great an evidence
of his power and glory, as the ascendant which he had over
Crassus; for he, the wealthiest among all the statesmen of his
time, and the most eloquent and greatest too, who had looked
down on Pompey himself, and on all others as beneath him, durst
not appear a candidate for the consulship before he had applied
to Pompey.  The request was made accordingly, and was eagerly
embraced by Pompey, who had long sought an occasion to oblige
him in some friendly office; so that he solicited for Crassus,
and entreated the people heartily, declaring, that their favor
would be no less to him in choosing Crassus his colleague, than
in making himself consul.  Yet for all this, when they were
created consuls, they were always at variance, and opposing one
another.  Crassus prevailed most in the senate, and Pompey's
power was no less with the people, he having restored to them
the office of tribune, and having allowed the courts of
judicature to be transferred back to the knights by a new law.
He himself in person, too, afforded them a most grateful
spectacle, when he appeared and craved his discharge from the
military service.  For it is an ancient custom among the
Romans, that the knights, when they had served out their legal
time in the wars, should lead their horses into the
market-place before the two officers, called censors, and
having given an account of the commanders and generals under
whom they served, as also of the places and actions of their
service, should be discharged, every man with honor or
disgrace, according to his deserts.  There were then sitting in
state upon the bench two censors, Gellius and Lentulus,
inspecting the knights, who were passing by in muster before
them, when Pompey was seen coming down into the forum, with all
the ensigns of a consul, but leading his horse in his hand.
When he came up, he bade his lictors make way for him, and so
he led his horse to the bench; the people being all this while
in a sort of amaze, and all in silence, and the censors
themselves regarding the sight with a mixture of respect and
gratification.  Then the senior censor examined him:  "Pompeius
Magnus, I demand of you whether you have served the full time
in the wars that is prescribed by the law?"  "Yes," replied
Pompey with a loud voice, "I have served all, and all under
myself as general."  The people hearing this gave a great
shout, and made such an outcry for delight, that there was no
appeasing it; and the censors rising from their judgment-seat,
accompanied him home to gratify the multitude, who followed
after, clapping their hands and shouting.

Pompey's consulship was now expiring, and yet his difference
with Crassus increasing, when one Caius Aurelius, a knight, a
man who had declined public business all his lifetime, mounted
the hustings, and addressed himself in an oration to the
assembly, declaring that Jupiter had appeared to him in a
dream, commanding him to tell the consuls, that they should not
give up office until they were friends.  After this was said,
Pompey stood silent, but Crassus took him by the hand, and
spoke in this manner:  "I do not think, fellow-citizens, that I
shall do anything mean or dishonorable, in yielding first to
Pompey, whom you were pleased to ennoble with the title of
Great, when as yet he scarce had a hair on his face; and
granted the honor of two triumphs, before he had a place in the
senate."  Hereupon they were reconciled and laid down their
office.  Crassus resumed the manner of life which he had always
pursued before; but Pompey in the great generality of causes
for judgment declined appearing on either side, and by degrees
withdrew himself totally from the forum, showing himself but
seldom in public; and whenever he did, it was with a great
train after him.  Neither was it easy to meet or visit him
without a crowd of people about him; he was most pleased to
make his appearance before large numbers at once, as though he
wished to maintain in this way his state and majesty, and as if
he held himself bound to preserve his dignity from contact with
the addresses and conversation of common people.  And life in
the robe of peace is only too apt to lower the reputation of
men that have grown great by arms, who naturally find
difficulty in adapting themselves to the habits of civil
equality.  They expect to be treated as the first in the city,
even as they were in the camp; and on the other hand, men who
in war were nobody, think it intolerable if in the city at any
rate they are not to take the lead.  And so, when a warrior
renowned for victories and triumphs shall turn advocate and
appear among them in the forum, they endeavor their utmost to
obscure and depress him; whereas, if he gives up any
pretensions here and retires, they will maintain his military
honor and authority beyond the reach of envy.  Events
themselves not long after showed the truth of this.

The power of the pirates first commenced in Cilicia, having in
truth but a precarious and obscure beginning, but gained life
and boldness afterwards in the wars of Mithridates, where they
hired themselves out, and took employment in the king's
service.  Afterwards, whilst the Romans were embroiled in their
civil wars, being engaged against one another even before the
very gates of Rome, the seas lay waste and unguarded, and by
degrees enticed and drew them on not only to seize upon and
spoil the merchants and ships upon the seas, but also to lay
waste the islands and seaport towns.  So that now there
embarked with these pirates men of wealth and noble birth and
superior abilities, as if it had been a natural occupation to
gain distinction in.  They had divers arsenals, or piratic
harbors, as likewise watch towers and beacons, all along the
sea-coast; and fleets were here received that were well manned
with the finest mariners, and well served with the expertest
pilots, and composed of swift sailing and light-built vessels
adapted for their special purpose.  Nor was it merely their
being thus formidable that excited indignation; they were even
more odious for their ostentation than they were feared for
their force.  Their ships had gilded masts at their stems; the
sails woven of purple, and the oars plated with silver, as if
their delight were to glory in their iniquity.  There was
nothing but music and dancing, banqueting and revels, all along
the shore.  Officers in command were taken prisoners, and
cities put under contribution, to the reproach and dishonor of
the Roman supremacy.  There were of these corsairs above one
thousand sail, and they had taken no less than four hundred
cities, committing sacrilege upon the temples of the gods, and
enriching themselves with the spoils of many never violated
before, such as were those of Claros, Didyma, and Samothrace;
and the temple of the Earth in Hermione, and that of
Aesculapius in Epidaurus, those of Neptune at the Isthmus, at
Taenarus, and at Calauria; those of Apollo at Actium and
Leucas, and those of Juno, in Samos, at Argos, and at Lacinium.
They themselves offered strange sacrifices upon Mount Olympus,
and performed certain secret rites or religious mysteries,
among which those of Mithras have been preserved to our own
time, having received their previous institution from them.
But besides these insolencies by sea, they were also injurious
to the Romans by land; for they would often go inland up the
roads, plundering and destroying their villages and
country-houses.  And once they seized upon two Roman praetors,
Sextilius and Bellinus, in their purple-edged robes, and
carried them off together with their officers and lictors.  The
daughter also of Antonius, a man that had had the honor of a
triumph, taking a journey into the country, was seized, and
redeemed upon payment of a large ransom.  But it was most
abusive of all, that when any of the captives declared himself
to be a Roman and told his name, they affected to be surprised,
and feigning fear, smote their thighs and fell down at his
feet, humbly beseeching him to be gracious and forgive them.
The captive seeing them so humble and suppliant, believed them
to be in earnest; and some of them now would proceed to put
Roman shoes on his feet, and to dress him in a Roman gown, to
prevent, they said, his being mistaken another time.  After all
this pageantry, when they had thus deluded and mocked him long
enough, at last putting out a ship's ladder, when they were in
the midst of the sea, they told him he was free to go, and
wished him a pleasant journey; and if he resisted, they
themselves threw him overboard, and drowned him.

This piratic power having got the dominion and control of all
the Mediterranean, there was left no place for navigation or
commerce.  And this it was which most of all made the Romans,
finding themselves to be extremely straitened in their markets,
and considering that if it should continue, there would be a
dearth and famine in the land, determine at last to send out
Pompey to recover the seas from the pirates.  Gabinius, one of
Pompey's friends, preferred a law, whereby there was granted to
him, not only the government of the seas as admiral, but in
direct words, sole and irresponsible sovereignty over all men.
For the decree gave him absolute power and authority in all the
seas within the pillars of Hercules, and in the adjacent
mainland for the space of four hundred furlongs from the sea.
Now there were but few regions in the Roman empire out of that
compass; and the greatest of the nations and most powerful of
the kings were included in the limit.  Moreover by this decree
he had a power of selecting fifteen lieutenants out of the
senate, and of assigning to each his province in charge; then
he might take likewise out of the treasury and out of the hands
of the revenue-farmers what moneys he pleased; as also two
hundred sail of ships, with a power to press and levy what
soldiers and seamen he thought fit.  When this law was read,
the common people approved of it exceedingly, but the chief men
and most important among the senators looked upon it as an
exorbitant power, even beyond the reach of envy, but well
deserving their fears.  Therefore concluding with themselves
that such unlimited authority was dangerous, they agreed
unanimously to oppose the bill, and all went against it, except
Caesar, who gave his vote for the law, not to gratify Pompey,
but the people, whose favor he had courted underhand from the
beginning, and hoped to compass for himself.  The rest
inveighed bitterly against Pompey, insomuch that one of the
consuls told him, that if he was ambitious of the place of
Romulus, he would scarce avoid his end, but he was in danger of
being torn in pieces by the multitude for his speech.  Yet when
Catulus stood up to speak against the law, the people in
reverence to him were silent and attentive.  And when, after
saying much in the most honorable terms in favor of Pompey, he
proceeded to advise the people in kindness to spare him, and
not to expose a man of his value to such a succession of
dangers and wars, "For," said he, "where could you find another
Pompey, or whom would you have in case you should chance to
lose him?"  they all cried out with one voice, "Yourself."  And
so Catulus, finding all his rhetoric ineffectual, desisted.
Then Roscius attempted to speak, but could obtain no hearing,
and made signs with his fingers, intimating, "Not him alone,"
but that there might be a second Pompey or colleague in
authority with him.  Upon this, it is said, the multitude being
extremely incensed, made such a loud outcry, that a crow flying
over the market-place at that instant was struck, and drops
down among the crowd; whence it would appear that the cause of
birds falling down to the ground, is not any rupture or
division of the air causing a vacuum, but purely the actual
stroke of the voice, which when carried up in a great mass and
with violence, raises a sort of tempest and billow, as it were,
in the air.

The assembly broke up for that day; and when the day was come,
on which the bill was to pass by suffrage into a decree, Pompey
went privately into the country; but hearing that it was passed
and confirmed, he resumed again into the city by night, to
avoid the envy that might be occasioned by the concourse of
people that would meet and congratulate him.  The next morning
he came abroad and sacrificed to the gods, and having audience
at an open assembly, so handled the matter that they enlarged
his power, giving him many things besides what was already
granted, and almost doubling the preparation appointed in the
former decree.  Five hundred ships were manned for him, and an
army raised of one hundred and twenty thousand foot, and five
thousand horse.  Twenty-four senators that had been generals of
armies were appointed to serve as lieutenants under him, and to
these were added two quaestors.  Now it happened within this
time that the prices of provisions were much reduced, which
gave an occasion to the joyful people of saying, that the very
name of Pompey had ended the war.  However, Pompey in pursuance
of his charge divided all the seas, and the whole Mediterranean
into thirteen parts, allotting a squadron to each, under the
command of his officers; and having thus dispersed his power
into all quarters, and encompassed the pirates everywhere, they
began to fall into his hands by whole shoals, which he seized
and brought into his harbors.  As for those that withdrew
themselves betimes, or otherwise escaped his general chase,
they all made to Cilicia, where they hid themselves as in their
hive; against whom Pompey now proceeded in person with sixty of
his best ships, not however until he had first scoured and
cleared all the seas near Rome, the Tyrrhenian, and the
African, and all the waters of Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily;
all which he performed in the space of forty days, by his own
indefatigable industry and the zeal of his lieutenants.

Pompey met with some interruption in Rome, through the malice
and envy of Piso, the consul, who had given some check to his
proceedings, by withholding his stores and discharging his
seamen; whereupon he sent his fleet round to Brundusium,
himself going the nearest way by land through Tuscany to Rome;
which was no sooner known by the people, than they all flocked
out to meet him upon the way, as if they had not sent him out
but few days before.  What chiefly excited their joy, was the
unexpectedly rapid change in the markets, which abounded now
with the greatest plenty, so that Piso was in great danger to
have been deprived of his consulship, Gabinius having a law
ready prepared for that purpose; but Pompey forbade it,
behaving himself as in that, so in all things else, with great
moderation, and when he had made sure of all that he wanted or
desired, he departed for Brundusium, whence he set sail in
pursuit of the pirates.  And though he was straitened in time,
and his hasty voyage forced him to sail by several cities
without touching, yet he would not pass by the city of Athens
unsaluted; but landing there, after he had sacrificed to the
gods, and made an address to the people, as he was returning
out of the city, he read at the gates two epigrams, each in a
single line, written in his own praise; one within the gate: --

Thy humbler thoughts make thee a god the more;

the other without: --

Adieu we bid, who welcome bade before.

Now because Pompey had shown himself merciful to some of these
pirates that were yet roving in bodies about the seas, having
upon their supplication ordered a seizure of their ships and
persons only, without any further process or severity,
therefore the rest of their comrades in hopes of mercy too,
made their escape from his other commanders, and surrendered
themselves with their wives and children into his protection.
He continued to pardon all that came in, and the rather because
by them he might make discovery of those who fled from his
justice, as conscious that their crimes were beyond an act of
indemnity.  The most numerous and important part of these
conveyed their families and treasures, with all their people
that were unfit for war, into castles and strong forts about
Mount Taurus; but they themselves having well manned their
galleys, embarked for Coracesium in Cilicia, where they
received Pompey and gave him battle.  Here they had a final
overthrow, and retired to the land, where they were besieged.
At last, having dispatched their heralds to him with a
submission, they delivered up to his mercy themselves, their
towns, islands, and strong-holds, all which they had so
fortified that they were almost impregnable, and scarcely even
accessible.

Thus was this war ended, and the whole power of the pirates at
sea dissolved everywhere in the space of three months, wherein,
besides a great number of other vessels, he took ninety
men-of-war with brazen beaks; and likewise prisoners of war to
the number of no less than twenty thousand.

As regarded the disposal of these prisoners, he never so much
as entertained the thought of putting them to death; and yet it
might be no less dangerous on the other hand to disperse them,
as they might reunite and make head again, being numerous,
poor, and warlike.  Therefore wisely weighing with himself,
that man by nature is not a wild or unsocial creature, neither
was he born so, but makes himself what he naturally is not, by
vicious habit; and that again on the other side, he is
civilized and grows gentle by a change of place, occupation,
and manner of life, as beasts themselves that are wild by
nature, become tame and tractable by housing and gentler usage,
upon this consideration he determined to translate these
pirates from sea to land, and give them a taste of an honest
and innocent course of life, by living in towns, and tilling
the ground.  Some therefore were admitted into the small and
half-peopled towns of the Cilicians, who for an enlargement of
their territories, were willing to receive them.  Others he
planted in the city of the Solians, which had been lately laid
waste by Tigranes, king of Armenia, and which he now restored.
But the largest number were settled in Dyme, the town of
Achaea, at that time extremely depopulated, and possessing an
abundance of good land.

However, these proceedings could not escape the envy and
censure of his enemies; and the course he took against Metellus
in Crete was disapproved of even by the chiefest of his
friends.  For Metellus, a relation of Pompey's former colleague
in Spain, had been sent praetor into Crete, before this
province of the seas was assigned to Pompey.  Now Crete was the
second source of pirates next to Cilicia, and Metellus having
shut up a number of them in their strong-holds there, was
engaged in reducing and extirpating them.  Those that were yet
remaining and besieged sent their supplications to Pompey, and
invited him into the island as a part of his province, alleging
it to fall, every part of it, within the distance from the sea
specified in his commission, and so within the precincts of his
charge.  Pompey receiving the submission, sent letters to
Metellus, commanding him to leave off the war; and others in
like manner to the cities, in which he charged them not to
yield any obedience to the commands of Metellus.  And after
these, he sent Lucius Octavius, one of his lieutenants, to act
as general, who entering the besieged fortifications, and
fighting in defense of the pirates, rendered Pompey not odious
only, but even ridiculous too; that he should lend his name as
a guard to a nest of thieves, that knew neither god nor law,
and make his reputation serve as a sanctuary to them, only out
of pure envy and emulation to Metellus.  For neither was
Achilles thought to act the part of a man, but rather of a mere
boy, mad after glory, when by signs he forbade the rest of the
Greeks to strike at Hector:  --

"for fear
Some other hand should give the blow, and he
Lose the first honor of the victory."

Whereas Pompey even sought to preserve the common enemies of
the world, only that he might deprive a Roman praetor, after
all his labors, of the honor of a triumph.  Metellus however
was not daunted, but prosecuted the war against the pirates,
expelled them from their strongholds and punished them; and
dismissed Octavius with the insults and reproaches of the whole
camp.

When the news came to Rome that the war with the pirates was at
an end, and that Pompey was unoccupied, diverting himself in
visits to the cities for want of employment, one Manlius, a
tribune of the people, preferred a law that Pompey should have
all the forces of Lucullus, and the provinces under his
government, together with Bithynia, which was under the command
of Glabrio; and that he should forthwith conduct the war
against the two kings, Mithridates and Tigranes, retaining
still the same naval forces and the sovereignty of the seas as
before.  But this was nothing less than to constitute one
absolute monarch of all the Roman empire.  For the provinces
which seemed to be exempt from his commission by the former
decree, such as were Phrygia, Lycaonia, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Cilicia, the upper Colchis, and Armenia, were all added in by
this latter law, together with all the troops and forces with
which Lucullus had defeated Mithridates and Tigranes.  And
though Lucullus was thus simply robbed of the glory of his
achievements in having a successor assigned him, rather to the
honor of his triumph, than the danger of the war; yet this was
of less moment in the eyes of the aristocratical party, though
they could not but admit the injustice and ingratitude to
Lucullus.  But their great grievance was, that the power of
Pompey should be converted into a manifest tyranny; and they
therefore exhorted and encouraged one another privately to bend
all their forces in opposition to this law, and not tamely to
cast away their liberty; yet when the day came on which it was
to pass into a decree, their hearts failed them for fear of the
people, and all were silent except Catulus, who boldly
inveighed against the law and its proposer, and when he found
that he could do nothing with the people, turned to the senate,
crying out and bidding them seek out some mountain as their
forefathers had done, and fly to the rocks where they might
preserve their liberty.  The law passed into a decree, as it is
said, by the suffrages of all the tribes.  And Pompey in his
absence was made lord of almost all that power, which Sylla
only obtained by force of arms, after a conquest of the very
city itself.  When Pompey had advice by letters of the decree,
it is said that in the presence of his friends, who came to
give him joy of his honor, he seemed displeased, frowning and
smiting his thigh, and exclaimed as one overburdened, and weary
of government, "Alas, what a series of labors upon labors!  If
I am never to end my service as a soldier, nor to escape from
this invidious greatness, and live at home in the country with
my wife, I had better have been an unknown man."  But all this
was looked upon as mere trifling, neither indeed could the best
of his friends call it anything else, well knowing that his
enmity with Lucullus, setting a flame just now to his natural
passion for glory and empire, made him feel more than usually
gratified.

As indeed appeared not long afterwards by his actions, which
clearly unmasked him; for in the first place, he sent out his
proclamations into all quarters, commanding the soldiers to
join him, and summoned all the tributary kings and princes
within his charge; and in short, as soon as he had entered upon
his province, he left nothing unaltered that had been done and
established by Lucullus.  To some he remitted their penalties,
and deprived others of their rewards, and acted in all respects
as if with the express design that the admirers of Lucullus
might know that all his authority was at an end.  Lucullus
expostulated by friends, and it was thought fitting that there
should be a meeting betwixt them; and accordingly they met in
the country of Galatia.  As they were both great and successful
generals, their officers bore their rods before them all
wreathed with branches of laurel; Lucullus came through a
country full of green trees and shady woods, but Pompey's march
was through a cold and barren district.  Therefore the lictors
of Lucullus, perceiving that Pompey's laurels were withered and
dry, helped him to some of their own, and adorned and crowned
his rods with fresh laurels.  This was thought ominous, and
looked as if Pompey came to take away the reward and honor of
Lucullus's victories.  Lucullus had the priority in the order
of consulships, and also in age; but Pompey's two triumphs made
him the greater man.  Their first addresses in this interview
were dignified and friendly, each magnifying the other's
actions, and offering congratulations upon his success.  But
when they came to the matter of their conference or treaty,
they could agree on no fair or equitable terms of any kind, but
even came to harsh words against each other, Pompey upbraiding
Lucullus with avarice, and Lucullus retorting ambition upon
Pompey, so that their friends could hardly part them.
Lucullus, remaining in Galatia, made a distribution of the
lands within his conquests, and gave presents to whom he
pleased; and Pompey encamping not far distant from him, sent
out his prohibitions, forbidding the execution of any of the
orders of Lucullus, and commanded away all his soldiers, except
sixteen hundred, whom he thought likely to be unserviceable to
himself, being disorderly and mutinous, and whom he knew to be
hostile to Lucullus; and to these acts he added satirical
speeches, detracting openly from the glory of his actions, and
giving out, that the battles of Lucullus had been but with the
mere stage-shows and idle pictures of royal pomp, whereas the
real war against a genuine army, disciplined by defeat, was
reserved to him, Mithridates having now begun to be in earnest,
and having betaken himself to his shields, swords, and horses.
Lucullus, on the other side, to be even with him, replied, that
Pompey came to fight with the mere image and shadow of war, it
being his usual practice, like a lazy bird of prey, to come
upon the carcass, when others had slain the dead, and to tear
in pieces the relics of a war.  Thus he had appropriated to
himself the victories over Sertorius, over Lepidus, and over
the insurgents under Spartacus; whereas this last had been
achieved by Crassus, that obtained by Catulus, and the first
won by Metellus.  And therefore it was no great wonder, that
the glory of the Pontic and Armenian war should be usurped by a
man who had condescended to any artifices to work himself into
the honor of a triumph over a few runaway slaves.

After this Lucullus went away, and Pompey having placed his
whole navy in guard upon the seas betwixt Phoenicia and
Bosporus, himself marched against Mithridates, who had a
phalanx of thirty thousand foot, with two thousand horse, yet
durst not bid him battle.  He had encamped upon a strong
mountain where it would have been hard to attack him, but
abandoned it in no long time, as destitute of water.  No sooner
was he gone but Pompey occupied it, and observing the plants
that were thriving there, together with the hollows which he
found in several places, conjectured that such a plot could not
be without springs, and therefore ordered his men to sink wells
in every corner.  After which there was, in a little time,
great plenty of water throughout all the camp, insomuch that he
wondered how it was possible for Mithridates to be ignorant of
this, during all that time of his encampment there.  After this
Pompey followed him to his next camp, and there drawing lines
round about him, shut him in.  But he, after having endured a
siege of forty-five days, made his escape secretly, and fled
away with all the best part of his army, having first put to
death all the sick and unserviceable.  Not long after Pompey
overtook him again near the banks of the river Euphrates, and
encamped close by him; but fearing lest he should pass over the
river and give him the slip there too, he drew up his army to
attack him at midnight.  And at that very time Mithridates, it
is said, saw a vision in his dream foreshowing what should come
to pass.  For he seemed to be under sail in the Euxine Sea with
a prosperous gale, and just in view of Bosporus, discoursing
pleasantly with the ship's company, as one overjoyed for his
past danger and present security, when on a sudden he found
himself deserted of all, and floating upon a broken plank of
the ship at the mercy of the sea.  Whilst he was thus laboring
under these passions and phantasms, his friends came and awaked
him with the news of Pompey's approach; who was now indeed so
near at hand, that the fight must be for the camp itself, and
the commanders accordingly drew up the forces in battle array.
Pompey perceiving how ready they were and well prepared for
defense, began to doubt with himself whether he should put it
to the hazard of a fight in the dark, judging it more prudent
to encompass them only at present, lest they should fly, and to
give them battle with the advantage of numbers the next day.
But his oldest officers were of another opinion, and by
entreaties and encouragements obtained permission that they
might charge them immediately.  Neither was the night so very
dark, but that, though the moon was going down, it yet gave
light enough to discern a body.  And indeed this was one
especial disadvantage to the king's army.  For the Romans
coming upon them with the moon on their backs, the moon, being
very low, and just upon setting, cast the shadows a long way
before their bodies, reaching almost to the enemy, whose eyes
were thus so much deceived that not exactly discerning the
distance, but imagining them to be near at hand, they threw
their darts at the shadows, without the least execution.  The
Romans therefore perceiving this, ran in upon them with a great
shout; but the barbarians, all in a panic, unable to endure the
charge, turned and fled, and were put to great slaughter, above
ten thousand being slain; the camp also was taken.  As for
Mithridates himself, he at the beginning of the onset, with a
body of eight hundred horse charged through the Roman army, and
made his escape.  But before long all the rest dispersed, some
one way, some another, and he was left only with three persons,
among whom was his concubine, Hypsicratia, a girl always of a
manly and daring spirit, and the king called her on that
account Hypsicrates.  She being attired and mounted like a
Persian horseman, accompanied the king in all his flight, never
weary even in the longest journey, nor ever failing to attend
the king in person, and look after his horse too, until they
came to Inora, a castle of the king's, well stored with gold
and treasure.  From thence Mithridates took his richest
apparel, and gave it among those that had resorted to him in
their flight; and to every one of his friends he gave a deadly
poison, that they might not fall into the power of the enemy
against their wills.  From thence he designed to have gone to
Tigranes in Armenia, but being prohibited by Tigranes, who put
out a proclamation with a reward of one hundred talents to any
one that should apprehend him, he passed by the head-waters of
the river Euphrates, and fled through the country of Colchis.

Pompey in the meantime made an invasion into Armenia, upon the
invitation of young Tigranes, who was now in rebellion against
his father, and gave Pompey a meeting about the river Araxes,
which rises near the head of Euphrates, but turning its course
and bending towards the east, falls into the Caspian Sea.  They
two, therefore, marched together through the country, taking in
all the cities by the way, and receiving their submission.  But
king Tigranes, having lately suffered much in the war with
Lucullus, and understanding that Pompey was of a kind and
gentle disposition, admitted Roman troops into his royal
palaces, and taking along with him his friends and relations,
went in person to surrender himself into the hands of Pompey.
He came as far as the trenches on horseback, but there he was
met by two of Pompey's lictors, who commanded him to alight and
walk on foot, for no man ever was seen on horseback within a
Roman camp.  Tigranes submitted to this immediately, and not
only so, but loosing his sword, delivered up that too; and last
of all, as soon as he appeared before Pompey, he pulled off his
royal turban, and attempted to have laid it at his feet.  Nay,
worst of all, even he himself had fallen prostrate as an humble
suppliant at his knees, had not Pompey prevented it, taking him
by the hand and placing him near him, Tigranes himself on one
side of him and his son upon the other.  Pompey now told him
that the rest of his losses were chargeable upon Lucullus, by
whom he had been dispossessed of Syria, Phoenicia, Cilicia,
Galatia, and Sophene; but all that he had preserved to himself
entire till that time he should peaceably enjoy, paying the sum
of six thousand talents as a fine or penalty for injuries done
to the Romans, and that his son should have the kingdom of
Sophene.  Tigranes himself was well pleased with these
conditions of peace, and when the Romans saluted him king,
seemed to be overjoyed, and promised to every common soldier
half a mina of silver, to every centurion ten minas, and to
every tribune a talent; but the son was displeased, insomuch
that when he was invited to supper, he replied, that he did not
stand in need of Pompey for that sort of honor, for he would
find out some other Roman to sup with.  Upon this he was put
into close arrest, and reserved for the triumph.

Not long after this Phraates, king of Parthia, sent to Pompey,
and demanded to have young Tigranes, as his son-in-law, given
up to him, and that the river Euphrates should be the boundary
of the empires.  Pompey replied, that for Tigranes, he belonged
more to his own natural father than his father-in-law, and for
the boundaries, he would take care that they should be
according to right and justice.

So Pompey, leaving Armenia in the custody of Afranius, went
himself in chase of Mithridates; to do which he was forced of
necessity to march through several nations inhabiting about
Mount Caucasus.  Of these the Albanians and Iberians were the
two chiefest.  The Iberians stretch out as far as the Moschian
mountains and the Pontus; the Albanians lie more eastwardly,
and towards the Caspian Sea.  These Albanians at first
permitted Pompey, upon his request, to pass through the
country; but when winter had stolen upon the Romans whilst they
were still in the country, and they were busy celebrating the
festival of Saturn, they mustered a body of no less than forty
thousand fighting men, and set upon them, having passed over
the river Cyrnus, which rising from the mountains of Iberia,
and receiving the river Araxes in its course from Armenia,
discharges itself by twelve mouths into the Caspian.  Or,
according to others, the Araxes does not fall into it, but they
flow near one another, and so discharge themselves as neighbors
into the same sea.  It was in the power of Pompey to have
obstructed the enemy's passage over the river, but he suffered
them to pass over quietly; and then leading on his forces and
giving battle, he routed them, and slew great numbers of them
in the field.  The king sent ambassadors with his submission,
and Pompey upon his supplication pardoned the offense, and
making a treaty with him, he marched directly against the
Iberians, a nation no less in number than the other, but much
more warlike, and extremely desirous of gratifying Mithridates,
and driving out Pompey.  These Iberians were never subject to
the Medes or Persians, and they happened likewise to escape the
dominion of the Macedonians, because Alexander was so quick in
his march through Hyrcania.  But these also Pompey subdued in a
great battle, where there were slain nine thousand upon the
spot, and more than ten thousand taken prisoners.  From thence
he entered into the country of Colchis, where Servilius met him
by the river Phasis, bringing the fleet with which he was
guarding the Pontus.

The pursuit of Mithridates, who had thrown himself among the
tribes inhabiting Bosporus and the shores of the Maeotian Sea,
presented great difficulties.  News was also brought to Pompey
that the Albanians had again revolted.  This made him turn
back, out of anger and determination not to be beaten by them,
and with difficulty and great danger he passed back over the
Cyrnus, which the barbarous people had fortified a great way
down the banks with palisadoes.  And after this, having a
tedious march to make through a waterless and difficult
country, he ordered ten thousand skins to be filled with water,
and so advanced towards the enemy; whom he found drawn up in
order of battle near the river Abas, to the number of sixty
thousand horse, and twelve thousand foot, ill armed generally,
and most of them covered only with the skins of wild beasts.
Their general was Cosis, the king's brother, who as soon as the
battle was begun, singled out Pompey, and rushing in upon him,
darted his javelin into the joints of his breastplate; while
Pompey, in return, struck him through the body with his lance,
and slew him.  It is related that in this battle there were
Amazons fighting as auxiliaries with the barbarians, and that
they came down from the mountains by the river Thermodon.  For
that after the battle, when the Romans were taking the spoil
and plunder of the field, they met with several targets and
buskins of the Amazons; but no woman's body was found among the
dead.  They inhabit the parts of Mount Caucasus that reach down
to the Hyrcanian Sea, not immediately bordering upon the
Albanians, for the Gelae and the Leges lie betwixt; and they
keep company with these people yearly, for two months only,
near the river Thermodon; after which they retire to their own
habitations, and live alone all the rest of the year.

After this engagement, Pompey was eager to advance with his
forces upon the Hyrcanian and Caspian Sea, but was forced to
retreat at a distance of three days' march from it, by the
number of venomous serpents, and so he retreated into Armenia
the Less.  Whilst he was there, kings of the Elymaeans and Medes
sent ambassadors to him, to whom he gave friendly answer by
letter; and sent against the king of Parthia, who had made
incursions upon Gordyene, and despoiled the subjects of
Tigranes, an army under the command of Afranius, who put him to
the rout, and followed him in chase as far as the district of
Arbela.

Of the concubines of king Mithridates that were brought before
Pompey, he took none to himself, but sent them all away to
their parents and relations; most of them being either the
daughters or wives of princes and great commanders.
Stratonice, however, who had the greatest power and influence
with him, and to whom he had committed the custody of his best
and richest fortress, had been, it seems, the daughter of a
musician, an old man, and of no great fortune, and happening to
sing one night before Mithridates at a banquet, she struck his
fancy so, that immediately he took her with him, and sent away
the old man much dissatisfied, the king having not so much as
said one kind word to himself.  But when he rose in the
morning, and saw tables in his house richly covered with gold
and silver plate, a great retinue of servants, eunuchs, and
pages, bringing him rich garments, and a horse standing before
the door richly caparisoned, in all respects as was usual with
the king's favorites, he looked upon it all as a piece of
mockery, and thinking himself trifled with, attempted to make
off and run away.  But the servants laying hold upon him, and
informing him really that the king had bestowed on him the
house and furniture of a rich man lately deceased, and that
these were but the first-fruits or earnests of greater riches
and possessions that were to come, he was persuaded at last
with much difficulty to believe them.  And so putting on his
purple robes, and mounting his horse, he rode through the city,
crying out, "All this is mine;" and to those that laughed at
him, he said, there was no such wonder in this, but it was a
wonder rather that he did not throw stones at all he met, he
was so transported with joy.  Such was the parentage and blood
of Stratonice.  She now delivered up this castle into the hands
of Pompey, and offered him many presents of great value, of
which he accepted only such as he thought might serve to adorn
the temples of the gods, and add to the splendor of his
triumph; the rest he left to Stratonice's disposal, bidding her
please herself in the enjoyment of them.

And in the same manner he dealt with the presents offered him
by the king of Iberia, who sent him a bedstead, table, and a
chair of state, all of gold, desiring him to accept of them;
but he delivered them all into the custody of the public
treasurers, for the use of the Commonwealth.

In another castle called Caenum, Pompey found and read with
pleasure several secret writings of Mithridates, containing
much that threw light on his character.  For there were memoirs
by which it appeared that besides others, he had made away with
his son Ariarathes by poison, as also with Alcaeus the Sardian,
for having robbed him of the first honors in a horse-race.
There were several judgments upon the interpretation of dreams,
which either he himself or some of his mistresses had had; and
besides these, there was a series of wanton letters to and from
his concubine Monime.  Theophanes tells us that there was found
also an address by Rutilius, in which he attempted to
exasperate him to the laughter of all the Romans in Asia;
though most men justly conjecture this to be a malicious
invention of Theophanes, who probably hated Rutilius because he
was a man in nothing like himself; or perhaps it might be to
gratify Pompey, whose father is described by Rutilius in his
history, as the vilest man alive.

From thence Pompey came to the city of Amisus, where his
passion for glory put him into a position which might be called
a punishment on himself.  For whereas he had often sharply
reproached Lucullus, in that while the enemy was still living,
he had taken upon him to issue decrees, and distribute rewards
and honors, as conquerors usually do only when the war is
brought to an end, yet now was he himself, while Mithridates
was paramount in the kingdom of Bosporus, and at the head of a
powerful army, as if all were ended, just doing the same thing,
regulating the provinces, and distributing rewards, many great
commanders and princes having flocked to him, together with no
less than twelve barbarian kings; insomuch that to gratify
these other kings, when he wrote to the king of Parthia, he
would not condescend, as others used to do, in the
superscription of his letter, to give him his title of king of
kings.

Moreover, he had a great desire and emulation to occupy Syria,
and to march through Arabia to the Red Sea, that he might thus
extend his conquests every way to the great ocean that
encompasses the habitable earth; as in Africa he was the first
Roman that advanced his victories to the ocean; and again in
Spain he made the Atlantic Sea the limit of the empire; and
then thirdly, in his late pursuit of the Albanians, he had
wanted but little of reaching the Hyrcanian Sea.  Accordingly
he raised his camp, designing to bring the Red Sea within the
circuit of his expedition, especially as he saw how difficult
it was to hunt after Mithridates with an army, and that he
would prove a worse enemy flying than fighting.  But yet he
declared, that he would leave a sharper enemy behind him than
himself, namely, famine; and therefore he appointed a guard
of ships to lie in wait for the merchants that sailed to
Bosporus, death being the penalty for any who should attempt to
carry provisions thither.

Then he set forward with the greatest part of his army, and in
his march casually fell in with several dead bodies still
uninterred, of those soldiers who were slain with Triarius in
his unfortunate engagement with Mithridates; these he buried
splendidly and honorably.  The neglect of whom, it is thought,
caused, as much as anything, the hatred that was felt against
Lucullus, and alienated the affections of the soldiers from
him.  Pompey having now by his forces under the command of
Afranius, subdued the Arabians about the mountain Amanus,
himself entered Syria, and finding it destitute of any natural
and lawful prince, reduced it into the form of a province, as a
possession of the people of Rome.  He conquered also Judaea,
and took its king, Aristobulus, captive.  Some cities he built
anew, and to others he gave their liberty, chastising their
tyrants.  Most part of the time that he spent there was
employed in the administration of justice, In deciding
controversies of kings and States; and where he himself could
not be present in person, he gave commissions to his friends,
and sent them.  Thus when there arose a difference betwixt the
Armenians and Parthians about some territory, and the judgment
was referred to him, he gave a power by commission to three
judges and arbiters to hear and determine the controversy.  For
the reputation of his power was great; nor was the fame of his
justice and clemency inferior to that of his power, and served
indeed as a veil for a multitude of faults committed by his
friends and familiars.  For although it was not in his nature
to check or chastise wrongdoers, yet he himself always treated
those that had to do with him in such a manner, that they
submitted to endure with patience the acts of covetousness and
oppression done by others.

Among these friends of his, there was one Demetrius who had the
greatest influence with him of all; he was a freed slave, a
youth of good understanding, but somewhat too insolent in his
good fortune, of whom there goes this story.  Cato, the
philosopher, being as yet a very young man, but of great repute
and a noble mind, took a journey of pleasure to Antioch, at a
time when Pompey was not there, having a great desire to see
the city.  He, as his custom was, walked on foot, and his
friends accompanied him on horseback; and seeing before the
gates of the city a multitude dressed in white, the young men
on one side of the road, and the boys on the other, he was
somewhat offended at it, imagining that it was officiously done
in honor of him, which was more than he had any wish for.
However, he desired his companions to alight and walk with him;
but when they drew near, the master of the ceremonies in this
procession came out with a garland and a rod in his hand, and
met them, inquiring, where they had left Demetrius, and when he
would come?  Upon which Cato's companions burst out into
laughter, but Cato said only, "Alas, poor city!"  and passed by
without any other answer.  However, Pompey rendered Demetrius
less odious to others by enduring his presumption and
impertinence to himself.  For it is reported how that Pompey,
when he had invited his friends to an entertainment, would be
very ceremonious in waiting, till they all came and were
placed, while Demetrius would be already stretched upon the
couch as if he cared for no one, with his dress over his ears,
hanging down from his head.  Before his return into Italy, he
had purchased the pleasantest country-seat about Rome, with the
finest walks and places for exercise, and there were sumptuous
gardens, called by the name of Demetrius, while Pompey his
master, up to his third triumph, was contented with an ordinary
and simple habitation.  Afterwards, it is true, when he had
erected his famous and stately theater for the people of Rome,
he built as a sort of appendix to it, a house for himself, much
more splendid than his former, and yet no object even this to
excite men's envy, since he who came to be master of it after
Pompey could not but express wonder and inquire where Pompey
the Great used to sup.  Such is the story told us.

The king of the Arabs near Petra, who had hitherto despised the
power of the Romans, now began to be in great alarm at it, and
sent letters to him promising to be at his commands, and to do
whatever he should see fit to order.  However, Pompey having a
desire to confirm and keep him in the same mind, marched
forwards for Petra, an expedition not altogether
irreprehensible in the opinion of many; who thought it a mere
running away from their proper duty, the pursuit of
Mithridates, Rome's ancient and inveterate enemy, who was now
rekindling the war once more, and making preparations, it was
reported, to lead his army through Scythia and Paeonia, into
Italy.  Pompey, on the other side, judging it easier to destroy
his forces in battle, than to seize his person in flight,
resolved not to tire himself out in a vain pursuit, but rather
to spend his leisure upon another enemy, as a sort of
digression in the meanwhile.  But fortune resolved the doubt;
for when he was now not far from Petra, and had pitched his
tents and encamped for that day, as he was talking exercise
with his horse outside the camp, couriers came riding up from
Pontus, bringing good news, as was known at once by the heads
of their javelins, which it is the custom to carry crowned with
branches of laurel.  The soldiers, as soon as they saw them,
flocked immediately to Pompey, who notwithstanding was minded to
finish his exercise; but when they began to be clamorous and
importunate, he alighted from his horse, and taking the letters
went before them into the camp.  Now there being no tribunal
erected there, not even that military substitute for one which
they make by cutting up thick turfs of earth and piling them
one upon another, they, through eagerness and impatience,
heaped up a pile of pack-saddles, and Pompey standing upon
that, told them the news of Mithridates's death, how that he
had himself put an end to his life upon the revolt of his son
Pharnaces, and that Pharnaces had taken all things there into
his hands and possession, which he did, his letters said, in
right of himself and the Romans.  Upon this news, the whole
army expressing their joy, as was to be expected, fell to
sacrificing to the gods, and feasting, as if in the person of
Mithridates alone there had died many thousands of their
enemies.

Pompey by this event having brought this war to its completion,
with much more ease than was expected, departed forthwith out
of Arabia, and passing rapidly through the intermediate
provinces, he came at length to the city Amisus.  There he
received many presents brought from Pharnaces, with several
dead bodies of the royal blood, and the corpse of Mithridates
himself, which was not easy to be known by the face, for the
physicians that embalmed him had not dried up his brain, but
those who were curious to see him knew him by the scars there.
Pompey himself would not endure to see him, but to deprecate
the divine jealousy, sent it away to the city of Sinope.  He
admired the richness of his robes, no less than the size and
splendor of his armor.  His swordbelt, however, which had cost
four hundred talents, was stolen by Publius, and sold to
Ariarathes; his tiara also, a piece of admirable workmanship,
Gaius, the roster brother of Mithridates, gave secretly to
Faustus, the son of Sylla, at his request.  All which Pompey
was ignorant of, but afterwards, when Pharnaces came to
understand it, he severely punished those that embezzled them.

Pompey now having ordered all things, and established that
province, took his journey homewards in greater pomp and with
more festivity.  For when he came to Mitylene, he gave the city
their freedom upon the intercession of Theophanes, and was
present at the contest, there periodically held, of the poets,
who took at that time no other theme or subject than the
actions of Pompey.  He was extremely pleased with the theater
itself, and had a model of it taken, intending to erect one in
Rome on the same design, but larger and more magnificent.  When
he came to Rhodes, he attended the lectures of all the
philosophers there, and gave to every one of them a talent.
Posidonius has published the disputation which he held before
him against Hermagoras the rhetorician, upon the subject of
Invention in general.  At Athens, also, he showed similar,
munificence to the philosophers, and gave fifty talents towards
the repairing and beautifying the city.  So that now by all
these acts he well hoped to return into Italy in the greatest
splendor and glory possible to man, and find his family as
desirous to see him, as he felt himself to come home to them.
But that supernatural agency, whose province and charge it is
always to mix some ingredient of evil with the greatest and
most glorious goods of fortune, had for some time back been
busy in his household, preparing him a sad welcome.  For Mucia
during his absence had dishonored his bed.  Whilst he was
abroad at a distance, he had refused all credence to the
report; but when he drew nearer to Italy, where his thoughts
were more at leisure to give consideration to the charge, he
sent her a bill of divorce; but neither then in writing, nor
afterwards by word of mouth, did he ever give a reason why he
discharged her; the cause of it is mentioned in Cicero's
epistles.

Rumors of every kind were scattered abroad about Pompey, and
were carried to Rome before him, so that there was a great
tumult and stir, as if he designed forthwith to march with his
army into the city, and establish himself securely as sole
ruler.  Crassus withdrew himself, together with his children
and property, out of the city, either that he was really
afraid, or that he counterfeited rather, as is most probable,
to give credit to the calumny and exasperate the jealousy of
the people.  Pompey, therefore, as soon as he entered Italy,
called a general muster of the army; and having made a suitable
address and exchanged a kind farewell with his soldiers, he
commanded them to depart every man to his country and place of
habitation, only taking care that they should not fail to meet
again at his triumph.  Thus the army being disbanded, and the
news commonly reported, a wonderful result ensued.  For when
the cities saw Pompey the Great passing through the country
unarmed, and with a small train of familiar friends only, as if
he was returning from a journey of pleasure, not from his
conquests, they came pouring out to display their affection for
him, attending and conducting him to Rome with far greater
forces than he disbanded; insomuch that if he had designed
any movement or innovation in the State, he might have done it
without his army.

Now, because the law permitted no commander to enter into the
city before his triumph, he sent to the senate, entreating them
as a favor to him to prorogue the election of consuls, that
thus he might be able to attend and give countenance to Piso,
one of the candidates.  The request was resisted by Cato, and
met with a refusal.  However, Pompey could not but admire the
liberty and boldness of speech which Cato alone had dared to
use in the maintenance of law and justice.  He therefore had a
great desire to win him over, and purchase his friendship at
any rate; and to that end, Cato having two nieces, Pompey asked
for one in marriage for himself, the other for his son.  But
Cato looked unfavorably on the proposal, regarding it as a
design for undermining his honesty, and in a manner bribing him
by a family alliance; much to the displeasure of his wife and
sister, who were indignant that he should reject a connection
with Pompey the Great.  About that time Pompey having a design
of setting up Afranius for the consulship, gave a sum of money
among the tribes for their votes, and people came and received
it in his own gardens a proceeding which, when it came to be
generally known, excited great disapprobation, that he should
thus for the sake of men who could not obtain the honor by
their own merits, make merchandise of an office which had been
given to himself as the highest reward of his services.  "Now,"
said Cato to his wife and sister, "had we contracted an
alliance with Pompey, we had been allied to this dishonor too;"
and this they could not but acknowledge, and allow his judgment
of what was right and fitting to have been wiser and better
than theirs.

The splendor and magnificence of Pompey's triumph was such that
though it took up the space of two days, yet they were
extremely straitened in time, so that of what was prepared for
that pageantry, there was as much withdrawn as would have set
out and adorned another triumph.  In the first place, there were
tables carried, inscribed with the names and titles of the
nations over whom he triumphed, Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia,
Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, the Iberians, the Albanians,
Syria, Cilicia, and Mesopotamia, together with Phoenicia and
Palestine, Judaea, Arabia, and all the power of the pirates
subdued by sea and land.  And in these different countries
there appeared the capture of no less than one thousand
fortified places, nor much less than nine hundred cities,
together with eight hundred ships of the pirates, and the
foundation of thirty-nine towns.  Besides, there was set forth
in these tables an account of all the tributes throughout the
empire, and how that before these conquests the revenue
amounted but to fifty millions, whereas from his acquisitions
they had a revenue of eighty-five millions; and that in present
payment he was bringing into the common treasury ready money,
and gold and silver plate, and ornaments, to the value of
twenty thousand talents, over and above what had been
distributed among the soldiers, of whom he that had least had
fifteen hundred drachmas for his share.  The prisoners of war
that were led in triumph, besides the chief pirates, were the
son of Tigranes, king of Armenia, with his wife and daughter;
as also Zosime, wife of king Tigranes himself, and Aristobulus,
king of Judaea, the sister of king Mithridates and her five
sons, and some Scythian women.  There were likewise the
hostages of the Albanians and Iberians, and of the king of
Commagene, besides a vast number of trophies, one for every
battle in which he was conqueror, either himself in person, or
by his lieutenants.  But that which seemed to be his greatest
glory, being one which no other Roman ever attained to, was
this, that he made his third triumph over the third division of
the world.  For others among the Romans had the honor of
triumphing thrice, but his first triumph was over Africa, his
second, over Europe, and this last, over Asia; so that he
seemed in these three triumphs to have led the whole world
captive.

As for his age, those who affect to make the parallel exact in
all things betwixt him and Alexander the Great, do not allow
him to have been quite thirty-four, whereas in truth at that
time he was near forty.  And well had it been for him had he
terminated his life at this date, while he still enjoyed
Alexander's fortune, since all his aftertime served only either
to bring him prosperity that made him odious, or calamities too
great to be retrieved.  For that great authority which he had
gained in the city by his merits, he made use of only in
patronizing the iniquities of others, so that by advancing
their fortunes, he detracted from his own glory, till at last
he was overthrown even by the force and greatness of his own
power.  And as the strongest citadel or fort in a town, when it
is taken by an enemy, does then afford the same strength to the
foe, as it had done to friends before; so Caesar, after
Pompey's aid had made him strong enough to defy his country,
ruined and overthrew at last the power which had availed him
against the rest.  The course of things was as follows.
Lucullus, when he returned out of Asia, where he had been
treated with insult by Pompey, was received by the senate with
great honor, which was yet increased when Pompey came home; to
check whose ambition they encouraged him to assume the
administration of the government, whereas he was now grown cold
and disinclined to business, having given himself over to the
pleasures of ease and the enjoyment of a splendid fortune.
However, he began for the time to exert himself against Pompey,
attacked him sharply, and succeeded in having his own acts and
decrees, which were repealed by Pompey, reestablished, and with
the assistance of Cato, gained the superiority in the senate.
Pompey having fallen from his hopes in such an unworthy
repulse, was forced to fly to the tribunes of the people for
refuge, and to attach himself to the young men, among whom was
Clodius, the vilest and most impudent wretch alive, who took
him about, and exposed him as a tool to the people, carrying
him up and down among the throngs in the market-place, to
countenance those laws and speeches which he made to cajole the
people and ingratiate himself.  And at last for his reward, he
demanded of Pompey, as if he had not disgraced, but done him
great kindness, that he should forsake (as in the end he did
forsake) Cicero, his friend, who on many public occasions had
done him the greatest service.  And so when Cicero was in
danger, and implored his aid, he would not admit him into his
presence, but shutting up his gates against those that came to
mediate for him, slips out at a back door, whereupon Cicero
fearing the result of his trial, departed privately from Rome.

About that time Caesar, returning from military service,
started a course of policy which brought him great present
favor, and much increased his power for the future, and proved
extremely destructive both to Pompey and the commonwealth.  For
now he stood candidate for his first consulship, and well
observing the enmity betwixt Pompey and Crassus, and finding
that by joining with one he should make the other his enemy, he
endeavored by all means to reconcile them, an object in itself
honorable and tending to the public good, but as he undertook
it, a mischievous and subtle intrigue.  For he well knew that
opposite parties or factions in a commonwealth, like passengers
in a boat, serve to trim and balance the unready motions of
power there; whereas if they combine and come all over to one
side, they cause a shock which will be sure to overset the
vessel and carry down everything.  And therefore Cato wisely
told those who charged all the calamities of Rome upon the
disagreement betwixt Pompey and Caesar, that they were in error
in charging all the crime upon the last cause; for it was not
their discord and enmity, but their unanimity and I friendship,
that gave the first and greatest blow to the commonwealth.

Caesar being thus elected consul, began at once to make an
interest with the poor and meaner sort, by preferring and
establishing laws for planting colonies and dividing lands,
lowering the dignity of his office, and turning his consulship
into a sort of tribuneship rather.  And when Bibulus, his
colleague, opposed him, and Cato was prepared to second
Bibulus, and assist him vigorously, Caesar brought Pompey upon
the hustings, and addressing him in the sight of the people,
demanded his opinion upon the laws that were proposed.  Pompey
gave his approbation.  "Then," said Caesar, "in case any man
should offer violence to these laws, will you be reedy to give
assistance to the people?"  "Yes," replied Pompey, "I shall be
ready, and against those that threaten the sword, I will appear
with sword and buckler."  Nothing ever was said or done by
Pompey up to that day, that seemed more insolent or
overbearing; so that his friends endeavored to apologize for it
as a word spoken inadvertently; but by his actions afterwards
it appeared plainly that he was totally devoted to Caesar's
service.  For on a sudden, contrary to all expectation, he
married Julia, the daughter of Caesar, who had been affianced
before and was to be married within a few days to Caepio.  And
to appease Caepio's wrath, he gave him his own daughter in
marriage, who had been espoused before to Faustus, the son of
Sylla.  Caesar himself married Calpurnia, the daughter of Piso.

Upon this Pompey, filling the city with soldiers, carried all
things by force as he pleased.  As Bibulus, the consul, was
going to the forum, accompanied by Lucullus and Cato, they fell
upon him on a sudden and broke his rods; and somebody threw a
vessel of ordure upon the head of Bibulus himself; and two
tribunes of the people, who escorted him, were desperately
wounded in the fray.  And thus having cleared the forum of all
their adversaries, they got their bill for the division of
lands established and passed into an act; and not only so, but
the whole populace being taken with this bait, became totally
at their devotion, inquiring into nothing and without a word
giving their suffrages to whatever they propounded.  Thus they
confirmed all those acts and decrees of Pompey, which were
questioned and contested by Lucullus; and to Caesar they
granted the provinces of Gaul, both within and without the
Alps, together with Illyricum, for five years, and likewise an
army of four entire legions; then they created consuls for the
year ensuing, Piso, the father-in-law of Caesar, and Gabinius,
the most extravagant of Pompey's flatterers.

During all these transactions, Bibulus kept close within doors,
nor did he appear publicly in person for the space of eight
months together, notwithstanding he was consul, but sent out
proclamations full of bitter invectives and accusations against
them both.  Cato turned prophet, and, as if he had been
possessed with a spirit of divination, did nothing else in the
senate but foretell what evils should befall the Commonwealth
and Pompey.  Lucullus pleaded old age, and retired to take his
ease, as superannuated for affairs of State; which gave
occasion to the saying of Pompey, that the fatigues of luxury
were not more seasonable for an old man than those of
government.  Which in truth proved a reflection upon himself;
for he not long after let his fondness for his young wife
seduce him also into effeminate habits.  He gave all his time
to her, and passed his days in her company in country-houses
and gardens, paying no heed to what was going on in the forum.
Insomuch that Clodius, who was then tribune of the people,
began to despise him, and engage in the most audacious
attempts.  For when he had banished Cicero, and sent away Cato
into Cyprus under pretence of military duty, and when Caesar
was gone upon his expedition to Gaul, finding the populace now
looking to him as the leader who did everything according to
their pleasure, he attempted forthwith to repeal some of
Pompey's decrees; he took Tigranes, the captive, out of prison,
and kept him about him as his companion; and commenced actions
against several of Pompey's friends, thus designing to try the
extent of his power.  At last, upon a time when Pompey was
present at the hearing of a certain cause, Clodius, accompanied
with a crowd of profligate and impudent ruffians, standing up
in a place above the rest, put questions to the populace as
follows:  "Who is the dissolute general?  who is the man that
seeks another man?  who scratches his head with one finger?"
and the rabble, upon the signal of his shaking his gown, with a
great shout to every question, like singers making, responses
in a chorus, made answer, "Pompey."

This indeed was no small annoyance to Pompey, who was quite
unaccustomed to hear anything ill of himself, and
unexperienced altogether in such encounters; and he was yet
more vexed, when he saw that the senate rejoiced at this foul
usage, and regarded it as a just punishment upon him for his
treachery to Cicero.  But when it came even to blows and wounds
in the forum, and that one of Clodius's bondslaves was
apprehended, creeping through the crowd towards Pompey with a
sword in his hand, Pompey laid hold of this pretence, though
perhaps otherwise apprehensive of Clodius's insolence and bad
language, and never appeared again in the forum during all the
time he was tribune, but kept close at home, and passed his
time in consulting with his friends, by what means he might
best allay the displeasure of the senate and nobles against
him.  Among other expedients, Culleo advised the divorce of
Julia, and to abandon Caesar's friendship to gain that of the
senate; this he would not hearken to.  Others again advised him
to call home Cicero from banishment, a man who was always the
great adversary of Clodius, and as great a favorite of the
senate; to this he was easily persuaded.  And therefore he
brought Cicero's brother into the forum, attended with a strong
party, to petition for his return; where, after a warm dispute,
in which several were wounded and some slain, he got the
victory over Clodius.  No sooner was Cicero returned home upon
this decree, but immediately he used his efforts to reconcile
the senate to Pompey; and by speaking in favor of the law upon
the importation of corn, did again, in effect, make Pompey
sovereign lord of all the Roman possessions by sea and land.
For by that law, there were placed under his control all ports,
markets, and storehouses, and in short, all the concerns both
of the merchants and the husbandmen; which gave occasion to the
charge brought against it by Clodius, that the law was not made
because of the scarcity of corn, but the scarcity of corn was
made, that they might pass a law, whereby that power of his,
which was now grown feeble and consumptive, might be revived
again, and Pompey reinstated in a new empire.  Others look upon
it as a politic device of Spinther, the consul, whose design it
was to secure Pompey in a greater authority, that he himself
might be sent in assistance to king Ptolemy.  However, it is
certain that Canidius, the tribune, preferred a law to dispatch
Pompey in the character of an ambassador, without an army,
attended only with two lictors, as a mediator betwixt the king
and his subjects of Alexandria.  Neither did this proposal seem
unacceptable to Pompey, though the senate cast it out upon the
specious pretence, that they were unwilling to hazard his
person.  However, there were found several writings scattered
about the forum and near the senate-house, intimating how
grateful it would be to Ptolemy to have Pompey appointed for
his general instead of Spinther.  And Timagenes even asserts
that Ptolemy went away and left Egypt, not out of necessity,
but purely upon the persuasion of Theophanes, who was anxious
to give Pompey the opportunity for holding a new command, and
gaining further wealth.  But Theophanes's want of honesty does
not go so far to make this story credible as does Pompey's own
nature, which was averse, with all its ambition, to such base
and disingenuous acts, to render it improbable.

Thus Pompey being appointed chief purveyor, and having within
his administration and management all the corn trade, sent
abroad his factors and agents into all quarters, and he himself
sailing into Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa, collected vast
stores of corn.  He was just ready to set sail upon his voyage
home, when a great storm arose upon the sea, and the ships'
commanders doubted whether it were safe.  Upon which Pompey
himself went first aboard, and bid the mariners weigh anchor,
declaring with a loud voice, that there was a necessity to
sail, but no necessity to live.  So that with this spirit and
courage, and having met with favorable fortune, he made a
prosperous return, and filled the markets with corn, and the
sea with ships.  So much so that this great plenty and
abundance of provisions yielded a sufficient supply, not only
to the city of Rome, but even to other places too, dispersing
itself; like waters from a spring, into all quarters.

Meantime Caesar grew great and famous with his wars in Gaul,
and while in appearance he seemed far distant from Rome,
entangled in the affairs of the Belgians, Suevians, and
Britons, in truth he was working craftily by secret practices
in the midst of the people, and countermining Pompey in all
political matters of most importance.  He himself with his army
close about him, as if it had been his own body, not with mere
views of conquest over the barbarians, but as though his
contests with them were but mere sports and exercises of the
chase, did his utmost with this training and discipline to make
it invincible and alarming.  And in the meantime his gold and
silver and other spoils and treasure which he took from the
enemy in his conquests, he sent to Rome in presents, tempting
people with his gifts, and aiding aediles, praetors, and
consuls, as also their wives, in their expenses, and thus
purchasing himself numerous friends.  Insomuch, that when he
passed back again over the Alps, and took up his winter
quarters in the city of Luca, there flocked to him an infinite
number of men and women, striving who should get first to him,
two hundred senators included, among whom were Pompey and
Crassus; so that there were to be seen at once before Caesar's
door no less than six score rods of proconsuls and praetors.
The rest of his addressers he sent all away full fraught with
hopes and money; but with Crassus and Pompey, he entered into
special articles of agreement, that they should stand
candidates for the consulship next year; that Caesar on his
part should send a number of his soldiers to give their votes
at the election; that as soon as they were elected, they should
use their interest to have the command of some provinces and
legions assigned to themselves, and that Caesar should have
his present charge confirmed to him for five years more.  When
these arrangements came to be generally known, great
indignation was excited among the chief men in Rome; and
Marcellinus, in an open assembly of the people, demanded of
them both, whether they designed to sue for the consulship or
no.  And being urged by the people for their answer, Pompey
spoke first, and told them, perhaps he would sue for it,
perhaps he would not.  Crassus was more temperate, and said,
that he would do what should be judged most agreeable with the
interest of the Commonwealth; and when Marcellinus persisted in
his attack on Pompey, and spoke, as it was thought, with some
vehemence, Pompey remarked that Marcellinus was certainly the
unfairest of men, to show him no gratitude for having thus made
him an orator out of a mute, and converted him from a hungry
starveling into a man so full-fed that he could not contain
himself.

Most of the candidates nevertheless abandoned their canvass for
the consulship; Cato alone persuaded and encouraged Lucius
Domitius not to desist, "since," said he, "the contest now is
not for office, but for liberty against tyrants and usurpers."
Therefore those of Pompey's party, fearing this inflexible
constancy in Cato, by which he kept with him the whole senate,
lest by this he should likewise pervert and draw after him all
the well-affected part of the commonalty, resolved to withstand
Domitius at once, and to prevent his entrance into the forum.
To this end, therefore, they sent in a band of armed men, who
slew the torchbearer of Domitius, as he was leading the way
before him, and put all the rest to flight; last of all, Cato
himself retired, having received a wound in his right arm while
defending Domitius.  Thus by these means and practices they
obtained the consulship; neither did they behave themselves
with more decency in their further proceedings; but in the
first place, when the people were choosing Cato praetor, and
just ready with their votes for the poll, Pompey broke up the
assembly, upon a pretext of some inauspicious appearance, and
having gained the tribes by money, they publicly proclaimed
Vatinius praetor.  Then, in pursuance of their covenants with
Caesar, they introduced several laws by Trebonius, the tribune,
continuing Caesar's commission to another five years' charge of
his province; to Crassus there were appointed Syria, and the
Parthian war; and to Pompey himself, all Africa, together with
both Spains, and four legions of soldiers, two of which he lent
to Caesar upon his request, for the wars in Gaul.

Crassus, upon the expiration of his consulship, departed
forthwith into his province; but Pompey spent some time in
Rome, upon the opening or dedication of his theater, where he
treated the people with all sorts of games, shows, and
exercises, in gymnastics alike and in music.  There was
likewise the hunting or baiting of wild beasts, and combats
with them, in which five hundred lions were slain; but above
all, the battle of elephants was a spectacle full of horror and
amazement.

These entertainments brought him great honor and popularity;
but on the other side he created no less envy to himself, in
that he committed the government of his provinces and legions
into the hands of friends as his lieutenants, whilst he himself
was going about and spending his time with his wife in all the
places of amusement in Italy; whether it were he was so fond of
her himself, or she so fond of him, and he unable to distress
her by going away, for this also is stated.  And the love
displayed by this young wife for her elderly husband was a
matter of general note, to be attributed, it would seem, to his
constancy in married life, and to his dignity of manner, which
in familiar intercourse was tempered with grace and gentleness,
and was particularly attractive to women, as even Flora, the
courtesan, may be thought good enough evidence to prove.  It
once happened in a public assembly, as they were at an election
of the aediles, that the people came to blows, and several
about Pompey were slain, so that he, finding himself all
bloody, ordered a change of apparel; but the
servants who brought home his clothes, making a
great bustle and hurry about the house, it chanced
that the young lady, who was then with child, saw his
gown all stained with blood; upon which she dropped immediately
into a swoon, and was hardly brought to life again; however,
what with her fright and suffering, she fell into labor and
miscarried; even those who chiefly censured Pompey for his
friendship to Caesar, could not reprove him for his affection
to so attached a wife.  Afterwards she was great again, and
brought to bed of a daughter, but died in childbed; neither did
the infant outlive her mother many days.  Pompey had prepared
all things for the interment of her corpse at his house near
Alba, but the people seized upon it by force, and performed the
solemnities in the field of Mars, rather in compassion for the
young lady, than in favor either for Pompey or Caesar; and yet
of these two, the people seemed at that time to pay Caesar a
greater share of honor in his absence, than to Pompey, though
he was present.

For the city now at once began to roll and swell, so to say,
with the stir of the coming storm.  Things everywhere were in a
state of agitation, and everybody's discourse tended to
division, now that death had put an end to that relation which
hitherto had been a disguise rather than restraint to the
ambition of these men.  Besides, not long after came messengers
from Parthia with intelligence of the death of Crassus there,
by which another safeguard against civil war was removed, since
both Caesar and Pompey kept their eyes on Crassus, and awe of
him held them together more or less within the bounds of
fair-dealing all his lifetime.  But when fortune had taken away
this second, whose province it might have been to revenge the
quarrel of the conquered, you might then say with the comic
poet,

The combatants are waiting to begin,
Smearing their hands with dust and oiling each his skin.

So inconsiderable a thing is fortune in respect of human
nature, and so insufficient to give content to a covetous mind,
that an empire of that mighty extent and sway could not satisfy
the ambition of two men; and though they knew and had read,
that

The gods, when they divided out 'twixt three,
This massive universe, heaven, hell, and sea,
Each one sat down contented on his throne,
And undisturbed each god enjoys his own,

yet they thought the whole Roman empire not sufficient to
contain them, though they were but two.

Pompey once in an oration to the people, told them, that he had
always come into office before he expected he should, and that
he had always left it sooner than they expected he would; and,
indeed, the disbanding of all his armies witnessed as much.
Yet when he perceived that Caesar would not so willingly
discharge his forces, he endeavored to strengthen himself
against him by offices and commands in the city; but beyond
this he showed no desire for any change, and would not seem to
distrust, but rather to disregard and contemn him.  And when he
saw how they bestowed the places of government quite contrary
to his wishes, because the citizens were bribed in their
elections, he let things take their course, and allowed the
city to be left without any government at all.  Hereupon there
was mention straightaway made of appointing a dictator.
Lucilius, a tribune of the people, was the man who first
adventured to propose it, urging the people to make Pompey
dictator.  But the tribune was in danger of being turned out of
his office, by the opposition that Cato made against it.  And
for Pompey, many of his friends appeared and excused him,
alleging that he never was desirous of that government, neither
would he accept of it.  And when Cato therefore made a speech
in commendation of Pompey, and exhorted him to support the
cause of good order in the Commonwealth, he could not for shame
but yield to it, and so for the present Domitius and Messala
were elected consuls.  But shortly afterwards, when there was
another anarchy, or vacancy in the government, and the talk of
a dictator was much louder and more general than before, those
of Cato's party, fearing lest they should be forced to appoint
Pompey, thought it policy to keep him from that arbitrary and
tyrannical power, by giving him an office of more legal
authority.  Bibulus himself, who was Pompey's enemy, first gave
his vote in the senate, that Pompey should be created consul
alone; alleging, that by these means either the Commonwealth
would be freed from its present confusion, or that its bondage
should be lessened by serving the worthiest.  This was looked
upon as a very strange opinion, considering the man that spoke
it; and therefore on Cato's standing up, everybody expected
that he would have opposed it; but after silence made, he said
that he would never have been the author of that advice
himself, but since it was propounded by another, his advice was
to follow it, adding, that any form of government was better
than none at all; and that in a time so full of distraction, he
thought no man fitter to govern than Pompey.  This counsel was
unanimously approved of, and a decree passed that Pompey should
be made sole consul, with this clause, that if he thought it
necessary to have a colleague, he might choose whom he pleased,
provided it were not till after two months expired.

Thus was Pompey created and declared sole consul by Sulpicius,
regent in this vacancy; upon which he made very cordial
acknowledgments to Cato, professing himself much his debtor,
and requesting his good advice in conducting the government; to
this Cato replied, that Pompey had no reason to thank him, for
all that he had said was for the service of the commonwealth,
not of Pompey; but that he would be always ready to give his
advice privately, if he were asked for it; and if not, he
should not fail to say what he thought in public.  Such was
Cato's conduct on all occasions.

On his return into the city Pompey married Cornelia, the
daughter of Metellus Scipio, not a maiden, but lately left a
widow by Publius, the son of Crassus, her first husband, who
had been killed in Parthia.  The young lady had other
attractions besides those of youth and beauty; for she was
highly educated, played well upon the lute, understood
geometry, and had been accustomed to listen with profit to
lectures on philosophy; all this, too, without in any degree
becoming unamiable or pretentious, as sometimes young women do
when they pursue such studies.  Nor could any fault be found
either with her father's family or reputation.  The disparity
of their ages was however not liked by everybody; Cornelia
being in this respect a fitter match for Pompey's son.  And
wiser judges thought it rather a slight upon the commonwealth
when he, to whom alone they had committed their broken
fortunes, and from whom alone, as from their physician, they
expected a cure to these distractions, went about crowned with
garlands and celebrating his nuptial feasts; never considering,
that his very consulship was a public calamity, which would
never have been given him, contrary to the rules of law, had
his country been in a flourishing state.  Afterwards, however,
he took cognizance of the cases of those that had obtained
offices by gifts and bribery, and enacted laws and ordinances,
setting forth the rules of judgment by which they should be
arraigned; and regulating all things with gravity and justice,
he restored security, order, and silence to their courts of
judicature, himself giving his presence there with a band of
soldiers.  But when his father-in-law Scipio was accused, he
sent for the three hundred and sixty judges to his house, and
entreated them to be favorable to him; whereupon his accuser,
seeing Scipio come into the court, accompanied by the judges
themselves, withdrew the prosecution.  Upon this Pompey was
very ill spoken of, and much worse in the case of Plancus; for
whereas he himself had made a law, putting a stop to the
practice of making speeches in praise of persons under trial,
yet notwithstanding this prohibition, he came into court, and
spoke openly in commendation of Plancus, insomuch that Cato,
who happened to be one of the judges at that time, stopping his
ears with his hands, told him, he could not in conscience
listen to commendations contrary to law.  Cato upon this was
refused, and set aside from being a judge, before sentence was
given, but Plancus was condemned by the rest of the judges, to
Pompey's dishonor.  Shortly after, Hypsaeus, a man of consular
dignity, who was under accusation, waited for Pompey's return
from his bath to his supper, and falling down at his feet,
implored his favor; but he disdainfully passed him by, saying,
that he did nothing else but spoil his supper.  Such partiality
was looked upon as a great fault in Pompey, and highly
condemned; however, he managed all things else discreetly, and
having put the government in very good order, he chose his
father-in-law to be his colleague in the consulship for the
last five months.  His provinces were continued to him for the
term of four years longer, with a commission to take one
thousand talents yearly out of the treasury for the payment of
his army.

This gave occasion to some of Caesar's friends to think it
reasonable, that some consideration should be had of him too,
who had done such signal services in war, and fought so many
battles for the empire, alleging, that he deserved at least a
second consulship, or to have the government of his province
continued, that so he might command and enjoy in peace what he
had obtained in war, and no successor come in to reap the
fruits of his labor, and carry off the glory of his actions.
There arising some debate about this matter, Pompey took upon
him, as it were out of kindness to Caesar, to plead his cause,
and allay any jealousy that was conceived against him, telling
them, that he had letters from Caesar, expressing his desire
for a successor, and his own discharge from the command; but it
would be only right that they should give him leave to stand
for the consulship though in his absence.  But those of Cato's
party withstood this, saying, that if he expected any favor
from the citizens, he ought to leave his army, and come in a
private capacity to canvas for it.  And Pompey's making no
rejoinder, but letting it pass as a matter in which he was
overruled, increased the suspicion of his real feelings towards
Caesar.  Presently, also, under presence of a war with Parthia,
he sent for his two legions which he had lent him.  However,
Caesar, though he well knew why they were asked for, sent them
home very liberally rewarded.

About that time Pompey recovered of a dangerous fit of sickness
which seized him at Naples, where the whole city, upon the
suggestion of Praxagoras, made sacrifices of thanksgiving to
the gods for his recovery.  The neighboring towns likewise
happening to follow their example, the thing then went its
course throughout all Italy, so that there was not a city
either great or small, that did not feast and rejoice for many
days together.  And the company of those that came from all
parts to meet him was so numerous, that no place was able to
contain them, but the villages, seaport towns, and the very
highways, were all full of people, feasting and sacrificing to
the gods.  Nay, many went to meet him with garlands on their
heads, and flambeaux in their hands, casting flowers and
nosegays upon him as he went along; so that this progress of
his, and reception, was one of the noblest and most glorious
sights imaginable.  And yet it is thought that this very thing
was not one of the least causes and occasions of the civil war.
For Pompey, yielding to a feeling of exultation, which in the
greatness of the present display of joy lost sight of more
solid grounds of consideration, and abandoning that prudent
temper which had guided him hitherto to a safe use of all his
good fortune and his successes, gave himself up to an
extravagant confidence in his own, and contempt of Caesar's
power; insomuch that he thought neither force of arms nor care
necessary against him, but that he could pull him down much
easier than he had set him up.  Besides this, Appius, under
whose command those legions which Pompey lent to Caesar were
returned, coming lately out of Gaul, spoke slightingly of
Caesar's actions there, and spread scandalous reports about
him, at the same time telling Pompey, that he was unacquainted
with his own strength and reputation, if he made use of any
other forces against Caesar than Caesar's own; for such was the
soldiers' hatred to Caesar, and their love to Pompey so great,
that they would all come over to him upon his first appearance.
By these flatteries Pompey was so puffed up, and led on into
such a careless security, that he could not choose but laugh at
those who seemed to fear a war; and when some were saying, that
if Caesar should march against the city, they could not see
what forces there were to resist him, he replied with a smile,
bidding them be in no concern, "for," said he, "whenever I
stamp with my foot in any part of Italy, there will rise up
forces enough in an instant, both horse and foot."

Caesar, on the other side, was more and more vigorous in his
proceedings, himself always at hand about the frontiers of
Italy, and sending his soldiers continually into the city to
attend all elections with their votes.  Besides, he corrupted
several of the magistrates, and kept them in his pay; among
others, Paulus, the consul, who was brought over by a bribe of
one thousand and five hundred talents; and Curio, tribune of
the people, by a discharge of the debts with which he was
overwhelmed; together with Mark Antony, who, out of friendship
to Curio, had become bound with him in the same obligations
for them all.  And it was stated as a fact, that a centurion of
Caesar's waiting at the senate-house, and hearing that the
senate refused to give him a longer term of his government,
clapped his hand upon his sword, and said, "But this shall give
it."  And indeed all his practices and preparations seemed to
bear this appearance.  Curio's demands, however, and requests
in favor of Caesar, were more popular in appearance; for he
desired one of these two things, either that Pompey also should
be called upon to resign his army, or that Caesar's should not
be taken away from him; for if both of them became private
persons, both would be satisfied with simple justice; or if
both retained their present power, each being a match for the
other, they would be contented with what they already had; but
he that weakens one, does at the same time strengthen the
other, and so doubles that very strength and power which he
stood in fear of before.  Marcellus, the consul, replied
nothing to all this, but that Caesar was a robber, and should
be proclaimed an enemy to the state, if he did not disband his
army.  However, Curio, with the assistance of Antony and Piso,
prevailed, that the matter in debate should be put to the
question, and decided by vote in the senate.  So that it being
ordered upon the question for those to withdraw, who were of
opinion that Caesar only should lay down his army and Pompey
command, the majority withdrew.  But when it was ordered again
for those to withdraw, whose vote was that both should lay
down their arms and neither command, there were but twenty-two
for Pompey, all the rest remained on Curio's side.  Whereupon
he, as one proud of his conquest, leaped out in triumph among
the people, who received him with as great tokens of joy,
clapping their hands, and crowning him with garlands and
flowers.  Pompey was not then present in the senate, because it
is not lawful for generals in command of an army to come into
the city.  But Marcellus rising up, said, that he would not sit
there hearing speeches, when he saw ten legions already passing
the Alps on their march toward the city, but on his own
authority would send someone to oppose them in defense of the
country.

Upon this the city went into mourning, as in a public calamity,
and Marcellus, accompanied by the senate, went solemnly through
the forum to meet Pompey, and made him this address.  "I hereby
give you orders, O Pompey, to defend your country, to employ
the troops you now command, and to levy more."  Lentulus,
consul elect for the year following, spoke to the same purpose.
Antony, however, contrary to the will of the senate, having in
a public assembly read a letter of Caesar's, containing various
plausible overtures such as were likely to gain the common
people, proposing, namely, that both Pompey and he quitting
their governments, and dismissing their armies, should submit
to the judgment of the people, and give an account of their
actions before them, the consequence was that when Pompey began
to make his levies, he found himself disappointed in his
expectations.  Some few, indeed, came in, but those very
unwillingly; others would not answer to their names, and the
generality cried out for peace.  Lentulus, notwithstanding he
was now entered upon his consulship, would not assemble the
senate; but Cicero, who was lately returned from Cilicia,
labored for a reconciliation, proposing that Caesar should
leave his province of Gaul and army, reserving two legions
only, together with the government of Illyricum, and should
thus be put in nomination for a second consulship.  Pompey
disliking this motion, Caesar's friends were contented that he
should surrender one of the two; but Lentulus still opposing,
and Cato crying out that Pompey did ill to be deceived again,
the reconciliation did not take effect.

In the meantime, news was brought that Caesar had occupied
Ariminum, a great city in Italy, and was marching directly
towards Rome with all his forces.  But this latter was
altogether false, for he had no more with him at that time than
three hundred horse and five thousand foot; and he did not mean
to tarry for the body of his army, which lay beyond the Alps,
choosing rather to fall in on a sudden upon his enemies, while
they were in confusion, and did not expect him, than to give
them time, and fight them after they had made preparations.
For when he came to the banks of the Rubicon, a river that
made the bounds of his province, there he made a halt, pausing
a little, and considering, we may suppose, with himself the
greatness of the enterprise which he had undertaken; then, at
last, like men that are throwing themselves headlong from some
precipice into a vast abyss, having shut, as it were, his
mind's eyes and put away from his sight the idea of danger, he
merely uttered to those near him in Greek the words,
"Anerriphtho kubos," (let the die be cast,) and led his army
through it.  No sooner was the news arrived, but there was an
uproar throughout all the city, and a consternation in the
people even to astonishment, such as never was known in Rome
before; all the senate ran immediately to Pompey, and the
magistrates followed.  And when Tullus made inquiry about his
legions and forces, Pompey seemed to pause a little, and
answered with some hesitation, that he had those two legions
ready that Caesar sent back, and that out of the men who had
been previously enrolled he believed he could shortly make up a
body of thirty thousand men.  On which Tullus crying out aloud,
"O Pompey, you have deceived us," gave his advice to send off a
deputation to Caesar.  Favonius, a man of fair character,
except that he used to suppose his own petulance and abusive
talking a copy of Cato's straight-forwardness, bade Pompey
stamp upon the ground, and call forth the forces he had
promised.  But Pompey bore patiently with this unseasonable
raillery; and on Cato putting him in mind of what he had
foretold from the very beginning about Caesar, made this answer
only, that Cato indeed had spoken more like a prophet, but he
had acted more like a friend.  Cato then advised them to choose
Pompey general with absolute power and authority, saying that
the same men who do great evils, know best how to cure them.
He himself went his way forthwith into Sicily, the province
that was allotted him, and all the rest of the senators
likewise departed every one to his respective government.

Thus all Italy in a manner being up in arms, no one could say
what was best to be done.  For those that were without, came
from all parts flocking into the city; and they who were
within, seeing the confusion and disorder so great there, all
good things impotent, and disobedience and insubordination
grown too strong to be controlled by the magistrates, were
quitting it as fast as the others came in.  Nay, it was so far
from being possible to allay their fears, that they would not
suffer Pompey to follow out his own judgment, but every man
pressed and urged him according to his particular fancy,
whether it proceeded from doubt, fear, grief, or any meaner
passion; so that even in the same day quite contrary counsels
were acted upon.  Then, again, it was as impossible to have any
good intelligence of the enemy; for what each man heard by
chance upon a flying rumor, he would report for truth, and
exclaim against Pompey if he did not believe it.  Pompey, at
length, seeing such a confusion in Rome, determined with
himself to put an end to their clamors by his departure, and
therefore commanding all the senate to follow him, and
declaring, that whosoever tarried behind, should be judged a
confederate of Caesar's, about the dusk of the evening he went
out and left the city.  The consuls also followed after in a
hurry, without offering the sacrifices to the gods, usual
before a war.  But in all this, Pompey himself had the glory,
that in the midst of such calamities, he had so much of men's
love and good-will.  For though many found fault with the
conduct of the war, yet no man hated the general; and there
were more to be found of those that went out of Rome, because
that they could not forsake Pompey, than of those that fled for
love of liberty.

Some few days after Pompey was gone out, Caesar came into the
city, and made himself master of it, treating everyone with a
great deal of courtesy, and appeasing their fears, except only
Metellus, one of the tribunes; on whose refusing to let him
take any money out of the treasury, Caesar threatened him with
death, adding words yet harsher than the threat, that it was
far easier for him to do it than say it.  By this means
removing Metellus, and taking what moneys were of use for his
occasions, he set forwards in pursuit of Pompey, endeavoring
with all speed to drive him out of Italy before his army, that
was in Spain, could join him.

But Pompey arriving at Brundusium, and having plenty of ships
there, bade the two consuls embark immediately, and with them
shipped thirty cohorts of foot, bound before him for
Dyrrhachium.  He sent likewise his father-in-law Scipio, and
Cnaeus his son, into Syria, to provide and fit out a fleet
there; himself in the meantime having blocked up the gates,
placed his lightest soldiers as guards upon the walls; and
giving express orders that the citizens should keep within
doors, he dug up all the ground inside the city, cutting
trenches, and fixing stakes and palisades throughout all the
streets of the city, except only two that led down to the
sea-side.  Thus in three days space having with ease put all
the rest of his army on shipboard, he suddenly gave the signal
to those that guarded the walls, who nimbly repairing to the
ships, were received on board and carried off.  Caesar meantime
perceiving their departure by seeing the walls unguarded,
hastened after, and in the heat of pursuit was all but
entangled himself among the stakes and trenches.  But the
Brundusians discovering the danger to him, and showing him the
way, he wheeled about, and taking a circuit round the city,
made towards the haven, where he found all the ships on their
way, excepting only two vessels that had but a few soldiers
aboard.

Most are of opinion, that this departure of Pompey's is to be
counted among the best of his military performances, but Caesar
himself could not but wonder that he, who was thus ingarrisoned
in a city well fortified, who was in expectation of his forces
from Spain, and was master of the sea besides, should leave and
abandon Italy.  Cicero accuses him of imitating the conduct of
Themistocles, rather than of Pericles, when the circumstances
were more like those of Pericles than they were like those of
Themistocles.  However, it appeared plainly, and Caesar showed
it by his actions, that he was in great fear of delay, for when
he had taken Numerius, a friend of Pompey's, prisoner, he sent
him as an ambassador to Brundusium, with offers of peace and
reconciliation upon equal terms; but Numerius sailed away with
Pompey.  And now Caesar having become master of all Italy in
sixty days, without a drop of blood shed, had a great desire
forthwith to follow Pompey; but being destitute of shipping, he
was forced to divert his course, and march into Spain,
designing to bring over Pompey's forces there to his own.

In the meantime Pompey raised a mighty army both by sea and
land.  As for his navy, it was irresistible.  For there were
five hundred men of war, besides an infinite company of light
vessels, Liburnians, and others; and for his land forces, the
cavalry made up a body of seven thousand horse, the very flower
of Rome and Italy, men of family, wealth, and high spirit; but
the infantry was a mixture of unexperienced soldiers drawn from
different quarters, and these he exercised and trained near
Beroea, where he quartered his army; himself noways slothful,
but performing all his exercises as if he had been in the flower
of his youth, conduct which raised the spirits of his soldiers
extremely.  For it was no small encouragement for them to see
Pompey the Great, sixty years of age wanting two, at one time
handling his arms among the foot, then again mounted among the
horse, drawing out his sword with ease in full career, and
sheathing it up as easily; and in darting the javelin, showing
not only skill and dexterity in hitting the mark, but also
strength and activity in throwing it so far that few of the
young men went beyond him.

Several kings and princes of nations came thither to him, and
there was a concourse of Roman citizens who had held the
magistracies, so numerous that they made up a complete senate.
Labienus forsook his old friend Caesar, whom he had served
throughout all his wars in Gaul, and came over to Pompey; and
Brutus, son to that Brutus that was put to death in Gaul, a man
of a high spirit, and one that to that day had never so much as
saluted or spoke to Pompey, looking upon him as the murderer of
his father, came then and submitted himself to him as the
defender of their liberty.  Cicero likewise, though he had
written and advised otherwise, yet was ashamed not to be
accounted in the number of those that would hazard their lives
and fortunes for the safeguard of their country.  There came to
him also into Macedonia, Tidius Sextius, a man extremely old,
and lame of one leg; so that others indeed mocked and laughed
at the spectacle, but Pompey, as soon as he saw him, rose and
ran to meet him, esteeming it no small testimony in his favor,
when men of such age and infirmities should rather choose to be
with him in danger, than in safety at home.  Afterwards in a
meeting of their senate they passed a decree, on the motion of
Cato, that no Roman citizen should be put to death but in
battle, and that they should not sack or plunder any city that
was subject to the Roman empire, a resolution which gained
Pompey's party still greater reputation, insomuch that those
who were noways at all concerned in the war, either because
they dwelt afar off, or were thought incapable of giving help,
were yet, in their good wishes, upon his side, and in all their
words, so far as that went, supported the good or just cause,
as they called it; esteeming those as enemies to the gods and
men, that wished not victory to Pompey.

Neither was Pompey's clemency such, but that Caesar likewise
showed himself as merciful a conqueror; for when he had taken
and overthrown all Pompey's forces in Spain, he gave them easy
terms, leaving the commanders at their liberty, and taking the
common soldiers into his own pay.  Then repassing the Alps, and
making a running march through Italy, he came to Brundusium
about the winter solstice, and crossing the sea there, landed
at the port of Oricum.  And having Jubius, an intimate friend
of Pompey's, with him as his prisoner, he dispatched him to
Pompey with an invitation, that they, meeting together in a
conference, should disband both their armies within three days,
and renewing their former friendship with solemn oaths, should
return together into Italy.  Pompey looked upon this again as
some new stratagem, and therefore marching down in all haste to
the sea-coast, possessed himself of all forts and places of
strength suitable to encamp in, and to secure his laud forces,
as likewise of all ports and harbors commodious to receive any
that came by sea, so that what wind soever blew, it must needs
in some way or other be favorable to him, bringing in either
provision, men, or money; while Caesar, on the contrary, was so
hemmed in both by sea and land, that he was forced to desire
battle, daily provoking the enemy, and assailing them in their
very forts; and in these light skirmishes for the most part had
the better.  Once only he was dangerously overthrown, and was
within a little of losing his whole army, Pompey having fought
nobly, routing the whole force, and killing two thousand on the
spot.  But either he was not able, or was afraid, to go on and
force his way into their camp with them, so that Caesar made
the remark, that "Today the victory had been the enemy's, had
there been anyone among them to gain it."  Pompey's soldiers
were so encouraged by this victory that they were eager now to
have all put to the decision of a battle; but Pompey himself,
though he wrote to distant kings, generals, and states in
confederacy with him, as a conqueror, yet was afraid to hazard
the success of a battle, choosing rather by delays, and
distress of provisions, to tire out a body of men, who had
never yet been conquered by force of arms, and had long been
used to fight and conquer together; while their time of life,
now an advanced one, which made them quickly weary of those
other hardships of war, such as were long marches, and frequent
decampings, making trenches, and building fortifications, made
them eager to come to close combat and venture a battle with
all speed.

Pompey had all along hitherto by his persuasions pretty well
quieted his soldiers; but after this last engagement, when
Caesar for want of provisions was forced to raise his camp, and
passed through Athamania into Thessaly, it was impossible to
curb or allay the heat of their spirits any longer.  For all
crying out with a general voice, that Caesar was fled, some
were for pursuing and pressing upon him, others for returning
into Italy; some there were that sent their friends and
servants beforehand to Rome, to hire houses near the forum,
that they might be in readiness to sue for offices; several of
their own motion sailed off at once to Lesbos to carry to
Cornelia, (whom Pompey had conveyed thither to be in safety,)
the joyful news, that the war was ended.  And a senate being
called, and the matter being under debate, Afranius was of
opinion, that Italy should first be regained, for that it was
the grand prize and crown of all the war; and they who were
masters of that, would quickly have at their devotion all the
provinces of Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Spain, and Gaul; but
what was of greatest weight and moment to Pompey, it was his
own native country that lay near, reaching out her hand for his
help; and certainly it could not be consistent with his honor
to leave her thus exposed to all indignities, and in bondage
under slaves and the flatterers of a tyrant.  But Pompey
himself, on the contrary, thought it neither honorable to fly a
second time before Caesar, and be pursued, when fortune had
given him the advantage of a pursuit; nor indeed lawful before
the gods to forsake Scipio and divers other men of consular
dignity dispersed throughout Greece and Thessaly, who must
necessarily fall into Caesar's hands, together with large sums
of money and numerous forces; and as to his care for the city
of Rome, that would most eminently appear, by removing the
scene of war to a greater distance, and leaving her, without
feeling the distress or even hearing the sound of these evils,
to await in peace the return of whichever should be the victor.

With this determination, Pompey marched forwards in pursuit of
Caesar, firmly resolved with himself not to give him battle,
but rather to besiege and distress him, by keeping close at his
heels, and cutting him short.  There were other reasons that
made him continue this resolution, but especially because a
saying that was current among the Romans serving in the cavalry
came to his ear, to the effect, that they ought to beat Caesar
as soon as possible, and then humble Pompey too.  And some
report, it was for this reason that Pompey never employed Cato
in any matter of consequence during the whole war, but now when
he pursued Caesar, left him to guard his baggage by sea,
fearing lest, if Caesar should be taken off, he himself also by
Cato's means not long after should be forced to give up his
power.

Whilst he was thus slowly attending the motions of the enemy,
he was exposed on all sides to outcries, and imputations of
using his generalship to defeat, not Caesar, but his country
and the senate, that he might always continue in authority, and
never cease to keep those for his guards and servants, who
themselves claimed to govern the world.  Domitius Aenobarbus,
continually calling him Agamemnon, and king of kings, excited
jealousy against him; and Favonius, by his unseasonable
raillery, did him no less injury than those who openly attacked
him, as when he cried out, "Good friends, you must not expect
to gather any figs in Tusculum this year."  But Lucius
Afranius, who had lain under an imputation of treachery for the
loss of the army in Spain, when he saw Pompey purposely
declining an engagement, declared openly, that he could not but
admire, why those who were so ready to accuse him, did not go
themselves and fight this buyer and seller of their provinces.

With these and many such speeches they wrought upon Pompey, who
never could bear reproach, or resist the expectations of his
friends; and thus they forced him to break his measures, so
that he forsook his own prudent resolution to follow their vain
hopes and desires:  weakness that would have been blamable ill
the pilot of a ship, how much more in the sovereign commander
of such an army, and so many nations.  But he, though he had
often commended those physicians who did not comply with the
capricious appetites of their patients, yet himself could not
but yield to the malady and disease of his companions and
advisers in the war, rather than use some severity in their
cure.  Truly who could have said that health was not disordered
and a cure not required in the case of men who went up and down
the camp, suing already for the consulship and office of
praetor, while Spinther, Domitius, and Scipio made friends,
raised factions, and quarrelled among themselves, who should
succeed Caesar in the dignity of his high-priesthood, esteeming
all as lightly, as if they were to engage only with Tigranes,
king of Armenia, or some petty Nabathaean king, not with that
Caesar and his army that had stormed a thousand towns, and
subdued more than three hundred several nations; that had
fought innumerable battles with the Germans and Gauls, and
always carried the victory; that had taken a million of men
prisoners, and slain as many upon the spot in pitched battles?

But they went on soliciting and clamoring, and on reaching the
plain of Pharsalia, they forced Pompey by their pressure and
importunities to call a council of war, where Labienus, general
of the horse, stood up first and swore that he would not return
out of the battle if he did not rout the enemies; and a]l the
rest took the same oath.  That night Pompey dreamed that as he
went into the theater, the people received him with great
applause, and that he himself adorned the temple of Venus the
Victorious, with many spoils.  This vision partly encouraged,
but partly also disheartened him, fearing lest that splendor
and ornament to Venus should be made with spoils furnished by
himself to Caesar, who derived his family from that goddess.
Besides there were some panic fears and alarms that ran through
the camp, with such a noise that it awaked him out of his
sleep.  And about the time of renewing the watch towards
morning, there appeared a great light over Caesar's camp,
whilst they were all at rest, and from thence a ball of flaming
fire was carried into Pompey's camp, which Caesar himself says
he saw, as he was walking his rounds.

Now Caesar having designed to raise his camp with the morning
and move to Scotussa, whilst the soldiers were busy in pulling
down their tents, and sending on their cattle and servants
before them with their baggage, there came in scouts who
brought word that they saw arms carried to and fro in the
enemy's camp, and heard a noise and running up and down, as of
men preparing for battle; not long after there came in other
scouts with further intelligence, that the first ranks were
already set in battle array.  Thereupon Caesar, when he had
told them that the wished for day was come at last, when they
should fight with men, not with hunger and famine, instantly
gave orders for the red colors to be set up before his tent,
that being the ordinary signal of battle among the Romans.  As
soon as the soldiers saw that, they left their tents, and with
great shouts of joy ran to their arms; the officers, likewise,
on their parts drawing up their companies in order of battle,
every man fell into his proper rank without any trouble or
noise, as quietly and orderly as if they had been in a dance.

Pompey himself led the right wing of his army against Antony,
and placed his father-in-law Scipio in the middle against
Lucius Calvinus.  The left wing was commanded by Lucius
Domitius; and supported by the great mass of the horse.  For
almost the whole cavalry was posted there, in the hope of
crushing Caesar, and cutting off the tenth legion, which was
spoken of as the stoutest in all the army, and in which Caesar
himself usually fought in person.  Caesar observing the left
wing of the enemy to be lined and fortified with such a mighty
guard of horse, and alarmed at the gallantry of their
appearance, sent for a detachment of six cohorts out of the
reserves, and placed them in the rear of the tenth legion,
commanding them not to stir, lest they should be discovered by
the enemy; but when the enemy's horse should begin to charge,
and press upon them, that they should make up with all speed to
the front through the foremost ranks, and not throw their
javelins at a distance, as is usual with brave soldiers, that
they may come to a close fight with their swords the sooner,
but that they should strike them upwards into the eyes and
faces of the enemy; telling them that those fine young dancers
would never endure the steel shining in their eyes, but would
fly to save their handsome faces.  This was Caesar's employment
at that time.  But while he was thus instructing his soldiers,
Pompey on horseback was viewing the order of both armies, and
when he saw how well the enemy kept their ranks, expecting
quietly the signal of battle; and, on the contrary, how
impatient and unsteady his own men were, waving up and down in
disorder for want of experience, he was very much afraid that
their ranks would be broken upon the first onset; and therefore
he gave out orders that the van should make a stand, and
keeping close in their ranks, should receive the enemy's
charge.  Caesar much condemns this command; which he says not
only took off from the strength of the blows, which would
otherwise have been made with a spring; but also lost the men
the impetus, which, more than anything, in the moment of their
coming upon the enemy, fills soldiers with impulse and
inspiration, the very shouts and rapid pace adding to their
fury; of which Pompey deprived his men, arresting them in their
course and cooling down their heat.

Caesar's army consisted of twenty-two thousand, and Pompey's of
somewhat above twice as many.  When the signal of battle was
given on both sides, and the trumpets began to sound a charge,
most men of course were fully occupied with their own matters;
only some few of the noblest Romans, together with certain
Greeks there present, standing as spectators without the
battle, seeing the armies now ready to join, could not but
consider in themselves to what a pass private ambition and
emulation had brought the empire.  Common arms, and kindred
ranks drawn up under the self-same standards, the whole flower
and strength of the same single city here meeting in collision
with itself, offered plain proof how blind and how mad a thing
human nature is, when once possessed with any passion; for if
they had been desirous only to rule, and enjoy in peace what
they had conquered in war, the greatest and best part of the
world was subject to them both by sea and land.  But if there
was yet a thirst in their ambition, that must still be fed with
new trophies and triumphs, the Parthian and German wars would
yield matter enough to satisfy the most covetous of honor.
Scythia, moreover, was yet unconquered, and the Indians too,
where their ambition might be colored over with the specious
pretext of civilizing barbarous nations.  And what Scythian
horse, Parthian arrows, or Indian riches, could be able to
resist seventy thousand Roman soldiers, well appointed in arms,
under the command of two such generals as Pompey and Caesar,
whose names they had heard of before that of the Romans, and
whose prowess, by their conquests of such wild, remote, savage,
and brutish nations, was spread further than the fame of the
Romans themselves?  Today they met in conflict, and could no
longer be induced to spare their country, even out of regard
for their own glory or the fear of losing the name which till
this day both had held, of having never yet been defeated.  As
for their former private ties, and the charms of Julia, and the
marriage that had made them near connections, these could now
only be looked upon as tricks of state, the mere securities of
a treaty made to serve the needs of an occasion, not the
pledges of any real friendship.

Now, therefore, as soon as the plains of Pharsalia were covered
with men, horse, and armor, and that the signal of battle was
raised on either side, Caius Crassianus, a centurion, who
commanded a company of one hundred and twenty men, was the
first that advanced out of Caesar's army, to give the charge,
and acquit himself of a solemn engagement that he had made to
Caesar.  He had been the first man that Caesar had seen going
out of the camp in the morning, and Caesar, after saluting him,
had asked him what he thought of the coming battle.  To which
he, stretching out his right hand, replied aloud, "Thine is the
victory, O Caesar, thou shalt conquer gloriously, and I myself
this day will be the subject of thy praise either alive or
dead."  In pursuance of this promise he hastened forward, and
being followed by many more, charged into the midst of the
enemy.  There they came at once to a close fight with their
swords, and made a great slaughter; but as he was still
pressing forward, and breaking the ranks of the vanguard, one
of Pompey's soldiers ran him in at the mouth, so that the point
of the sword came out behind at his neck; and Crassianus being
thus slain, the fight became doubtful, and continued equal on
that part of the battle.

Pompey had not yet brought on the right wing, but stayed and
looked about, waiting to see what execution his cavalry would
do on the left.  They had already drawn out their squadrons in
form, designing to turn Caesar's flank, and force those few
horse, which he had placed in the front, to give back upon the
battalion of foot.  But Caesar, on the other side, having given
the signal, his horse retreated back a little, and gave way to
those six subsidiary cohorts, which had been posted in the
rear, as a reserve to cover the flank; and which now came out,
three thousand men in number, and met the enemy; and when they
came up, standing by the horses, struck their javelins upwards,
according to their instructions, and hit the horsemen full in
their faces.  They, unskillful in any manner of fight, and
least of all expecting or understanding such a kind as this,
had not courage enough to endure the blows upon their faces,
but turning their backs, and covering their eyes with their
hands, shamefully took to flight.  Caesar's men, however, did
not follow them, but marched upon the foot, and attacked the
wing, which the flight of the cavalry had left unprotected, and
liable to be turned and taken in the rear, so that this wing
now being attacked in the flank by these, and charged in the
front by the tenth legion, was not able to abide the charge, or
make any longer resistance, especially when they saw themselves
surrounded and circumvented in the very way in which they had
designed to invest the enemy.  Thus these being likewise routed
and put to flight, when Pompey, by the dust flying in the air,
conjectured the fate of his horse, it were very hard to say
what his thoughts or intentions were, but looking like one
distracted and beside himself, and without any recollection or
reflection that he was Pompey the Great, he retired slowly
towards his camp, without speaking a word to any man, exactly
according to the description in the verses,

But Jove from heaven struck Ajax with a fear;
Ajax the bold then stood astonished there,
Flung o'er his back the mighty sevenfold shield,
And trembling gazed and spied about the field.

In this state and condition he went into his own tent, and sat
down, speechless still, until some of the enemy fell in
together with his men that were flying into the camp, and then
he let fall only this one word, "What?  into the very camp?"
and said no more; but rose up, and putting on a dress suitable
to his present fortune, made his way secretly out.

By this time the rest of the army was put to flight, and there
was a great slaughter in the camp among the servants and those
that guarded the tents, but of the soldiers themselves there
were not above six thousand slain, as is stated by Asinius
Pollio, who himself fought in this battle on Caesar's side.
When Caesar's soldiers had taken the camp, they saw clearly the
folly and vanity of the enemy; for all their tents and
pavilions were richly set out with garlands of myrtle,
embroidered carpets and hangings, and tables laid and covered
with goblets.  There were large bowls of wine ready, and
everything prepared and put in array, in the manner rather of
people who had offered sacrifice and were going to celebrate a
holiday, than of soldiers who had armed themselves to go out to
battle, so possessed with the expectation of success and so
full of empty confidence had they gone out that morning.

When Pompey had got a little way from the camp, he dismounted
and forsook his horse, having but a small retinue with him; and
finding that no man pursued him, walked on softly afoot, taken
up altogether with thoughts, such as probably might possess a
man that for the space of thirty-four years together had been
accustomed to conquest and victory, and was then at last, in
his old age, learning for the first time what defeat and flight
were.  And it was no small affliction to consider, that he had
lost in one hour all that glory and power, which he had been
getting in so many wars, and bloody battles; and that he who
but a little before was guarded with such an army of foot, so
many squadrons of horse, and such a mighty fleet, was now
flying in so mean a condition, and with such a slender retinue,
that his very enemies who fought him could not know him.  Thus,
when he had passed by the city of Larissa, and came into the
pass of Tempe, being very thirsty, he kneeled down and drank
out of the river; then rising up again, he passed through
Tempe, until he came to the seaside, and there he betook
himself to a poor fisherman's cottage, where he rested the
remainder of the night.  The next morning about break of day he
went into one of the river boats, and taking none of those that
followed him except such as were free, dismissed his servants,
advising them to go boldly to Caesar, and not be afraid.  As he
was rowing up and down near the shore, he chanced to spy a
large merchant-ship, lying off, just ready to set sail; the
master of which was a Roman citizen, named Peticius, who,
though he was not familiarly acquainted with Pompey, yet knew
him well by sight.  Now it happened that this Peticius dreamed,
the night before, that he saw Pompey, not like the man he had
often seen him, but in a humble and dejected condition, and in
that posture discoursing with him.  He was then telling his
dream to the people on board, as men do when at leisure, and
especially dreams of that consequence, when of a sudden one of
the mariners told him, he saw a river boat with oars putting
off from shore, and that some of the men there shook their
garments, and held out their hands, with signs to take them in;
thereupon Peticius looking attentively, at once recognized
Pompey, just as he appeared in his dream, and smiting his hand
on his head, ordered the mariners to let down the ship's boat,
he himself waving his hand, and calling to him by his name,
already assured of his change and the change of his fortune by
that of his garb.  So that without waiting for any further
entreaty or discourse, he took him into his ship, together with
as many of his company as he thought fit, and hoisted sail.
There were with him the two Lentuli, and Favonius; and a little
after they spied king Deiotarus, making up towards them from
the shore; so they stayed and took him in along with them.  At
supper time, the master of the ship having made ready such
provisions as he had aboard, Pompey, for want of his servants,
began to undo his shoes himself; which Favonius noticing ran to
him and undid them, and helped him to anoint himself, and
always after continued to wait upon, and attend him in all
things, as servants do their masters, even to the washing of
his feet, and preparing his supper.  Insomuch that anyone
there present, observing the free and unaffected courtesy of
these services, might have well exclaimed,

O heavens, in those that noble are,
Whate'er they do is fit and fair.

Pompey, sailing by the city of Amphipolis, crossed over from
thence to Mitylene, with a design to take in Cornelia and his
son; and as soon as he arrived at the port in that island, he
dispatched a messenger into the city, with news very different
from Cornelia's expectation.  For she, by all the former
messages and letters sent to please her, had been put in hopes
that the war was ended at Dyrrhachium, and that there was
nothing more remaining for Pompey, but the pursuit of Caesar.
The messenger finding her in the same hopes still, was not able
to salute or speak to her, but declaring the greatness of her
misfortune by his tears rather than by his words, desired her
to make haste if she would see Pompey, with one ship only, and
that not of his own.  The young lady hearing this, fell down in
a swoon, and continued a long time senseless and speechless.
And when with some trouble she was brought to her senses again,
being conscious to herself that this was no time for
lamentation and tears, she started up and ran through the city
towards the seaside, where Pompey meeting and embracing her, as
she sank down, supported by his arms, "This, sir," she
exclaimed, "is the effect of my fortune, not of yours, that I
see you thus reduced to one poor vessel, who before your
marriage with Cornelia, were wont to sail in these seas with a
fleet of five hundred ships.  Why therefore should you come to
see me, or why not rather have left to her evil genius one who
has brought upon you her own ill-fortune?  How happy a woman
had I been, if I had breathed out my last, before the news came
from Parthia of the death of Publius, the husband of my youth,
and how prudent if I had followed his destiny, as I designed!
But I was reserved for a greater mischief, even the ruin of
Pompey the Great."

Thus, they say, Cornelia spoke to him, and this was Pompey's
reply:  "You have had, Cornelia, but one season of a better
fortune, which it may be, gave you unfounded hopes, by
attending me a longer time than is usual.  It behoves us, who
are mortals born, to endure these events, and to try fortune
yet again; neither is it any less possible to recover our
former state, than it was to fall from that into this."
Thereupon Cornelia sent for her servants and baggage out of the
city.  The citizens also of Mitylene came out to salute and
invite Pompey into the city, but he refused, advising them to
be obedient to the conqueror, and fear not, for that Caesar was
a man of great goodness and clemency.  Then turning to
Cratippus, the philosopher, who came among the rest out of the
city to visit him, he began to find some fault, and briefly
argued with him upon Providence, but Cratippus modestly
declined the dispute, putting him in better hopes only, lest by
opposing, he might seem too austere or unseasonable.  For he
might have put Pompey a question in his turn, in defense of
Providence; and might have demonstrated the necessity there was
that the commonwealth should be turned into a monarchy, because
of their ill government in the state; and could have asked,
"How, O Pompey, and by what token or assurance can we
ascertain, that if the victory had been yours, you would have
used your fortune better than Caesar?  We must leave the divine
power to act as we find it do."

Pompey having taken his wife and friends aboard, set sail,
making no port, nor touching anywhere, but when he was
necessitated to take in provisions, or fresh water.  The first
city he entered was Attalia, in Pamphylia, and whilst he was
there, there came some galleys thither to him out of Cilicia,
together with a small body of soldiers, and he had almost sixty
senators with him again; then hearing that his navy was safe
too, and that Cato had rallied a considerable body of soldiers
after their overthrow, and was crossing with them over into
Africa, he began to complain and blame himself to his friends
that he had allowed himself to be driven into engaging by land,
without making use of his other forces, in which he was
irresistibly the stronger, and had not kept near enough to his
fleet, that failing by land, he might have reinforced himself
from the sea, and would have been again at the head of a power
quite sufficient to encounter the enemy on equal terms.  And in
truth, neither did Pompey during all the war commit a greater
oversight, nor Caesar use a more subtle stratagem, than in
drawing the fight so far off from the naval forces.

As it now was, however, since he must come to some decision,
and try some plan within his present ability, he dispatched his
agents to the neighboring cities, and himself sailed about in
person to others, requiring their aid in money and men for his
ships.  But, fearing lest the rapid approach of the enemy might
cut off all his preparations, he began to consider what place
would yield him the safest refuge and retreat at present.  A
consultation was held, and it was generally agreed that no
province of the Romans was secure enough.  As for foreign
kingdoms, he himself was of opinion, that Parthia would be the
fittest to receive and defend them in their present weakness,
and best able to furnish them with new means and send them out
again with large forces.  Others of the council were for going
into Africa, and to king Juba.  But Theophanes the Lesbian,
thought it madness to leave Egypt, that was but at a distance
of three days' sailing, and make no use of Ptolemy, who was
still a boy, and was highly indebted to Pompey for the
friendship and favor he had shown to his father, only to put
himself under the Parthian, and trust the most treacherous
nation in the world; and rather than make any trial of the
clemency of a Roman, and his own near connection, to whom if he
would but yield to be second, he might be the first and chief
over all the rest, to go and place himself at the mercy of
Arsaces, which even Crassus had not submitted to, while alive;
and, moreover, to expose his young wife, of the family of the
Scipios, among a barbarous people, who govern by their lusts,
and measure their greatness by their power to commit affronts
and insolencies; from whom, though she suffered no dishonor,
yet it might be thought she did, being in the hands of those
who had the power to do it.  This argument alone, they say, was
persuasive enough to divert his course, that was designed
towards Euphrates, if it were so indeed that any counsel of
Pompey's, and not some superior power, made him take this other
way.

As soon, therefore, as it was resolved upon, that he should fly
into Egypt, setting sail from Cyprus in a galley of Seleucia,
together with Cornelia, while the rest of his company sailed
along near him, some in ships of war, and others in merchant
vessels, he passed over sea without danger.  But on hearing
that king Ptolemy was posted with his army at the city of
Pelusium, making war against his sister, he steered his course
that way, and sent a messenger before to acquaint the king with
his arrival, and to crave his protection.  Ptolemy himself was
quite young, and therefore Pothinus, who had the principal
administration of all affairs, called a council of the chief
men, those being the greatest whom he pleased to make so, and
commanded them every man to deliver his opinion touching the
reception of Pompey.  It was, indeed, a miserable thing, that
the fate of the great Pompey should be left to the
determinations of Pothinus the eunuch, Theodotus of Chios, the
paid rhetoric master, and Achillas the Egyptian.  For these,
among the chamberlains and menial domestics, that made up the
rest of the council, were the chief and leading men.  Pompey,
who thought it dishonorable for him to owe his safety to
Caesar, riding at anchor at a distance from shore, was forced
to wait the sentence of this tribunal.  It seems they were so
far different in their opinions that some were for sending the
man away, and others again for inviting and receiving him; but
Theodotus, to show his cleverness and the cogency of his
rhetoric, undertook to demonstrate, that neither the one nor
the other was safe in that juncture of affairs.  For if they
entertained him, they would be sure to make Caesar their enemy,
and Pompey their master; or if they dismissed him, they might
render themselves hereafter obnoxious to Pompey, for that
inhospitable expulsion, and to Caesar, for the escape; so that
the most expedient course would be to send for him and take
away his life, for by that means they would ingratiate
themselves with the one, and have no reason to fear the other;
adding, it is related, with a smile, that "a dead man cannot
bite."

This advice being approved of, they committed the execution of
it to Achillas.  He, therefore, taking with him as his
accomplices one Septimius, a man that had formerly held a
command under Pompey, and Salvius, another centurion, with
three or four attendants, made up towards Pompey's galley.  In
the meantime, all the chiefest of those who accompanied Pompey
in this voyage, were come into his ship to learn the event of
their embassy.  But when they saw the manner of their
reception, that in appearance it was neither princely nor
honorable, nor indeed in any way answerable to the hopes of
Theophanes, or their expectation, (for there came but a few men
in a fisherman's boat to meet them,) they began to suspect the
meanness of their entertainment, and gave warning to Pompey
that he should row back his galley, whilst he was out of their
reach, and make for the sea.  By this time, the Egyptian boat
drew near, and Septimius standing up first, saluted Pompey in
the Latin tongue, by the title of imperator.  Then Achillas,
saluting him in the Greek language, desired him to come aboard
his vessel, telling him, that the sea was very shallow towards
the shore, and that a galley of that burden could not avoid
striking upon the sands.  At the same time they saw several of
the king's galleys getting their men on board, and all the
shore covered with soldiers; so that even if they changed their
minds, it seemed impossible for them to escape, and besides,
their distrust would have given the assassins a pretence for
their cruelty.  Pompey, therefore, taking his leave of
Cornelia, who was already lamenting his death before it came,
bade two centurions, with Philip, one of his freedmen, and a
slave called Scythes, go on board the boat before him.  And as
some of the crew with Achillas were reaching out their hands to
help him, he turned about towards his wife and son, and
repeated those iambics of Sophocles,

He that once enters at a tyrant's door,
Becomes a slave, though he were free before.

These were the last words he spoke to his friends, and so he
went aboard.  Observing presently that notwithstanding there
was a considerable distance betwixt his galley and the shore,
yet none of the company addressed any words of friendliness or
welcome to him all the way, he looked earnestly upon Septimius,
and said, "I am not mistaken, surely, in believing you to have
been formerly my fellow-soldier."  But he only nodded with his
head, making no reply at all, nor showing any other courtesy.
Since, therefore, they continued silent, Pompey took a little
book in his hand, in which was written out an address in Greek,
which he intended to make to king Ptolemy, and began to read
it.  When they drew near to the shore, Cornelia, together with
the rest of his friends in the galley, was very impatient to
see the event, and began to take courage at last, when she saw
several of the royal escort coming to meet him, apparently to
give him a more honorable reception; but in the meantime, as
Pompey took Philip by the hand to rise up more easily,
Septimius first stabbed him from behind with his sword; and
after him likewise Salvius and Achillas drew out their swords.
He, therefore, taking up his gown with both hands, drew it over
his face, and neither saying nor doing anything unworthy of
himself, only groaning a little, endured the wounds they gave
him, and so ended his life, in the fifty-ninth year of his age,
the very next day after the day of his birth.

Cornelia, with her company from the galley, seeing him
murdered, gave such a cry that it was heard to the shore, and
weighing anchor with all speed, they hoisted sail, and fled.  A
strong breeze from the shore assisted their flight into the
open sea, so that the Egyptians, though desirous to overtake
them, desisted from the pursuit.  But they cut off Pompey's
head, and threw the rest of his body overboard, leaving it
naked upon the shore, to be viewed by any that had the
curiosity to see so sad a spectacle.  Philip stayed by and
watched till they had glutted their eyes in viewing it; and
then washing it with sea-water, having nothing else, he wrapped
it up in a shirt of his own for a winding-sheet.  Then seeking
up and down about the sands, at last he found some rotten
planks of a little fisher-boat, not much, but yet enough to
make up a funeral pile for a naked body, and that not quite
entire.  As Philip was busy in gathering and putting these old
planks together, an old Roman citizen, who in his youth had
served in the wars under Pompey, came up to him and demanded,
who he was that was preparing the funeral of Pompey the Great.
And Philip making answer, that he was his freedman, "Nay,
then," said he, "you shall not have this honor alone; let even
me, too, I pray you, have my share in such a pious office.
that I may not altogether repent me of this pilgrimage in a
strange land, but in compensation of many misfortunes, may
obtain this happiness at last, even with mine own hands to
touch the body of Pompey, and do the last duties to the
greatest general among the Romans."  And in this manner were
the obsequies of Pompey performed.  The next day Lucius
Lentulus, not knowing what had passed, came sailing from Cyprus
along the shore of that coast, and seeing a funeral pile, and
Philip standing by, exclaimed, before he was yet seen by any
one, "Who is this that has found his end here?"  adding, after
a short pause, with a sigh, "Possibly even thou, Pompeius
Magnus!"  and so going ashore, he was presently apprehended and
slain.  This was the end of Pompey.

Not long after, Caesar arrived in the country that was polluted
with this foul act, and when one of the Egyptians was sent to
present him with Pompey's head, he turned away from him with
abhorrence as from a murderer; and on receiving his seal, on
which was engraved a lion holding a sword in his paw, he burst
into tears.  Achillas and Pothinus he put to death; and king
Ptolemy himself, being overthrown in battle upon the banks of
the Nile, fled away and was never heard of afterwards.
Theodotus, the rhetorician, flying out of Egypt, escaped the
hands of Caesar's justice, but lived a vagabond in banishment;
wandering up and down, despised and hated of all men, till at
last Marcus Brutus, after he had killed Caesar, finding him in
his province of Asia, put him to death, with every kind of
ignominy.  The ashes of Pompey were carried to his wife
Cornelia, who deposited them at his country house near Alba.



