# Seth's Vision

After his pilgramage, Seth returned to his parents. When he returned, he almost
expected to see another baby in the arms of his father and mother, but Seth
would be lying if he said he didn't feel some relief when he saw that it was
just his mother and father waiting for him.

In those first seconds of return, Seth was simply excited to see his parents
again, and they were excited to see him. It seemed wrong to Seth to mention to
his parents that he encountered Cain on his journies, at least, it seemed wrong
to do so as the very first thing that he said to them, so he decided he would
wait until some minutes went by before he said anything.

When some minutes went by, and Seth was discussing all of the things he saw,
when he went to describe the swamp, he left out the part where there was a
cottage in the distance, and he left out the part where he met a stranger and
had a conversation with him. It seemed inappropiate to him to shift the
conversation so suddenly from the description of fantastical and wonderous
landscapes to a strange encounter that Seth still hadn't fully understood or
processed. So he decided he would wait until some hours before he bringing up
Cain.

After hours went by, Seth finished his recollection of his pilgramage to his
parents without mentioning Cain. It seemed wrong. Everything seemed so happy.
He was happy, his parents were happy. He didn't want to ruin that. He knew that
they would have a whole myriad of question for him, and Seth wasn't sure if he
was ready to answer them. So, Seth argued, the time was not tonight. Seth
decided to wait some days, so that he could resume regular life back on the
farms, before telling his parents about Cain.

Days went by. Seth returned to work on the farms. Seth involuntarily got in the
habit of stopping his work occasionally and gazing east towards the swamp while
he thought about the conversation that the two of them had. Eventually, though,
his mother asked Seth what he was looking at, and Seth shrugged his shoulders,
and just said, "I don't know." It still didn't seem like the time to tell them.

After weeks, and then months went by, Seth had resolved to himself that he was
probably never going to tell his parents about his encounter with Cain. During
that year, there was a particularly winter harsh evening, and the three of
the family were huddled around the fire. Seth felt that this might be a good
time to mention Cain to his parents, but his father made the comment "This is
such a gorgeous moment, I don't want anything to ruin it" which was enough for
Seth to repress the memory for a little while longer.

After years went by, Seth became less concerned with his encounter with Cain,
and more concerned with building a family, starting a life for himself, and
working to inherit the farms and the livestock from his parents. Throughout the
years, Seth went through many different journies to different lands. He went on
another pilgramage, this time towards the West, where he found the desert. When
he first found the desert, he thought that he had found the "end of the world"
because the only thing he could see for miles was endless sand expanding
towards the west without end. However, after some meditation, Seth decided that
he could see for himself what was on the other side of the desert, so he
decided he would follow the setting sun through the desert for as long as he
could bear. After he had walked for some time through the desert, and was
considering doubling back because he was running out of supplies, Seth found an
entire expanse of water which he decided to call the "Sea". Like the desert,
the Sea seemed to go on for miles, but in order to find the other side of the
sea, Seth would have to swim those miles, rather than walk them. Either way,
Seth was still excited that he had explored an entirely new area of the world,
and was buzzing with ideas about all the ways that the sea might prove useful
in the future. He was also excited that he had navigated the desert, when his
parents had told them that it was barren, and impossible navigate.

Seth couldn't help but think of Cain during his journey through the desert.
Seth had all but forgotten what happened to him during that time. Details of
their conversation were fuzzy. Even the vague outline of what it was that Cain
told him about was becoming less and less clear as Seth aged. He was young, and
he was never able to integrate the encounter with Cain into his life, so
everything that happened to him was only a memory, and nothing more. Still
though, for whatever reason, Seth's trek through the desert reminded him of
Cain. There was a comment that Seth remembered, something about the most
resourceful of creatures being able to survive in the desert. Well, Seth didn't
remember the exact words that his brother said, but resourcefulness was
certainly something Seth valued greatly during his time in the desert, and the
fact that resourcefulness was very loosly connected to Cain made Seth feel that
this was somehow appropiate.

After many havests of crops, as well as many cycles of the livestock (to
the point where the current generation of livestock was many generations
younger than the generation that Seth grew up with) life started to become
mundane for Seth. While there were still things that he could work to improve
in his crop rotation cycle, and there were still tricks to be discoverd about
herding and corralling animals, Seth felt that life had become stale.

However, Seth wasn't really in the mind to do anything about it. He was content
with his life, he loved his parents, and he loved his life. This seemed to be
the world, for Seth.

One day, Seth had a vision in his sleep. During his sleep, Seth was lying on
his stomach, face towards the earth. In his vision, Seth became something
like an infinite plane, extending in every direction. Above this infinite
plane was the sky, and below this infinite plane, there was the sea. However,
the sea was not like the sea that he saw on the other side of the desert;
instead, this was a sea of deep crimson blood. Because Seth was resting, he was
not alarmed by this vision, and started to become lucid to the fact that he was
dreaming, and become very perplexed.

Seth began to look around, and see the things that there were to see. Because
he was on his stomach, Seth had a good view of the surface of the blood. The
surface was perfectly still, and took the color a pearl would take if pearls
ever took a ruby color.

Seth realized that he was looking to his left while he was on his stomach, so
he changed his head to tilt to the right. When that happened, the whole sea of
blood shifted, and started made a large wave, which caused ripples in Seth's
pysche when he did. Still, this change didn't enlighten Seth in any way,
because still all he could see in any direction in the vision was a sea clean
blood.

Seth then decided that he would try and look in to the blood. In his sleep, he
started to bury his head into his pillow, and curl himself up into his blanket.
When he did this, he felt his body start to immerse itself in the blood, and
Seth discovered that the blood was actually quite warm, and comfortable to swim
in. Seth also noticed that he could still breath while under the surface of the
blood, and he could also even see. So clearly, the rules of this vision and of
what was happening to Seth were being discovered moment by moment.

As Seth found himself in the blood, curled up tightly in a ball, he saw
something in the distance. He wasn't sure what it was. He wanted to swim to it,
but he didn't know what the rules of swimming were in this vision. Should he
try and extend his limbs again, to disrupt the sea of blood so that he could
navigate the currents, or should he just wait here, and let himself drift
towards the object of his desire?

After some time, Seth started to feel comfortable just staying in the one place
without moving, so he came to the conclusion that he probably wasn't going to
get there by doing nothing and just drifting, he would have to do something to
get to the small object he saw in the distance.

Seth started to experiment with his sleeping position, all the while staying
mostly face down on his stomach, occasionally shifting to one side or the
other. He found that, as he was able to rock a bit, he was able to create
something like empty space in the volume of blood, and Seth could use this
empty space to 
