# Cain's Eden

"Listen to my story, Seth. Let yourself be taken away by it."

Cain began his words, and already Seth felt like the walls were closing in on
him.

"I need space, I need air. If nothing else, please allow me that." Seth said,
recognizing now the strange effects the plants his brother had given him were
having on him.

"In fact." Seth though for a moment. "As far as I'm aware, you just poisoned
me, and you are keeping me here until the poison takes effect..." Seth looked
over at his brother for a moment as he said these words, "... I don't believe
you have done that to me, but at least give us the curtosy of returning to your
cottage where it is more comfortable."

But as Seth was speaking, Cain replied, and said, "No, I insist. Your
discomfort is only your body resisting that which brings it to true trancendent
life. Let go of that discomfort, let yourself be free of those things which you
feel as though you need. Leave yourself, and your body, behind, as you let
yourself drift through the cosmos, guided only by the sound of my voice."

Before Seth realized it, he was following Cain's voice to it's conculsions, and
reaching those same conclusions with his own thoughts. It felt as though every
time a thought would emerge in Seth's mind, Cain would say it only moments
later.

"Listen to me, Seth. I took the same mushrooms that you did, and you can trust
me when I say that I have studied these fungus more than I have studied every
other plant in this greenery. If anything about what I have experincend with
these mushrooms is at all accurate, that means that our minds are going to
'sync up' in some sense, and everything that I say, you will be already
thinking before I say it. Is this happening to you right now?"

As Cain was saying the words, Seth was becoming more and more constantly amazed
at how well his thoughts were lining up with Cain's words. It was as if his
thoughts were being guided by a light, or a force, and that force was also
guiding the words of Cain just as well as it was guiding the thoughts of Seth.
It would take Seth many months to be able to articulate this idea, and for the
moment, he could only feel what it felt like to know what it was like.

When Cain finished his words, and posed his question, it took Seth a moment for
him to realize that the conversation, which they were having, had come to a
screeching halt, and that it was waiting on his reply. But he felt no
obligation to reply immediately, and decided he would reply in an off hand way.

"I feel as though I can't tell if what you are saying about the mushrooms is
true, or if you are simply very good at manipulating my psychology to get me to
think you are somehow ahead of me in speech. Either way, riddle me impressed,
but it still doesn't mean I'm just going to surrender my guard to you. How
about we get on with your story already."

With that, Cain grinned and replied, "Very well then, to my story it is."


