Prompt
================================================================================
The angelic war is raging on. Multiple factions of humans, all led by angels,
are warring with eachother with no conceivable end in sight. One of the humans
of a particularly persuasive angel named Lucifer has been given an assignment.
He is to assassinate the child of God. Tell about this man's experience as he
receives his order and then detail out the steps he takes to act them out. It
is up to you whether he suceeds or fails, and in what way he does so.

Pre-writing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So words cannot express right now how much I don't want to write about this
stupid fucking prompt and instead want to tell that man whomever it was that
wrote it to go blow himself. Knowing that man full well, he might very well
attempt it, in which case kudo's to him. But in any case, I will not be held
responsible for the ineptitudes of those that would sucumnb to the nonsense
that is this Lucifer drabble.

Okay, that being said, I believe I am being overly harsh. The man is clearly
taking influence from those who have achieved measured success in such circles
and as such wishes to achieve a level of the magnitude of skill and talent that
such men possess by imitating them on face value. This man is attempting to
spur that excitment in all of us that we feel when we connect with a new idea
or a new hobby or a new concept. The idea takes hold of us and we must follow
it through to it's conclusion, roadblocks be damned. So, roadblocks be damned,
let us begin by setting the scene a little bit.

(And yes, I know a lot of the techniques I use will be considered poor writing.
I will overexplain, undertalk, overshow and underevaluate. Some cadence will be
placed upon to little or too few of words that were said and editting
considerations will be neglected in favor of keeping the train of
thoughtrolling. So forgive me if upon reading this garbage back to yourself you
have the feeling like something should have been done differently there or some
such detail could have been better utilized in a seperate way. Or continue on
with whatever. The point is that this is not meant to be a completed work so
treat it as such.)

Begin
================================================================================
The angelic war was raging on. Caithness knew not how long he would continue to
be held in alert position like this. It was disconcerting to him that he had to
stand guarding the palace for hours on end even during times of peace when no
enemies had been declared either outgoing or incoming. Still he stood here,
resolute in the fact that he was serving his Lord and Country in the tumultuous
times of the Angelic War.

While it might be appropiate here to go on about the case and causes leading to
the tragedies that were later to be known as "the Great War of the Angels" it
is rather instead much more prudent to instead proceed with the indication that
this man, Caithness aforenamed, had what many would call in those circles that
would choose to label such things as such would say he was afflicted with a
typical case so-named "Interenal Conflict Disorder" which is a made up
condition whereby so called "experts" of the day would claim he was too caught
up in his own internal emotions that he couldn't accomplish a simple task such
as "stand in front of the palace and keep watch" without continually disracting
himself with non-causalities and trivialities of the day to day world which he
would justify by saying "There has to be something more to life than keeping
watch of a palace that will never be broached," nevermind the fact that the
reason the enemies stayed at bay were precisely that reason that his guards
were perpetually and ever-vigilantly on duty for all times of all seasons of
all the days of every year that the war raged on.

It was that vigilance, that fortitude, the ability to look out in to the world
and say, "Attack us if you must but we will stay ever vigilent for centuries if
need be so that we might have the most supreme of all defenders advantage, and
that is in you taking our lives we inevitably take yours." Such was the way of
Lucifer's Armies. Armies constructed not to march but instead to set foot
against any and every outcry that might come against them.

It was in this way that Lucifer negotiated with his enemies. Only, for Lucifer,
it was generally the case that the marching had to be done in order to find the
enemies he was so keen to fight. And the losers of his battles were most
certainly wont to lose their lives even when there was no threat to Lucifer's
Life or even his position in status among them.

No, Lucifer delighted in the overcoming of formidable enemies and betraying
them. For it was in that attitude that their kingdom was spawned.

And how could it not be? Lucifer argued that him and his kind were the highest
form of genetic offspring. Him and his peoples, when left to their own devices
and in times of peace, were the most prosperous and most giving of all nations.
They proviveded in times of peace food to those who needed it and gave freely
their excess to those around them so that they might enjoy the things that the
peoples of Lucifer also enjoyed. Such was the state of their nation in the
times of peace, even up until the beginning of the Angelic War.

It is known that war changes people. Sexy, know-it-all, handsome men with
slicked back haircuts and shotguns on their holster go in to a hardened warzone
to find that their idealized image of men shooting at eachother with the aim to
kill one another was an entirely different kind of game than anyone could
imagine playing. Yet it was something entirely known to this man even going in
to the time of war than anyone is caring to admin. For it is better to be a
Soldier in a time of peace than a Farmer in a time of War. In becoming Soldiers
we can become farmers but we must remember first the Soldiers motto. To do
everything with the understanding that life is suffering and that paying back
our suffering with our utmost and most complete work is the correct and most
complete path to redemption.

The problem becomes when someone like Lucifer takes charge of Soldiers and
creates an army. Such was the plight of Caithness.

Caithness tossed a coin in his hand as he contemplated his position. Yes, it
was illigal for Lucifer's guard to do anything but hold their riffles and stand
resolutely forward, but somehow this seems inadequeate for Caithness. Was it
not the rebellious spirit which came forth and became Lucifer's being? This was
the story, the propoganda, which Lucifer spread in to the hearts and the minds
of his peoples. So was also the upbringing Caithness came in to. It was only
just now, flipping his coin as a castle guard, that he possibly considered
Lucifer other than what he was, an Angel amongst men.

It was no secret. Men knew in these times that man was simply a genitic
offspring of primates, and that the variety of men around them were competition
to the food chain at large. Still, man also had the understanding that there
were others, whom man liked to call "Angels" but were really just another
off-shoot of the primate genetic chain, which were fewer and farer between but
still had that quality of an entire species.

In the interplay of these two species, it became clear that the Angel species
was quite more wise and intelligent than the Sapien species, yet the Sapiens
had been around the genetic food chain longer so they had strength in numbers.
And so the Angels genetics got subsumed in with the genetics of the humans and
such was the spirit of man born.

Caithness knew nothing of this however, and continued to toss his coin. All
Caithness knew was that Lucifer would not himself stand here and recieve orders
from some unknown "higher up" who can't even bother himself to introduce
himself to those he would call "his army".

"How can I be his if I haven't even met the Angel?"

Such were the thoughts that would pop in to Caithness's mind on the days when
he grew most weary of the long hours he would stand in service to his highness
and royalty Lucifer himself.

Caithness on this particular day decided that enough was enough. This was war,
and he must take a warriors stance if anything is ever meant to be done about
this situation. The war has been raging on for long enough, and it's time some
of us took charge and injected ourselves in the ways that we know we can
contribute so as to bring about a harmonious balance of power and display of
dominance that can not be argued with but instead represents a disciplined and
ordered way of life that should be sought after and admired as a reason to live
in and of itself.

Or perhaps Caithness was feeding himself pipe dreams, musings of a troubled
guard, to himself as he watched the sun rise and fall on the long hours of the
summer time day shift. Two breaks for food, and a night of sleep, all with
rotating shifts of similar men who did similar things in a similar way.

Whichever it was, Caithness knew that he was recieving weird thoughts and
dreams in to his head lately from he knew not where. 

Caithness pocketed his coin and stood back erect on his post. He just
remembered something about a dream he had last night, and he didn't want to
provoke attention as he tried to remember it.

Caithness suddenly became the embodiment of a day time guard. Quickly scanning
the surroundings for threats, evaluating two exact anomolies and subsequently
evalutaing the first as a mere triffle and motion of a bush in the wind and the
second as a point of glare as it reflected on the lake to the North East by the
sun as it rose in the East, and then proceeding back to a standared ready
position, he then allowed his gaze to stare at the horizon as he attempted to
recall the images and shapes of his previous nights rest.

As he struggled to rememeber just what exactly it was that he dreamed last
night nor was he able to remember why it was so important for him to recall it
right now, Caithness once again scanned the horizons. This time he spotted no
anomolies and return to staring out at the horizen idly.

"Perhaps it is because I want to go out. I want to see the world, I want to
take part in it's adventures. I don't want to stare at this empty space of sand
with forests and lakes in the distance and pretend like a truly care whether or
not some ruffling in the breeze means anything or not. The part of me loyal to
my superiors is strong but growing ever stronger by the day is the part of me
that wants to take charge of my own life and grab a handle of the situation as
a soldier and not as a guard."

So was the manner in which Caithness continued to amuse himself as he stood
feet planted on the marble steps of the palace which he guarded.

Of course his job was important. Lucifer himself resided in that palace. It was
there that all the good things of his ever giving nature flowed. It only seemed
right to obey his words blindly, because in times of peace they would provide
in abundance even in the most obscure of ways, so it only made sense to display
that same level of trust in time of war as well.

"Stay resolute in your path, that my assignment to you is most pure, even
beyond your own wife or husband, because I have brought you great prosperity to
your farms with my advice so trust me now. You are to be a guard, and you are
to set forth a new security for not only yourself but for all peoples who would
seek to exist in our time. I annoint thee, Caithness."

Caithness remeniced fondly of the commencemnt ceremony. It seemed like many
lifetimes had gone by since then. So many times that Caithness thought surely
this time, this confrontation, would be the one to end it all for him. But
against the odds Caithness fought against the face of death itself and came out
the other end a stronger and more resolute man because of it.

"How many lifetimes ago was I that innocent boy, swearing allegiance to Lucifer
as one of the most elite's guards not only of the Angel's but of All Known
Living Things?" This of many questions was what plagued Caithness' thoughts as
he continued to keep watch of the desert before him.

Caithness reminded himself of his pledge. So much for fantasys. No need to
remember dreams. I must be a guard. Because I am a guard. Most elite of elite.
Most ready of ready. Never to go out and become that bully which picks the
fight, but instead taking arms against those who would oppose anyone who takes
arms simply for the reason of taking arms.

The sun finished it's route over the day time sky as Caithness completed his
shift for the day. At the appointed time his replacement arrived to relieve
Caithness of his duty so that Caithness may retire to the quarters and recieve
the appointed level of food and sleep.

But even in retirement Caithness still felt the spirit of the Guard keep itself
ever-present and vigilent as the very spirit that his soul had become.

"Even in his sleep the Army of Lucifer is ready to respond at even the
slightest inkling of a call-to-arms. The Army is so in-tuned with the pulse of
the ways of things to know when to be ready."

"Yes." Caithness thought as he lye down in his bed to attempt to sleep for the
night. "The guard is ever vigilent and ever aware. Ever aware of the fact that
there are no enemies in the distance and that sometimes there might be better
things to do with life than hold a rifle and stare out into the distance."

Bitterness does not become a guard. If that were so, then why was Caithness
feeling it now. Bitterness at the world for causing him to be born as a Guard.
There could have been worse things, no doubt. In fact, almost every alternative
Caithness could think of was a notable downgrade from Lucifer's Guard when it
came to standard's and quality of life. Caithness certainly would not have
enjoyed being the "Army of the Chosen One" whose members all were betrayed at
the hands of a blaspheming and scheming angel whose sole purpose in life was to
bring up a false following only to destroy them all in spectacular manner at
the hands of their own master. Caithness could not even fathon such a man who
would come to be led by such an obvious lier and adulterer of words, yet they
existed in the world for Caithness to compare himself to. "Compared to that
man," Caithness argued, "This existance is sublime."

But was it the best? Caithness admired Lucifer. He admired him for his
rebellious spirit. It was well known that Lucifer was a soldier of the army of
God, one of the most well-renowned and well-statused, and opennly opposed the
verdicts of God himself. In so doing he created a following of those so bent to
the same will as himself and created the Army's of Lucifer, breaking
spectacularly and decisively from the Army's of God so that they might earn if
not their fear at least their respect as they formed their own nation.

It was in that attitude that he felt he must betray himself as a guard and
instead become something new, something more.

A guard was the only thing he knew, though. Nothing else did Caithness know how
to accomplish in his life. He watched at times the lives of the farmers as they
tilled over the soil and harvested the plants every season with utmost
regularity. "Their life is more mundane then mine. I do not envy the man that
must provide food for all but recieve little. Better be the man that provides
protection for all and recieves much food."

But was that the case? Man lived not for food alone.

Such were the wonderings of Caithness as he drifted to sleep.

When Caithness woke it was not because he wanted to, but because he was
startled.

"There is an assignment. You must come right away."

This was the moment Caithness was anticipating as he fell asleep, but now that
it was happening he wanted nothing more but to go back to sleep and return to
his dreams. He was having such a pleasent dream but now in the time being
startled awake he couldn't remember a thing about it except that he wanted to
return to it.

This only lasted a moment though as Caithness recieved himself out of his bed
and stood up. With pride he dressed himself in Lucifer's garb as he followed
the man who alerted him through the barracks.

Taking long strides to match pace with eachother, Caithness let himself have
fanciful dreams about where this might lead. He was growing weary of the
Guard's life. Perhaps this was the spirit of Lucifer the Angel at work in him.
Perhaps he was in some way more significant than even the highest significance
a man can know, being one of the elite guard.

Such were the things that a man as Caithness lived for. These are the moments
that define a man. Rise up to these moments. Overcome your urge to sleep in
wont of better dreams than those of idle whimsical fantasys. Let the fantasy of
your mind play out in the world of the living. The world will giveth but the
world may taketh away. Only you may giveth back unto the world and in so doing
may you recieve unto it.

Caithness reminded himself of the Prayer Indictus Fornicutus to be recited in
times of hardship.

This was the thrill he remembered. The days of glory at the night watch which
have become distant memories were suddenly raging with all of their glory again
inside of Caithness. Something felt grand about this assignment. It felt like
what he was meant to do. It was something that had come in to himself and that
now was being fullfilled.

We must keep pace. Caithness matched the pace of his summoner, sure to maintain
the level of discipline so known by those of Lucifer's elite.

After coming outside in to the night sky from the barracks was Caithness then
guided to a boat which gently guided Caithness to Lucifer's true residence,
being a shanty on an island.

Only certain few were made to know that this secluded area deep in the forest
even existed. Caithness knew to remain silent and not ask questions of his
summoner. He also knew that it would not become a member of the Guard to gawk
in amazement at the sheer brilliance through which this area was hidden.

Caithness was then led to a chamber, and in the chamber there was a bookcase.
The summoner pressed on the right edge of the bookcase which caused it to spin
on a center axis revealing a room on the other end with a fire. Upon entering
this room with no windows entirely dark save the aforementioned fire, Caithness
knew to turn towards the Angel who he felt must be Lucifer (for Caithness felt
something of a divine aura just by being in his presence so it must be him)
bowed his head and said, "Oh lord, I am not worthy. Tell me of the task with
which you might pleasure me to undertake."

"Rise servent. You are indeed as great as I have observed. Resolute and sure of
yourself you are in your path. I have a divine task to be assigned to only my
most capable of man. You are to take this burden freely, and are of no
obligation to accept. I can see that you are a trustworthy man and I will
respect you as such. Would you like to hear such a task as I might assign such
a man?"

"Yes, Master" Caithness replied. That and that alone was all he needed to say,
so he spoke no more.

"Good. I will not mince my words. You are to slay the Son of God. You will work
directly with my Son also named Lucifer and you and he are to do this together.
Now, Rise, Gabriel, and come forth to your new assignment. How plea you?"

"I accept, Master."

"Good! Go forth."
