# 002
Seth approached his parents house with a hastened sense of urgency. He had
reasoned to himself that Satan wasn't in their midst (or at least, Seth
thought his argument was sound enough) but he still wasn't sure why his Father
had placed all of the sacrificial goods on the west side of the cottage instead
of the east.

Seth felt a bead of sweat drop into his left eye as he picked up his pace. He
wasn't quite running, but he was definitely moving at a pace which would be
considered substantially faster than leisurely.

Seth burst in to the house panting, not even slowing down his jog as he
approached the door.

"Someone has moved the sacrificial goods! They are on the West instead of the
East."

Adam was preparing the table for their meal. He looked up at Seth, and calmly
replied "Indeed. Someone did move the goods. That someone was me."

Seth looked back at his father dumbfounded. Adam simply continued to arrange
the plates and silverware on the table.

"I received a vision from Yahweh, and he told me that it is imperative that all
of the goods be moved to the opposite side of the cottage. So when I woke up, I
moved them all. I must have forgotten to tell you."

Adam nonchelantly continued to arrange the dinner table.

Seth looked at his Father with bewilderment. "Must... Have... Forgotten?" Seth
couldn't believe his ears, and voiced the words over in his mind to make sure
he heard himself correctly.

Who was this man? Was this his Father? The father he had known for years would
never have so casually moved the sacrifcial goods without informing the other
members of the family. Could he possibly be possessed?

That might be it. Seth had to be sure that Satan hadn't possessed his father.
But what could he use as a sanity check?

Seth looked at the table, and saw that the knife and fork at his mothers place
were reversed. His father must have put them in the wrong place (or were they
in the right place now that everything was backwards?) Seth left his fathers
mistake there, and then addressed his mother.

"Did you hear the voice of Yahweh too, Mother?" Seth asked.

"No, she hasn't heard the voice of Yahweh in many seasons now. I'm the only one
that hears Him now. You know that Seth." Adam replied for Eve.

"I wasn't asking you," Seth mumbled inaudibly before he said out loud, "And
what was your vision? How did Yahweh address you."

Adam grabbed the pot of stew from Eve and placed it in the center of the table
as he answered. "Oh, this was a simple dream." Adam placed the pot down and
arranged himself to gesture out his words. "In the dream, it was the day of
the sacrifice. As we were preparing the ceremony the voice of Yahweh spoke to
me. He said, 'Adam, move your goods to the opposite of the cottage.'

"At first, I didn't think this was the true voice of Yahweh. As you know, the
voices of many demons take the form of Yahweh. I continued on with the
sacrifice as usual. When the fire was ignited, and the first of the barley was
burned, I heard the voice again. Again it said, 'Adam, move your goods to the
opposite of the cottage.'

"Having heard the voice a second time, I was more keen on believing that it was
the voice of Yahweh. But I needed to be sure. So this time I replied, 'But
Yahweh, the sacrifice has already begun. It cannot be stopped now. Do you
really wish for this sacrifice to go to waste just so that we can move the
alter to the other side of the room?'

"And Yahweh said to me, 'But Adam, your sacrifice is not begun. I have told you
two times, and I will tell you one more. But once I have told you thrice, no
more will I say these words. Move your goods to the opposite of the cottage.
Now. Go Forth!'

"And at that point I woke up. It was deep in the night, but I took it upon
myself to heed the words of Yahweh and immediately move the goods. I made my
way to the cottage by moonlight, and transfered the goods to the other side. I
suppose that's how I forgot to mention it to you, because I told your Mother
when I returned to bed. I told her and I forgot to tell you. Sorry Seth."

Adam paused for a moment. Eve had finished preparing the food, and the table
was set.

"Let us pray." Adam gestured towards Seth to take his seat.

Seth had many more questions about this dream. For instance, Seth still wasn't
convinced that it was the voice of Yahweh. Sure, it spoke to Father three
times, and Seth knew that the number "three" was holy for some reason, but
why wouldn't a demon be clever enough to figure that out, and inject that in to
his Father's vision? It still seemed suspect to Seth.

However, Seth knew not to inturrupt prayer, so he kept his questions to
himself.

In his right hand, Seth grabbed his Father's hand, and in his left he grabbed
his Mother's. Forming a circle around the food, Adam began his prayer.

"Father, in Heaven, bless this food that you have provided for us through the
Earth. We thank You for Your continued involvment in our lives, and we are ever
grateful for the visions that You provide. Though we might not always
understand Your ways, Oh Lord, we humble ourselves before Your glory and submit
ourselves to Your will. We are but vessels for Your everlasting Light. Fill us
with your Light so that we may shine bright with radiance. Amen."

"Amen" Eve and Seth replied in unison.

The trio took their seats, and everyone began serving the food.

Seth thought about all of the questions he had before the prayer, but now
somehow it seemed as though he didn't want to ask them anymore.  Both of his
parents seemed content, as if the conversation was over, and the food looked
very good. Seth looked in to the pot of stew, and saw some of the basil leaves
that he helped his mother grow. He had worked hard on them, and was curious if
he would notice anything in the taste. Seth also examined the cut of lamb that
his mother used for this pot, and saw that it was very tender. Seth was excited
to begin his meal.

What sorts of questions did Seth have about the dream anyway? This wasn't the
first time that his Father had mentioned the voice of Yahweh. It didn't happen
often, but when it did, it usually represented some change in the rituals they
performed. For example, the last time that Adam had heard the voice of Yahweh,
He told Adam to restructure the farms so that they would be parallel to the
rivers, rather than across from them. Seth resisted such a drastic shift in
their living space at first, but in time Seth was able to see the wisdom in
Yahweh's words. There was practical benefit to the change that Seth was only
able to see after many years.

However, this change seemed different somehow. What could Yahweh be trying to
tell us? Did it really matter which side of the cottage the sacrifice took
place on? The chimney was along the North Wall, equidistant between the two
sides of the cottage, so it didn't seem to be a matter of airflow. Perhaps the
wind will blow through a different way? But the wind always seems to go one way
or the other depending on the day, and even on the time of day, Seth had not
been able to find any sort of pattern to it.

"Do not question the word of the Lord."

Seth reminded himself of his mantra, and then chastised himself for questioning
the words of Yahweh.

Still, Seth couldn't shake this feeling. Seth felt that somehow, this time, the
voice of Yahweh was speaking to him, personally, rather than his Father. But
that made no sense. Father was the only one that Yahweh ever spoke to, and it
wasn't as if Seth had any dreams or visions recently. It was just a lingering
feeling, but it was a feeling that Seth couldn't shake.

"What could Yahweh be trying to tell me?" Seth pondered as he was in the middle
of his meal.

"Do not question the word of the lord." Seth repeated the mantra in his head.

Seth realized that he wasn't sure why he was repeating that mantra to himself.
Was he questioning the Lord? What sorts of questions did he have that he
shouldn't ask? Why shouldn't he question God? Is God not righteous enough
to answer questions?

"Do not question the word of the Lord."

The mantra repeated itself in Seth's head. It was as if the mantra were saying
itself, and Seth had no control over it.

Seth didn't think too deeply about it. After all, that was the point of a
mantra. At least, that's what his Father had told him. "When the mantra speaks
itself, you know it has set."

Perhaps that was faith. Seth still wasn't sure what faith meant, but mantras
that speak themselves seemed like a close enough approximation to what he
thought faith might mean. Or perhaps faith was something else. Seth wasn't
sure. When he asked his father, he always got the same reply."In time, you will
come to accept the words of the Lord."

Seth still wasn't sure what that meant. All Seth could do was accept that faith
was important, that he didn't have enough, and that when he was older he would
have more.

"Do not question the word of the Lord."

Seth felt a bit more content, now that he was focusing on the mantra, rather
than the distractions. Seth felt like his mind was in the middle of a
whirlwind, and that the mantra was an anchor for him to hold on to. But was the
anchor strong? Would it hold if the storm became too turbulent?

"Do not question the word of the Lord."

Seth refocused back on his stew. It was still hot, but cooling to the perfect
eating temperature.

For a moment, Seth forgot about both his parents, and simply became lost in the
sensations of eating. The meat was more tender than he thought it would be, and
the broth felt soothing and calming as it went down his throat. Seth took a
large spoonful of broth. He was paying close attention to the taste to see if
he could taste anything special about the basil. He wanted to see if he could
notice the different soil he used to grow these particular leaves.

Suddenly, Seth was ripped out of his trance.

"Seth." His mother addressed him. Seth looked up towards her. Eve was silent
and motionless. Seth had a mouth full of food. After some moments, Seth asked,
"Yes Mother?"

Eve's gaze turned to a glare as she pointed to her lips. Seth knew what that
gesture meant. It's what his mom would do when he was chewing with his mouth
open.

Seth wanted to object. He wanted tell her all about how excited he was about
the basil, and he wanted to say that in order to get the full aroma in his
mouth to really taste a difference, he had to open his mouth to let the air
circulate. But he knew there was no point. Both of his parents were very firm
about the things that mattered to them. They were also very clear that they
did not like when Seth talked back. Seth didn't always understand his parents
requests, but he felt that their demands were reasonable enough. After all, the
tasks around the farm needed to get done, and many of the habits that his
parents enforced were benefical towards that end. Still, Seth felt like there
should be at least _some_ exceptions to the rules his parents put in place. It
seemed unreasonable to obey all of the rules at all times. But Seth knew that
as long as he was living at his parents house, he had to follow his parents
rules, and that meant paying the consequences for his misteps. His parents were
very steadfast about their rules, and Seth admired that about them, but at the
same time he felt that it might be healthy to ease up on it all sometimes. But
now wasn't the time or place to push back.

Seth nodded to his mother, and began chewing silently with his mouth closed.
Seth forgot what he was thinking about before his mother inturrupted him. "I
probably should be more diligent about table manners" Seth thought as he
returned to his food.

All three of them were silent as they finished their food, with the only sounds
being silverware clanging on plates. Seth had a very idle thought that he could
turn a plate on it's side and hit it with his fork to create a lasting "clang"
type noise, but he pushed away the thought as absurd. Plates are supposed to go
flat, not vertical. Who would ever hang a plate vertically and strike it? How
absurd.

Seth finished his stew. When he got all he could with his spoon, he reached
with his left hand to grab a fork. He wanted to gather the dribble that had
accumulated in the bottom of his bowl. When Seth examined the utinsel that he
ended up with in his hand, however, he found that it was a knife rather than a
fork. For whatever reason, holding the knife in his left hand like this
triggered a thought that Seth had been meaning to bring up to his parents for
some time now. Why the knife triggered it, Seth could not fathom.

Seth had been waiting for the right opportunity to tell his parents. Seth knew
he needed to simply say the words, but every time he prepared himself to do
that, something would come up. The last time Seth thought about bringing the
idea up with his Father, one of the sheep in the meadows started running amock
in the fields. Seth worked with Adam until sundown that day to quarantine the
possessed sheep, calm down the herd, and return the meadow to it's state of
usual calm. Seth took that as enough of a sign to wait on his words.

But this time it seemed as appropiate as it would ever be. The food was
amazing, the scene was set, and both of his parents seemed to be in an
agreeable enough mood. Still, Seth found himself very nervous to speak up. Seth
almost opened his mouth to speak a couple times, but stopped himself before he
did each time. Why was he so nervous?

After some moments, Seth reminded himself how absurd it was to be nervous about
his idea, and tried to remain calm. He felt his heart racing. He felt the knife
slipping in his hand as his palms became moist. Seth had to regulate his breath
because he noticed it was becoming hurried.

Seth resolved that he would just say his idea, and let whatever conversation
that might emerge out of his words emerge. It was silly to be so nervous about
something Seth felt so passionately about.

With knife held in his left hand, Seth burst out...

"I want to go on a pilgramage!"

