# Cain's Epilogue

Seth awoke to find himself lying next to the Tree of Knowledge. He was in a
daze, and not sure if what he just experienced was a dream or not. When he
looked at the mushrooms growing on the tree, he saw a small hole where he
presumed Cain must have gathered the mushrooms for their tea.

Seth suddenly realized that he felt deathly ill, and began vomitting profusely.
Red, yellow, white, blue, green, all colors Seth saw bursting forth from his
essence as he watched his vomit turn in to pychedelic patterns and shapes. It
seemed as though the projectile path it was taking would float off, and
transform into butterflys and dragonflys, and all sorts of other flys that Seth
had never seen before. It all took place before Seth knew what was happening.

Seth though he was experiencing an exorcism.

After violently convulsing, gasping for air between each session of vomit, Seth
was able to gather himself for a couple of moments to notice a note next to
him. However, very soon after the nausea came back, and he bagan vomitting
again. Seth felt as though the Devil himself were pulling on something that was
inside of him, and the Devil wanted it kept in the stomach, and now, for
whatever reason, his stomach decided that it has had enough of this devil
nonsense, and chose to react in the most violent and decisive way possible.

Seth was almost certain this was an exorcism.

After multiple long minutes of vomiting, then gathering breath desperatly,
followed by more vomitting, Seth was finally able to find himself to a point
where he felt as though he had survived a whole ordeal, and he had come out on
the other side a new man.

Seth was proud of the exorcism he underwent.

After Seth gathered himself a moment, he turned to the note beside him, and
began reading it. It read...

> Seth,

> First things first, the mushrooms might cause some nausua. It could be
> anywhere from light to severe, but it's rare I have eaten them and not gotten
> sick. Still, I feel the experience is neccesary.

Seth looked back to the mushrooms on the tree, and then to the vomit he had
left all over the ground, and too exhuasted to do anything about any of it, he
just kept reading the letter.

> I apologize for telling you like this, but you are not welcome here anymore.
> After seeing how you reacted to the mushrooms, and hearing what you have to
> say about how mom and dad still are, I think it would be best if each of us
> went our seperate ways, and made our own families. I think you will agree, it
> would be best if we never meet again.

> You will become a great leader of men, and you will bring forth into us a
> great nation. There will be many like you, but you will rise above. I see
> leadership in you. And in time, though I do not believe his claims will be
> true, there will be one who will call himself the chosen one, the messigh,
> the Son of God, the King of Kings, and so forth. He will be descended from
> your blood. Of course, all of things will get conflated and some sort of
> unneccesary reverence will be given to him. But I'm just saying how I think
> things will go. If people want to worship him, and call him Holiest of Holys,
> so be it. If people want to revere him, and sing hymns to his name, so be it.
> After all, I am the first murderer. And not even just that, but I am the
> first man to commit fratricide. I can only laugh at the stories that I am
> sure will be told about some great nation fighting the demons of my
> ancestors, or something else equally ridiculous. Again, so be it.

> I just ask one thing. Always remember the effect the mushrooms had. I'm sure
> you will probably repress this event, marking it off to be the manipulations
> of some crazed madman of a long lost brother. Such is my fate; I've accepted
> that. Just remember, in the times when you feel the most lost, that it you
> who are lost, and so it must be you who does the finding.

> Find yourself, Seth.

> With Love, Your Estranged Brother

> Cain
