# 003
Adam dropped his fork, and it fell on to his plate, creating a loud clanging
noise.  Immediately after, he choked on a piece of bone from the lamb he was
chewing on, and began coughing. The coughing was subtle at first, but became
hoarse and loud as it continued. Seth wanted to try and help his father, but
wasn't sure what he could do. If Seth could reach in and extract the lamb bone
from his father's esophogus, it would stop choking, but there was no way he
would be able to do that while Adam was coughing violently.

Eve gently ceased what she was doing, lowered her utinsels, and began wiping
her face with a napkin to hide the fact that she was turning a ghastly color of
white.

Seth waited in the moments that followed his ejaculation. He felt strange. His
parents hadn't said anything, yet somehow he felt he had already said something
dreadfully wrong. Perhaps he should have clarified exactly what he meant by
pilgramage, before he said it? Seth opened his mouth during these moments to
attempt to clarify his statement, but he couldn't find the words he needed to
say, so he closed his mouth again without saying anything, and then swallowed
his own spit.

In between spurts of coughing, Adam was able to get out the words, "We forbid
you from leaving!"

Seth looked back at his father, who was still choking, but was quickly
resolving the issue. Seth then looked to his mother, who cowered even further
behind her napkin when Seth glanced at her.

Seth was rather resolved to go on this pilgramage. He knew he would face
resistance from his parents, but he didn't expect that they would react so
vicserally to his announcement.

Seth was the one who broke the silence.

"Listen, I've been thinking about it a lot, and I know you say that eveyrthing
I need is here..."

"You are right, Yahweh provides everything you need here!" Adam interjected

"Can you let me finish?" Seth asked. His father would interject himself like
this in regular conversation, and it annoyed Seth, but he always put up with
it.. He had never talked back to his father like this. As soon as Seth said the
words, he cowored a little bit. Then, Seth realized he was cowering, and then
became over-exagerattedely brave, puffing his chest out large. Then he felt
silly doing that, so he sat back in his normal position, while he waited his
fathers reply.

Adam coughed out the last of the drizzle that was left in his throat, and took
a large sip of water. He reached in to his threat, and extracted the lamb bone
he was choking on. It was in the shape of a hook, tearing the esophogus down.
Adam was fortunate to have extracted it, or else it would have hurt dreadfully
all the way down in to his stomach. Adam gently put the bone down on his plate,
took a large drink of water, and made a sweeping gesture to Seth, indicating
him to finish his point. The look on Adam's face was hostile.

"So everything I need _is_ here, and that is amazing. You and mom have done a
great job with Yahweh's creation. But I got to thinking. Imagine there is
something like a great flood, which wipes out all of civilization..."

"And what would cause such a great flood? You are chasing red herrings Seth."

Seth was upset that his father inturrupted him so soon into his point, but
decided not to let it get to him.

"It's just a hypothetical scenrio, I don't mean it literally." Seth caught
himself before he rolled his eyes. He knew his Father hated it when he rolled
them, and Seth was not keen on upseting his father any more than he had to. "I
am just saying, if there were some sort of great disaster, and all of the farms
were to be wiped out, I would want to have the ability to know how to rebuild
them. I think a pilgramage would be the quickest way for me to learn how to
live with just me and the land."

"And Yahweh!" Father interjected at the end of Seth's point. Seth was done, but
apparently his father thought that one more point needed to be added to the
conversation.

"Of course," Seth added non-chelantly. It didn't seem like a great time to
bring up that he was having doubts about the "Yahweh" story his parents had
told him, so he brushed off the subject as a given. In fact, one of Seth's main
motivations for wanting to go on a pilgramage was to see if he could find the
voice of Yahweh on his own, whithout the guidance of his parents.  During
prayer and sabbath, Seth appreciated his parents guidance, but sometimes he
felt they were overbearing on him. Seth felt like he was missing something. He
understood everything _about_ Yahweh, but he had never experienced Yahweh. Seth
didn't know what sort of experience he was missing, but he had lived with his
parents for long enough to know that he would need to seperate himself from
them if he were ever to find it. That was the part of his motivation that Seth
didn't tell his parents.

Instead, he said, "I want to learn how to build farms from the land, and how to
raise animals from the wild. I would rather prepare for a flood and have one
never arrive then drown in my free spiritedness. Please reconsider. Let me go
on this pilgramage, so that I can grow as a human."


