# 003
Adam dropped his fork, and it fell on to his plate, creating a loud clanging
noise.  Immediately after, he choked on a piece of bone from the lamb he was
chewing on, and began coughing. The coughing was subtle at first, but became
hoarse and loud as it continued. Seth wanted to try and help his father, but
wasn't sure what he could do. If Seth could reach in and extract the lamb bone
from his father's esophogus, it would stop the choking, but there was no way he
would be able to do that while Adam was coughing violently.

Eve gently ceased what she was doing, lowered her utinsels, and began wiping
her face with a napkin to hide the fact that she was turning a ghastly color of
white.

Seth waited in the moments that followed his ejaculation. He felt strange. His
parents hadn't said anything, yet somehow he felt he had already said something
dreadfully wrong. Perhaps he should have clarified exactly what he meant by
pilgramage before he said it? Seth opened his mouth during these moments to
attempt to clarify his statement, but he couldn't find the words he needed to
say, so he closed his mouth again without saying anything, and then swallowed
his own spit.

In between spurts of coughing, Adam was able to get out the words, "We forbid
you from leaving!"

Seth looked back at his father, who was still choking, but was quickly
resolving the issue. Seth then looked to his mother, who cowered even further
behind her napkin when Seth glanced at her.

Seth was rather resolved to go on this pilgramage. He knew he would face
resistance from his parents, but he didn't expect that they would react so
vicserally to his announcement.

Seth was the one who broke the silence.

"Listen, I've been thinking about it a lot, and I know you say that eveyrthing
I need is here..."

"You are right, Yahweh provides everything you need here!" Adam interjected

"Can you let me finish?" Seth asked. His father would interject himself like
this in regular conversation, and it annoyed Seth, but he always put up with
it. He knew not to talk back to his father like this. As soon as Seth said the
words, he cowored a little bit. Then, Seth realized he was cowering so he
became over-exagerattedely brave, puffing his chest out large. Then he felt
silly doing that, so he sat back in his normal position, while he waited his
fathers reply.

Adam coughed out the last of the drizzle that was left in his throat, and took
a large sip of water. He reached in to his threat, and extracted the lamb bone
he was choking on. It was in the shape of a hook, tearing the esophogus down.
Adam was fortunate to have extracted it, or else it would have hurt dreadfully
all the way down in to his stomach. Adam gently put the bone down on his plate,
took a large drink of water, and made a sweeping gesture to Seth, indicating
him to finish his point. The look on Adam's face was hostile.

"So everything I need _is_ here, and that is amazing. You and mom have done a
great job with Yahweh's creation. But I got to thinking. Imagine there is
something like a great flood, which wipes out all of civilization..."

"And what would cause such a great flood? You are chasing red herrings Seth."

Seth was upset that his father inturrupted him so soon into his point, but
decided not to let it get to him.

"It's just a hypothetical scenrio, I don't mean it literally." Seth caught
himself before he rolled his eyes. He knew his father hated it when he rolled
them, and Seth was not keen on upseting his father any more than he had to. "My
point is, if there were some sort of great disaster and all of the farms were
to be wiped out, I would want to have the ability to know how to rebuild them.
I think a pilgramage would be the quickest way for me to learn how to live with
just me and the land."

"And Yahweh!" Adam interjected at the end of Seth's point. Seth was done, but
apparently his father thought that one more point needed to be added to the
conversation.

"Of course," Seth added non-chelantly. It didn't seem like a great time to
bring up that he was having doubts about the "Yahweh" story his parents had
told him, so he brushed off the subject as a given. In fact, one of Seth's main
motivations for wanting to go on a pilgramage was to see if he could find the
voice of Yahweh on his own, without the guidance of his parents.  During
prayer and sabbath, Seth appreciated his parents guidance, but sometimes he
felt they were overbearing on him. Seth felt like he was missing something. He
understood everything _about_ Yahweh, but he had never experienced Yahweh. Seth
didn't know what sort of experience he was missing, but he had lived with his
parents for long enough to know that he would need to seperate himself from
them if he were ever to find it. That was the part of his motivation that Seth
didn't tell his parents.

"And what is your plan if you get raped and mauled by a wild bear? Those exist
in the wild, you know." Adam inturrupted Seth's train of thought.

"Wild bear?" Seth thought to himself, but accidentally said it aloud.

"Yes, or a mountain lion, or a wooly mammoth. Your mother and I named all of
these things, Seth, and they are very dangerous. We forbid you from going."

Seth shrunk at his father's assertiveness. Soon, he realized he was shrinking
again, and expanded his chest again, this time more naturally.

"I can bring some of the tools you use to butcher and skin our lambs. I
wouldn't use the knives that you use on the sacrifice, but..."

"You absolutely will not bring the sacrifical knives!" Adam's tone increased
multiple orders of magnitude, and he stood up in his chair. Eve gently touched
Adam on the forearm, and he sat back down. "Do not defile this table with your
words, Seth. We do not use our tools to destroy, but rather to cherish Yahweh's
great creation. You must understand this."

"I DO understand it, that is what I was saying." Seth felt bewilderred. Adam's
violent interjection was wholly unexpected, and Seth forgot what he was in the
middle of saying. He took a moment to try and regather his words and his sense.

"This is absolutely unaccaptable!" Adam continued. Seth abandonned any hope he
had of remembering his words. "We must fix this. Your mother and I
raised you better than this, Seth."

"But I want to see the world, is that so bad?" Seth felt legitamately confused.

"Should we tell him?" Eve's voice was barely a whisper, and her words were very
clearly directed towards Adam.

"Tell him what?" Seth asked, "I'm sitting right here." Seth felt annoyance at
his mother's behavior. Seth would notice that during their dinner conversations
sometimes, both of his parents would talk to eachother about him as if he were
in another room. Seth had mentioned that he didn't like it when they did this,
but that didn't stop his parents from talking about Seth as if he weren't
there. Eventually, Seth started to realize that it was an advantage to remain
quiet, and listen to what his parents would say about him while he was sitting
there. He was able to learn a lot about what his parents thought about him by
eavesdropping in this way. However, in this case, when Seth was very clearly
the one who initiated the conversation, this sort of subversion served no
practical purpose. Seth decided he wasn't going to stand being a ghost
to his parents right now, which is why he spoke up.

"Do not talk back to your mother like that!" Adam's voice grew hot again, and
Seth could see that he was already starting to shake. Seth was amazed at how
quickly the tone of the dinner meal changed from a pleasent conversation to a
hostile discussion.

"I'm NOT talking back to her, she was talking to YOU!" Seth retorted. Seth
immediately felt a feeling of warmth as he realized his response was the most
cutting thing he could have said in that moment.

This feeling was immediately squashed by his father, who stood up out of his
chair, grabbed Seth by the arm, and dragged him towards the wall of the cave.

As this was happening, Seth recognized this as part of his fathers discipline
procedure. Any time he was in trouble, his father would grab him like this, and
bring him somewhere to have a discussion. During those discussions, Adam would
force himself upon Seth, and demonstrate his power over him. Any retort by Seth
would be met with a jab to the ribs, and any attempt to break free from his
father's grasp would only make his grip tighter. Seth quickly learned to accept
his father's discipline.

Usually when Adam felt the discussion was adequete, when he felt that
Seth understood his transgressions, he would then instruct Seth to go to
storage and grab a belt. When Seth returned with one, Adam would ask Seth to
say a number, and Adam would strike Seth that number of times with the belt.
If Adam felt the number was too low, Adam would count three strikes of the whip
as one.

As Seth was being escorted to the wall of the cave, he started thinking about
which belt and how many strikes he should choose. Too low and that
would only infuriate his father more, so a balance had to be found between
physical pain and damage control. Adam was always harsh when it came to
discipline, but reasonable when it came to understanding the time and place for
it. This time felt serious to Seth, so he was considering the frayed belt with
perhaps as many as forty lashes to the back.

As Seth was thinking through these things, his father pinned him against the
wall with his left hand, gently carressed Seth's face with his right, pulled
back with a fist, and struck Seth in the left eye with his right hand.

Everything went black.

