# 
The sun shone down on Seth from the top of the sky as he pruned away the last
of the wheat with his shears. With a bundle of oats in his wagon, Seth made his
way back to his parents cottage.

Inside, his father Adam was nearly finished preparing three cuts of the lamb
they had sacrificed earlier that year. Seth's mother Eve was tending to the
plants that were growing outside of the eating area. Both his father and his
mother turned to Seth as he walked in to the cottage.

"Where should I put the excess?" Seth asked his father as he set down the
wagon.

Adam pointed towards the cottage in the dastence and said, "I have started
gathering this year's sacrifice in the cottage. Take your excess there, and by
the time you return, the food should be ready."

Seth nodded towards his father, turned around and began walking towards the
cottage.

The cottage had been built inside of a groove which fit nicely between
two hills. It had unpainted tree trunks for walls and hand-planed slats for a
roof. The entrance was simply an opening which faced the main house, and
towards the back was a window which looks out to the vast fields of nature
beyond. It was within sight of the main house, so Seth picked it out on the
horizon, and made his way towards it.

Seth had made this trip hundreds of times before. Every year in the farms
there would be excess crops, and every year in the meadows there would be
excess livestock. Since before Seth was born, his parents made it a ritual to
routinely sacrifice the excess to Yahweh.

Seth had never attended a sacrifice himself. When Seth asked them why he was
not allowed to attend the sacrifice, his father always told him "When you are
old enough, you will understand." Seth felt he was old enough to be told what
he didn't understand, but his father still disagreed. Seth wasn't sure if he
respected his father more or less because of this.

"If only Yahweh had given us a list of commandments. That would be nice." Seth
brushed off the thought. "Do not question the word of God," Seth reminded
himself.

Seth had been exposed to his fathers explanation of sacrifice since a young
age, but as he grew older he started to realize that it was a rather strange
thing for the creator to ask for. After all if He created everything, then why
does He have need of the excess? Would it not be wiser to store the excess in
case of a harsh winter?

"Do not question the words of God," Seth reminded himself as he approached the
cottage. It had become a mantra for Seth. As he was continuing to approach
maturity, Seth had many questions for his parents, and one of his father's
most common replies was "You must have faith in Yahweh's Great Plan."

Seth thought he had faith. At least, when he prayed, he felt like he could feel
God, and his mother told him that it was the effort and the faith that mattered
to God more than the actual prayer.

Still, Seth wasn't sure if what he felt was faith, or if it was hope. Surely he
didn't just "hope" God exists, right? Was his lack of faith a sin? Why was it
so hard to know if the person he was talking to was actually God or not?

Seth shook his head. "Do not question the word of the Lord" Seth reminded
himself again as he continued steadily along the beaten path towards the
cottage.

Seth opened the entrance to the cottage, and passed in.

Seth looked to his right and found something he wasn't expecting. Nothing.

Seth looked to his left, and saw the collected offering that had been
accumulated so far.

Seth walked outside again, and looked at the sun to get his bearings. Since it
was high noon, Seth couldn't tell from the sun which way was East, and which
way was West, but he could tell from the direction of the shadow the direction
that split between them. His shadow pointed in the direction of the opening,
which meant the opening still faced in the same compass direction that it had
been for years.

Of course, that was exactly the result Seth was expecting to find, but somehow
it seemed more reasonable to think that somehow the sun had changed in its
path rather than to believe that his father had moved the sacrificial
collection to the opposite side of the cottage.

Seth thought back to a time that his father became alarmingly upset over a
particular bone that had been misplaced on the alter during the ceremony. For
many days after that sacrifice, Adam wouldn't talk to either Seth or Eve, and
it got to the point that Eve actually became concerned that Adam might become
violent.

During that period, as Seth was tending to the livestock, Adam approached him
and started yelling at him over some misplaced butcher's knives. Seth had
simply left them in the rinsing trough overnight instead of taking them out to
dry, which meant that the finish on the handles became moldy. This happened in
the heat of Adam's anger, and when he saw it, he immediately began yelling at
Seth.

Seth became very scared in that time. Seth knew that it was a mistake to leave
the knives unattended like that, and he apoligized for it profusely. That
didn't seem like it was enough for Adam.

As Adam's voice became louder, Seth wasn't sure what to do, and started
cowering before his father. Seth put his arms together in front of his face and
started turning away from his father to protect himself.

When Adam saw Seth make this motion, a serene calm came over him, and he
started crying. Adam collapsed as a baby, tears flowing down his eyes, over
his cheeks, and onto his lips. Adam stood up, wiped away his tears and said,
"I'm sorry Seth, please forgive me. What I do you understand not, but you will
understand in time." With that Adam walked away, and his attitude returned to
normal after that.

Since that event, Seth had always been sure to be particularly conscientous
about the sacrifcial goods. Adam wanted everything just perfect for the
sacrificial ceremony, and Seth knew how much it meant to him.

But now that all of the supplies were on the West side of the cottage instead
of the East, Seth had no idea what to do. Seth placed the goods on the East
side of the cottage where his Father had last instructed him to, and began
his return journey back to the house.

"For what reason could the goods be on the West?" Seth pondered all of the
possibilites. "One posibility is that Satan could have moved them!"

Seth chastised himself for thinking of it so late. He was already halfway back
to the house, and needed to make a decision.

"If it really was the devil, then I need to act fast, which means I should turn
towards the cottage, and make sure that all ef the sacrifical goods are safe
and attended for."

Seth turned the other way towards his parents house.

"But, if it is not the devil, and my father really did move everything to the
other side of the cottage, then I should continue on my path home, and ask him
about the reason for the change."

Seth was torn in two, and honestly didn't know which way to turn.

Seth looked up and felt the sun beating down on him. "Yahweh, listen to your
humble child praying. Instruct me in the way I should go. Amen."

With that short prayer uttered, Seth closed his eyes and waited for the voice
of Yahweh. He heard silence. Seth opened his eyes.

Seth looked right, and then left, and then up again. In front of Seth was the
livestock, and behind him was the sheaves of wheat blowing by.

"The only direction I haven't looked is down," Seth thought. "Is there anything
down worth looking at?"

Seth thought about it for a moment? What was down? The earth? Surely he
shouldn't pray to the earth.

Seth thought again. The devil was also down. Lucifer, the fallen angel, now
called Satan, and the Anti-hero of the Angelic War. If the devil was down, then
that meant that he wasn't left. At least, that reasoning made sense to Seth.

Seth continued on towards his parents home.
