% copied from before

"When I said this, from the corner of my eye, I saw a bright light. The light
started from the corner of the landscape where the sun shown most brightly, but
when I turned to look at it, I saw that it was not simply the sun, but it was
the form of an angel presenting itself before me.

"The angel said to me, 'Cain, do not be afraid. Yahweh does not command those
denziens of hell at his whim. You can not look to him to face the demons that
you see now. You must go, and you must confront them yourself.'

"When the angel said this, I was terribly scared, and I said, 'Myself? But who
will guide me in case I falter? What will happen if I fall victim to their
evils?'

% Begin Session 20190506

"When I said this, from the corner of my eye, I saw the bright light that was
the sun in my eyes, and then I turned in that direction, and, almost as if
bursting forth out of the sun itself, a whole family of doves revealed itself
to me in the distance in all of it's glory.

"I took this as a sign from Yahweh, or more accurately, the Holy Spirit, that
my prayer's were answered, and that I should make my way towards the cliff from
which the doves carried themselves.

"After an arduous hike, on which a faced many hardships like thorns in my feet
and jagged, uncomfortable terrain, I found myself at the top of the mountain,
and I got on my knees, and I fell, and I prayed again, and I said, 'My God in
heaven, please reveal yourself to me. I come before you now a sinner, humbled
in your presence. Deliver me into your presence, unclean though I am, so that I
may be filled and enlightened by your holiness. I am to be only a vessel of
yours to nourish the peoples with your glory.'

"Having prayed thusly, I continued to kneel my head and wait for the Lord to
reveal himself to me."

Cain paused at this point in the story for dramatic effect. The silence in the
room mirrored the silence that Cain heard in those moments. After some time,
Cain resumed his story.

"Well, I waited, at first with bowed head, to wait and see if I would hear or
see something which would indicated that Yahweh or the Holy Spirit had heard me
this second time.

"And I will be entirely honest with you, Seth, when I listened deeply to my own
voice, I heard what sounded like the voice of Yahweh to me. And the voice of
Yahweh began speaking to me, as both our mother and father have said that
Yahweh has spoken to them. But when the voice of Yahweh spoke to me, Seth, I
could tell that it was not the genuine voice of Yahweh. Instead, it was what I
thought Yahweh might say in a moment like this. I wanted to hear him so badly
that my mind was creating a voice to projecting into my subconscious so that I
might hear him.

"When I recognized this was happening to me, I started to grow impatient. It
became impossible for me to distinguish those voices which were a part of my
every day thoughts and musings that none of us can turn off, and which of those
voices were the legitimate voices of angels and demons and archangels and
devils and Gods and Lucifers. It seemed as though all of the voices could be
all of the different things in whatever context they could fit.

"So, being so confused, conflicted, and feeling hurt that my prayers were not
being answered, after many hours of meditating there without sensing or feeling
the presence of Yahweh in any way beyond my psychological imagination, and
seeing that the daylight was waning rather quickly and that my time for light
was coming to be rather short, I decided to make my way back down the mountain,
and back in to the forest, where I would return to my hut."

Cain paused at this point in the story again. This time, there was no reason
for his pause other than the fact that his voice was becoming hoarse from
telling his story nonstop to Seth in this way. He was getting excited telling
the story, and in telling the story while under the influence of the mushrooms,
he was able to, in some sense, relive in that moment the feelings that he felt
the first time he ate the mushrooms in this story.

"I made it back to my caravan and built a camp. As I was preparing myself to
settle in for the night, I had a realization. The visions of Satan, and the
demons, were very strong, and it seemed as though the thoughts of Yahweh made
them disappear.

"My mind began racing at the implication of everything that I had experienced
to that point. Let me tell you, Seth, it's hard to pinpoint exactly what I was
feeling in that moment, because memory, vivid though it may feel to us in these
moments, can prove to be dreadfully inaccurate when it comes to specific
details, especially when it comes to emotionally charged or otherwise
intensified situations. All of that to say, it would be an excercise in
futility to attempt to recall an exact timeline of exactly what happened in
this story.

"Still, though," Cain resumed, "I certainly remember that during that night, I
was feeling greatly disappointed in Yahweh, and I remember having the thought
at some point that, 'Since I have already eaten the mushrooms, there should be
no harm in eating more of them.' So, with that thought, I ventured out in to
the woods to find this spot" Cain gestured towards the tree with his hand "and
I gathered myself another handful of mushroom caps, and I ate them."

Cain paused again here, again for dramatic effect. It seemed the Cain could
only relive this story at a certain pace, and to force him to tell the story at
a speed any faster would have been impossible for him.

"This time, as I ate them, instead of praying to Yahweh, I decided I would
instead simply listen to the voices in my head, and follow them to their
conclusions.

"At first, when I practiced this, it seemed simply enough to find my thoughts,
and hold on to them long enough to see where they lead. But, rather quickly I
might add, I started to realize that many of my thoughts were violent, or
sinful, or otherwise distasteful to think or imagine about, and I would find
myself repressing those thoughts and refocusing my energy on other thoughts
that I would cofabulate on the spot.

"But once I realized I was doing this to myself, instead of repressing the
thoughts, I instead let myself think them. 'After all,' I reasoned, 'simply
having the thoughts can not be a sin if I don't act on them, and since it seems
as though Yahweh does not choose to reveal himself to me in this moment, I will
instead follow these thoughts to see if they lead to some place similar to the
place Yahweh might have taken me.'

"So I began to follow my thoughts, and not just the pleasant or the favorable
thoughts, but all of the thoughts I was having.

"With a renewed sense of my mission and purpose in my act of meditation, on top
of the fact that the newly ingested mushrooms were freshly digesting in to my
system again at that point, I began to not only have thoughts of, but actually
see visions of demons, devils, and fallen arch angels in the patterns of
geometry that I could make out in the shadows of the darkness.

"When I would focus on these demons and archangels, they would fly towards me,
and attempt to frighten me. I noticed that observing them filled me with
anxiety, but it was the sort of anxiety that is not so overwhelming that it
becomes unbearable. In fact, recognizing that these visions of these demons
contained many of my anxieties was freeing to me, and it allowed myself to let
go of my sense of what was real or fantasy and instead it enabled me to begin
to actually interact with and associate with the demons of my visions."

Cain stopped here for a moment to make sure that Seth was understanding.

"So you started to have conversations with the demons and archangels of your
imagination?" Seth asked.

Cain smiled. "Is it really so hard to imagine? In fact, try to do it right now.
If I ask you to find a demon and look at it, what do you see?"

Seth, a bit taken aback that he was being asked to imagine what demons looked
like directly, still felt that this request seemed innocent enough to oblige.
Seth closed his eyes for a moment, and let his imagination take him to a place
where images and pictures of all sorts of things would just appear to him, as
if there were a confetti maker of faces which was spraying in to his
consciousness.

Out of this array of faces, Seth was able to pick out one that looked like a
demon to him. He felt that this image was sufficient for Cain's demonstration.

"It's a man with red skin, with two horns on his head like a goat. He is tall
and muscular, with feet round like an elephants and a tail that is long and
curves up all the way back to his head. The tail also has an arrowhead at the
tail of it." Seth described his demon as best he was able to Cain.

"Good, I like it," Cain returned to his story. "So you see, it's not
unreasonable to think that my mind was able to confabulate some demons for me
to interact with in that time, because that is what I needed to move on."

Cain paused to make sure Seth was understanding. He wasn't sure that he was,
but he continued on with his story.

"Well, after I had meditated for quite some time, and I had found many of these
demons, and began to follow them where they might take me, I began to take what
felt like a trip through the lakes and valleys of Hell itself. I saw, in the
distance, the capital city of Pandemonium (but only because I chose to place
the capital city in the distance there, and I had been told that there was such
a thing by our parents ... but I saw it none-the-less). The city was built like
a great fortress, towering above the valleys all around. The walls were many
hundreds of feet high, and I'm sure dozens of feet thick.

"As I began to familiarize myself with the sort of lava and hell-scape that I
was experiencing in a strangly real way (although I must remind you, Seth, that
this whole time I was keenly aware that I was simply meditating under the
influence of the mushrooms) I began to navigate my way through the environment
so that I could find someone I could talk to and reason with."

Cain place a short pause here, and Seth, now becoming genuinely interested yet
still wary about this story, said, "It's really crazy, I never would have
thought it possible, but as you explain your story to me, it's as if I am
living the story you are telling me, and it's as if I am feeling the things
that you felt, and it's as if I am doing the things that you did. It's such a
strange feeling, I don't know what to do with it."

But Seth gave paused again, before he continued with, "But now you're telling
me that you were able to explore hell so that you could find someone who would
explain to you the questions that you didn't have answers for?"

"Yes, precisely." Cain smiled, keenly aware of the aura of indifference he was
placing on the ridiculousness of the story. "Again, I must remind you, at that
moment (as we are now) I was strongly under the influence of these mushrooms,
and so the hell-scape that was being generated by my psyche was not so much
being actively generated as it was being actively explored and reasoned about
my my mind. Perhaps, if one day I start a mythology, it will be based upon this
hellscape..."

Cain paused again, and Seth only looked back at him with something of a
dumbfounded stare.

"But let me move on," Cain resumed.

"Having found myself in a place of eternal torment and damnation, I took the
course of action which seemed most appropiate to me in that time. I began
asking those demons around me if they could help me find someone who I could
talk to.

"Many of the demons simply had no time for me, I suppose because they were busy
doing demon things in this demon world, and didn't have time for me.

"But then I talked to one demon who would listen to me. He introduced himself
to me, and he said, 'I am Belial, and it is my duty to introduce souls to those
devils which would most appreciate their visit.'

"Not sure whether to feel relieved or more anxious at having now made contact
with a devil who knew where to take me, I reminded myself of my physical
location, and reassured myself that in any event I was in no physical danger.

"Having met Belial, I followed him as he led me in to the capital city of
Pandemonium.

"Inside the city were rivers of lava flowing. Inside of these rivers there
would be boats with oars, with wisps of dead souls rowing endlessly for
eternity, so that the boat might navigate the waters and the demons might more
freely enjoy themselves in this place they created for themselves.

"Belial brought me to a particular sort of oar boat, only fit for sitting two
at most, that he ushered us both to sit inside so that he might bring us both
to this demon.

"I don't remember much of the boat ride itself. I mostly remember looking on at
the city of Pandemonium in awe as I felt the heat of the lava river emmenate
into our quaint vessel.

"In what felt like only a moment, Belial was ushering me out of the boat, and
in to what I could only describe as a small palace which was placed on top of a
prominant hill in the city."

Cain took a moment to look at Seth and see that he was still sufficiently
captivated to simply resume the story.

"We walked in to this palace, and when we made our way through the main
entrance, we came to a large throne room. However, instead of the throne facing
towards the entrance, it was facing away, and the direction it was facing was
towards a balcony, where another demon was standing and observing the city of
Pandemonium with his idle gaze.

"Belial walked silently towards this second demon, and gestured for me to
follow. This second demon would not bring their gaze away from the city.

"After a bit, Belial addressed me and said, 'I leave you to your duties.' With
that, he scurried off, and I presume returned to the oar boat where he went
back to his duties of matching souls with their demons.

"After Belial left, I turned toward the demon, who was turned away from me on
the other side of the throne room chair, and made my way toward him. I made my
way probably halfway to the throne when I heard the voice of the demon say,
'Stop there human if you wish to return to the world of the living.'

"When I heard this voice, there were two things that startled me. The first was
the intensity the voice carried. The power of the command shook me to my very
core, and I felt as if I was somehow experincing the raw power of the universe
in the form of the voice of this demon.

"The second is that the voice was female.

"There was no mistaking that the voice of the demon I heard was a female voice.
She turned from her perch on the balcony, and made her steps towards the
throne.

"'Seems a shame,' she began speak, 'to face the throne this way, when all the
demons and souls of Pandemonium are that way. Unfortunate.'

"The demon walked towards the chair, and turned it towards the entrance of the
palace, and towards me, with the wave of her hand. Then, with the coil like
precision of a snake, brought her demonic figure seated in to the chair in a
pose which presented her in all of her demonic glory.

"'Speak' she ordered, clearly not in the mood for making small talk.

"I was frightened, and of course I was. This was the first time I had spoken
with a demon on these terms before, and I was beginning to realize that I had
absolutely no idea what words I wanted to say. So I asked, "

% From here, I am done writing for the time being. What needs to happen next
% is, she reveals that Yahweh is not real, and also that neither is she. I don't
% know what flavor the dialogue will take, but I like ending with a line such
% as "call me the Eve of Eden" or something like that.
