# Cain's Eden

"Listen to my story, Seth. Let yourself be taken away by it."

Cain began his words, but Seth only felt as though he were losing space. It
felt to Seth that the walls and ceiling of the hut they were in were slowly
getting smaller, and Seth wasn't able to convince himself that the walls truly
weren't collapsing in on him.

"I need space, I need air. If nothing else, please allow me that." Seth said,
almost in a hurry, recognizing now the strange effects the plants his brother
had given him were having on him.

But Cain remained silent letting Seth calm himself down a little bit before
replying. "Please, just listen to my story. I want to give you the full
experience. Let go of this moment, and let it take you where it may."

Seth heard to his brother, but he didn't really listen to his words. 

"In fact," Seth continued, "as far as I'm aware, you have poisoned
me, and you are keeping me here until the poison takes effect..." Seth looked
over at his brother for a moment as he said these words, "... I don't believe
you have done that to me, but at least give us the curtosy of returning to your
cottage where it is more comfortable."

But Cain replied and said, "No, I insist. Your discomfort is only your body
resisting that which brings it to true trancendent life. Let go of that
discomfort, let yourself be free of those things which you feel as though you
need. Leave yourself, and your body, behind, as you let yourself drift through
the cosmos, guided only by the sound of my voice."

Before Seth realized it, he was following Cain's voice to it's conculsions, and
reaching those same conclusions with his own thoughts. It felt as though every
time a thought would emerge in Seth's mind, Cain would say it only moments
later.

"Listen to me, Seth. I took the same mushrooms that you did, and you can trust
me when I say that I have studied these fungus more than I have studied every
other plant in this greenery. If anything about what I have experincend with
these mushrooms is at all accurate, that means that our minds are going to
'sync up' in some sense, and everything that I say, you will be already
thinking before I say it. Is this happening to you right now?"

As Cain was saying the words, Seth was becoming more and more constantly amazed
at how well his thoughts were lining up with Cain's words. It was as if his
thoughts were being guided by a light, or a force, and that force was also
guiding the words of Cain just as well as it was guiding the thoughts of Seth.
It would take Seth many months to be able to articulate this idea, and for the
moment, he could only feel what it felt like to know what it was like.

When Cain finished his words, and posed his question, it took Seth a moment for
him to realize that the conversation, which they were having, had come to a
screeching halt, and that it was waiting on his reply. But he felt no
obligation to reply immediately, and decided he would reply in an off hand way.

"I feel as though I can't tell if what you are saying about the mushrooms is
true, or if you are simply very good at manipulating my psychology to get me to
think you are somehow ahead of me in speech. Either way, riddle me impressed,
but it still doesn't mean I'm just going to surrender my guard to you. How
about we get on with your story already."

With that, Cain grinned and replied, "Very well then, to my story it is."

When Cain said this, Seth waited in anticipation of the first words that were
going to come out of Cain's mouth. It felt as though it couldn't be soon enough
that Cain got his story over and done with.

But Cain waited, letting the moment linger.

"I began my pilgramage just as you did," Cain finally broke the silence. "I saw
many things on my journeys, from new kinds of exotic and fascinating birds to
entire landscapes that I can't even attempt to describe.

"When I started my pilgramage, it was very clear to me when I began that I
would need to preserve as much as the food I brought with me as possible. I had
planned on staying for quite a long time, as I have told you, so I needed to
experiment with new food sources.

"So every new kind of place that I came to, the first thing I would do would be
examine it for what sorts of plants and fruits grow there. Even in the desert,
where you would think that there would be nothing but heat and sand for miles,
there are still creatures and plants that manage to find and create life for
themselves there. It seems that there is always more to learn and discover
about this world that we live in."

Cain paused for a moment, and looked around his greenhouse.

"This greenhouse," Cain gestured as he continued talking, "is the result of
twenty years of work travelling, foraging, crossbreeding, and cultivation. In
the times of my travels, I found so many plants that I thought it would be a
great sin not to compile all of them and experiment with what I could make
happen with them.

"During my pilgramage, I mostly just experimented with eating most things raw,
but even at that time I knew of the wonders of fire and what sorts of things it
could do to make things more digestable. But as I traveled, I started to find
those plants which would make for good nutrition, and those which would not.

"Now," Cain made a noticable shift in the tone of his voice, "I could go on
with each plant that I've found and cultivated, and I could talk to you for
days on end about each one, how I found it, what my story and relationship is
with it, and what sorts of practical uses it has or doesn't have, but we don't
have all day here, and I don't want to bore you with the ramblings of an
over-excited arborist.

"The reason I am telling you all of this is to set the stage for you when I
found this swamp.

"I found this place towards the end of my pilgramage. I immediately found it
interesting because the ponds and the waters actualy stay risen throughout the
years. For all seasons, the ground is constantly being soaked by the water
which stays dormant over the land. This creates an interesting dynamic for the
plants here. Again, though, I could go on about the botanical details for many
lifetimes of conversation, and again, I will spare you from such talk.

"Regardless, I immediately became excited about the farming possibilities when
I saw this place. I saw the foliage that was already growing here on it's own,
and the possiblities of combining these plants with the ones I had already
found were endless.

"I explored as much as I could at the time. I saw that the swamp was divided in
to two main sections. There is this section, which I have purposed into my
farms, and then there is first section, where you and I both first entered and
where I have made the cottage for ourselves.

"As I was exploring, and getting more and more excited about the posibilites
these plants had to offer, I came upon this."

Cain pointed with an open palm towards the mushrooms growing at the base of the
large tree there.

"When I first saw them, I did not want to admit to myself what they were. They
were just so beautiful, growing like they were. The entire base of the tree was
covered in these mushroom spores, and each one popped out into it's own
intricate cap. I mean, just look at them."

Seth snapped himself out of the trance of listening to his brother to look at
the patterns in the mushrooms again. It was all so new to Seth that he still
wasn't sure if they were intricate and beautiful, or if he was still in a state
of overstimulation from everything that had happened to him, but either way,
Seth knew that, regardless of whatever his brother said, the mushrooms that
were growing in front of him were gorgeous.

"Quickly, though," Cain continued, "I realized what they must be, as you have
as well. I realized, as I stood there, alone, excited and longing for more
sources of nourishment, that I had come upon something that was exactly like
the mushrooms that our mother describes in her story about the Garden of Eden.
Let me tell you, Seth, that I actually looked around for a talking serpent. Of
course, I didn't see one, but that would have been grand if it were so."

Cain just smiled as he said this last bit.

"Well, standing there, I felt torn in two. There was the part of me that was
raised and developed by our parents that told me to resist temptation, renounce
the devil, and pray to the almighty Yahweh for forgivness for the sin of even
thinking about eating them.

"Then there was the other part of me that wanted to take every last mushroom
spore and eat it then and there on the spot.

"It was quite the dichotomy of psychological pull that I found myself in. Our
parents, as you know, became very good at raising us to be strong and
independent men, and I have to remind you that this is before I started
rebelling against the rituals we practice. At this point in my life, you could
say I was the most firm believer in Yahweh and the stories that our parents
told about him that I have ever been. The discipline instilled in to us by our
parents was so strong in me in that moment, that I am quite surprised even
still to this day that I broke free from it.

"And of course, the opposite side of that dichotomy came from a part of myself
that felt somehow deeper, and more visceral than my more tempered half. Of
course, such a deep and visceral feeling our parents would call 'Carnal
Desire', but such a labeling seemed disengenuous to me. Seeing the mushrooms
there, in all their glory, and just reaching in to the possibilites that these
mushrooms might unlock from an arborists point of view, was too much for me to
overcome.

"So, of course, as you can probably guess, my weaker half one, and I gave in to
my desires."

Cain paused. "How many did you eat?" Seth asked.

"Oh, at first I only chose one cap that seemed to me to be of moderate size
and exhibited signs of good health. It actually took me quite some time after
the initial desicion to eat the mushrooms to bring myself to pick them and eat
them. But you have to remember, my initial desire was as an arborist, so I was
not so concerned with eating the mushrooms as I was with examining them. So I
suppose you could say I spend some time examining them, and as part of my
examination I ate them. It just seemed wrong to me to _not_ eat them, so I
did.

"For some time, I still just continued examining the mushrooms and the tree. As
I did this, I couldn't help but start to feel as though I were betraying not
only our parents, but also myself and God and everyone else by what I was
doing. I started to feel immense guilt and suffering for eating the mushrooms.

"I started to see visions and hear voices. In one moment I would be looking
very closly at a mushroom spore, and then in the next I would suddenly jump up
because I thought I saw something move in the distance.

"I also started to feel my mind lose it's grip on the body. Much like I'm sure
you are feeling now."

Cain stopped and looked in to the eyes of Seth for long enough to see the nod
of agreement come from his head.

"At first it was bearable. My fascination with the patterns was enough to
distract me from the sensations I was feeling. But eventually the visions
became too vivid to ignore, and the voices became to loud to dampen out. I
started to see demons, ranging from small demons the size of a squirel or a
skunk to large demons the size of a bear. These visions of demons would come to
me in flashes. Sometimes I would have a vision, and when I focused on it, I
would find that the vision was an actual ordinary animal that my mind had
conflated in to a fantastical creature. Other times, focusing on the vision
would only make me more anxious of the things that I was seeing. The sensations
were entirely new to me, and I did not know if I was safe or not, so I began to
panic.

"In the distance, when I looked out, I saw on the horizon a large shadow cast
by the mountain which when looked in to directly from the right angle and at
the right time look like pure blackness. If the eyes aren't adjusted to the
darkness, it can look like an endless abyss that leads to the bottom of all
that exists.

"At this moment, I looked in to this darkness, and when I looked deeply, I saw
not darkness like I expected, but instead I saw the gates of hell leading to a
terrible underworld capital where demons and fallen angels and sorcorers and
every other kind of demonic being were roaming about.

"I looked in to this shadow for only a moment before I had to look away. It was
too much for me to bear.

"So in that moment, in my fear, I decided to pray. It seemed to me to be the
most appropiate thing to me. So I prayed.

"I said, 'Oh Father, I am not worthy for your presence, I have sinned towards
you and towards humanity, and now you have sent the demons to purge me from
this world! Please, save me from these monsters!'

"When I said this, from the corner of my eye, I saw a bright light. The light
started from the corner of the landscape where the sun shown most brightly, but
when I turned to look at it, I saw that it was not simply the sun, but it was
the form of an angel presenting itself before me.

"The angel said to me, 'Cain, do not be afraid. Yahweh does not command those
denziens of hell at his whim. You can not look to him to face the demons that
you see now. You must go, and you must confront them yourself.'

"When the angel said this, I was terribly scared, and I said, 'Myself? But who
will guide me in case I falter? What will happen if I fall victim to their
evils?'
