# Yahweh's Eden

Seth stopped for a moment, still sipping on his now warm tea. Was it half full
or half empty? Seth didn't know, and he didn't know what to think of his
brother's story either.

Still, Seth had his senses about him, so he said. "I'm... not sure what to
say..."

Well, that at least seemed better to Seth than deafening silence.

"Heh, I don't either."

After the short reply, Cain turned back to his tea. He had already finished
most of his, so he poured the remainder into his mouth and swallowed it with
one final gulp.

"I love when the ending of a story matches the ending of a drink!" Cain said in
a meager attempt to lighten the mood.

Seth looked at his drink, and took another sip. He wasn't sure he was finished
with his yet.

"There's one thing I don't get," Seth realized, and started to voice out loud.
"So, I followed your story, you had a pilgramage where you learned 'something'
(and we must return to exactly what that something is) and when you returned,
our parents rejected it. Then, you proceeded to describe how you first
rejected, then defamed, and finally defiled all that both of them believe to be
holy, all because you felt you had some sort of 'revelation' that was so
profound that this somehow justifies everything?" Seth paused for a moment to
let the ridiculousness of the whole thing sink in. "Well, I don't know about
you, but no singular experience or revelation that I have had has been so
profound that I would put myself through everything that you have, and _still_
find myself on the other end telling the tale as if I were somehow on the upper
end of everything. The fact that you can stand there and prentend that somehow
killing your brother, expressing incestuous interest in our mother, and
disrespect and defaming the name of our father are all a reasonable price to
pay for something so profound that you would pay all of those things seven and
seventy times over if you had to?"

Seth paused, and realized that Cain was becoming wholy uninterested in what he
was saying. When Seth noticed this, he became upset, and said, "Hey, answer me.
I'm asking you a question about your story."

Cain stopped for a moment before he turned to Seth and replied. "Your eyes are
asleep, but soon they will be awoken. I could attempt to explain all of the
things you want answers for, but when you open your eyes to see the truth, you
will see the world as I see it.

"And, to answer your immediate question (though I won't answer any more, so
don't ask them), I would argue that for all who take a spiritual awakening, the
tax of that awakening is on the original sin of man to bear. That original sin
is mine, and mine alone, to bear, just as it is yours, and yours alone to bear.
One day you will see that. You will have to."

With that Cain finished his question. Seth immediately had an entire multiude
of things to come back with, but Cain saw this, turned his finger toward Seth,
and said, "Remember, I said no more questions. I'm not answering so don't ask."

Before Seth could react in any way to this demand from Cain, Cain continued,
"But, let me tell you a story I came up with. There is a lot of free time for a
farmer like myself to come up with a lot of stories, and this is one that I've
written. Maybe this story will answer your questions."

Seth, while not entirely satisfied, was curious enough if Cain was talented
enough to answer the questions he had with a story. So, Seth allowed it, and
decided to listen to another story of Cain's, this time presumed to be
fictional rather than historical.

"So, before I tell you this story, I must first inform you that our main
character, whose name is 'Steve' in this version (but he could be named
anything you like really, I just chose 'Steve' because it seemed vanilla enough
for my purposes), is a fifth dimensional being.

"Now, I know what you're thinking stright up. 'Five dimensions! But we only
live in Four dimensions. How do you expect me to imagine an entirely new
spacial dimension? That's ridiculous.'

"To that, I must hastily reply that, when counted in this way, our character
'Steve' is actually a _seven_ dimensional being, composed of five spatial
dimensions, and two temporal ones.

"And I know everyone has tons of questions about how multiple orthagonal
timelines work, or how five spatial dimensions can even be thought about or
reason with in a practical story telling sense. But to answer those questions
would be pointless. The bottom line that you need to know is that, while some
quirks of motion and time do exist to our main character, the relationships and
politics and governments and so forth of our seven dimensional friends more or
less resemble the same quables and quarlls that our four dimensional selves
love and enjoy."

Seth, still not at all sure if trusting Cain that this story was going to be
worth while, decided to let Cain continued before he made any sort of
interjections. He just merely said "Sure, why not" to indicate that he would
suspend his disbelief for the sake of the story.

"Good, so our five dimensional friend Steve has a five dimensional job working
for the five dimeniosal goverment of five dimensional affairs. I could come up
with names for all of these things, but the point is, Steve has a mundane life
doing mundane five dimensional things, and he decides that he wants to take up
a hobby.

"In this five dimensional world, one of the things that some of the beings do
is called 'Archetechture'. Now, what this 'Archetechture' (or they also just
call it 'Arch' for short) is in five dimensions in entirely different than what
we would call architechture in three dimensions. But 'Arch' was a technique
that these 5-d beings would use to compress one of their time dimensions in to
a space dimension, and then compress three of the space dimensions into the
other time dimensions.

"The people who did this in this world called thimselves 'Architcets' and they
oversaw and maintained the care of what to them was a strange and fascinating
living and breathing fourth dimensinoal universe. And, because of the way that
their five dimensional buildings worked, they could fit all of this in four of
the dimensions, and still have a dimension left over for things like opening
doors, and walking in and out of the building. That way, the 'Archs' took care
of their world like it was their babay, but they were able to keep it all
contianed inside of it's own little universe.

"Well, of course, Steve, being such an architect in this universe, was so
inspired by his visit to the cross dimensional pan atlantic expressway universe
that he decided that he wanted to try his hand at creating his own very first
universe from scratch.

"And a small fact you should know about these hobbies is that they are mighty
difficult to maintain at any scale. But still, with a refined enough hand, and
a skilled enough craftsman, one man could, in theory at least, operate and
maintain his own 'Arch' (which is what they called their worlds). However, it
was very expensive to do, and the smallest of mistakes could cause the whole
thing to implode. When Arch's implode, they don't usually do any harm (although
the really large ones would certainly harm people in the near vicinity if those
imploded, but of course they have many precautions against that happening) but
it still means tons of time, energy, and resources which have effectively been
flush down the five dimensional drain and need to be re-gathered and
re-constructed from scratch.

"But, with all of that being said, of all the being in this five-dimensional
universe (which we will call 'Plex' for no reason other than that it seems
like a good name for a five dimensional place) Steve was one of the best suited
architechts to handle his own personal project like that.

"So, with ferocity, he got to work on his new project. Over the course of many
months in one direction, and multiple years in the other, along with tons of
whatever five-dimensional currency he used to purchase the raw material needed,
Steve was finally able to put together his own, working, Arch.

"Of course, it wasn't perfect, and while he was in the process of building it,
he went through a few phases where it would stabalize in to a living four
dimensional world, before it would collapse suddenly. But after he got all of
the details fine-tuned, and ironed out all of the kinks in his design, he was
able to get a working prototype which so closely resembled his final vision for
his project that he couldn't help but feel in awe of what he had accomplished.

"After all of that two dimensional time spent, Steve's Arch was operational.
Steve found the closest figurines, (which would be the 5-d equivilent of lego
people) and used them to place objects which appeared to become something like
living things (but, I must remind you, very strange and novel living things
that resemeble something like "intricate dust in the wind" to these beings)
which were to become the first lifelike objects to go in to his universe.

"And when he placed them there, he said to them, 'My name is Steve, I created
you in my image. I also created the world, and everything around you, so that
it may nourish and sustain you...'

"But at around that moment, as he was giving his first oration to the first
living objects of his own, personal, arch, he realized that he was still using
the quantum flux generator to power the core of the universe, and it would be
some number of quantum hours before it would be entirely safe to stably remove
it from the design of his arch. He realized all of this as he was talking to
his creatures, so he also said to them...

"'Of the fruit of the tree of life you should not eat, but of every other fruit
you should nourish yourself.'

"Satisfied that he had sufficiently warned his creatures of the dangers of
eating the forbidden fruit, Steve went on to do his regular five dimensional
things, while us three dimensional beings wandered around in wonder at the new
and astonishing things that Steve made for us.

"And of course, from there we eat the mushrooms, and Steve finds out, and so on
and so forth."

And then Cain just stopped. His story just ended.

"Well, that's about as far as I have gotten. I'm not so inspired to write more
of it, but I think that's because this is the only part I am interested in.
It's certainly not a complete story, and it also doesn't tell us any morals.
There also in very little connection to what happens in our day to day lives in
this story. But still, I like this story. I just like it. It's absurd, and
that's what I love."

Cain stopped, and saw that Seth was almost frothing at the mouth in
anticipation to retort. Almost as if commanding him again, Cain said, "Well, go
ahead, say what you want to say."

"But that is utter ridiculousness! You presume me so naive not to see straight
through your analogy? Steve is Yahweh, and his Arch is our universe. It's so
directly a paradoy of our parents story, it's almost insulting to them, and to
Abel, and to me, and even to yourself to have the nerve to come up with a story
like that. And you think that it doesn't have any connection to what happens in
our day to day lives? It has _everything_ to do with our day to day lives,
because it's a parody of the bedrock on which I was and am being raised by our
parents."

But Cain just chuckled at Seth's response, and said, "No, Seth, it has
everything to do with _your_ day to day lives, but it has nothing to do with
mine. In fact, this story allowed me to get to understand that this story truly
does has nothing to do with our universe, or the predicament we are in.

"In other words, we are not ruled by a tran-dimensional being named Yahweh who
created us and watches us and guides and who we can 'tap in to' if we only pray
hard enough. That's not what's going on here. What my story did, was it allowed
me to stop telling myself that that is what happened. My story is the
absolutely most feasable explanation for how our parents story could be in any
way true, and my story is so blatently far-fetched that to even begin to
believe my version of 'Yahweh's Eden' would be considered lunacy by even the
most mad of mad men. To honestly believe that the truth of the universe was
that there were beings that existed of dimensions beyond what we can conceive,
and that these beings were manipulating and creating and playing and otherwise
bothering themselves with us, in our own, seperate, real and physical universe,
well, to think about how unlikely it is that this is the explanation of how
everything came about is exactly the point of my story. It's because it is so
absurd that I find it so satisfying.



