So for this I would like to attempt something new. I would like to attempt
writing in what I call "heroic theater" whereby some magician or otherwise
embued "stage actor" is the sole actor on the stage, and through his whimsys
and fancies he is able to "bring up" the stage with his words. When the stage
is set, other member from the scenes in the stage appear in the image, and they
have their own lines and their own verse.

The stage hand can interject himself at any point to give background as needed
to the audience when he feels it is neccary, but for the most part it is the
job of the stage hand to set the viewer up for a seamless, enjoyable, and
fantastical viewing experience.

Because this art is not meant to be "real" or "performed" in any way, great
care must be taken in understanding that the most common way that this sort of
work is to be consumed is as any work or novel is to be consumed. The growing
rise of books on tape will also allow one to play with the new format in a
specific kind of way resembling theater, but it is also important to remember
that the primary way a reader will consume a media such as a book is by reading
it to himself in the privacy of his or her own home.

So without further ado, I bring you my first attempt at heroic theater.

---

Welcome welcome merry soul for how kind
it is for you to indulge this lonesome
tired director with his persistent
monologues and otherwise pestilant
drabble. Today you must take part as we
explore and experiment with all of
this new and emerging technology
designed forth right to bring to life theater
as it has never been experienced by
None or all before. A heart and dream we
go 'long and by this way we carry on;
for in that heart and dream we find apart
against the tragedies of our ever
persistent lives ... hope, fear, anger, rage, dreams
we take in waking life. But must we stay
in such a state? Does not sleep bring itself
unto the mind even during waking 'ours
of wee fantasy? Imagination:
So being the mechanism by which we
conduct our ever mortal coils so to
we find dreams at work ever present in
Imagination as such. Sleep and wake,
Twere only so much to care one nor other.
Choose but one and keep to it, bring not your
toils to me. Such as I say so I must
Too bring... But Look! I contradict even
myself with my own words! I seek you to
Sleep in wake and wake in sleep; against those
that say to keep away I say "Begon with you"
for those are not welcome in this world of
half sleep and half awake mortal beings
that choose the dreams of day or strifes of night
O'er all else which may come their way. Hark Fight!
Against the dying light by which all things,
living and dead, come to rest. Join me in
Theater antics as we let what come
What may!

Enough of this strict meter I say.
Let the words and lines flow in and of themselves.
Bring about a new kind of thought flow.
Allow ourselves to be swept up in the magic of the theater
Irreverent of the means or mechanisms by which
Our imaginational fancies bring themselves
From the depths of our very souls and in some
Manner through the work of the magical magicians
Conjuring abilities we are able to see, as visions,
That which he might choose to bring from within ourselves
To light! But care you not about the fancies,
Whimsical the magician is! Care not for your prittle and prattle
Rhyme not he will unless he so desire.
Meter he might concern himself
But maybe not? Who is to know.
I do not but maybe he, the one we call magic maker,
Can bring about this world himself.
His work unknown even to me.
So bring about him, no more page.
I tire hearing my own words fife.
Let the magician take the stage,
And bring his fancies out to life.

From the stage comes the magician. He is dressed in fantastical robes that seem
to take the shape of the entire universe in one glance of the eye, yet upon
directing your gaze directly on them you see not the universe any more but the
plain decor of simply decortaed clothing.

As the man takes the center stage, he faces the audience as if to speak to
them, but before he does, he takes out his wand and begins to wave it like a
conductor.

At first nothing happens. No music occurs and nothing appears. It is as if a
bafoon has appeared on stage and waved a wand like a child in hopes that the
audience would laugh. The magician took a quick gander at his wand and showed
an incredulous look of confusion towards the audience. Was the audience meant
to believe that his wand was not working, or was this all part of the act.

Their fears were assauged as the magician turned around, and with a similar
stroke of the wand brought forth in to light a glowing orb like the sun in the
center of the stage, and spoke unto it thus.

Great and glorious orb theine are.
Fromest you everything can be known.
If only us mere mortal folk could come to know
those ways and methods that tireless over reaching of man
might bring himself to gather all of the knowledge contained
in this one very orb of light that sits
Here before the audience to reveal itself in
All its glory. Come, take a look and see inside
This great and glorious ball of all. For to you
It may only look as bright as sun, but dim the lights
And you shall see what all who study such things
Behold: Mazes, Trappings, the wonders of the universe
All tangled away in the workings of an intricately balanced,
carefully aligned, perfectly imperfect eternal globe.
I bring you, the weaver of orbs! Behold his creation!

With this the great glowing orb in the center of the stage began to dim itself
to reveal an entire complex of systems all intricetly woven in and amongst
eachother with perfect harmony to create a rich eco system of varying light and
color. Purple bursts would intermingle with green flowing rivers to combine and
form a fantastical burst that some would dare say resembled the snort of the
very nose of the Dragon himself. But such things were lost upon the mortals of
the audience. Though they could now begin to understand the masters and wonders
of the orb, they were still lost in the hopeless thoughts of their own troubles
and their own day to day existance to even begin to fathom all that they were
seeing.

The magician continued.

Hopeless now I see you all and hopeless you shall stay.
But indulge me now, and let me go about my devices
So that you may at least superficially
Understand that very well spring which I have shown
Forth right and true upon your face. Lost on you
I know it is, yet worth bring about and showing
It always is. Never do I tire of
This constant mortal journey which brings us
all from this world to the next and back again
In one fell swoop of fantasy and adventure!

Let me take you in, so that you may see everything
You want or not want to ever know. Bring your hands
up to the stage and connect yourself by your connection
To that which is eternal and lord of all.

The magician with a snap of his fingers put out the glowing maze that was the
original orb of light, leaving the entire audience in darkness.

From his wand he puffed out a small tift of light. This tift revealed nothing
at first, except there was one thing notable about it, namely that it was
moving at a steady and linear pace towards the edge of the stage. The audience
became somehow held in suspense about the fate of this one drifting flame of
light which had come forth from the magicians wand in ever so graceful a
gesture.

The light came wisping towards the wall to reveal that a candleholster had been
placed their the whole time, presumably in advance by the magician for just the
purpose of amazing his audience with these light tricks. After the candle began
buring as regular candles of this world do it became slowly revealed the room
in which the candle was being held.

The room was dark, and contained one window which looked out directly to a
three-quarter moon waxing towards full. The moon illuminated a single desk with
strewn about papers on it. A man quietly sat on the desk.

To what do I own this painful plight?
I sit and I toil on pages and pages of work
Day in and day out with only my weary fingers
to show for the fruits of the labors which I
so hope to reap. I grow tired of work. I grow
Weary of papers. Give me a sword by which I can command
myself to conquer the enemy that stands before me;
Ask me not longer to fight the enemy of my mind
by writing calculations on papers with the sole
purpose of being read by men who would seek
to read them for whatever god-forsaken reason
one human might compell himself to read
the work of another.

The light in the corner of the room stayed lit. Silence ensues in the room for
some time. The man resolutely stares at the moon, unsure of whether to feel
profound by it or to let it pass him as any other day and as any other kind of
human being might look up at the light of the sky and treat it is a regular for
granted phenomenon of our day to day existance.

Magician:
Something bored, I know not what, this man
Does not care to make things interesting.
Interest must our audience take lest they
fall asleep at this mans troublesome but ultimately
weary and tired mind. Uninteresting his plight
Though large to him. Let's help him see the
Insignificance of his internal conflicts!

With a new wave of the wand the magician was able to act upon the backdrop of
stars which so captured the window behind the scene that the audience could
see. First, from the magicians wand came forth an entire web of light filled
threads, each one glowing with it's own aura yet each one noticably distinct
from the other which came forth from the same very source of the tip of his
wand. Each one to a different locaotion went. Each connected to its own star.

And in doing this the audience became at unawares to the scene at hand. This
man unsure of what was happening but to troubled and weary to care just let
himself look directly at the moon which did not change and did not occupy
itself and instead stayed intent on the three-quarters full position which was
aforementioned as the place in its cycle that it lay. All the while the
magician wove his webs and arranged the stars in such a pattern to create
entire scenes of warring nations and forgotten heroes of old in to their
patterns.

And then the wall returned and the scene was brought again to the window. The
wall of the stage severed the strands of life to bring the audience back to the
very same study with the very same man with the very same problems that he had
before. The only difference being the time of day and the position of the
stars. But the man on the stage did not care about the place of the stars, and
was so indifferent to his own plights that he didn't even bother to notice that
any one of them had moved. Instead, he only looked at the moon and thought of
his own plights.

What is the moon? To what do we owe this
Eternal reflection of the light and glory
Of God's great sun towards us at even the
Darkest hour of the deepest darkest night sky?
Did such a man exist before those as I that might
Deserve something so glorious as the moon?
Whereby what mechanism did those great men
Put forth the effort and tranquility to
Deserve such things? If only I were wont to care
more about these things would I stop starring at
the moon and concern myself to answer my own
nagging questions. But perhaps it's the questions
That I need. Perhaps its the struggle that
Makes me thrive. But the struggle is what
Causes me to want to quit. Take arms against
The unfair trade; For to put in an arm the world
Will but give you back a toe, and not even one
that would fit on your own foot. But look! I
drabble on with meaningless babble! Does the
Philosopher think of such things? Should I not
be ashamed of the thought which have been allowed
to think themselves in the cavern of mine own mind?
Ashamed not I am, not even worried. Indifferent:
The emotion not to be wished upon any soul.
If only I were not so indifferent as to want
to change my own indifference! My plights
become me not; Attractive not are thes musings.
Not even to myself do I want to hear such words.
But begone these evil thoughts of Moon lights past
Let this wave of self-sympathy wash over me.
Let my soul take charge of itself: For even if
such charge is empty and meaningless, tis better
to charge without meaning than to waste away certain
of your ever growing pathetic life-span.

I am quite done writing any more. I like the fact that I tried this, but I am
much too much too tired to keep going. I will try my hand at this some other
time when I am feeling more inspired and when I feel as though I can get a
handle on it better. For now, I just want to say that I think I am getting the
feel for the way tha lyrical prose works and that I believe that as I
understand the works of shakespeare and as I start to see the mechanisms by
which he was able to bring forth the things that he was able to bring forth am
I going to be more able to let the thoughts and words of my mind come out in a
similarly elegent and joyously pleasent way to read as any other thing.

So be it. We are done. What is the word count? 2500. Cool. We are doing that.
We are done.


