Raphael skirted under the sun gently carressing the mist of the clouds with his
wings as he soared to his destination.

"Of all places..." thought Raphael for what was probably at least the thirtieth
time on this flight.

Raphael hated when he received orders like this. It reminded him of the Angelic
War. In one moment you are chatting with Gabriel about the best way to align a
Galactic Magnetic Constant and the next Yahweh informs you that you have to go
under because there is a new task that must be completed. Raphael of course
always obeyed the will of the Lord from which all things came but Yahweh was
truly begining to wear on him. Yet Yahweh still had the direct favor of God
so Raphael knew it his duty to continue on in spite of whatever qualmes he had.

Rapheal slid between two mists of cloud. He felt the moisture of the starboard
side cloud carress his back along his spine. The feeling of water burned
Raphael's wings but he didn't care. It felt too good.

Angels live in a continual psychedelic state and only take material form as
required by the Lord, Creator of All himself demands. Raphael remembered very
briefly the previous time he took material form. It was to inform Adam, First
of Man of the doings of Satan after the Angelic War. That expenditure of energy
Raphael remembers fondly as doing his part to help save mankind from the spawns
and evils of Satan and his followers, but in the aftermath of it he learned
that his part merely served to distract Adam from the impending doom of Eve's
demise. Raphael felt betrayed at the lord for blinding him to the true
intentions of his ways, but this feeling was soon reconciled as Raphael
re-entered the "Cosmos of All" (as the angel's like to put it) and revitalized
himself as a true member and contributor to that which is known irrefutably to
be that which all life springs from.

Raphael approached an opening in the clouds. The sun was beginning to grow hot
on Rapheal's newly furnished physical form and he was growing weary of gliding
above the mist. Raphael turned belly up as he approached the opening in the
mists of the sky and when he felt his back no longer accumulating mist he dove
backwards head first so that his gaze shown on the other side of the opening
upside-down. Raphael let himself dip into free fall. The feeling of cold air
came upon Raphael's outer layer of form as it rushed upward along his body.
Raphael no longer felt as one anxious of the future or regretant of the past.
This free fall he knew would bring him to the surface level of the planet, and
that is all he needed to focus on. Raphael could feel the sense of "Past,
Present, and Future" come in to him. Even though he knew such things were mere
illusions he began to feel them and experience them regardless. Such was the
nature of the world of the living. For his task to be fulfilled he knew he had
to willingly and deliberately partake in these feelings. Without exposing
himself to the rules and frameworks of God's Creation through Gai√§ he wouldn't
be able to create deliberate and divinly inspired work in this world.

Raphael gently flexed his wings and found himself taking a corkscrew-180 turn,
righting his flight path to belly down again. Raphael felt the cooling effect
of darkness come over him as he began to glide under the mist of the clouds.
Looking behind him he saw the opening where he entered close behind him leaving
the halo of light which formerly illuminated the ground beneath behind. Raphael
brought himself back to a steady gliding pace so that he could evaluate the
land and landscape of the world newly entered.

The area around Raphael was dark save for the opening in the mist which he
descended from. The clouds were sufficient to block out most of the sun's
light. As Rapheal began to acclimate to the new standards of vision that he
would have to become accustomed to he began to notice that the land below him
was quite varied in elevation and covered in trees. The trees themselves grew
straight upward towards the sun which gave Raphael the ability to examine simply
the angle that the trees pointed in relation to the land they grew from. In
doing so Raphael could create something of an abstract image of a topographical
map in his mind's eye. Once this map was created he was able to reconcile it
with the memory of the maps other angels spoke of in the Cosmos of All and
determined that he was East of his destination. Remembering that the sun was
setting and to his left side before he descended under the clouds Raphael lifted
his right wing so that it could catch air and gently redirect his glide towards
a more westerly direction. With this maneouver completed he settled himself in
for a long glide.

Raphael decided to let himself gain some insight of the world he was flying
over. Angels never know exactly what sort of physical body they are going to
take on when they do, so it becomes something of a surprise to an angel when
their physical form has strange emotions or otherwise base and worldly things.
It's easy for an angel to grow too accustomed to the Cosmos of All and as such
it is required for many of them to take regular trips in to the World of the
Living in order to remind themselves what is one and true essence of what they
are able to achieve.

Raphael was not an angel that required such discipline. In fact, the
opposite could be argued. Many angels thought Raphael should be revered as one
of those angels trancended to the highest ranks of those that curate the
wellspring of the Cosmos. Such angels had achieved their role and had formed
their own complete reconcilation so as to be seen as uprightly divine and
inspired beings. As such they had no need to descend from their place in the
Cosmos of All to the World of the Living. Lord, Creator of All certainly
did not require anything more from Raphael than he had already given in the
form of the physical but Raphael knew it to be true that he should continue to
do so even after it was no longer required of him. Such was the nature of the
spirit which burst forth from the Great Bang of Creation that would become
Raphael. It was born and bred in to his very essence the need to continually
interact with the two forms of existance as needed. Raphael was one that could
argue with not only Yahweh but the Lord, Creator of All himself and always
propose a winning argument. As such, it could be said that Raphael has the most
intimate understanding of the World of the Living, and that understanding is so
born and bred in the very nature through which Raphael came in to existance in
the Great Bang of Creation that he is able to argue with even that which
brought existance forth into being and propose constructive and ultimately
fantastical new ideas in to that which seeks to bring the greatest form of all
life in to existance. Because of this nature Raphael was given the exclusive
privelege of the Lord, Creator of All's private conversation. As such, it could
be said that Raphael knew the Lord most of all things, perhaps even more so
than the Lord, Creator of All himself, and was most fit of all Angel's as a
seat at the council of those which reside in the Cosmos of All forever.

Yet here he was. Raphael knew the Lord, Creator of All had a reason for
bringing him in to existance at this time, but Raphael couldn't help but feel
that this job was better fit for a younger and more apprenticed angel. Such
imperfection that he knew was required for his task was not in Raphael's
nature, yet he knew in his deepest feeling of connection to the Cosmos of All
that such was the nature of his existance in this moment.

As much as Raphael felt annoyed at the prospect of his new journey, he felt all
the more thrilled. This was the kind of experience that fullfilled Raphael.
While he knew that his whole of creation had been fully reconciled it was still
enjoyable to Raphael to remind himself that he was not always so in tune with
everything that he was meant to do and that it was fun to bring himself in to
this state of existance even if it were for mere triffles and play things.
After all, this is what Lucifer wanted. He wanted to build an entire city to
himself. He got what he wanted, but at what cost? He gets to stumble and fall
in the Chaos of Pandemonium for the rest of his existance until the Great
Reckoning of All where his reconcilation will happen as the very last piece of
the Grand Cosmic Fullfillment. Raphael certainly did not envy his former lover.

Raphael noticed the forest start to become more level and flat as he continued
his way west. Angel's were always given a pretty good instinct coming in to a
new body of existance and matter but sometimes it was in the will of the powers
that be to leave the Angel in something of a state of ignorance as they partook
in their tasks. Raphael in this task was most certainly given a body which
could connect quite viscerally with the Eternal Lord's Great Vision but as
Raphael tried to harness this connection he felt his connections to Lucifer and
his previous false allegiance to him intrude on his thoughts. This particualar
form while quite adept with cosmological certainty was also strife with what
would be considered rather base and immature emotions that Raphael was not
fully and totally accustomed to handling. Raphael made note of this discrepency
and continued forth under the clouds.

Since the ground was becoming quite level and the density of trees was becoming
such that it was possible to see some of the naked earth underneath, Rapheal
knew based upon his pre-assigned instinct that he was nearing his destination.
Raphael felt uncertain in Yahweh's motivations for bringing Raphael in to
existance in this way but of his actions and his doings in this world Raphael
was quite certain. Raphael began to feel uneasy but reminded himself that his
reconcilation with the internal conflict which subsists in every being that
acts in independence from Lord, Creator of All was that uneasyness is actually
desirable in some circumstances and that true sublimation results only in
accepting those things which are not to be understood. The only way to be truly
open to accepting the magnificence that the Lord, Creator of All has brought
forth is to allow yourself to become captivated and in awe of it. One must go
forth in to it with the attitude of one that would seek to begin anew. Raphael
enjoyed this feeling more sublimely than any other feeling he knew. It was in
flying through the air that he was able to remind himself that the stinging and
biting sensations that flowed through his essence were just the very reason
that one would want to connect to the Cosmos of All at all and any other reason
for doing so would be frought with crooked corners and jagged edges. Raphael
let himself simply exist as a being of physical matter as his form continued to
soar through the air.

The ground under Raphael continued rapidly as he quickly marked in his mind's
eye the location that he knew must have been pre-wired in to this particular
physical essence. Raphael quickly examined a hilltop towards the Northeast that
marked the crest of the Mount of Contemplation so named by those that would
desire to name such trivialities and which marked the reference point which he
was to build from. Raphael slowly turned his path toward the desired center
point from which the locus of his work would be built.

Raphael felt the familiar thrill of Gai√§ rising up to meet him. To a being like
Raphael the sensation of descent was indistinguishable from the sensation of
meeting a long lost friend or former lover and engaging in mutual embrace
again. As Raphael approached just one wings tip length from the ground he felt
the sensation of humming emerge from the depths of the familar creation of
Gai√§, Eternal Mother being so called "Earth" by those that would be to reside on
it. He let his descent slow not to a halt but instead to a respectful breeze as
he connected himself spiritually to that which he was to build on.

Raphael became lost in his own entwinement with the spirit of Gai√§. Raphael was
surprised yet somehow ready for the assimilation which was about to take place.
Very gently Raphael was reminded of the feeling of entering in to union with
another of Lord, Creator of All's eternal beings. Raphael being only an angel
was sometimes clouded by the own whimseys and miscarings of those other angel's
which would seek to steer him astray or otherwise distract him from his true
task, but Raphael only needed to remind himself of the wellspring of warmth
that would come forth from that which trancended all material things and
manifested itself quite comepletely as the essence of itself in both the World
of the Living and of the Cosmos of All. Such was the majesty of Gai√§, Eternal
Mother. With eyes closed Raphael took in the sensation of joining in union with
such a Celestial body as Earth as he continued to glide over and slowly towards
her. Though Raphael had experienced the feeling of eternal union with a form
built out of Gai√§'s eternal essence infinitely countless times before each new
encounter was always unique and pure in it's own way. Such uniqueness of
experience was what gave her the quality which was irrefutablly connected to
those celestial beings created from the pure essence of Lord, Creator of All..
In his mind's eye Raphael felt the most true form of integration that any
angelic form can enter in to. It was in this connection to the Lord's Creation
that Raphael was able to continually remind himself of the true and undeniable
reason for being brought forth into existance. His connection to Gai√§ kept him
focused on his task at hand, but simultaneously brought Raphael to the state of
being which he knew would be required for his coming hardships. His doubts and
suspicians of intruding thoughts and devilish visions evaporated away as Gai√§'s
healing and guiding essence was felt completely by the whole of Raphael's
angelic existance.

Raphael felt himself suddenly wanting to break away from Gai√§'s embrace. He
wasn't sure why but he knew it to be time to remove himself from her union.
Raphael removed himself from his own mind's eye and reopened his two physical
eyes to find a prism of marble fast approaching in his flight path not even one
body length ahead. In that immediate moment Raphael did not care to distinguish
whether he was moving towards the slab or whether the slab was moving towards
him, all he knew was that he needed to bank up in order to avoid collision.
Raphael let his instincts as a physical being take over himself as he quickly
flexed his wings externally to open up the feathers which would bring him up
and above the approaching marble object. Such was his physical capability of
that moment. While it was enough to avoid complete catastrophe, it was not
enough to avoid colision entirely. The arc of the angel's path was such that,
while the general trend of his flight was upward, the general trend of the
sideways moving cube was still sideways and impacted directly with Raphael's
trailing lower half. This collision resulted in a complete somersault which to
the external eye might hove been percieved as a graceful rebalancing of a
tricky situation but to Raphael was a painful endeavor that he was unsure would
result in a successful landing.

Raphael felt the pain of this impact immediately. Raphael was aggressively
reminded of the heightened acutity of newly born angelic bodies as he felt what
could only be described as a rebirth of some new spawn of Pain herself bursting
forth from the essence of Raphael's lower half. While Raphael's nature was such
that a demon such a Pain could not aflict him at the internal level, it still
became uncomfortable and frightening to him that she would bring herself in to
his adventure so soon as he just emerged.

With a flutter of his wings Raphael corrected the breif tailspin as he brought
himself to a hover. Very gently he opened his wings so that they could act as a
parachute as he let the Earth gently come up to his seated position. As Raphael
and Earth came to meet eachother, Raphael corrected his wing direction to allow
himself to land on the very marble slab which brought him into such a frenzy in
the first place. This slab, Raphael knew, marked the center point of his new
task.

For a moment Raphael brought himself into the ego of his own thoughts. The Pain
which had spawned from his encounter with the slab was aggresively intrusive,
pervading every conscious and unconcious part of Raphael's being. Raphael was
immeditaely brought to the image of Lucifer. He saw his former lover
transforming herself from female to male so that he may ensemenate himself into
the demons of fallen angels which followed him into Pandemonium. Raphael saw
visions of hosts of such demon's, all former angel by which Raphael was
formerly intimate and deeply in tune with, all feeling not only the Mistress of
Pain but also the Embodiment of Agony as they each in their own way sought to
reconcile their being with their actions in that moment of their fall.

As Raphael felt these thoughts spring forth into the illusion of his newly
emerging sense of self he continually reminded himself of his direction and
purpose in descending yet again to the World of the Living.
