## THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE GREEKS


This dark picture is worlds apart from the stories of classical mythology. The
study of the way early man looked at his surroundings does not get much help
from the Greeks. How briefly the anthropologists treat the Greek myths is
noteworthy.

Of course the Greeks too had their roots in the primeval slime. Of course they
too once lived a savage life, ugly and brutal. But what the myths show is how
high they had risen above the ancient filth and fierceness by the time we have
any knowledge of them. Only a few traces of that time are to be found in the
stories.

We do not know when these stories were first told in their present shape; but
whenever it was, primitive life had been left far behind. The myths as we have
them are the creation of great poets. The first written record of Greece is the
Iliad. Greek mythology begins with Homer, generally believed to be not earlier
than a thousand years before Christ. The Iliad is, or contains, the oldest
Greek literature; and it is written in a rich and subtle and beautiful language
which must have had behind it centuries when men were striving to express
themselves with clarity and beauty, an indisputable proof of civilization. The
tales of Greek mythology do not throw any clear light upon what early mankind
was like. They do throw an abundance of light upon what early Greeks were
like—a matter, it would seem, of more importance to us, who are their
descendants intellectually, artistically, and politically, too. Nothing we
learn about them is alien to ourselves.

People often speak of “the Greek miracle.” What the phrase tries to express is
the new birth of the world with the awakening of Greece. “Old things are passed
away; behold, all things are become new.” Something like that happened in
Greece.





The Greeks, unlike the Egyptians, made their gods in their own image.





Why it happened, or when, we have no idea at all. We know only that in the
earliest Greek poets a new point of view dawned, never dreamed of in the world
before them, but never to leave the world after them. With the coming forward
of Greece, mankind became the center of the universe, the most important thing
in it. This was a revolution in thought. Human beings had counted for little
heretofore. In Greece man first realized what mankind was.

The Greeks made their gods in their own image. That had not entered the mind of
man before. Until then, gods had had no semblance of reality. They were unlike
all living things. In Egypt, a towering colossus, immobile, beyond the power of
the imagination to endow with movement, as fixed in the stone as the tremendous
temple columns, a representation of the human shape deliberately made unhuman.
Or a rigid figure, a woman with a cat’s head suggesting inflexible, inhuman
cruelty. Or a monstrous mysterious sphinx, aloof from all that lives. In
Mesopotamia, bas-reliefs of bestial shapes unlike any beast ever known, men
with birds’ heads and lions with bulls’ heads and both with eagles’ wings,
creations of artists who were intent upon producing something never seen except
in their own minds, the very consummation of unreality.

These and their like were what the pre-Greek world worshiped. One need only
place beside them in imagination any Greek statue of a god, so normal and
natural with all its beauty, to perceive what a new idea had come into the
world. With its coming, the universe became rational.

Saint Paul said the invisible must be understood by the visible. That was not a
Hebrew idea, it was Greek. In Greece alone in the ancient world people were
preoccupied with the visible; they were finding the satisfaction of their
desires in what was actually in the world around them. The sculptor watched the
athletes contending in the games and he felt that nothing he could imagine
would be as beautiful as those strong young bodies. So he made his statue of
Apollo. The storyteller found Hermes among the people he passed in the street.
He saw the god “like a young man at the age when youth is loveliest,” as Homer
says. Greek artists and poets realized how splendid a man could be, straight
and swift and strong. He was the fulfillment of their search for beauty. They
had no wish to create some fantasy shaped in their own minds. All the art and
all the thought of Greece centered in human beings.

Human gods naturally made heaven a pleasantly familiar place. The Greeks felt
at home in it. They knew just what the divine inhabitants did there, what they
ate and drank and where they banqueted and how they amused themselves. Of
course they were to be feared; they were very powerful and very dangerous when
angry. Still, with proper care a man could be quite fairly at ease with them.
He was even perfectly free to laugh at them. Zeus, trying to hide his love
affairs from his wife and invariably shown up, was a capital figure of fun. The
Greeks enjoyed him and liked him all the better for it. Hera was that stock
character of comedy, the typical jealous wife, and her ingenious tricks to
discomfit her husband and punish her rival, far from displeasing the Greeks,
entertained them as much as Hera’s modern counterpart does us today. Such
stories made for a friendly feeling. Laughter in the presence of an Egyptian
sphinx or an Assyrian bird-beast was inconceivable; but it was perfectly
natural in Olympus, and it made the gods companionable.

On earth, too, the deities were exceedingly and humanly attractive. In the form
of lovely youths and maidens they peopled the woodland, the forest, the rivers,
the sea, in harmony with the fair earth and the bright waters.

That is the miracle of Greek mythology—a humanized world, men freed from the
paralyzing fear of an omnipotent Unknown. The terrifying incomprehensibilities
which were worshiped elsewhere, and the fearsome spirits with which earth, air,
and sea swarmed, were banned from Greece. It may seem odd to say that the men
who made the myths disliked the irrational and had a love for facts; but it is
true, no matter how wildly fantastic some of the stories are. Anyone who reads
them with attention discovers that even the most nonsensical take place in a
world which is essentially rational and matter-of-fact. Hercules, whose life
was one long combat against preposterous monsters, is always said to have had
his home in the city of Thebes. The exact spot where Aphrodite was born of the
foam could be visited by any ancient tourist; it was just offshore from the
island of Cythera. The winged steed Pegasus, after skimming the air all day,
went every night to a comfortable stable in Corinth. A familiar local
habitation gave reality to all the mythical beings. If the mixture seems
childish, consider how reassuring and how sensible the solid background is as
compared with the Genie who comes from nowhere when Aladdin rubs the lamp and,
his task accomplished, returns to nowhere.

The terrifying irrational has no place in classical mythology. Magic, so
powerful in the world before and after Greece, is almost nonexistent. There are
no men and only two women with dreadful, supernatural powers. The demoniac
wizards and the hideous old witches who haunted Europe and America, too, up to
quite recent years, play no part at all in the stories. Circe and Medea are the
only witches and they are young and of surpassing beauty—delightful, not
horrible. Astrology, which has flourished from the days of ancient Babylon down
to today, is completely absent from classical Greece. There are many stories
about the stars, but not a trace of the idea that they influence men’s lives.
Astronomy is what the Greek mind finally made out of the stars. Not a single
story has a magical priest who is terribly to be feared because he knows ways
of winning over the gods or alienating them. The priest is rarely seen and is
never of importance. In the Odyssey when a priest and a poet fall on their
knees before Odysseus, praying him to spare their lives, the hero kills the
priest without a thought, but saves the poet. Homer says that he felt awe to
slay a man who had been taught his divine art by the gods. Not the priest, but
the poet, had influence with heaven—and no one was ever afraid of a poet.
Ghosts, too, which have played so large and so fearsome a part in other lands,
never appear on earth in any Greek story. The Greeks were not afraid of the
dead—“the piteous dead,” the Odyssey calls them.

The world of Greek mythology was not a place of terror for the human spirit. It
is true that the gods were disconcertingly incalculable. One could never tell
where Zeus’s thunderbolt would strike. Nevertheless, the whole divine company,
with a very few and for the most part not important exceptions, were
entrancingly beautiful with a human beauty, and nothing humanly beautiful is
really terrifying. The early Greek mythologists transformed a world full of
fear into a world full of beauty.

This bright picture has its dark spots. The change came about slowly and was
never quite completed. The gods-become-human were for a long time a very slight
improvement upon their worshipers. They were incomparably lovelier and more
powerful, and they were of course immortal; but they often acted in a way no
decent man or woman would. In the Iliad Hector is nobler by far than any of the
heavenly beings, and Andromache infinitely to be preferred to Athena or
Aphrodite. Hera from first to last is a goddess on a very low level of
humanity. Almost every one of the radiant divinities could act cruelly or
contemptibly. A very limited sense of right and wrong prevailed in Homer’s
heaven, and for a long time after.

Other dark spots too stand out. There are traces of a time when there were
beast-gods. The satyrs are goat-men and the centaurs are half man, half horse.
Hera is often called “cow-faced,” as if the adjective had somehow stuck to her
through all her changes from a divine cow to the very human queen of heaven.
There are also stories which point back clearly to a time when there was human
sacrifice. But what is astonishing is not that bits of savage belief were left
here and there. The strange thing is that they are so few.

Of course the mythical monster is present in any number of shapes,


Gorgons and hydras and chimaeras dire,



but they are there only to give the hero his meed of glory. What could a hero
do in a world without them? They are always overcome by him. The great hero of
mythology, Hercules, might be an allegory of Greece herself. He fought the
monsters and freed the earth from them just as Greece freed the earth from the
monstrous idea of the unhuman supreme over the human.

Greek mythology is largely made up of stories about gods and goddesses, but it
must not be read as a kind of Greek Bible, an account of the Greek religion.
According to the most modern idea, a real myth has nothing to do with religion.
It is an explanation of something in nature; how, for instance, any and
everything in the universe came into existence: men, animals, this or that tree
or flower, the sun, the moon, the stars, storms, eruptions, earthquakes, all
that is and all that happens. Thunder and lightning are caused when Zeus hurls
his thunderbolt. A volcano erupts because a terrible creature is imprisoned in
the mountain and every now and then struggles to get free. The Dipper, the
constellation called also the Great Bear, does not set below the horizon
because a goddess once was angry at it and decreed that it should never sink
into the sea. Myths are early science, the result of men’s first trying to
explain what they saw around them. But there are many so-called myths which
explain nothing at all. These tales are pure entertainment, the sort of thing
people would tell each other on a long winter’s evening. The story of Pygmalion
and Galatea is an example; it has no conceivable connection with any event in
nature. Neither has the Quest of the Golden Fleece, nor Orpheus and Eurydice,
nor many another. This fact is now generally accepted; and we do not have to
try to find in every mythological heroine the moon or the dawn and in every
hero’s life a sun myth. The stories are early literature as well as early
science.

But religion is there, too. In the background, to be sure, but nevertheless
plain to see. From Homer through the tragedians and even later, there is a
deepening realization of what human beings need and what they must have in
their gods.

Zeus the Thunderer was, it seems certain, once a rain-god. He was supreme even
over the sun, because rocky Greece needed rain more than sunshine and the God
of Gods would be the one who could give the precious water of life to his
worshipers. But Homer’s Zeus is not a fact of nature. He is a person living in
a world where civilization has made an entry, and of course he has a standard
of right and wrong. It is not very high, certainly, and seems chiefly
applicable to others, not to himself; but he does punish men who lie and break
their oaths; he is angered by any ill treatment of the dead; and he pities and
helps old Priam when he goes as a suppliant to Achilles. In the Odyssey, he has
reached a higher level. The swineherd there says that the needy and the
stranger are from Zeus and he who fails to help them sins against Zeus himself.
Hesiod, not much later than the Odyssey if at all, says of a man who does evil
to the suppliant and the stranger, or who wrongs orphan children, “with that
man Zeus is angry.”

Then Justice became Zeus’s companion. That was a new idea. The buccaneering
chieftains in the Iliad did not want justice. They wanted to be able to take
whatever they chose because they were strong and they wanted a god who was on
the side of the strong. But Hesiod, who was a peasant living in a poor man’s
world, knew that the poor must have a just god. He wrote, “Fishes and beasts
and fowls of the air devour one another. But to man, Zeus has given justice.
Beside Zeus on his throne Justice has her seat.” These passages show that the
great and bitter needs of the helpless were reaching up to heaven and changing
the god of the strong into the protector of the weak.

So, back of the stories of an amorous Zeus and a cowardly Zeus and a ridiculous
Zeus, we can catch sight of another Zeus coming into being, as men grow
continually more conscious of what life demanded of them and what human beings
needed in the god they worshiped. Gradually this Zeus displaced the others,
until he occupied the whole scene. At last he became, in the words of Dio
Chrysostom, who wrote during the second century A.D.: “Our Zeus, the giver of
every good gift, the common father and saviour and guardian of mankind.”

The Odyssey speaks of “the divine for which all men long,” and hundreds of
years later Aristotle wrote, “Excellence, much labored for by the race of
mortals.” The Greeks from the earliest mythologists on had a perception of the
divine and the excellent. Their longing for them was great enough to make them
never give up laboring to see them clearly, until at last the thunder and
lightning were changed into the Universal Father.





