# Preface

## Preface


A book on Mythology must draw from widely different sources. Twelve hundred
years separate the first writers through whom the myths have come down to us
from the last, and there are stories as unlike each other as “Cinderella” and
“King Lear.” To bring them all together in one volume is really somewhat
comparable to doing the same for the stories of English literature from Chaucer
to the ballads, through Shakespeare and Marlowe and Swift and Defoe and Dryden
and Pope and so on, ending with, say, Tennyson and Browning, or even, to make
the comparison truer, Kipling and Galsworthy. The English collection would be
bigger, but it would not contain more dissimilar material. In point of fact,
Chaucer is more like Galsworthy and the ballads like Kipling than Homer is like
Lucian or Aeschylus like Ovid.

Faced with this problem, I determined at the outset to dismiss any idea of
unifying the tales. That would have meant either writing “King Lear,” so to
speak, down to the level of “Cinderella”—the vice versa procedure being
obviously not possible—or else telling in my own way stories which were in no
sense mine and had been told by great writers in ways they thought suited their
subjects. I do not mean, of course, that a great writer’s style can be
reproduced or that I should dream of attempting such a feat. My aim has been
nothing more ambitious than to keep distinct for the reader the very different
writers from whom our knowledge of the myths comes. For example, Hesiod is a
notably simple writer and devout; he is naïve, even childish, sometimes crude,
always full of piety. Many of the stories in this book are told only by him.
Side by side with them are stories told only by Ovid, subtle, polished,
artificial, self-conscious, and the complete skeptic. My effort has been to
make the reader see some difference between writers who were so different.
After all, when one takes up a book like this, one does not ask how
entertainingly the author has retold the stories, but how close he has brought
the reader to the original.

My hope is that those who do not know the classics will gain in this way not
only a knowledge of the myths, but some little idea of what the writers were
like who told them—who have been proved, by two thousand years and more, to be
immortal.





