## Introduction to Classical Mythology


Of old the Hellenic race was marked off from the barbarian as more keen-witted
and more free from nonsense.

HERODOTUS I: 60.



GREEK and Roman mythology is quite generally supposed to show us the way the
human race thought and felt untold ages ago. Through it, according to this
view, we can retrace the path from civilized man who lives so far from nature,
to man who lived in close companionship with nature; and the real interest of
the myths is that they lead us back to a time when the world was young and
people had a connection with the earth, with trees and seas and flowers and
hills, unlike anything we ourselves can feel. When the stories were being
shaped, we are given to understand, little distinction had as yet been made
between the real and the unreal. The imagination was vividly alive and not
checked by the reason, so that anyone in the woods might see through the trees
a fleeing nymph, or bending over a clear pool to drink, behold in the depths a
naiad’s face.

The prospect of traveling back to this delightful state of things is held out
by nearly every writer who touches upon classical mythology, above all by the
poets. In that infinitely remote time primitive man could


Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;

Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.



And we for a moment can catch, through the myths he made, a glimpse of that
strangely and beautifully animated world.

But a very brief consideration of the ways of uncivilized peoples everywhere
and in all ages is enough to prick that romantic bubble. Nothing is clearer
than the fact that primitive man, whether in New Guinea today or eons ago in
the prehistoric wilderness, is not and never has been a creature who peoples
his world with bright fancies and lovely visions. Horrors lurked in the
primeval forest, not nymphs and naiads. Terror lived there, with its close
attendant, Magic, and its most common defense, Human Sacrifice. Mankind’s chief
hope of escaping the wrath of whatever divinities were then abroad lay in some
magical rite, senseless but powerful, or in some offering made at the cost of
pain and grief.





