## CHAPTER II


The Two Great Gods of Earth


FOR the most part the immortal gods were of little use to human beings and
often they were quite the reverse of useful: Zeus a dangerous lover for mortal
maidens and completely incalculable in his use of the terrible thunderbolt;
Ares the maker of war and a general pest; Hera with no idea of justice when she
was jealous as she perpetually was; Athena also a war maker, and wielding the
lightning’s sharp lance quite as irresponsibly as Zeus did; Aphrodite using her
power chiefly to ensnare and betray. They were a beautiful, radiant company, to
be sure, and their adventures made excellent stories; but when they were not
positively harmful, they were capricious and undependable, and in general
mortals got on best without them.

There were two, however, who were altogether different—who were, indeed,
mankind’s best friends: Demeter, in Latin Ceres, the Goddess of the Corn, a
daughter of Cronus and Rhea; and Dionysus, also called Bacchus, the God of
Wine. Demeter was the older, as was natural. Corn was sowed long before vines
were planted. The first cornfield was the beginning of settled life on earth.
Vineyards came later. It was natural, too, that the divine power which brought
forth the grain should be thought of as a goddess, not a god. When the business
of men was hunting and fighting, the care of the fields belonged to the women,
and as they plowed and scattered the seed and reaped the harvest, they felt
that a woman divinity could best understand and help woman’s work. They could
best understand her, too, who was worshiped, not like other gods by the bloody
sacrifices men liked, but in every humble act that made the farm fruitful.
Through her the field of grain was hallowed. “Demeter’s holy grain.” The
threshing-floor, too, was under her protection. Both were her temples where at
any moment she might be present. “At the sacred threshing-floor, when they are
winnowing, she herself, Demeter of the corn-ripe yellow hair, divides the grain
and the chaff in the rush of the wind, and the heap of chaff grows white.” “May
it be mine,” the reaper prays, “beside Demeter’s altar to dig the great
winnowing fan through her heaps of corn, while she stands smiling by with
sheaves and poppies in her hand.”

Her chief festival, of course, came at the harvest time. In earlier days it
must have been a simple reapers’ thanksgiving day when the first loaf baked
from the new grain was broken and reverently eaten with grateful prayers to the
goddess from whom had come this best and most necessary gift for human life. In
later years the humble feast grew into a mysterious worship, about which we
know little. The great festival, in September, came only every five years, but
it lasted for nine days. They were most sacred days, when much of the ordinary
business of life was suspended. Processions took place, sacrifices were held
with dances and song, there was general rejoicing. All this was public
knowledge and has been related by many a writer. But the chief part of the
ceremony which took place in the precincts of the temple has never been
described. Those who beheld it were bound by a vow of silence and they kept it
so well that we know only stray bits of what was done.

The great temple was at Eleusis, a little town near Athens, and the worship was
called the Eleusinian Mysteries. Throughout the Greek world and the Roman, too,
they were held in especial veneration. Cicero, writing in the century before
Christ, says: “Nothing is higher than these mysteries. They have sweetened our
characters and softened our customs; they have made us pass from the condition
of savages to true humanity. They have not only shown us the way to live
joyfully, but they have taught us how to die with a better hope.”

And yet even so, holy and awesome though they were, they kept the mark of what
they had sprung from. One of the few pieces of information we have about them
is that at a very solemn moment the worshipers were shown “an ear of corn which
had been reaped in silence.”

In some way, no one knows clearly how or when, the God of the Vine, Dionysus,
came to take his place, too, at Eleusis, side by side with Demeter.


Beside Demeter when the cymbals sound

Enthroned sits Dionysus of the flowing hair.



It was natural that they should be worshiped together, both divinities of the
good gifts of earth, both present in the homely daily acts that life depends
on, the breaking of bread and the drinking of wine. The harvest was Dionysus’
festival, too, when the grapes were brought to the wine-press.


The joy-god Dionysus, the pure star

That shines amid the gathering of the fruit.



But he was not always a joy-god, nor was Demeter always the happy goddess of
the summertime. Each knew pain as well as joy. In that way, too, they were
closely linked together; they were both suffering gods. The other immortals
were untouched by lasting grief. “Dwelling in Olympus where the wind never
blows and no rain falls ever nor the least white star of snow, they are happy
all their days, feasting upon nectar and ambrosia, rejoicing in all glorious
Apollo as he strikes his silver lyre, and the sweet voices of the Muses answer
him, while the Graces dance with Hebe and with Aphrodite, and a radiance shines
round them all.” But the two divinities of Earth knew heart-rending grief.

What happens to the corn plants and the luxuriant branching vines when the
grain is harvested, the grapes gathered, and the black frost sets in, killing
the fresh green life of the fields? That is what men asked themselves when the
first stories were told to explain what was so mysterious, the changes always
passing before their eyes, of day and night and the seasons and the stars in
their courses. Though Demeter and Dionysus were the happy gods of the harvest,
during the winter it was clear that they were altogether different. They
sorrowed, and the earth was sad. The men of long ago wondered why this should
be, and they told stories to explain the reason.





DEMETER (CERES)


This story is told only in a very early poem, one of the earliest of the
Homeric Hymns, dating from the eighth or the beginning of the seventh century.
The original has the marks of early Greek poetry, great simplicity and
directness and delight in the beautiful world.



Demeter had an only daughter, Persephone (in Latin Proserpine), the maiden of
the spring. She lost her and in her terrible grief she withheld her gifts from
the earth, which turned into a frozen desert. The green and flowering land was
ice-bound and lifeless because Persephone had disappeared.

The lord of the dark underworld, the king of the multitudinous dead, carried
her off when, enticed by the wondrous bloom of the narcissus, she strayed too
far from her companions. In his chariot drawn by coal-black steeds he rose up
through a chasm in the earth, and grasping the maiden by the wrist set her
beside him. He bore her away weeping, down to the underworld. The high hills
echoed her cry and the depths of the sea, and her mother heard it. She sped
like a bird over sea and land seeking her daughter. But no one would tell her
the truth, “no man nor god, nor any sure messenger from the birds.” Nine days
Demeter wandered, and all that time she would not taste of ambrosia or put
sweet nectar to her lips. At last she came to the Sun and he told her all the
story: Persephone was down in the world beneath the earth, among the shadowy
dead.

Then a still greater grief entered Demeter’s heart. She left Olympus; she dwelt
on earth, but so disguised that none knew her, and, indeed, the gods are not
easily discerned by mortal men. In her desolate wanderings she came to Eleusis
and sat by the wayside near a well. She seemed an aged woman, such as in great
houses care for the children or guard the storerooms. Four lovely maidens,
sisters, coming to draw water from the well, saw her and asked her pityingly
what she did there. She answered that she had fled from pirates who had meant
to sell her as a slave, and that she knew no one in this strange land to go to
for help. They told her that any house in the town would welcome her, but that
they would like best to bring her to their own if she would wait there while
they went to ask their mother. The goddess bent her head in assent, and the
girls, filling their shining pitchers with water, hurried home. Their mother,
Metaneira, bade them return at once and invite the stranger to come, and
speeding back they found the glorious goddess still sitting there, deeply
veiled and covered to her slender feet by her dark robe. She followed them, and
as she crossed the threshold to the hall where the mother sat holding her young
son, a divine radiance filled the doorway and awe fell upon Metaneira.

She bade Demeter be seated and herself offered her honey-sweet wine, but the
goddess would not taste it. She asked instead for barley-water flavored with
mint, the cooling draught of the reaper at harvest time and also the sacred cup
given the worshipers at Eleusis. Thus refreshed she took the child and held him
to her fragrant bosom and his mother’s heart was glad. So Demeter nursed
Demophoön, the son that Metaneira had borne to wise Celeus. And the child grew
like a young god, for daily Demeter anointed him with ambrosia and at night she
would place him in the red heart of the fire. Her purpose was to give him
immortal youth.

Something, however, made the mother uneasy, so that one night she kept watch
and screamed in terror when she saw the child laid in the fire. The goddess was
angered; she seized the boy and cast him on the ground. She had meant to set
him free from old age and from death, but that was not to be. Still, he had
lain upon her knees and slept in her arms and therefore he should have honor
throughout his life.

Then she showed herself the goddess manifest. Beauty breathed about her and a
lovely fragrance; light shone from her so that the great house was filled with
brightness. She was Demeter, she told the awestruck women. They must build her
a great temple near the town and so win back the favor of her heart.





The rape of Persephone (Proserpine)





Thus she left them, and Metaneira fell speechless to the earth and all there
trembled with fear. In the morning they told Celeus what had happened and he
called the people together and revealed to them the command of the goddess.
They worked willingly to build her a temple, and when it was finished Demeter
came to it and sat there—apart from the gods in Olympus, alone, wasting away
with longing for her daughter.

That year was most dreadful and cruel for mankind over all the earth. Nothing
grew; no seed sprang up; in vain the oxen drew the plowshare through the
furrows. It seemed the whole race of men would die of famine. At last Zeus saw
that he must take the matter in hand. He sent the gods to Demeter, one after
another, to try to turn her from her anger, but she listened to none of them.
Never would she let the earth bear fruit until she had seen her daughter. Then
Zeus realized that his brother must give way. He told Hermes to go down to the
underworld and to bid the lord of it let his bride go back to Demeter.

Hermes found the two sitting side by side, Persephone shrinking away, reluctant
because she longed for her mother. At Hermes’ words she sprang up joyfully,
eager to go. Her husband knew that he must obey the word of Zeus and send her
up to earth away from him, but he prayed her as she left him to have kind
thoughts of him and not be so sorrowful that she was the wife of one who was
great among the immortals. And he made her eat a pomegranate seed, knowing in
his heart that if she did so she must return to him.

He got ready his golden car and Hermes took the reins and drove the black
horses straight to the temple where Demeter was. She ran out to meet her
daughter as swiftly as a Maenad runs down the mountainside. Persephone sprang
into her arms and was held fast there. All day they talked of what had happened
to them both, and Demeter grieved when she heard of the pomegranate seed,
fearing that she could not keep her daughter with her.

Then Zeus sent another messenger to her, a great personage, none other than his
revered mother Rhea, the oldest of the gods. Swiftly she hastened down from the
heights of Olympus to the barren, leafless earth, and standing at the door of
the temple she spoke to Demeter.


Come, my daughter, for Zeus, far-seeing, loud-thundering, bids you.

Come once again to the halls of the gods where you shall have honor,

Where you will have your desire, your daughter, to comfort your sorrow

As each year is accomplished and bitter winter is ended.

For a third part only the kingdom of darkness shall hold her.

For the rest you will keep her, you and the happy immortals.

Peace now. Give men life which comes alone from your giving.



Demeter did not refuse, poor comfort though it was that she must lose
Persephone for four months every year and see her young loveliness go down to
the world of the dead. But she was kind; the “Good Goddess,” men always called
her. She was sorry for the desolation she had brought about. She made the
fields once more rich with abundant fruit and the whole world bright with
flowers and green leaves. Also she went to the princes of Eleusis who had built
her temple and she chose one, Triptolemus, to be her ambassador to men,
instructing them how to sow the corn. She taught him and Celeus and the others
her sacred rites, “mysteries which no one may utter, for deep awe checks the
tongue. Blessed is he who has seen them; his lot will be good in the world to
come.”





Queen of fragrant Eleusis,

Giver of earth’s good gifts,

Give me your grace, O Demeter.

You, too, Persephone, fairest,

Maiden all lovely, I offer

Song for your favor.





In the stories of both goddesses, Demeter and Persephone, the idea of sorrow
was foremost. Demeter, goddess of the harvest wealth, was still more the divine
sorrowing mother who saw her daughter die each year. Persephone was the radiant
maiden of the spring and the summertime, whose light step upon the dry, brown
hillside was enough to make it fresh and blooming, as Sappho writes,


I heard the footfall of the flower spring…



—Persephone’s footfall. But all the while Persephone knew how brief that beauty
was; fruits, flowers, leaves, all the fair growth of earth, must end with the
coming of the cold and pass like herself into the power of death. After the
lord of the dark world below carried her away she was never again the gay young
creature who had played in the flowery meadow without a thought of care or
trouble. She did indeed rise from the dead every spring, but she brought with
her the memory of where she had come from; with all her bright beauty there was
something strange and awesome about her. She was often said to be “the maiden
whose name may not be spoken.”

The Olympians were “the happy gods,” “the deathless gods,” far removed from
suffering mortals destined to die. But in their grief and at the hour of death,
men could turn for compassion to the goddess who sorrowed and the goddess who
died.





DIONYSUS OR BACCHUS


This story is very differently told from the story of Demeter. Dionysus was the
last god to enter Olympus. Homer did not admit him. There are no early sources
for his story except a few brief allusions in Hesiod, in the eighth or ninth
century. A last Homeric Hymn, perhaps even as late as the fourth century, gives
the only account of the pirates’ ship, and the fate of Pentheus is the subject
of the last play of Euripides, in the fifth century, the most modern of all
Greek poets.



Thebes was Dionysus’ own city, where he was born, the son of Zeus and the
Theban princess Semele. He was the only god whose parents were not both divine.


At Thebes alone do mortal women bear

Immortal gods.



Semele was the most unfortunate woman of all those Zeus fell in love with, and
in her case too the reason was Hera. Zeus was madly in love with her and told
her that anything she asked of him he would do; he swore it by the river Styx,
the oath which not even he himself could break. She told him that what she
wanted above all else was to see him in his full splendor as King of Heaven and
Lord of the Thunderbolt. It was Hera who had put that wish into her heart. Zeus
knew that no mortal could behold him thus and live, but he could do nothing. He
had sworn by the Styx. He came as she had asked, and before that awful glory of
burning light she died. But Zeus snatched from her her child that was near
birth, and hid it in his own side away from Hera until the time had come for it
to be born. Then Hermes carried it to be cared for by the nymphs of Nysa—the
loveliest of earth’s valleys, but no man has ever looked upon Nysa or knows
where it lies. Some say the nymphs were the Hyades, whom Zeus afterwards placed
in the sky as stars, the stars which bring rain when they near the horizon.

So the God of the Vine was born of fire and nursed by rain, the hard burning
heat that ripens the grapes and the water that keeps the plant alive.

Grown to manhood, Dionysus wandered far to strange places.


The lands of Lydia rich in gold,

Of Phrygia too; the sun-struck plains

Of Persia; the great walls of Bactria.

The storm-swept country of the Medes;

And Araby the Blest.



Everywhere he taught men the culture of the vine and the mysteries of his
worship and everywhere they accepted him as a god until he drew near to his own
country.

One day over the sea near Greece a pirates’ ship came sailing. On a great
headland by the shore they saw a beautiful youth. His rich dark hair flowed
down over a purple cloak that covered his strong shoulders. He looked like a
son of kings, one whose parents could pay a great ransom. Exulting, the sailors
sprang ashore and seized him. On board the ship they fetched rude bonds to
fetter him with, but to their amazement they were unable to bind him; the ropes
would not hold together; they fell apart when they touched his hands or feet.
And he sat looking at them with a smile in his dark eyes.

Alone among them the helmsman understood and cried out that this must be a god
and should be set free at once or deadly harm would come to them. But the
captain mocked him for a silly fool and bade the crew hasten to hoist the sail.
The wind filled it and the men drew taut the sheets, but the ship did not move.
Then wonder upon wonder happened. Fragrant wine ran in streams down the deck; a
vine with many clusters spread out over the sail; a dark green ivy-plant twined
around the mast like a garland, with flowers in it and lovely fruits.
Terror-stricken, the pirates ordered the helmsman to put in to land. Too late,
for as they spoke their captive became a lion, roaring and glaring terribly. At
that, they leaped overboard and instantly were changed into dolphins, all
except the good helmsman. On him the god had mercy. He held him back and bade
him take courage, for he had found favor with one who was indeed a
god—Dionysus, whom Semele bore in union with Zeus.

When he passed through Thrace on his way to Greece, the god was insulted by one
of the kings there, Lycurgus, who bitterly opposed this new worship. Dionysus
retreated before him and even took refuge from him in the depths of the sea.
But later he came back, overpowered him, and punished him for his wickedness,
though mildly, by


Imprisoning him within a rocky cave

Until his first fierce maddening rage

Passed slowly and he learned to know

The god whom he had mocked.



But the other gods were not mild. Zeus struck Lycurgus blind and he died soon
after. None lived long who strove with gods.

Some time during his wanderings, Dionysus came upon the princess of Crete,
Ariadne, when she was utterly desolate, having been abandoned on the shore of
the island of Naxos by the Athenian prince, Theseus, whose life she had saved.
Dionysus had compassion upon her. He rescued her, and in the end loved her.
When she died Dionysus took a crown he had given her and placed it among the
stars.

The mother whom he had never seen was not forgotten. He longed for her so
greatly that at last he dared the terrible descent to the lower world to seek
her. When he found her, he defied the power of Death to keep her from him; and
Death yielded. Dionysus brought her away, but not to live on earth. He took her
up to Olympus, where the gods consented to receive her as one of themselves, a
mortal, indeed, but the mother of a god and therefore fit to dwell with
immortals.


The God of Wine could be kind and beneficent. He could also be cruel and drive
men on to frightful deeds. Often he made them mad. The MAENADS, or the
BACCHANTES, as they were also called, were women frenzied with wine. They
rushed through woods and over mountains uttering sharp cries, waving
pine-cone-tipped wands, swept away in a fierce ecstasy. Nothing could stop
them. They would tear to pieces the wild creatures they met and devour the
bloody shreds of flesh. They sang,


Oh, sweet upon the mountain

The dancing and the singing,

The maddening rushing flight.

Oh, sweet to sink to earth outworn

When the wild goat has been hunted and caught,

Oh, the joy of the blood and the raw red flesh!



The gods of Olympus loved order and beauty in their sacrifices and their
temples. The madwomen, the Maenads, had no temples. They went to the wilderness
to worship, to the wildest mountains, the deepest forests, as if they kept to
the customs of an ancient time before men had thought of building houses for
their gods. They went out of the dusty, crowded city, back to the lean purity
of the untrodden hills and woodlands. There Dionysus gave them food and drink:
herbs and berries and the milk of the wild goat. Their beds were on the soft
meadow grass; under the thick-leaved trees; where the pine needles fall year
after year. They woke to a sense of peace and heavenly freshness; they bathed
in a clear brook. There was much that was lovely, good, and freeing in this
worship under the open sky and the ecstasy of joy it brought in the wild beauty
of the world. And yet always present, too, was the horrible bloody feast.

The worship of Dionysus was centered in these two ideas so far apart—of freedom
and ecstatic joy and of savage brutality. The God of Wine could give either to
his worshipers. Throughout the story of his life he is sometimes man’s
blessing, sometimes his ruin. Of all the terrible deeds laid to his account the
worst was done in Thebes, his mother’s city.

Dionysus came to Thebes to establish his worship there. He was accompanied, as
was his custom, by a train of women dancing and singing exultant songs, wearing
fawn-skins over their robes, waving ivy-wreathed wands. They seemed mad with
joy. They sang,


O Bacchanals, come,

Oh, come.

Sing Dionysus,

Sing to the timbrel,

The deep-voiced timbrel.

Joyfully praise him,

Him who brings joy.

Holy, all holy

Music is calling.

To the hills, to the hills,

Fly, O Bacchanal

Swift of foot.

On, O joyful, be fleet.



Pentheus, the King of Thebes, was the son of Semele’s sister, but he had no
idea that the leader of this band of excited, strange-acting women was his own
cousin. He did not know that when Semele died Zeus had saved her child. The
wild dancing and the loud joyous singing and the generally queer behavior of
these strangers seemed to him highly objectionable, and to be stopped at once.
Pentheus ordered his guards to seize and imprison the visitors, especially the
leader, “whose face is flushed with wine, a cheating sorcerer from Lydia.” But
as he said these words he heard behind him a solemn warning: “The man you
reject is a new god. He is Semele’s child, whom Zeus rescued. He, with divine
Demeter, is greatest upon earth for men.” The speaker was the old blind prophet
Teiresias, the holy man of Thebes who knew as no one else the will of the gods.
But as Pentheus turned to answer him he saw that he was tricked out like the
wild women: a wreath of ivy on his white hair, his old shoulders covered by a
fawn-skin, a queer pine-tipped stick in his trembling hand. Pentheus laughed
mockingly as he looked him over and then ordered him with contempt out of his
sight. Thus he brought upon himself his doom; he would not hear when the gods
spoke to him.

Dionysus was led in before him by a band of his soldiers. They said he had not
tried to flee or to resist, but had done all possible to make it easy for them
to seize and bring him until they felt ashamed and told him they were acting
under orders, not of their own free will. They declared, too, that the maidens
they had imprisoned had all escaped to the mountains. The fetters would not
keep fastened; the doors unbarred themselves. “This man,” they said, “has come
to Thebes with many wonders—”

Pentheus by now was blind to everything except his anger and his scorn. He
spoke roughly to Dionysus, who answered him with entire gentleness, seeming to
try to reach his real self and open his eyes to see that he was face to face
with divinity. He warned him that he could not keep him in prison, “for God
will set me free.”

“God?” Pentheus asked jeeringly.

“Yes,” Dionysus answered. “He is here and sees my suffering.”

“Not where my eyes can see him,” Pentheus said.

“He is where I am,” answered Dionysus. “You cannot see him for you are not
pure.”

Pentheus angrily ordered the soldiers to bind him and take him to the prison
and Dionysus went, saying, “The wrongs you do to me are wrongs done to the
gods.”

But the prison could not hold Dionysus. He came forth, and going to Pentheus
again he tried to persuade him to yield to what these wonders plainly showed
was divine, and welcome this new worship of a new and great god. When, however,
Pentheus only heaped insults and threats upon him, Dionysus left him to his
doom. It was the most horrible that there could be.

Pentheus went to pursue the god’s followers among the hills where the maidens
had fled when they escaped from prison. Many of the Theban women had joined
them; Pentheus’ mother and her sisters were there. And there Dionysus showed
himself in his most terrible aspect. He made them all mad. The women thought
Pentheus a wild beast, a mountain lion, and they rushed to destroy him, his
mother first. As they fell upon him he knew at last that he had fought against
a god and must pay with his life. They tore him limb from limb, and then, only
then, the god restored their senses, and his mother saw what she had done.
Looking at her in her agony the maidens, all sobered now, the dancing over and
the singing and the wild wand-waving, said to one another,


In strange ways hard to know gods come to men.

Many a thing past hope they had fulfilled,

And what was looked for went another way.

A path we never thought to tread God found for us.

So has this come to pass.





The ideas about Dionysus in these various stories seem at first sight
contradictory. In one he is the joy-god—


He whose locks are bound with gold,

Ruddy Bacchus,

Comrade of the Maenads, whose

Blithe torch blazes.



In another he is the heartless god, savage, brutal—


He who with a mocking laugh

Hunts his prey,

Snares and drags him to his death

With his Bacchanals.



The truth is, however, that both ideas arose quite simply and reasonably from
the fact of his being the god of wine. Wine is bad as well as good. It cheers
and warms men’s hearts; it also makes them drunk. The Greeks were a people who
saw facts very clearly. They could not shut their eyes to the ugly and
degrading side of wine-drinking and see only the delightful side. Dionysus was
the God of the Vine; therefore he was a power which sometimes made men commit
frightful and atrocious crimes. No one could defend them; no one would ever try
to defend the fate Pentheus suffered. But, the Greeks said to each other, such
things really do happen when people are frenzied with drink. This truth did not
blind them to the other truth, that wine was “the merry-maker,” lightening
men’s hearts, bringing careless ease and fun and gaiety.


The wine of Dionysus,

When the weary cares of men

Leave every heart.

We travel to a land that never was.

The poor grow rich, the rich grow great of heart.

All-conquering are the shafts made from the Vine.



The reason that Dionysus was so different at one time from another was because
of this double nature of wine and so of the god of wine. He was man’s
benefactor and he was man’s destroyer.

On his beneficent side he was not only the god that makes men merry. His cup
was


Life-giving, healing every ill.



Under his influence courage was quickened and fear banished, at any rate for
the moment. He uplifted his worshipers; he made them feel that they could do
what they had thought they could not. All this happy freedom and confidence
passed away, of course, as they either grew sober or got drunk, but while it
lasted it was like being possessed by a power greater than themselves. So
people felt about Dionysus as about no other god. He was not only outside of
them, he was within them, too. They could be transformed by him into being like
him. The momentary sense of exultant power wine-drinking can give was only a
sign to show men that they had within them more than they knew; “they could
themselves become divine.”

To think in this way was far removed from the old idea of worshiping the god by
drinking enough to be gay or to be freed from care or to get drunk. There were
followers of Dionysus who never drank wine at all. It is not known when the
great change took place, lifting the god who freed men for a moment through
drunkenness to the god who freed them through inspiration, but one very
remarkable result of it made Dionysus for all future ages the most important of
the gods of Greece.

The Eleusinian Mysteries, which were always chiefly Demeter’s, had indeed great
importance. For hundreds of years they helped men, as Cicero said, “to live
with joy and to die with hope.” But their influence did not last, very likely
because nobody was allowed to teach their ideas openly or write about them. In
the end only a dim memory of them was left. It was quite otherwise with
Dionysus. What was done at his great festival was open to all the world and is
a living influence today. No other festival in Greece could compare with it. It
took place in the spring when the vine begins to put forth its branches, and it
lasted for five days. They were days of perfect peace and enjoyment. All the
ordinary business of life stopped. No one could be put in prison; prisoners
were even released so that they could share in the general rejoicing. But the
place where people gathered to do honor to the god was not a wild wilderness
made horrible by savage deeds and a bloody feast; it was not even a temple
precinct with ordered sacrifices and priestly ceremonies. It was a theater; and
the ceremony was the performance of a play. The greatest poetry in Greece, and
among the greatest in the world, was written for Dionysus. The poets who wrote
the plays, the actors and singers who took part in them, were all regarded as
servants of the god. The performances were sacred; the spectators, too, along
with the writers and the performers, were engaged in an act of worship.
Dionysus himself was supposed to be present; his priest had the seat of honor.

It is clear, therefore, that the idea of the god of holy inspiration who could
fill men with his spirit to write gloriously and to act gloriously became far
more important than the earlier ideas of him. The first tragic plays, which are
among the best there are, never equaled except by Shakespeare, were produced in
the theater of Dionysus. Comedies were produced there, too, but tragedies far
outnumbered them, and there was a reason why.

This strange god, the gay reveler, the cruel hunter, the lofty inspirer, was
also the sufferer. He, like Demeter, was afflicted, not because of grief for
another, as she was, but because of his own pain. He was the vine, which is
always pruned as nothing else that bears fruits; every branch cut away, only
the bare stock left; through the winter a dead thing to look at, an old gnarled
stump seeming incapable of ever putting forth leaves again. Like Persephone
Dionysus died with the coming of the cold. Unlike her, his death was terrible:
he was torn to pieces, in some stories by the Titans, in others by Hera’s
orders. He was always brought back to life; he died and rose again. It was his
joyful resurrection they celebrated in his theater, but the idea of terrible
deeds done to him and done by men under his influence was too closely
associated with him ever to be forgotten. He was more than the suffering god.
He was the tragic god. There was none other.

He had still another side. He was the assurance that death does not end all.
His worshipers believed that his death and resurrection showed that the soul
lives on forever after the body dies. This faith was part of the mysteries of
Eleusis. At first it centered in Persephone who also rose from the dead every
spring. But as queen of the black underworld she kept even in the bright world
above a suggestion of something strange and awful: how could she who carried
always about her the reminder of death stand for the resurrection, the conquest
of death? Dionysus, on the contrary, was never thought of as a power in the
kingdom of the dead. There are many stories about Persephone in the lower
world; only one about Dionysus—he rescued his mother from it. In his
resurrection he was the embodiment of the life that is stronger than death. He
and not Persephone became the center of the belief in immortality.

Around the year 80 A.D., a great Greek writer, Plutarch, received news, when he
was far from home, that a little daughter of his had died—a child of most
gentle nature, he says. In his letter to his wife he writes: “About that which
you have heard, dear heart, that the soul once departed from the body vanishes
and feels nothing, I know that you give no belief to such assertions because of
those sacred and faithful promises given in the mysteries of Bacchus which we
who are of that religious brotherhood know. We hold it firmly for an undoubted
truth that our soul is incorruptible and immortal. We are to think (of the
dead) that they pass into a better place and a happier condition. Let us behave
ourselves accordingly, outwardly ordering our lives, while within all should be
purer, wiser, incorruptible.”





