## CHAPTER IV


The Earliest Heroes



PROMETHEUS AND IO


The materials for this story are taken from two poets, the Greek Aeschylus and
the Roman Ovid, separated from each other by four hundred and fifty years and
still more by their gifts and temperaments. They are the best sources for the
tale. It is easy to distinguish the parts told by each, Aeschylus grave and
direct, Ovid light and amusing. The touch about lovers’ lies is characteristic
of Ovid, as also the little story about Syrinx.



IN those days when Prometheus had just given fire to men and when he was first
bound to the rocky peak on Caucasus, he had a strange visitor. A distracted
fleeing creature came clambering awkwardly up over the cliffs and crags to
where he lay. It looked like a heifer, but talked like a girl who seemed mad
with misery. The sight of Prometheus stopped her short. She cried,


This that I see—

A form storm-beaten,

Bound to the rock.

Did you do wrong?

Is this your punishment?

Where am I?

Speak to a wretched wanderer.

Enough—I have been tried enough—

My wandering—long wandering.

Yet I have found nowhere

To leave my misery.

I am a girl who speak to you,

But horns are on my head.



Prometheus recognized her. He knew her story and he spoke her name.


I know you, girl, Inachus’ daughter, Io.

You made the god’s heart hot with love

And Hera hates you. She it is

Who drives you on this flight that never ends.



Wonder checked Io’s frenzy. She stood still, all amazed. Her name—spoken by
this strange being in this strange, lonely place! She begged,


Who are you, sufferer, that speak the truth

To one who suffers?



And he answered,


You see Prometheus who gave mortals fire.



She knew him, then, and his story.


You—he who succored the whole race of men?

You, that Prometheus, the daring, the enduring?



They talked freely to each other. He told her how Zeus had treated him, and she
told him that Zeus was the reason why she, once a princess and a happy girl,
had been changed into


A beast, a starving beast,

That frenzied runs with clumsy leaps and bounds.

Oh, shame…



Zeus’s jealous wife, Hera, was the direct cause of her misfortunes, but back of
them all was Zeus himself. He fell in love with her, and sent


Ever to my maiden chamber

Visions of the night

Persuading me with gentle words:

“O happy, happy girl,

Why are you all too long a maid?

The arrow of desire has pierced Zeus.

For you he is on fire.

With you it is his will to capture love.”

Always, each night, such dreams possessed me.



But still greater than Zeus’s love was his fear of Hera’s jealousy. He acted,
however, with very little wisdom for the Father of Gods and Men when he tried
to hide Io and himself by wrapping the earth in a cloud so thick and dark that
a sudden night seemed to drive the clear daylight away. Hera knew perfectly
well that there was a reason for this odd occurrence, and instantly suspected
her husband. When she could not find him anywhere in heaven she glided swiftly
down to the earth and ordered the cloud off. But Zeus too had been quick. As
she caught sight of him he was standing beside a most lovely white heifer—Io,
of course. He swore that he had never seen her until just now when she had
sprung forth, newborn, from the earth. And this, Ovid says, shows that the lies
lovers tell do not anger the gods. However, it also shows that they are not
very useful, for Hera did not believe a word of it. She said the heifer was
very pretty and would Zeus please make her a present of it. Sorry as he was, he
saw at once that to refuse would give the whole thing away. What excuse could
he make? An insignificant little cow… He turned Io reluctantly over to his wife
and Hera knew very well how to keep her away from him.

She gave her into the charge of Argus, an excellent arrangement for Hera’s
purpose, since Argus had a hundred eyes. Before such a watchman, who could
sleep with some of the eyes and keep on guard with the rest, Zeus seemed
helpless. He watched Io’s misery, turned into a beast, driven from her home; he
dared not come to her help. At last, however, he went to his son Hermes, the
messenger of the gods, and told him he must find a way to kill Argus. There was
no god cleverer than Hermes. As soon as he had sprung to earth from heaven he
laid aside everything that marked him as a god and approached Argus like a
country fellow, playing very sweetly upon a pipe of reeds. Argus was pleased at
the sound and called to the musician to come nearer. “You might as well sit by
me on this rock,” he said, “you see it’s shady—just right for shepherds.”
Nothing could have been better for Hermes’ plan, and yet nothing happened. He
played and then he talked on and on, as drowsily and monotonously as he could;
some of the hundred eyes would go to sleep, but some were always awake. At
last, however, one story was successful—about the god Pan, how he loved a nymph
named Syrinx who fled from him and just as he was about to seize her was turned
into a tuft of reeds by her sister nymphs. Pan said, “Still you shall be mine,”
and he made from what she had become


A shepherd’s pipe

Of reeds with beeswax joined.



The little story does not seem especially tiresome, as such stories go, but
Argus found it so. All of his eyes went to sleep. Hermes killed him at once, of
course, but Hera took the eyes and set them in the tail of the peacock, her
favorite bird.

It seemed then that Io was free, but no; Hera at once turned on her again. She
sent a gad-fly to plague her, which stung her to madness. Io told Prometheus,


He drives me all along the long sea strand.

I may not stop for food or drink.

He will not let me sleep.



Prometheus tried to comfort her, but he could point her only to the distant
future. What lay immediately before her was still more wandering and in
fearsome lands. To be sure, the part of the sea she first ran along in her
frenzy would be called Ionian after her, and the Bosphorus, which means the
Ford of the Cow, would preserve the memory of when she went through it, but her
real consolation must be that at long last she would reach the Nile, where Zeus
would restore her to her human form. She would bear him a son named Epaphus,
and live forever after happy and honored. And


Know this, that from your race will spring

One glorious with the bow, bold-hearted,

And he shall set me free.



Io’s descendant would be Hercules, greatest of heroes, than whom hardly the
gods were greater, and to whom Prometheus would owe his freedom.





EUROPA


This story, so like the Renaissance idea of the classical—fantastic, delicately
decorated, bright-colored—is taken entirely from a poem of the third-century
Alexandrian poet Moschus, by far the best account of it.



Io was not the only girl who gained geographical fame because Zeus fell in love
with her. There was another, known far more widely—Europa, the daughter of the
King of Sidon. But whereas the wretched Io had to pay dearly for the
distinction, Europa was exceedingly fortunate. Except for a few moments of
terror when she found herself crossing the deep sea on the back of a bull she
did not suffer at all. The story does not say what Hera was about at the time,
but it is clear that she was off guard and her husband free to do as he
pleased.

Up in heaven one spring morning as he idly watched the earth, Zeus suddenly saw
a charming spectacle. Europa had waked early, troubled just as Io had been by a
dream, only this time not of a god who loved her but of two Continents who each
in the shape of a woman tried to possess her, Asia saying that she had given
her birth and therefore owned her, and the other, as yet nameless, declaring
that Zeus would give the maiden to her.

Once awake from this strange vision which had come at dawn, the time when true
dreams oftenest visit mortals, Europa decided not to try to go to sleep again,
but to summon her companions, girls born in the same year as herself and all of
noble birth, to go out with her to the lovely blooming meadows near the sea.
Here was their favorite meeting place, whether they wanted to dance or bathe
their fair bodies at the river mouth or gather flowers.

This time all had brought baskets, knowing that the flowers were now at their
perfection. Europa’s was of gold, exquisitely chased with figures which showed,
oddly enough, the story of Io, her journeys in the shape of a cow, the death of
Argus, and Zeus lightly touching her with his divine hand and changing her back
into a woman. It was, as may be perceived, a marvel worth gazing upon, and had
been made by no less a personage than Hephaestus, the celestial workman of
Olympus.

Lovely as the basket was, there were flowers as lovely to fill it with,
sweet-smelling narcissus and hyacinths and violets and yellow crocus, and most
radiant of all, the crimson splendor of the wild rose. The girls gathered them
delightedly, wandering here and there over the meadow, each one a maiden
fairest among the fair; yet even so, Europa shone out among them as the Goddess
of Love outshines the sister Graces. And it was that very Goddess of Love who
brought about what next happened. As Zeus in heaven watched the pretty scene,
she who alone can conquer Zeus—along with her son, the mischievous boy
Cupid—shot one of her shafts into his heart, and that very instant he fell
madly in love with Europa. Even though Hera was away, he thought it well to be
cautious, and before appearing to Europa he changed himself into a bull. Not
such a one as you might see in a stall or grazing in a field, but one beautiful
beyond all bulls that ever were, bright chestnut in color, with a silver circle
on his brow and horns like the crescent of the young moon. He seemed so gentle
as well as so lovely that the girls were not frightened at his coming, but
gathered around to caress him and to breathe the heavenly fragrance that came
from him, sweeter even than that of the flowery meadow. It was Europa he drew
toward, and as she gently touched him, he lowed so musically, no flute could
give forth a more melodious sound.





The rape of Europa





Then he lay down before her feet and seemed to show her his broad back, and she
cried to the others to come with her and mount him.


For surely he will bear us on his back,

He is so mild and dear and gentle to behold.

He is not like a bull, but like a good, true man,

Except he cannot speak.



Smiling she sat down on his back, but the others, quick though they were to
follow her, had no chance. The bull leaped up and at full speed rushed to the
seashore and then not into, but over, the wide water. As he went the waves grew
smooth before him and a whole procession rose up from the deep and accompanied
him—the strange sea-gods, Nereids riding upon dolphins, and Tritons blowing
their horns, and the mighty Master of the Sea himself, Zeus’s own brother.

Europa, frightened equally by the wondrous creatures she saw and the moving
waters all around, clung with one hand to the bull’s great horn and with the
other caught up her purple dress to keep it dry, and the winds


Swelled out the deep folds even as a sail

Swells on a ship, and ever gently thus

They wafted her.



No bull could this be, thought Europa, but most certainly a god; and she spoke
pleadingly to him, begging him to pity her and not leave her in some strange
place all alone. He spoke to her in answer and showed her she had guessed
rightly what he was. She had no cause to fear, he told her. He was Zeus,
greatest of gods, and all he was doing was from love of her. He was taking her
to Crete, his own island, where his mother had hidden him from Cronus when he
was born, and there she would bear him


Glorious sons whose sceptres shall hold sway

Over all men on earth.



Everything happened, of course, as Zeus had said. Crete came into sight; they
landed, and the Seasons, the gatekeepers of Olympus, arrayed her for her
bridal. Her sons were famous men, not only in this world but in the next—where
two of them, Minos and Rhadamanthus, were rewarded for their justice upon the
earth by being made the judges of the dead. But her own name remains the best
known of all.





THE CYCLOPS POLYPHEMUS


The first part of this story goes back to the Odyssey; the second part is told
only by the third-century Alexandrian poet Theocritus; the last part could have
been written by no one except the satirist Lucian, in the second century A.D.
At least a thousand years separate the beginning from the end. Homer’s vigor
and power of storytelling, the pretty fancies of Theocritus, the smart cynicism
of Lucian, illustrate in their degree the course of Greek literature.



All the monstrous forms of life which were first created, the hundred-handed
creatures, the Giants, and so on, were permanently banished from the earth when
they had been conquered, with the single exception of the Cyclopes. They were
allowed to come back, and they became finally great favorites of Zeus. They
were wonderful workmen and they forged his thunderbolts. At first there had
been only three, but later there were many. Zeus gave them a home in a
fortunate country where the vineyards and cornlands, unplowed and unsown, bore
fruits plenteously. They had great flocks of sheep and goats as well, and they
lived at their ease. Their fierceness and savage temper, however, did not grow
less; they had no laws or courts of justice, but each one did as he pleased. It
was not a good country for strangers.

Ages after Prometheus was punished, when the descendants of the men he helped
had grown civilized and had learned to build far-sailing ships, a Greek prince
beached his boat on the shore of this dangerous land. His name was Odysseus
(Ulysses in Latin) and he was on his way home after the destruction of Troy. In
the hardest battle he had fought with the Trojans, he had never come as near to
death as he did then.

Not far from the spot where his crew had made the vessel fast was a cave, open
toward the sea and very lofty. It looked inhabited; there was a strong fence
before the entrance. Odysseus started off to explore it with twelve of his men.
They were in need of food and he took with him a goatskin full of very potent
and mellow wine to give whoever lived there in return for hospitality. The gate
in the fence was not closed and they made their way into the cave. No one was
there, but it was clearly the dwelling of some very prosperous person. Along
the sides of the cave were many crowded pens of lambs and kids. Also there were
racks full of cheeses and pails brimming with milk, delightful to the sea-worn
travelers who ate and drank as they waited for the master.

At last he came, hideous and huge, tall as a great mountain crag. Driving his
flock before him he entered and closed the cave’s mouth with a ponderous slab
of stone. Then looking around he caught sight of the strangers, and cried out
in a dreadful booming voice, “Who are you who enter unbidden the house of
Polyphemus? Traders or thieving pirates?” They were terror-stricken at the
sight and sound of him, but Odysseus made swift to answer, and firmly, too:
“Shipwrecked warriors from Troy are we, and your suppliants, under the
protection of Zeus, the suppliants’ god.” But Polyphemus roared out that he
cared not for Zeus. He was bigger than any god and feared none of them. With
that, he stretched out his mighty arms and in each great hand he seized one of
the men and dashed his brains out on the ground. Slowly he feasted off them to
the last shred, and then, satisfied, stretched himself out across the cavern
and slept. He was safe from attack. No one but he could roll back the huge
stone before the door, and if the horrified men had been able to summon courage
and strength enough to kill him they would have been imprisoned there forever.

During that long terrible night Odysseus faced the awful thing that had
happened and would happen to every one of them if he could not think out some
way of escape. But by the time day had dawned and the flock gathering at the
entrance woke the Cyclops up, no idea at all had come to him. He had to watch
two more of his company die, for Polyphemus breakfasted as he had supped. Then
he drove out his flock, moving back the big block at the door and pushing it
into place again as easily as a man opens and shuts the lid to his quiver.
Throughout the day, shut in the cave, Odysseus thought and thought. Four of his
men had perished hideously. Must they all go the same dreadful way? At last a
plan shaped itself in his mind. An enormous timber lay near the pens, as long
and as thick as the mast of a twenty-oared ship. From this he cut off a good
piece, and then he and his men sharpened it and hardened the point by turning
it round and round in the fire. They had finished and hidden it by the time the
Cyclops came back. There followed the same horrible feast as before. When it
was over Odysseus filled a cup with his own wine that he had brought with him
and offered it to the Cyclops. He emptied it with delight and demanded more,
and Odysseus poured for him until finally a drunken sleep overcame him. Then
Odysseus and his men drew out the great stake from its hiding-place and heated
the point in the fire until it almost burst into flame. Some power from on high
breathed a mad courage into them and they drove the red-hot spike right into
the Cyclops’ eye. With an awful scream he sprang up and wrenched the point out.
This way and that he flung around the cavern searching for his tormentors, but,
blind as he was, they were able to slip away from him.

At last he pushed aside the stone at the entrance and sat down there,
stretching his arms across, thinking thus to catch them when they tried to get
away. But Odysseus had made a plan for this, too. He bade each man choose out
three thick-fleeced rams and bind them together with strong, pliant strips of
bark; then to wait for day, when the flock would be sent out to pasture. At
last the dawn came and as the beasts crowding through the entrance passed out
Polyphemus felt them over to be sure no one carried a man on his back. He never
thought to feel underneath, but that was where the men were, each tucked under
the middle ram, holding on to the great fleece. Once out of that fearful place
they dropped to the ground and, hurrying to the ship, in no time launched it
and were aboard. But Odysseus was too angry to leave in prudent silence. He
sent a great shout over the water to the blind giant at the cave’s mouth. “So,
Cyclops, you were not quite strong enough to eat all of the puny men? You are
rightly punished for what you did to those who were guests in your house.”

The words stung Polyphemus to the heart. Up he sprang and tore a great crag
from the mountain and flung it at the ship. It came within a hair’s breadth of
crushing the prow, and with the backwash the boat was borne landward. The crew
put all their strength into their oars and just succeeded in pulling out to
sea. When Odysseus saw that they were safely away, he cried again tauntingly,
“Cyclops, Odysseus, wrecker of cities, put out your eye, and do you so tell
anyone who asks.” But they were too far off by then; the giant could do
nothing. He sat blinded on the shore.

This was the only story told about Polyphemus for many years. Centuries passed
and he was still the same, a frightful monster, shapeless, huge, his eye put
out. But finally he changed, as what is ugly and evil is apt to change and grow
milder with time. Perhaps some storyteller saw the helpless, suffering creature
Odysseus left behind as a thing to be pitied. At all events, the next story
about him shows him in a very pleasing light, not terrifying at all, but a most
poor credulous monster, a most ridiculous monster, quite aware of how hideous
and uncouth and repulsive he was, and therefore wretched, because he was madly
in love with the charming, mocking sea nymph, Galatea. By this time the place
where he lived was Sicily and he had somehow got his eye back, perhaps by some
miracle of his father who in this story is Poseidon, the great God of the Sea.
The lovelorn giant knew Galatea would never have him; his case was hopeless.
And yet, whenever his pain made him harden his heart against her and bid
himself, “Milk the ewe you have; why pursue what shuns you?,” the minx would
come softly stealing near him; then suddenly a shower of apples would pelt his
flock and her voice would ring in his ears calling him a laggard in love. But
no sooner was he up and after her than she would be off, laughing at his slow
clumsiness as he tried to follow her. All he could do was again to sit wretched
and helpless on the shore, but this time not trying in fury to kill people,
only singing mournful love songs to soften the sea nymph’s heart.

In a much later story, Galatea turned kind, not because the exquisite,
delicate, milk-white maid, as Polyphemus called her in his songs, fell in love
with the hideous one-eyed creature (in this tale, too, he has got back his
eye), but because she prudently reflected that he was the favored son of the
Lord of the Sea and by no means to be despised. So she told her sister nymph,
Doris, who had rather hoped to attract the Cyclops herself, and who began the
talk by saying scornfully, “A fine lover you’ve got—that Sicilian shepherd.
Everybody’s talking about it.”


GALATEA: None of your airs, please. He’s the son of Poseidon. There!

DORIS: Zeus’s, for all I care. One thing’s certain—he’s an ugly, ill-mannered
brute.

GALATEA: Just let me tell you, Doris, there’s something very manly about him.
Of course it’s true he’s got only one eye, but he sees as well with it as if he
had two.

DORIS: It sounds as if you were in love yourself.

GALATEA: I in love—with Polyphemus! Not I—but of course I can guess why you’re
talking like this. You know perfectly well he has never noticed you—only me.

DORIS: A shepherd with only one eye thinks you handsome! That’s something to be
proud of. Anyway, you won’t have to cook for him. He can make a very good meal
off a traveler, I understand.



But Polyphemus never won Galatea. She fell in love with a beautiful young
prince named Acis, whom Polyphemus, furiously jealous, killed. However, Acis
was changed into a river-god, so that story ended well. But we are not told
that Polyphemus ever loved any maiden except Galatea, or that any maiden ever
loved Polyphemus.





FLOWER-MYTHS: NARCISSUS, HYACINTH, ADONIS


The first story about the creation of the narcissus is told only in an early
Homeric Hymn of the seventh or eighth century, the second I have taken from
Ovid. There is an immense difference between the two poets, who are separated
from each other not only by six or seven hundred years, but also by the
fundamental difference between the Greek and the Roman. The Hymn is written
objectively, simply, without a touch of affectation. The poet is thinking of
his subject. Ovid is as always thinking of his audience. But he tells this
story well. The bit about the ghost trying to look at itself in the river of
death is a subtle touch which is quite characteristic of him and quite unlike
any Greek writer. Euripides gives the best account of the festival of
Hyacinthus; Apollodorus and Ovid both tell his story. Whenever there is any
vividness in my narrative it may be ascribed securely to Ovid. Apollodorus
never deviates into anything like that. Adonis I have taken from two
third-century poets, Theocritus and Bion. The tale is typical of the
Alexandrian poets, tender, a little soft, but always in exquisite taste.



In Greece there are most lovely wild flowers. They would be beautiful anywhere,
but Greece is not a rich and fertile country of wide meadows and fruitful
fields where flowers seem at home. It is a land of rocky ways and stony hills
and rugged mountains, and in such places the exquisite vivid bloom of the wild
flowers,


A profusion of delight,

Gay, bewilderingly bright,



comes as a startling surprise. Bleak heights are carpeted in radiant colors;
every crack and crevice of a frowning crag blossoms. The contrast of this
laughing, luxuriant beauty with the clear-cut, austere grandeur all around
arrests the attention sharply. Elsewhere wild flowers may be little noticed—but
never in Greece.

That was as true in the days of old as it is now. In the faraway ages when the
tales of Greek mythology were taking shape men found the brilliant blossoms of
the Greek spring a wonder and a delight. Those people separated from us by
thousands of years, and almost completely unknown to us, felt as we do before
that miracle of loveliness, each flower so delicate, yet all together covering
the land like a rainbow mantle flung over the hills. The first storytellers in
Greece told story after story about them, how they had been created and why
they were so beautiful.

It was the most natural thing possible to connect them with the gods. All
things in heaven and earth were mysteriously linked with the divine powers, but
beautiful things most of all. Often an especially exquisite flower was held to
be the direct creation of a god for his own purpose. That was true of the
narcissus, which was not like ours of that name, but a lovely bloom of glowing
purple and silver. Zeus called it into being to help his brother, the lord of
the dark underworld, when he wanted to carry away the maiden he had fallen in
love with, Demeter’s daughter, Persephone. She was gathering flowers with her
companions in the vale of Enna, in a meadow of soft grass and roses and crocus
and lovely violets and iris and hyacinths. Suddenly she caught sight of
something quite new to her, a bloom more beautiful by far than any she had ever
seen, a strange glory of a flower, a marvel to all, immortal gods and mortal
men. A hundred blossoms grew up from the roots, and the fragrance was very
sweet. The broad sky above and the whole earth laughed to see it, and the salt
wave of the sea.

Only Persephone among the maidens had spied it. The rest were at the other end
of the meadow. She stole toward it, half fearful at being alone, but unable to
resist the desire to fill her basket with it, exactly as Zeus had supposed she
would feel. Wondering she stretched out her hands to take the lovely plaything,
but before she touched it a chasm opened in the earth and out of it coal-black
horses sprang, drawing a chariot and driven by one who had a look of dark
splendor, majestic and beautiful and terrible. He caught her to him and held
her close. The next moment she was being borne away from the radiance of earth
in springtime to the world of the dead by the king who rules it.


This was not the only story about the narcissus. There was another, as magical,
but quite different. The hero of it was a beautiful lad, whose name was
Narcissus. His beauty was so great, all the girls who saw him longed to be his,
but he would have none of them. He would pass the loveliest carelessly by, no
matter how much she tried to make him look at her. Heartbroken maidens were
nothing to him. Even the sad case of the fairest of the nymphs, Echo, did not
move him. She was a favorite of Artemis, the goddess of woods and wild
creatures, but she came under the displeasure of a still mightier goddess, Hera
herself, who was at her usual occupation of trying to discover what Zeus was
about. She suspected that he was in love with one of the nymphs and she went to
look them over to try to discover which. However, she was immediately diverted
from her investigation by Echo’s gay chatter. As she listened amused, the
others silently stole away and Hera could come to no conclusion as to where
Zeus’s wandering fancy had alighted. With her usual injustice she turned
against Echo. That nymph became another unhappy girl whom Hera punished. The
goddess condemned her never to use her tongue again except to repeat what was
said to her. “You will always have the last word,” Hera said, “but no power to
speak first.”

This was very hard, but hardest of all when Echo, too, with all the other
lovelorn maidens, loved Narcissus. She could follow him, but she could not
speak to him. How then could she make a youth who never looked at a girl pay
attention to her? One day, however, it seemed her chance had come. He was
calling to his companions. “Is anyone here?” and she called back in rapture,
“Here—Here.” She was still hidden by the trees so that he did not see her, and
he shouted, “Come!”—just what she longed to say to him. She answered joyfully,
“Come!” and stepped forth from the woods with her arms outstretched. But he
turned away in angry disgust. “Not so,” he said; “I will die before I give you
power over me.” All she could say was, humbly, entreatingly, “I give you power
over me,” but he was gone. She hid her blushes and her shame in a lonely cave,
and never could be comforted. Still she lives in places like that, and they say
she has so wasted away with longing that only her voice now is left to her.

So Narcissus went on his cruel way, a scorner of love. But at last one of those
he wounded prayed a prayer and it was answered by the gods: “May he who loves
not others love himself.” The great goddess Nemesis, which means righteous
anger, undertook to bring this about. As Narcissus bent over a clear pool for a
drink and saw there his own reflection, on the moment he fell in love with it.
“Now I know,” he cried, “what others have suffered from me, for I burn with
love of my own self—and yet how can I reach that loveliness I see mirrored in
the water? But I cannot leave it. Only death can set me free.” And so it
happened. He pined away, leaning perpetually over the pool, fixed in one long
gaze. Echo was near him, but she could do nothing; only when, dying, he called
to his image, “Farewell—farewell,” she could repeat the words as a last
good-bye to him.

They say that when his spirit crossed the river that encircles the world of the
dead, it leaned over the boat to catch a final glimpse of itself in the water.

The nymphs he had scorned were kind to him in death and sought his body to give
it burial, but they could not find it. Where it had lain there was blooming a
new and lovely flower, and they called it by his name, Narcissus.


Another flower that came into being through the death of a beautiful youth was
the hyacinth, again not like the flower we call by that name, but lily-shaped
and of a deep purple, or, some say, a splendid crimson. That was a tragic
death, and each year it was commemorated by


The festival of Hyacinthus

That lasts throughout the tranquil night.

In a contest with Apollo

He was slain.

Discus throwing they competed,

And the god’s swift cast

Sped beyond the goal he aimed at



and struck Hyacinthus full in the forehead a terrible wound. He had been
Apollo’s dearest companion. There was no rivalry between them when they tried
which could throw the discus farthest; they were only playing a game. The god
was horror-struck to see the blood gush forth and the lad, deathly pale, fall
to the ground. He turned as pale himself as he caught him up in his arms and
tried to stanch the wound. But it was too late. While he held him the boy’s
head fell back as a flower does when its stem is broken. He was dead and Apollo
kneeling beside him wept for him, dying so young, so beautiful. He had killed
him, although through no fault of his, and he cried, “Oh, if I could give my
life for yours, or die with you.” Even as he spoke, the bloodstained grass
turned green again and there bloomed forth the wondrous flower that was to make
the lad’s name known forever. Apollo himself inscribed the petals—some say with
Hyacinth’s initial, and others with the two letters of the Greek word that
means “Alas”; either way, a memorial of the god’s great sorrow.

There is a story, too, that Zephyr, the West Wind, not Apollo, was the direct
cause of the death, that he also loved this fairest of youths and in his
jealous anger at seeing the god preferred to him he blew upon the discus and
made it strike Hyacinth.





Such charming tales of lovely young people who, dying in the springtime of
life, were fittingly changed into spring flowers, have probably a dark
background. They give a hint of black deeds that were done in the far-distant
past. Long before there were any stories told in Greece or any poems sung which
have come down to us, perhaps even before there were storytellers and poets, it
might happen, if the fields around a village were not fruitful, if the corn did
not spring up as it should, that one of the villagers would be killed and
his—or her—blood sprinkled over the barren land. There was no idea as yet of
the radiant gods of Olympus who would have loathed the hateful sacrifice.
Mankind had only a dim feeling that as their own life depended utterly on
seedtime and harvest, there must be a deep connection between themselves and
the earth and that their blood, which was nourished by the corn, could in turn
nourish it at need. What more natural then, if a beautiful boy had thus been
killed, than to think when later the ground bloomed with narcissus or hyacinths
that the flowers were his very self, changed and yet living again? So they
would tell each other it had happened, a lovely miracle which made the cruel
death seem less cruel. Then as the ages passed and people no longer believed
that the earth needed blood to be fruitful, all that was cruel in the story
would be dropped and in the end forgotten. No one would remember that terrible
things had once been done. Hyacinthus, they would say, died not slaughtered by
his kinsfolk to get food for them, but only because of a sorrowful mistake.





Of these deaths and flowery resurrections the most famous was that of Adonis.
Every year the Greek girls mourned for him and every year they rejoiced when
his flower, the bloodred anemone, the windflower, was seen blooming again.
Aphrodite loved him; the Goddess of Love, who pierces with her shafts the
hearts of gods and men alike, was fated herself to suffer that same piercing
pain.

She saw him when he was born and even then loved him and decided he should be
hers. She carried him to Persephone to take charge of him for her, but
Persephone loved him too and would not give him back to Aphrodite, not even
when the goddess went down to the underworld to get him. Neither goddess would
yield, and finally Zeus himself had to judge between them. He decided that
Adonis should spend half the year with each, the autumn and winter with the
Queen of the Dead; the spring and summer with the Goddess of Love and Beauty.

All the time he was with Aphrodite she sought only to please him. He was keen
for the chase, and often she would leave her swan-drawn car, in which she was
used to glide at her ease through the air, and follow him along rough woodland
ways dressed like a huntress. But one sad day she happened not to be with him
and he tracked down a mighty boar. With his hunting dogs he brought the beast
to bay. He hurled his spear at it, but he only wounded it, and before he could
spring away, the boar mad with pain rushed at him and gored him with its great
tusks. Aphrodite in her winged car high over the earth heard her lover’s groan
and flew to him.

He was softly breathing his life away, the dark blood flowing down his skin of
snow and his eyes growing heavy and dim. She kissed him, but Adonis knew not
that she kissed him as he died. Cruel as his wound was, the wound in her heart
was deeper. She spoke to him, although she knew he could not hear her:—


“You die, O thrice desired,

And my desire has flown like a dream.

Gone with you is the girdle of my beauty,

But I myself must live who am a goddess

And may not follow you.

Kiss me yet once again, the last, long kiss,

Until I draw your soul within my lips

And drink down all your love.”



The mountains all were calling and the oak trees answering,

Oh, woe, woe for Adonis. He is dead.

And Echo cried in answer, Oh, woe, woe for Adonis.

And all the Loves wept for him and all the Muses too.



But down in the black underworld Adonis could not hear them, nor see the
crimson flower that sprang up where each drop of his blood had stained the
earth.





