## Chapter06



The rest of my school day passed quickly until my final class, Latin.

Most students took a foreign language they might actually be able to use
someday, like Mandarin, or Hindi, or Spanish. I’d decided to take Latin because
James Halliday had taken Latin. He’d also occasionally used Latin words and
phrases in his early adventure games. Unfortunately, even with the limitless
possibilities of the OASIS at her disposal, my Latin teacher, Ms. Rank, still
had a hard time making her lessons interesting. And today she was reviewing a
bunch of verbs I’d already memorized, so I found my attention drifting almost
immediately.

While a class was in session, the simulation prevented students from accessing
any data or programs that weren’t authorized by their teacher, to prevent kids
from watching movies, playing games, or chatting with each other instead of
paying attention to the lesson. Luckily, during my junior year, I’d discovered
a bug in the school’s online library software, and by exploiting it, I could
access any book in the school’s online library, including Anorak’s Almanac. So
whenever I got bored (like right now) I would pull it up in a window on my
display and read over my favorite passages to pass the time.

Over the past five years, the Almanac had become my bible. Like most books
nowadays, it was only available in electronic format. But I’d wanted to be able
to read the Almanac night or day, even during one of the stacks’ frequent power
outages, so I’d fixed up an old discarded laser printer and used it to print
out a hard copy. I put it in an old three-ring binder that I kept in my
backpack and studied until I knew every word by heart.

The Almanac contained thousands of references to Halliday’s favorite books, TV
shows, movies, songs, graphic novels, and videogames. Most of these items were
over forty years old, and so free digital copies of them could be downloaded
from the OASIS. If there was something I needed that wasn’t legally available
for free, I could almost always get it by using Guntorrent, a file-sharing
program used by gunters around the world.

When it came to my research, I never took any shortcuts. Over the past five
years, I’d worked my way down the entire recommended gunter reading list.
Douglas Adams. Kurt Vonnegut. Neal Stephenson. Richard K. Morgan. Stephen King.
Orson Scott Card. Terry Pratchett. Terry Brooks. Bester, Bradbury, Haldeman,
Heinlein, Tolkien, Vance, Gibson, Gaiman, Sterling, Moorcock, Scalzi, Zelazny.
I read every novel by every single one of Halliday’s favorite authors.

And I didn’t stop there.

I also watched every single film he referenced in the Almanac. If it was one of
Halliday’s favorites, like WarGames, Ghostbusters, Real Genius, Better Off
Dead, or Revenge of the Nerds, I rewatched it until I knew every scene by
heart.

I devoured each of what Halliday referred to as “The Holy Trilogies”: Star Wars
(original and prequel trilogies, in that order), Lord of the Rings, The Matrix,
Mad Max, Back to the Future, and Indiana Jones. (Halliday once said that he
preferred to pretend the other Indiana Jones films, from Kingdom of the Crystal
Skull onward, didn’t exist. I tended to agree.)

I also absorbed the complete filmographies of each of his favorite directors.
Cameron, Gilliam, Jackson, Fincher, Kubrick, Lucas, Spielberg, Del Toro,
Tarantino. And, of course, Kevin Smith.

I spent three months studying every John Hughes teen movie and memorizing all
the key lines of dialogue.

Only the meek get pinched. The bold survive.

You could say I covered all the bases.

I studied Monty Python. And not just Holy Grail, either. Every single one of
their films, albums, and books, and every episode of the original BBC series.
(Including those two “lost” episodes they did for German television.)

I wasn’t going to cut any corners.

I wasn’t going to miss something obvious.

Somewhere along the way, I started to go overboard.

I may, in fact, have started to go a little insane.

I watched every episode of The Greatest American Hero, Airwolf, The A-Team,
Knight Rider, Misfits of Science, and The Muppet Show.

What about The Simpsons, you ask?

I knew more about Springfield than I knew about my own city.

Star Trek? Oh, I did my homework. TOS, TNG, DS9. Even Voyager and Enterprise. I
watched them all in chronological order. The movies, too. Phasers locked on
target.

I gave myself a crash course in ’80s Saturday-morning cartoons.

I learned the name of every last goddamn Gobot and Transformer.

Land of the Lost, Thundarr the Barbarian, He-Man, Schoolhouse Rock!, G.I. Joe—I
knew them all. Because knowing is half the battle.

Who was my friend, when things got rough? H.R. Pufnstuf.

Japan? Did I cover Japan?

Yes. Yes indeed. Anime and live-action. Godzilla, Gamera, Star Blazers, The
Space Giants, and G-Force. Go, Speed Racer, Go.

I wasn’t some dilettante.

I wasn’t screwing around.

I memorized every last Bill Hicks stand-up routine.

Music? Well, covering all the music wasn’t easy.

It took some time.

The ’80s was a long decade (ten whole years), and Halliday didn’t seem to have
had very discerning taste. He listened to everything. So I did too. Pop, rock,
new wave, punk, heavy metal. From the Police to Journey to R.E.M. to the Clash.
I tackled it all.

I burned through the entire They Might Be Giants discography in under two
weeks. Devo took a little longer.

I watched a lot of YouTube videos of cute geeky girls playing ’80s cover tunes
on ukuleles. Technically, this wasn’t part of my research, but I had a serious
cute-geeky-girls-playing-ukuleles fetish that I can neither explain nor defend.

I memorized lyrics. Silly lyrics, by bands with names like Van Halen, Bon Jovi,
Def Leppard, and Pink Floyd.

I kept at it.

I burned the midnight oil.

Did you know that Midnight Oil was an Australian band, with a 1987 hit titled
“Beds Are Burning”?

I was obsessed. I wouldn’t quit. My grades suffered. I didn’t care.

I read every issue of every comic book title Halliday had ever collected.

I wasn’t going to have anyone questioning my commitment.

Especially when it came to the videogames.

Videogames were my area of expertise.

My double-weapon specialization.

My dream Jeopardy! category.

I downloaded every game mentioned or referenced in the Almanac, from Akalabeth
to Zaxxon. I played each title until I had mastered it, then moved on to the
next one.

You’d be amazed how much research you can get done when you have no life
whatsoever. Twelve hours a day, seven days a week, is a lot of study time.

I worked my way through every videogame genre and platform. Classic arcade
coin-ops, home computer, console, and handheld. Text-based adventures,
first-person shooters, third-person RPGs. Ancient 8-, 16-, and 32-bit classics
written in the previous century. The harder a game was to beat, the more I
enjoyed it. And as I played these ancient digital relics, night after night,
year after year, I discovered I had a talent for them. I could master most
action titles in a few hours, and there wasn’t an adventure or role-playing
game I couldn’t solve. I never needed any walkthroughs or cheat codes.
Everything just clicked. And I was even better at the old arcade games. When I
was in the zone on a high-speed classic like Defender, I felt like a hawk in
flight, or the way I thought a shark must feel as it cruises the ocean floor.
For the first time, I knew what it was to be a natural at something. To have a
gift.

But it wasn’t my research into old movies, comics, or videogames that had
yielded my first real clue. That had come while I was studying the history of
old pen-and-paper role-playing games.





Reprinted on the first page of Anorak’s Almanac were the four rhyming lines of
verse Halliday had recited in the Invitation video.

Three hidden keys open three secret gates

Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits

And those with the skill to survive these straits

Will reach The End where the prize awaits





At first, this seemed to be the only direct reference to the contest in the
entire almanac. But then, buried among all those rambling journal entries and
essays on pop culture, I discovered a hidden message.

Scattered throughout the text of the Almanac were a series of marked letters.
Each of these letters had a tiny, nearly invisible “notch” cut into its
outline. I’d first noticed these notches the year after Halliday died. I was
reading my hard copy of the Almanac at the time, and so at first I thought the
notches were nothing but tiny printing imperfections, perhaps due to the paper
or the ancient printer I’d used to print out the Almanac. But when I checked
the electronic version of the book available on Halliday’s website, I found the
same notches on the exact same letters. And if you zoomed in on one of those
letters, the notches stood out as plain as day.

Halliday had put them there. He’d marked these letters for a reason.

There turned out to be one hundred and twelve of these notched letters
scattered throughout the book. By writing them down in the order they appeared,
I discovered that they spelled something. I nearly died of excitement as I
wrote it down in my grail diary:

The Copper Key awaits explorers

In a tomb filled with horrors

But you have much to learn

If you hope to earn

A place among the high scorers





Other gunters had also discovered this hidden message, of course, but they were
all wise enough to keep it to themselves. For a while, anyway. About six months
after I discovered the hidden message, this loudmouth MIT freshman found it
too. His name was Steven Pendergast, and he decided to get his fifteen minutes
of fame by sharing his “discovery” with the media. The newsfeeds broadcast
interviews with this moron for a month, even though he didn’t have the first
clue about the message’s meaning. After that, going public with a clue became
known as “pulling a Pendergast.”

Once the message became public knowledge, gunters nicknamed it “the Limerick.”
The entire world had known about it for almost four years now, but no one
seemed to understand its true meaning, and the Copper Key still had yet to be
found.

I knew Halliday had frequently used similar riddles in many of his early
adventure games, and each of those riddles had made sense in the context of its
game. So I devoted an entire section of my grail diary to deciphering the
Limerick, line by line.

The Copper Key awaits explorers

This line seemed pretty straightforward. No hidden meaning that I could detect.

In a tomb filled with horrors.

This line was trickier. Taken at face value, it seemed to say that the key was
hidden in a tomb somewhere, one filled with horrifying stuff. But then, during
the course of my research, I discovered an old Dungeons & Dragons supplement
called Tomb of Horrors, which had been published in 1978. From the moment I saw
the title, I was certain the second line of the Limerick was a reference to it.
Halliday and Morrow had played Advanced Dungeons & Dragons all through high
school, along with several other pen-and-paper role-playing games, like GURPS,
Champions, Car Wars, and Rolemaster.

Tomb of Horrors was a thin booklet called a “module.” It contained detailed
maps and room-by-room descriptions of an underground labyrinth infested with
undead monsters. D&D players could explore the labyrinth with their characters
as the dungeon master read from the module and guided them through the story it
contained, describing everything they saw and encountered along the way.

As I learned more about how these early role-playing games worked, I realized
that a D&D module was the primitive equivalent of a quest in the OASIS. And D&D
characters were just like avatars. In a way, these old role-playing games had
been the first virtual-reality simulations, created long before computers were
powerful enough to do the job. In those days, if you wanted to escape to
another world, you had to create it yourself, using your brain, some paper,
pencils, dice, and a few rule books. This realization kind of blew my mind. It
changed my whole perspective on the Hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg. From then
on, I began to think of the Hunt as an elaborate D&D module. And Halliday was
obviously the dungeon master, even if he was now controlling the game from
beyond the grave.

I found a digital copy of the sixty-seven-year-old Tomb of Horrors module
buried deep in an ancient FTP archive. As I studied it, I began to develop a
theory: Somewhere in the OASIS, Halliday had re-created the Tomb of Horrors,
and he’d hidden the Copper Key inside it.

I spent the next few months studying the module and memorizing all of its maps
and room descriptions, in anticipation of the day I would finally figure out
where it was located. But that was the rub: The Limerick didn’t appear to give
any hint as to where Halliday had hidden the damn thing. The only clue seemed
to be “you have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high
scorers.”

I recited those words over and over in my head until I wanted to howl in
frustration. Much to learn. Yeah, OK, fine. I have much to learn about what?

There were literally thousands of worlds in the OASIS, and Halliday could have
hidden his re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors on any one of them. Searching
every planet, one by one, would take forever. Even if I’d had the means to do
so.

A planet named Gygax in Sector Two seemed like the obvious place to start
looking. Halliday had coded the planet himself, and he’d named it after Gary
Gygax, one of the creators of Dungeons & Dragons and the author of the original
Tomb of Horrors module. According to Gunterpedia (a gunter wiki), the planet
Gygax was covered with re-creations of old D&D modules, but Tomb of Horrors was
not one of them. There didn’t appear to be a re-creation of the tomb on any of
the other D&D-themed worlds in the OASIS either. Gunters had turned all of
those planets upside down and scoured every square inch of their surfaces. Had
a re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors been hidden on one of them, it would have
been found and logged long ago.

So the tomb had to be hidden somewhere else. And I didn’t have the first clue
where. But I told myself that if I just kept at it and continued doing
research, I’d eventually learn what I needed to know to figure out the tomb’s
hiding place. In fact, that was probably what Halliday meant by “you have much
to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high scorers.”

If any other gunters out there shared my interpretation of the Limerick, so far
they’d been smart enough to keep quiet about it. I’d never seen any posts about
the Tomb of Horrors on any gunter message boards. I realized, of course, that
this might be because my theory about the old D&D module was completely lame
and totally off base.

So I’d continued to watch and read and listen and study, preparing for the day
when I finally stumbled across the clue that would lead me to the Copper Key.

And then it finally happened. Right while I was sitting there daydreaming in
Latin class.

