## Chapter22



The Vonnegut dropped out of light speed, and Archaide suddenly filled the
cockpit viewscreen. It stood out from the other planets in the area because it
wasn’t coded to look real. All of the neighboring planets were perfectly
rendered, with clouds, continents, or impact craters covering their curved
surfaces. But Archaide had none of these features, because it was home to the
OASIS’s largest classic videogame museum, and its appearance had been designed
as a tribute to the vector-graphic games of the late ’70s and early ’80s. The
planet’s only surface feature was a web of glowing green dots similar to the
ground lights on an airport runway. They were spaced evenly across the globe in
a perfect grid, so that, from orbit, Archaide resembled the vector-graphic
Death Star from Atari’s 1983 Star Wars arcade game.

As Max piloted the Vonnegut down to the surface, I prepared for the possibility
of combat by charging up my armor and buffing my avatar with several potions
and nano packs. Archaide was both a PvP zone and a chaos zone, which meant that
both magic and technology functioned here. So I made sure to load up all of my
combat contingency macros.

The Vonnegut’s perfectly rendered steel loading ramp lowered to the ground,
standing out in sharp contrast against the digital blackness of Archaide’s
surface. As I stepped off the ramp, I tapped a keypad on my right wrist. The
ramp retracted, and there was a sharp hum as the ship’s security system
activated. A transparent blue shield appeared around the Vonnegut’s hull.

I gazed around at the horizon, which was just a jagged green vector line,
denoting mountainous terrain. Here on the surface, Archaide looked exactly like
the environment of the 1981 game Battlezone, another vector-graphic classic
from Atari. In the distance, a triangular volcano spewed green pixels of lava.
You could run toward that volcano for days and never reach it. It always
remained at the horizon. Just like in an old videogame, the scenery never
changed on Archaide, even if you circumnavigated the globe.

Following my instructions, Max had set the Vonnegut down in a landing lot near
the equator in the eastern hemisphere. The lot was empty, and the surrounding
area appeared deserted. I headed toward the nearest green dot. As I approached,
I could see that it was actually the mouth of an entrance tunnel, a neon green
circle ten meters in diameter leading belowground. Archaide was a hollow
planet, and the museum exhibits were all located beneath the surface.

As I approached the nearest tunnel entrance, I heard loud music emanating from
below. I recognized the song as “Pour Some Sugar on Me” by Def Leppard, off
their Hysteria album (Epic Records, 1987). I reached the edge of the glowing
green ring and jumped in. As my avatar plummeted down into the museum, the
green vector-graphic theme disappeared and I found myself in high-resolution
full-color surroundings. Everything around me looked completely real once
again.

Below its surface, Archaide housed thousands of classic video arcades, each one
a loving re-creation of an actual arcade that had once existed somewhere in the
real world. Since the dawn of the OASIS, thousands of elderly users had come
here and painstakingly coded virtual replicas of local arcades they remembered
from their childhood, thus making them a permanent part of the museum. And each
of these simulated game rooms, bowling alleys, and pizza joints was lined with
classic arcade games. There was at least one copy of every coin-operated
videogame ever made down here. The original game ROMs were all stored in the
planet’s OASIS code, and their wooden game cabinets were each coded to look
like the antique originals. Hundreds of shrines and exhibits devoted to various
game designers and publishers were also scattered throughout the museum.

The museum’s various levels were comprised of vast caverns linked by a network
of subterranean streets, tunnels, staircases, elevators, escalators, ladders,
slides, trapdoors, and secret passageways. It was like a massive underground
multilevel labyrinth. The layout made it extremely easy to get lost, so I kept
a three-dimensional holographic map on my display. My avatar’s present location
was indicated by a flashing blue dot. I’d entered the museum next to an old
arcade called Aladdin’s Castle, close to the surface. I touched a point on the
map near the core of the planet, indicating my destination, and the software
mapped the quickest route for me to get there. I ran forward, following it.

The museum was divided into layers. Here, near the planet’s mantle, you could
find the last coin-operated videogames ever made, from the first few decades of
the twenty-first century. These were mostly dedicated simulator cabinets with
first-generation haptics—vibrating chairs and tilting hydraulic platforms. Lots
of networked stock car simulators that allowed people to race each other. These
games were the last of their kind. By that era, home videogame consoles had
already made most coin-op games obsolete. After the OASIS went online, they
stopped making them altogether.

As you ventured deeper into the museum, the games grew older and more archaic.
Turn-of-the-century coin-ops. Lots of head-to-head fighting games with blocky
polygon-rendered figures beating the crap out of each other on large
flat-screen monitors. Shooting games played with crude haptic light guns.
Dancing games. Once you reached the level below that, the games all began to
look identical. Each was housed in a large rectangular wooden box containing a
cathode picture tube with a set of crude game controls mounted in front of it.
You used your hands and your eyes (and occasionally your feet) to play these
games. There were no haptics. These games didn’t make you feel anything. And
the deeper I descended, the cruder the game graphics got.

The museum’s bottom level, located in the planet core, was a spherical room
containing a shrine to the very first videogame, Tennis for Two, invented by
William Higinbotham in 1958. The game ran on an ancient analog computer and was
played on a tiny oscilloscope screen about five inches in diameter. Next to it
was a replica of an ancient PDP-1 computer running a copy of Spacewar!, the
second videogame ever made, created by a bunch of students at MIT in 1962.

Like most gunters, I’d already visited Archaide a few times. I’d been to the
core and had played both Tennis for Two and Spacewar! until I’d mastered them.
Then I’d wandered around the museums’ many levels, playing games and looking
for clues Halliday might have left behind. But I’d never found anything.

I kept running, farther and farther down, until I reached the Gregarious
Simulation Systems Museum, which was located just a few levels above the planet
core. I’d been here once before too, so I knew my way around. There were
exhibits devoted to all of GSS’s most popular games, including several arcade
ports of titles they’d originally released for home computers and consoles. It
didn’t take me long to find the exhibit where Halliday’s five Game Designer of
the Year trophies were displayed, next to a bronze statue of the man himself.

Within a few minutes, I knew I was wasting my time here. The GSS Museum exhibit
was coded so that it was impossible to remove any of the items on display, so
the trophies could not be “collected.” I spent a few minutes trying in vain to
cut one of them free of its pedestal with a laser welding torch before calling
it quits.

Another dead end. This whole trip had been a waste of time. I took one last
look around and headed for the exit, trying not to let my frustration get the
best of me.

I decided to take a different route on my way back up to the surface, through a
section of the museum I’d never fully explored on my previous visits. I
wandered through a series of tunnels that led me into a giant, cavernous
chamber. It contained a kind of underground city comprised entirely of pizza
joints, bowling alleys, convenience stores, and, of course, video arcades. I
wandered through the maze of empty streets, then down a winding back alley that
dead-ended by the entrance of a small pizza shop.

I froze in my tracks when I saw the name of the place.

It was called Happytime Pizza, and it was a replica of a small family-run pizza
joint that had existed in Halliday’s hometown in the mid-1980s. Halliday
appeared to have copied the code for Happytime Pizza from his Middletown
simulation and hidden a duplicate of it here in the Archaide museum.

What the hell was it doing here? I’d never seen its existence mentioned on any
of the gunter message boards or strategy guides. Was it possible no one had
ever spotted it before now?

Halliday mentioned Happytime Pizza several times in the Almanac, so I knew he
had fond memories of this place. He’d often come here after school, to avoid
going home.

The interior re-created the atmosphere of a classic ’80s pizza parlor and video
arcade in loving detail. Several NPC employees stood behind the counter,
tossing dough and slicing pies. (I turned on my Olfatrix tower and discovered
that I could actually smell the tomato sauce.) The shop was divided into two
halves, the game room and the dining room. The dining room had videogames in it
as well—all of the glass-top tables were actually sit-down arcade games known
as “cocktail cabinets.” You could sit and play Donkey Kong on the table while
you ate your pizza.

If I’d been hungry, I could have ordered a real slice of pizza at the counter.
The order would have been forwarded to a pizza vendor near my apartment
complex, the one I’d specified in my OASIS account’s food service preference
settings. Then a slice would have been delivered to my door in a matter of
minutes, and the cost (including tip) would have been deducted from my OASIS
account balance.

As I walked into the game room, I heard a Bryan Adams song blasting out of the
speakers mounted on the carpeted walls. Bryan was singing about how, everywhere
he went, the kids wanted to rock. I pressed my thumb to a plate on the change
machine and bought a single quarter. I scooped it out of the stainless-steel
tray and headed to the back of the game room, taking in all of the simulation’s
little details. I spotted a handwritten note taped to the marquee of a Defender
game. It read BEAT THE OWNER’S HIGH SCORE AND WIN A FREE LARGE PIZZA!

A Robotron game was currently displaying its high-score list. Robotron allowed
its all-time best player to enter an entire sentence of text beside their score
instead of just their initials, and this machine’s top dog had used his
precious victory space to announce that Vice-Principal Rundberg is a total
douchebag!

I continued farther into the dark electronic cave and walked up to a Pac-Man
machine at the very back of the room, wedged between a Galaga and a Dig Dug.
The black-and-yellow cabinet was covered with chips and scratches, and the
garish side-art was peeling.

The Pac-Man game’s monitor was dark, and there was an OUT OF ORDER sign taped
to it. Why would Halliday include a broken game in this simulation? Was this
just another atmospheric detail? Intrigued, I decided to investigate further.

I pulled the game cabinet out from the wall and saw that the power cord was
unplugged. I plugged it back into the wall socket and waited for the game to
boot up. It seemed to work fine.

As I was shoving the cabinet back into place, I spotted something. At the top
of the game, resting on the metal brace that held the glass marquee in place,
was a single quarter. The date on the coin was 1981—the year Pac-Man had been
released.

I knew that back in the ’80s, placing your quarter on a game’s marquee was how
you reserved the next turn on the machine. But when I tried to remove the
quarter, it wouldn’t budge. Like it was welded in place.

Weird.

I slapped the OUT OF ORDER sign on the neighboring Galaga cabinet and looked at
the start-up screen, which was listing off the game’s villainous ghosts: Inky,
Blinky, Pinky, and Clyde. The high score at the top of the screen was 3,333,350
points.

Several things were strange about this. In the real world, Pac-Man machines
didn’t save their high score if they were unplugged. And the high-score counter
was supposed to flip over at 1,000,000 points. But this machine displayed a
high score of 3,333,350 points—just 10 points shy of the highest Pac-Man score
possible.

The only way to beat that score would be to play a perfect game.

I felt my pulse quicken. I’d uncovered something here. Some sort of Easter egg,
hidden inside this old coin-op videogame. It wasn’t the Easter egg. Just an
Easter egg. Some sort of challenge or puzzle, one I was almost certain had been
created and placed here by Halliday. I didn’t know if it had anything to do
with the Jade Key. It might not be related to the egg at all. But there was
only one way to find out.

I would have to play a perfect game of Pac-Man.

This was no easy feat. You had to play all 256 levels perfectly, all the way up
to the final split-screen. And you had to eat every single dot, energizer,
fruit, and ghost possible along the way, without ever losing a single life.
Less than twenty perfect games had been documented in the game’s sixty-year
history. One of them, the fastest perfect game ever played, had been
accomplished by James Halliday in just under four hours. He’d done it on an
original Pac-Man machine located in the Gregarious Games break room.

Because I knew Halliday loved the game, I’d already done a fair amount of
research on Pac-Man. But I’d never managed to play a perfect game. Of course,
I’d never really made a serious attempt. Up until now, I’d never had a reason
to.

I opened my grail diary and pulled up all of the Pac-Man–related data I’d ever
collected. The original game code. The unabridged biography of the designer,
Toru Iwatani. Every Pac-Man strategy guide ever written. Every episode of the
Pac-Man cartoon series. The ingredients for Pac-Man cereal. And, of course,
patterns. I had Pac-Man pattern diagrams out the wazoo, along with hundreds of
hours of archived video of the best Pac-Man players in history. I’d already
studied a lot of this stuff, but I skimmed over it again now to refresh my
memory. Then I closed my grail diary and studied the Pac-Man machine in front
of me, like a gunfighter sizing up an opponent.

I stretched my arms, rolled my head and neck around on my shoulders, and
cracked my knuckles.

When I dropped a quarter into the left coin slot, the game emitted a familiar
electronic bea-wup! sound. I tapped the Player One button, and the first maze
appeared on the screen.

I wrapped my right hand around the joystick and began to play, guiding my
pizza-shaped protagonist through one maze after another.
Wakka-wakka-wakka-wakka.

My synthetic surroundings faded away as I focused on the game and lost myself
in its ancient two-dimensional reality. Just as with Dungeons of Daggorath, I
was now playing a simulation within a simulation. A game within a game.





I had several false starts. I would play for an hour, or even two; then I’d
make one tiny mistake and I’d have to reboot the machine and start all over.
But I was now on my eighth attempt, and I’d been playing for six hours
straight. I was rockin’ like Dokken. This game had been Iceman-perfect so far.
Two-hundred and fifty-five screens in and I still hadn’t made a single mistake.
I’d managed to nail all four ghosts with every single power pill (until the
eighteenth maze, when they stop turning blue altogether), and I’d snagged every
bonus fruit, bird, bell, and key that had appeared, without dying once.

I was having the best game of my life. This was it. I could feel it. Everything
was finally falling in to place. I had the glow.

There was a spot in each maze, just above the starting position, where it was
possible to “hide” Pac-Man for up to fifteen minutes. In that location, the
ghosts couldn’t find him. Using this trick, I’d been able to take two quick
food and bathroom breaks during the past six hours.

As I chomped my way through the 255th screen, the song “Pac-Man Fever” began to
blast out of the game room stereo. A smile crept onto my face. I knew this had
to be a small tip-of-the-hat from Halliday.

Sticking to my tried-and-true pattern one last time, I whipped the joystick
right, slid into the secret door, then out the opposite side and straight down
to snag the last few remaining dots, clearing the board. I took a deep breath
as the outline of the blue maze began to pulse white. And then I saw it,
staring me in the face. The fabled split-screen. The end of the game.

Then, in the worst case of bad timing imaginable, a Scoreboard alert flashed on
my display, just a few seconds after I began to play through the final screen.

The top ten rankings appeared, superimposed over my view of the Pac-Man screen,
and I glanced at them just long enough to see that Aech had now become the
second person to find the Jade Key. His score had just jumped 19,000 points,
putting him in second place and knocking me into third.

By some miracle, I managed not to flip out. I stayed focused on my Pac-Man
game.

I gripped the joystick tighter, refusing to let this wreck my concentration. I
was nearly finished! I only had to milk the final 6,760 possible points from
this last garbled maze and then I would finally have the high score.

My heart pounded in time with the music as I cleared the unblemished left half
of the maze. Then I ventured into the twisted terrain of the right half,
guiding Pac-Man through the pixelated on-screen refuse of the game’s depleted
memory. Hidden underneath all of those junk sprites and garbled graphics were
nine more dots, worth ten points each. I couldn’t see them, but I had their
locations memorized. I quickly found and ate all nine, gaining 90 more points.
Then I turned and ran into the nearest ghost—Clyde—and committed Pacicide,
dying for the first time in the game. Pac-Man froze and withered into
nothingness with an extended beeewup.

Each time Pac-Man died on this final maze, the nine hidden dots reappeared on
the deformed right half of the screen. So to achieve the game’s maximum
possible score, I had to find and eat each of those dots five more times, once
with each of my five remaining lives.

I did my best not to think about Aech, who I knew must be holding the Jade Key
at that very moment. Right now, he was probably reading whatever clue was
etched into its surface.

I pulled the joystick to the right, weaving through the digital debris one
final time. I could have done it blindfolded by now. I fish-hooked around Pinky
to grab the two dots near the bottom, then another three in the center, and
then the last four near the top.

I’d done it. I had the new high score: 3,333,360 points. A perfect game.

I took my hands off the controls and watched as all four ghosts converged on
Pac-Man. GAME OVER flashed in the center of the maze.

I waited. Nothing happened. After a few seconds, the game’s attract screen came
back up, showing the four ghosts, their names, and their nicknames.

My gaze shot to the quarter sitting on the edge of the marquee brace. Earlier
it had been welded in place, unmovable. But now it tumbled forward and fell
end-over-end, landing directly in the palm of my avatar’s hand. Then it
vanished, and a message flashed on my display informing me that the quarter had
automatically been added to my inventory. When I tried to take it back out and
examine it, I found that I couldn’t. The quarter icon remained in my inventory.
I couldn’t take it out or drop it.

If the quarter had any magical properties, they weren’t revealed in its item
description, which was completely empty. To learn anything more about the
quarter, I would have to cast a series of high-level divination spells on it.
That would take days and require a lot of expensive spell components, and even
then there was no guarantee the spells would tell me anything.

But at the moment, I was having a hard time caring all that much about the
mystery of the undroppable quarter. All I could think about was that Aech and
Art3mis had now both beaten me to the Jade Key. And getting the high score on
this Pac-Man game on Archaide obviously hadn’t gotten me any closer to finding
it myself. I really had been wasting my time here.

I headed back up to the planet’s surface. Just as I was sitting down in the
Vonnegut’s cockpit, an e-mail from Aech arrived in my inbox. I felt my pulse
quicken when I saw its subject line: Payback Time.

Holding my breath, I opened the message and read it:

Dear Parzival,



You and I are officially even now, got that? I consider my debt to you hereby
paid in full.



Better hurry. The Sixers must already be on their way there.



Good luck,

Aech





Below his signature was an image file he’d attached to the message. It was a
high-resolution scan of the instruction manual cover for the text adventure
game Zork—the version released in 1980 by Personal Software for the TRS-80
Model III.

I’d played and solved Zork once, a long time ago, back during the first year of
the Hunt. But I’d also played hundreds of other classic text adventure games
that year, including all of Zork’s sequels, and so most of the details of the
game had now faded in my memory. Most old text adventure games were pretty
self-explanatory, so I’d never actually bothered to read the Zork instruction
manual. I now knew that this had a been a colossal mistake.

On the manual’s cover was a painting depicting a scene from the game. A
swashbuckling adventurer wearing armor and a winged helmet stood with a glowing
blue sword raised over his head, preparing to strike a troll cowering before
him. The adventurer clutched several treasures in his other hand, and more
treasures lay at his feet, scattered among human bones. A dark, fanged creature
lurked just behind the hero, glowering malevolently.

All of this was in the painting’s foreground, but my eyes had instantly locked
on what was in the background: a large white house, with its front door and
windows all boarded up.

A dwelling long neglected.

I stared at the image a few more seconds, just long enough to curse myself for
not making the connection on my own, months ago. Then I fired the Vonnegut’s
engines and set a course for another planet in Sector Seven, not far from
Archaide. It was small world called Frobozz that was home to a detailed
re-creation of the game Zork.

It was also, I now knew, the hiding place of the Jade Key.

