## Chapter25



Max alerted me when Shoto arrived an hour or so later. I granted his ship
clearance to enter Falco’s airspace and told him to park in my hangar.

Shoto’s vessel was a large interplanetary trawler named the Kurosawa, modeled
after a ship called the Bebop in the classic anime series Cowboy Bebop. Daito
and Shoto had used it as their mobile base of operations for as long as I’d
known them. The ship was so big that it barely fit through my hangar doors.

I was standing on the runway to greet Shoto as he emerged from the Kurosawa. He
was dressed in black mourning robes, and his face bore the same inconsolable
expression I’d seen when we spoke on the phone.

“Parzival-san,” he said, bowing low.

“Shoto-san.” I returned the bow respectfully, then stretched out my palm, a
gesture he recognized from the time we’d spent questing together. Grinning, he
reached out and slipped me some skin. But then his dark expression immediately
resurfaced. This was the first time I’d seen Shoto since the quest we’d shared
on Tokusatsu (not counting those “Daisho Energy Drink” commercials he and his
brother appeared in), and his avatar seemed to be a few inches taller than I
remembered.

I led him up to one of my stronghold’s rarely used “sitting rooms,” a
re-creation of the living room set from Family Ties. Shoto recognized the decor
and nodded his silent approval. Then, ignoring the furniture, he seated himself
in the center of the floor. He sat seiza-style, folding his legs under his
thighs. I did the same, positioning myself so that our avatars faced each
other. We sat in silence for a while. When Shoto was finally ready to speak, he
kept his eyes on the floor.

“The Sixers killed my brother last night,” he said, almost whispering.

At first, I was too stunned to reply. “You mean they killed his avatar?” I
asked, even though I could already tell that wasn’t what he meant.

Shoto shook his head. “No. They broke into his apartment, pulled him out of his
haptic chair, and threw him off his balcony. He lived on the forty-third
floor.”

Shoto opened a browser window in the air beside us. It displayed a Japanese
newsfeed article. I tapped it with my index finger, and the Mandarax software
translated the text to English. The headline was ANOTHER OTAKU SUICIDE. The
brief article below said that a young man, Toshiro Yoshiaki, age twenty-two,
had jumped to his death from his apartment, located on the forty-third floor of
a converted hotel in Shinjuku, Tokyo, where he lived alone. I saw a school
photo of Toshiro beside the article. He was a young Japanese man with long,
unkempt hair and bad skin. He didn’t look anything like his OASIS avatar.

When Shoto saw that I’d finished reading, he closed the window. I hesitated a
moment before asking, “Are you sure he didn’t really commit suicide? Because
his avatar had been killed?”

“No,” Shoto said. “Daito did not commit seppuku. I’m sure of it. The Sixers
broke into his apartment while we were engaged in combat with them on Frobozz.
That’s how they were able to defeat his avatar. By killing him, in the real
world.”

“I’m sorry, Shoto.” I didn’t know what else to say. I knew he was telling the
truth.

“My real name is Akihide,” he said. “I want you to know my true name.”

I smiled, then bowed, briefly pressing my forehead to the floor. “I appreciate
your trusting me with your true name,” I said. “My true name is Wade.” I could
no longer see the point in keeping secrets.

“Thank you, Wade,” Shoto said, returning the bow.

“You’re welcome, Akihide.”

He was silent for a moment; then he cleared his throat and began to talk about
Daito. The words poured out of him. It was obvious he needed to talk to someone
about what had happened. About what he’d lost.

“Daito’s real name was Toshiro Yoshiaki. I didn’t even know that until last
night, until I saw the news article.”

“But … I thought you were his brother?” I’d always assumed that Daito and Shoto
lived together. That they shared an apartment or something.

“My relationship with Daito is difficult to explain.” He stopped to clear his
throat. “We were not brothers. Not in real life. Just in the OASIS. Do you
understand? We only knew each other online. I never actually met him.” He
slowly raised his eyes to meet my gaze, to see if I was judging him.

I reached out and rested a hand on his shoulder. “Believe me, Shoto. I
understand. Aech and Art3mis are my two best friends, and I’ve never met either
of them in real life either. In fact, you are one of my closest friends too.”

He bowed his head. “Thank you.” I could tell by his voice that he was crying
now.

“We’re gunters,” I said, trying to fill the awkward silence. “We live here, in
the OASIS. For us, this is the only reality that has any meaning.”

Akihide nodded. A few moments later he continued to talk.

He told me how he and Toshiro had met, six years ago, when they were both
enrolled in an OASIS support group for hikikomori, young people who had
withdrawn from society and chosen to live in total isolation. Hikikomori locked
themselves in a room, read manga, and cruised the OASIS all day, relying on
their families to bring them food. There had been hikikomori in Japan since
back before the turn of the century, but their number had skyrocketed after the
hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg began. Millions of young men and women all over
the country had locked themselves away from the world. They sometimes called
these children the “missing millions.”

Akihide and Toshiro became best friends and spent almost every day hanging out
together in the OASIS. When the hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg began, they’d
immediately decided to join forces and search for it together. They made a
perfect team, because Toshiro was a prodigy at videogames, while the much
younger Akihide was well versed in American pop culture. Akihide’s grandmother
had attended school in the United States, and both of his parents had been born
there, so Akihide had been raised on American movies and television, and he’d
grown up learning to speak English and Japanese equally well.

Akihide and Toshiro’s mutual love of samurai movies served as the inspiration
for their avatars’ names and appearances. Shoto and Daito had grown so close
that they were now like brothers, so when they created their new gunter
identities, they decided that in the OASIS they were brothers, from that moment
on.

After Shoto and Daito cleared the First Gate and became famous, they gave
several interviews with the media. They kept their identities a secret, but
they did reveal that they were both Japanese, which made them instant
celebrities in Japan. They began to endorse Japanese products and had a cartoon
and a live-action TV series based on their exploits. At the height of their
fame, Shoto had suggested to Daito that perhaps it was time for them to meet in
person. Daito had flown into a rage and stopped speaking to Shoto for several
days. After that, Shoto had never suggested it again.

Eventually, Shoto worked his way up to telling me how Daito’s avatar had died.
The two of them had been aboard the Kurosawa, cruising between planets in
Sector Seven, when the Scoreboard informed them that Aech had obtained the Jade
Key. When that happened, they knew the Sixers would use Fyndoro’s Tablet of
Finding to pinpoint Aech’s exact location and that their ships would soon be
converging on it.

In preparation for this, Daito and Shoto had spent the past few weeks planting
microscopic tracking devices on the hulls of every Sixer gunship they could
find. Using these devices, they were able to follow the gunships when they all
abruptly changed course and headed for Frobozz.

As soon as Shoto and Daito learned that Frobozz was the Sixers’ destination,
they’d easily deciphered the meaning of the Quatrain. And by the time they
reached Frobozz, just a few minutes later, they’d already figured out what they
needed to do to obtain the Jade Key.

They landed the Kurosawa next to an instance of the white house that was still
deserted. Shoto ran inside to collect the nineteen treasures and get the key,
while Daito remained outside to stand guard. Shoto worked quickly, and he only
had two treasures left to collect when Daito informed him by comlink that ten
Sixer gunships were closing in on their location. He told his brother to hurry
and promised to hold off the enemy until Shoto had the Jade Key. Neither of
them knew if they’d have another chance to reach it.

As Shoto scrambled to get the last two treasures and place them in the trophy
case, he remotely activated one of the Kurosawa’s external cameras and used it
to record a short video of Daito’s confrontation with the approaching Sixers.
Shoto opened a window and played this video clip for me. But he averted his
eyes until it was over. He obviously had no desire to watch it again.

On the vidfeed, I saw Daito standing alone in the field beside the white house.
A small fleet of Sixer gunships was descending out of the sky, and they began
to fire their laser cannons as soon as they were within range. A hailstorm of
fiery red bolts began to rain down all around Daito. Behind him, in the
distance, I could see more Sixer gunships setting down, and each one was
off-loading squadrons of power-armored ground troops. Daito was surrounded.

The Sixers had obviously spotted the Kurosawa during its descent to the
planet’s surface, and they’d made killing the two samurai a priority.

Daito didn’t hesitate to use the ace up his sleeve. He pulled out the Beta
Capsule, held it aloft in his right hand, and activated it. His avatar
instantly changed into Ultraman, a glowing-eyed red-and-silver alien superhero.
As his avatar transformed, he also grew to a height of 156 feet.

The Sixer ground forces closing in on him froze in their tracks, staring up in
frightened awe as Ultraman Daito snatched two gunships out of the sky and
smashed them together, like a giant child playing with two tiny metal toys. He
dropped the flaming wreckage to the ground and began to swat other Sixer
gunships out of the sky like bothersome flies. The ships that escaped his
deadly grasp banked around and sprayed him with laser bolts and machine-gun
fire, but both deflected harmlessly off his armored alien skin. Daito let out a
booming laugh that echoed across the landscape. Then he made a cross with his
arms, intersecting at the wrists. A glowing energy beam blasted forth from his
hands, vaporizing half a dozen gunships unlucky enough to fly through its path.
Daito turned and swept the beam over the Sixer ground forces around him, frying
them like terrified ants under a magnifying glass.

Daito appeared to be enjoying himself immensely. So much so that he paid little
attention to the warning light embedded in the center of his chest, which had
now begun to flash bright red. This was a signal that his three minutes as
Ultraman had nearly elapsed and that his power was almost depleted. This time
limit was Ultraman’s primary weakness. If Daito failed to deactivate the Beta
Capsule and return to human form before his three minutes were up, his avatar
would die. But it was obvious that if he changed back into his human form right
now, in the middle of the massive Sixer onslaught, he’d be killed instantly
too. And Shoto would never be able to reach the ship.

I could see the Sixer troops around Daito screaming into their comlinks for
backup, and additional Sixer gunships were still arriving in droves. Daito was
blasting them out of the sky one at a time, with perfectly aimed bursts of his
specium ray. And with each blast he fired, the warning light on his chest
pulsed faster.

Then Shoto emerged from the white house and told his brother via comlink that
he’d acquired the Jade Key. In that same instant, the Sixer ground forces
spotted Shoto, and sensing a much easier target, they began to redirect their
fire at his avatar.

Shoto made a mad dash for the Kurosawa. When he activated the Boots of Speed he
was wearing, his avatar became a barely visible blur racing across the open
field. As Shoto ran, Daito repositioned his giant form to provide him with as
much cover as possible. Still firing energy blasts, he was able to keep the
Sixers at bay.

Then Daito’s voice broke in on the comlink. “Shoto!” he shouted. “I think
someone is here! Someone is inside—”

His voice cut off. At the same moment, his avatar froze, as if he’d been turned
to stone, and a log-out icon appeared directly over his head.

Logging out of your OASIS account while you were engaged in combat was the same
thing as committing suicide. During the log-out sequence, your avatar froze in
place for sixty seconds, during which time you were totally defenseless and
susceptible to attack. The log-out sequence was designed this way to prevent
avatars from using it as an easy way to escape a fight. You had to stand your
ground or retreat to a safe location before you could log out.

Daito’s log-out sequence had been engaged at the worst possible moment. As soon
as his avatar froze, he began to take heavy laser and gunfire from all
directions. The red warning light on his chest began to flash faster and faster
until it finally went solid red. When that happened, Daito’s giant form fell
over and collapsed. As he fell, he barely missed crushing Shoto and the
Kurosawa. As he hit the ground, his avatar’s body transformed and shrank back
to its normal size and appearance. Then it began to disappear altogether,
slowly fading out of existence. When Daito’s avatar vanished completely, it
left behind a small pile of spinning items on the ground—everything he’d been
carrying in his inventory, including the Beta Capsule. He was dead.

I saw another blur of motion on the vidfeed as Shoto ran back to collect
Daito’s items. Then he looped around and ran back aboard the Kurosawa. The ship
lifted off and blasted into orbit, taking heavy fire the entire way. I was
reminded of my own desperate escape from Frobozz. Luckily for Shoto, his
brother had wiped out most of the Sixer gunships in the vicinity, and
reinforcements had yet to arrive.

Shoto was able to reach orbit and escape by making the jump to light speed. But
just barely.





The video ended and Shoto closed the window.

“How do you think the Sixers found out where he lived?” I asked.

“I don’t know,” Shoto said. “Daito was careful. He covered his tracks.”

“If they found him, they might be able to find you, too,” I said.

“I know. I’ve taken precautions.”

“Good.”

Shoto removed the Beta Capsule from his inventory and held it out to me. “Daito
would have wanted you to have this.”

I held up a hand. “No, I think you should keep it. You might need it.”

Shoto shook his head. “I have all of his other items,” he said. “I don’t need
this. And I don’t want it.” He held the capsule out to me, insistent.

I took the artifact and examined it. It was a small metal cylinder, silver and
black in color, with a red activation button on its side. Its size and shape
reminded me of the lightsabers I owned. But lightsabers were a dime a dozen. I
had over fifty in my collection. There was only one Beta Capsule, and it was a
far more powerful weapon.

I raised the capsule with both hands and bowed. “Thank you, Shoto-san.”

“Thank you, Parzival,” he said, returning the bow. “Thank you for listening.”
He stood up slowly. Everything about his body language seemed to signal defeat.

“You haven’t given up yet, have you?” I asked.

“Of course not.” He straightened his body and gave me a dark smile. “But
finding the egg is no longer my goal. Now, I have a new quest. A far more
important one.”

“And that is?”

“Revenge.”

I nodded. Then I walked over and took down one of the samurai swords mounted on
the wall and presented it to Shoto. “Please,” I said. “Accept this gift. To aid
you in your new quest.”

Shoto took the sword and drew its ornate blade a few inches from the scabbard.
“A Masamune?” he asked, staring at the blade in wonder.

I nodded. “Yes. And it’s a plus-five Vorpal Blade, too.”

Shoto bowed again to show his gratitude. “Arigato.”

We rode the elevator back down to my hangar in silence. Just before he boarded
his ship, Shoto turned to me. “How long do you think it will take the Sixers to
clear the Third Gate?” he asked.

“I don’t know,” I said. “Hopefully, long enough for us to catch up with them.”

“It’s not over until the fat lady is singing, right?”

I nodded. “It’s not over until it’s over. And it’s not over yet.”

