Short note: I am writing out this dream a good 36 hours after it occured. Still
it is just a short anxiety dream and dream fragment.

So the first part of the dream was a dream fragment. It was a very interesting
fragment, however, and I am not sure how to interpret it.

This fragment took place in a cave, much like a cave in a dungeon of a legend
of zelda map. On one side of the cave was an opening. I do not know what most
of the cave was like, but in the room where this fragment takes place, there
was a pit of lava at the bottom, and stretching across the pit of lava was a
bridge which connected one room to another. In the fragment, emerging from the
lava was a large demon, akin to something like Sephirot from FFXIV, but this
demon was very red. He had two horns and the extent of the dream fragment was
that he was spewing lava, almost like he was vomiting, across the bridge. I
also remember parts of the bridge collapsing as a result. There was a man that
was trying to cross the bridge, but the demon kept spewing lava. I am not sure
where the "I" being the dreamer was. I was I suppose observing the whole scene
from the back right of the cave towards the side where the hero was trying to
get across.

The second dream was a bit longer of a dream. I was at my old apartment in
Irving, and I wanted to go to the golf course. I walked on to the course (IRL I
had to slip through a fence, but in the dream it was open) and I started
observing the various terrain there. I started to realize that the grass took
on a sort of spongy and slippery feeling, and I also saw that there were some
parts that would make good slopes. So I hopped on to one of the slopes, and I
began to slide.

I remember going through this on a couple of the fairways, and on one
particular fairway there were three consecutive slopes. The first two were
mellow enough, but as I was approaching the third with some speed, I realized
that it was quite steep and that it would be quite the jump when I hit.
I was not able to slow down in time however, and resolved myself to taking the
thing in full stride.

I hit that slope, and got quite a bit of air. I remember having a moment in the
air time where I thought to myself "I have had dreams like this before, but
this is not a dream so I must slow my fall." I grabbed at some of the braches
to the side and was able to with my right hand slow my fall enough to land on
the slopes.

I then decided to keep sliding even though there were quite a few more such
steep slopes, and a few times I got more air than I was comfortable with, but
every time I was able to find something to grab on to and slow myself.

I then hit one of the holes and there were golfers there ready to tee off, so I
decided to halt on my escapades and find a way back. However, while I knew
where I was, I was not sure exactly the best way to get back, and eventually
decided to make my way in to the club house.

I walked in to the club house, and in there was the course manager. He mostly
just looked at me, and I decided it would be best not to tell him I was lost,
so I made myself look like I belonged there, but pretty quickly made my way
out.

I then continued on some of the slopes in a direction that I perceived to be
the "correct" direction, and I grew very cautious of the golfers around me.
That was about the extent of that dream, because then I woke up.
