Last night I had a dream. This dream took place in a rather different sort of
dream version of Chuck and Michelle's house.

The dream started with me and the family in the car on the way to theirs. There
was not anything about this part of the dream that I remember much except maybe
my mother and father talking about something as they usually do when we
approach such things. It has been a long time irl since we have had a road trip
like this. Something also to note is that, while the positions of my dad and my
mom were in their usual places, I was sitting behind my mother in Kyle's usual
place, rather than behind the drivers seat on the left side. The dream image of
Kyle and Evan are both vague to me.

We arrive at the destination, and immediately we are greeted. I don't concern
myself much with the pleasentries and go straight upstairs. Jacquelyn is there
to meet me. We meet and she is very happy to see us, which reflects a mood very
happy in me.

As I go upstairs there are a few peculiarities to note about this version of
the dream house. First is that the house is actually very similar to their real
house in layout, which is unusual for my dream versions of their house. Second
is that the entire living room area is open to the outdoors, in a rather
surreal sort of way.

So after we meet, and Jac is very happy to see us, she asks if we want to go to
her room and hang out. I of course tell her that yes, I would love to. Her room
is a part of this huge open outdoor space, and it comes out over their kitchen
area in a sort of balcony or overlook sort of thing. But it is very much a
dream image kind of balcony, because as I remember it in the dream it was
almost floating in space above the living room.

So we go to this area, and we all sit around the furniture which is placed
there for the purpose of hanging out. As we are sitting there, I am sitting
towards the direction of the outside (which I say is outside but resembles more
like the wondeful backdrop of stars, as if we are inside the great orb that I
have talked about in other dreams) and as we start to hang out, and
conversation starts to flow (and I don't remember what that conversation, as
short as it was, was about) Jacquelyn asks somewhat shyly if I smoke marijuana.
I of course tell her that yes I do, and I ask if she would like me to grab
some. She says not to bother, because she has some in her own personal stash
that she goes and gathers. She then procures a bong, which is the largest and
most peculiar bong I have seen.

This bong as I said was very large. It resembled more of a large and oversized
genie lamp than it did a bong. The "stem" part of the genie lamp came up to the
point where you would inhale, and from there it went down in to a chamber that
I could entimate was a full meter in radius and about chest height in total.
I'm not entirely sure how Jacquelyn was able to procure such a large aparatus
but this can be explained by the fact that this is a dream.

At first I did not realize that this large lamp was to be used as a bong, and
was riddled by it, but I very quickly came to understand how it was to be used
and how it worked. Jacquelyn had already packed the bowl and was asking if I
was ready to inhale. It was around that moment that I lucidly understood how it
worked, so I told her that yes, I was ready, and I placed my lips on it and
began to inhale.

The smoke from the "handle" end of the lamp (although the lamp didn't really
have a handle, it was more just the place where the bowl entered in to the
large champber) went in to the resivior, which contained multiple gallons of
water. I cannot estimate how much water in gallons because it is too much. I
could make an estimate based upon the cubic centimeters that it probably took
up, but I am not going to bother with such things at the moment. It was
multiple hundreds of gallons of water (give or take) just to give an idea of
the order of magnitude.

After I inhaled and recieved the smoke, Jacquelyn and then Jessica (who was
also in the dream now) each took their own inhale. As I was inhaling and I had
the lighter in my hand, and I was about ready to take a second hit, I started
to realize that somehow the whole platform of the balcony was getting filled
with water, and I had let the lighter (which was not my own but one that Jaq
let me borrow) fall in to the water. I apologized for my mistake, and offered
to go to my car to grab another. Jac said that it wasn't a problem, and tried
to spark it up again, but it was only sparking and not creating a flame.

I then realized that Jaq had another lighter, this one shaped in the contour of
her hand, and this lighter was not a cheap bic lighter that she had given me to
use but instead must have been some sort of custom or luxury lighter of some
sort. I proclaimed that such a lighter could be used, but Jaquelyn was very
reluctant to take it from her hands, and said she held it dear to herself.

At around this point I examanined my surroundings to see that Chuck was
watching on. I was not sure if he would approve of us smoking weed like this in
his own house, but quickly Jac started handling the situation in the way she
does by putting up all of the things in a carefree manner and navigating the
platform that we were all hanging out on towards the bottom floor so we could
walk down and meet with the rest of the family. I very much wanted to take
another hit but determined that the time for smoking was done now and that we
would have to socialize with the family.

As we came down to the kitchen table I sat there idly while Jaq and the rest
were socializing in the kitchen. Chase was at the table, and he was playing
some game. I am not sure what game it was exactly, but it was a board game with
some cards associated with it.

Chase asked me if I wanted to play with him, and to be totally honest I didn't
really want to play this game (it was a simple childrens game and I knew it
wouldn't really capture my interest in the way it would him) but I decided that
I would play with him simply because he asked me to. My mom was also there, on
the right side of the table, and Chase was on the left (I was on the end of the
table closer to the kitchen, facing the outside). I must mention that the scene
was still the same, that is, the entire living room and kitchen areas were
arranged as they are in real life but the entire wall and ceiling were stripped
away and outside was the inside of my "Great Orb" as I like to put it. My mom
was much more enthusiastic about playing the game with Chase, so the three of
us began to set up the game and started to play, all the while I looked outside
longingly at the scene of the stars.

It was around this point that I woke.
