So last night I spent the bulk of the sleeping night with dreams that I don't
particularly remember. As I woke up, I really struggled to get myself to get up
because my body is feeling beat down, so I stayed laying down. I had multiple
twenty minute dream fragments that I don't remember, but then, I had one full
rem cycle with a very strange dream. This is that dream as best I remember it.

So this dream takes place in a very strange and very new sort of location. I
have never had dreams in a place like this before.

The main area of this location was an indoor pool. The pool was decent sized,
although not quite full olympic length, but definitely about as wide. Along the
North side there were multiple diving platforms of different heights, and
towards the northeast corner on the east wall there was a door which led to a
stairway which led under the whole place. Later in the dream, we will discover
that this entire place is something like a strange apartment, and in the
southeast corner will be a small and very crowded kitchen area. From this
kitchen area is the door that leads to the main outdoor hallway. This unit is
the last unit on this hallway.

The dream begins in the stairway. In that stairway, I met a man who was coming
up. The details of the timeline and the characters of the dream are a little
bit fuzzy, but I do remember that this man was wearing a white shirt with maybe
simple jeans (I'm not sure on the pants). There is not anyone he directly
resembles to me, although I seem to have some dream figures floating around
that I could use to describe. If I were given some samples of faces I could
pick this guy out. He was the sort that is probably a decent functioning
alcoholoc, although there was nothing in the dream to indicate that he is drunk
in this particular instance.

When I meet him, he is coming up the stairs to talk with a woman. He is clearly
upset with this woman about something, although throughout the dream I am never
sure what exactly the conflict is about. Regardless, he comes up the stairs so
I follow him. At the top of the stairs (as we go in to the pool area, which the
pool is drained of water also, which is a point that I feel is relevent) we
meet the girl in question. She is leaning against the east wall of the pool
room. I remember her being mildly attractive but not especially so. She was
wearing a standard T-Shirt (I believe of faded blue color) and jeans. I also
have in my head that she was smoking, although that might be a figment of my
waking imagination.

Anyway, these two meet, and immeditaely they start quabbling towards eachother.
The quabbling escalates pretty quickly, to the point where the girl pulls out a
gun and points it at the man. The man says something like, "Okay, are we doing
this now? I know you're not going to shoot me, and I'm not going to shoot you,
but we can play this game if you want to." With this comment the man had also
pulled out his gun, and they were both gesturing with their guns and saying
things and continuing their disagreement (whatever it was) with their guns
pointed at eachother.

I stood there to the south of both of them. The girl stayed along the east wall
and the guy was among the bases of the diving platforms. As I looked on the
scene I remember thinking that I just needed to observe and see how this entire
thing was going to play out. I didn't want to interfere, because I felt that
any interference could unneccesarily escalate the whole scene. So I simply
waited and let them continue their quarell.

After some of this, a third man enters from the southeast corner. This man was
mexican, he was wearing a sombraro, and he had a revolving rounds pistol. It
was not a six shooter, but it was in the form of a six-shooter pistor and I
have decided upon reflection that it was a fourteen shooter. This man comes out
and asks what the trouble is all about, and both the guy and the girl are
neither able to really say clearly what the argument is about. I do remember
the guy then saying, upon seeing the man who had his gun outstretched the
entire time, "So someone else wants to bring a gun into this, huh?"

The mexican man then fires at the girl (I believe it was the girl, I'm not sure
about that fact but we will say it is her) but it turns out that the round was
a blank. Then the man jumps back and starts saying, "Oh, okay, blanks, we're
doing that now huh. How utterly pathetic."

The mexican man smiles at him and then opens up the chamber (which is how I was
able to see and refelect upon the fourteen rounds) and shows that some of them
are blanks and some of them are rounds. The way this was revealed to me in the
dream was that the blanks would be hollow rounds, and the rounds would be
filled in with a black circle.

The mexican man then says something like, "I'm not playing around here. I want
this conflict resolved." Both the guy and the girl then became somewhat
nervous, but neither concedes their points, and we find ourselves in a very
tense standoff.

I have to this point been back away towards the south east kitchen area, and I
know not to try and deescalate anything because it would not be wise. Somehow I
simply know that I am just there to observe.

At around this point, a fourth man enters. This man is like a cop in the
movies, the cops that don't wear uniforms and work wearing flannel and
otherwise conspicuous clothing. He enters from that same back right kitchen
area, and as he comes in, he has a gun holstered but with his hand on it ready
to take it out. He enters without much pomp, and asks me what's the situation
is. I tell him that the man and woman both have guns, and that the third man
has a gun with some blanks in it, and that they are all three in a mexican
standoff of sorts. The cop then starts to take control of the situation, which
I take to mean that my job as an observer there is done, and I proceed towards
the back right kitchen area.

In that kitchen area, the entire place is a crowded mess. It is a very small
kitchen. To describe it briefly, when you walk through the opening (there
wasn't even a door) that leads to the kitchen area, on the left is two pantries
along the wall and another pantry which is over the sink which is angled at a
forty five degree. To the right of the sink, along the east wall, is the door
which leads to the hallway of which this unit is the end of. That gives you an
idea about the tiny size of this kitchen. In the middle of it is a very small
island, but it was so small and so full of stuff that I don't even remember if
it was an island or if it was just a bunch of mess of pots and pans. There were
tons of dirty pots and pans all under the cabinet space as well, and in general
the entire place was a mess.

So in the kitchen area was my mom. She was working on some food, and was now
cleaning up the pans and such after she was done. I decided to start helping
her clean up some of the mess, but just as I started doing that there was
someone at the door.

I open the door to see the hallway, and at the door is another woman, dressed
in all black. She hands me a black gun but tells me it is just a water gun. She
turns it to the side where I can see a nerf logo on it (and I know nerf doesn't
make water guns, but thats what it was in the dream) and I can see the
different pipes and things which make it clear that this is a water gun. She
hands me the gun, and make a sarcastic comment of some sort. Something like,
"Just what we need right now, another gun that we don't know if it's a threat
or not." I pointed the gun upwards towards the ceiling and pulled the trigger
to make sure that it was harmless, and the gun made a loud bang noise before it
fizzled and the water drained out of it. I was quite surprised at this and was
not expecting the trigger to do anything at all. The girl laughed and walked
away.

I had enough of this gun shit already and immediately went back in to the pool
room. In that room, the three original characters were gone, and the only one
left was the cop character who was sitting on the floor along the east wall
with his head in his hands. He was clearly exhausted from dealing with these
tense situations, although this one he had worked out. I'm not sure exactly how
he did it or what the resolution was to the conflict, but he was clearly worn
out from doing it. I then slid the water gun towards him, and said, "Here's
another gun someone gave to me, I figured I would hand it to you." He took it
in his hands and snapped it in two and threw both pieces on the ground in front
of himself, clearly exhausted. He might have mumbled something at this point as
well such as "I can't take much more of this" or something to that effect, but
I saw that he was clearly distraught. I decided to leave him be and go back to
the kitchen.

My mom at this point was asking me to help with the sink. I must mention
something peculiar about the sink as well. The front end of the sink was
entirely open to the rest of the kitchen. The sink didn't have a drain, but
instead simply drained out the front, and the water would come in to a drainage
pan that was put there because the sink was designed in this way.

I was working to clear all of the water of this sink (because that was
something that had to be done with a sink of this variety) and scoop it in to
the pan on the floor, but as I was doing that I spilled some on the floor. I
reasoned that it wasn't a big deal because there was so much on the floor to
soak up the water that it wouldn't matter since we would have to clean up the
floor later anyway. Either that, or the floor was so dirty that I reasoned that
a little bit more water wouldn't hurt it.

Either way, when I had done this and most of the water was out of the sink, I
then lifted the sink up (it had a cavity which it slid in and out of) and under
the sink was all sorts of vegatable chunks. With the sink lifted, I then
started to work on cleanig out under the sink, getting two or three handfulls
of carrot bits and pea bits and so forth from the crevices where those things
had been stuck.

It was around this point in the dream that I woke up.
