So this dream starts in a theater which is to be later revealed in the dream to
be known to those that attend it as the "H-Thearter".

The theater itself is somewhat large. It is the centerpiece of the theater, so
it resembles more of a stadium when it comes to archetechture and construction
than it does a theater, although the room we start in is certainly a theater.

There were approximately fifty to sixty rows of seating chairs, with three main
colmuns, being the primary certer column which was about twenty chairs wide and
then two side columns which were each four chairs wide (I think it was exactly
four, but the right one might have been only three or even maybe only two).

I was there and among the midst of the crowds who were there to watch a
particular film. This film was designed for the purpose of enjoyment to those
who would care to watch it. I remember having a bit of trouble navigating the
theater to find my particular chair amongst the columns (i knew the row). By
this what I mean is, I got to the theater early and arrived at my seat rather
quickly, but there were a lot of concessions and previews and otherwise
uninteresting things going on in the theater before the main feature began, so
I at one point decided to get up. The place was getting crowded at that point,
so when I went to return to my seat I wasn't sure exactly which one it was.

Fortunately, the people in the same rows with me were pretty cool, and it
seemed like none of them knew where to sit, nor did any of them care where they
were meant to sit, so I sat down in an empty chair which I am certain was a
decent number of chairs to the left of my assigned spot, but I resolved to sit
there and enjoy the film because it was starting.

Another point that must be made is that, while I got up, I saw the creator of
this film sitting there. He resembled a man that I saw a few weeks ago at an
FNM, but he only resembled this man to me at first sight. The primary feature
of this man was the T-shirt he wore, it being a sort of beaten variety, plain
color, and generally unassuming. It was the sort of shirt that Neo and the crew
wore on the matirx, with a large neck and ratted edges. The man had a laptop
which was projecting on to the big screen and on which he had his work (the
film) that he wanted to show us and that we were there to see.

So, after I had seated myself in the seat, my neighbor to the left of me (who
resembled my neighbor who I have very recently met in real life named Billy)
started talking to me about every detail of the film. I do not remember much
about the film except that it started off pretty intense with vast landscapes
and perhaps a main character that was somehow contemplating this landscape, or
something of that nature. I remember more my neighbor talking to me, and I
remember thinking, "Okay, so it will be proper etiquitte to talk to eachother
during this film. Or at least, this man is the sort that will do that." I
wasn't sure if other people would be whispering to eachother like this, so I
mostly decided that I would make a comment to my neighbor if it seemed
appropiate, but I also decided that his overall commentary wasn't the worst
thing that could be, and it might actually be a nice change of pace if people
talked in a theater as they watched a movie.

Pretty soon after the movie started, there were technical difficulties. The
scene had just started the main action of the movie, but before I could watch
long enough to figure out what the main characters name was, what he was doing,
or for what reason any of the movie was there, it quit.

Immediately the aforementioned film creator apologized for the delays and
attempted to figure out what the technical difficulties were. I garuntee that
he was figuring it out, and it would only be a simple matter of time before he
entirely did, but before he could fix the problems and get the movie back up,
one person got up and started proclaiming, "This is ridicululous, I'm not going
to put with this" and started gathering money from theater goer's to get his
money back. He also was promissing everyone else their money back.

In the dream I remember this point because it struck me as strange. How would
the theater get their money back if this man was taking money from those in the
theater. But the man proclaimed "You can get your money back this way, and
everyone should get their money back."

Around this point is when everyone started standing up and egtting out of the
theater. At first it was just a few others who started collecting their money
back from the first man, who was handing out the money he had acquired from
others, but most just wanted to leave, and they were following the crowd out of
the theater.

I wanted to stay, but the overwhelming majority wanted to leave. As I thought
about it, the theater organizer wouldn't want to show his film just to one lone
man sitting in the audience (and I didn't really go through this train of
thought in the dream except maybe subconsciously) and the crowds were getting
overwhelming in terms of the outflow of people pushing me also out with them,
that I eventually decided I would walk out with everyone else and call it a
day.

As I got out of the theater, we came to the exterior mold of the theater. This
is where I say the archetechture resembled more of a stadium then a theater,
because the room we just exited faced the outside front door, but to the left
and to the right were large hallways with tall cielings and glass windows
extending all the way from the outside to the top of the inner theater in a
elegent manner, so there was plenty of room for the crowds to walk around,
enter the theater from multiple angles, and get concessions and things of that
nature (I did not see such stands in the dream but I know they must be there)

Outside, I was now with my friend Peter (who was not a dream image before but
is now, and in the present of the dream he was also watching the film with me
but has only now just appeared in the dream... no matter) and we were about to
go our seperate ways, but before he got to his car I stopped him in between two
rows of cars (and I could go a bit about the landscape of the parking lot, but
that is not dreadfully important. What is important is that Peter was parked
directly in the path of the front entrance and all the way to the back of the
lot, and I was parked to the left. That is, if the Theater were in the North,
Peter was parked in the South just barely on the East side, and I was parked on
the far west side) and I said, "I have two questions I want to ask you." and he
said "go for it."

"The first question," I started, "I just want to know if I annoyed you with my
messages. I feel really bad about bothering you in that way, and would like to
know if you really cared."

Peter replied with, "Not really, but what is your second question." Which I
took to mean that he wasn't going to concern himself with such trivialities.

"The second question." I began, with all of the sudden the second question
leaving me in the dream state but quickly returning. "Is, I feel a crippling
loneliness, and I don't know what to do about it. What would you say to that?"

And he replied with, "Well, I don't know if there is much I can say to that,
other then I knew a girl, and this girl was happy playing an MMO, and she had a
Husband and a child, but she had the same crippling loneliness that you are
talking about, so maybe stop playing the MMO."

I told him, "I'm not playing the MMO anymore." to which he replied, "That's
good, that's all I can really say on that." From there he said, "And thank you
for the trip to the theater." Because it has not been mentioned yet but similar
to how Peter simply appeared in the dream but it was as if he had always been
there, it was also the case now that I had invited him to the theater.

I replied with, "Yeah, of course, but I'm sorry that it was a bust."

As Peter was getting in to his car he said, "Bust? Are you kidding? Just
consider this an adventure to the H-Theater" Which was the name of the theater.

When he said this he got in to his car and drove away, to which I took my queue
to go to my car.

When I got to the car (which was the family suburban of all things, I don't
understand that dream image now in waking moments but whatever) I opened the
door and openned it so wide that I banged the car next to me. I thought little
of it but chastised myself briefly for being careless before I backed out of
the spot (and I always back IN to spots in real life, so this is something to
note I think but it might not be important) anyway, as I turned towards the
theoretical north there was a car parked entierly sideways, blocking my path
out completely, and the rows of parking spaces behind him was empty, so I could
only surmise that this car had parked intentionally like this for the express
purpose of blocking the path.

I moved forward and bumped in to this car to see if I would be able to get
through it. I did not get through it, but instead woke up at about this moment.
