Last night I had a most upsetting dream. In fact, I would say that this
particular dream is one where I woke up the most upset I have ever woken up
from a dream before. I've had upsetting dreams before, but the feeling of raw
and visceral anger that I felt as soon as I woke up was so intense that I
immediately wanted to ransack everything in the room I was in and in the rooms
surrounding myself. That's how upseting this dream was.

So the dream begins innocently enough in my parents house. I'm not sure if it
is Christmas (there wasn't anything particularly Christmasy in the house) but
it was a time when people were exchanging gifts. I received as a gift a wooden
model of R2D2. I thought it was really cool, and I was very excited to build
it.

So I undid the box and layed out the instructions to begin building it. There
were multiple wooden boards with all of the parts on them which had to be
popped out. It's very much like one of the models I have made a few months ago.

As I started laying out all of the pieces on the table, Evan and Dad ask me if
they can help in building it. I say sure on the condition that they let me go
through the process of figuring out how it's put together and that we go at my
pace.

I'm pretty sure they didn't listen to my qualifications because immediately
they started building the thing. I was on a particular step (I believe it was
step 21-23 which I now recognize as an interesting point to correlate my age
to) and Evan had already taken the pieces and popped them out and wanted to
move on.

The first thing I tried to express was that I was unhappy that he was already
building it before I had even read and understood the instructions, but then
Evan said that he was ready to move on to the next step. My father was there
overseeing the whole thing, and he said something to the effect of "We don't
need to go over this anymore, Evan already completed it."

At this point I'm already upset in the dream, and insist on them ceasing their
help with the project and leaving me to do it on my own. They refuse, even
going so far as to turn the page of the instruction book I was reading and
continuing on with the project in their own way.

At some point I tried to keep up with where they were, but I wanted to express
the fact that they had rushed through those steps, and as such they were going
to run in to problems later down the road if they didn't listen to me and
return. They didn't listen, and instead continued building through into step 44
at which point I wanted to smash the project altogether.

Something else to emphasize is that I was not very sure of the fact that what I
was saying was true or not, and that they justified themselves in continuing by
saying that I needed to keep up with them or else I would be left behind. They
just kept building the project with no regard to anything I wanted to say.

Then, at this step, they reach an impasse where the instructions don't match
the project, and they are not sure why. I look and I see that the piece of the
manual which I was still holding (which was now step 27 which understand in
waking life most certainly indicates my age) wasn't completed. I try and say
something like "well no shit that's what I was trying to say" but even that
they don't listen to and instead they take out the manuals from my hands and
start building the piece that was indicated there.

At this point, I am wholly distraught, and go in to the kitchen. They seem to
wonder if I am upset, and I tell them of course I am, and if they don't
understand why then they are wholly despicable human beings. Someone tells
Evan that he should apologize to me for doing the project, and he turns to me
and starts to give me a half hearted apology. I don't accept it at all and walk
past him through the dining room and in to my parents room.

I go to the corner of the room that I have slept in before when we have a bunch
of family over, and I lay down there, now in the dream feeling entirely upset.
In this corner, my mom reveals herself and asks me why I am upset. I tell
her it's because they did the project, and not only am I upset about that but I
am jealous that they were able to do it so fast. I then walked past her to
storm out of the room and go for a jog, but then Evan is there. This time he
has a big smile on his face, and he starts to apologize again.

At this point, I punch him once in the face with my left hand, knocking him on
to my parents bed, and when he was on the bed I punched him in the stomach
repeatedly, causing him to bounce up and down on the bed. I punched him six
times, and I wanted to punch him more because I could tell that I had not done
much damage to him, but my mom was yelling at me to stop and I wanted to move
on and go on my jog.

I didn't even really want to jog, I just didn't know what to do with all of my
anger. I felt entirely helpless to do anything.

Before I went on the jog, I remember going back in to the kitchen and seeing
the project put back in to the boards as they had taken it back apart and put
the unassembled boards back how they were in the box. I grabbed all of the
boards and smashed them on the ground in front of me. I grabbed two or three
boards at a time from off the ground and tried to smash them again so that the
entire thing would be wholly destroyed. After all of the boards were grabbed
board by board and smashed on the ground I left to go on my jog.

So I then went outside, and at this point the dream morphs from a realistic
scene to a much more strange one (as happens a lot in my dreams). I started to
jog, and I made my way after the initial stretch of path towards an archway
like a tunnel that had a label of "1" on it and led in to a multiple way split
with many doors. These doors (I use the word doors but all of them were like
these archway-tunnels) were aligned in a circle with a large fountainpiece in
the middle, and I was jogging counter-clockwise through the path that led
around the fountain. The place had a drab green feeling to it, and pathway I
was on was made out of faded golden bricks.  Inside of this door there was a
dream figure (someone I have never met in real life) and he was like an NPC in
a video game who I could talk to and he could give me hints about which
direction to go. I decided to ignore him and started running along the circular
pathway. I went across a couple of these open archways until I realized that I
could run up on to the ceiling and exit out an entirely different set of doors
which were upside down and each was cooresponding as a dual to the door below
it. I run through the upside down "1" pathway and this pathway has a lot of
spiral turns and twists but it is all mostly upside down. I end up back outside
where the original entryway was. There was a spiral path which allowed be to
return to running up-side-up and I saw a label that instead of "1" it said
"1-30", and I realized that to get through the maze I would have to figure out
30 doors I would have to run through to complete my jog.  Around this point I
woke up.

I don't know if I have ever woken up more upset than I have ever been in my
life. Like I said at the beginning, I had a very strong urge to ransack my
entire parents house relentlessly and unashamedly. I wasn't sure what time it
was, and when I looked at the clock I saw that was actually some time around
6:30, so I decided to IRL go outside and go on a morning walk and meditate. At
this point now (9:00) I am not near as upset as I felt except maybe in the
sense that I'm feeling exhausted a little bit depressed again and I want to lay
down to go back to sleep, even though I was able to get a good seven and a half
hours of sleep last night (by my estimation).
