So last night I had a dream. This dream was somewhat uneventful, but at the
same time somewhat eventful. This dream takes place in a hotel like building.
This hotel has been in past dreams, where it is under construction, but now it
is completed (mostly, as far as I can tell) and the rooms are available.

The dream starts out with us (being me, Kyle Evan and Mom) recieving a hotel
room from Lori (the family therapist Lori). Lori has just mentioned that she
has finished with her job there as some sort of professor and that she is
willing to rent off her room to us. We go through some of the neccesary steps
to write off the room from one party to another, such has handing over keys,
and Lori shows us around the place. She gives us a brief tour of the room, and
towards the end, as we reach the front door, she mentions that there is an area
for her financial dealings with the establishment off to the left of the front
door (left from where you walk in) and that she will have it remain locked
while we are there because we are not working there as professors.

She leaves. This part of th dream is rather ethereal to me, and I think can
only really be encapsulated as "we live there for some time." I cannot say how
much time has gone by, but I think it would be safe to say that the fall and
spring semesters of the school year have gone by, and it is nearing the end of
the spring semester.

At this point, we start to have some financial trouble. There is something that
my mom is freaking out about a bit that I am not sure what it is. Regardless,
it becames the case that we attempt to start finding a solution.

We mention the room that has been blocked off by Lori, and that it is possible
that there is something there that we can use that will help us in our
situation. We talk about it a bit, saying that it might still be active, but
then I remember and realize that it has been closed off, that we don't have
access to it, and that even if we did, it had to do with Lori's work there, and
because we haven't been working it won't particularly help us anyway.

However, my mom elects that there is still a way that we ought to be able to
use the room. We open the door, which loops around to a balcony which rests
opposite the front door. From this balcony there are beams, like rafters, which
connect this building to another building. The balcony is empty, but we know it
to be the case that the building which connects to this building contains what
we are looking for.

We are on the third floor of this building though, so I reason that it seems
precarious to walk across these rafters, which are narrow, and exposed to the
wind which is blowing from left to right with a rather high intensity and
variation. I reason that, while we could walk across them without much problem,
it would be safer to climb down a floor, walk across the rafter that connects
that floor to the other building, then climb back up to the third floor on the
other side.

As I am reasoning all of this, Kyle just hops on the third floor rafter and
darts across to the other side. Evan follows him thereafter. When they are on
the other side, they mention how all of those other steps aren't really
neccesary as the rafter isn't that hard to cross, and either way we will have
to cross the rafter without falling in order to get across.

At this point I start to work up my nerve to simply cross the rafter, but I
still reason to myself that I probably want to get across by climbing down a
floor, but as I am processing all of this my mother attempts to cross just as
Kyle and Evan did.

She makes it nearly all the way across, but towards the end of the rafter she
falls toward the left side of the rafter near the balcony on the other side.
She holds on to the edge of the balcony, which is solid concrete, but as she
tries to pull herself up on to it, she doesn't have the strength to make it. I
attempt to tell her to save her energy and just hold on so I can make it across
and pull her up myself, but before I can really do any of that, she falls the
two stories to the ground underneath.

I am quite taken by this course of events, and quickly decide on a course of
action. I ask her if everything is okay, and she screams a bit that she thinks
she has broken an ankle. I yell down towards her that I am going to make my way
down there. I considered jumping after her, but quickly decided that this
wasn't correct, so I said that I was going to run down the stairs in the main
entryway of the building to make it towards her as fast as I could.

I run out of the room into the hallway, and I make it to the entryway where I
run down the four flights (two flights for each floor) as quickly as I can, and
then I run out of the building and meet her where she fell. I ask her how she
is doing, and again she says that she think she broke her ankle. I ask if
anything else is hurt, but she says no.

I then perform some analysis on her ankle. I probe in various directions and
ask her what hurts the most, and I check both her left and right ankles. Her
left ankle is the one that is broken, and as I check I determine that it is
mostly sprained, and maybe a bit broken. I tell her that, in doctor Webster's
opinion, she should take 400 mg of ibuprofin every four hours to help with the
swelling, and with that it should be good.

We then decide to head out towards the store to get some ibuprofin.

As we are leaving, I talk with Evan to ask if he wants to go with me. He says
sure, that he would like to go with me, and we start to get in the car to leave
to get to the store. As we are about to head off, however, everyone else in the
family decides that they want to come with.

We make it to the store (I remember some of the ride there, but not much) and
when we get there, it is a large cube like building with a parking lot on the
opposite side of the store in relation to the road. We park in the back left
corner of the lot, and we all start walking to the store. As we go, dad gets
distracted by a man who is working on something related to his car and mom get
distracted by wondering where the entrance to the store is. As in, she starts
just freaking out about "is the entrance over here, or over there, I don't
know, hmmmm, how are we to know where the entrance is?" sort of way.

It ends up being the case that Evan and I break off and go towards the south
side of the store, where there are multiple storage unit areas, (none of which
we visit) and a sort of back entrance. We go in to this store (which is not
like any other store that I have been to in a dream or in real life) and
start looking around the shelves for the ibuprofin. As we are looking, we run
in to Lori.

I am not sure what the interaction is with her. I think she mostly asks us what
we are doing there. What I remember most, however, is that there was a very
orange sunset-like glow behind her, and it remarked me in the dream that this
was the sort of way that a lot of shows were ended when the character is
brought to a bright sort of area resembling a heaven like aura, except in this
dream, it certainly was not like heaven, but instead a sort of "anti-heaven."
Not like hell, but instead more like a sort of countifiet heaven glow, is maybe
a more apt way of putting it.

Regardless, we interact with her for a bit, with her having this sort of
sinister glow about her, when my mom arrives from the other side. Lori and my
mom start to interact, in a very friendly and cordial manner, and they are
about to conclude the interaction and go their seperate ways when Lori starts
to notice that my mom is limping on her ankle. She asks for what reason she is
doing that, in a very suspicious and probing sort of way, and my mom dodges the
topic, pretending that her ankle is totally fine. She then re-concludes the
conversation, but Lori is still adament about prusuing the topic, yet my mom
just starts to walk away hastily, attempting to hide her limp but clearly not
doing a great job of it.

The dream ends around this point. I don't remember much more of the dream from
this point anymore.
