So last night I had a dream.

This dream was more of a dream fragment, and honestly there were a few things
that happen in this fragment which feel relevent but that I don't remember at
all, so I will just go over the things which do feel relevent.

This dream takes place in my parents house during a large thanksgiving
gathering.

There a quite a lot of extended family on my moms side here. I am not going to
name everyone, but I would say that there are probably three dozen or so people
here.

The most relevent part of the fragment that I remember is that I was walking
from the kitchen to the den, and in the den there was a little girl walking
from the den to the kitchen. We meet paths and get to that thing where neither
of us knows how to get out of the way of the other. To my right is a wall, so I
think for a moment about going left, to let her continue on straight, but
instead I decide to be playful and come down and stare with her and see if she
can understand that she needs to go around to her right and that she can make
it around me. I decide that, if she does go that way, I am going to let her
pass.

She stops in front of me and we make eye contact for a bit. We have some
playfulness for a moment, and I start walking towards her while she starts
walking back. I am smiling and she is laughing while this is happening.

At some point we make it all the way back to the piano, and she tries to dodge
around me to her left. I had already decided that she was only go to my left
(her right) to get around me, so I sidestep to block her path there (in a
playful way) and she immediately starts inconsolably crying. Her mother was
watching this whole thing unfold, and she was ammused at my interaction with
her, and once she starts crying immeditaley scoops her up and starts comforting
her.

Later in that fragment, my family and Chucks family and Granny and Papa all are
working up for our "scheduled brunch". We go to the garage and we all attempt
to pile in to one car with some questionable double buckling procedures. We
drive to the restaurant and go in, and it is clear that they have to bustle in
order to serve us.

The only real significant thing that I remember here is saying, "I'm surprised
we are doing this with the virus and all."

I have just remember a last fragment. This one takes place at Sam's. I wish I
remembered the details, but in one trip, Kyle and Evan and I are all shopping,
and as we get to the checkout I say that I will pay for everything this trip
and Kyle will pay for it all next. He disagrees.

The next time he goes shopping, I have trouble remembering who paid and who
didn't, until I remember that we paid seperately and Kyle says, "Isn't a good
thing we did that then so we don't have to remember each time." I do feel he
has a point there.

The last thing about this fragment is that I remember that there was something
involved with the checkout procedure that became an ordeal, but I can't
remember what that was. I know that we began the checkout procedure, but
something about the items I disagreed with, or something about the way we were
doing it, or something of that nature. I don't remember. I do somewhat remember
that Evan was getting involved, and we got into an argument about whatever the
ordeal was, and eventually the attendent had to come over and tell us that this
wasn't the place to be fighting like this.

I wish I remembered the details here better, but that is that.
