So this dream starts in a sort of morphed version of Irving in my real life
dream world.

The earliest portion of the dream that I remember now, (although I feel as
though there was more before this) was entering a target store, and attempting
to find something there (I forget what) but realizing that it was only a
limited supply target, and didn't have what it was I was looking for. It was
divided in to two sections, and I remember in the right section was womens
clothing, and in the left section I belive was also womens clothing, but I
don't particularly remember what distinguishes the two.

Not finding whatever it was that I was looking for, I leave the target. In the
parking lot I go upward to a restaurant that was there. In the restaurant,
there were two things of note that I remember from the dream. The first was
that there was murmuring from Daniel Gonzalez about how there were people that
were infected with the coronavirus and still going out to restaurants and
things in spite of being confirmed with the case. I remember overhearing this
conversation.

The second thing to note at this restaurant was that there was sushi and I
wasn't sure exactly what kind I wanted. There was a few Japanese words being
thrown around about it, but I don't remember what they were. I think I said
that I didn't want Calamari, but something else, and that something else was
Spicy Tuna, but there was a japanese name for it.

I order the sushi and eat it facing the outside towards the west, and decide to
make my way home.

I get on my motorcycle (in the dream I have a motorcycle) and start on the road
home.

The road is very much like a back country road, but still very much a highway.
The roads were very sparse. I remember there was a sort of truck next to me at
one point, and I was riding along on the left lane of the road when a
construction worker comes out suddenly from the side of the road directly in my
path. I am able to speed ahead of the truck to my right and clear the worker on
the right side, but I remark about how close that was.

At some point, the intersection become a lot more cluttered, much more like a
downtown area. Eventually they get so convoluted that I end up finding myself
at the top of a stairway. I stop at the top of it, and look down the stairs. My
first idea of how to get down is to get off the bike and walk down with it, but
then I think about the advantage of the bike, how the suspension is strong on
it, and how with some skill it's possible to ride down the stairs. I then elect
to stay on the bike and ride down the stairs.

I make it down the first steps rather smoothly, riding the bumps with a degree
of finesse. However, in the stairs there is a landing half way down that levels
out for some bit and then continues down. I come to this landing with a similar
kind of attitude of riding down using the action of the suspension, but when I
get there I end up popping up quite high.

As I am flying up, I look down. At first I think it is possible for me to ride
this out and then land on the ground, as the suspension of the bike will lessen
the fall, but upon second analysis I look and say that it is too far down to
risk the impact.

At this point I look around for alternatives. It is also at this point that I
remember thinking "this isn't a dream, I can't just fall." Afterward, when I
woke up, I remember thinking that such a thought was peculiar for me to happen
in the dream.

This stairway was in the midst of a downtown area, so there were tall
buildings. The building immediately to my right was one that I could grab on
to, so I position myself to grab on to the window there, and hang on. There
were multiple levels of these window like ledges for me to hold on to, but they
were rather spaced apart, and something peculiar to note about this particular
building is that these windows were more like vertical monkey bars that were
spaced far apart.

I grab on to the top bar, and decide what my best way down is. I consider
simply letting go and dropping down to the bar below, but at the same time I'm
not sure if that's something I should do while I am still holding on to the
bike which is between my legs.

It's around this point the dream ends with a false awakening, which is when I
contemplate the fact that I thought it was real, and it amuses me.

This false awakening doesn't last long, and that is the extent of the dream as
I remember it.

