So last night I had a dream.

This dream took place in a dream version of the camp. Again, like the mall
dream, there were a lot of just random happenings that aren't really worth
writing down, and instead it is worth writing down the main thrust of the
dream.

So the main focus of the dream was on this play. In this dream, it was the case
that my cousins, Jaq and Jess in particular, had a ritual where they would
gather people to recite a play of theirs. It was something of an original play.
From what I can gather in my waking life, it was a play that they had
commissioned out.

So they gave me a version of the script so that I could learn my part, which
was the part of a character whose name I forget but it was very similar to
Seth. I think the name was literally something like Sett. There was another
character, to be played by some dream figure who doesn't coorespond directly to
someone in real life that I pieced together in the dream who would be something
like Cain, but really it was something like Bruce in the dream (I forget
exactly what his name was). There were many other characters that played more
prominant roles. These characters were just sort of C-rank characters in the
play. They were important, but certainly not the main cast.

So I am handed this script and told to rehearse my part in the play. At this
point, all of the family goes down to the base floor to just hang out and
converse and do family things, and I go upstairs to the upper floor. The upper
floor, it is worth mentioning, actually takes the form of the upper floor of
Chuck and Michelle's house.

I go into Jess's room to begin looking at the script, but I am strongly
procrastinating the entire thing. It's not a script that I find particularly
engaging, and the whole ritual seems somewhat silly and nonsensical to me
anyway. So in a way I put off learning my part out of a desire to blow off this
entire endeavor.

At some point in the dream, Jess comes up and asks me what I am doing, and I
tell her that I am learning my part as best I can. She looks at me skeptically
as she rightfully doesn't believe me, but isn't able to mount any sort of case
against me, and just says something like, "Well, I hope you have it ready by
the time the play comes around." I nod and continue not working on the script.

At some point, I transition to Jaq's room, because I have to pee. The restroom
is positioned on the opposite side of the room from where it is IRL, but
instead of going in there, I decide to pee around the bed on the carpet. I pee
there, and immediately as I start doing this, I think to myself, "Why am I
doing this?" I even had the thought that, "I have done this in my dreams and
now the habit is bleeding into my real life." Because, in the dream, I had some
inkling that this was real and that it wasn't actually a dream.

Anyway, I look at the stain on the carpet, which was white, and determine that
it will fade out somewhat quickly, and that no one is going to look here while
it is still fresh, so everything is okay.

I return back downstairs where the play is beginning. My part doesn't occur
until well into the second act, so I am mostly just hanging out while everyone
else is acting out their drama. At some time, my part comes in, and I take
quite a haughty stance in the dream, puffing my chest and reading directly from
the script in as magnificent a voice as I can muster. I will also add that this
entirely fit in with my character and what I was meant to play, I wasn't being
sarcastic here, I was legitimately giving this part my best effort.

Around this part I start drifting in and out of half awake and half dream
states. I shift my body to the left, and that seems to resemble the "Seth"
part, and I shift my body to the rgiht, and that seems to resemble the "Bruce"
part, but which I definitely see as an analouge to "Cain".

It's around this point that I wake up.
part. 
