So last night I had a rather long and sexual charged that I will do my best to
write out in a condensed manner.

So the dream starts in a movie theater. For whatever reason, the Phantom Menace
is playing as a reshowing, and quite a lot of people have arrived to watch it.

During the movie, I curl up and fall asleep towards the middle, because I have
seen this part before and I know it is a lot of exposition (to note is that
this section that I sleep through is not in the irl movie, it takes place on a
ship and has Obi-Wan and a Anakin mostly in formulation of some mission that
they are to undertake).

I wake up during the fight with Darth Maul (which is very much like the irl
movie) and in particular at the point where Obi-Wan is in the tunnel hanging on
the knob. I watch as he is able to hurl himself upward from the tunnel and grab
Qui-Gon's lightsaber and cut Maul in half.

The two things to note here are that, just before he does this, his eyes turn
from blue to green, very much symolizing a sort of transformation taking place
in him during this point. Second to note is that, in this version of the movie,
it is clear that the shaft has a bottom, and that maul and his legs fall on
this bottom and are able to hobble their way out of it.

This marks the end of the movie, and people start to leave. It turns out I am
there with Kyle and Tim Franda, and they start walking out with everyone, but I
say that I want to stay and see the credits. Confused by this, they walk out
anyway.

After the credits, I go out and meet them outside, then we get in a car and
head home.

That night, we are going to bed in our childhood bedroom. I am in the top bunk
and Kyle is in his bunk, while Evan is in the bottom bunk. At some point I am
reading some childrens chapter book (which later becomes the object of the
dream) but I am getting bored of it and decide that I want to masterbate.

However, there is the problem of having Kyle and Evan in the room. At that
time, Kyle starts to chat with me, saying how difficult it is to masterbate
when there are others in the room. He mentions that you could do it under the
covers, but then it's very easy to see the motions of everything going on from
the outside. He then leans his head over the edge, and expresses his desire to
masterbate like this with the blood going to his head.

I remark at all of his words, and think for a moment about how, since we are
both wanting to masterbate, we could just do it, as the cat is out of the bag.
However, I know Kyle well enough to know that he would not be okay with that,
so I leave it be.

I return to my book for a bit, but eventually decide to simply leave the bed
and go outside, where the book world has evolved.

In the book, what was happening was that one person was injured in a rather
catastrophic way (I'm not sure how, maybe he was just struck dreadfully ill)
and needed medical attention, but the town we were in didn't have the proper
medical facilities so we needed to take a train to the nearest downtown area.

While we are on the train, the entire thing breaks down to a point that it
becomes decommissioned. Unable to ride the train any longer, we decide (me and
the characters of the dream, of which there is only really to note one other, a
male who is something of a country boy but also an intellegent and hardworking
school goer, whose name I'm going to say is Gavin) to carry him on his trowel
ourselves along the train tracks to the city.

As we start to take him, Gavin and I start to become dismayed as we realize
that it is over ten miles to the city. He and I decide to jog ahead and prepare
the way for the others to enter as it is the only way we can think to speed up
the process for our dying friend.

As we jog along, we are stopped by some police officers who are on the train
tracks, asking us what we are doing. We try and avoid them and shrug them off
as best we can, and say that we are going to the city to aid our dying friend.
When the officers ask where he is, we point backward along the track towards
where our friends are, but the officer says that he sees no-one (because he
doesn't, we are quite ahead of the others by this point). We can't be bothered
by arguing further with the officer, and simply continue along past him, and
leave the officer to his duties.

We make it to the city, and jog in to a luxury restaurant, which also has a
sort of shopping center attached to it. We head in to the bathroom, and Gavin
says that we need to change in to formal wear. I ask him if that is really
neccesary, and he says something like, "We need to blend in if we are to make
it to the medical people".

Going along, I ask him if he has any spare pants, as I have a dressy shirt, but
not slacks. Gavin, after some searching through his things, produces a pair of
black slacks for me to wear, and I put them on.

We then go out to the restaurant to get something to eat, and we navigate our
way up and down the rows of tables. Eventually we come upon a table that is on
the end of one of the rows. On the side facing the entrance/exit (which we will
call north) there is a booth, and on the other side there are chairs which are
pushed up against a free standing wall that sits there.

There are people already at this table, but I reason that it seems to be
curtesy to allow everyone to sit at the tables where there are empty seats.

Rather quickly, one of the women (who becomes the sexual object of this dream)
starts to speak with us, asking us who we are and what we are about. I start to
talk about our friend, who is in need of medical attention, and go through our
story when I start to become aware that she is not really at interested in the
details of the story.

Instead, she moves a couple of chairs closer, next to the one that I am sitting
at, and starts to hold my arm and rub against it. I recoil at first, not
entirely sure what to make of the situation, and she notices this. She then
says something like, "Why can't we talk with our senses as well as our words?
English in not my first language."

I then start to catch on to this. A brief shift takes place in my brain in how
to handle this situation. I very quickly agree to use our body language to
communicate rather than formal conversation, and we begin to feel eachothers
arms, stroking up and down on them. We become closer to eachother, and share a
passionately brief kiss for a moment, but not to long as to raise suspicion.

At this point I then take an analysis of her. She is a shorter, plumper woman
with a rather well endowed busom. She was wearing a low cut dress that was dark
pink/light purple in color, and her fingernails and eyeshadow and lipstick
matched this color. Her smell was also something that I took note in, although
quite briefly, and it was the sort of smell that I have associated with
attractive women before. It is difficult to describe smells, but no matter.

It is time for us to order, and she hands us the menu for us to decide what to
order for her, as something of a test. As she hands us the menu, her hand
scrapes over the section for salmon. Taking this as a hint, I decide to order
the Salmon for myself and her, and she seems pleased with this choice.

The food arrives, and we begin to eat. As we eat, she and I are continuing to
make physical contact with one another, and she playfully grabs some of the
sides on my plate to eat for herself. I attempt the same, but realize that she
has eaten all of her food already, and has had her plate taken away.

At this time, I turn to Gavin (who is on my left, while the lady is on my
right) and mention that this "blending in" concept was a great idea, and I am
glad that he thought of he. He then points to my collar, where my tie has
started to slip out, and says something like, "Well, you need to work on how
well you blend in."

I chastise myself mildly for this lack of care in dressing, and think how best
to rectify the situation before my overly critical lady friend finds out. (And
that is something of note that I want to make explicit here, if it is not so
already, is that I was very much making sure that I continued to act in a way
to satisify her, and I was being very acute to her senses, as if any wrong move
would push her away in a sort of femenine huff where she would look over her
shoulder and say "Oh, such a shame, you were such a cute one as well" as she
moved on from her interest in me in a fleeting moment.)

To fix my tie, I decide it is best to go back to the restroom to use the mirror
to freshen myself up. At this point, as I figure out how I want to excuse
myself, I decide to say, "Well, I must make my way to the little boys room to
freshen up" because that was how I thought someone of this class might annonce
their intention to leave.

As I go to the room, I then think that she might interpret this as an
invitation to follow me, and to my surprise she does. She is practically
already at the door when I make it there, and we go in together.

We attempt to find some stalls that are unoccupied, but we look into some of
the stalls in this front area and they are, so we go to the back of the
restroom where the sinks are, and turn to the left towards the "common area".

This common area is divided into four main stalls, each of which has two
toilets in it (one for each side of the wall in the corner that it occupies)
and in the center there are quite a few men changing and such.

We quickly make our way to the bottom left stall and there is a man there who
is sitting on the left side of the stall. The man becomes fully erect, and the
lady starts to flirt with him, saying how she could just sit on him and bypass
me.

She has hiked her skirt up at this point, and I continue to grab her and keep
her close and reach around to begin pleasuring her with my fingers. The man
gets up from the toilet and pulls his pants up and leaves as her and I begin
the act of sex.

I myself have started to become erect, and take off my pants to begin
penetration. The lady says something like, "Oh, not yet" and turns around with
her face to the front of the stall and her ass pointed towards me in a way that
suggests that she wants cunnilingus performed. I close the curtain to the stall
and kneel down and begin licking her with my tongue. What I remember in the
dream is feeling a strong tingling sensation as I played with her clit with my
tongue, and I remember her moaning, satisfied with what I was doing.

After some moments of this, I then stand up and insert myself in to her, and I
continue to play with her clit while reaching around to her front now.

There was no feeling of orgasm or finish in the dream, but after some time it
became clear that we were done. She recomposes herself and returns her dress to
standard state, and we walk out of the stall.

In the upper right stall, there is a man in there that other men are fascinated
by. He is performing a sort of limbo act where he can bend himself all the way
to parallell backwards. I am not sure why he is doing this, but it is
impressive none the less.

After seeing this man, we make our way back to the front area with the
individual stalls, and she makes her leave.

Gavin meets me rather soon after with my pants and tie, and hands them to me,
rather upset that I have so carelessly discarded them. It was only at this
point that I realized that they were missing.

I re-robe myself and ask if we are ready to make our way to the medical office.
Gavin snorts, and says that, yes, we are, if I'm done messing around with the
seductress. While Gavin definitely meant his comment in a sarcastic tone, I
think on it for a bit, and reason that we had our time with eachother, and not
more will come of it. She will move on to another man to seduce and tempt.

Gavin gives another snort at my consideration of his remark, and we make our
way out of the bathroom.

This is the ending of the dream.


