So last night I had a dream.

This dream takes place in a version of Sam's club. In the back right of the
store is the place that can be considered the "place that I am staying." It is
a little peculiar, as I am not explicitly renting this place, although it is
also not the case that I am squatting. It is something like the place that I am
staying.

Anyway, this version of the store is laid out nearly like any reasonable Sam's
Club store is laid out, at least for the main area, except for one thing. This
is that there is something like a "console" in the front of the store just
behind the check out stations that one can buy various services.

I am having a hard time explaining it irl, even though it made sense to me in
the dream. Let me just continue on describing this thing.

So the first thing I use this for is to purchase some "character" in a video
game like space. I am reminded of those mobile games which are designed to give
you a character and then, by logging every day you are meant to do repeated
tasks which level these characters up, and you are able to recieve in game
rewards and such for doing so.

In the course of the dream, I remember purchasing two characters. The first was
something straight, like a paladin of some sort, and I remember being entirely
underwhelmed by this character entirely. I play with him for a little bit, but
dismiss him rather quickly.

The next was a much darker character, like a sorcerer of some sort with emo
style and edgy black hair and so forth. I am reminded of someone like Magnus
from Chrono Trigger (at least I think that is his name). I play with this
character some, and I am at least intrigued by his abilities, although still I
am underwhelmed by the whole experience, this time not because I find the
character uninteresting, but because I find the entire endeavor somewhat
uninteresting.

As I am in the process of playing around with this console, and working my way
towards deciding that I am not particularly interested in using it, Isaiah
comes up to me from the side. He is rather excited, and I ask him what is up.
He says, "He man, let's get some hookers from the console." I am a bit confused
at first, as I know prostitution is generally speaking illegal. But he says
that, through this console it is changing to be legal, and that we should hire
some.

I eventually agree to this, so we go up to the console and hire two ladies.

The ladies arrive from the back, and they are each dressed in lingire. One of
them had a rather large bust and was what you might call "thicc" and the other
was more petite and tall, a little bit older, and a little bit more shy.

I am of course immediately drawn to the more petite lady, even though I do
admit to myself that the large breasted lady is more attractive, objectively
speaking, I know that this lady is more my type.

We go in to a front office like area, where some formalities have to take
place. Essentially what happens here is we talk and discuss the nature of the
arrangement, the time frame of it, and things like this. There might have been
some paper work, but I don't remember signing anything or the like.

We then begin to make our way through the store to the back rooms. On the way
to the back we run in to a girl that I have known in the past. For whatever
reason she feels very much like Emily from college, but her appearance is much
more like Hannah from BJJ. In the dream she is neither of these people, but
instead some dream figure that I have met before in the context of this
particular dream.

My immediate first thought is that she might want to join us, and I would
welcome that, but immediately after this thought I catch myself and reason that
of course it is not the case that she would want to join. We talk for a little
bit. I tell her that we have hired two prostitutes, and that we are about to
head in to the back room. She laughs in almost a mocking kind of way, like "Oh,
you boys and your prostitutes, how quaint." We continue this conversation a
little bit, but she ends up walking away.

Before she goes, though, she does give me one tip. She says, "I know you have
never had sex before, so I want to warn you that, when you are both skinny like
you and this girl are, you don't want to knock your bone against eachother. It
hurts, like hitting your knee on the table, and you want to avoid that as much
as you can." This advice was unironic, and I thanked for it.

She goes away now, and I head in to the back room with my escort.

In the room is a bedroom lit up with ambient red and green lights. In the front
is a dressing stand to the left, and to the right is more desk like area.
Towards the back and to the left is the bed, which is quite made up with fancy
bed like stuff (I don't know, I suppose any bed is fancy to me, but still it
had curtains and bedstands and comforters and crap like that).

Both of us make our way to the bed, and we determine to just get straight into
it.

I get on the bed, and I am facing towards the foot stand, and she says, "Okay,
I am ready to do this however you want to do it." I don't have anything crazy
planned, but do have some idea that I want to have some sort of engaging
"tantra like" experience to go with it.

However, the lady just lays there at the foot of the bed, feet towards me, and
then spreads herself very uncermoniously, and says, "Go ahead and do whatever
you want."

I am quite turned off by this entire thing now suddenly, but decide to try and
make the best of it. I start by first placing my head upon her stomach and
kissing her body around her panties and belly and such in a way which to me
seems to be the most intimate way that I can muster given the lack of
enthusiasm which suddenly became this scenario. I don't do much of this before
I notice that her hip bones are sticking up somewhat (not in an emaciated way,
but in the way that they do for skinny people) and I remember the advice not to
rub bones aganist eachother. I still however do encounter some bone rubbing,
but I don't chastise myself for it and continue going knowing that it is part
of the learning process.

Around this point is when I wake up.

