So last night I had a dream. I had three dreams actually, mostly fragments.

The first fragment was a rather strange sexual kind of fragment. The dream
starts in a scene with Skyler from Breaking Bad lying on a sort of bed like
apparatus in the school room. She is lying so that her head is facing dream
north (so irl west), and she is under the covers. She is idly conversining with
two others there, both male.

They are talking very casually, and I don't even particularly remember what the
conversation was about, but I do know that it had a flirtatuous manner to it.
part way through the conversation she starts revealing her breasts, just one at
first, but eventually both. In the conversation she is carressing them and
such. At first I think that she has done this on accident, and that I ought to
sieze at this opportunity to see her while I have the chance, but then I
realize that they are being flirtatious with one another and that this was the
result she wanted.

She begins masturbating, and the two men there continue to converse with her in
this casual kind of way. I decide I want to join in, and begin to get myself
arroused, and I do so in a way so as to be sensitive to the fact that I don't
want to be forceful and ruin the chill vibe of the whole thing.

It is around this point that I realize that I am sitting in the school room
with Tim and Nikki Franda and Kyle and probably Evan all there, and that we are
watching a porn on the tv, but we didn't realize it was porn at first. I am
already on my way to full arousal, but everyone else in the room is eying me
strangly. I argue that this is the point of the whole work, and that it should
be okay if I want to join in, but they continue to give me a sort of "Seriously
Brett?" kind of look. This dream ends with me sitting there feeling conflicted.

The second fragment takes place at a location. I am with my mom and my
grandmother for sure, and I feel as though dad and papa are in the background.
The dream starts in a sort of park like a zoo, but the layout of the park
resembles the layout of the UTD campus.

We go towards one attraction which is a lagoon ride. We hop on a boat which
departs from around where "The Green Building" ought to be, and we navigate
around this lagoon (which I am realizing now in waking life matches pretty
closely to the eastern street, I forget its name, and synergy parkway). As we
go through it, I notice some large (but not gigantic) baluga whale kind of
creatures, which are the whole point of the attraction. I mention to my mother
who is there that I have seen these sorts of creatures in previous dreams
before but that its in a way that isn't guarded by this boat.

The attraction finishes and we find our way back to the center of "campus"/the
zoo. There is an "info kiosk" there, and I remember wanting to investigate to
see if there was more of the zoo to explore, but I remember dad and also papa
were both more or less interested in leaving for the day. That was the extent
of that fragment.

The last fragment takes place in a local game store. In particular, it is the
one I found in Irving, but it is laid out like the one in Richardson.

In this dream I am working there, and it is my first day. I am told that they
have these boxes of cards, or other sorting kinds of things, and that I should
open the boxes and sort whatever is in them, and usually it will be the case
that I will find an appropiate box to sort them in.

At this point it is early in the day, and there are not many customers in the
store, so I have some time to sort some magic cards to start out. I remember in
the dream having the quality that any time I looked at something and then away
and then back at that thing that it would be different than it was before. It's
an annoying quality of dreams such as this.

Anyway, after some time with that, I mostly finish up the sorting, and move on
to another box. Surprisingly, this box is full of watches. I pull it out, and
start to lay out many of the watches. Most of the watches are in the
"Affordable luxury" category of watches (in fact, all of them are). I recognize
some of them, but not others. As I am sorting, I arrange them based upon their
model name, but as I start to do this, I realize that there is one Fossil watch
that I have placed in quite a different place than another, and I think that
maybe I should arrange them by brand name.

Regardless of that, I mostly get them sorted by model name, and I go and put
the box on the side of the counter next to the cash register. I am not sure if
anyone there recognizes that I did this, but pretty soon after I check and
someone had picked it up, so I was satisfied with my work.

I get to work on another box, and as I open this one up, I notice that there is
an entire box of what I suspect is sealed product of some obscure trading card
game. I open the outer casing (which had already been opened) to find an entire
sleeve of cards inside still sealed. I put it back how I found it and reason
that I'll let the owner know about it so that he can decide what he wants to do
with it. For a brief moment I question whether or not I should open it and sort
it with the rest of the cards, but this feels absurd.

Around this time also, I have noticed that the store has become quite a bit
more occupied. Most of the people are playing card games with eachother, and I
notice that while most are having a good time, a couple are disgruntled. The
owner is making an annoncement, saying that there are a couple of magic cards
with white borders that people have been using which should not be used in the
games. The confusion arose because the card originally was in a standard
product, but that product has rotated out of standard. The confusion lies in
that there was a reprinted version of the card in the latest commander product,
but this didn't apply to standard. THis was what the disgruntled customers were
disgruntled about.

Around this time I realize that I have to use the bathroom, so I go to the back
and find the room. Its a small little room, and I start using it. I am mostly
done peeing when someone starts coming in to the room. I say "occupied" but he
comes in anyway. There is a shower system above the toilet which he starts
turning on, as he is about to take a shower. I navigate around and I am still
getting the last drops of my pee in the toilet when he is full on taking a
shower there, so I decide to pinch it off as best I can before returning back
to the store, hopeful that I don't have any leaking pee drops in my underwear.

One last thing to note is that this person taking a shower reminds me very much
of the brother from "Get out". That is, the white brother with the lacrosse
stick and all. I have no clue what the connection there is, but this dream
character resemebled that character (physically, that is) almost exactly.

That was all.
