So last night I had a dream. I don't remember much about this dream in terms of
structure. Mostly, I just want to talk about one of the people in this dream,
and what it is I remember about him.

I think the first place to start is to say what about the dream I remember. I
remember vaguely about deciding to go with my mother to some part of town. As I
write this now, I suddenly realize as if I'm an idiot that my mother IRL the
previous day asked me to join her to Discount Tire to get her tire patched
because the store she was going to was in a shady-ish part of town. So this is
obviously part of the material the dream is drawing from.

In the dream, however, I don't know what the reasoning was. Regardless, the
thing to note about the town or area of town that we were to go to was that it
had a rather "marketplace" vibe to it. It was rather crowded and dank, and the
general aura about it was one of yellowish orange atmosphere.

Inside of this town was a tent, and inside of this tent was a person. I
remember speaking to this person (or perhaps the person spoke to me. I'm not
sure what the motivation was for speaking to eachother). We have a brief
encounter which I remember leaving me with a feeling of being somewhat
bewildered by, as if I wasn't sure to what degree he was a hooligan style
individual and what degree he was simply playing this part.

My mother and I leave this tent, but as we are walking our way out of this
town, I remember saying we should go back to him. Again, I don't remember why I
thought this was an appropiate course of action. I think perhaps it was just in
curiosity.

We go back to the tent, and this time there were two or three others with him.
Maybe there were others there, others that had the same kind of capacity as
him, who were entering and leaving the tent. By this I mean, in this world it
is clear that he is something of a vendor (if it really is a marketplace) and
we were certainly the customers, and the others in this tent were also vendors
of some sort, or at the very least, regular customers and not curious customers
as we were.

In this time, I remember we encountered eachother again, and this time this guy
very much directs the course of the encounter towards his explicit intent to
harm us. I had a couple watches that I had brought, and I had laid out my
things in the corner of my tent as I often do when I go places, and at the
outset he was acting in ways which made it very clear that he was sizing me up
to see if I was a potential target for him to steal from.

At some way part way through this, as it becomes more and more clear to me that
the "playful banter" that we were having was actually an expression of his
desire to do us some harm if neccesary to acquire my things, I grabbed his
shirt by the collar to attempt to reason with him. I tell him "you are ruining
whatever semblance we could have had towards having an interesting coversation,
don't you see how the way you are acting is absurd" or something to that
effect. He then replies by saying "Hey man, no need to get physical here." And
I ironically retort "And that's the first reasonable thing you have said in
this conversation."

After this piece, I tell my mother to grab the trash can that was there (which
was the trash can I had bought IRL to take ice baths with, and likewise the
trashcan IRL that now contains most of my paraphenalia) and to get away from
here. I tell her that I will be right after her.

I begin to attempt to gather my things, and in particular I start to grab my
watches out of my shoes where I had left them and pick up my backpack to get
out of there, when the man begins to harrass me. I shove him off, telling him
that I don't want to get physical with him (and I don't as I'm not certain
whether or not others will join on his side or whether or not he is wielding a
knife) and that I will be out of there as soon as I can.

I wanted to take a moment to take a brief inventory of my things, but whenever
I would do this, I would be inturrupted by him again. Eventually I trusted
myself enough to reason that most of my things were accounted for, and whatever
was lost was simply a casuaslty at this point and that I should cut my losses
and get out of there.

It occurs to me that I have not described this man yet, and this is what in my
mind is most interesting about the whole thing.

The man was gaunt and tall. I would reason that he was probably 6'2 and 170
pounds or something thereabouts. His face was thin. He was white. He was
wearing loose fitting clothing, like a blue hawaiian t-shirt, but it was ratted
up. I am not sure about his pants, but in waking life I presume that it was
probably some sort of tattered blue jeans. His skin, as I said, was white, but
he was also somewhat dusty. He was the sort of white that had seen too much
sun. Also, his hair was thinning and unkempt. In other words, he had all of the
exemplary signs of someone who didn't have the means or will to take care of
himself.

Anyway, after I got out of there I went to meet up with my mother. I catch up
to her, and I ask her to make sure she is okay. She says yes, and asks the same
of me. I tell her that I think I might have lost one of my watches although
when I take an inventory of them I am pretty sure I still have all the ones I
came in with, and besides that I am okay. I ask her where the trashcan went,
and she asks me, almost with a sense of feigned obliviousness, what trashcan
she means. I think on it for a bit, and distinctly remember telling her to take
the trashcan and get out of there, but it could also be the case that I could
have told her to get out of there and my intention for her to take the trash
can was simply a gesture that I used which could have meant a few different
things. Besides I'm not too worried because nothing particularly valuble was in
it.

We continue on away from this tent and out of the town.

As we are walking away, we enter a building which is on the threshold of this
town and the rest of the world. This building is something of a factory. It's
worth describing the layout of this building.

From the entrance that we enter, its as if we are entering in to the side of
the building. I am not sure which way would be called the front, but it is most
appropiate to call this part the side. From this entrance is a lower loft which
is rectangular. Directly in front of us is the level of a floor which comes up
to about chest height, certainly short enough to see what is happening on the
"upper" floor (and I use upper in quotes because it is only about four feet
higher than this ground level floor), and to our right is a brief staircase
containing approximately five or six stairs going up. At the top of these
stairs is a corner of the room, to which when you turn left leads us facing the
same way as the entrance, and then to the left again there is a handrail which
blocks this elevated area from the lower loft area. When you start going
forward after making your way up the stairs, the wall to the right ends up
going away towards a sort of reception area and the area to the left ends up
extending well beyond the lower area towards the main part of the factory. I
only end up looking towards this part of the factory, rather than exploring it
directly, and in it there is quite a lot of large machinery with large pipes of
at least six to eight feet in diameter which contain all sort of hydrolics and
otherwise impressive machinery. I am unsure what this factory is meant to
produce. As you continue fowards, in the same direction as the entrance, this
elevated area will go back down again, with stairs to the left that go down to
this second lower loft area. After going down these stairs and orienting
yourself back in the forwards direction, there is another vantage point where
you can see left into more of the parts of the main factory, and to the right
this loft area is extended which goes beyond the wall which marks of the
aforementioned reception area, leading eventually to another doorway on the
left which is on the opposite side of the one we entered. This leads out into a
different section of the grander cosmos of the entire thing.

With this having been described now, my mother and I walk in to this building
with the intention of making our way to the other side. As we walk in we
quickly perform the neccesary calculus to determine how to get to the other
side, and we go up the stairs and back down the second set of stairs to get to
the second lower loft area and make our way out the door. As we get to this
second area, however, I find a little girl who is sitting and playing with some
dolls as she rests herself with her back against the wall which exists under
the elevated area. I stop to talk to this girl, which my mom is not interested
in (as she would rather just continue on out of this factory entirely), and I
ask her what she is doing here. She says she is playing because her daddy is
working.

I remember feeling a great feeling of pity for this girl. It did not seem to me
that her dad was particularly attentive to her. I suppose, in waking life,
there are two kinds of dad this could be. It could be that her dad is a
passionate hard-working individual doing his best to earn a living wage for
himself and his little girl and he was doing his best to provide for her in
whatever way he could, or it could be the case that this dad just said "have
some dolls while daddy works" and just left her here rather than attempting to
accomodate her, and it was abundantly clear to me in the dream that this was
the latter scenario.

I attempted to engage with her in a meaningful way, but my mother kept
encouraging me to come on, and get to the other side of the building so that
we could go on.

It is around this point that the dream ends.


