So last night I had a dream.

This dream starts in the dream version of the mall which I have talked about
before. The way this mall is layed out is that it has an entrance which is very
similar to the entrance to one of the department stores, like Macy's. In fact,
I think without loss of generality that we could say that this is Macy's. The
primary difference is that, instead of being entirely open like Macy's is, it
has many smaller rooms, each with it's own "ambience" and they occur at
different levels.

The dream begins with me going through some of these rooms. I am not looking
for anything in particular, but in some way I am looking for something. I go
through some of the rooms, and have some unfavorable interactions with some of
the people there. Nothing crazy, but I remember people being generally
unfriendly. The kind of thing where people complain just because they want to
complain.

Anyway, after some time here, I decide that what I'm looking for isn't really
here, and I walk out of this part not through the main entrance, but through a
more side exit which goes in towards a different part of the dream world.

It turns out that this mall leads to the area which has occured in other dreams
which reperesents the entrance into the Seattle portion of my dream world. I am
in one of the houses which is at the bottom of the hill which leads from here
and I find a lady there. In some ways this is still a remnant of the mall part,
as she is shopping there.

I attempt to make some conversation with her, (or she makes conversation with
me, I don't remember) but I remember wanting to find Avi. She says something
like, "I don't know who you are looking for, but there is this one very strange
character around here that is quite crazy." She continues to talk about how
wierd this person is, talking about his deformities and strange personality
quirks.

As she is talking, this person comes up, and she looks to him and goes, "That's
him!" I turn to him and immediately recognize him as Avi and turn very excited
to reunite with him.

I do notice, however, that he has become quite mishapen. He is short like a
midget, except for his arms which are still the usual length (usual for
non-midget people but as a result rather large for midget people), and his skin
is crusty as if he has some kind of skin disease.

We go in for a hug, but I am apprehensive to do so because of Covid. He says
that it's okay, he contracted and recovered from Covid a long time ago, and
that's why he has changed like this, but that he doesn't have it now. I embrace
anyway despite my doubts mostly just because I want to hug him.

I ask him what he has been up to.  He leads me into another room where he wants
to show me.

He turns on a computer where he starts controlling a character in a game
surfing over waves of water. The waves were super realistic, so much so that I
thought it had to be pre-rendered. I express my amazment at the quality of this
work, and exclaim outloud that this is beyond anything has done to this point.

He then laughs and says, "Do you want to see how we did it?" I say of course.

He then takes me to the project (in the computer) and opens up the main project
window. There is a graph there with multiple connecting parts. He talks through
some of the main things, (the boot strapper, the graphics engine, and so forth)
which he says everyone else worked on (he has clearly been working on this with
a team) and then he shows me a section which is the main backend which does all
of the calculation of the waves and their locations and reflections and such.

He says, "This is my part of the whole project, I didn't have to worry about
all of the stuff to make it actually show up, I just did the calculations." He
then opens up the section for that piece, and inside there are simply a bunch
of elementary functions strung together with different coefficients and such,
but all elementary.

I am quite astonished by this, and say, "Wait, so you did this just by
stringing together a bunch of cosines and sines? Did you use something like
Navier-Stokes equations at all?"

He laughs, and he says no. He could have used that, but it would have taken
longer for the computer to caluculate using that method and this way is much
more streamlined.

I chuckle and say, "Yeah, I suppose that makes sense. After all, you could
represent all of this in terms of complicated equations, but when you do the
calculations it really boils down to a bunch of polynomial terms in the end, so
it makes sense that you used those directly."

He agrees.

We then go through the simulation again, and this time I notice that all of the
little ripples in the wave take the form of little humps which a glued together
piecewise with smoothing functions. I remark on this, and Avi seems a little
bit perplexed, saying that I'm on the right track but that's not really how his
implementation works.

This was about the extent of the dream. I think before it ends, he asks me what
I have been up to since college, and I tell him a few things but stop part way
through as I realize that none of it is particularly interesting.

It was around this point that I wake up.
