So last night I had a dream.

It was two dream fragments. Both dream fragments took place in a video game
universe.

The first fragment took place in something of an action kind of game. The game
had three characters, and each character could use another character as a
secondary, making a total of six total combinations. I was playing as one of
the primary characters in something of a tutorial mode, before you would get to
the secondary characters.

In the game, the tutorial was meant to take you through some killing of various
rats. Most of the rats were rather easy to kill, and after I did that I was
instructed to move on. However, I knew that one of the more fearsome rats of
the game was in this area, and I wanted to try and take it on.

The rest of the dream consists of me chasing after this rat and fighting it.
There was a lot of navigation around the landscape, which was shaped much like
a video game town with lots of elevated buildings and cool structures, and the
rat and I continued to fight around all of this.

I could go in to more detail about the rat, but I don't really want to as the
general gist of it is that the rat was quite a formidable opponent, and it was
certainly above my capability to best easily like I was the other rats, but not
entirely out of my league.

At some point, the rat gets away, and I am convinced to continue on with the
story and pick one of the secondary characters. I am not sure which one I want
to pick. One is a girl who is dressed in green, and another is a guy dressed in
blue. The character I was playing was dressed in a darker blue. I don't know if
any of that is relevent at all, but there it is.

The second dream also takes place in a video game environment. This one,
instead of being placed in a crowded town, takes place on an island. The island
is structured something like a spiral, with the bottom part being a beach that
leads to the ocean to the north and then the west, and then as you go around to
the south and then to the east, it spirals up with the landscape to a hill
which finds its peak in the north.

The game starts about part way up this hill in a little cottage at dusk. One of
the main things that i first know about this game is that it is quite small, as
it only takes place on this island, and critics of the game have remarked how
short the game is.

Never the less, I go down the hill towards the west side of the lower part of
the island. At this point is another cottage, slightly larger and more
interesting than the main cottage with two stories. The top story is entirely
open to the bottom, and faces the front of the cottage, which faces north.

I go in to this cottage, and I explore a bit. In exploring, I notice some
things which seem suspicious. There are remnants of evidence that the person
which lives on the very top of the spiral hill (which I have not mentioned yet
has a rather large house) is a mob boss. As I am putting this together, a lady
walks in with a henchman. I piece together that these two are lackys of the mob
boss, but I don't give away my hand.

I navigate this tense situation and eventually leave the cottage. The lady
doesn't want me to leave, by I remain firm in my resolve to leave.

After leaving, it has become late evening into night, and I decide to go up to
the house and confront the mob boss.

As I go up and past the original cottage, I walk along the path which leads to
the big house, and the mob boss is standing outside waiting for me. A fight
then ensues wherein I have to fight a bunch of lackys and then eventually
confront the mob boss directly in a rather intense boss battle.

After winning this battle, I am then reminded about the shortness of the game.
This brief segment concludes the first of three chapters in the game.

After defeating the mob boss, time "zooms forward" towards morning in a sense
that only feels natural in dreams (and its only in waking life that am unable
to grasp what really happened. Perhaps there was some screen that was like
"chapter 1 complete, would you like to save? And then I saved and then the game
returned me back to the top of the hill and now it is morning). I then feel
that this boss was quite difficult for the first encounter of the game, but at
the same time I feel that, while it is indeed that the game is quite short, the
three acts to it definitely give a fullness kind of vibe, as if we are really
exploring the entirety of what is to happen on this island.

Regardless, the dream ends at about this point.

One last thing to note is, at the beginning of "chapter 2" I saw a portal which
led to chapter 1 incase I wanted to return there. I saw it, but reasoned that
there would be no real reason to return to chapter 1 after I had already done
chapters 2 and 3, and that if there was anything that needed to be done there
it would have become irrelevent by the time I had completed the remainder of
the game.

Around this point is when I wake up.
