Last night I had a particularly greusome dream. This dream starts from a top
down view of a car accident. This car accident was particularly large. It was
at an intersection, and in the accident which occured on the north bound
street it orginially started with just two cars. However, very quickly it
became a multiple car pileup, with the entire street blocked off. I even
remember, quite comically, even after the first of the crash, there was a
westbound drive that turned on to the street and ran in to the cars that were
stacked there because he was not aware that there was an accident.

At around this point in the dream it switches from the top down perspective to
a personal perspective. From this perspective, there was a person in one of the
cars that gets out of his car and starts running away from the accident. He was
black, and very much a sort of black from a lower income class of our society.
A few people, myself included, start running after him, but as he runs away, he
begins to wave a knife towards us to deter us from following him.

This knife waving is enough for me to know to back off from him, but there is
another person in the crowd that is not at all detered from this, and says
something to the effect of "I'm not going to let some silly knife waving stop
me from following this guy" and he proceeds to run after him.

I follow both of them, keeping my distance from them on the western side of the
sidewalk. At some point, the knife wielding man turns around to directly
confront the other chasing man (who is also black, but I think from a higher
income class).

The knife wielding man reveals that he also has a very large machete like
sword. If I had to estimate, this sword was something like eight feet long, and
a foot and a half wide near the hilt that taper off in a curve towards the
point.

The two spar for a moment, with the chasing man clearly being much more in
control of the situation. At some point, the running man is able to point the
machete towards the other, and threatens to perform a thrust (I think there
might have been a particular name for the maneuver that he was to perform, but
I can't exactly remember what it was. In essence it was a simple stabbing
motion through the heart.)

The other man, who has the machete pointed towards him, then starts to play
with the other man saying, "Oh, so you want to perform the hapkadu (which is a
name I just made up for it, but close enough)." With this he then grasps the
blade with both hands on the sides with open palms, pinching the blade between
his hands, and the he continues taunting the other saying "Are you going to
attempt the maneuver on this side," and he controls the point of the blade to
the right side of his body, "Or this side" and he controls the point to the
left side of his body.

When the man does not answer, the man with the blade point between his palms
then says, "Or how about I show you how it is performed." From here, the man
the takes control of the blade using both of his hands to turn it 180 degrees,
loosing it out of the hands of the original wielder, and grabs the hilt, with a
slow but very firm and steady motion, he is able to thrust the blade through
the other man rather completely so that it pierces all the was through the man
mostly through the center of his body, but very slightly throgh the left side.

Once the blade is firmly inserted in the runners chest, he then says, "Have fun
with that" and walks away, southward back towards the accident. The runner,
being impaled but still alive, stands there in hopes of dislodging the blade.
Much to his disatisfaction, the hilt of the blade has passed in to his body
already, so it is impossible for him to remove the blade in any way. It is also
impossible for the blade to become removed going through his body without push
the width of the hilt all the way thorugh. Evenutally, the man decides to
simply leave the blade where it is, as he is losing his strength.

From this point, the blade is pulled by the force of gravity, and starts to
slice downward through the mans body. He is bleeding rather profusely at this
point, and the blade gets stuck for some time near the bottom of his body near
the pelvis. Finally, the man totally gives up any efforts, and the blade severs
him all the way through to the bottom of his hips, through the legs, and both
halves of him collapse to the ground, very definitely dead.

I walk up to the corpse and examine the body briefly to find the insides of his
two halves quite taken apart. There is quite a lot of blood and gore that is
strewn out from his body and visible to the naked eye.

At this point in the dream, I go towards the top right of the street to some
people who are there hanging out under the balcony. These people are simply
dream figures, not anyone I know. I walk towards them with the purpose of being
an eyewitness for them for the purpose of police and insurance (which insurance
doesn't make much sense, but there is certainly going to be some sort of report
for everything that happened here).

There is not much to say about what happens under the canopy here. We talked a
little bit about how crazy everything that happened was, and we exchange some
information (in voice, I don't remember filling out any papers).

At this point, I then go back across the street towards the other side
(southwest side of this street where everything happened) towards an apartment
complex where the man who impaled the other lived.

I go up to his door and knock on it. He answers his door, and I start to talk
to him. I ask him what sort of martial art he knew, as he was way too confident
with his maneuvers and handling of the situation to not be trained in
something. I ask if he is trained in aikido or systema or something similar,
and he says that no, and that he'll be back in a moment.

He comes back after a brief moment dressed in his gi with a black belt, and
says that he is trained in a martial art that I had not heard of before
(something like hapiku). That is about the extent of the interaction there.

The dream concludes with me going down the hall towards a different room that
is to the right. There are a few girls that live in this apartment, and I seem
to be familiar with them on some level (or perhaps now that I think about it,
there is someone else who is my friend that lives here, and these girls are
visitors or roommates). I enter the room to hang out here for a bit, and I talk
about how awesome the man was handling the situation. The girls agree, saying
that yes, he is a rather cool and chill dude. That was the extent of the dream.
