Last night I had a dream that I would say was not so much of a dream as it was
a sort of location exploration.

This place was a rather large circlar prism that expanded four stories, and
represents a sort of "college" common area. The center of the place is open to
the sky, and there is a large lake in the center. Around this lake is a
pathway.

Along the southern sides of this area is the entrance, and then on either side
(south east and south west) are shopping areas. The first floor on the right
has men's clothing, the second floor on the right has womens clothing, the
third floor has a lot of watches, and the fourth floor is mens tailored
clothing. On the south west side on the first floor there is a sort of gift
center, and on the third floor is more watches, but I don't remember or don't
know what was on the second and fourth floors there. Along all the north side
is dorm rooms and other living areas.

Along the northern side is dorm rooms.

The dream takes place first by me arriving at this place, ready to start
college again, and I park in a strip mall that is within brief walking distance
from this four storied circular area. I walk to this place.

There are a few fragments of the dream that I remember. First I remember
entering to the right, and going up some stairs (the entire place has numerous
stairs around the area.) On these stairs there is a sort of overhang with some
flowers in it. I go up and wait in these for a bit. It had something to do with
two other people who were there, but I don't remember it exactly.

Most of the rest of the dream is simply me running around the complex. I start
at floor 1, and make my way counterclockwise, going up a level every
revolution. On this sort of journey, I get sidetracked a few times, and I
encounter Tim Hoffman a couple of times as well.

That's honestly really all that happens in the dream. I remember walking in to
some of the watch areas, and checking out some of the stands, but that was
about it. The dream ends with me walking through the gift shop area back
outside to my car, where I remember there being some group of people who were
there. That was all.
