So last night I had a dream.

I actually had one full dream, and then two dream fragments. The dream
consisted of some time with Peter, and the two fragments consisted of firstly a
strange chase with a sort of trickster thing on a set of highbar, and the other
fragment consisted of a dancing catilion sort of place.

To start on the two fragments, because they are easiest. The first fragment
consisted of me at the catilion that I did during my middle school years. In
this dream version, we were told to be paired up and begin dancing. However,
there was one key point of the dream, a point which even in the dream seemed
strange to me, and that is that all of the women brought their
anti-depressents, whataver those were, and placed them in the wall behind their
seats, and after a man and a woman were to be paired up, the men were to take
one of their pills. For the very first dance I did this, which already felt a
little strange to me, but it seemed not only strange but untenable in the sense
that we were going to change our pairs a number of times during that session
and it was very much the case that I wasn't sure what was going to happen after
taking so many anti-depressents.

This became clear in the dream in a particular form when two girls continued to
dance with eachother, always "accidentally" pairing up with eachother each time
they were meant to change partners, and they both continued to become more and
more fucked up by taking eachothers pills. The most interesting thing to note
here is that firstly, they were not dancing on the dance floor, they were
dancing outside near the back wall of the facility, and secondly, one of the
girls was getting fucked up and was not at all feeling favorable to the
experience, and the other girl was more enthralled with her state and wanted to
keep going, continually convincing the un-enthralled girl to continue this
process of dancing and taking pills. Eventually, the former nearly goes
unconcious and is leaning against the wall, and the other girls comes in to
kiss her in spite of her clearly debilitated state.

The second dream fragment involved three characters. There was me, then there
was a trickster demon sort of thing, and finally there was a much larger sort
of charicature of the most confident and big version of me. The setting of this
fragment took place in a gymnastics gymnasium, and the main thrust of the dream
takes place in a row of uneven and high bars. We all start on one end of the
bars, we will call this end the south, and me and myself (is how we will call
it, even though observing self remains in the ground version of "me" and
"myself" remains another character in the dream) start on the ground, while the
trickster is on top of the high bars. We would like to catch the trickster, and
so both me and myself are pursuing him. As we begin our pursuit, at the
beginning of the dream I am unconfident in my ability to get on top of the high
bars and pursue the trickster to a reasonable degree, but quickly I see that
myself is quite capable of filling that role and climbs on top of the bars and
jumps from bar to bar in pursuit.

I am quite relieved by this, and maintain myself at the bottom, arguing that I
will play the role of the one who will catch the trickster whenever myself is
able to push him off of the bars. If myself isn't able to catch him up there, I
would be the one to be the "garbage collector" (which was a term used in
ultimate). So I took this role. Myself chases after the trickster, and the
fragment ends before we are able to catch him or anything else of the sort.

The dream took place in my parents house. My parents were away for some time so
I had the place to myself. The beginning of the dream starts with me in the
school room checking out some of the books from the wheel of time series. I
pick up the sixth book having never read the fifth (and in reality I have not
even read the fourth) but I decide to pick it up for the sake of gathering the
story to some degree.

(In post, as I reread this story, I think it is worth mentioning what I
fervently believe this to be. The progression of calculus and physics would go
something like this. First is the three main calculus courses, then diff-eq,
then wave dynamics, then quantum mechianics. I have taken the three main
courses at UTD, but I have not taken Diff eq (which would represent the fourth
version) I have been watching through quantum mechanics courses on MIT
Opencourseware, which would be represented by the sixth book, and I am doing
this without having gone through the wave dynamics course except in a way in
which I have a quite decent idea of what is to be covered in that course.
Anyway, back to the dream)

As I am reading this, I decide to make contact with Peter. I call him up just
to catch up and see what he is up to, and as I do this, he actually mentions
that he is with some friends and that he wants to bring them to my parents
place to see me. I agree to this and they come over.

We all meet in the living room. In the living room, the hide-a-bed in the couch
has been extended and people are watching the tv there. On the tv is the sixth
book of the wheel of time series. Peter and some of his friends ask me if I had
read the fifth book, and I tell them that I had not but that I knew a lot of
what happens in it and as a result I am able to watch the sixth one without
getting lost. They seem rather impressed by this, if maybe a little bit
skeptical, but we all continue to watch in this way.

At some point in the middle of watching, when everyone has settled in to what
they are doing, I have to use the restroom, so I go into the bathroom. I start
peeing in the toilet, as one does, but as I continue I realize that I have
quite a lot of pee to relieve and that the length of time that I am peeing is
atypically long. I reason that it's totally fine, and that if anyone asks me
why it took so long to pee, I will say it is because I had a lot of piss to get
out.

However, as this persists, I realize that the bowl of the toilet is filling up,
to the point where the ammount of urine is bringing it above the rim. I
continue to reason that this is fine, and that the bowl is plenty big enough to
handle it, but eventually the level of the urine/water is at the level of the
rim, and at this point the stream of urine hitting the water is causing waves
in the pool which become increasingly turbulent and result in wave patterns
which overflow the bowl. Urine water begins splashing all over the floor.

I am somewhat horrified by this. Eventually, after this goes on for some time
and the bowl has completely overfilled, I finish my flow of urine and get to
work on the clean up. At this point it is entirely obvious to everyone there
what has transpired, and mostly I own it, saying that I really had a lot of
urine and that the toilet wasn't enough to handle it. I grab some towels and
clean it up.

It turns out this dream was also more of a dream fragment, as I realize that is
the end of it. I felt there was more to it, and I think this is because it was
the first fragment of the night and it did somewhat bleed in to the other
fragments even if only in a superficial way. That is all.
