So last night I had a dream.

This dream took place in a few locations. It was the sort of dream that has a
very fragmented kind of structure to it.

The context of this dream is that me and some others are a part of a whole
summer camp kind of endeavor, although the setting of this camp is not outside,
it just seems to have a summer camp kind of vibe to it. The biggest way that it
feels like summer camp is that there are a lot of people involved, I have quite
a variation in how well I know some vs others, and it is clear that we are here
to have fun but that it will end at some point in the future.

The main theme of this dream is that I don't feel like I am "in" with this
summer camp. In other words, people are doing things, and I feel that I get
left behind in some cases.

More concretely, I remember being in a store (which greatly resembles Target,
which I think is of course no coincidence as I am in my second week of working
there) and everyone in the camp had gone on to do something, but I had stayed
at one of the shelves to organize some of the items there.

Later, we are in my parents living room, and everyone is having fun watching TV
and playing games, and I feel greatly uninterested in partaking in those
things, but still try and fit in regardless.

Later in the dream, as part of the camp, Elon Musk actually joins in, and he is
helping some of the members work on a puzzle. Peter Rangel has been a
persistent part of this summer camp as well, and he has been quite involved
with everything that is happening.

I go in to the puzzle room (which is the dining room, except through the dining
room it comes out to a much bigger house) and I begin to interact with Elon
Musk. I know he must be getting all of the time that people adore him and ask
him questions which I am sure he is tired of answering, so I decide to think
about my question for him before I ask it so as to make the most of it.

Eventually, I formulate my question, and I say, "I have a question. When you
are inventing the things that you invent, a lot of times there is a visual way
to percieve and reason about it, and there is also a more rigourous way to
think about it. When you invent, how much are you considering the visual way of
analyzing your system, and how much are you thinking about the pure mechanics
of it."

He nods his head as I mention the visual parts, and when I am done answering my
question, he replies, "The visual aspect of things is extremely important in
what I do when I invent. Imagine that you tried to invent something without
considering the visual side of it. For instance, for one size of a lever I
might be able to clear another piece, but if that lever were my head, for some
size I might clear the table (and at this point he bends down past the table to
make his point) but if I don't consider the visual aspect of it, for other
sizes I will hit my head on the table, and I wouldn't know that if I didn't
look at the visual component.

I feel a quite profound shift in my understand of what he is saying. I spend a
moment ruminating on this, and after I let it sink in, I thank him for his
insight, and let him resume working with everyone else on his puzzle.

That was about the extent of the dream. There is more that could be said about
a few points of it in the beginning, but I don't remember them very well. I do
remember that I did feel quite left out, which is the most important aspect of
the dream.
