Last night I had two dreams, the second of which is divided into some sections.

The first dream takes place in a sort of video game like scenario.

It takes place inside a two story house (a house that I believe has been in
dreams before, but I don't remember when or where). The house has an entrance
which leads to a sort of common area, and then when you take a right and a
right there is a stairway with a turning flight which leads to an upstairs
which has another more lounge like common area and a bedroom off to the left.

The dream starts where I explore a little bit about the "rules of the game". It
is somewhat like an RTS game, except when I "select" a character, I become that
character.

I start as a sort of worker character, like a lemming, walking along the left
side of the ground floor. As this lemming, I decide that, instead of just
walking through the first common area and going upstairs, like I would if I
were being hasty with this endeaveor, I instead find a square where a bunker
could be built, and I instruct the lemming to build a bunker there.

From here, the dream takes the form of a third person adventure more than an
RTS. It starts with me going in to the common area. As I make it to the common
area, an "enemy" appears from the entrance in the form of a goddess. The
goddess has lasers which fire out of her eyes, and she is attempting to aim and
fire at me.

I hide behind the bunker that was built (which I am very glad that I took the
time to do) while she attacks. Something to note is that she is not very fast,
and is much more just attacking the area than hunting me, (although she is
doing so with some intent of hunting me). In some sense, she is like a "purge
robot" that has been sent to this house. Something like that, although that
doesn't do her justice.

Regardless, at some point I find a way to gaurd myself and make it to the
stairs. Once I get up the stairs, I find another bunker that has been built, as
well as some other people who have played the game. There are a few there, and
they talk about how they speed run the game.

The points that they talk about involve the steps after this point in the game,
where they go to an area outside, an area that is something like a factory, and
in this factory it seems like you are trapped inside, but they have a portal
gun, and with the portals they are able to gain momentum and propel themselves
out of the room.

In the dream I find this somewhat fascinating the precision with which they
have to do this, as well as the variety of strats that they use.

That was about the extent of that dream.

The second dream was definitely interesting.

The first part of the dream, I am in the supermarket with my mom. She is at the
deli counter, and I am preparing for the role of Neo in a matrix reboot. As a
background to this section of the dream, this is a role that I got that I am
not sure why I was selected for, given that I am not an actor and have no
formal training as one, but that I have taken and am ready to give it my all
on.

My mom is taking some time at the deli counter though, and the person at the
counter ends up asking me what my hurry is. I tell him that I am playing the
role of Neo, and he looks at me in a sort of skeptical way. I tell him that I'm
not really sure why I got the role either, but that it feels appropiate anyway.

We leave the supermarket and start driving to the studio. However, on the way
there, I realize that we are going the wrong way, and are well on the way to
being late. My mom seems very non chelant about it, though. That about the end
of that section of the dream.

The second section I believe is a false awakening. I wake up in a house very
similar to my dad's mother's house. I am sleeping near the wall between the
living room and the common room. Around me, the entire house is being
demolished and remodeled.

The main theme of this dream that I remember is becoming upset, although what
exactly the tension was between me and my parents (both of them were in the
dream) I don't remember. There was a bit of storming around, first to the
bathroom near the kitchen, and then outside.

This dream then transitions after some time to my parents home, where
remodeling is taking place on the back porch. The fence and gate are being
rearranged so that the fence will wrap around the entire porch, and the gate
will open up parallel to the back door.

While we are working there (and I still feel some of the tension from the
previous dream) my dad starts to say that he wants to make some changes to the
driveway, and as result they need to call the people who poured it.

The people come out, and they begin talking with them about the adjustments to
be made, not only to the driveway but also to the wall between the garage and
the porch.

While they are figuring that out, Parker and Jaq come by. I let them in through
the front.

We are sitting on a table on the porch, me closest to the door, Jaq on my right
and Parker across from me.

Jaq confronts me about a list that she made around Christmas time about what
everyone wanted to do for Christmas. She asks me what it is I wanted to do. In
the dream I remember back to Christmas, where I joined in with the family and
very begrudgingly went to church and exchanged presents.

Jaq asks me that if I was going to treat it like I did, why didn't I put what I
wanted to do on the list. She also says something like, "If all you wanted to
do was be a scrooge and mope around your apartment by yourself, why didn't you
just put that on the list?"

I tell her that what I really wanted to do I couldn't put on the list (unspoken
being that I wanted to become intimate with her). I then quickly get defensive
and say, "In fairness, I am not the only one that left the list blank. Ten of
the fourteen entries are blank just like mine." She then retorts with "Yeah,
well those ten were satisfied with the status quo, where you clearly are not."
To which I say that is a valid point.

She starts to huff, like this whole conversation is a waste of time, and I tell
her that I value this conversation and that it's an area worth exploring,
because I am not exactly sure what it is I would prefer to do on Christmas, and
I think it would be great if we could talk about something that would be
better.

Well, that is the last part of the conversation that I remember. Something else
to note is that we began facing eachother in a sort of close way, almost in
missionary position, but with her brooding over me. It doesn't become
explicitely sexual, but it is erotically charged certainly.
