So last night I had a dream that I would say is not very impactful, but I want
to write down the high points of it anyway.

The dream starts with some interesting notes about me playing Slay the Spire. I
am playing the watcher, the newest character of the game, and I am in the old
school room. One of the cards has an interesting mechanic that is done when
played. I attempt to figure out how it works, and I try to show it to Evan, but
it doesn't work how I expect, so I save and quit and reload. When I reload,
however, I load into a different game state. I spend some time attempting to
figure out how to get back in to the game state that I was in originally. After
some tinkering, I am able to find it. The way the card works is, when it enters
your hand it is unplayable, and if you play a card with cost four or more, next
turn one of the three effects that it generates will be free, and the effect
chosen has to do with the effect of the card that you play. If you play a card
of cost less than four, the effect costs two next turn.

After this, I turn off the game to go into the kitchen, where we are expecting
company. Linda and Richard and Daniel and Sarah are already there, and while we
wait Chuck and his family arrive.

After they arrive, I then go back into the school room to play some games on
the switch. I power it up, and as I start to play, Chase wants to join in. Very
soon after, Jaq and Jess and Kyle and Evan also want to join. We have to figure
out a way to get six people connected to one console, and we do it by having
some connected by hardwired controllers (which are incidentally shaped like the
N64 controllers) and others connected by wireless.

The game is Mario Kart. We play for some time. At the end of the three laps, we
make our way to the room before the final stretch, and we find it to be blocked
off. We then discover that there is a new feature in this version of the game
that is somewhat experimental, where each character is to enter a different
door which leads to an entirely different room, and in this room, depending on
your character, you are meant to perform some task before you can finish the
stage.

As Mario, I enter in the sixth door and perform the task relegated there. The
task for Mario is to provide mock counselling services for a few varied cases.

I am surprised at some of the cases, and do my best to work through the best
ways to interact with them.

One of them was a boy that had a brain surgery. I had to consol him by telling
him how badass and hardcore it was. There was another that I think was a girl
with some sort of anxiety about something, I'm not sure what, but I consoled
her with a similar sort of treatment.

After the five cases (some of which I felt I didn't do very well with) I return
to the race course, and make my way to the finish line.

After the finish, we talk with a woman there who is getting feedback on the new
features of the race. I tell her that I liked the welcome surprise, that it's
not something you would expect from a mario kart game, but that I felt it was
interesting none-the-less to force you to have to shift your mode of thinking
from a race to thought provoking discussion so suddenly.

Something I do comment on is that I only feel this way because I am not a
hardcore Mario Kart fan, and that if I were, I would probably really hate this
section if I were going for time trials or speedruns, and that the people that
do are most certainly going to be annoyed at the fact that each character has a
different door to enter, creating a bunch of slightly different and arbitrary
categories, and that they are going to explore this area and come up with a
strategy for each door. The lady insists that it is constructed to be
non-predictable, but I am rather skeptical at this because people who want to
will figure it out.

After the finish line, there is then an area where we have to take a ticket
that we received from the room and scan it at a sort of register (which is much
like a self-check register at a grocery) where it will turn out green or red
depending on how we did. We then have to take that red or green reciept to a
man who will then let us pass.

I turn in my ticket, and am surprised for it to turn back green. I feel as
though I have counterfieted this green sticker somehow, but the man I have to
turn it in to assures me that if it turns out green that it is genuine, and
taht I have nothing to worry about.

From here, I am met with my parents, and we go to disney world, where there is
an attraction that is very much like the room I spoke of, but designed to be
more accessable, allowing not to be like a test and more like an exploation of
the design of it.

We go in there, and I decide to enter not as Mario but as Luigi. His task has
to do with hopping from one area of the room to the other, where each hop has
to reach a certain height. I am a bit taken by theh height of these hops but
eventually make it across.

When I get out, I want to explore other characters, in particular, Peach, but
there is a long line to enter this attraction, and the staff doesn't want me to
hold up the line.

I then go to another room where Brett Chauviere is serving something like 150
people a big potluck dinner in a large common area with something like eight
rows of folding tables all in a line. This is the end of the dream.
