So last night I had a dream.

This dream took place in my dream version of New Mexico. It's not quite New
Mexico, but it's definitely not Colorado.

Anyway, as the dream takes place, I am transistioning between apartments. In
the apartment I am currently in, in the dream, I have been putting the mat
where I sleep closer to the door of the apartment, and I have been using less
and less of the rest of the room. At this point, I decide that, if I am going
to live like this, I might as well find a smaller apartment and live there so
that I don't have to pay as much rent.

I drive around the highway there, (which runs East-West in the dream and is
surely the "main highway" of the dreamscape at this location) and I go West
along it some, and come across a new apartment. This apartment is smaller, and
it has two things. Firstly, the main studio is right there as you walk in, and
directly in the back of the studio is the kitchen. To the left is the main
living area which leads to the left side wall, but to the right is a door which
leads to the bathroom.

I decide to rent out this apartment (which in the dream simply consists of
moving my sleeping mat to the new apartment and telepathically informing the
landlord that I am now living there) and I bring in some of my relatives to
show them the place.

Chuck, my uncle, shows up first, and he sits in front of the counter facing the
main door. I speak with him some, and he likes the apartment in a jovial way.

Next, my father and mother walk in. Immediately my father starts telling me how
ridiculous that this is, that this apartment is not adequete for my spacing,
and that I am a fool for renting this place out.

Chuck starts combatting this by arguing with him, defending me and my decision
to rent here. Both of them start to get heated, with Chuck simply matching my
father, where as my father is consistently taking the entire argument to a
continually excited state of aggression.

Eventually, as this starts to become more and more intense, I decide that it is
not healthy and that I want to remove myself from between them (my father is
standing at the door and Chuck is on the side of the kitchen facing towards the
door, and I have been standing to the left looking back and forth between them)
so I walk through them to the door to the bathroom, where I walk in.

Inside the bathroom there is an interesting feature. The toilet itself is to
the left, the shower is to the right, and all of this is on a raised platform
which goes down, and eventually becomes open to the rest of the world. It's not
even like a balcony where the wall is entirely missing, it resembles more a
public pathway.

Anyway, in this bathroom I stand on the elevated platform with the toilet and
the shower, and on the lowered platform I see that my dad has brought his dog
(which of course, my dad irl does not own a dog, but this dream version of my
dad does) and the dog is chilling there. I say chilling, but this dog is
certainly not chill. I know that in the past he has had a tendancy of
aggression towards others, and I am no exception. Still, I decide to squat
down, still on the elevated platform, and engage the dog.

I kneel down and the dog starts posturing and barking at me. It is still on the
lower platform, but it has its front paws on the upper section and barking. I
attempt to make contact with my hands to get the dog under control, as with
each bark his entire body undergoes a sort of convulsive motion and I would
like to calm down the dog to some extent. I exhibit my control as best I can,
but eventually as I extend my arms, the dog bites me on the right arm.

I forcibly remove the biting dog from my right arm and examine it, making sure
that nothing is infected. I am concerned that it might be as I know my dad is
not entirely diligent with regulated saftey precautions with this dog, but I
suspect that it is probably okay, and is nothing as serious as rabies or some
such disease. At worst, it might become infected if not treated properly.

At this point now, I leave the bathroom through the non-existant wall, and I
take the dog with me by holding on to it's collar with right hand and holding
on to its muzzle with my left. The dog convulses to try and break free of this
grip, but I keep his head steady so that only its body is jerking around. These
convulsions are quite violent and sudden, and at some points I am concerned
that my control is not quite sufficient, but by control is sufficient enough so
that I don't get bit in the rest of the dream.

From here, I exit the apartment through the opening in the bathroom which
points east and take the dog further east towards a restaurant which resembles
a chick-fil-a for whatever reason. In the parking lot of the chick-fil-a I
remain with the dog and continue to further hone my control over it, reasoning
that eventually it will stop being so aggresive to me once it realizes that I
am serious about not getting bit again.

I start talking to the dog, telling him that he must remain under control if I
am to offer it any of the food that I order, whenever I do. The dog, of course,
does not understand english, but at least begins to understand that his
convulsions are influencing my decision to feed him or not.

The dream ends around this point. I feel as though, had the dream continued, I
would have resumed maintaining control of the dog until it began to respect my
control and eventually it would have calmed enough (as I eased gradually on my
control as judged whether or not the dog was genuine in remaining calm or just
fiegning such a thing so that I would let go of it) eventually to the point
where I would have began to feed it. The plan would have been then to order
some food, eat it myself, and feed some to the dog for only as long as it
remained calm and showed it's respect towards me. If it failed to do that, I
would have ceased feeding and returned to my control. Especially if it bit me
again.
