So last night I had two dreams.

The first dream started in the parking lot of King of Glory. It started on the
part of the lot which leads to the exit that goes to 635. An interesting
feature of the dream version of this lot was the it had multiple tier'd slopes.
If we designate north as "when you take a right out of the exit you are going
north" (which is as typical in my dreams rotated ninety degrees in the counter
clockwise direction) then the highest tier of this lot was on the west side
(east of the building itself) then down a tier to the east and down another
tier again to the bottom of the lot.

In between these tiers were something like wooden structures which partly
resembled walls and also partly resembled something like artistic flavor. The
walls had large openings in them in various places, and the walls themselves at
point were like standard walls, but at other points were various configurations
of planks of wood fashioned in structural ways to indicate the barrier.

In this dream I am with Jacquelyn for reasons unknown to me, and we are walking
from the place where we parked (which is the place where we would always park
irl) to the entrance of the church. I also want to say for whatever reason that
this was not typical church time, instead it was a weekday in the middle of the
morning when not a lot of people and traffic was going in and out of the
church.

As we walk to the entrance of the church, to our right and through one of the
barriers is a man. This was a somewhat older man, perhaps in his fifties,
somewhat balding, and he harkens to us as if to get our attention. In
particular he is attempting to get Jacquelyn's attention. The details of the
manner in which he was doing this I don't remember, but I remember both myself
and Jacquelyn feeling as though this was a rather creepy sort of encounter and
that this man was making untoward sexual advances upon her in particular.

At some point here, I remember actually getting quite defensive of Jac, putting
myself between her and this man and effectively telling him to mind his
business. It was around the point that tensions here were starting to rise that
he revealed that he had two small children, aged probably eight and ten, both
girls, and he was looking for someone who might interact with them in a
favorable way.

I, myself, took a quite sudden shift of character at this point. I remember
thinking something like, "Oh, he is not a creep, he is simply trying to find
someone to play with his daughters." Jacquelyn, however, was still skeptical of
the entire thing.

Pretty soon after this "reveal" he then offers to show us something. I agree to
follow, and Jacquelyn reluctantly comes along with me for want of not being
left out.

We go around to the lowest level of the lot, towards the back of the church (to
the easternmost wall which would sit adjacent to the basketball court IRL). He
then takes us in to a door which then goes up to the second floor in a
staircase which is quite narrow and closed off from teh rest of the church, and
opens another door that leads to his office.

As we go through this door, the first thing we see is a rather large exective
desk with all of his different things (being a lamp, papers, pens and pencils,
various outcroppings pulled out, and so forth) and behind this is firstly a
large window which looks out to the general outdoor foyer area of the church
(which has a more traditional modern art sculpture in the center of it, as I
believe it does irl) and around the window is a structure of bookshelves with
various books of interest.

From the desk area, you can then keep going to the right, (the left was the
wall of his office) in the direction which we are calling north (so south would
the aforementioned wall, and west would be the window) in to an area which
opens up in to a series of library shelves with all kinds of books in them.

Along the west wall and above the window I saw a series of books being the
original german first editions of Nietzche's works. It took me some time to
piece this together, but in particular I notice the word "Zarathustra" on one
of them and immediately recognized it. Then, as you continue deeper in to the
library, the entire western wall is one long set of bookshelves, and to the
eastern side was rows of shelves which sat orthoganal to the eastern wall, so
that the shelves themselves faced both north and south. In some of these
shelves, I noticed various childrens works, which were books that I remember
from childhood. I saw the complete works of the Chronicles of Narnia, and I
remember seeing another compilation work that I forget exactly what it was, but
it had a red binding.

I remember continuing to go through these things knowing that there would be a
lot of quality material to sift through here.

Before the dream ends, the man explains that he rents this room out from the
church, and all of these works are the works that he has read that he feels are
appropiate to keep and store here. This was the extent of the dream.

---

The second dream takes place in the dream version of my parents home. The start
of the dream takes place in my dad's study with something of a false awakening.
I wake up, and decide to sneak out the back without telling my parents, who I
glimpse for the moment as being in the den.

We will again use the designation that "dream north" is equivilent to "irl
west".

I get in to my car, and I drive towards the north. When I hit Plano road, I
decide to go along the west to explore what is on this side. In waking moments,
I realize now that I have explored parts which are north of the east side of
this road, and in other dreams I have explored parts which are on north of the
west side of this road.

As I drive, instead of going along the various footpaths that I have explored
in previous dreams, I instead go towards a location I know that has a peculiar
six flags ride attached to it. This ride is a ride that leads all the way from
richardson to six flags at arlington, and that there is a cooresponding ride in
the park itself that only attaches near the end of the ride. I also am able to
intuit that it is used quite rarely, but has remained in service despite its
infrequent us. It is a aspect of the dream world that I have always known about
(in this particular dream that is, it is quite novel to me now in waking life)
but have not chosen to explore before.

I enter the area of the entrance of this ride, which resembles a musty cave
(the sort of musty cave that is made intentionally musty for dramatic effect)
and enter in to the vehicle. Simultaneous to all of this, I also begin to
notice that I have started developing boils on my head. This doesn't
particularly concern me, as its a development which seems somehow expected in
the dream, even though I am quite bewildered by it's meaning in waking life.

The ride then starts, and it shoots out to the north before it curves to the
east and begins to coast over the field near the corner of arapaho and plano
road where blockbuster used to be. At around this point I go by an attendent
who explains the typical procedure of "keep your hands and feet in the vehicle
at all times" and so forth which is obviously scripted as what they are
required to say.

Something to note about this ride is that I am quite concerned about the
narrowness and rickityness of the tracks which the car moves along, but decide
to trust in it anyway on the grounds that as of yet no catastrophic failure has
happened here.

After some time of relative uninteresting straight section of track, the car
eventually pulls in to the station where it will join in with the whole of the
six flags theme park. Upon entering here, I have noticed that the boils on my
head have gotten quite worse to the point where there are quite signficant
bulges where the boils are, creating something of an amusing pattern of
valleyways that one could navigate with a finger along the form of the head.

In this new station, I encounter another attendent, this one quite attractive.
I remember sharing some of the typical formalities one would expect with
someone like this, but this turned in to some light flirtatious behavior
leading to her offering to clip some of the stray hairs that I had. I remember
being flattered by this, saying that I had intended to buzz my hair entirely
soon but that if she wanted to help me with some stray hairs she was welome to
do so. Pretty soon after she begins this, however, I remmeber the boils, and
say that she probably shouldn't for want of keeping her scissors clean. She
agrees and puts them away before proceeding with the rest of her duties in
relation to the ride.

At this point I remember thinking that I wanted to get her number or some such
way of continuing the relationship, but by the time I thought about it it was
too late in that the ride was already underway. The ride dropped down in to a 
dark portion of the ride, and it turned around first in a sharp u-turn to the
left and under the station and then with a gradual turn to the right. I
remember seeing her at this gradual turn and being quite impressed that she was
able to move from her original post to this post in such a short time. The ride
then takes a few more turns before coming in to the main station which leads to
the rest of the park.

I get out of the ride and find myself in a quite crowded area. I entertain the
idea of going to another ride in the park, but quickly decide that I need to
return back to Richardson. There is a moment here where I think that I am going
to be late for work, but it takes me a little bit to remember that I don't work
at Alliant anymore.

In this croweded area (which is in an indoor sort of "hubway" so to speak) I
end up asking around for various people to lead me to the station that leads
back to richardson. Many of the people around are park visitors, and some with
green shirts on are the park associates. I find one of the associates and they
are able to point me in the direction of a doorway from this building that
leads to a path outside which will bring me to the direction of the station
that I need.

All this while become incresingly aware of the lack of any sort of distancing
taking place amongst the people there. This place was quite crowded to the
point that I couldn't walk through without bumping in to someone.

At this point as I was walking towards the entrance that I needed to get to I
bumped in to someone and I stopped to mention that I would like to get out of
there as soon as I could due to the virus. She stopped with a defiant tone and
began to explain to me how we can't be afraid of this virus forever and how I
shouldn't be so pussy whipped by an imagined threat such as this (or something
to that effect, I don't remember the exact words used and I am certainly
paraphrasing here in wakened life).

I explained to her that it was imperative that I don't get the virus, as my dad
was immuno-compromised and would very likely die if he contracted it, but she
didn't seem to care and continued to get in my face about it. At this point my
boils were developing to become quite worse, enveloping my own head, and I
decide to simply sidestep her and made my way to the place I was trying to get.

After going through the doorway there was something of a sloping path which
led to a kind of bus station sort of area of the park. I remember going up to
the main attendent who was there as introduction for everyone entering this
part of the area and said that I would like to get back to richardson. She
directed me to a particular bus (which didn't have a ceiling) with a bunch of
other people on it, and led me on to the bus. The bus took off immediately
after I got on it, and I realized at that point that this attendent had
actually held the bus from leaving so that I could get on it. I wanted to thank
her for her efforts, but by the time I realized this we were already well on
our way.

I took a moment to gather myself, and realized that this bus was much more like
a public transit than it was the roller coaster that was the entrance to the
park, so I decided to just accept the fact that it was going to take a little
longer to get back.

Next to me was a father with a son, about six years old, and they were there to
visit richardson. I told them that I was from richardson, and they seemed eager
about this, asking me what sorts of things were interesting in Richardson. "For
instance," he asked, "I have heard the 20th century fox headquarters is in
Richardson. Is that true?" I told him that I honestly had no idea, because even
though I grew up there, I really knew very little about it. He becomes
withdrawn and somewhat dissapointed that I am not able to help him, but
mentions that him and his kid are interested visiting.

It was around this point that I awoke.

