Last night I had two dreams.

The first dream I just want to touch on the major theme of the dream. I was
back at Alliant, and there was a new hire, an older man with effeminant
qualities, and it was clear that he was more than qualified to do their work,
yet he was still being put through their standard introductionary process.

One of the duties that he was there for was to give a sort of lecture. It seems
as though that was part of the reason he was hired. The rest of the dream takes
place in the large conference room (with a difference being that the conference
room was flipped 180 from how it was irl, and wider and not as long) with him
giving a sort of inspirational kind of speech. However, I remember the speech
not being so much about inspiration as it was about the processes at Alliant,
and which ones are inefficient or otherwise unneccesary or silly.

The second dream is a bit more interesting and a bit more elaborate.

This dream starts with the family taking a vacation of sorts to a version of
Austin, a version which consists much more of urban downtown like area than
real Austin does. It is also worth noting that it seems as though this vacation
is somehow mandatory. In other words, it seems as though the vacation is not
something that we want to do, and are looking forward too, but instead that we
are going on this vacation out of some sort of obligation.

We make it to Austin, and when we arrive, it is clear that there is a large
celebration of sorts happening. The celebration is akin to something like a new
years celebration.

The main characteristic of this celebration in relation to the dream is that
most of the coveted and exclusive parties are taking place in the highest
buildings of the large skyscrapers. There are long lines leading up to these
buildings and in particular leading to these elevators of people that are
waiting to get in to these parties.

At this point in the dream we agree to split apart from the family. Or at
least, I know I split up. We agree to meet up later at a baseball game that is
happening, where the coach of one of the teams is friends with my dad.

I go to one of these buildings, and I decide that I don't really want to go all
the way to the top where there are large crowds and long lines, but instead
that I want to go a few floors lower, as I am mostly curious about what these
parties are like but I don't care enough to wait in the long line for them.

In one of the buildings, I make it up to the 86th floor where the parties are
taking place on the floors up to 90 (which is the highest floor of this
building) and I am not much surprised to hear loud rave music with what I
presume is a dark atmosphere with fog and rave lights and etc.

At this point I am content with my experience with these parties, and decide
that it's time to make my way to the baseball game.

On the way down the elevator, I am met by two girls who have been a part of the
party above, and are making their way out and down. They are clothed in very
minimal outfits, wearing nothing but a bikini like wardrobe. Their clothes are
very stylish in the sense that you would expect to see at a rave.

The reason that this part is of notes is because one of the girls is having
trouble with the straps on her bra, and I remember catching glimpses of her
breasts as she struggled with getting them oriented correctly.

The way the bra was shaped had four sections, two on each side, with one part
that came from the neck and down to cover the breasts, and another part that
came down under the bust line and strapped to the bottom. She was having
trouble deciding which way was forward on the bra, and even when she had it
forward, she was having trouble fastening the bra over her breasts to cover her
nipples. In the dream I remember seeing her breasts rather clearly.

This entire time she has been mostly unconcerned with her exporsure, as she is
mostly focused on getting her wardrobe oriented correctly. Even as we exit the
elevator, she is still talking with her friend about how the bra ought to be
fastened, and the last thing I remember was her leaving the area and walking to
the left down the street still trying to get her bra to fit correctly.

I then take a right and make my way to the baseball stadium.

In the stadium, the entrance is on the left (what I will call Western) side of
the stadium. The entrance faces the south. From this entrance the stands loop
around going through the north of the stadium, and then to the east, which is
where the players pen and coaches are.

I enter the stadium and make my way through the stands to the eastern side.
There, there are large steps which go down to the players boxes. It is here
that I meet the coach. He gives me an introductory remark and recognition
before returning to the game, which is very much underway.

There are a few things to note about this game. The first of which is that the
game is played on ice. The second thing to note is that the process of throwing
pitches and batting at them takes place in the center of the ice, similar to
cricket. Lastly, and most peculiar, is that this process which is normally
considered baseball (pitching and batting, that is) is only a sort of auxillary
component to this version of baseball. Instead, the main force that takes place
during the innings is a sort of dance performance that takes place on the ice.
This performance takes place among four people. There is a time limit set on
it, and they are to perform some number of maneuveurs (I believe the number is
three) during that time, which they are judged upon.

A general vibe I get from this game (which I am very much not accustomed to and
trying to figure out as I watch from above the players booth) is that there is
a sort of unknown hurrideness to the game. The dance moves are scripted, yet it
seems to me that there is a good amount of on the fly decision making which the
coach has to make. I am not sure what sorts of factors go in to these
decisions, but the decisions seem mostly to do with which players go in at
which times, as well as which maneuvers to perform for a certain inning.

I am trying to figure this all out. In the dream, I remember seeing one batting
session, as well as one session pretty well coerographed out performed by four
of the people of the friendly team (the one coached by the friend of my dad).

Next thing I remember is that the opposing team was then to go and perform
their routine. Their routine had a particular skill set of one man that had an
uncanny ability to become very thin and flat and lay himself out on the ice
belly down with abnormally thin arms and legs, but with his head facing upright
and at a normal size. His appendages were layed out like a star fish as he
turned clockwise around the ice, and the routine involved the other three
participants weaving in and out of the gaps between his limbs as he turned.

The first time he does this, it is quite clear that it is uncomfortable for him
to move in this way, and the second time he says that he doesn't know if he can
take doing this any more. These first two times were not performed to the
satisfaction of how he knew his move could be pulled off.

The coach of the friendly team is very perplexed by this move, because it is
clear to him that it is something that gives the opposing team quite an
advantage over his team. He then goes to the ice from the south side (the
friendly teammates are on the north side as they weave in and out of the
starfish tentecles) to observe this move.

The third time the man attempts this move, it is going quite well, but in the
middle of it he runs in to the coach as he has too hastily and obtrusively
involved himself in observing the actions. As soon as this happens, the man
stands up and requests a foul. The teammates and other coach are also very much
upset, and argue that the observation of a coach should not intrude with the
game. The friendly coach agrees, somewhat reluctantly, and makes his way back
to his player box.

At this point, there is still commotion about the inturruption, and an official
walks down from the stands to escort the friendly coach away from the game. The
coach objects to this course of action, but the official is insistant, and
eventually half forcibly but half voluntarily takes the coach away.

With the coach gone, it then seems to fall to me to coach the rest of the team
for the remainder of the game. Multiple times I argue that I am unaware of how
this game is meant to be played, and I say that I don't even know who my
players are or anything about them. Still, it is expected that I pick it up as
quickly as I can and coach the game.

At some point among the hurriedness of my new position, I start to ask the
opposing coach (who I am not aware at first is the opposing coach) how this
game is placed. She (she was a she, which I feel is worth noting) starts to
give me off-handed advice about how the game is played, but mostly her advice
is tongue in cheek, like, "Yeah, of course that is how it is played, what are
you stupid, like you don't know the rules of baseball?" She doesn't say these
things to me in the dream, but that is the general attitude of how she
approaches my questions.

One of the observations I note is that I am aware that it has something to do
with pitching and batting, and she replies with a "Yeah, no shit" to me. It is
around this point that I realize that she is the opposing coach.

At this point, I start doing my best to coach on the fly. Mostly, all I do is
put the players on the field as it seems best fit due to me reading their
reactions to the game. When it seems that one player is mentally preparing and
poised to enter the field, I put him in.

The game ends. I am unsure of who won or lost, but the team feels satisfied and
exhausted of the game.

We make out way up the stairs from the players box, and make our way out
towards the stands.

The players are allowed to go past the stands towards a sort of back exit along
the northern part of where the stands are. This area is a fielded area that has
a sort of backcountry kind of feel to it.

We walk around this area to the east side of the stadium. In order to get out,
we must go through a door which is near the same door as the main entrance, but
faces east to the sidewalk which leads to the entryway.

As we are about to leave, one of the players mentions that this exits is meant
for players only, so I need to do a good job of pretending that I am part of
the team. It is also worth noting that Kyle joined us as well. I also forgot to
mention that on the way out, I said hello to my parents, who were in the
stands watching the game, and my dad makes some comment about my coaching.

Anyway, we are leaving this back area when a man attempts to stop and question
us. One of the players shows their player id badge, and vouches for us that we
are part of the team. The man then starts to question us. I say that me and
Kyle are substitute coaches that the coach brought in in case anything happened
to him. The bouncer then says, still in a probing and almost accusatory sort of
way, "Oh, right, I saw you coaching after he got ejected. You did a good job."

I say thank you, hoping to be on our way quickly, when he then asks for our
badges. I am not able to procure a badge, and the fact that Kyle was with us
and did not take part in the game is not helping our case. The bouncer is about
to take us in for custody when the coach then comes with his jacket and puts it
over my shoulders. The bouncer then very reluctantly backs off of us.

In the last section of the dream, the player that was escorting us out then
says that he is going to the practice field, and he would like us to meet one
of the teammates.

We make our way to the field, and we open the door to the field. The teammate
is there, in full baseball uniform, a little bit dirtied from practicing, and
reaches out his hand to introduce himself. I believe his name was Galad. I
remember him being rather tall, standing above the step. I shake his hand,
feeling as though I have met a great person at this moment. It is around this
point that the dream ends.
