So last night I had multiple dream fragments.

The most pertinant thing to note about these dream fragments is that today is
firstly the day that daylight savings ends and also the first day I have truely
started my work at target. In other words, I have gone through orientation, and
I am currently in the interim period before I head over there for my true first
day.

So the first dream fragment is the evening before daylight savings. It is dusk
and the night before daylight savings. I reason that in order to right my
sleeping schedule, I will need to sleep some at this point, but not too much.

My parents are away in the dream, and I know that they are returning today, so
I decide to go to the house on the end of Tulane near Yale and sleep on the
front patio there. In the dream, this front patio has some low brick walls
around, so I am given a bit of privacy there.

As I am laying there, getting some sleep, someone in the dream comes up to me.
This person is someone I know, and is looking for me. He finds me sleeping here
and asks me what I am thinking. I tell him my thought process of getting some
sleep before daylight savings, and doing so in a place that will wake me up
when my parents go by.

He/she (I honestly forget which it is) tells me how ridiculous an idea this is,
mainly because it is on the front patio of someone's property. "What if they
were to walk out and find you? You are tresspassing right now." I realize that
this is true, and I knew it was true, but when I decided to sleep there it
didn't seem like a problem.

Fortuantely, as I am in the middle of this moral dilima, my parnts drive
through, so I leave and return to their house.

Inside, I make some small talk, but retire almost immediately to our old "boys
bedroom". While there, I go to sleep. Of course, in the dream, I am not really
sleeping, but consistently checking the clock. I notice it go from six o clock
to nine o clock, and as I do this, I am reminding myself that daylight savings
is ending and that I need to sleep for this portion. After I wake up in the
dream, I remember that my shift starts at seven, and I am already two hours
late.

I become very distraught and begin pacing and cursing at myself for how stupid
I have been in the living room. My mom is also in the living room, and says,
"Well, now that this is what is happening, what is the best course of action?"
I say, "At this point, it would be best to still go to work and just see what
they say. But it still looks very bad for me to be two full hours late on my
first day." She agrees with me and says, "Yeah, it really does suck."

At this point I wake up irl and hastily check my watch to find that it is 3:30.
I was actually somewhat paniced irl and quickly calmed myself down after
realizing that my panic was caused by the dream. I am able to return to sleep
for another hour and a half when I have another dream fragment.

In this fragment, I am at a train station. The platform we are on is lower than
the platform on the other side, but not by much. Moreso, it is very wide.

I am there with my brother Kyle, and I know that dad is in the background.
There are also some of my cousins, and in particular there is a young nephew
who I don't have. It seems that he is a son of my Aunt and Uncle, but in the
dream I know him to be a nephew and not a cousin. It is very strange.

Anway, the nephew asks, "I wonder how fast you would have to be going to jump
across to the other platform." I pause and say, "Well, to figure it out exactly
I would have to get some pencil and paper, but we can use some rough
estimations to figure it out."

I then begin attempting to reason about what sort of speed you would have to be
going to jump across, but to my dismay I become quite befuddled with which
kinematic equations to use. Still, Kyle is there with me, and we together
reason that another relevant quantity is what angle the jump is taken from. I
say, "Yeah, the final equation probably has to do with the tangent function of
the angle that you jump from."

At all of this talk, the nephew quickly becomes disinterested and walks away,
which makes me feel sad and inadequate that I wasn't able to answer his
question quickly enough.

Still, Kyle and I continue working on the problem. Eventually, we end up
walking off of the platform through the door which happens to lead directly in
to the living room. I feel as though it will have to do with the velocity and
delta x equation, but I don't remember exactly how it goes. In particular, I
don't remember if it has do to with adding the final term or subtracting, or if
the final term is multiplied by two or divided by two.

When I wake up, I immediately remember that it is plus and multiply, but in the
dream it was quite frustrating.

That is all.


