Last night I had two dreams, each of which feels somewhat related, but when I
think about it are really two distinct dreams. They are not particularly
significant in their plot, so I will simply touch upon their general themes.

The first dream takes place in a sort of talk show environment. The host
reminds me of someone I saw on a random youtube video who won a bluffing game
twice against someone else. The guest is someone that reminds me of Pete Holmes
and Eligah Wood both. The show takes place in a sort of large room, and it is
important to note that the scene is very much un-talk show set like. Instead it
is in a sort of common area with lots of folding tables and such all set up in
various patterns.

The nature of the session lasts for a bit, and I don't particularly remember
the contents of what the two talked about. However, I do remember that it was a
very playful interview, with some physical contact between the two individuals.

In fact, during the interview I remember the dream taking a sort of flashback
to the pre-interview where the host had the guest sign multiple forms, one of
which was more of a survey. On the survey, one question that I remember seeing
was something to the effect of, "I felt *blank* about the interaction with the
host" with multiple choices for the blank, ranging from assaulted to
apprehensive to playful to ticklish.

Towards the end of the interview, as they are signing off, I remember the guest
asking me to trust him with something. What exactly that something was I don't
remember. But as he is asking, the host says that this man can't be trusted,
because he is a member of the AFS Party (and I might not have the acronym
exactly right, but it was something like that). I as what the AFS party is, and
he says that it is the American Free Speech party. I then proceed to ask what
the AFS is all about, and the guest, in a very joking and slighting manner,
says that anyone who is all about Free Speech can join.

The dream then moves to my parents living room, and the guest is sitting in the
guest chair occupied with something else, and I continue to probe him on what
exactly the party is about. He continues with the same dismissory tone of "its
all about free speech, its in the name." He then takes me to a website that has
a list of all of the members of the party (one of which is Elijah Wood) and I
am still dissatisfied with his explanations.

I then use the example of democrats and republicans, saying that it is not
really sufficent to say that a democrat is all about democracy, because the US
is a democratic republic, and so everyone to some extent is all about democracy
if they are a part of the US. Associating with the democratic party has more to
do with aligning yourself with certain democratic ideals, some of the most
basic of which are issues on abortion, gay marriage, and a general liberal
attitude regarding social norms and standards.

Even with this example, (which I felt hit to the heart of what I was trying to
explain) the man still off handedly gave the same response. Around here is
where the dream ended.

As I began typing, I remember that tonight there were three dreams that took
place. The next two are not quite as involved.

The next dream I had takes a much more serious tone. In this dream, the first
secene I remember was taken from the perspective of some airplane bombers
flying over the south Texas (being San Antonio and Austin area) and bombing
those areas.

It then becomes a topic in the news about who these bombers were. They were
bombers from Iraq. The topic of conversation then goes to how they got these
weapons. It could not be the case that they bought them directly from the US
(in the dream there is an assumption that the US produces all of the weapons
that this group possesses) because we have stopped shipment to them. However, a
different country is brought up, a name of which is similar to Libya (but is
not that name, but has a Middle Eastern sounding name) who we still are
supplying weapons to, and it is speculated that they are selling their weapons
to Iraq.

On the news, it then goes on to talk about a couple of points. The first point
is that this attack comes as no surprise because the president had received a
manifesto from that country, and in the manifesto is very straightforward talk
of hatred to the united states, as well as paragraphs containing direct
intention to bomb us.

The second point made is that there are other countries that we need to be
considering. The reporter then goes on to list these countries, countries all
with middle eastern sounding names, yet these I know are not actual countries.

During this whole report, I remember the dream taking a landscape kind of tour
of the country which Iraq got their weapons from. It was a sort of hilly
townstead on the coast. I remember thinking "Man, if the news had more direct
evidence of exactly what is going on, like it is right now, it would be much
more clear for everyone to understand it, and I might watch it more."

The final point to be made in the dream is that I was talking with Michelle
about the news, and I remember asking why it seemed to be the topic everyone
was talking about. She said that it was directly addressed for the whole of the
morning news on CNN, and so it must be on everyones minds.

The last dream I had takes place at UTD. It starts with some ultimate practice.
This practice area takes similar form to other UTD dreams I have had recently.
The only real difference between it and the actual practice fields was that
this field was elevated.

After this session (of which there isn't anything I can really note) I needed
to go back and organize my class schedule (I have had recurring dreams where I
miss classes because I can't remember which classes happen on which days, so in
this dream I resolve myself to create notes about which classes I am taking and
when they are).

IN order to try and organize myself, I take a book which contains a catalog of
all of the classes, and I compare that with a sheet of paper containing the
classes I am taking. I have quite a lot of difficulty though, for a few
reasons. The first reason is that all of the class names are in Latin (for
whatever reason), where as all of the names on my sheet are in english. The
catalog has the main title in Latin, along with the subtitle in english, so I
am able to match some of the classes, but as I go to compile everything on a
third sheet of paper, I keep mixing things up, and as I flip thorugh the
catalog I am never able to find the same pages in the same spot.

I go through this for some time, and as I become increasingly frustrated by
these difficulties, I look for a table of contents in the catalog so that I can
just have at least some way to reference the pages without randomly flipping,
but I can't find one.

At some point, it gets to be the morning, and I haven't to this point completed
the project. I think to myself "This is really something that I should have
done before my classes started rather than after they began" but at the same
time I know that it is something that needs to be done and this is the
situation I am in now.

The last point in the dream is me deciding to take a break. I find myself in my
grandparents house in the bedromm that is considered "Chuck's Room." I walk
outside to the living room, and Lynn Wright is there, and she asks me how
everything is going. I tell her that I haven't been able to complete my catalog
or list, and she looks at me dissapointingly.

That is the extent of the dream.
