So last night I had a dream. I actually had three dreams, all three of which
were little more than dream fragments.

I will write them out all now because I know I have a tendency to forget them.

The first dream took place in a car around our nieghborhood streets. The second
one was a pure dream fragment with some notion of gladiator contendors. The
last was a dream around a rather large and fantastical theater.

So the frist dream was somewhat short. I was in my car, but I was in the back
seat and mom was driving the steering wheel in the drivers seat and Kyle was in
the passenger seat operating the pedals there (the pedals were mounted to the
passenger seat floorboards for whatever reason. It's a dream) We were driving
along rather comfortably except for one fact, and that was that Kyle was
punching the pedals much harder than he should have been, which made it very
difficult for mom to navigate the turns. We went around a few turns with some
rather questionably fast driving behavior. Mom was quite apt in handling the
turns, although it was quite difficult for her to manage it, and we were
certainly on the verge of potentially losing control and spinning out at a few
points.

When we arrive at our destination, which was on the dream west side of the
elementary school, we stop and get out of the car. We are standing behind the
car (and why I feel that is relevant I don't know) while Kyle starts talking
about how poorly mom handled those corners. I then retort and say that the poor
handling of those corners had nothing to do with mom, but instead had
everything to do with the fact that he was pressing the pedals so violently. He
laughs at this and says that his role in the whole thing was entirely
irrelevant, as he wasn't the one responsible for the steering wheel.

Eventually I get heated up, and I tell him that if he keeps on insisting that
the erratic turns weren't his fault that I was going to punch him. He laughs
again and reason that there is no way he had anything to do with the turns
because he didn't have control of the steering wheel. I punch him in the face.
Not just once either, he falls back, and I punch a couple more times in the
face while he is down.

Mom of course tells me to stop, but at the same time she is somewhat standing
back. Kyle is quite disoriented and hurt lying on the ground. I pick him up and
place him in the back of the hatchback lying down. I think I get in the car and
say that I am going to operate the pedals now. I'm not sure about that last
part. Either way, that is the end of the dream.

The next dream fragment starts on the ground of a sci fi alien planet of sorts.
I am somethnig of coordinator of a galactic gladiator tournament which is
approching, one of the biggest galactic fights that occurs in this universe. I
am picked up by the organizing commitee on their space ship.

After taking off and flying, a few contendors are brought before me. I remember
only three of them, and two of them were "contendor pairs". One was a father
son pair. I remember the father was something of a brute, and the son was a bit
of a punk who very clearly looked up to his dad. There was another pair that
was similar to this, but I think not as stereotypical. I honestly quite forget
what this pair was like. Then, another person was brought before me. He was
something of a characiture of a "big tough guy softie" if that makes any sense.
My mind goes to a more human like version of blanka from street fighter.  I
remember looking at this final character and thinking that he was at a
disadvantage because he wasn't a part of a pair, but at the same time I was
hopeful of his prospects and secretly wanted to root for him because he was
clearly skillful at what he does, even if he was somewhat unrefined.

The last dream is the one that most resembles a typical dream. It takes place
in a futuristic (or rather, excesively modern) kind of theater. It resembles
the sydney opera house in it's construction, and it stands out from the rest of
the structures there.

I walk in to this theater firstly by myself, with the knowledge that the rest
of the family who I was with was going to follow. I go in and I check out the
list, and I am curious to see if Tenet is still on the showing list. It is, but
it is thrid down on the list, which surprises me.

As I am considering going to watch the movie, my mother then comes in, and asks
me what I am doing. I say that I am just waiting on the chair and checking out
what sorts of movies are showing. At this point I browse the rest of the movies
and find nothing of particular interest on the board; they all seem quite
uninteresting.

We then walk around to another part of the theater, this time a direction which
goes around the main desk and faces not on the left side (where we originally
were) but instead on the right side, which faces more the food court area.
Further in on this right side goes to a section of hallway which leads to more
theater areas.

At this place, my dad is there as well as my aunt and uncle. We are sitting in
some chairs there, and as we are sitting on them, the actually begin receding
into the wall in a way that they come to when they collapse. The two things to
note here are that I was quite worried about how high off of the ground we
were and I was concerned that we wouldn't have a place to sit, but it turns out
that when they were receded they had a lip that was wide enough to sit on,
although not very comforatbly. The second thing to note is that I was quite
impressed by how compact the whole thing could become. This made sense to me as
I thought on it further, as this would be how they keep the theater when
everything is closed.

As these chairs recede, I look out of the large window (large in the sense that
the entire wall was a pane of glass) which faces to the right across the tables
and chairs of the food court and I see a baseball stadium which sits near this
theater. In the baseball stadium, I see that there are workers there who are
facilitating the task of the compression of the baseball stands in a similar
way. The essential difference here is that the stands were actually collapsing
in from one side of the circle which made up the entire stadium to the other
side, and it was creating quite a fascinating pattern which folded in to a
perfect square as it proceeded. Eventually, however, as this chairs to the
right started to meet the center of the stadium (so the entire folding process
was about 2/3 the way done, I would estimate) the entire thing was halted and
placed quickly back to the original sitting configuration. I am not sure if
this was intentional, or if something happened which required the chairs to
return. I feel as though there was some snag in the entire thing, but I also
feel as though it was because they didn't realize a game was about to happen
and they needed the stands for the people there.

I look away after they unfold the stadium stairs, and I look back soon after
and am quite surprised to find that the stands are already full. I reason that
they must have enabled some process by which the crowds were sorted to allow
for maximum efficiency in filling the stands after they were ready. Of course,
this is somewhat nonsensical for two reasons, first that crowds are never this
orderly, and second because the speed at which the stands were filled was so
ridiculously fast that it couldn't have been anything but "dream magic".

Anyway, at this point me and my dad are still sitting on the stairs that had
receded, and by this point we were not so high up anymore, to the point that I
could jump down a minimal distance and arrive back on the ground. Dad refused
to do this, however, and I decided that if he wanted to stay up there I
couldn't do anything to convince him otherwise.

Chuck and Michelle then walk off, saying that they no longer have any business
here and want to move on to other things. I consider going with them but decide
against it for the reason that I do kind of want to watch a movie.

This was the extent of the dream.
