So last night I had a dream.

This was a proper dream, unlike the dream fragments I have been having lately.

This dream takes place during a dream vacation my family is taking at a Disney
world which is in dream east along central expressway, but the dream itself
does not take place at all in the vacation spot, but instead of a building of
car repair services.

While me and the family are on vacation at Disney World, it just so happens
that on some day of the vacation part way through our time (I am going to say
it is the fourth day, but that is mostly irrelevent to my mind) my car doesn't
start. I decide to go to a place that my dad has recommended in the past as I
good place to go when your car breaks down.

I will take a brief moment to describe this place. It is not a place that I
have been to in dream or waking life before.

The entrance to the place is like it's own seperate little foyer/waiting room.
As you walk in, it is quite like a nature section, with trees that come in from
the ground and go out of the cieling, overhangs of growth which are purposely
spread coming in from the walls, and so forth. It is also the case that the
walls are made of wood and the whole atmosphere has the feel almost like the
Dallas Aquarium, except for the size of a foyer. To be maybe more precise, it
could be ten meters wide and three meters deep.

To the left this waiting area comes to a rectangle, but to the right is a
semicircle which is cut in to this rectangle which goes to a restroom inside of
this cut semicircel. I did not go in to this restroom during this dream. This
semicircle is cut in the bottom right corner of the room, and above the
semicircle, in the path that leads there is the door which brings you in to the
main area.

The main area is quite larger than the first area. It is two stories, with the
second story being entirely open to the first. When you walk through the
waiting area, you are first in a small connecting hallway, with a door to the
right that connects to the reception desk and some offices. Then, when you walk
through in to the main area, to the right is the main desk area, and to the
left is a mostly open space, bustling with people. The layout of this open
space is more modern in style. I would say that it resembles something of a
modern building with some fountains and things in the middle. Things that you
usually walk past when you are in these sorts of buildings and go "huh, that's
neat" but nothing really more than that.

The stairs to the second floor are ahead and to the left, and quite
impressively the second floor is elevated and held up only by the stairs. In
other words, you can walk all under this second floor. Something else to
mention is that, along the left and back corner it is entirely open to the
outside world. There is no wall which contains the left side of the main area.

To the right of these stairs is another enclosed area, this one containing
offices for the higher ups for this building, and also containing offices for
consultations and such.

To be clear, this office area is behind the main desk area. So when you first
walk through the connecting hallway, the main open area is open to the left,
but ahead and to the right is mostly closed off to these contained rooms.

So the dream starts in the foyer waiting room area. I know that this place in
some way is designed to connect clients to the people that can work on their
cars.

I am waiting in this area, and there are two things that I remember. One was
that there were some unsavory characters in this waiting room with me. Some of
them were homeless, and others were just, well, generally unsavory. One of them
was tall and lanky and was missing some teeth, and another couple (probably a
gay couple now that I think in waking life) were two very tall very broad burly
strong men. They both walked out of the bathroom and poised themselves walking
across the waiting room towards whatever "super important" business they had to
attend to over there. I remember looking at them and saying "I would not want
to have to try and choke them, it would be impossible to do it around their
meaty necks." I then looked over ot teh lanky guy and thought, "He would be
much more manageable".

Also, as I was waiting here, three guys come in to the waiting room through the
connecting hallway and advertise themselves to everyone. They have this skit
that they perform, which is meant to attract people to their group, which I
remember being really campy and silly. I don't remember exactly what the skit
was, but I remember thinking, "Geez, that is so irrelevent to their ability to
work on cars."

At some point I am called back to the store. I am led through the connecting
hallway to the main area. I talk to someone there at the front desk, and they
direct me up the stairs to someone who can help me. I find him at the top of
the stairs behind an open desk there. I tell him what is happening, that my car
has stopped working while me and my family were visiting Disney World, and that
I need to find someone that can help me figure out what it is and how to fix
it. I say that I suspect and hope that its just the battery but I honestly
don't know what it is and need someone to help diagnose it.

The person then puts in my order and charges me something around 28 dollars
convienience fee for putting in the order. He also asks for and takes my
drivers liscence and says that someone will be there as soon as they get the
memo, and that I should wait.

I spend some time in the main area as I wait for the person, and at some point
I decide to sneak my way in to the back room behind the connecting hallway as
non-chalantly as I can to see how this place works. I am still somewhat
confused about how everything is meant to operate, and this whole system of
paying a broker to find someone to fix my car seems entirely unneccesary, but I
don't understand the whole thing anyway so I reserve my doubts about this whole
operation.

Anyway, I go back to the little hallway that leads between the waiting room and
the main area, and this hallway is quite packed, so I decide to head in to the
door because it is busy and no one will question it.

Inside the door I find myself behind the counters. I walk in to one of the
rooms that has a cash register, and I find my license and my order card in one
of the registers there. I decide to take it out and keep those things with me.
I'm not exactly sure why I do this, but I think the best way to describe it
(which isn't entirely accurate but hits it as best I can in waking life) is
because I think this whole thing is perhaps a little shady (not in the "this
could be a front for the mafia" kind of way but in the "This place is full of
business salesman who have a toxic business mentality" kind of way) and that I
would feel more comfortable if I had my things with me.

After I grab my things and close the register, someone comes and asks me what I
am doing back here. I casually say that I was wandering and accidentely came
back here, and that I have put together that I'm not meant to be here and that
I was making my way out. In fact, I was making my way out at that point, but
her catching me definitely hurried that process along.

I walk back out to the main area, and by this point someone finds me and tells
me that someone has come to see me.

I am met by a typical business man. He is wearing slacks and a dress shirt that
I believe is colored baby blue and he is carrying a portfolio that is very
business appropiate. He says, "Brett?" to identify me, and I say, "Yeah, that's
me," and he replies with, "Great, come with me and we can discuss our
business." To which I follow him to one of the private rooms.

We go in to one of the private rooms meant for the purpose of customer client
interaction like this, and he begins to ask me what my problem is. I tell him
about my car, how it has stopped working in the middle of our vacation, and
that I need someone to help me figure out what is wrong with it.

He then seems somewhat perplexed, and says, "I was told that the battery wasn't
working. Have you purchased a new one and need help installing it?" I tell him,
"No, I don't know what is wrong with it. I suspect it might be the battery, but
the battery in my car is pretty new (and in fact, irl it is quite new), so I am
really unsure of why it won't start. I need help diagnosing the thing. It could
be the battery, but shouldn't you be able to test if its the starter, or the
alternator, or some other component of the car which isn't working? It could be
any of those things."

The businessman smile starts to fade, and he says, "Oh, well if you don't know
what it is, well, that makes things difficult. Let me tell you a little bit
about our company."

He then opens the portfolio he was carrying and starts on the very canned and
campy speech about how awesome their company is. He goes on about company
events that they all attend, about how they have this tight knit and family
atmosphere, and how they always try to keep things fun throughout the day to
keep work morale up.

As he is going through all of this, I am quite annoyed. I don't see how any of
this has to do with my car and I am quite doubting that he knows at all how to
diagnose it. He seems to be acting in a way which indicates that "that's not
really what they do." He seems more adament about convincing me of thier
awesome work atmosphere than actually talking about our business together, and
I feel that this is some tactic to distract me from the fact that he is
eventually going to say, "We can change your battery and see if that helps
start the car." I become quite annoyed at this person in general, and somewhat
flabbergasted.

Secondly, as he is going through this, I am caught upon one of the pages that
he shows me, and I notice that it has one of the men from earlier that came in
to the waiting room and did their ridiculous skit. I put together that these
two work for the same company, and any doubts I had about the efficacy of their
company become more solid at that point.

At this point, in spite of my inherent instinct to give them the benefit of the
doubt, I tell him that I'm not interested in their business and that I will
find someone else who knows how to diagnose my car. I leave the room, and as I
do of course he continues to urge me to change my mind. I tell him that I am
not interested in his business and would appreciate if he would let me go. He
does and says that he is very sorry.

I am quite upset at this point, to the point where I feel angry and impotent
simultaneously. As he walks away, I sort of say to myself, "Is this fucking
real? This is ridiculous. This is a gigantic bafoonary of a situation." I do
want to note that the exposition of this paragraph is me putting this in during
waking life, and that during the dream was mostly just the subjective feeling
which comes about when I ask all of these inherent questions to myself here.

Back to the dream, I then go back to the front counter and ask, "Okay, so I
have declined the company and would like to investigate another lead. Do I
still have to pay the broker fee even though you led me to a company which was
inadequete and was not what I wass looking for or can I extend it to finding
another lead?" They say that, from their point of view it doesn't matter that I
didn't follow through on their lead, it still occupied their resources to get
the salesman to their location.  If I want to follow another lead, I will have
to return to the queue and wait for another broker.

I am quite upset, but decide to get in the queue anyway. At this point, my mind
is going on about how I am tempted at this point to just work on the car myself
in spite of being on vacation and forgoe this entire process.

It is around this point that I go to the back near the office areas as I am
waiting, and I see my dad come out of one of the offices as a member of this
entire facility. I am quite astonished at this. He begins walking from this
office to the front waiting area, and he seems preoccupied. I walk with him and
say, "Whoa, I didn't know you worked here. When did this start?" He continues
on in a way to indicate that he is really busy, and that he wants to make this
entire thing as non-chelant as possible. He says, "Oh, I am fine to work here,
its something that I can do."

I notice that he is having some difficulty walking as he is going quite fast. I
say, "I think its fine that you are working here, but can you slow down so that
we can talk about it. This is new to me."

He then says, "I'm totally fine, I am walking well enough that I can work
here."

He continues walking by at a quick pace, and comes up to one of the fountains.
He makes a hop and a skip over the fountain as if to lose me as a tail, but in
doing so loses his footing on the landing. He falls over the lip of the
fountain backwards which puts him in a precarious off-balance kind of fall
towards his back.

I watch helplessly as he falls, and as he is falling I watch in particular his
head, as there is a little double step of stairs that he is falling towards
with sharp corners, and I am worried that he might hit his head on that. He
almost does, and I do think his head had some impact, but it was minimal at
least and not as forceful as it could have been.

I rush to him as quick as I can and get under him to cradle him and keep his
head safe as best I can. He begins yelling out, saying, "Someone call the
ambulance! Call 911! Oh god, this might be the end. Is this the end for me? It
very well could be it for me! Is this what my last moments are going to be?"

I look around and attempt to flag someone who can call 911. I look for someone,
but see that Kyle is there as well, over my right shoulder. I decide that he is
the best person to call 911, so I tell him to do that. Kyle, almost
relectantly, takes out his phone and calls 911.

In the mean time, I ask my father some questions to assess the damage. I ask,
"How is your head doing, did you hit it on the edge?" He replies with, "I think
I did, I definitely hit it." In his reply, this is congruent with the image of
what I saw, and my assesment is that he did hit it but fortunatly in a way
which was mild and at least not lethal.

We stay like this for some time, and I can see his pain begin to reside
somewhat. Eventually, his cries of pain become less and less, and as he comes
back to grips with himself, he starts to say, "Okay, I'm okay, everything is
okay." He then starts to get back up and say, "Call back the ambulance, I don't
need it, I'm tottaly okay."

I stop him from standing up and say, "No, your definitely not okay. Your fall I
don't believe was at all lethal but it is still significant and must be
attended to." He begins to counter me saying that he is fine, to which I
counter with, "What was the deal with all of that "Is this the end?" stuff
then? You remember that don't you? You were screaming "Is this the end?"". He
blows this off, saying that that wasn't really a thing, and that he is
perfectly fine now and that he can get up and get back to work. I try and stop
him and insist that he remain in a safe position on the ground until the
amublance comes, but beligerantly insists that he is okay and resists me by
pushing me away and standing up so he can get back to work.

The dream ends around this point. There was no real resolution to what happens
as this point. I remember being conflicted about insisting that emergency
services come and treat him and just letting him go off on his stubborn ways. I
do remember at the end of the dream that he did get up and begin walking off in
a somewhat delirious but at least capable manner.

As far as my car goes, there was no resoltion to that at all in the dream. So
yeah.

My immiedate feeling upon waking was being grateful that I had one of the
dreams like this, and I spent a considerable amount of effort in remembering
the details of it before going to row. There was minimal affect from dream just
upon waking, although, now having written it out I do feel quite a decent
affect of perplexion and foreboding. I also have a certainly not insignificant
affect of anger and frustration at the whole business system that my dream life
subjected me to.

That was the extent of the dream.
