So last night I had a dream.

This dream has two parts, both of which involve my extended family.

The first part of the dream takes place in a fancy restaurant. The main thrust
of this dream is that I am a part of eating with everyone, but I consistently
leave the restaurant and come back and I don't feel like I am a part of the
group.

In the next part of the dream, I am organizing all of my yugioh cards, and
collecting them into piles. I am about to put them all away when Chase says,
"That's such a silly game, I bet I could beat you at it." To which point then I
say, "Oh really, well lets do a draft to find out."

I then take all of the cards that I have and randomize them as best I can. I
set them up on the table in multiple piles and begin going on about the rules
of the draft. I have to come up with some arbitrary rules because I am used to
magic drafts and not yugioh drafts. I remember saying that everyone has 5000
life points, and then looking to Kyle to see if that seemed okay, and he wanted
to lower it, but I decide to keep it set at 5000. I mention everyone should
keep a pad of paper to keep track of their points, and everyone starts pulling
out their phones. I then mention that we are going to play three rounds, and
someone interjects and says that we only have five people, so who is going to
sit out? I say that some people will have a buy round, but instead, Chuck jumps
in and decides that he wants join. The most interseting thing to note is that I
was quite concerned through this whole thing that people would lose interest in
the entire thing. This was the main feeling of the dream.

We don't even get to talking about the draft itself before the dream ends.
