So last night I had a dream fragment.

This fragment took place at a vacation resort. For whatever reason, these
resorts take the name of "Disney World" in my mind even though they are very
little like that park.

Anyway, in this park there was a famous half-marathon obstacle course. I say
obstacle course, but really all it was was some mudpits interspersed in a
half-marathon. I decided that I wanted to try out this course.

I begin on the track, and at the beginning there are only small dirt/mud pits.
I go over a couple of them with no difficulty.

I then get to one that is a particularly long stretch of dirt. I remember
people saying to watch out for the wet spots in these stretches because if it
gets too wet it can create quicksand.

I begin on this section at first with some caution, and after a very short time
on it I fall through.

I struggle at first to try and get out of the quick sand, but I remember what
people say and I catch myself panicing. I relax, and allow myself to breathe
over the surface of the water which I am trapped under, and when I do this, I
begin to come back up.

Eventually I get out of the quicksand and try to go back on the course. I go
again, and around the same point, but in a different spot, there is another wet
spot of quicksand. I fall again, and a similar thing happens. I panic, realize
that I am panicing, I relax, and then I start to come free from the quicksand.

That was the extent of that fragment.

There is another fragment that I just remember after writing that one out.

This one takes place in the square schoolway building that has occured in many
dreams before. In this dream I am enrolled in courses and I am going to them.
For one of my courses, however, I realize that I have missed it, so I think
that perhaps I might be able to go to another one. Of course, this logic makes
no sense, I shouldn't be able to attend courses that I haven't been to, and me
missing a class doesn't change any of that, and I even knew this in the dream,
but I decided to go with that narrative anyway.

I head in to a sort of sub-building where I examine the scene to see which
class I am going to squat on, and in that central area there with me is a
professor, although this professor is sort of worn down and battered. He sees
me, and immediately becomes animated in my presence.

I notice that he is not wearing a mask, and I am apprehensize of his hygeine,
but try my best to be personable anyway. However, when hes starts to encroach
on my personal space, I insist that he maintain distance and wear a mask. He
does so, but only superficially.

Anyway, what he became animated about was his work. He writes down an equation
for something involving a kind of alphebet that I had not seen before, but one
in which the symbols did come in to a sort of notation which resemebled
mathematical notation. The letters were very intricate.

The equation he wrote down had four terms in it, and they were written so that
three of the terms when combined in some way equalled the fourth.

He shows me this equation, and he points to the third term, and he says, "You
see this. Usually people just write the rest of the equation without this term,
but when you include this term you can include so much more. This is the error
term."

I am intrigued by what he is saying. Eventually, more students (who I presume
are legitmattely taking his class) come in, and he continues on about the error
term, how to reason about it, and he goes on to some higher level calculations,
things that are just above my level of understanding at that point, about how
to apply this understanding to the work that you do.

The final thing to remark about this is that I remember some of the students
taking notes and looking at them, and they were creating pokedex entries for
pokemon entries. In other words, they were able to apply his work to the game
of pokemon that they were writting (this was a software engineering course) and
in doing so, they were able to create pokemon with stats that were way more
dynamic than regular pokemon.

This was the extent of the fragments.

