Last night I had three dreams that I can remember.

The first was a dream that took place in a strip mall that resembles the area
that Sloth BJJ resided.

The second takes place at the bayhouse, where we fire the potato cannon.

The last was a dream fragment taking place at Target.

The first dream is the longest and the most elaborate. This dream has two main
stores to take note of. The strip mall in question takes the shape of a right
angle. We will say for the sake of direction that the street this mall is on
rides from south to north, and is on the west side of this road. The L shape
that the mall takes is open on the East and South sides, and has buildings on
the West and North.

On the western side of the building is the first shop of note. It is a candy
store. Outside of this candy store is some covered parking. I park my car
outside of the store, and I notice a sign that says these spots are for candy
store participants only, but I ignore the sign, thinking that it probably isn't
enforced.

I then make my way to the place where I was intending to go. This was the
destination of the journey. It was a bar which is more in the corner of the
store.

The gathering to take place at the store was very similar to an Alliant bar
night that we would have while I worked there. In the store was Kaley who I
remember most. I remember mostly not fitting in to the conversation, and
wandering off a little to the other side of the store, near the back.

In the back was a sort of off section to the store. It almost reminds of a
other dreams I have had where this sort of area leads to an entirely fictuous
sort of world that has a linear sort of path and serves as something like a
gateway to another place, but in this dream I don't explore it or go through
it. Instead, the place I go to in this dream is like a sort of lobby or waiting
room for this place.

Here I find two women, not women that I know in real life, but just simply
dream figures. There is some interaction with them, but not much that I
remember.

Around this point in the dream, the people of Alliant are settling down, and
the gathering is starting to dwindle. I decide that I want to get out a game to
play with people. However, to my dismay, most people there are either already
wrapped up in what they are doing or they are playing their own games in their
own sections and are in the middle of them and uninterested in me joining them.

Around this point I decide that it is time for me to just go. I go outside back
to the lot and see that there is a large truck which is obsuring the view to my
car. I walk to the look around the truck and get to my car when I find that the
spot is completely empty.

At this point I curse myself for ignoring the sign, and walk in to the candy
store to ask the people working there what is going on. I ask if they towed
away a White Honda Fit earlier. They say that they did, and that it is at the
towyard now. I ask them where it is and how I can get to it, and he replies by
asking me for a moment, both to get the info, but also because he is busy with
some customers.

Kyle is there, and I ask him if he will help me get the car by driving me to
the yard when we get there. He agrees, but definitely with a bit of reluctance.

After some time, the manager of the store comes back and says that the people
from the yard have not had the car for long enough to require all of the
formalities required to receive it, so they have agreed to return it to the
lot.

I thank the manager for his help.

As I am waiting for the car, I check my pockets and realize that all of my
belongings are missing. I panic for a moment, and remember that I left them
near my spot. I curse myself for a moment as I go back to retrieve them and I
am relieved to find that my wallet phone and keys are all sitting at the lot.
However, I am dismayed to discover that my pen is missing, and I feel that
someone must have stolen it. I consider bothering the manager about it again,
but decide against it, and regardless, it is around this time that my car is
returning from the impound lot.

The tow drivers park the car on the north side of the lot, east of where the
bar was (which is now closed, and all of the people have left it).

As I look at the car, I am rather shocked to discover that the entire body is
missing, and all that is left of the car is the frame and the internal
components. I ask what this is all about, and the tow driver says that it's
standard procedure to remove the body from the car when it's recieved in to the
lot.

I ask what there is to do about the missing body, and he says that he is
willing to put on a new body for me.

I deliberate over this for a bit, as I like the body on my car, and don't feel
it is time yet to totally replace the body, but decide that it would be best
given the current circumstances to let them put the new body on. 

I am somewhat relived temporarily as they put on the new body because the
pieces are a rather pearl and clean white, and elect to be happy about the
changes to the car.

Something to note here is that they had an entire time put the body on. It was
something like nine people that they had working on it. They used a large
contraption, as wide as the car and shaped like a square frame with cubic metal
bars to fasten the body parts to the car. Inside of this frame were rods which
contained the tools for fastening the bars to the car, and they lined up rather
perfectly for the job.

After this team of people was done with the car, they then wrapped up and
headed their way off before handing me back control of the car. I am thankful
for their generousity and their work, but as soon as they leave, I turn to my
car and realize that the body has been replaced with some sort of strange
"luxiourious" model of the body. The back end of the car was the pearl white
body that I knew of, but the front end of the car took on a sort of strange
furry shape, almost like the head of an animal such as a wolf or a badger
(which is meant to be a very modern and distinctive style for the car) and the
drivers chair was a rather large and lush chair, almost as if made of bear skin
and shaped like a large half dome.

I go to the car and sit in it and determine that it is indeed luxiourious, but
decide that this is very much not the sort of body that I want on my car and
that I liked the simplicity of how it was before.

I talk to the manager of the candy store (who I may have forgot to mention was
still there) and ask him if there is anything I can do to rectify this. He
points to the frame of tool that the team left, and also to the old parts that
were still there, and says that, while it make take some effort, he is willing
to help me wield the tool, even though it will be unwieldy with only two
people, and help me remove the current body and replace it with the old body.

I gratefully accept this course of action, and the two of us get to work.

We are able to get through some of the beginnings of removing and replacing the
body parts when I get dreadfully exhausted over the course of the work from
wielding this tool which is meant for a whole team to use just between the two
of us. It is clear that the manager is much more compentent with using it, and
I am using quite a lot of excess energy in manipulating and wielding this
frame.

After some point, I tell him that I need a break, but the manager seems to
almost ignore my request. I eventually just step away from the work and head
back in to the bar.

In the bar there are still a couple people that I know, but not much of anyone
else, and I sit there and take a drink of water and relax for a bit. I talk
about how the car had a new body that was very much not to my liking, and
explain that I was working with the manager to put the new body on, but that it
was difficult work with just two people, and how I needed a break.

Now that I think about it, was Kyle and Kaley there, so I also mostly just kept
them up to date on how things were progressing.

I was only there for a short time when I decided to go back outside and resume
work on replacing the body. However, when I go out, I find that manager has
stopped working on the car and is nowhere to be found. I curse myself for
taking the break that I did, reasoning that of course the manager would leave,
because it was not even his car and he was only helping me out of good will.

The tools and body parts were still there, though, so I decided to get to work
on my own in finishing the job. The last thing I remember in the dream was
attempting to hoist the frame over the car as the team of nine did, and also as
the manager and I did as two, and having quite a bit of difficulty getting
everything to line up as it should. I am rather quite resolved to make it work,
and begin to determine ways to rig up a system of work to get it done.

It is at this point that I wake up.

The other two dreams were less detailed, and I don't feel very much like going
in to them right now. I will do so briefly.

The next dream takes place at the bay house. There is something of a gathering
taking place there. My mom, Chuck, and Papa, among others, are lounging under a
canopy that is set up at the top of the bluff. I enter the canopy and begin
telling my mom about a formula that I had worked out. It is a formula about
finding the odds of hitting a certain out among a number of cards that can be
drawn. Chuck asks me what the point of such a thing is when you can just figure
it out in each individual case, and I tell him that this formula gives you a
way to figure it out for any case that shows up, and it is preformulated to
give you the answer in a much faster way than could be worked up on a case by
case basis.

Chuck is not quite satisfied with that answer, but we don't dwell on it.

This dream ends with me then heading down the bluff to use this information to
aid in the loading and firing of the potato cannon out to the bay. Of course,
card drawing odds has nothing to do with the cannon, but in the dream it seems
to be the case.

The last dream is more of a dream fragment. It takes place in a target. In the
target is a central area that is closed off from the rest where the womens
clothes, and in particular the panties, are kept. I am with my mother, and she
gets me a pair. I remember examining them, and determing that this style wasn't
precisely the style that I wanted. She returns to the area, and I ask her to go
through the various styles and sizes that they have there. There are three
things that are given there, ranging from something like a least comfortable to
more comfortable style. Thinking on it in the waking world makes me reason that
they were something like Sexy, stylish, and comfort, but those weren't the
words used. Maybe something like Tight, Cropped, and Wide-edged. I don't know.
Regardless, what matters is that there were three styles, and I wanted the last
of the styles (being the most comfortable).
