So last night I had a dream.

This dream mostly took place in a large mall like ecosystem. I say eco system
rather than a mall because it seemed to represent the society at large. As in,
this mall was not one building in the realm of many, this mall was the
building.

While there was a lot to this dream in the sense that there is quite a lot of
content from it that I know took place, a lot of that content took much the
same flavor.

The central piece of this content which is worth mentioning is that there was a
movie theater in this mall that I began to take a liking to. In fact, the
attendent at the theater was a middle aged women of certain kind of likabliity
to her. She was not physically attractive but she was the kind of person that I
would warm up to any time I was around her, and I think the feeling was
somewhat mutual there.

The dream basically alternated back and forth from me watching movies towards
me exploring various aspects of the mall. These aspects would be anything from
checking out a certain hallway with offices in them, to checking out the stands
and such, and also going in to various food venues and seeing what sorts of
food they had to offer.

The main thing of note here is that there was a common theme of trying to find
somewhere to pee. At times, I would go in to large bathrooms and see an entire
row of toilets and urinals and I would find a plant to pee in. Other times
there would not be a bathroom, but I would just decide that some corner of the
mall was a fine place to pee.

In one of my encounters with this theater attendent, I tell her that my
interest in movies has really been a new sort of fascination for me and that
its one that I am really starting to feel.

After this encounter, and after watching a movie, I go through to a sort of
"central hub" of the mall and attempt to find a place to pee. In the first I go
into a bathroom, and I pee in one of the sinks there. Then I walk out, and I
see a sort of newstand which is next to a bunch of toilets (four exactly, now
that I think about it) which stood to the left of the stand which were out in
the open. I remember thinking that those toilets would be perfectly reasonable
places to pee, but that I still felt that I had a problem and wasn't sure why I
didn't want to use them. I decide (somewhat shamefully) to pee in this
newstand. So I pull down my pants and pee there and the lady at the newstand
immediately pulls out her phone and starts raising alarms and filming me,
telling me how this is entirely unacceptable and that she is going to propogate
this footage to everyone in the area and ruin my life in the best way that she
possibly can.

I finish peeing, and feel quite abashed by this entire encounter. I walk away
and reason that she is not going to have near as much pull over her attempt to
frame me in this way, and I also feel somewhat like her reaction is entirely
over the top.

As soon as I walk back to the theater (which was right away) the attendent
shows me the footage on her phone and asks me what it is all about. I am at
first quite impressed with how fast that footage got to her as I wasn't even
sure that it would arrive to her at all. I then explain that it is something I
am working on and that I really would like to pee only in the toilets from here
on. I also mention that it is hindering my potential with employers as well, as
I am looking for work and I don't want them to know about.

In spite of my response, she continues to remain disgusted (even if that digust
is somewhat hesitant) and I feel quite bad at having dissapointed her and
perhaps ruining our relationship.

It's around this point that I wake up.
