This dream starts in a sort of area that I am not sure exactly how to describe
(it is not quite solid in my mind of what exactly it was). It was certainly
indoor, but it was a bit open, and in there we (being me my brothers and my
cousins on my mothers side) were playing some sort of game. I decided that I
was done with the game, and wanted to go back to the house.

This house warrents describing as it is a large part of the dream that resontes
with me. It is of form very similar to the old bay house, except for the fact
that the entire left half of the rooms were absent. Simply gone. It had the
stairway which led up to the kitchen and living room area, but it had not
master bedroom or bath, and then there was another stairway which led up to the
upper bedroom, of which only the one my parents used to stay in existed.

I walked up the stairs of the house, and as I get to the third floor, I step
over a toilet which is in the way to the bedroom which is quite old and out of
service. This was a point of remark in the dream. I then go over to the
overlook area of this bedroom and observe.

At this point in the dream, much of the side wall disappears toward the
outside. This is not so much anything peculiar to me, but it is just what
happened in the dream. At this point also, my cousins and brothers have come to
this house to play a game. On each floor, there are two people, one of them
holding a cup and the other filling the cup with soapy water, and the object of
this game is to dump the water outside where the wall is gone on to the ground
in succession of floors in a sort of cycle. On the upper floor is Evan and me,
on the middle floor is Jaq and Kyle, and on the bottom floor is Chase and
Jessica.

We play this game for some time, and I take good care to make sure that my
sequence in the game is maintained, always dumping after the first floor crew
has gone, and before the second floor crew goes. This creates a third floor,
second floor, first floor, back to third floor cycle of soapy water being
dumped from each floor. Michelle is also outside doing a sort of conducting.

As we play, Evan hastily maintaining pace filling the cup with soapy water, I
proceed with my turn in the cycle dumping water after the bottom floor has
gone. We maintain this cycle for a bit, but after one of the sequences in the
cycle after I dump my water from the third floor, the second floor people halt
and wait.

I look at them because I am confused why they are waiting. After a bit, they
say, "It's your go." I tell them that I already went, and that it is actually
their go. They disagree, and say that I must be mistaken. I look towards
Michelle, and she is corraborating with the second floor people. I argue my
point that I did in fact take my turn, and that they must have missed it (and
post dream I realize I could have appealed to the mess on the ground although I
don't believe that would have made the result of the dream any different) but
both Michelle and the second floor people continue on with their version of the
story.

I get very upset at this point, and decide that I am absolutely done playing
this game. I thought it was a sort of silly game anyway, and I didn't want to
play in the first place. There was no real goal, it was just something to do,
and I was especially upset towards it when the people involved became obstinant
towards my part in the game.

I leave the house and go past Michelle to another house, this one much like my
parents, but with a part that is somewhat like the study, but different. I vent
some steam here. I am not sure exactly what I did, but post dream I seem to
remember beating a pillow and smashing it into the ground. After this, I
situated myself in a corner of the room, and bundled myself in a blanket and
waited.

At this point my mother comes in and asks me why I am so upset. I explain to
her that I was taking part in their game, but that it was a silly game anyway
because there was no real goal behind it, and that I played my part in the
sequencing that needed to happen, but I was being denied the acknowledgement
that I fulfilled my role. In the dream I admitted that it was triggering to me,
in that I know I have a strong irritation for being correct in something but
being told that I am incorrect.

Towards the end of the dream, I remember my mother attempting to console me in
some way, but I did not want any part of it. I also remember my father peering
around the corner at some point, but not taking part in the conversation. The
last thing I remember was walking out of the house towards the garage, not sure
where I was going to go next.

That was the extent of the dream.
