So last night I had something of a dream fragment. There are two pieces of this
dream fragment, each fragment itself being somewhat independent, but they
somewhat merge together to form an entire fragment.

The first fragment is of an excursion to a sporting goods place. This place
reminds me of the irl childhood store refered to as "Oshman's" which later irl
became "Sport's Authority". As I go to this store, I gather myself a myriad of
sporting supplies. The first thing I do is grab a full baseball batters helmet
and I put it on. I then place it near the opening of the store and continue to
gather many other supplies, ranging from various balls (softballs, baseballs,
raquetballs and so forth) in addition to some particular apparatuses, such as a
lacrosse stick (I don't know the technical name) a bat, and even I think some
golf clubs and a raquetball raquet.

I go to the check out and begin scanning these things. I remember being
somewhat bewildered by the unwieldyness with which all of these things couldn't
fit in to the bags, and I remember the station becoming quite convoluted with
these things. I also remember the total continuing to upwards of a hundred
dollars, which in waking life I realize is quite low considering all of the
things that were being added, and in the dream I remember being quite concerned
with how much this was adding up to be.

It was then that I remembered the baseball helmet that I had set aside, and so
as the person at the register is ringing up all of the other items, I go and
put the helmet on as if I was wearing it the whole time. When I return to the
register with it on, the cashier asks me if that is something that I picked up
in the store. I non-commitally waffle about the answer, giving an extremely
weak attempt at saying that I don't remember if I wore it coming in or if it
was in the store. The cashier obviously sees through this facade and rings it
up.

After everything is accounted for, I then walk out the exit of the store where
someone is there to check my exit status. He then removes the security tag on
the helmet, to which point I am then grateful that it was indeed caught by the
cashier and that my attempt to feign ignorance and steal it was thwarted,
because otherwise I would have been caught at this checkpoint.

This was the extent of the first fragment.

In the parking lot of this store I then meet Kyle and Evan in a car. They are
making their way to a movie, and they ask me if I would like to join. I say
that yes, I would love to join, and I get in the back of the car.

Kyle then begins driving to a place that resembles something like downtown
Plano. The primary difference here is first the location of this place (which
was irl north from Central expressway and felt like it was north rather than
west in the dream, which is atypical) and also the compactness of the entire
thing. The main road goes through the center of this downtown area, but all of
the passageways to each side are narrow and contain many kinds of convoluted
passageways containing stairs and abandoned indoor areas and such.

The three of us go up one of these stairways which lies to the right of the
main road and inbetween two buildings, and Kyle and Evan begin playing on these
stairs. As they are playing, Evan begins to become somewhat distressed, as Kyle
(dream version of Kyle in this case) can do something which will render Evan
immobile for a time, almost like provoking the onset of a siezure. As they are
playing, Kyle performs this maneuver, which resembles something like a Vulcan
neck pulse maneuver (or whatever it is called in Star Trek) and Evan
involuntarily becomes unconsicous and simultaneously tenses up all of his
muscles like a siezure, as I said.

When this happens, I catch Evan (as I am slightly below the two of them on the
stairs) and begin to cradle him in my arms as a means of relieving as much of
his discomfort as I can. I remember having a moment of wish to speed up the
process of him regaining his faculties, but quickly recognize that this is
something that must run it's course, and that all I can do is attempt to
alliviate whatever suffering he is experinecing as best I can.  I think about
how he is unconscious now, so there is not much neccesarily that he is feeling,
except perhaps in the sense of a very deep and primal mode of non-real sort of
awareness which may or may not be taking place here.

During this procedure, Kyle is somewhat pleased with himself at getting the
upperhand in their playfullness, but not much beyond that. Also, towards the
end but before Evan comes back to conscious awareness, someone walks by (a
complete dream stranger) and asks what is going on. I explain that Kyle has
rendered Evan unconsious and that I am helping to facilitate his return to
consiousness. He somewhat shrugs his shoulders finding the whole thing somewhat
perverse and unrelatable, and goes on his way.

Around this point, Evan regains consciousness, and as he comes to I recognize
that he is having a sort of bewildered response, as he doesn't know where he is
or what has just happened to him or anything of that sort. I continue to
comfort him, telling him that he is okay, that I am here for him, and that Kyle
just performed his sort of practical joke on him and that he is in the process
of recovering from that.

Evan gains some level of faculty in returning to understanding of the
situation, and eventually surrenders himself to calmness in his distressed
state as he allows himself to similarly let the process of coming back to
waking life happen as it will.

It is around this point that I wake up.

