Last night I had two dreams.

The first takes place in a dream version of King of Glory.

The dream starts when I am on my way there. There is something of an ultimate
tournament happening there, something that Jack has told me about and that he
is super excited about. However, I know that I don't play ultimate anymore, so
I sit to the side. "The side" in this dream is a part of the parking lot of
King of Glory.

While I am there I start talking with someone, a dream figure who reminds me of
the "good ole boy" that I knew from my public speaking class in high school.
We are talking, and the conversation is friendly enough, but eventually he
starts probing in to things. I forget exactly what part of the conversation led
him to do this, but he starts treating me as if I am under arrest. At first the
conversation was like two friends catching up, but I knew in the back of my
mind that he was a cop, and he starts to "turn on" his cop persona in the midst
of the conversation.

At some point, I ask him what he's on about. He says that he needs to arrest me
for whatever it is that I said. However, I know what it was (and I wish I
remember what it was) was something rather trivial and that he had no probable
cause for it, and that really what he was doing was searching for probable
cause.

As a side note, fuck this kid. I really don't like him.

Anyway, back to the dream. We continue talking and he asks me point blank if I
have every smoked marijuana. I say that in my past, yes I have. He then radios
in to his companion saying, "We've got a smoker here, we ought to be able to
find something." And he keeps searching my car, now intent on finding
marijuana.

I know that he isn't going to find anything, and I tell him this, but he
continues searching anyway. At some point someone else comes by, an
acquantance, and he asks what is happening. I say, "Apparently this dickwad
thinks I am under arrest and he is pretending as though he is on duty." The
acquaintance scoffs and says, "Are you serious." and I reply with, "I honestly
feel that this has to be some kind of joke, but he seems to be taking it
serious."

That was the extent of the first dream.

The second dream takes place in a dream version of california. The main feature
of this dream is firstly the hotel that has taken place here, which is
something of a rustic hotel, but in a quaint way. The next feauture is the town
itself, which is quite compact and has many walkways and things more so than
roads. Lastly, there is a facility where laser tag is played.

The dream starts in the hotel, and I am on my way to the laser tag place. I get
there (its early morning in the dream) and it is pretty empty. I kind of want
to play a game of laser tag, but for whatever reason that wasn't really clear
and still isn't in waking life I am not sure if I want to. The two reasons for
this that come to me in waking life would be either that I wasn't sure if I
wanted to pay for it or that it wouldn't be that exciting with so few people to
play with.

I stay at this place for some time. I talk with the attendent for a bit, but
nothing much interesting comes up. He describes the laser tag a bit, and as he
is describing it the dream goes to what it might be like to play, but it
dosen't fully transform there.

There is someone else in the lobby who is there with his kid, and he is
describing this laser tag to me as well. He has hopped in the queue with his
kid to play a game.

Eventually I decide to leave and go back to the hotel. By this point it has
become mid-afternoon in the dream and I haven't decided if I want to leave and
head out or go back to the laser tag.

I decide to go back and check out the laser tag, and this time when I go in it
is packed with people. I talk to the attendent to see if there are any open
spots in the queue and he says that there is no way I could join, they are
absolutely full for the day and that I could come back tommorrow.

I leave then, not really dissapointed, and go back to my hotel. At some point,
I remembre there was something about losing my wallet and dropping it, and
going on but then returning and being glad to have stumbled upon it or else I
might have forgotten about it and lost it.

I remember going back to the hotel and gathering some of my things and then
getting in my car and then driving off back to Texas.

That was about the extent of that dream.
