So last night I had a dream.

This dream took place in something of a skiing resort. I say "something of" for
the reason that the entire thing was quite like a resort, but at the same time
was quite peculiar in some key ways.

So the first thing that was peculiar about this resort was that, when the dream
starts, me and Evan and mom (and perhaps Kyle, although I don't particularly
remember him in the dream and whatever part he has is minimal) are all skiing
down a portion of the mountain which is well groomed, not steep, and is
actually enclosed in a large "warehouse" like structure. This structure had
walls which were perhaps a hundred meters across and fifteen feet high with a
ceiling that matched the gradient of the slope. From the top of the slope (or
rather the middle of the slope where the dream began) one could not see down to
the outside, but as it will become clear later in the dream, at the bottom of
the slope the structure doesn't have a "back wall" and just instead has the
entire thing as an opening to a much more trecherous part of the mountain (but
we will get to that in time)

As we are going down this portion of the slope, I remember having some fun
cutting the corners and practicing my mogul technique in that idealized
environment. Evan was there as well and was more concerned about just going
down the mountain.

At the bottom of the slope the gradient levels out some. If you were to keep
going forward, the "warehouse" structure which has walls on each side and a
ceiling which is about, I would say, fifteen feet high, it would lead to an
opening in the warehouse which leads to a completely open area of the mountain.
On the right, before this warehourse structure opens up, is a passageway which
leads to another lift which takes you to another part of the mountain, a part
of the mountain which is well known for its more advanced sections.

I decide to go into the passageway to take the more advanced section, and Evan
decides to come with me. As we ski along the corridor, however, there are
groomers which start to come directly at us from the bottom up. The people in
the groomers look at us inquizatively and resume upon their grooming quite
ignoring us, and Evan and I are forced to dodge them. Eventually, I come to
piece together that this lift is closed for the moment, that we are not meant
to be here, and that Evan and I should backtrack out of the passageway.

We return back to the initial section, and this time we all decide (except for
mom, who I believe doesn't enter the dream again after this point iirc) to
continue on to the more open area of the mountain.

So the most relevant thing to mention about this open area of the mountain is
that it does not take the form of any sort of skiing work. In fact, it
resembles more "extreme mountain biking" than it does skiing. It is composed of
many narrow paths that hang over long precipices, and the paths themselves
weave in and around parts of the mountain which are by no means skiiable.

So we are all skiing along these pathways, which irl would be very difficult to
ski because they are mostly level and even have an upward and downward tendancy
to them, and there are many times that we do this that someone has a close call
with falling over the precipice. This happens a few times with myself being
quite spooked by the closeness with which I fell, and also with Kyle (who I am
certain is in the dream at this point) and Evan. At some point, when we are on
something of "the furthest point out" from the initial area, and the path is
beginning to turn around back to the initial part of the mountain, two things
happen. Firstly, we all stop because I want us to and I talk about how we
really need to be careful around this part of the mountain, and secondly, I
look over to the mountain as a whole and I am just taken in for a moment at the
beauty of the whole thing. As I look over the precipice, I can see somewhat
vaguely and far down the whole of the closest village, which is quite some
number of thousands of feet downward (certainly within acceptable base jumping
height) and I am able to look the other way and get a good view of the rest of
the mountain, which has some ski slopes but also other portions like this
trecherous pathway structure which are much more highly elevated on the
mountain. I take a moment to soak it in before we resume on our way along the
path which will lead back to the initial area.

On the way back, there is a part of the path which is particularly perilous.
The path turns around so that on our left is an area of the mountain, and to
the right is a large abyss which needs to be crossed, and the path on the left
side comes to an end and the path "continues" (although the path itself is
discontinuous in the sense that there is an abyss there) on the right side of
this abyss. Kyle and I are able to navigate a portion of the path which is
navigable to the other side of the abyss, but Evan decides to keep going on the
left pathway that ends. As he is going, he ends up finding himself in a
position where the path behind him is quite non-existant, and he is trying to
reach up to a place on the mountain to the left which would form a plateau for
him to ride down and take a very rocky and otherwise undesirable path back to
the main area of the slopes. This course, while certainly possible, is much
more difficult and unwieldy to navigate.

As Evan is in this place, he starts to lose his balance and ends up nearly
falling in to this abyss. Before he does he is able to grab hold of a vine
which is connected to a tree on the plateau that he is trying to reach.

He is swinging on this vine, and Kyle and I are on the other side, so I start
attempting to direct him to swing himself up to the plateau. He attempts to do
so, but it is clear that he won't be able to do it on his own, either due to
the fact that it is quite a difficult maneuver, but also because it's clear he
doesn't have the skills neccesary to make it.

I then return to the other side of the path where he is, and I help him gather
his momentum and swing up to the plateau. It takes a few attempts, and on the
attempt that I thought he would make, he doesn't end up making it, and so I
take great pains to make sure that the subsequent swing is going to bring him
where he needs to go, as I am not confident in his ability to hold on much
longer. From behind then I am able to meet the arc of his swing and push him up
on to the plateau.

With that entire ordeal out of the way, we then continue along back to the
"warehouse slope" area, and I am satisfied to find that the lift to the "more
advanced area" is open now and entirely unencumbered by groomers.

I end up being the only one that wants to go here, as Evan has had enough from
his excursion to the outskirts, and Kyle is ready to just call it a day.

I make my way up the lift then, excited about what this part of the mountain
might have to offer.

On the way up, I examine the slopes under me. These slopes are quite a bit more
difficult than the slopes in the initial part of the dream, although I am aware
that this portion of the slope isn't the "advanced part" of the mountain, but
instead I know that the advanced part lies beyond the top of the lift. Still,
though, I am struck by how many people are on this part of the mountain.

As I am on the lift, there is actually a portion of the lift which grazes the
mountain close enough that I can put my ski's on the mountain. I don't know why
this is worth mentioning, but it was something in the dream that happened and I
feel it is worth noting here. Also worth noting is that this portion of the
mountain is entirely outdoors now, unlike the indoor like part of the initial
part of the dream.

The rest of the ride proceeds as normal. At the top of the lift, rather than
the typical turnstyle which would be expected, there is instead something of a
lodge. It's like a liesure lounge here.

I arrive at the lounge, and I turn in to find it has multiple tables and booths
and such with people either simply conversing in the booths, but on the tables
I find that there are people who are playing board games.

At one of the tables, I find an acquaintance who, in the instance of this
particular dream, I have played with before. To be clear, I have not had other
dreams irl where I have played games with this acquaintance (who resembles
quite greatly asmongold the twitch streamer) but in the context of this dream
it is the case that we have met and played with eachother before.

I approach this table, and am quite pleased to find that he remembers me. He
gets up and greets me like an old friend, to which I reply with in kind.

He mentions that he is playing a game right now, and that it would be possible
for me to join. I respectfully decline, saying that I would love to play, but
that I am here to ski. He tentatively understands, at least to some degree, and
lets me be on my way.

To the left of the lodge (left now that I have turned around, right from the
perspective of the lifts coming in to the lodge) is now a hallway which I know
leads to the more advanced part of the slopes. I turn in to this hallway and
turn to the right. Straight ahead is something of a pedastal with a promotion
for a kind of box, a box which is labeled to be ideal for holding and
displaying your most reputable watches. I examine this for a bit, and judge
that it is for rich people with expendable money to spend their money on, and
that I don't have the means or the desire to invest in something like this.

On the left side of the hallway (although now its the right side because I have
turned around again, so its the right side of the hallway from the view of the
lift) is a door that leads to the more advanced section. I enter the door and
find that there is another hallway, this one with quite a few turns in it
(which I am not going to bother to describe) and as you progress down this
hallway it gets more and more narrow. Eventually, it gets so small that one has
to get on elbows and knees and army crawl through a narrow passageway. I begin
to attempt to do this, but on the other side I see someone who is trying to
come back throguh the other way, and I don't want to get in his way. That, on
top of the fact that I honestly didn't know if I would fit through, deter me
enough that I decide to turn around.

I find myself then back at the main lodge. The lodge has an elevated area,
which was the initial area that I came in to from the top of the lift and teh
place where my friends were playing their board game, and along the left side
(the side with the door that led to the hallway) there is a staircase which
leads to a lower area. In this lower area is a girl. I decide that I would like
to speak to her just to simply ask her what the best way to get to the primary
slope (even though I already know that), but she is facing out the window and
doesn't notice me walk up. I become tentative, and think that to get her
attention, I might touch her on the back in a familiar way. I stand here for a
moment, attempting to reason myself in to whether or not this would be wierd,
until I eventually just raise my voice and say "excuse me".

At this she jumps a little bit, although not much, at which point I am glad to
have only used my voice rather than make any sort of untoward physical advance
upon her, and I ask her "what is the best way to get to the slope." She then
points me in the direction of the stairway which I had come down, and tells me
to go around the tables there to the other side of the lodge (which would be
the left side when viewed from the ascending chair lift) and from there will be
a doorway which leads to the outside.

I thank her, and attempt to find some way to continue the conversation, but she
simply says "no problem" and returns to looking contemplatively out the window.

I decide to take this as my queue to leave her alone. I go back up the stairs
and around the tables and make my way out of the door and to the slope.

This dream ends then as I start to go down. These slopes are quite a bit
steeper and much more fun to ski down, and I end up practicing my cutting and
turning down these slopes as I navigate around the other people that are
skiing.

This is the extent of the dream.
