So last night I had two dreams.

The first started on Plano Road toward downtown Plano, where my mom was driving
something like a forklift towards a storage unit, where I was going store some
of my things.

On the way to the unit, we stop at a place in Richardson where we attempt to
rent out a storage unit there, but to no avail. There is something to do with
jurisdiction, and for some reason in this dream for this region I am not
allowed to rent out units.

We continue along toward Downtown Plano, where we approach a unit. The unit is
a tall building, with a narrow base, with full glass walls and ceiling.

As we approach this building, we decide that in order to maximize our chances
of renting out a unit, we should raise the forklift to a height above twenty
feet. I am hanging on the forklift and agree to this. My mom raises the lift,
and we end up going up to over 32 feet, up to 35, where I am hanging on to the
lift with some anxiety, but I reason to myself that this height is just as
dangerous as 20 feet would have been, and that I am able to hang on none the
less.

When we get to the unit, mom lowers the lift. We walk in to the building, where
there are two girls there to facilitate the process.

As we are working through renting a unit, they show us how they work. It is a
contraption similar to the parking lot in I-robot that cycles in the units
automatically, and displays the unit to the person requesting it.

The two ladies cycle through a unit towards us and asks us what we think. I
start to put some of my things in the unit, and when the fit comfortably, I say
that I am satisfied with this unit. The girl behind the counter then begins the
formal paperwork (which is all online) and I start to acquaint myself with the
other girl there. I remember a trick my dad told me in that, when negotiating
with someone, you should do three things similar to them, in terms of their
body language, and that makes them more comfortable around you. I begin by
first arrange my legs in the same way she has them, and as I am trying to think
of two other things about her body language to mimic, she immediately perks up
and comes towards me. I am excited about her interest in me, and we immediately
show affection towards one another. We kiss and hold arms and hold eachother
close.

Her friend, the girl behind the counter, says that she has finished the
paperwork, and comes to join in. She positions herself in front of me, and
pulls my arms so that they can stimulate her vagina. I rub up and down on her
for a bit before making my way out.

On the way out, I make my way back to the car, when I notice Feathers from days
of ulitimate past in the building. I consider talking to him, and go back and
forth between wanting to approach him and avoiding him. Eventually I decide
that I should just approach him.

I say hi to him, unsure if he would recognize me, and to my pleasant surprise
he does, and treats me like an old friend. I ask him what he has been up to,
and he says that he was working for EA, but that they had a strict "come in to
the office" policy for COVID-19 and as a result he decided that it was no
longer worthwhile to work for them.

After a bit, we decide to leave. At this point my Dad and Evan are there. I
decide that to go home, I will ride with my dad (as we would when we had two
cars). I figured I would ride with dad and Evan would ride with mom, but to my
surprise when we get in the car Evan is in there with us, so it is Dad and Evan
and I. We make our way back home. That is the extent of the dream.

The second dream takes place in target. The store is being rearranged (as it is
being done IRL) and I am browsing through the womens clothing department
looking for a bra to wear. I go through and find a couple of bras that I want,
one a navy blue color, and another a more magenta color. I hold up the XS size
to my breasts (which is my male body) and determine that it is the correct size
for what I am going for. I then look for the correct size in the magenta, but
as I move down the isle to find it, I discover that it has been moved as I was
looking.

The rest of the dream mostly involves me going around the areas of the target
attempting to find the womens clothing isles again. Towards the western end of
the store (opposite where I was) I find that there is a movie theater with fast
food restaurants and such, and towards the north east side of the store there
is something like a childrens play area.

Eventually, I find the womens section near the center of the store, but I can't
find the exact isles that I was looking at before. That is about the extent of
that dream.
