FABLE I. [I.5-31]

  God reduces Chaos into order. He separates the four elements, and
  disposes the several bodies, of which the universe is formed, into
  their proper situations.

At first, the sea, the earth, and the heaven, which covers all things,
were the only face of nature throughout the whole universe, which men
have named Chaos; a rude and undigested mass,[4] and nothing {more} than
an inert weight, and the discordant atoms of things not harmonizing,
heaped together in the same spot. No Sun[5] as yet gave light to the
world; nor did the Moon,[6] by increasing, recover her horns anew. The
Earth did not {as yet} hang in the surrounding air, balanced by its own
weight, nor had Amphitrite[7] stretched out her arms along the
lengthened margin of the coasts. Wherever, too, was the land, there also
was the sea and the air; {and} thus was the earth without firmness, the
sea unnavigable, the air void of light; in no one {of them} did its
{present} form exist. And one was {ever} obstructing the other; because
in the same body the cold was striving with the hot, the moist with the
dry, the soft with the hard, things having weight with {those} devoid of
weight.

To this discord God and bounteous Nature[8] put an end; for he separated
the earth from the heavens, and the waters from the earth, and
distinguished the clear heavens from the gross atmosphere. And after he
had unravelled these {elements}, and released them from {that} confused
heap, he combined them, {thus} disjoined, in harmonious unison, {each}
in {its proper} place. The element of the vaulted heaven,[9] fiery and
without weight, shone forth, and selected a place for itself in the
highest region; next after it, {both} in lightness and in place, was the
air; the Earth was more weighty than these, and drew {with it} the more
ponderous atoms, and was pressed together by its own gravity. The
encircling waters sank to the lowermost place,[10] and surrounded the
solid globe.

    [Footnote 4: _A rude and undigested mass._--Ver. 7. This is very
    similar to the words of the Scriptures, ‘And the earth was without
    form and void,’ Genesis, ch. i. ver. 2.]

    [Footnote 5: _No Sun._--Ver. 10. Titan. The Sun is so called, on
    account of his supposed father, Hyperion, who was one of the
    Titans. Hyperion is thought to have been the first who, by
    assiduous observation, discovered the course of the Sun, Moon, and
    other luminaries. By them he regulated the time for the seasons,
    and imparted this knowledge to others. Being thus, as it were, the
    father of astronomy, he has been feigned by the poets to have been
    the father of the Sun and the Moon.]

    [Footnote 6: _The Moon._--Ver. 11. Phœbe. The Moon is so called
    from the Greek φοῖβος, ‘shining,’ and as being the sister of
    Phœbus, Apollo, or the Sun.]

    [Footnote 7: _Amphitrite._--Ver. 14. She was the daughter of
    Oceanus and Doris, and the wife of Neptune, God of the Sea. Being
    the Goddess of the Ocean, her name is here used to signify the
    ocean itself.]

    [Footnote 8: _Nature._--Ver. 21. ‘Natura’ is a word often used by
    the Poet without any determinate signification, and to its
    operations are ascribed all those phenomena which it is found
    difficult or impossible to explain upon known and established
    principles. In the present instance it may be considered to mean
    the invisible agency of the Deity in reducing Chaos into a form of
    order and consistency. ‘Et’ is therefore here, as grammarians term
    it, an expositive particle; as if the Poet had said, ‘Deus sive
    natura,’ ‘God, or in other words, nature.’]

    [Footnote 9: _The element of the vaulted heaven._--Ver. 26. This
    is a periphrasis, signifying the regions of the firmament or upper
    air, in which the sun and stars move; which was supposed to be of
    the purest fire and the source of all flame. The heavens are
    called ‘convex,’ from being supposed to assume the same shape as
    the terrestrial globe which they surround.]

    [Footnote 10: _The lowermost place._--Ver. 31. ‘Ultima’ must not
    be here understood in the presence of ‘infima,’ or as signifying
    ‘last,’ or ‘lowest,’ in a strict philosophical sense, for that
    would contradict the account of the formation of the world given
    by Hesiod, and which is here closely followed by Ovid; indeed, it
    would contradict his own words,--‘Circumfluus humor coercuit
    solidum orbem.’ The meaning seems to be, that the waters possess
    the lowest place only in respect to the earth whereon we tread,
    and not relatively to the terrestrial globe, the supposed centre
    of the system, inasmuch as the external surface of the earth in
    some places rises considerably, and leaves the water to subside in
    channels.]


EXPLANATION.

  The ancient philosophers, unable to comprehend how something could be
  produced out of nothing, supposed a matter pre-existent to the Earth
  in its present shape, which afterwards received form and order from
  some powerful cause. According to them, God was not the Creator, but
  the Architect of the universe, in ranging and disposing the elements
  in situations most suitable to their respective qualities. This is the
  Chaos so often sung of by the poets, and which Hesiod was the first to
  mention.

  It is clear that this system was but a confused and disfigured
  tradition of the creation of the world, as mentioned by Moses; and
  thus, beneath these fictions, there lies some faint glimmering of
  truth. The first two chapters of the book of Genesis will be found to
  throw considerable light on the foundation of this Mythological system
  of the world’s formation.

  Hesiod, the most ancient of the heathen writers who have enlarged upon
  this subject, seems to have derived much of his information from the
  works of Sanchoniatho, who is supposed to have borrowed his ideas
  concerning Chaos from that passage in the second verse of the first
  Chapter of Genesis, which mentions the darkness that was spread over
  the whole universe--‘and darkness was upon the face of the deep’--for
  he expresses himself almost in those words. Sanchoniatho lived before
  the Trojan war, and professed to have received his information
  respecting the original construction of the world from a priest of
  ‘Jehovah,’ named Jerombaal. He wrote in the Phœnician language; but we
  have only a translation of his works, by Philo Judæus, which is by
  many supposed to be spurious. It is, however, very probable, that from
  him the Greeks borrowed their notions regarding Chaos, which they
  mingled with fables of their own invention.

