# 4 - 4.2 Do things have personalities?
[Metadata]: # {05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 4.2 Do things have personalities?
The things in Tolkien's cosmos are not only beautiful; they also have something
like personalities. The division between things and persons is not as absolute
there as it is in our culture. Yet neither things nor persons are thereby
demeaned, as modern materialism demeans persons and modern subjectivism demeans
material things.

Ever since Descartes, the Western mind has separated matter and spirit, body
and soul, physical and spiritual, as two "clear and distinct ideas" that have
nothing in common. Matter takes up space and does not think; mind thinks and
does not take up space. But before Descartes it was not so. The distinction was
there, but not total. There was an in-between category, life, which Descartes
eliminated. (He thought of even an animal as a complicated machine.)

But Tolkien restores the ancient, pre-Cartesian cosmology in which things are
not that neat. Even inorganic things like mountains are alive; the distinction
between trees and Ents (thinking, treelike tree herders) is not absolute; and
in general the whole world of things is more personlike, mindlike, spiritlike,
than in the Cartesian machine-universe.

There are at least three killers of this old cosmology in the modern mind. One
of them, of course, is materialism. Another is Cartesian dualism, which sells
out half the world—everything made of matter—to materialism, reducing
everything except mind and spirit to passivity and mechanism. The third is
spiritualism, and the Gnostic New Age philosophy of "Create your own reality."
Both materialism and spiritualism are attractive because they are simple. They
are reductionisms. They obey Ockham's Razor ("Entities should not be multiplied
beyond necessity"), as William of Ockham, a fourteenth-century English
philosopher, formulated it—in other words, always use the simplest explanation.
Modern science has found the Razor to be a very useful principle of method, but
it does not follow that it is also a good principle of cosmology. It is true
that reductionism (reducing the complex to the simple) is almost by definition
the ideal of scientific explanation. The rules of grammar, chemical formulae,
and road maps are examples. But to think that reality contains nothing more
than the scientific method can know is like thinking that Shakespeare's plays
are nothing but exercises in grammar, that the water that endlessly fascinates
the poet and the mystic is actually nothing but hydrogen and oxygen, or that
the road we actually travel has nothing more on it than the map does.

Part of the confusion comes from reducing Aristotle's four causes to one or, at
the most, two. (1) Science can deal with the efficient cause (the agent of
change). (2) It would seem that science can also deal with the material cause
(what a thing is made of, the raw material or potentiality, that out of which
something comes to be); but even this is not so, for "potentiality" is a
metaphysical notion that dropped out of modern science with Descartes and
Hobbes. (3) Science has definitely dropped the formal cause, the essence, the
natural or metaphysical species (as distinct from humanly, conventionally
arranged classes or categories). (4) And science has very self-consciously
dropped final causality, purpose, teleology, design. That is the philosophical
issue underlying the current dispute about evolution by blind accident versus
evolution by cosmic design. Atheists resist the very idea of design in nature,
because they see where it naturally (designedly?) leads: to a Designer of
Nature.

A simple and startling example of how reductionistic we are can be found in C.
S. Lewis's Narnia chronicles, from The Voyage of the "Dawn Treader". I think we
can learn much about ourselves from our reaction to this passage. We are
willing to grant much "suspension of disbelief" in fantasy, especially when it
describes another world; but notice how we rise up in protest against the
apparent silliness of the idea presented here at first, and then how, upon
reflection, we see the silliness not of the idea but of our prejudice:

"Are we near the World's End now, Sir?" asked Caspian. "Have you any knowledge
of the seas and lands farther east than this?"

"I saw them long ago," said the Old Man, "but it was from a great height. I
cannot tell you such things as sailors need to know."

"Do you mean you were flying in the air?" Eustace blurted out.

"I was a long way above the air, my son," replied the Old Man. "I am Ramandu.
But I see that you stare at one another and have not heard this name. And no
wonder, for the days when I was a star had ceased long before any of you knew
this world, and all the constellations have changed."

"Golly," said Edmund under his breath. "He's a retired star." . . .

""In our world," said Eustace, "a star is a huge ball of flaming gas."

"Even in your world, my son, that is not what a star is but only what it is
made of."2

Lewis inserts Merlin into the plot in That Hideous Strength precisely to make
the point that there was once more room in the cosmos for things of that sort.3

