# 12 - 12.5 Are promises sacred?
[Metadata]: # {13.06}
[Descriptor]: # {13.06}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 12.5 Are promises sacred?
This is a single concept, though there is not a single word for it in English.
"Honesty" has been too often trivialized in modern parlance to mean mere
candor, which is often only shamelessness, not a virtue but a vice. In Hebrew
there is a single word, and it is emeth (truth), but the "truth" not only of a
thought or even of a deed but of a person, or a person's character. It is one
of the primary attributes of God in the Old Testament. It is manifested
especially in keeping promises.

It can be seen best, perhaps, by contrasting two concrete characters: Faramir
and Boromir. But we must simply forget, if not forgive, the movie's gratuitous
redrawing of the character of Faramir as crafty and suspicious and lusting
after the Ring. Rather, we must remember his noble words:

"I would not snare even an Orc with a falsehood," said Faramir (LOTR, p. 949).

"We are truth-speakers, we men of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or
die in the attempt. Not if I found it on the highway would I take it I said.
Even if I were such a man as to desire this thing, and even though I knew not
clearly what this thing was when I spoke, still I should take those words as a
vow, and be held by them" (LOTR, pp. 665-66).

Boromir, on the other hand, betrays his vow to the Fellowship to protect the
Ring bearer when he succumbs to Ring lust and tries to lure Frodo into giving
him the Ring, then tries to take it by force.

But Boromir is only stubborn and weak, and repents. The more complete lack of
emeth is found in Gollum. (Perhaps the best character to contrast him with
would be Emeth himself in C. S. Lewis's The Last Battle.) He has lost his soul,
his "I", his integrity. He can no longer even use that sacred word, the word
God revealed as His own eternal Name in the burning bush (see Ex 3:14). He
speaks of himself in the plural ("we", "us") or in the third person ("They took
his Precious and he's lost now" (LOTR, p. 602)—until Frodo binds him with a
promise:

"No, I will not take it [the Elf-rope] off you," said Frodo, "not unless"—he
paused a moment in thought—"not unless there is any promise you can make that I
can trust."

"We will swear to do what he wants, yes, yess," said Gollum. . . . We promises,
yes I promise!" said Gollum. "I will serve the master of the Precious" (LOTR,
pp. 603-4).

The "I" and the "promise" necessarily go together.

How important are promises? Keeping them was the main thing King Theoden was
eulogized for: he "kept his oaths" (LOTR, p. 851). When Aragorn took "the Paths
of the Dead" (really, the Undead) he roused them to fight and thus gave them
the rest they had been denied because they had broken their oath to fight
against Sauron:

"Oathbreakers, why have ye come?"

And a voice was heard out of the night that answered him, as if from far away:
"To fulfill our oath and have peace" (LOTR, p. 772).

Promise keeping is the fundamental thing that holds all societies together. It
is the root of all law and thus of all social stability. Personal integrity is
the basis for social integrity. All pre-modern societies knew that. Tolkien
notes that "promises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest things
feared to break them" (LOTR, p. 12).

The consequences of promise breaking are the loss of personal integrity. And
the consequences of that are Gollum's inner Hell, which is the exact opposite
of Sartre's in No Exit, where "Hell is other people." Gollum's Hell is the
withdrawal from the other, as it is in Charles Williams's truly terrifying
Descent Into Hell.

The virtue of Emeth is the precondition for all virtue. There can no more be
any other virtue without truthfulness than there can be any successful
operation without light in the operating room. Even moral relativists know
this: no one admires a man who lies to himself, who sins against his own
conscience. Even the wicked have this light, for it is the light that
enlightens every man who comes into the world (see Jn 1:9). Without it,
nothing.

And with it, everything. There is no more life-transforming reform than total
honesty, the absolute refusal to lie to oneself or others. Ask anyone in A.A.
That's why we need Purgatory, for our sins to come into the light. That's why
"practicing the presence of God" and momento mori (remember death) is the way
to sanctity: there are not many sins a man will commit on his deathbed.

C. S. Lewis was an absolutist about honesty, especially in "Man or Rabbit?" If
Lewis could make everyone in our world read any one short essay or chapter he
wrote, I think he would choose that one.

It begins with a question: "Can't you lead a good life without believing in
Christianity?" And his answer is to question the question:

The question sounds as if it were asked by a person who said to himself, "I
don't care whether Christianity is in fact true or not. . . . All I'm
interested in is leading a good life. I'm going to choose beliefs not because I
think them true but because I find them helpful." Now frankly, I find it hard
to sympathise with this state of mind. . . . If Christianity is untrue, then no
honest man will want to believe it, however helpful it might be; if it is true,
every honest man will want to believe it, even if it gives him no help at all.4

