# 9 - 9.2 The metaphysics of words: Can words have real power?
[Metadata]: # {10.03}
[Descriptor]: # {10.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 9.2 The metaphysics of words: Can words have real power?
But there is more: strange as it sounds, things are in words for Tolkien. The
language of The Lord of the Rings, and even more of The Silmarillion, is not
merely a device for communicating thoughts and feelings. The words are not mere
labels for concepts. Rather, it is in the words that the things live and move
and have their being; and in the words they come to us. As Martin Heidegger
puts it, language is "the House of Being". "For words and language are not
wrappings in which things are packed for the commerce of those who write and
speak. It is in words and language that things first come into being and are.
For this reason the misuse of language, in idle talk, in slogans and phrases,
destroys our authentic relation to things."2

"This naming does not consist merely in something already known being supplied
with a name; it is rather that when the poet speaks the essential word, the
existent is by this name nominated as what it is. So it becomes known as
existent [real]. Poetry is the establishing of being by means of the word."3

Thus poetry is making, as its name says (poiesis). Poetry is not ornament but
fundamental speech; prose is fallen poetry. And fundamental speech is an act of
creating. And unspeak-ing is uncreating. "Last of all is set the name of
Melkor, He Who Arises in Might. But that name he has forfeited, and the Noldor,
who among the Elves suffered most from his malice, will not utter it"
(Silmarillion, p. 31). And Gandalf will not utter the words on the Ring in the
language of Mordor in the Shire, but only at the Council of Elrond in
Rivendell, and even in that safe and holy place the words summon something of
the presence of their Hellish source:

"Ash nazg durbatuluk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatuluk agh burzum-ishi
krimpatul."

The change in the wizard's voice was astounding. Suddenly it became menacing,
powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to pass over the high sun, and the
porch for a moment drew dark. All trembled, and the Elves stopped their ears.

"Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that tongue in Imladris,
Gandalf the Grey," said Elrond, as the shadow passed and the company breathed
once more (LOTR, pp. 247-48).

The power of words is based on the fact that real things are found in words.
Words are not merely things among a world of things, things with one additional
feature, the ability to point to other things. No, words are the encompassing
frame of the world of things. Things constitute a "world" only by the creative
word of the author, who names them.

And therefore, since the things are encompassed by words, our wonder at the
things is encompassed by our wonder at the words.

The genealogies are the dullest part of the Bible for modern readers, but they
were some of the most wonderful for the ancients.

There is a numinous, electrifying scene in the play Equus where a boy who has
invented a religion of worshipping horses (since there is nothing in his modern
world to worship) invokes the many names of his horse-god.

At the end of the movie Roots, when the family of slaves finally enters its
freedom and its promised land, it solemnizes the event by reciting the account
of its origins, the words that had been faithfully handed down for generations:
"One day Kunta Kinte went out to fell a tree to make a drum." And then followed
the list of ancestral names.

