# 6 - 6.2 Is intuition a form of knowledge?
[Metadata]: # {07.03}
[Descriptor]: # {07.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 6.2 Is intuition a form of knowledge?
The central debate in classical modern philosophy is between the epistemologies
of rationalism (Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Hegel) and empiricism (Bacon,
Hobbes, Locke, Hume). The issue is the priority of reason or sense experience.

Both epistemologies ignore a more ancient organ of knowing: intuition. Pascal
appeals to this in his famous saying: "The heart has its reasons which reason
knows nothing of." This is not a justification of sentiment, feeling, or desire
over reason, but an expansion of the meaning of reason beyond "calculation" to
"intuition".

At least a dozen times during his quest Frodo chooses to follow his heart over
his calculating reason and his experience, and most of the time the choice
turns out to be crucially right. (See the Concordance for examples.)

Tolkien's epistemology includes trust in this third eye of the heart. But the
heart is not an infallible organ. (Remember the uncertainties in the chapter
entitled "The Choices of Master Samwise".) Sauron's and Saruman's hearts and
intuitions mislead them. For this "third eye", unlike reason and sense
experience, depends on moral goodness; it is trustworthy only in the virtuous.
So virtue is part of epistemology! Epistemology depends on ethics; knowledge
(of the highest and most important things) depends on goodness. That's what
Jesus said, after all: "My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me; if any
man's will is to do his will, he shall know whether the teaching is from God"
(Jn 7:16-17). And, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God" (Mt
5:8).

We must be careful here. This is not "Get in touch with your own higher
consciousness", "Listen to your feelings", or even "Feel the Force". Frodo is
humble and knows he lacks the wisdom the Quest demands, so he listens to
others, to his superiors, and to tradition. And when he has to rely on his own
intuition, it is his moral innocence, not any epistemo-logical or psychological
method, that saves him.

Frodo learns from experience, but not the way Goethe's Faust does. He does not
eat experience like a spider eating flies, trapping them in the web of his
consciousness. He lets himself be tutored by experience because he believes in
objective truth and, implicitly, in a providential order in the world. That's
why he trusts experience. As C. S. Lewis put it, "What I like about experience
is that it is such an honest thing. You may take any number of wrong turnings;
but keep your eyes open and you will not be allowed to go very far before the
warning signs appear. You may have deceived yourself, but experience is not
trying to deceive you. The universe rings true wherever you fairly test it."2

Lewis explains why intuition sees more than literal sight or literal reason and
scientific analysis in a profound little essay in epistemology called
"Meditation in a Toolshed". What he means in the following passage by "looking
along" is one form of intuition, or the "eye of the heart". It is the ancient
and forgotten art of sign reading, seeing the things in the universe not as
mere brute facts but as signs, as significant, as a kind of language, and thus
as implicitly designed by a Mind. (It was a medieval cliche that "God wrote two
books, nature and Scripture.")

I was standing today in the dark toolshed. The sun was shining outside and
through the crack at the top of the door there came a sunbeam. From where I
stood that beam of light, with the specks of dust gyrating in it, was the most
striking thing in the place. Everything else was almost pitch-black. I was
seeing the beam, not seeing things by it.

Then I moved, so that the beam fell on my eyes. Instantly the whole previous
picture vanished. I saw no toolshed, and (above all) no beam. Instead I saw,
framed in the irregular cranny at the top of the door, green leaves moving on
the branches of a tree outside and beyond that, 90 odd million miles away, the
sun. Looking along the beam, and looking at the beam are very different
experiences.

But this is only a very simple example of the difference between looking at and
looking along. A young man meets a girl. The whole world looks different when
he sees her. . . . He is, as they say, "in love". Now comes a scientist and
describes this young man's experience from the outside. For him it is all an
affair of the young man's genes and a recognized biological stimulus. That is
the difference between looking along the sexual impulse and looking at it. . .
.

The people who look at things have had it all their own way; the people who
look along things have simply been brow-beaten. . . . That, in fact, is the
whole basis of the specifically "modern" type of [reductionist] thought.3

In The Abolition of Man he applies this principle to moral values:

You cannot go on "explaining away" for ever: you will find that you have
explained explanation itself away. You cannot go on "seeing through" things for
ever. The whole point of seeing through something is to see something through
it. It is good that the window should be transparent, because the street or
garden beyond it is opaque. How if you saw through the garden too? It is no use
trying to "see through" first principles [of morality]. If you see through
everything, then everything is transparent, but a wholly transparent world is
an invisible world. To "see through" all things is the same as not to see (p.
91).

