# 6 - Epistemology
[Metadata]: # {07.01}
[Descriptor]: # {07.01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# Epistemology
Epistemology is that division of philosophy which studies knowledge—not the
objects of knowledge, or the content of knowledge, but knowledge itself, how we
know, and whether we can attain truth, and if so how. There are many words for
"knowledge" in Greek; "epistemology" comes from episteme, which means "certain
knowledge".

Epistemology is important because it makes a great difference what kind of
knowing we can trust, if any. Can any knowledge be trusted, or must we begin
and end with scepticism? Descartes only began with scepticism, as a method (his
"universal methodic doubt"); a sceptic ends with it as his final verdict on
human knowledge.

If there is some kind of reliable knowledge, and we do not have to be sceptics,
the next question is how we attain it: by reason (rationalism) or sensation
(empiricism), or both (realism) or neither (mysticism)? Is it immediate and
intuitive, or by proof and argument, whether deductive or inductive?

Perhaps the most practical question in epistemology is: What sources of
knowledge can we trust? Ancient traditions? Intuition? People? Which ones? How
do we recognize trustworthy people? Do we have a third eye, an eye of the
heart, in addition to the eyes on the outside of the head and the eye of the
brain on the inside of the head? Does the heart know as well as feel and
desire? Does the heart have reasons that the reason cannot know?

On many occasions in The Lord of the Rings the Fellowship, especially Frodo and
Sam, have to make choices that are not merely moral choices between known good
and known evil, but epistemological choices between wisdom and folly, reality
and appearance, in choosing between two apparent goods or two apparent evils,
especially what to do with the Ring.

The question of whom to trust frequently arises. For instance, how did Frodo
know "Strider" was trustworthy when he first met him at Bree? He "feels fair
and seems foul"—is this "feeling" the eye of the heart and the "seeming" the
eye of the head?

How to know when to mete out justice and when to give mercy is another
epistemological question, as well as a moral question. Neither Frodo nor even
Gandalf knew the role Gollum was destined to play; yet Gandalf says, "My heart
tells me he has some role to play yet, for good or ill, before the end" (LOTR,
p. 58). How did Gandalf know this? He did not know the future; he was not a
prophet. In the terms of The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, he knew it
because he knew "the Deeper Magic from Before the Dawn of Time".

