# 6 - 6.4 What is truth?
[Metadata]: # {07.05}
[Descriptor]: # {07.05}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 6.4 What is truth?
"What is truth?" Mortimer Adler says this is one of the easiest questions in
philosophy to answer, and he quotes Aristotle's quintessentially commonsensical
definition of truth: "When one says of what is that it is, and of what is not
that it is not, he speaks the truth."

The most philosophically provocative part of "On Fairy-Stories" is what Tolkien
says about fairy stories being "true". It is . . . essential to a genuine
fairy-story. . . that it should be presented as "true." . . .

Probably every writer making a secondary world, a fantasy, every sub-creator,
wishes in some measure to be a real maker, or hopes that he is drawing on
reality: hopes that the peculiar quality of this secondary world (if not all
the details) are derived from Reality, or are flowing into it. . . . The
peculiar quality of the "joy" in successful Fantasy can thus be explained as a
sudden glimpse of the underlying reality or truth. It is not only a
"consolation" for the sorrow of this world, but a satisfaction, and an answer
to that question, "Is it true?" . . . In the "eucatas-trophe" we see in a brief
vision that the answer may be greater—it may be a far-off gleam or echo of
evangelium [gospel, good news] in the real world. . . . All tales may come
true; and yet, at the last, redeemed, they may be as like and as unlike the
forms that we give them as Man, finally redeemed, will be like and unlike the
fallen, that we know ("On Fairy-Stories", pp. 87-90).

Truth is objective, and discovered. Mere fictions are subjective creations.
Yet, like many great authors, Tolkien found the process of writing The Lord of
the Rings to be one of discovery rather than creation. Tolkien's son
Christopher said of his father's writing: "I say discover because that is how
he himself saw it, as he once said, 'Always I had the sense of recording what
was already there, somewhere; not of inventing'" (Silmarillion, Foreword, p.
9).

And Tolkien says he wrote The Lord of the Rings to elucidate "truth": "I would
claim, if I did not think it presumptuous in one so ill-instructed, to have as
one object the elucidation of truth, and the encouragement of good morals in
this real world, by the ancient device of exemplifying them in unfamiliar
embodiments, that may tend to 'bring them home'" (Letters, no. 153, p. 194).

But The Lord of the Rings is myth, not fact. How can it be "true"? C. S. Lewis
explains how a myth can teach a truth more powerfully than anything else can:

Human intellect is incurably abstract. . . . Yet the only realities we
experience are concrete—this pain, this pleasure, this dog, this man. While we
are loving the man, bearing the pain, enjoying the pleasure, we are not
intellectually apprehending Pleasure, Pain or Personality. When we begin to do
so, on the other hand, the concrete realities sink to the level of mere
instances or examples. ... This is our dilemma—either to taste and not to know
or to know and not to taste. . . . You cannot study Pleasure in the moment of
the nuptial embrace, nor repentance while repenting, nor analyse the nature of
humour while roaring with laughter. But when else can you really know these
things? . . .

Of this tragic dilemma myth is the partial solution. In the enjoyment of a
great myth we come nearest to experiencing as a concrete what can otherwise be
understood only as an abstraction.4

