# 12 - 12.1 Do principles or consequences make an act good?
[Metadata]: # {13.02}
[Descriptor]: # {13.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 12.1 Do principles or consequences make an act good?
There are ten men in a lifeboat, starving. If they kill one man and eat his
flesh, nine will live. If they do not, all ten will die. Which is the ethically
right choice? This is the classic example that distinguishes an absolutistic
ethic of duty from a rela-tivistic ethic of utility ("the end justifies the
means"). Other examples would be waging a preventive war, assassinating a
dictator, or burning incense to Caesar and calling him a god so that your
family will not be fed to the lions in the Coliseum. Does the end (in both
senses of "consequences" and "motive") justify the means in these cases? Or are
there absolute principles that must be obeyed no matter what the consequences?
The two answers can be labeled utilitarianism versus principialism, or
relativism versus absolutism.

The basic difference between the two answers lies in what justifies a moral
choice. Is it obedience to principles that are a priori, there before the act?
Or is it your estimation of the good and bad consequences caused by the act,
that come after it, a posteriori ? This can be illustrated by a diagram.

Elrond's last words to the Fellowship (which his Council had chosen), as they
exit Rivendell on their world-saving task, are: "You do not yet know the
strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each may meet upon the
road. . . . Look not too far ahead" (LOTR, p. 274).

We find in The Lord of the Rings four arguments for prin-cipialism and against
utilitarianism. They are implicit in the plot, of course, rather than
explicitly argued, for Tolkien is not writing philosophy but story. But
sometimes story's showing can be more convincing than philosophy's arguing.

There is, first, an epistemological argument. It is the simple fact that we do
not know the future. We are not God.

For these things change. But our marching orders, our principles, do not. They
are unchanging and universal, not dependent on time or place. And they are what
we do know. Tolkien never comes closer to summarizing his ethics than in
Aragorn's reply to Eomer's question:

"It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels. The world is all
grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields; and folk
speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war
that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the
Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?"

"As he ever has judged," said Aragorn. "Good and ill have not changed since
yesteryear; nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves and another among
Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden Wood as in his
own house" (LOTR, pp. 427-28).

We know these principles, but not infallibly. We must discern them. And
sometimes this is very hard, as in "The Choices of Master Samwise", when Sam
thought Frodo had been killed by Shelob and could not clearly discern whether
to take the Ring or to stay with his Master (LOTR, pp. 711-25).

Our reasoning is not always right and sometimes must be overridden by a deeper
knowledge—thus Sam's interior dialogue on Mount Doom. His calculating voice
says,

"You are the fool, going on hoping and toiling. You could have lain down and
gone to sleep together two days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But you'll
die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down now and give it
up. You'll never get to the top anyway."

And then his deeper wisdom answers,

"I'll get there, if I leave everything but my bones behind," said Sam. "And
I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop
arguing!" (LOTR, p. 918).

Notice that Sam's deeper wisdom treats his rationalizing voice as an other, not
as his self.

What passes for reasoning is often rationalizing, and our deeper reason knows
it. Moral absolutism is not arrogant but humble. It claims absolute status for
principles, not for our knowledge of them. It is moral relativism that is
arrogant, both because it will not bow to principles and because it plays God
in assuming we can know the future, the consequences, like a soldier disobeying
his orders because he thinks he knows better than his commanding officer.

A second argument for absolutism is an anthropological argument. Here again the
difference is exactly the reverse of what the relativist claims. The relativist
claims that his philosophy is personalistic and warm, designed to love and help
people. After all, principles are for people, not vice versa. But in fact, as
we shall see in the plot of The Lord of the Rings, the relativist's
"flexibility" actually harms people rather than helping them, while the
absolutist's adherence to principles helps people. So the real personalism is
principialism. It is the utilitarian who will sacrifice persons if "necessary",
like Saruman. The utilitarian ranks quantity over quality, and calculates that
nine live cannibals in a lifeboat are better than ten dead heroes.

Principles are indeed for persons rather than vice versa: that's why they are
so absolute, especially principles like loyalty and friendship. Tolkien's
heroes are certainly not unfeeling legalists.

Duty is really to persons, not to principles. Frodo says, at the Black Gate, "I
am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go. . . . If
there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after must come" (LOTR,
p. 624). (Note the last sentence. Tolkien is deliberately rejecting
utilitarianism with its calculation of consequences.) Like Eowyn, Frodo has
been "commanded", by a person, not a principle. And he knows and trusts his
commanders (Elrond and Gandalf) and therefore obeys them. He does not say, as
Kant did, that he obeys reason, or duty, or the Categorical Imperative. He does
not say, "I think my rational duty is this, and I obey it." Ultimately,
obedience and duty come down to knowing, trusting, and loving a person.

A third argument for absolutism is psychological. It is very simple: bad people
are often utilitarians. Utilitarianism tempts you to badness; it is a very
convenient excuse for doing something bad. Thus Saruman's argument to Gandalf
(LOTR, p. 253) for joining the apparently inevitable winner, Sauron, before
it's too late. But good people are not utilitarians. Why? Because they exercise
the great non-utilitarian moral virtues: charity, self-forgetfulness,
self-sacrifice:

"Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost," answered
Gimli. "His foresight failed him."

"The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for himself
or for others," said Aragorn (LOTR, p. 430).

Gandalf's counsel is the heart of Tolkien's ethics. It is short and sweet, hard
and true: "To cast aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand" (LOTR, p.
507).

A fourth argument for moral absolutism is a historical one. It is an argument
not from principles but from consequences. In fact, it is a consequentialist
argument against consequentialism. It is that the consequences of
consequentialism are bad, and the consequences of principialism are good.

Consequentialism gives up too easily. Frodo, seeing the vast army of Mordor, at
first thinks, "I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost.
Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will be no one I
can tell. It will be in vain." But, then, "Despair had not left him, but the
weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a moment
before he had felt the opposite, that what he had to do, he had to do, if he
could, and that whether Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or
anyone else ever knew about it was beside the purpose" (LOTR, p. 692).

C. S. Lewis defended moral absolutism and attacked utilitarianism in many
places—for instance, in the first book of Mere Christianity; in one of the
century's most prophetic books, The Abolition of Man (which is too long to
quote but not too long to read); and in the shorter article "The Poison of
Subjectivism".

One of the sharpest examples of the conflict between duty and utility in his
fiction is Digory's choice in The Magician's Nephew to obey Aslan and not
accept a magic apple from the Witch even though it would have healed his dying
mother. Aslan tells him that

it would have healed her, but not to your joy or hers. The day would have come
when both you and she would have looked back and said it would have been better
to die in that illness. . . . That is what would have happened, child, with a
stolen apple. It is not what will happen now. What I give you now will bring
joy. It will not, in your world, give endless life, but it will heal. Go. Pluck
her an apple from the Tree."1

Here, as in Tolkien, consequentialism has bad consequences and obedience to
duty rather than consequences has good ones. It is the Principle of "First and
Second Things" (see Lewis's essay by that title in God in the Dock).

