# 11 - 11.3 How weak is evil?
[Metadata]: # {12.04}
[Descriptor]: # {12.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 11.3 How weak is evil?
The weakness of evil is that it cannot conquer weakness. No matter how much
power evil has, it is always defeated by the free, loving renunciation of
power. It can be defeated in Middle-earth as it was on Calvary: by martyrdom.
Scripture's image of the last battle between good and evil is a battle between
two mythical beasts: Arnion, the meek little Lamb, and

Therion, the terrible dragon beast. And the Lamb overcomes the Beast by a
secret weapon: His own blood.

Evil is limited to power; it cannot use weakness. It is limited to pride; it
cannot use humility. It is limited to inflicting suffering and death; it cannot
use suffering and death. It is limited to selfishness; it cannot use
selflessness. But good can.

It takes selflessness to give birth, whether biologically or artistically. You
let yourself be used as a birth canal, or as an instrument of divine
inspiration. Evil cannot create, or give birth. For "nothing is evil in the
beginning" (LOTR, p. 261). "Trolls are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in
the Great Darkness, in mockery of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves" (LOTR, p. 474).
"The Shadow that bred them can only mock, it cannot make" (LOTR, p. 893).

Martin Luther conveys both evil's power and its weakness in his great hymn:

For still our ancient foe

Doth seek to work us woe.

His craft and power are great

And, armed with cruel hate,

On earth is not his equal.

Did we in our own strength confide,

Our striving would be losing,

Were not the right Man on our side,

The Man of God's own choosing.

Dost ask who that may be?

Christ Jesus, it is He!

Lord Sabaoth His name.

From age to age the same

And He must win the battle.

For though this world, with devils filled,

Should threaten to undo us,

We will not fear, for God has willed

His truth to triumph through us.

The prince of darkness grim,

We tremble not for him.

His rage we can endure.

For lo, his doom is sure.

One little word shall fell him.

That Word, above all earthly powers

—no thanks to them—abideth.

The Spirit and the gifts are ours

Through Him who with us sideth.

Let goods and kindred go,

This mortal life also.

The body they may kill;

God's truth abideth still.

His kingdom is forever.

And "in the end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing: there was light
and beauty for ever beyond its reach" (LOTR, p. 901).

"Only a small and passing thing"? But this Shadow is Satan, the one who
succeeded in killing God for three days! Who but a Christian could possibly
plumb the depths of evil, and therefore, by hard-won right, of good—as in
Corrie Ten Boom's shattering confession in The Hiding Place from the
antechambers of Hitler's Mordor in Ravensbrook: "This darkness is very deep,
but our God has gone deeper still. When you have been to Calvary, even
Ravensbrook looks small."

One reason the powerful Ring makes you weak rather than strong is terrifyingly
relevant to our own lives, dependent as they are on our many smaller rings of
technologies. (Are we sure there is no one ruling Ring behind them all?)
Tolkien explains:

The Ring of Sauron is only one of the various mythical treatments of the
placing of one's life, or power, in some external object [technically, this is
"fetishism"—note that it is nearly identical with technologism!], which is thus
exposed to capture or destruction with disastrous results to oneself. If I were
to "philosophize" this myth, or at least the Ring of Sauron, I should say it
was a mythical way of representing the truth that potency if it is to be
exercised, and produce results, has to be externalized and so as it were
passes, to a greater or less degree, out of one's direct control. A man who
wishes to exert "power" must have subjects, who are not himself. But he then
depends on them (Letters, no. 211, p. 279).

This is an example of Hegel's famous "master—slave dialectic": the slave does
not need or depend on his master, but the master needs and depends on his
slave; therefore the master is really the slave to his slave or, rather, to his
own need for his slave, while the slave is free.

We do not have slaves because we have substitutes for them: machines. The
Industrial Revolution made slavery inefficient and unnecessary. But our
addiction is the same whether the slaves are made of flesh, metal, or plastic.
We have done exactly what Sauron did in forging the Ring. We have put our power
into things in order to increase our power. And the result is, as everyone
knows but no one admits, that we are now weak little wimps, Shelob's slaves,
unable to survive a blow to the great spider of our technological network. We
tremble before a nationwide electrical blackout or a global computer virus.
Only hillbillies and Boy Scouts would survive a nuclear war. In our drive for
power we have deceived ourselves into thinking that we have become more
powerful when all the time we have been becoming less. We are miserable little
Nietzsches dreaming we are supermen. For in gaining the world we have lost our
selves.

Who dares tell such a "reactionary" truth today? Tolkien does, like the little
boy in "The Emperor's New Clothes". And we can't help listening to the prophet
when he says, "You can't fight the Enemy with his own Ring without turning into
an Enemy; but unfortunately Gandalf's wisdom seems long ago to have passed with
him into the True West" (Letters, no. 81, p. 94).

This is why we never see Sauren's face in The Lord of the Rings. It is because
we do not see our own. We have forged a Ring. Ours is not the supernatural
technology of Sauron's magic but natural technology. But, though the means are
different, they serve the same end.

And the critics call this "escapist fantasy"!

