# 2 - 2.1 Does God exist?
[Metadata]: # {03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 2.1 Does God exist?
The question of whether God really exists is obviously one of the most
interesting and important questions in the world for most people, especially
for most philosophers. For God's existence or nonexistence makes a difference
to everything, since "God" means "the creator and designer and therefore the
ultimate explanation for everything". Conversion from atheism to theism, or
vice versa, always makes the greatest difference to everything in any person's
life.

That includes atheists. Some atheists, including Friedrich Nietzsche and
Sartre, are clearer than most theists about God's existence or nonexistence
making a total difference to everything. We never appreciate a person so much
as when he dies; and Nietzsche applies this to God, who according to Nietzsche
is now dead (i.e., the illusion, the faith in God, is dead). The result is that
we now feel like a planet detached from its sun, spinning into outer darkness
(Nietzsche's image from The Joyful Wisdom). For Sartre, the difference God's
nonexistence makes is that there can be no eternal truth because there is no
divine mind to think it, no objectively real universal moral law because there
is no divine will to command it, and no real meaning or purpose to human life
because there is no Author to design it (see Sartre's Existentialism and Human
Emotions).

So the answer to the critic who claims Tolkien never brings God into The Lord
of the Rings is that He is never out of it. Every one of these fifty
philosophical questions would have been answered differently if Tolkien had not
believed in God. Can you imagine Sartre or Camus or Beckett writing The Lord of
the Rings?

God is in The Silmarillion explicitly, right from sentence one, as the single
Creator, Iluvatar (All-Father). But how is He in The Lord of the Rings? Not as
a named character, but as the sun is in sunlight. Those with eyes to see can
detect His presence everywhere.

Take the Elves, and their songs and their gifts. (I highly recommend you do!)
They come from the Blessed Realm, transcendent to Middle-earth, and they
"smell" of their origin, trailing clouds of glory. We do not see that origin
but we see its effects in Middle-earth, even in natural things ("the heavens
declare the glory of God")—for instance, the "light and high beauty" that Sam,
stuck in the slag heap of Mordor, suddenly sees in that star whose beams pierce
not just his eye but his soul (LOTR, p. 901).

Both atheism and orthodox Jewish, Christian, or Muslim theism are sharp and
demanding, often distressing. But many people prefer something in the muddled
middle, some compromise that will avoid the demands of both traditional theism
and atheism. Increasingly in the West this generic religiosity, or
"spirituality", is replacing specific, revealed religion. Bookstores usually
have sections on "spirituality" or "New Age" that are much larger than their
sections on Christianity.

This newly popular religion is really pantheism. C. S. Lewis explains the
difference between pantheism and theism strikingly:

[T]here are things which God is not. In that sense He has a determinate
character. Thus He is righteous, not a-moral; creative, not inert. The Hebrew
writings here observe an admirable balance. Once God says simply I AM,
proclaiming the mystery of self-existence. But times without number He says, "I
am the Lord"—I, the ultimate Fact, have this determinate character and not
that. And men are exhorted to "know the Lord," to discover and experience this
particular character. . . .

The Pantheist's God does nothing, demands nothing. He is there if you wish for
Him, like a book on a shelf. He will not pursue you. There is no danger that at
any time heaven and earth should flee away at His glance. If He were the truth,
then we could really say that all the Christian images of kingship were a
historical accident of which our religion ought to be cleansed. It is with a
shock that we discover them to be indispensable. You have had a shock like that
before, in connection with smaller matters—when the line pulls at your hand,
when something breathes beside you in the darkness. So here; the shock comes at
the precise moment when the thrill of life is communicated to us along the clue
we have been following. It is always shocking to meet life where we thought we
were alone. "Look out!" we cry, "it's alive!" And therefore this is the very
point at which so many draw back—I would have done so myself if I could—and
proceed no further with Christianity. An "impersonal God"—well and good. A
subjective God of beauty, truth and goodness, inside our own heads—better
still. A formless life-force surging through us, a vast power which we can
tap—best of all. But God Himself, alive, pulling at the other end of the cord,
perhaps approaching at an infinite speed, the hunter, king, husband—that is
quite another matter. There comes a moment when the children who have been
playing at burglars hush suddenly: was that a real footstep in the hall? There
comes a moment when people who have been dabbling in religion ("Man's search
for God"!) suddenly draw back. Supposing we really found Him? We never meant it
to come to that! Worse still, supposing He had found us? (Miracles, pp. 87-88,
93-94).

No human author in history has ever successfully portrayed God as a dramatic
character. Only the Bible did that; and even there, the Old Testament did it
with necessary anthropomorphic inadequacies. But in the New Testament the
problem of anthropomorphism is overcome in the most dramatic possible way: God
becomes a man, and a man is the one thing impossible to anthropomorphize.

Jesus is certainly a dramatic character. In fact, C. S. Lewis says that
everyone who has ever read the Gospels, Plato, and James Boswell will recognize
three characters in Heaven: Jesus, Socrates, and Samuel Johnson. But the
dramatic character of Jesus is not man's fiction but God's fact. The
impossibility of Jesus being a human invention has been a powerful argument for
the truth of the Gospels to readers with literary and psychological
imagination, like Dostoyevski (this is Dmitri Karamazov's argument) and
Kierkegaard (see the last two paragraphs of the first two chapters of
Philosophical Fragments).1

No human author, after the Gospels, has ever successfully portrayed Jesus as a
convincing dramatic character. There are only two possible exceptions. One of
them is Dostoyevski, in "The Grand Inquisitor", where Christ speaks not one
single word. The other is C. S. Lewis, in the Narnia chronicles. Aslan must be
Lewis's supreme literary achievement. I know of no other human author who has
accomplished what Lewis did: he enabled his readers to experience Christ, to
feel toward Aslan as Christ's contemporaries did to Him. How did he do this? By
the power of fantasy, which allowed a double distancing: making Christ a lion,
not a man, and putting Him in Narnia, not earth.

Tolkien does not portray God in The Lord of the Rings, as he does in The
Silmarillion; and he writes of times long before the Incarnation, so there is
no portrayal of Christ. But there are Christ figures, as we shall see in the
end (see Chapter 14). In fact, there are Christ figures everywhere in
literature and life. This should not surprise us. For Christ was not an
emergency afterthought or a freak from outer space, but the central point of
the whole human story from the beginning in the Mind of its Author. In fact,
Christ is the Mind of the Author, the inner Word of God, the Logos.

