# 3 - 3.3 Could there be creatures between men and angels, such as Elves?
[Metadata]: # {04.04}
[Descriptor]: # {04.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 3.3 Could there be creatures between men and angels, such as Elves?
One reason Tolkien did not bring the Valar (angels) more directly into The Lord
of the Rings is that they would have "lowered" the Elves, made them less
distinguishable from Men, less awesome, less like angels. For Elves are
semiangelic beings in The Lord of the Rings, both in themselves and to us. In
themselves because they are semi-immortal; to us because when we look at them
we look in the direction of the angels, just as when a crab looks up from the
bottom of a pool at the fish swimming near the water's surface it looks in the
direction of the birds, air, and light.

Elves are not, like the Ainur, pure spirits that can assume bodies as we assume
clothing. Nor are they mortals like us. Their bodies are immortal as long as
the matter of the world lasts, and if their bodies are killed in Middle-earth,
their spirits return to the Halls of Mandos and are given new bodies by
reincarnation.

Tolkien writes, "The Elves represent . . . the artistic, aesthetic, and purely
scientific aspects of the Humane [sic] Nature raised to a higher level than is
actually seen in Men" (Letters, no. 181, p. 236). The movie has them fight
alongside Men (and Dwarf) at Helm's Deep—a legitimate extension of the
friendship between Legolas and Gimli—to show the alliance of all the good
species and the involvement of all in the spiritual warfare that is the main
theme of history.

One reason both Elves and Dwarves are so common in pre-modern literature is
that they represent, roughly, the spiritual and the physical, soul and body,
angel-like and animal-like halves of human nature. In The Lord of the Rings,
however, the contrast is more between Elves and Hobbits, who are neither
artists nor scientists nor seers, but humble, earthy, "bourgeois",
creature-comfort-loving homebodies. An author succeeds if we recognize parts of
ourselves in each character; but Tolkien aims higher: we recognize parts of
ourselves in each species.

Elves and fairies are not quite synonymous, but they are overlapping; and when
Tolkien writes the most insightful essay ever written about fairy tales, he is
writing about Elves. Indeed, he makes the connection explicitly:

"Faerian Drama"—those plays which according to abundant records the elves have
often presented to men—can produce Fantasy with a realism and immediacy beyond
the compass of any human mechanism. As a result their usual effect (upon a man)
is to go beyond Secondary Belief [literary belief]. If you are present at a
Faerian drama you yourself are, or think that you are, bodily inside its
Secondary World [as the four Hobbits felt at Tom Bombadil's house in The
Fellowship of the Ring, chap. 7]. . . . To the elvish craft, Enchantment,
Fantasy aspires, and when it is successful of all forms of human art most
nearly approaches ("On Fairy-Stories", pp. 51-53).

Here is the clue that solves the great Tolkien puzzle. The puzzle is why, of
all humans who ever took pen to paper, Tolkien has produced by far the most
convincing, desirable, beautiful, believable, and awesome Elves. And the answer
is that he must have been an Elf. Or at least he had Elf blood somewhere in his
ancestry. For if any work of literature in the history of the world is a
"Faerian drama", it is The Lord of the Rings.

The existence of Elves, or something like Elves, is widespread in pre-modern
cultures. (And over half of the world's most literate nation, Iceland, still
believes in them; that's why their wilderness roads take sudden turns, to avoid
disturbing them.) When the word is used today, most people snicker. But most
pre-modern accounts are far more angelic, more transcendent, more wonderful,
more formidable, than the silly Tinkerbells of modern literature.

Tolkien writes that "they represent really Men with greatly enhanced aesthetic
and creative faculties, greater beauty and longer life, and nobility—the Elder
Children, doomed to fade before the Followers" (Letters, no. 144, p. 176).
Nobility, but not perfection. In The Silmarillion, the Elves' history, like
ours, is mainly war, tragedy, and darkness. They envy us our mortality, as we
envy them their immortality. (Envy is one of the stupidest of sins, the only
one that never caused a single moment of even false joy.) Though Tolkien is
both temperamentally and ideologically conservative, the Elves are bad
conservatives: they want to embalm the present. Seeing the downward slant of
the present, they try to preserve the past. They are not evil like Sauron, who
always wants to sing "I Did It My Way", but they are foolish because they sing
"I Believe in Yesterday". We too are foolishly Elvish when we want to hold onto
our youth, or the initial experience of falling in love, or when we seek the
enoughness of eternity that we all innately long for in places where it can
never be, somewhere in time.

The same philosophical arguments for the existence of angels that we saw C. S.
Lewis use (see section 3.1) could also be used as probable arguments for the
possible existence of Elves or other species between the human and the angelic.

Though C. S. Lewis never wrote about Elves as such, either in his fiction or in
his nonfiction, he did nicely summarize what humanity has thought of them in
The Discarded Image, in the chapter on the Longaevi, or longlivers (pp.
122-38):

Their unimportance is their importance. They are marginal, fugitive creatures.
. . . Herein lies their imaginative value. They soften the classic severity of
the huge [cosmic] design. They intrude a welcome hint of wildness and
uncertainty into a universe that is in danger of being a little too
self-explanatory, too luminous. . . .

There was sufficient belief to produce rival theories of their nature; . . .

(1) That they are a third rational species distinct from angels and men. . . .

(2) That they are angels, but a special class of angels who have been, in our
jargon, "demoted". . . .

(3) That they are the dead, or some special class of the dead. . . .

(4) That they are fallen angels; in other words, devils. . . .

No agreement was achieved. As long as the Fairies remained at all they remained
evasive.4

