# 4 - 4.1 Is nature really beautiful?
[Metadata]: # {05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 4.1 Is nature really beautiful?
Unlike much science fiction, fantasy uses realistic settings. Middle-earth is
our earth. It is not a never-never land, or even another planet. It is not a
different place, only a different time. The setting of Tolkien's fantasies is
literally real.

One of the main uses of fantasy, Tolkien says, in "On Fairy-Stories", is
"recovery", the ability to see the natural world more clearly by dipping it in
myth and strangeness—like Chesterton's story (that he never wrote) of the
English yachtsman who lost his way in a fog and discovered England, thinking it
was a wild, faraway island with the most unbelievably exotic inhabitants and
habits. Chesterton wrote:

The fairy-tale philosopher is glad that the leaf is green precisely because it
might have been scarlet. He feels as if it had turned green an instant before
he looked at it. He is pleased that snow is white on the strictly reasonable
ground that it might have been black. Every colour has in it a bold quality as
of choice; the red of garden roses is not only decisive but dramatic, like
suddenly spilt blood.1

Tolkien probably had this passage in mind, at least unconsciously, when he
wrote,

[W]e need recovery. We should look at green again, and be startled anew (but
not blinded) by blue and yellow and red. . . . Recovery... is a
re-gaining—regaining of a clear view. . . "seeing things as we are (or were)
meant to see them"—as things apart from ourselves. . . . We need ...to clean
our windows; so that the things seen clearly may be freed from the drab blur of
triteness. . . . This triteness is really the penalty of "appropriation": . . .
we laid hands on them, and then locked them in our hoard, acquired them, and
acquiring, ceased to look at them ("On Fairy-Stories", pp. 5-8).

In other words, we need to return to the classical priority of contemplation
over action.

"Recovery" of a clear view of nature (the cosmos) is one of the primary
purposes of fantasy, according to Tolkien:

Fantasy is made out of the Primary World, but a good craftsman loves his
material. . . . By the forging of Gram cold iron was revealed; by the making of
Pegasus horses were ennobled. . . .

It was in fairy-stories that I first divined the potency of words, and the
wonder of the things, such as stone, and wood, and iron; tree and grass; house
and fire; bread and wine (ibid., p. 59).

There is a point Tolkien makes later in "On Fairy-Stories" that may seem to be
a point about epistemology, or theory of knowledge (see chap. 6), but it is
really a point about cosmology. It is the point that although fantasy is
creative, it is also realistic; its truth conforms to the real world rather
than (re-)creating it. It is therefore a rational activity, in the ancient,
deeper, more basic meaning of "rational" (knowing reality). (We tend to mean by
"rational" only "logical".) Since fantasy is rational, and since the cosmos is
really full, fantasy too is full. Fantasy is a flight to reality.

The keener and the clearer is the reason, the better fantasy will it make. If
men were ever in a state in which they did not want to know or could not
perceive truth (facts or evidence), then Fantasy would languish until they were
cured. . . .

For creative Fantasy is founded upon the hard recognition that things are so in
the world as it appears under the sun; on a recognition of fact, but not a
slavery to it. . . . If men really could not distinguish between frogs and men,
fairy-stories about frog-kings would not have arisen (ibid., pp. 54-55).

One could even say that of the five aspects of a story—plot, characters,
setting, style, and theme—it is the setting that is the most important in The
Lord of the Rings. The real "hero" of The Lord of the Rings is Middle-earth
itself! There are many detailed descriptions of topography that Tolkien learned
to love on his many walking tours with the Inklings. This is why the maps are
so important. Tolkien says, "I wisely started with a map, and made the story
fit. . . . The other way about lands one in confusions . . . it is weary work
to compose a map from a story" (Letters, no. 144, p. 177).

As the Elves are central in The Silmarillion, Hobbits are central in The Lord
of the Rings: thus the greater importance of the natural setting in The Lord of
the Rings. For Hobbits are far closer to nature than Elves or Men. They even
live in the earth, in holes, a natural symbol for the depth of their
earthiness.

Elves, though more transcendent to material nature than Men, are at the same
time closer to it.

The Ents are the closest of all to nature. In fact, Tolkien makes nature itself
live in the Ents. In Tolkien's world, nothing in nature is dead but all is
alive, so much so that modern readers will call this cosmos "magical". A better
word is "biblical". In Tolkien's cosmology, the earth as well as the heavens is
not dumb but declares the glory of God.

C. S. Lewis had the same appreciation of nature's beauty and potency to reveal
her Creator: "Any patch of sunlight in a wood will show you something about the
sun which you could never get from reading books on astronomy. These pure and
spontaneous pleasures are 'patches of Godlight' in the woods of our experience"
(Letters to Malcolm, p. 91).

