# 7 - 7.2 Is the past (tradition) a prison or a lighthouse?
[Metadata]: # {08.02}
[Descriptor]: # {08.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 7.2 Is the past (tradition) a prison or a lighthouse?
Humility entails learning from others. Learning from others entails respect for
tradition, for tradition is simply learning from dead others. As Chesterton
famously said, tradition is "the democracy of the dead".

The two commonest alternatives in the philosophy of history are traditionalism
or radicalism, conservatism or progressivism—to focus primary attention on
learning from the past or planning for the future. Tolkien is a conservative.
All pre-modern societies were. Perhaps most of the masses in many modern
societies still are. Their common sense will not let them believe that it is
more important to invent new things than to use and enjoy the ones we already
have. Most people are bourgeois, most people are Hobbits, most people are
conservatives. But the teachers, the intellectuals, are massively progressives.
That is part of the reason for Tolkien's great unpopularity among the critics
and his great popularity among their pupils, the masses, who have been deprived
of this gospel of the goodness of tradition by their teachers.

There are many meanings to the concept "modern", but common to all of them is
the opposition to tradition, the sense that the wisdom of the past has
dissipated like a rainbow, the sense that (as Karl Marx put it) "all that is
solid melts into air." Tolkien refutes this with a book that makes even its
critics marvel at the solidity of Middle-earth and of its history and
traditions.

The basic argument for tradition is simply that it works. It works in The Lord
of the Rings, over and over again. There are many close calls and dangerous
turns in the plot, and most of them would not have been negotiated successfully
if the protagonists had not known and followed tradition. They remember
something their enemies forget.

It is almost always words. Often it is a proverb or riddle or poem. To a
culture that scorned tradition, Tolkien offers an epic that exalts linguistic
traditions, which were not only his professional specialty, but his love.

There are more than five hundred references in The Lord of the Rings to the
past two ages of Middle-earth. Clyde Kilby counts six hundred in The Lord of
the Rings and The Hobbit together.3 Tolkien's heroes are humble and therefore
look to the past, to the wisdom they had been given. His villains and fools are
proud and therefore scorn tradition and look only within themselves for their
wisdom.

Tolkien is implicitly asking his readers, his culture, to remember their links
with their own ancient wisdoms—pagan, Jewish, and Christian. Few lessons,
however indirectly taught, could be more socially relevant than this one, for
tradition means linking, unifying over time; and no community can exist without
common unity over time as well as place. A generation gap destroys a community
more surely than a war.

Most people are traditionalists and thus sympathize with a passage like this:

The notion that motor-cars are more "alive" than, say, centaurs or dragons is
curious; that they are more "real" than, say, horses is pathetically absurd. .
. .

I do not think that the reader or the maker of fairy-stories need ever be
ashamed of the "escape" of archaism. . . . For it is after all possible for a
rational man, after reflection, ... to arrive at the condemnation ... of
progressive things like factories, or the machine-guns and bombs that appear to
be their most natural and inevitable, dare we say "inexorable," products ("On
Fairy-Stories", pp. 80-82).

C. S. Lewis too was a conservative and called progressivism "the vulgarest of
all vulgar errors, that of idolizing as the goddess History what manlier ages
belaboured as the strumpet Fortune".4

Progressivism is "chronological snobbery", he wrote,

the uncritical acceptance of the intellectual climate common to our own age and
the assumption that whatever has gone out of date is on that account
discredited. You must find why it went out of date. Was it ever refuted (and if
so by whom, where, and how conclusively) or did it merely die away as fashions
do? If the latter, this tells us nothing about its truth or falsehood
(Surprised by Joy, pp. 207-8).

Progressivism is arrogant, for we know the past far better than we know the
future: "We have no notion what stage in the journey we have reached. Are we in
Act I or Act V? Are our present diseases those of childhood or senility? . . .
A story is precisely the sort of thing that cannot be understood until you have
heard the whole of it" (Christian Reflections, p. 106).

Tolkien's traditionalism, with all its dependence on the past, does not make
the mistake of ignoring the future. In fact, the main reason for tradition is
to guide the future. It is not even accurate to say that Tolkien's heroes
balance their traditionalism with a sense of responsibility for the future, as
if the two things were opposites. For listening to the past and responsibility
for the future are two sides of the same coin.

