# 6 - 6.3 Is faith (trust) wisdom or ignorance?
[Metadata]: # {07.04}
[Descriptor]: # {07.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 6.3 Is faith (trust) wisdom or ignorance?
The Lord of the Rings never shows us a choice for or against any explicitly
religious or supernatural faith. But it shows us many choices for or against
natural faith as a way of knowing.

It is the Hobbits who best exemplify the epistemological virtue of faith
because of their humility. Humility is not only a moral virtue but an
epistemological virtue too. The Hobbits show this virtue because they are
relatively innocent and childlike (and sometimes even childish, which is not a
virtue); and this apparent weakness, surprisingly, is their strength—as
Gandalf, alone among the great Wizards, sees (LOTR, p. 264). Sauron and Saruman
both discount the Hobbits, to their peril. Both have their kingdoms destroyed
by the work of the Hobbits!

Jesus makes childlike trust the prerequisite for entering His kingdom: "Unless
you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven"
(Mt 18:3). Tolkien says something similar:

There is a truth in Andrew Lang's words (sentimental though they may sound):
"He who would enter into the Kingdom of Faerie should have the heart of a
little child." For that possession is necessary to all high adventure, into
kingdoms both less and far greater than Faerie. But humility and
innocence—these things "the heart of a child" must mean in such a context—do
not necessarily imply an uncritical wonder, nor indeed an uncritical tenderness
("On Fairy-Stories", p. 43).

Faith is not foolish or irrational.

C. S. Lewis's essay "On Obstinacy in Belief" is the clearest rational
justification I know of faith as a way of reliable knowing that goes beyond
reason but yet is perfectly reasonable. It is the answer to those who would
criticize Tolkien or his heroes for being naive and irrational for trusting:

[T]he scientist thinks it his duty to proportion the strength of his belief
exactly to the evidence; to believe less as there is less evidence and to
withdraw belief altogether when reliable adverse evidence turns up.... [This is
called "Clifford's Rule" in philosophy.]

If, for the first time, a doubt of his wife's fidelity crosses the scientist's
mind, does he consider it his duty at once to entertain this doubt with
complete impartiality, at once to evolve a series of experiments by which it
can be tested, and to await the result with pure neutrality of mind? . . .

There are times when we can do all that a fellow creature needs only if he will
trust us. In getting a dog out of a trap, in extracting a thorn from a child's
finger, in teaching a boy to swim or rescuing one who can't, in getting a
frightened beginner over a nasty place on a mountain, the one fatal obstacle
may be their distrust. We are asking them . . . to accept apparent
impossibilities: that moving the paw farther back into the trap is the way to
get it out—that hurting the finger very much more will stop the finger
hurting—that water which is obviously permeable will resist and support the
body—that holding onto the only support within reach is not the way to avoid
sinking—that to go higher and onto a more exposed ledge is the way not to fall.
To support all these incredibilia we can rely only on the other party's
confidence in us—a confidence certainly not based on demonstration. . . .

We are to God, always, as that dog or child or bather or mountain climber was
to us, only very much more so.... If human life is in fact ordered by a
beneficent being whose knowledge of our real needs and of the way in which they
can be satisfied infinitely exceeds our own, we must expect a priori that His
operations will often appear to us far from being beneficent and far from wise.
. . .

You are no longer faced with an argument which demands your assent, but with a
Person who demands your confidence . . . the assent, of necessity, moves us
from the logic of speculative thought into what might perhaps be called the
logic of personal relations (World's Last Night, pp. 13, 22-24, 26, 29-30).

