# 2 - 2.3 Are we both fated and free?
[Metadata]: # {03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 2.3 Are we both fated and free?
Closely connected to the idea of providence is the puzzle of free will and its
relation to fate, or destiny, or predestination. ("Destiny" seems the most
generic term, "fate" having more specifically pagan and "predestination" more
specifically Christian connotations.) It is one of the most obvious and most
often-asked questions in philosophy.

The Lord of the Rings is dense with destiny. Though the events are surprises to
the reader, as to the protagonists, they also form a pattern, and we eventually
see that they all "had" to happen that way. None of the endings, happy or sad,
are unconvincing, unnatural, or unbelievable (though they are unpredictable).
Sauron had to fall. At least some of the Hobbits had to rise to the heroic
occasion. Sacrifices had to be made. Battles had to be fought. And it was
predictable that the unpredictable would happen.

On the other hand, the protagonists make hundreds of free choices, some large,
some small; and even the small ones make large differences. For instance, just
one page after Frodo leaves Bag End, singing his Road song, he hears a horse on
the road. Apparently Gandalf is coming. But Frodo suddenly desires to hide. At
this point Frodo does not know the danger of the Black Riders; but had he not
hid, the Quest would have ended then and there. The Rider would have captured
Frodo and the Ring, delivered both to Sauron, and Middle-earth would have
become Hell on earth.

Nearly everyone believes in free will, at least until he meets arguments
against it, either from social scientists who claim that all our choices can be
explained by heredity plus environment, or from philosophers who begin with the
false assumption that a human choice must be either (2) caused, and thus
determined, and thus necessitated, and thus unfree, or else (2)free and thus
uncaused—but something uncaused is unintelligible. The answer to both is that
"free causality" is not a self-contradiction but a uniquely human kind of
causality.

We believe in free will because we directly experience it. We all know the
difference between being free and being forced. Sometimes a thing is in our
power or control, and sometimes not. There is also a middle case, when we are
at the mercy of a force but the force is internal, like an addiction. (This is
the case with the Ring.) It is our addiction, not another's, and if we had made
different free choices in the past, we might not have it; yet it removes our
freedom. Sometimes we freely sell ourselves into slavery.

But we also naturally believe in something like destiny. "It was meant to be",
we say. It is not so clear why we naturally believe this, but we do. Probably
because we unconsciously realize that the alternative is meaningless chaos, not
a story.

So we wonder how both can be true, since the two ideas seem to contradict each
other. Does destiny, or God, or fate pull my strings, or do I pull my own
strings with my free will?

There are good philosophical arguments for believing both, and for believing
that the two ideas do not contradict each other. I shall give two of them in a
moment. But the strongest, most convincing evidence comes not from philosophers
but from storytellers. Both of these ingredients, free will and destiny, are
always present in every successful story, every interesting story, every (and
this is the point) story we find realistic, "true to life". A story without
predestination means a story without an author, and that is a story without any
authority. But a story without free will, a story about machines or falling
raindrops, is not a story either. Every story has to have in it free persons
making free choices that they could have made differently—otherwise there is no
drama.

Every story has to have a plot, and thus a plotter, and thus destiny. Authors
can be bad plotters, plodding plotters, and their stories can turn out not just
sadly but badly. Authors can commit destiny fallacies just as philosophers can
commit logical fallacies. For instance, it is Ahab's destiny to be swallowed by
Moby Dick, and there would be a "destiny fallacy" if Ahab had listened to some
pop psychologist, been cured of his obsession, seen the error of his ways, and
become "Nice Captain Ahab"—just as there would be a "destiny fallacy" if
Scrooge had exorcised the Ghost of Christmas Future, put Bob Cratchit in the
poorhouse, and become the Godfather of the London Mafia.

We may not know how destiny and freedom can both be true, but we know that they
must both be present in true-to-life stories because they are both present in
life.

Sometimes philosophers can help. Here are two philosophical arguments to
explain how both of these ideas can be true without contradiction:

The first is the principle that divine grace, in dealing with anything in
nature, does not suppress or bypass its nature but perfects it and works
through it. (A human author does the same thing with his characters.)
Therefore, divine predestination preserves human free will, because God
invented it. As Aquinas says, man is free because God is all-powerful. For God
not only gets everything done that He designs, but also gets everything done in
the right way: subhuman things happen unfreely, and human things happen freely.
Just as in a novel, the setting is not free and the characters are.

The second philosophical argument (from Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy)
is that since God is not in time, destiny does not mean predestination, like
pushing dominoes. As usual, C. S. Lewis summarizes this point as clearly as
anyone has done:

God is not in Time.... He has all eternity in which to listen to the split
second of prayer put up by a pilot as his plane crashes in flames. . . .

God is not hurried along in the Time-stream of this universe any more than an
author is hurried along in the imaginary time of his own novel. He has infinite
attention to spare for each one of us. . . . You are as much alone with Him as
if you were the only being He had ever created. When Christ died, He died for
you individually just as much as if you had been the only man in the world. . .
.

[I]f God foresaw our acts, it would be very hard to understand how we could be
free not to do them. But suppose God is outside and above the Time-line. In
that case, what we call "tomorrow" is visible to Him in just the same way as
what we call "today." All the days are "Now" for Him. He does not remember you
doing things yesterday; He simply sees you doing them, because, though you have
lost yesterday, He has not. He does not "foresee" you doing things tomorrow; He
simply sees you doing them; because, though tomorrow is not yet there for you,
it is for Him. You never suppose that your actions at this moment were any less
free because God knows what you are doing. Well, He knows your tomorrow's
actions in just the same way—because He is already in tomorrow and can simply
watch you.4

