# 12 - 12.3 Can one go on without hope?
[Metadata]: # {13.04}
[Descriptor]: # {13.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 12.3 Can one go on without hope?
There are two kinds of hope, as there are two kinds of faith. One kind lives
only on the conscious surface of the self, in the feelings and the mind. This
kind often has to be killed in order for the deeper hope to emerge. The
Fellowship often has to do without this surface hope, especially after the loss
of Gandalf in Moria and when Frodo and Sam crawl through Mordor. But they
continue to act, to fight, to give every ounce of themselves because of a
deeper hope, which is much harder to identify or define. Let us look at these
two kinds of hope in the text.

Nearly every time Tolkien uses the word, he means surface hope, and when it
disappears, deep hope takes over and the result is not inaction or surrender
but total commitment to battle and action.

After Gandalf's death in Moria, Aragorn, now in command, says:

"Farewell, Gandalf!" . . . "Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of
Moria, beware? Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?"

He turned to the Company. "We must do without hope," he said (LOTR, p. 324).

When Frodo and Sam first approach the Black Gate, it seems absolutely hopeless
to try to sneak in past thousands of Orcs. But Frodo's

face was grim and set, but resolute. He was filthy, haggard, and pinched with
weariness, but he cowered no longer, and his eyes were clear. ". . . I purpose
to enter Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I do
not ask anyone to go with me."

...Sam said nothing. The look on Frodo's face was enough for him; he knew that
words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope in the
affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful Hobbit he had not needed hope,
as long as despair could be postponed. Now they were come to the bitter end.
But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had chiefly come
for, and he would still stick to him. His master would not go to Mordor alone.
Sam would go with him (LOTR, pp. 623-24).

An even more total despair settles upon the Fellowship outside the Black Gate.
For it seems the whole Quest has failed and Frodo and the Ring have been
captured when Sauron's messenger brings out Frodo's sword, cloak, brooch, and
mithril mail-shirt. "A blackness came over their eyes, and it seemed to them in
a moment of silence that the world stood still, but their hearts were dead and
their last hope gone" (LOTR, p. 871). Yet they do not yield, but fight to the
end. Pippin's last thought is: " 'So it ends as I guessed it would,' his
thought said, even as it fluttered away; and it laughed a little within him ere
it fled, almost gay it seemed to be casting off at last all doubt and care and
fear" (LOTR, p. 874).

Frodo and Sam also lose hope, yet continue to act, when approaching Mount Doom.
Frodo says to Sam, near the end,

"Lead me! As long as you've got any hope left. Mine is gone" (LOTR, p. 907).

"So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started," thought Sam; "to help
Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is the job then
I must do it." . . . But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to die, it was
turned into a new strength. Sam's plain hobbit-face grew stern, almost grim, as
the will hardened in him, and he felt through all his limbs a thrill, as if he
was turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither despair nor
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.

What is this deeper hope that emerges when all hope is gone? What is its
object?

It is not a feeling of optimism, a Mister Micawber philosophy of "something
will turn up." Quite the contrary. Galadriel warns Frodo, "[Y]our Quest stands
upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little, and it will fail, to the ruin of
all" (LOTR, p. 348). That hardly sounds like optimism.

It is certainly not calculation, not utility. In fact, it arises only when
calculation and utility fail. As Gabriel Marcel says, "While the structure of
the world we live in permits—and may even seem to counsel—absolute despair, yet
it is only such a world that can give rise to an unconquerable hope."3 So its
object is not the world as seen. Despair of that world seems to be the
precondition for hope in the deeper sense.

But hope's object is not miracle, and not (at least not explicitly) another
world that begins only after death, as a kind of compensation for loss in this
one. In this world, as Gandalf says, "The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning,
yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed" (LOTR, p.505).

Hope's object is persons, and their emeth, their trustworthiness, and the
trust, loyalty, and friendship between them. At first the hope of the
Fellowship is lodged in Gandalf—rightly, for he is really one of the Maiar, an
archangel sent to this world only to combat Sauron, as he reveals at the end
(LOTR, p. 950). Gandalf returns from death, like Christ, in the morning light
(even the "Easter" date is noted: March 1). If anyone else but Gandalf had sent
Frodo and Sam into Mordor on an apparently hopeless errand, no one could have
had hope for the errand. Hope for the task depends on trust in the taskmaster.

Hope's object is always a person, not an idea or ideal, not even the
fulfillment of the task. Frodo, in fact, loses hope in his task, but he still
has hope in Sam. Sam never did have much hope for the task; the object of his
deep hope is Frodo, and that hope is not disappointed. Even as they prepare to
die on Mount Doom, he is happy because his master is free.

Hope's object is always personal, but it is never one's self. Hope in one's
self is either foolish vanity or even more foolish pride. That is why even a
mere thing is a surer sign of hope than a person if the thing is outside
yourself and the person is yourself. Thus Sam's sighting of the star in Mordor
is, for me, the most moving passage in the entire book:

There, peeping among the cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains
Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as
he looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him. For like a
shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the end the Shadow was
only a small and passing thing: there was light and high beauty for ever beyond
its reach (LOTR, p. 901).

Hope is like the sky, unconquerable and spread over everything. Hope's object
is not limited to particulars; it is universal, it is the nature of things, it
is Being itself. Thus Marcel says,

To hope against all hope that a person whom I love will recover from a disease
which is said to be incurable is to say: It is impossible that I should be
alone in willing this cure; it is impossible that reality in its inward depth
should be hostile or so much as indifferent to what I assert is in itself a
good. It is quite useless to tell me of discouraging cases or examples: beyond
all experience, all probability, all statistics, I assert that a given order
shall be established, that reality is on my side in willing it to be so. I do
not wish: I assert; such is the prophetic tone of true hope (Philosophy of
Existentialism, p. 17).

Since (1) hope's object is always in the last analysis a person, not an
abstraction, and since (2) that object is also in the last analysis universal
and not particular, it follows that (3) that object must always, at least
implicitly and anonymously, be God, the only concrete universal, the only
Person ("I") who is also Being ("am").

Which brings us back to the traditional Christian labeling of hope as one of
the three theological virtues, that is, God-oriented virtues. We do not enter a
C. S. Lewis quotation on this topic here not because there is too little but
because there is too much. This is Lewis's most distinctive theme, and in light
of all that he has written about this: in his autobiography Surprised by Joy,
in the "Heaven" chapter in The Problem of Pain, in the Introduction to The
Pilgrim's Regress, in the "Hope" chapter in Mere Christianity, and in The
Weight of Glory, we need another whole book to begin to do it justice. I offer
you my own very feeble attempt to do just that: Heaven, the Heart's Deepest
Longing (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1981).

Instead, here is a single sentence from Lewis's autobiography, as a sort of
test: "It is more important that Heaven should exist than that any of us should
get there." If you understand this sentence (it may take years), you will
understand three things about this deep hope: why it comes when other hope
fails, why it is hope in what does not depend on yourself, and why it
nevertheless does not lead you to resignation and passivity but steels you for
action. All three effects flow from the same fact that, like charity, it
de-centers you from yourself.

