# 3 - 3.1 Are angels real?
[Metadata]: # {04.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 3.1 Are angels real?
Of all the divisions of philosophy in our outline, this one is certain to seem
the most surprising, suspicious, or even bizarre. Why?

Not because angels are not in themselves important enough to deserve a
philosophical science (angelology). For if they really exist, they are in many
ways to us what we are to animals: the next step up on the cosmic hierarchy,
immensely more intelligent, powerful, and beautiful than we are, the most
Godlike creatures that exist. And they make a far greater difference to our
lives than we suspect.

Angels are forgotten by modern philosophy not because they are unfashionable:
they are not unfashionable. They have returned to popular culture with an
exclamation point. But the wave of interest in them has not yet hit the beach
of philosophers.

Nearly every pre-modern culture has believed that something like angels
(superhuman spirits) exist and are prior to man both in rank and in time. We
find them at the beginning of the real world and also at the beginning of
Tolkien's fictional world in The Silmarillion. We also find them inspiring the
beginning of Tolkien's writing of this fictional world, during World War I,
when he was haunted by a single line in an eighth-century Anglo-Saxon poem by
Cynewulf entitled "Crist". The line was: "Hail Earendil, brightest of Angels,
Over Middle-earth sent unto men." Tolkien wrote, "I felt a curious thrill as if
something had stirred in me, half wakened from sleep. There was something very
remote and strange and beautiful behind those words, if I could grasp it, far
beyond the ancient English."1

The word "angel" means "messenger". It tells the angels' job description, not
their essence. As to their essence, the mainline Christian tradition says that
angels are pure spirits, with no kind of bodies, while a secondary tradition
says they have "spiritual bodies". Whichever of these is Tolkien's view, it is
clear that the angels in The Lord of the Rings (who are the Wizards, the
Istari) did not get their bodies from nature, from sex, or from parents. They
have no parents and no children.

In The Silmarillion the angels are named "the Ainur". Those who enter the
created world are called "the Valar". The lesser ranks of the Valar are the
Maiar. Some of the Maiar become Istari, or Wizards, like Gandalf. They are
guardian angels, and they carry out divine providence by guiding and guarding
man, just as in the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Scriptures and traditions. In
all three traditions, and in The Silmarillion, God creates angels before He
creates the material universe. But in The Silmarillion He then uses the angels
as instruments in creating the material world. This idea, while not part of the
mainline Christian tradition, is not heretical. It is a theologoumenon (a
possible theological opinion) that is found in some of the Church Fathers. And
it helps to solve a difficult aspect of the "problem of evil", the problem of
reconciling real evil with an all-good and all-powerful God. Moral evil can be
traced to human sin, but where did physical evils come from? If God entrusted
the shaping of the material world to angels, then since the fall of the angels
came before the fall of man, they may have had a hand in the world's "thorns
and thistles". Though most modern theologians do not even mention this
solution, C. S. Lewis refers to it respectfully in The Problem of Pain.

In The Silmarillion, the Ainur can put on human bodies as we put on clothes.
This is also a theologoumenon. Certain biblical passages seem to imply it: the
Nephilim in Genesis 6, the three angels eating Abraham's food in Genesis 19,
and Tobias being guided by the angel in disguise (Tobit 5-12).

In The Silmarillion,2 those Ainur who enter the world become the Valar, the
Powers of the World, and remain with it until the world's end. These, Tolkien
says, "Men have often called gods" (p. 25), thus offering a
more-than-psychological explanation for ancient polytheism.

Angels can bilocate. They can live both in Heaven and on earth at the same
time. The most important angel in The Lord of the Rings, next to Gandalf, is
Elbereth, who also bilocates, for she saves Frodo at the Ford of Bruinen and
again in Shelob's lair, but she is also Varda, Lady of the Stars.

The angels are the main protagonists of the first two parts of The Silmarillion
("Ainulindale" and "Valequenta"), the Elves are the main protagonists of most
of the rest of The Silmarillion, and Hobbits are the main protagonists of The
Lord of the Rings. But angels are certainly not absent from The Lord of the
Rings. The Wizards, including Gandalf and Saruman, are angels, of the lower
order of Maiar; Sauron and also the Balrogs are fallen, evil Maiar
(Silmarillion, p. 31); and Tom Bombadil and Goldberry are quite possibly the
Valar Aule and Yavanna (ibid., pp. 27-28, 39).

Tolkien and C. S. Lewis read their manuscripts aloud to each other at meetings
of the Inklings (an informal literary group) while Tolkien was working on The
Lord of the Rings and Lewis on his space trilogy. So there are bound to be many
influences, some conscious, some not. Decide for yourself, by instinct or your
innate "angel detector", how similar Lewis's angels are to Tolkien's. For
myself, I find no two writers' angels more compelling and believable.

Here is a philosophical argument for them (or against the prejudice against
them) from Lewis's Miracles:

The mere idea of a ...reality which is "supernatural" in relation to the world
of our five present senses but "natural" from its own point of view, is
profoundly shocking to a certain philosophical preconception. . . . [W]e are
prepared to believe either in a reality with one floor or a reality with two
floors, but not in a reality like a skyscraper with several floors. . . . That
is why many believe in God who cannot believe in angels and an angelic world. .
. . I cannot now understand, but I well remember, the passionate conviction
with which I myself once defended this prejudice. . . . Yet it is very
difficult to see any rational grounds for the dogma that reality must have no
more than two levels. There cannot, from the nature of the case, be evidence
that God never created and will never create, more than one system (Miracles,
pp. 153-55).

