# 8 - 8.2 Is beauty always good?
[Metadata]: # {09.02}
[Descriptor]: # {09.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 8.2 Is beauty always good?
In Greek there is a word (kalon) that means both "good" and "beautiful". This
is specified by another word, k'agathon, which is a contraction of to kalon kai
to agathon, "the good-and-beautiful". A great marriage! But in modern times,
the two are divorced: moral goodness becomes drab and beauty morally dangerous.
Spenser could still woo readers of his age by imaging Virtue as a beautiful
woman; but a century later Milton could not make people of our age love his God
more than his Satan. Aeschylus won civic honors (free room and board in the
Town Hall for life) with his religious dramas, but a modern poet is expected to
be a social rebel, live in poverty, go insane, and cut off his ear and send it
to his mistress.

Tolkien bewailed both the ugliness of his age and its separation between the
good and the beautiful. (See "On Fairy-Stories", p. 83 .)

But Beauty's moral danger seems to be not just in modern culture but in the
very nature of things. At all times and places the beauty of a Helen or a
Cleopatra has lured men to destruction. A beautiful face often masks an ugly
soul. And there have always been beautiful but wicked queens, like the White
Witch in Narnia or the Snow Queen in Hans Christian Andersen. And also the
reverse: someone like Strider, who seems foul yet feels fair, or like the
prophets; the hick town of Nazareth; the cold, dirty stable in Bethlehem; and
Calvary—why does God send His best gifts in such ugly wrappings?

The contrast between the good and the beautiful is not in the nature of things.
Only in a fallen world is beauty a temptation, or "vain" (see Prov 31:30); and
that is only because God trains us by what Lewis calls the Principle of "First
and Second Things" in the essay by that title (in God in the Dock, pp. 278-81).
Putting first things first is the key to the health of second things. Beauty is
a "second thing": it is very good, but not as good as moral goodness. And the
worship of "art for art's sake" will destroy not only true worship but also
art. An example of this Principle of "First and Second Things" in The
Silmarillion is Feanor, who puts his own greatest work of art, the Silmarils,
before his moral duty. He will not give up the jewels, just as in The Lord of
the Rings the proud will not give up the Ring. Feanor envies the Valar and
refuses his duty and his destiny—unlike Frodo. Even Niggle (Tolkien's gently
self-mocking self-portrait in "Leaf by Niggle") had to learn the principle that
art must be put second to morality, his painting second to his needy neighbor
(Parish).

But this way of putting it is misleading, as if beauty and goodness were
separate entities that could in principle clash. Rather, beauty is one of the
more important forms of goodness: beauty is very good. And goodness is the
highest form of beauty: the most beautiful thing in this world is a saint. Both
goodness and beauty are eternal and essential attributes of Ultimate Reality,
the One God, and therefore are ultimately one.

Beauty is the bloom on the rose of goodness and truth, the child conceived by
their union; and thus it is not only good but Heavenly. And while beauty cannot
of itself save us or substitute for either goodness or truth (contrary to
Keats's moving but muddled sentiment that "beauty is truth, truth beauty; that
is all you know on earth and all you need to know"), yet it contributes toward
the salvation of the creation. For it is the opposite of reductionism. In
Heaven the poets "shall have flames upon their heads".

We humans need beauty as well as morality in our lives. And the reason is that
we are made in God's image, and God is the most creative of artists. Tolkien
calls us subcreators and notes that "we make still by the law in which we're
made" ("On Fairy-Stories", p. 74).

The Principle of "First and Second Things" applies to the relation between
beauty and efficiency (a "Third Thing") as well as beauty and moral goodness (a
"First Thing"). Just as you lose beauty if you sacrifice morality for it, so
you lose efficiency if you sacrifice beauty for it—as Tom Shippey sagely points
out, commenting on "The Scouring of the Shire":

"This country wants waking up and setting to rights," says the leader of the
Hobbiton ruffians, as though he had some goal beyond mere hatred and contempt
for the Shire, and ... it seems to be more industrialization, efficiency,
economy of effort, all things often and still wished on the population of
Britain. The trouble with that (as developments after the publication of The
Lord of the Rings have tended to confirm), was that the products of
efficiency-drives were often not only soulless but also inefficient. Why do
Sharkey's men knock down perfectly satisfactory old houses and put up in their
place damp, ugly, badly-built, standardized ones? No one ever explains, but the
overall picture was one all too familiar to post-war Britons. . . . The
Sarumans of the world rule by deluding their followers with images of a
technological Paradise. ... But what one often gets (as has become only more
obvious since Tolkien's time) are the blasted landscapes of Eastern Europe,
strip-mined and polluted, and even ra-dioactive.4

Beauty can also be goodness's prophet (LOTR, p. 901).

