# 1 - 1.1 How big is reality?
[Metadata]: # {02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 1.1 How big is reality?
There are only three logically possible answers to this question.

The first is that "there are more things in heaven and earth (i.e., in reality)
than are dreamed of in your philosophies (i.e., in thought)." That was
Shakespeare's philosophy, as expressed by Hamlet to Horatio, who found it hard
to believe in ghosts. This is the philosophy of the poet and of the happy man,
for whom nature is a fullness, a moreness, and therefore wonderful. It is the
philosophy of all pre-modern cultures.

The second possible answer is that there are fewer things in reality than in
thought; that most of our thought is mere myth, error, convention, projection,
fantasy, fallacy, folly, dream, etc. This is the philosophy of the unhappy man,
the cynic, the pessimist: "Trust nobody and nothing." This philosophy is hardly
ever found in any pre-modern culture, except in a small minority.

The third possibility is that there are exactly the same number of things in
reality and in thought, that is, that we "know it all".

What difference does it make to your life which philosophy you believe?

It makes a total difference, a difference to absolutely every single thing in
your life. It colors everything. For if you believe the first philosophy, as
Shakespeare did, as Tolkien did, and as most pre-modern peoples did, then your
fundamental attitude toward all reality is wonder and humility. You are like a
small child in a large house. As Tolkien said in one of his letters, "You are
inside a very great story." You expect mysteries, you expect moreness: terrors
to stop your heart and joys to break it. Reality is big. I think of the simple,
haunting line in Ingmar Bergman's movie The Seventh Seal: "It is the Angel of
Death that's passing over us, Mia, it's the Angel of Death, the Angel of Death.
And he's very big." In this big world there may be not only things like
dragons, but even heroes.

The larger-than-life world is the one our ancestors lived in. Our culture's
greatest sadness is that we no longer live in this world. Tolkien's greatest
achievement is that he invites us to inhabit this world again. He shows us that
this world is our home. He even shows us heroism: he not only shows us heroes
but he also shows us that we ourselves believe in heroes. For after we have
read Tolkien's unashamedly heroic epic, we do not say, "Well, that was a
pleasant little escape from reality", but, "Hey! That was real!"

If you believe the second philosophy, that there are fewer things in Heaven and
earth than are dreamed of in our philosophies, then you are cynical, skeptical,
suspicious, bored, jaded, detached, ironic, and definitely non-heroic. You are
a reductionist: you reduce mystery to puzzle, love to lust, thought to
cybernetics, reasoning to rationalizing, ideals to desires, man to ape, God to
myth. In other words, you are a typically modern or post-modern man. (Is there
much of a difference?) You buy into the first step of the scientific method:
"Doubt everything that is not proved; treat every thought as guilty until
proved innocent, false until proved true." The older philosophy treated
thoughts as we treat people in court: innocent until proved guilty. (Compare
Socrates's method with Descartes's on this score.)

The third philosophy is rationalism, in fact, arrogant rationalism: Everything
in my thought is real, and everything real is in my thought. In ancient Greece
Parmenides said, "What is thought and what is real is the same", and in modern
Germany Hegel said, "The real is the rational and the rational is the real" but
I think only those with a divinity complex can actually believe that. And even
pantheists, who believe that the whole cosmos is only a thought or dream,
believe it is not our dream but God's, and therefore still "more", or
transcendent to our thoughtâ€”unless there is some confusion between us (or me)
and God, in which case a shrink or a smack will serve the soul better than a
syllogism.

Thomas Howard calls good fantasy a "flight to reality" because, though its
details are fictional, the nature of its world, its universal principles and
values, are true. Tolkien shows us the nature of the real world by his fantasy.
He is making a statement about reality, about being, about metaphysics when he
says:

The realm of fairy-story is wide and deep and high and filled with many things:
all manner of beasts and birds are found there; shoreless seas and stars
uncounted; beauty that is an enchantment, and an ever-present peril; both joy
and sorrow as sharp as swords. In that realm a man may, perhaps, count himself
fortunate to have wandered.1

The fundamental reason for the popularity of The Lord of the Rings is that
people sense it is real. No mere escape from reality can be voted "the greatest
book of the century".

And that is why Tolkien does not tell us half of what he knows about his world.
You can tell everything about your fantasies, your dreams, or your thoughts,
but not about anything real.

That is also why The Lord of the Rings bears endless rereading: it is heavy
enough to bear the mind's journeys into it, like our world. In fact, it is
perhaps the most "heavy", full, detailed, complex, real invented world in all
of human literature.

Tolkien himself tells us that he felt, in creating it, as we feel in reading
it: that it was discovered, not invented, that it had always been there, and it
was as much a surprise to Tolkien to discover it as it is to us: "I had the
sense of recording what was already 'there,' somewhere; not of 'inventing.'"2
Great authors often say that about the experience of writing their
masterpieces.

C. S. Lewis wrote from the same point of view:

We must not listen to [Alexander] Pope's maxim about the proper study of
mankind. "Know then thyself, presume not God to scan,/ The proper study of
mankind is man." The proper study of mankind is everything.

We should never ask of anything "Is it real?" For everything is real. The
proper question is, "A real what ?"3

