# INTRODUCTION
[Metadata]: # {01}
[Descriptor]: # {01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}
# INTRODUCTION
Oh, no! Not another book on Tolkien!

Why should you read this one?

Most of us can remember where we were when certain tragic historical events
occurred in America, such as 9/11, the Kennedy assassination, Pearl Harbor.

Most of us can also remember where we were when we first discovered The Lord of
the Rings.

We remember the excitement of discovery. Here was a world that was real—in
fact, more real, more solid than the one we left when we opened the covers of
that book. Those covers were magic doors, and we really walked through them
into Tolkien's world. They were not just windows to peer through, like cages at
a zoo. We were not tourists but natives. We knew this world. It was our own
world, seen more clearly than we had ever seen it before.

Exploring Tolkien's world was not just interesting (that all-purpose
meaningless euphemism). It was not even just fascinating. It was sheer joy. For
we knew that here we had touched truth. This book was a homecoming. This book
broke our hearts.

Subsequent readings confirmed the reality and truth of Tolkien's world, and joy
rose again like the sun. No one reads The Lord of the Rings only once; and that
is the clearest mark of a Great Book.

But when we read secondary sources, books about The Lord of the Rings, we do
not feel the same excitement of discovery, joy, and grateful wonder. We do not
smell the same sharp smell of truth, even when these books tell the truth. For
we do not want someone else to tell us what Tolkien told us. We do not want
summaries of Tolkien, we want Tolkien. We do not want books about Tolkien's
world, we want Tolkien's world.

This book is not about Tolkien's world. It is about Tolkien's worldview,
Tolkien's philosophy. Exploring that can be another adventure. For while this
philosophy is as much a part of Tolkien's world as its wars, its life forms,
its history, its beauties, and its terrors, the philosophy is not on the
surface, as are these other things, but hidden beneath it, or behind it, or
inside it, inside the things and events in the story. If The Lord of the Rings
were an allegory, the philosophy would be on the surface, like rocks. Instead,
it is more like the molten core of the earth: central but hidden.

Therefore this book can be a second adventure of discovery. After you read it,
you will know why you knew you had touched Truth when you first read The Lord
of the Rings.

Four different uses of this book

This book is four types of book in one.

First, it is a good read, and a voyage of discovery into the philosophical
heart of Middle-earth.

Second, it can be used as a research tool, a concordance. The philosophical
themes in The Lord of the Rings are outlined and organized into fifty
questions, accompanied by numerous references to the text of The Lord of the
Rings and to the three works of Tolkien's that form the most authentic
commentary on it: his essay "On Fairy-Stories", The Silmarillion, and The
Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien. (See pages 229ff.)

Researching is much more exciting than rehashing. I still remember the
excitement of first learning to use a concordance to study the Bible. I learned
far more from that than from any secondary sources. A concordance is like a
laboratory manual rather than a science textbook, or like a piece of sheet
music rather than a prerecorded CD, or like a cookbook rather than a plate of
leftovers. It is a road map for your own travels rather than a travel journal
recounting someone else's.

Third, this book can be used as an engaging introduction to philosophy. For
many of the great questions of philosophy are included in the fifty-question
outline, but not dressed in suits of armor, not in rigid definitions and
arguments abstracted from the field of battle.

If used in a philosophy class, I suggest using it in tandem with a classic
novel or poem that represents the most completely opposite philosophy, such as
Jean-Paul Sartre's Nausea, Albert Camus's The Stranger, Lucretius's On the
Nature of Things, B. F. Skinner's Walden Two, William Faulkner's The Sound and
the Fury, or Thomas Hardy's The Dynasts.

This book presents four tools for understanding each of the philosophical
issues The Lord of the Rings treats:

a. an explanation of the meaning and importance of the question;

b. a key quotation from The Lord of the Rings showing how Tolkien answered the
question (many more passages are given in the Concordance to The Lord of the
Rings in the Appendix);

c. a quotation from Tolkien's other writings (usually a letter) that explains
or comments on the theme in The Lord of the Rings;

d. a quotation from C. S. Lewis, Tolkien's closest friend, showing the same
philosophy directly stated.

Because present-day writers are limited in the extent to which they may quote
these writers, the reader will want to look up passages in their works that are
referred to in this book. All Tolkien references are to the one-volume American
edition (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1994) of The Lord of the Rings [LOTR].

The book can also be used to explore the very close parallel between Tolkien
and Lewis. Most of the parallels are not due to direct influence, either way,
but to a common familiarity with and respect for the same sources in the great
tradition, that is, pre-modern Western literature, philosophy, and religion.

G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were so close, in personal friendship, in
philosophical and religious belief, and in the common vocation of fighting a
common jihad against the modern world, that they were called "the Chesterbelloc
monster". We could with equal reason speak of "the Tolkie-lewis monster".

But Tolkien wasn't a philosopher!

"The philosophy of Tolkien"? Isn't that like "the politics of Chopin" or "the
theology of Euclid"? Tolkien was not a philosopher but a philologist.

True, Tolkien was not a professional philosopher—and probably neither are you.
But he had a very distinctive and definite philosophy, a world-and-life-view
(as the Germans say, a Weltanschauung and a Lebensschauung). And his philosophy
could not possibly be excluded from his life's work. Like religion, sex, age,
and race, philosophy permeates everything we do. A Hindu would have written a
very different Lord of the Rings than a Catholic. A woman would have written a
different Lord of the Rings than a man. A teenager would have written a
different Lord of the Rings than an adult. An Italian would have written a very
different Lord of the Rings than an Englishman. And it is equally certain that
a Marxist, a Cartesian rationalist, a Hegelian Idealist, a Nietzschean
nihilist, or (God help us!) a Derridadaist deconstructionist would have written
a very different Lord of the Rings than Tolkien did.

Philosophy is not confined to philosophers, thank God. Everyone has a
philosophy. As Cicero famously said, you have no choice between having a
philosophy and not having one, only between having a good one and having a bad
one. And not to admit that you have a philosophy at all is to have a bad one.
For it is one that does not know itself. So how could it know anything else,
especially us?

The greatness of The Lord of the Rings

The literary establishment in England was stunned, shocked, and scandalized by
an event of millennial significance when a major bookstore chain innocently
polled English-speaking readers, asking them to choose the greatest book of the
twentieth century. By a wide margin The Lord of the Rings won. Three times the
poll was broadened: to a worldwide readership, into cyberspace via Amazon.com,
and even to "the greatest book of the millennium". The same champion won each
time.

The critics retched and kvetched, wailed and flailed, gasped and grasped for
explanations. One said that they had failed and wasted their work of
"ed-u-ca-tion". "Why bother teaching them to read if they're going to read
that?"

The polls revealed one important thing about The Lord of the Rings: that it is
a classic, that is, a book loved by humanity, human nature, wherever it is
found. And they revealed one important thing about the critics: that humanity
isn't found in that arrogant oligarchy of utterly out-of-touch elitists. And
they revealed one important thing about our culture, the same thing revealed by
many polls that ask questions about values and about philosophy: that our
culture is not egalitarian at all, in fact, that it is perhaps the least
egalitarian culture in the history of the world. For in what other culture has
the worldview and life view of the teachers differed so radically from that of
the students?

Every human soul craves "the good, the true, and the beautiful" absolutely and
without limit. And it is precisely about these three most fundamental values
that the gap is the widest. Ordinary people still believe in a real morality, a
real difference between good and evil; and in objective truth and the
possibility of knowing it; and in the superiority of beauty over ugliness. But
our educators, or "experts" (Fr. Richard John Neuhaus calls them "the
chattering classes"), feel toward these three traditional values the way people
think medieval inquisitors felt toward witches. Our artists deliberately prefer
ugliness to beauty, our moralists fear goodness more than evil, and our
philosophers embrace various forms of post-modernism that reduce truth to
ideology or power.

So it is no surprise that in a culture in which philosophers scorn wisdom,
moralists scorn morality, preachers are the world's greatest hypocrites,
sociologists are the only people in the world who do not know what a good
society is, psychologists have the most mixed-up psyches, professional artists
are the only ones in the world who actually hate beauty, and liturgists are to
religion what Dr. Von Helsing is to Dracula—it is no surprise that in this
culture the literary critics are the last people to know a good book when they
see one.

So, what should we do about it? Just ignore them. That will do more to save
civilization than anything else you can possibly do (except becoming a saint).
It will also make them very angry, for, like teenagers, the critics' greatest
joy is to be shocking, and their greatest fear is to be ignored.





The Lord of the Rings is a touchstone. W H. Auden said, "If someone dislikes
it, I shall never trust [his] literary judgment about anything again."1 It is a
touchstone for more than literary judgment; it is a touchstone for one's whole
personality. Those who love Tolkien are almost always good people, honest
people. Some are Hobbit-like and some are Elvish, but none are Orcish. Not all
Tolkien haters are Orcs, but all Orcs are Tolkien haters.

But why did almost everyone else except the critics judge The Lord of the Rings
the greatest book of the century? I have not found a better answer to that
question than C. S. Lewis's review of the first volume:

Nothing quite like it was ever done before.... Probably no book yet written in
the world is quite such a radical instance of what its author has else where
called "sub-creation." . . . Not content to create his own story, he creates,
with an almost insolent prodigality, the whole world in which it is to move,
with its own theology, myths, geography, history, paleography, languages, and
orders of beings—a world "full of strange creatures beyond count." The names
alone are a feast. . . . You can hardly put your foot down anywhere ...without
stirring the dust of history. Our own world, except at certain rare moments,
hardly seems too heavy with its past. . . . This is surely the utmost reach of
invention, when an author produces what seems to be not even his own, much less
anyone else's. Is mythopoeia, after all, not the most, but the least,
subjective of activities?

This book is like lightning from a clear sky. . . here are beauties which
pierce like swords or burn like cold iron; here is a book that will break your
heart.

It is a master key; use it on what door you like. . . . As for escapism, what
we chiefly escape is the illusions of our ordinary life.

"But why," (some ask) "why, if you have a serious comment to make on this real
life of men, must you do it by [myth]?" Because, I take it, one of the main
things the author wants to say is that the real life of men is of that mythical
and heroic quality.... The value of the myth is that it takes all the things we
know and restores to them the rich significance which had been hidden by "the
veil of familiarity." The child enjoys his cold meat (otherwise dull to him) by
pretending it is buffalo, just killed with his own bow and arrow. And the child
is wise. The real meat comes back to him more savoury for having been dipped in
a story; you might say that only then is it the real meat. If you are tired of
the real landscape, look at it in a mirror. By putting bread, gold, horse,
apple, or the very roads into a myth, we do not retreat from reality: we
rediscover it. As long as the story lingers in our mind, the real things are
more themselves. This book applies the treatment not only to bread or apple but
to good and evil, to our endless perils, our anguish, and our joys. By dipping
them in myth we see them more clearly.

This book is too original and too opulent for any final judgment. . . . But we
know at once that it has done things to us. We are not quite the same men.2

The Lord of the Rings heals our culture as well as our souls. It gives us the
most rare and precious thing in modern literature: the heroic. It is a call to
heroism; it is a horn like the horn of Rohan, which Merry received from Theoden
and used to rouse the Hobbits of the Shire from their sheepish niceness and
passivity to throw off their tyrants, first in their souls and then in their
society.

The deepest healing is the healing of the deepest wound. The deepest wound is
the frustration of the deepest need. The deepest need is the need for meaning,
purpose, and hope. And that is what The Lord of the Rings offers us. As C. S.
Lewis said, "The most obvious appeal of the book is perhaps also its deepest:
'there was sorrow then too, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great
deeds that were not wholly vain.' Not wholly vain—it is the cool middle point
between illusion and disillusionment."3

Clyde Kilby tells us that "someone wrote me of a sixth-grade pupil who, after
reading The Lord of the Rings, had cried for two days. I think it must have
been a cry for life and meaning and joy from the wasteland."4

How its philosophy makes it great

Every story, long or short, has five dimensions. They are usually called its
(1) plot, (2) characters, (3) setting, (4) style, and (5) theme. We could call
them, respectively, the story's (1)work, (2)workers, (3)world, (4)words, and
(5) wisdom. "Philosophy" means "the love of wisdom". So a story's philosophy is
one of its five basic dimensions.

Which "dimension" sold The Lord of the Rings? All five. To be great, a work of
art must be great in not just one dimension but all, just as a healthy body
needs to be healthy in all its organs, a healthy soul in all its powers (mind,
will, and emotions), and a morally good act in all its dimensions (the deed,
the motive, and the circumstances).

A great story must have, first of all, a good plot, a great deed, a good work,
something worth doing. You cannot write a great story about saving a button on
a sweater and nothing more. You can, however, write a great story about saving
the world, which is what Tolkien did.

Second, a great story must also have great characters or at least one great
character (greatly drawn, at least) for readers to identify with, to find their
identity in. We become the characters—in spirit, in imagination. No story is
great unless it sucks us in, takes us up out of our bodies, and gives us an
out-of-body experience, an ek-stasis, standing outside yourself in another.
Great stories give us the grace of a mystical experience, on the level of the
imagination.

Nearly all of Tolkien's characters are identifiable-with, even Ents. Who would
have believed that any author could conjure up, in adult human beings, literary
belief in talking trees? And Hobbits: What other author has ever successfully
created a whole new species? And who else has ever given us more credible
Elves? We know these are the real Elves; we must have an innate Elf detector,
an innate Jungian archetype of true Elvishness. Even inanimate things—forests,
horns, swords—are characters with memorable, credible personalities.

Third, a great story also should have a great setting, an interesting world.
Sometimes it is a familiar part of this world, sometimes an unfamiliar part of
this world, and sometimes another world. The Lord of the Rings' setting is not
another world, but a historically unfamiliar portion of this world: its
mythical past. "Middle-earth" is an old name for "the third rock from the sun".

Sometimes, the setting is at a minimum (e.g., in The Three Musketeers: the
book, not the movie). Sometimes, it is at a maximum, when the setting is the
most memorable dimension of all (e.g., City of Joy: again, the book, not the
movie; or Hal Clement's sci-fi classic Mission of Gravity). The importance of
the setting varies with the genre. It is the most in epic and the least in
drama.

Many readers find the setting of The Lord of the Rings—Middle-earth itself—to
be its most captivating aspect. In America, legally, and also in Kazakhstan,
illegally, people come together to stage day-long outdoor reenactments of the
plot, using many acres of land, many characters in costumes (usually playing
multiple roles), weapons, battles, etc. This has never been done for Death of a
Salesman.

What of the fourth dimension, style? Sometimes a great story is told in a plain
style (e.g., the Koine Greek of Mark's Gospel), or even a bad style (e.g., the
fairy tales of George MacDonald). A great style can sometimes make up for a
small story (Sartre, Samuel Beckett, Ernest Hemingway, John Gardner, James
Stephens), but more often a bad style ruins a good story (Thomas Wolfe, Olaf
Stapleton, David Lindsay, even George MacDonald).

Even his most severe critics admit Tolkien's excellence in one aspect of style:
language, especially his proper names. Tolkien tells us that the whole of The
Lord of the Rings emerged from this preoccupation (The Lord of the Rings,
Introduction, p. xv).5

But surely the most valuable of all the gifts a story can give us is its fifth
dimension: its wisdom, its philosophy, its world-and-life-view, its insight
into ourselves and our lives and our world. Stories do not do this directly and
deliberately (as preaching does) or abstractly (as philosophy does), but they
do it. It is therefore perfectly proper to explore this crucial dimension, this
depth dimension of The Lord of the Rings, especially if The Lord of the Rings
is "the greatest book of the century" and this is, in some ways, the greatest
dimension of a book.

But it is only one dimension. This book is not about The Lord of the Rings but
only its philosophy. It therefore leaves out far more than it leaves in. Any
good book about a classic must do that, or it would be a classic itself. I
leave out such wonderful things as the fascinating yet familiar characters, the
elaborate yet satisfying plot, the realistic yet fantastic setting, the simple
yet archaic writing style, the historical revolution wrought by The Lord of the
Rings in the field of fantasy and in our society's attitude toward it, and
much, much more. The Lord of the Rings is a deep mine with many precious gems,
deep enough for many others to plumb to their hearts' content. But I am a
philosopher, and the search for wisdom is my quest.

Though Tolkien's philosophy can be gleaned from the story, the story is not
simply a vessel for philosophy. A true work of art, as opposed to a work of
propaganda, never is. But as a fruit of the imagination, The Lord of the Rings
is infused with the same light that illumined the man who wrote it. And that
light is true, for it reveals the reality of the world and life. And it is also
good, because it heals our blindness. Like the Fellowship itself, Tolkien's
philosophy fights. It conquers what George Orwell called the "smelly little
orthodoxies" of political correctness that have twisted and wounded our souls.
In other words, it is like the healing herb athelas (see LOTR, p. 193).

The relation between philosophy and literature

Philosophy and literature belong together. They can work like the two lenses of
a pair of binoculars. Philosophy argues abstractly. Literature argues too—it
persuades, it changes the reader—but concretely. Philosophy says truth,
literature shows truth.

For instance, a philosopher like Hegel may argue that each individual is
somehow responsible for all because society is a natural and organic whole, a
"concrete universal" with "internal relations". In The Brothers Karamazov,
however, Fyodor Dostoyevski not only has one of his characters (Father Zossima)
say this ("We are each responsible for all") but also has all the characters,
both good and evil, show it, live it, exemplify it. Sartre argues
philosophically that life is "absurd" in his brilliant but unreadable Being and
Nothingness, but he shows it dramatically in the novel Nausea and plays such as
No Exit.

God must have known that literature is a more effective teacher than
philosophy, for when He chose to teach mankind its most important theological
and moral lessons, He did so not primarily through abstract eternal truths but
through historical events, through acts. The Bible is primarily literature, not
philosophy; concrete, not abstract; narrative, not explanation. Its wisdom
literature, or philosophical books, are commentary on its historical books, in
both Testaments.

Human thought is both concrete (particular) and abstract (universal) at the
same time. We cannot think of abstract universals like "man" without imagining
some concrete, particular example of a man. Whenever we think of an abstract
universal, we have to use a particular concrete image. But the converse is also
true: whenever we recognize a concrete particular as intelligible and
meaningful, we use an abstract universal to classify it, to categorize it, to
define it: we see or imagine Joe as a man, not an ape. Unless, of course, we
are "educated" enough to treat abstractions as realities and join the ranks of
"the chattering classes", who can actually believe absurdities like duties to
abstractions like "humanity". But you need a Ph.D. to do that.

When you look through binoculars, you look through both lenses at once. Because
human thought is binocular, abstract philosophy and concrete literature
naturally reinforce each other's vision. Philosophy makes literature clear,
literature makes philosophy real. Philosophy shows essences, literature shows
existence. Philosophy shows meaning, literature shows life.

Allegory

It is not right to say that all literature illustrates a philosophy. The form
of literature that illustrates philosophy is allegory. In an allegory each
concrete thing means an abstract concept. In The Pilgrim's Progress, the
pilgrim is simply Everyman as pilgrim, and the giant Despair is simply despair.
Tolkien was not an allegorist, except once, in "Leaf by Niggle". He said, "I
cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so
since I grew old enough to detect its presence" (LOTR, p. xvii).

Literature incarnates philosophy. You actually see fate when you read Oedipus
Rex. You actually hear nihilism when you read Waiting for Godot. As the acts of
the body are the acts of the person, as a smile does not merely express
happiness (the nine-letter word does that) but actually contains it, so
literature actually contains or incarnates philosophical truths (or
falsehoods).

All literature incarnates some philosophy. Thus all literature teaches. In
allegory, the philosophy is taught by the conscious and calculating part of the
mind, while in great literature it is done by the unconscious and contemplative
part of the mind, which is deeper and wiser and has more power to persuade and
move the reader. Allegory engages only the mind, while great literature engages
the whole person; for allegory comes from only the mind, while great literature
comes from the whole person.

Literature not only incarnates a philosophy; it also tests it by verifying or
falsifying it. One way literature tests philosophy is by putting different
philosophies into the laboratory of life, incarnating them in different
characters and then seeing what happens. Life does exactly the same thing.
Literature also tests philosophy in a more fundamental way. It can be expressed
by this rule: a philosophy that cannot be translated into a good story cannot
be a good philosophy.

For instance, determinism, the philosophy that denies free will for the sake of
fate, is shown to be a bad philosophy by pitiful literary efforts to incarnate
it, like Skinner's Walden Two, and even by great but impossible efforts, like
Hardy's The Dynasts. But the mysterious interplay of fate and free will is the
stuff of all great literature (e.g., Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace and, of
course, The Lord of the Rings itself). The opposite philosophical error of
existentialist nihilism, which denies all fate or destiny and even purpose for
the sake of freedom, also has never been able to produce a great story. It can,
however, produce emotionally engaging ones, such as Camus's books The Stranger
and The Plague.

Actually, that is not quite accurate. I would argue that Camus implicitly
writes from a point of view that is on the way to theism. He at least wishes
and perhaps even hopes that there is a God, an Author, and thus a meaning and a
destiny to human life, even while he does not believe it—like his heroic
protagonist Dr. Rieux in The Plague, who lives and gives like a saint, yet does
not believe in God, and wonders how one can be a saint without God. A convinced
and settled atheist like Sartre would never take God seriously enough to invent
a Dr. Rieux—or, certainly, to be a person like Dr. Rieux.

The philosophy is in the point of view, and the point of view lies not in the
picture but in the frame. For example, a theistic frame, or point of view, is
present in Shakespeare's Macbeth and is deliberately removed in Faulkner's The
Sound and the Fury (the title refers to Macbeth's great "Tomorrow" speech).
Faulkner shows us what the world and life look like from the point of view of
Macbeth himself, a morally insane soul on his way to Hell. But when we read
Shakespeare we judge Macbeth to be insane from an implicitly higher point of
view, which "frames" the portrait of Macbeth.

Literature is judgmental. It could not be philosophical if it were not. Even
when it is nonjudgmental, it is judgmental, for nonjudgmentalism judges against
all judgmental systems. For instance, we judge Faust to be a wicked, damned
fool in Christopher Marlowe's version of the play, but not in Goethe's, for
Goethe does not believe the frame, which is Christianity. In Goethe the
opposite judgment is made: that Faust is a complete man, integrating his light
and dark sides, his God and his devil, by learning and growing from every
experience, even those experiences Catholics call mortal sins. His Nietzschean
"beyond good and evil" does not judge against evil, but it does judge against
something: against the Christian "judgmentalism", against the moral dualism
that judges against evil.

In an allegory, the philosophical frame becomes the story. The plot and the
characters are there only for that reason: they are used as means to illustrate
the philosophy. That is why we do not love the characters or care about them
much as individuals. They are lost in their archetypes. In non-allegorical
stories, the philosophy serves the story, as a frame serves a picture; in
allegory it is vice versa. Thus in non-allegory the story can test the
philosophy, since the story has priority, as data have priority over theory in
science.

I know The Lord of the Rings is not an allegory because I don't find myself
saying, of anything in it, "That reminds me of this or that", but I constantly
find myself saying, of this or that, "That reminds me of something in The Lord
of the Rings." In fact, almost everything reminds me of something in The Lord
of the Rings.

The philosophical themes

In outlining the themes, or kinds of questions, or basic divisions of
philosophy, I move from the more abstract and theoretical questions (e.g.,
those of metaphysics and theology) to the more concrete and practical ones
(e.g., those of personal ethics), even though this means beginning with the
least interesting points to most readers. But these are the most
philosophically important points; for ethics depends on metaphysics, and to see
this logical dependence is itself one of the most important, and forgotten,
lessons we need to learn today. We can fully understand concrete and specific
tactics in a war, or in a game like chess or football, only when we understand
the abstract and general principles of strategy. We can understand the motions
of the planets only after first learning the principles of geometry, and we can
understand a philosopher's ethics only after we understand his metaphysics, his
worldview.

Of course, when we begin to learn about these things we all do so inductively:
we begin not with general principles but with the concrete observation of the
movements of the soldiers, chess pieces, football players, or planets. But when
we teach them, it is a great time-saving device to teach deductively, to begin
with general principles. The logical order of teaching any subject is often the
reverse of the way we first learned it.

If this book were a work of literature, the logical order would destroy the
story, the suspense. (Angels, who begin with general principles and know
everything else by deduction from them, do not write stories.) But the purpose
of this book is only to teach, not to fascinate, engage, amaze, or move the
reader, as Tolkien does in The Lord of the Rings. I presuppose that you have
already been swept away by "the great grey ineluctable wave" of The Lord of the
Rings. This book is not like surfing but oceanography.

The philosophical questions are about:

1. metaphysics ("all-that-is", "worldview", "the big picture");

2. philosophical theology (God);

3.angelology (angels);

4. cosmology (the cosmos);

5. anthropology (man);

6. epistemology (knowledge);

7. philosophy of history;

8. aesthetics (beauty);

9. linguistics (philosophy of language);

10. political philosophy; and

11. ethics, which includes questions such as: Is evil real? Are moral
principles absolute? What is the greatest good? Why do we need the virtues of
duty, courage, hope, obedience, honesty, friendship, humility, gift-giving,
mercy, and charity?

The fifty philosophical questions

Within these eleven areas of philosophy, The Lord of the Rings deals with fifty
of the greatest questions that have been asked by the greatest minds in
history. This list is far from a complete introduction to all the great
questions of philosophy. But it is a representative sample of the most
important of them, the ones that make the greatest difference in our lives.

