# 1 - Metaphysics
[Metadata]: # {02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# Metaphysics
Introduction

"Philosophy" means "the love of wisdom". It should be what it means. The fact
that it has largely ceased to be that in modern "philosophy departments" does
not mean that its essence has changed, but that its disciples have. Similarly,
the fact that most Christians in North America are not martyrs or saints like
the early Christians does not mean that the meaning of Christianity has
changed, only that Christians have.

Metaphysics is the most important, most foundational, part of philosophy. It is
rational, not irrational; it is a "science" in the broad, ancient sense of the
word: a body of knowledge ordered through explanations and causes. Like the
rest of philosophy, it does not use the modern scientific method. (Neither does
anything else except modern science!) But it is a science, and it should not be
classified under "the occult", as it is in some bookstores.

Unlike all other sciences, including other philosophical sciences, metaphysics
explores reality as such, all of reality, not just some part or dimension of
reality, such as living things, chemicals, human history, or morality. It seeks
the truths, laws, and principles that are true of all being. ("Being" is the
traditional term, but "reality" sounds more concrete and less occultic than
"being".)

Here are a few sample questions of metaphysics:

— Is all being one, true, good, and beautiful?

— Is evil real?

— Is matter real?

— Is spirit real?

— Is God real?

— Is chance real?

— Is causality real?

— Is time real?

—How can a being change, that is, be both the same being it was, and also
different?

— What is the relation between a thing's essence (what it is) and its existence
(that it is)?

— Does language reflect reality? Are there in reality things (nouns), acts
(verbs), qualities (adjectives), relations (prepositions and conjunctions),
etc.?

—Are "universals" like justice, human nature, squareness, and redness real
things, or real aspects of things, or only concepts, or only words?

The Lord of the Rings illuminates at least three important metaphysical
questions:

1. How big is reality? Is it larger or smaller than our thought?

2. Does it include the supernatural?

3. Does it include universals, "Platonic Ideas", or "Jungian archetypes"?

