# 5 - 5.1 Is death good or bad?
[Metadata]: # {06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {06.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 5.1 Is death good or bad?
What knowledge may not be able to do, nature does. Death makes us an object, an
It. Death puts life into question. Death forces us to think, prods us to become
wise, as nothing else does. The most quoted quotation of the most quoted man
(besides Shakespeare) in English literature, Doctor Johnson, reads: "When a man
knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight, it concentrates his mind wonderfully."
(Watch the movie Dead Man Walking with this point in mind, and you may see a
serious argument for capital punishment.)

Of all physical evils, death is the worst, the final one, the sum of them all,
the loss of all earthly goods. Yet it also is the best thing for us if it is
the door to Heaven. Abolishing death by artificial immortality would make us
all into rotten eggs. We are designed to hatch. And if our culture's new summum
bonum, the "conquest of nature", is pushed to its apotheosis of the conquest of
death, we will see stunning parallels between Sauron and ourselves. There is a
natural connection between this point about death and the previous one about
the two magics and the spiritual danger of technology. Death is nature's trump
card. Until death is conquered, nature is not conquered. And that is the point
we have reached now. We are on the brink of the last frontier, our Crack of
Doom.

Readers are almost always surprised when they learn that Tolkien himself
considered the fundamental theme of The Lord of the Rings to be death and
immortality: "I do not think that even Power and Domination is the real center
of my story. . . . The real theme for me is about something much more permanent
and difficult: Death and Immortality" (Letters, no. 186, p. 246).

Richard Purtill comments wisely on this surprise:

This statement by the author of the story must be taken seriously, but it is
surprising, and at first we are inclined to resist accepting it. Very few of
the characters die in the story. There is little talk of death or immortality,
and there is certainly no description of or reflection on a life after death.
Once we start thinking along these lines, however, we can see that there is
perhaps more emphasis on death than we thought at first: the Barrow-wights, the
Dead Aragorn leads from the Paths of the Dead, the dead Elves and Men Frodo and
Sam see in the Dead Marshes, and even the Black Riders are all reminders of
death. Boromir, Denethor, Theoden, and Gollum all die in scenes important to
the plot; Gandalf and Frodo both seem to have died at key points in the action.
Furthermore, some of the important images in the story could be taken as death
images: the blasted land of Mordor, the destruction of the Ring, the passage
over the Western Sea.

About immortality, however, Tolkien at first seems to have almost nothing to
say.... But...Tolkien is a writer who achieves many of his most important
effects by indirection, and what is most important to him is often not stated
but underlies the whole story. As he says of religion, "the religious element
is absorbed into the story and the symbolism".1

If the reader at first does not realize the centrality of death to the story,
and then later, upon reflection, does, Tolkien himself seems to have gone
through the same two stages of awareness. He writes that "it is only in reading
the work myself . . . that I become aware of the dominance of the theme of
Death" (Letters, no. 208, p. 267). Aware not only of death but of immortality,
and the contrast between true and false immortality, "the hideous peril of
confusing true 'immortality' with limitless serial longevity" (ibid.).

Like the two magics, the two immortalities are opposites. With false
immortality, as life's quantity approaches infinity its quality approaches
zero. Gandalf explains, "A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings does
not die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues until at
last every minute is a weariness. . . . He fades. ... Sooner or later the dark
power will devour him" (LOTR, p. 46). In another letter, Tolkien explicitly
connects this point with the one about the two magics: "To attempt by device or
'magic' to recover longevity is thus a supreme folly and wickedness for
'mortals.' Longevity or counterfeit 'immortality' ... is the chief bait of
Sauron—it leads the small to a Gollum, and the great to a Ringwraith" (Letters,
no. 212, p. 286).

However, Tolkien does not condemn the desire for true immortality, an
immortality consonant with our nature and our destiny as designed by a wise
divine providence, as distinct from the depraved desire for a false and
unnatural immortality under our own foolish control. In "On Fairy-Stories" he
says that the highest purpose of fantasy, or the fairy tale, is the
satisfaction of deep desires, and most especially the desire for immortality,
"the oldest and deepest desire, the Great Escape: the Escape from Death. . . .
Almost I would venture to assert that all complete fairy-stories must have it.
. . . The eucatastrophic tale is the true form of fairytale, and its highest
function" (pp. 67-68).

The "good catastrophe" is clear in "Leaf by Niggle", a fairy tale about death.
Niggle's train journey is so obviously one of death that it is impossible not
to see the story as an allegory. And the eucatastrophe is clearly true
immortality, or Heaven, attained through self-giving, self-abnegation, and
purgation—in fact, not a bad description of the "moral lesson" of The Lord of
the Rings. This moral truth is not as simple, as clear, or as allegorical in
The Lord of the Rings as it is in "Leaf by Niggle", but that does not mean that
it is not present.

Two opposite kinds of death are required to attain the two opposite kinds of
immortality. The false immortality requires the death of conscience. The real
immortality requires the death of egotism. We can see this most clearly on the
Hobbit level, in the contrast between Frodo and Gollum. Both physically die:
Gollum at the Crack of Doom, Frodo by taking ship at the Grey Havens. But
Gollum has died to his conscience, his soul, for the sake of his ego's craving
for the Ring. Frodo has renounced possession of the Ring, and thus of his ego
(for that is the Ring's power over him; that is why it has no power over Tom
Bombadil). At the Crack of Doom it is not Frodo who falls into the fire of Hell
but Gollum, the incarnation of Frodo's false self, the ego that craves the
false immortality of power over everything, even death.

We could call this theme "good death versus bad death", death of the self (ego)
versus death of the soul. It is also a central theme of one of the greatest
books of the nineteenth century: The Brothers Karamazov. Dostoyevski insisted
that John 12:24 ("Unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it
remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit") be placed before his
story, and he quoted it twice within the story. The point is not simply "Don't
be egotistical, be unselfish." It is much more mysterious and wonderful than
that. It is that he who voluntarily loses his life, gives up his life, for
others, will save it, and he who chooses to cling to his life will lose it.
When we try to be the lords of our own life, the life we cling to as our own is
a miserable shadow of the true life that the true Lord wants to give us. But
that life is so large and inconceivable that we cannot receive it unless our
hands and minds are open, unless we give up our toys, our egos, our Rings.

Clearly this is the strange, surprising, even scandalous Christian vision of
immortality: the road to immortality is the death of the ego. The pre-Christian
classical world could conceive immortality only in an Olympian way, as an
eternalizing of our natural human life and desires, not qualita-tively
transformed but only quantitatively amplified by unlimited longevity and power.
Our culture still lives by three dreams of immortality from paganism, only one
of which is consonant with Christianity. One dream is the ancient longing to
become gods by moral heroism, like Oedipus. Another is the longing to become
like gods by cleverness, like Odysseus. (The modern version of cleverness is
science and technology.) The third is the Christian promise of immortality by
the drowning of baptism, by being born again in blood and water from the Cross.

Sigmund Freud was a famous and influential critic of the Christian dream, but
even he admits the failure of the pagan one. In Civilization and Its
Discontents, he lays out this puzzle: (1) all men desire happiness; (2) all
gods are only dreams born of wishful thinking; (3) modern man has left his gods
behind because he has become a god himself, having fulfilled in his own person,
and by his own scientific cleverness and technological power, the ancient
dreams that gave birth to the fairytale fantasies of religion; yet (4) modern
man is not happier than ancient man. In fact, he is probably unhappier. And
Freud does not know why.

Tolkien's heroes are crypto-Christians. They do not know, believe, mention,
wonder about, or allegorize Christian doctrine. But they exemplify exactly what
life would be like if the Christian claims are true, especially its central
paradox about immortality through death and resurrection of the self,
self-realization through self-sacrifice. Frodo gives himself up for the Shire,
and for all Middle-earth, by accepting the burden of the Ring and not lusting
after it. It is this death, this self-abnegation, that is precisely the central
point about death that Tolkien is making. It is not just Frodo's courage and
suffering, the inner torment of Frodo's soul ascending Mount Doom; that is part
of pagan wisdom too. It is not just Frodo's incurable sadness and his inability
to enjoy the Shire that he is left with afterward; that too is part of pagan
tragic wisdom. Nor is it just the sad necessity for Frodo to take ship from
Middle-earth forever at the end: that too is simply the pagan wisdom of
"know-thyself" mortality. Those are all images of what Kierkegaard calls "the
knight of infinite resignation" rather than "the knight of faith". Rather, in
The Lord of the Rings we find the uniquely Christian kind of death, the
mystical power of self-abnegation and self-donation, which makes full sense
only as a consequence of Christ's death, as our incorporation into that. For
Tolkien believes that "the greatest examples of the action of the spirit and of
reason are in abnegation" (Letters, no. 186, p. 246). If this is not so, Jesus
Christ was not the greatest man who ever lived but a failure and a fool. And so
are all His followers, especially the saints.

Here is how C. S. Lewis explains the Christian view of death that formed the
depths of Tolkien's soul from which The Lord of the Rings grew:

Christian doctrine, if accepted, involves a particular view of Death. There are
two attitudes towards Death which the human mind naturally adopts. One is the
lofty view, which reached its greatest intensity among the Stoics, that Death
"doesn't matter" . . . and that we ought to regard it with indifference
(Miracles, p. 125).

Lewis demolishes this view from his own experience of his wife's death:

It is hard to have patience with people who say "there is no death" or "Death
doesn't matter." . . . You might as well say that birth doesn't matter. I look
up at the night sky. Is anything more certain than that in all those vast times
and spaces, if I were allowed to search them, I should nowhere find her face,
her voice, her touch? She died. She is dead. Is the word so difficult to learn?
(A Grief Observed, p. 16).

The other [non-Christian view of death] is the "natural" point of view,
implicit in nearly all private conversations on the subject ...that Death is
the greatest of all evils. . . . The first idea simply negates, the second
simply affirms, our instinct for self-preservation. . . . Christianity
countenances neither. Its doctrine is subtler. On the one hand Death is the
triumph of Satan, the punishment of the Fall, and the last enemy. Christ shed
tears at the grave of Lazarus and sweated blood in Gethsemane: the Life of
Lives that was in Him detested this penal obscenity not less than we do, but
more. On the other hand, only he who loses his life will save it. We are
baptized into the death of Christ, and it is the remedy for the Fall. Death is,
in fact, what some modern people call "ambivalent." It is Satan's great weapon
and also God's great weapon; it is holy and unholy; our supreme disgrace and
our only hope; the thing Christ came to conquer and the means by which He
conquered (Miracles, p. 125).

Hence as suicide is the typical expression of the stoic spirit, and battle of
the warrior spirit, martyrdom always remains the supreme enacting and
perfection of Chris-tianity.2

