# 5 - 5.4 What do we most deeply desire?
[Metadata]: # {06.05}
[Descriptor]: # {06.05}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 5.4 What do we most deeply desire?
Just as there are two opposite magics in The Lord of the Rings, there are two
opposite longings, or deep desires. There is, of course, the desire to possess
the Ring; and that corresponds to the magic of power, and technology. More
subtly and sweetly, there is also another desire, a longing whose object cannot
be defined, much less possessed. This longing sweeps through The Lord of the
Rings like a wind over the sea. In fact, the sea is one of its symbols,
especially for Legolas (see LOTR, p. 935), as it was for Tolkien and many
island-dwelling Englishmen.

Tolkien himself was haunted by a recurrent dream of the sea. He speaks of

my Atlantis-hunting. This legend or myth or dim memory of some ancient history
has always troubled me. In sleep I had the dreadful dream of the ineluctable
Wave, either coming out of the quiet sea, or coming in towering over the green
islands. It still occurs occasionally, though now exorcized by writing about
it. It always ends by surrender, and I awake gasping out of deep water
(Letters, no. 257, p. 347).

Any mystic or any surfer would understand that. Of course it is not literally
the sea, or the wave, but the thing they symbolize. And that is obviously God,
and Heaven or Paradise, or union with God. It is no accident that when Lewis
writes about an unfallen planetary Eden, it is an ocean planet of floating
islands that must be ridden like waves.

There are literally hundreds of lines in The Lord of the Rings that express
this longing for something lost, something Edenic. The past haunts the present
like an undersea creature that constantly troubles the surface of the water. It
is much more than mere nostalgia for "the good old days". It is also more than
traditionalism's practical payoff of getting things that are useful for
yourself by remembering what was useful for your ancestors. Rather, the past as
such has a fascination. And this is not because of its content; for if we could
return, we would not be fulfilled; we would not find Eden.

It is its very unattainability that makes the past such a powerful symbol of
something that is unattainable not because it is past but because it is future,
or, rather, transcendent to all history. What is achieved by the "haunting of
history" in The Lord of the Rings is not nostalgia but Sehnsucht: a longing for
the transcendent, the "more".

Already in the second chapter we see it in Frodo:

Often he wandered by himself, and to the amazement of sensible folk he was
sometimes seen far from home walking in the hills and woods under the
starlight. Merry and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times, as
Bilbo had done. . . . He found himself wondering at times, especially in the
autumn, about the wild lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had
never seen came into his dreams. He ...began to feel restless, and the old
paths seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond
their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its
borders (LOTR, pp. 41-42).

It is not clear what is being desired here, but it is "something more".

The "more" is qualitative, not quantitative. It is a desire for a step up the
hierarchy of being, for communion with more exalted beings. It is, in fact, a
desire for communion with Elves: "Sam . . . believed he had once seen an Elf in
the wood, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the legends that he had
heard in his early years such fragments of tales and half-remembered stories
about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always moved him most deeply" (LOTR,
p. 44).

It is also a desire somehow to transcend ordinary time; this is done in Elvish
places: Rivendell and Lothlorien. Bilbo says of Rivendell, "Time doesn't seem
to pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether" (LOTR, p. 225). And in
Lothlorien,

Frodo felt that he was in a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall
into forgetfulness. When he had gone and passed again into the outer world,
still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire would walk there. Frodo stood still,
hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, and
sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth (LOTR, p. 342).

And we too—we readers who have walked into The Lord of the Rings as Frodo has
walked into Lothlorien—we feel like Sam when he first meets the Elves in the
Shire forests: "Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream, with an
expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy" (LOTR, p. 80).

The sea, the stars, and the Elves seem to be the most powerful catalysts for
this desire, or images of its mysterious object. The three are connected in the
figure of Earendil, the mariner "from Otherworld beyond the Sea", who "came
unto the timeless halls where shining fall the countless years" (LOTR, pp.
228-29) and is now revered as "Earendil, the Evening Star, most beloved of the
elves" (LOTR, p. 355). It was this name, this single word in an eighth-century
Anglo-Saxon poem "Crist", that first moved Tolkien to create his myth from
which The Lord of the Rings grew.

The Elves themselves feel the sea-longing. Legolas confesses that "deep in the
hearts of all my kindred lies the sea-longing, which it is perilous to stir.
Alas! for the gulls. No peace shall I have again under beech or under elm"
(LOTR, p. 855).

The sea is a nearly universal symbol of death. Thus Frodo, like King Arthur, or
like a Viking hero, leaves Middle-earth forever by ship. There seems to be a
fairly obvious connection between this sea love and the desire for something
that can be attained only after death.

C. S. Lewis helps us to understand this desire as well as anyone ever has, I
think. It is not mere boredom or discontent, for it comes not at the worst
times but at the best—as Psyche explains to Orual in Till We Have Faces:

"I have always . . . had a kind of longing for death."

"Ah, Psyche," I said, "have I made you so little happy as that?"

"No, no, no," she said. "You don't understand. Not that kind of longing. It was
when I was happiest that I longed most. It was on happy days when we were up
there on the hills, the three of us, with the wind and the sunshine. . . . And
because it was so beautiful, it set me longing, always longing. Somewhere else
there must be more of it. Everything seemed to be saying, Psyche come! But I
couldn't (not yet) come and I didn't know where I was to come to. It almost
hurt me. I felt like a bird in a cage. "6

What is it then?

It is distinguished from other longings by two things. In the first place,
though the sense of want is acute and even painful, yet the mere wanting is
felt to be somehow a delight. . . . This hunger is better than any other
fullness; this poverty better than all other wealth. . . .

In the second place, there is a peculiar mystery about the object of this
desire. . . . Every one of these supposed objects for the Desire is inadequate
to it.7

It is from this point of view that we can understand hell in its aspect of
privation. All your life an unattainable ecstasy has hovered just beyond the
grasp of your consciousness. The day is coming when you will wake to find,
beyond all hope, that you have attained it, or else, that it was within your
reach and you have lost it forever (The Problem of Pain, p. 118).

Lewis then interprets this data as a kind of experiential proof of the
existence of God: "This Desire was, in the soul, as the Siege Perilous in
Arthur's castle—the chair in which only one could sit. And if nature makes
nothing in vain, the One who can sit in this chair must exist" (Pilgrim's
Regress, p. 10).

Creatures are not born with desires unless satisfaction for those desires
exists. A baby feels hunger: well, there is such a thing as food. A duckling
wants to swim: Well, there is such a thing as water. Men feel sexual desire:
well, there is such a thing as sex. If I find in myself a desire which no
experience in this world can satisfy, the most probable explanation is that I
was made for another world (Lewis, Mere Christianity, p. 120).

If you are really a product of a materialistic universe, how is it you don't
feel at home there? Do fish complain of the sea for being wet? Or if they did,
would that fact itself not strongly suggest that they had not always been, or
would not always be, purely aquatic creatures? Notice how we are perpetually
surprised at Time. ("How time flies! Fancy John being grown-up and married! I
can hardly believe it!") In heaven's name, why? Unless, indeed, there is
something in us which is not temporal.8

Tolkien, of course, does not give us these Christian interpretations or
arguments in The Lord of the Rings. But that is not because The Lord of the
Rings is not Christian, but because it is not interpretation and argument. It
is fiction.

But did Tolkien deliberately intend that The Lord of the Rings should have this
effect on us? Of course he did. For in "On Fairy-Stories" he explicitly points
to this arousal of desire as fantasy's primary end.

But desire for what? In "On Fairy-Stories" Tolkien mentions four aspects of
this desire that fairy tales both stimulate and satisfy: fantasy, recovery,
escape, and consolation. In one word, it is Paradise. We live in a fallen,
broken world. And we remember and long for another. That is why "this world is
not enough", why we have our "lover's quarrel with the world". To use Pascal's
image, we are like disinherited princes: if we did not remember our kingly
other-worldly glory, why would we be so dissatisfied with this beautiful world?
But we are, even (especially!) when it is at its best: in sunsets and stars and
storms and symphonies.

We feel as if we are in the middle of the classic Vermont farmer joke: "You
can't get there from here." Then how . ..? Only the Incarnation brings Heaven
back to earth. Only Christ fulfills this universal longing. Very subtly, yet
very deeply, The Lord of the Rings really points to Christ. That is why its
central symbol is the Ring: it is the exact opposite of the Cross (see chap.
14).

