# 13 - 13.1 What is the power of friendship?
[Metadata]: # {14.02}
[Descriptor]: # {14.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 13.1 What is the power of friendship?
The importance of this topic to Tolkien is evident from the title of the first
volume: The Fellowship of the Ring. "Fellowship" is another word for
friendship.

It is a greater power than wisdom. Gandalf knows this, and that is why he picks
Merry and Pippin at the Council of Elrond. "It is true that if these hobbits
understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But . . . I think, Elrond,
that in this matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than
to great wisdom" (LOTR, p. 269).

This is why Gandalf is so happy to hear that Sam went with Frodo into Mordor
after the Fellowship broke up at Amon Hen: a mini-fellowship, at least, might
work, but a lone individual would not.

There is evidently a connection between this point, the value of friendship,
and the previous one about the superiority of duty to utility, or calculation.
Soldiers do not die for causes, or even for "country", but for their buddies,
their friends. Friendship shows its power most when the situation is most
desperate and temptation is strongest—as it was for Sam in the tower of Cirith
Ungol. "In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to
hold him firm" (LOTR, p. 881). Friendship, after all, is a form of love.

If there is one single thing that was most responsible for the success of the
Fellowship, it was their fellowship, their friendship, especially between Frodo
and Sam. That literally carried the Ring to Mount Doom:

"I said I'd carry him, if it broke my back," he muttered, "and I will!"

"Come, Mr. Frodo!" he cried. "I can't carry it for you, but I can carry you and
it as well. So up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam will give you a
ride.... "

Sam staggered to his feet; and then to his amazement he felt the burden light.
He had feared that he would have barely strength to lift his master alone, and
beyond that he had expected to share in the dreadful dragging weight of the
accursed Ring. But it was not so (LOTR, p. 919).

Of course not: "He ain't heavy; he's my brother."

In this Sam fulfilled to the letter his promise at the beginning:

"It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already dangerous. Most likely
neither of us will come back."

"If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain," said Sam. Don't
you leave him! They said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I am going
with him, if he climbs to the Moon, and if any of those Black Riders try to
stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said (LOTR, p. 85).

And Merry and Pippin too: "You can trust us to stick to you through thick and
thin—to the bitter end. . . . But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble
alone, and go off without a word. We are your friends, Frodo" (LOTR, p. 103).

And because friendship is so close to the whole meaning of life, that is why it
is self-sufficient, why its fruit is joy, even if everything else is lost.
After Gollum fell into the Crack of Doom liberating Frodo from the Ring, Sam
was totally happy, even though all other hopes seemed totally gone:

"Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee," said a voice by his side. And there was
Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there was peace
now....

"Master!" cried Sam, and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin of the world for
the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The burden was gone. His master had
been saved; he was himself again, he was free....

"I'm glad you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam" (LOTR, p.
926).

With-ness: that is all friendship wants. That is joy, because it is the image
of what ultimate reality is if Tolkien's Christian faith is true. The pagan
mystic may seek his joy in the flight of the alone to the Alone, but not the
Christian. For according to that faith, the trinitarian God Who is not alone
made man in His own image and declared that "it is not good for man to be
alone", even in ruin.

It is because friendship, fellowship, and loyalty are so good that their
opposites, treason and betrayal, are so bad. Gandalf knows that "In all the
wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest foe" (LOTR, p.
245). "Indeed in nothing is the power of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than
in the estrangement that divides all those who still oppose him" (LOTR, p.
339). Satan's simplest strategy is "divide and conquer".

C. S. Lewis not only wrote great things about friendship (especially in the
chapter devoted to that subject in The Four Loves) but practiced it. In fact,
he was Tolkien's closest friend. But for his Churchillianly dogged
encouragement, we would never have seen The Lord of the Rings in print.

He notes that "to the ancients, Friendship seemed the happiest and most fully
human of all loves; the crown of life and the school of virtue. The modern
world, in comparison, ignores it . . . very few modern people think Friendship
. . . even a love at all" (Four Loves, p. 55).

Those who cannot conceive Friendship as a substantive love but only as a
disguise or elaboration of Eros betray the fact that they have never had a
friend. . . . In some ways nothing is less like a Friendship than a
love-affair. Lovers are always talking to one another about their love; Friends
hardly ever about their Friendship. Lovers are normally face to face, absorbed
in each other; Friends, side by side, absorbed in some common interest [such as
saving all of Middle-earth from Sauron and his Ring] (ibid., p. 58).

