# 13 - 13.2 Is humility humiliating?
[Metadata]: # {14.03}
[Descriptor]: # {14.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 13.2 Is humility humiliating?
In The Lord of the Rings the Hobbits appear at first to be only comic contrast
to the larger and more heroic Men and Elves; yet almost all the greatest deeds
are achieved by Hobbits. Bilbo slays Smaug the Dragon in The Hobbit; Merry
saves Eowyn and helps her slay the Lord of the Nazgul; Pippin helps save
Faramir from Denethor; Merry and Pippin move the Ents to destroy Isengard; Sam
wounds Shelob; and Frodo—"What more shall I say? For time would fail me to
tell" (Heb 11:32). After many mighty little heroics along every step of the
way, Frodo finally saves all of Middle-earth, with Gollum's unforeseen help,
and destroys Sauron and his Ring. Not Gandalf or Aragorn or the Elves but Frodo
achieves the Quest (and only by the help of Sam and Gollum). Not Aragorn but
Frodo is taken to Heaven, like the wounded Arthur, at the end.

One of the main themes of The Lord of the Rings is the relation of mutual
dependence between the high-heroic and the humble-Hobbit-like. The motive for
the heroic is the defense of ordinary life: wars are fought, heroically, to
protect ordinary peaceful non-heroes. Correlatively, the enjoyment of ordinary
life (the Shire) is the reward for heroism, and only heroism can sustain it.
This is a literary bridge that carries the reader's mind over it in both
directions, a Jacob's Ladder on which the reader's thoughts continually ascend
and descend between the low and earthly and the high and Heavenly.

Tolkien confesses of his Hobbits, "I loved them myself, since I love the vulgar
and simple as dearly as the noble, and nothing moves my heart... so much as
'ennoblement' (from the Ugly Duckling to Frodo)" (Letters, no. 180, p. 232).
Tolkien loves Hobbits so much that he writes an eight-page reply to a reader's
question about who among the Hobbits gives and who receives birthday presents!
(Letters, no. 214, p. 289).

He loves them so much that he loses many of his readers in the first fifty
pages of utterly provincial details about the habits of Hobbits. Many of us who
love The Lord of the Rings and have learned to love Hobbits must confess that
the first time we read this book we were put off by the long, slow start and
were tempted to give up before the "excitement" began. Many of us did.

Tolkien not only loves his Hobbits, he is one: "I am in fact a Hobbit (in all
but size)" (Letters, no. 213, p. 288).

Among the Hobbits it is not even Frodo but Sam, the humble servant, who is the
most heroic. Tolkien, several times in his letters, insists that Sam is "the
chief hero" of The Lord of the Rings. But Sam at the beginning seems only a
comic figure, and throughout the narrative his importance seems merely relative
to Frodo, as Frodo's servant and gardener—by definition a secondary character.
Very much in the style of the God he believes in, Tolkien raises up the lowly
to put down the lordly. The Lord of the Rings is the perfect illustration of
Mary's "Magnificat" (see Lk 1:46-55). (Work it out for yourself, verse by
verse.)

Sam's exaltation into hero is believable because Sam is Sam, and not just
servant. He is more than his role. There are fixed roles, and hierarchy, in his
pre-modern society; yet there are also real individuals. (Perhaps we should
say, " Therefore there are real individuals.") Sam has enough independence to
conspire to go with Frodo out of the Shire and to stay with him when the
Fellowship breaks up at Amon Hen, though both times Frodo tried to "escape". He
is also more open-minded, Elf-loving, and adventurous than most Hobbits. He
even dreams of seeing an Oliphaunt! Though clearly "bourgeois", Sam is not
petty.

But Sam is "hobbity". The "lowly" that Tolkien is exalting here is not merely
the physically small or the poor but the provincial, the bourgeois, the
unheroic, the small-minded (see Ps 131). Sam is like your uncle.

God did the same sort of thing as Tolkien did over and over again in history.
He used the most unpromising material. The act of creation is the supreme
example, because the material there was nothing at all. Then the people He
chose were more like Hobbits than like Wizards or Elves. Abraham and Sarah were
old beyond childbearing, and God made their descendants as numerous as the
stars. Jacob was a schemer, and God made him Israel. Joseph was the spoiled
child, and God used him to save Egypt and the Jews from starvation. Moses was a
stutterer, and God made him His biggest "mouth" (the literal meaning of
"prophet"), who gave the world its Commandments. David was a child with sheep
and a slingshot, and God made him Israel's greatest king. The twelve apostles
were Hobbit-like peasants, and God made them saints. And the greatest example
of all, His supreme revelation of Himself, was a tiny embryo, then a baby born
amid cow dung who grew up to become an unemployed wanderer in a hick town and a
crucified criminal. "The stone which the builders rejected has become the head
of the corner. This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes" (Ps
118:22-23).

C. S. Lewis corrects a popular misunderstanding of humility when he says that
to be humble is

to take off a lot of silly, ugly, fancy-dress in which we have all got
ourselves up and are strutting about like the little idiots we are....

Do not imagine that if you meet a really humble man he will be what most people
call "humble" nowadays: he will not be a sort of greasy, smarmy person, who is
always telling you that, of course, he is nobody. Probably all you will think
about him is that he seemed a cheerful, intelligent chap who took a real
interest in what you said to him. If you do dislike him it will be because you
feel a little envious of anyone who seems to enjoy life so easily. He will not
be thinking about humility: he will not be thinking about himself at all
>(Letters, no. 191, p. 252). As Gandalf foresaw, only "the pity of Bilbo [in
sparing Gollum] will rule the fate of many" (LOTR, p. 60) and save
Middle-earth. Frodo's "failure" shows that pity is necessary: That is why
"Humility, after the first shock, is really a cheerful virtue" (The Problem of
Pain, p. 67).

