# 9 - 9.1 How can words be alive?
[Metadata]: # {10.02}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 9.1 How can words be alive?
Words were to Tolkien the most beautiful things in the world. That would be a
ridiculous preference for a Hindu or Buddhist, but not for a Christian, for
whom the most beautiful thing human eyes have ever seen is called "the Word of
God".

Tolkien loved words (especially proper names) so much that he gave all his
favorite things many names, not just one, and lingered long and lovingly over
the art of naming:

Taniquetil the Elves name that holy mountain, and Oiolosse Everlasting
Whiteness, and Elerrina Crowned with Stars, and many names beside; but the
Sindar spoke of it in their later tongue as Amon Uilos. . . . Telperion the one
was called in Valinor, and Silpio, and Ninquelote, and many other names; but
Laurelin the other was, and Malinalda, and Culurien, and many names in song
beside (Silmarillion, pp. 37-38).

It is as T. S. Eliot says, in his sage advice at the beginning of "Old Possum's
Book of Practical Cats":

The Naming of Cats is a difficult matter,

It isn't just one of your holiday games;

You may think at first I'm as mad as a hatter

When I tell you, a cat must have three DIFFERENT NAMES.

Words were important to Tolkien, not just instrumentally, through their power
and effect on life, but metaphysically, through their source and basis and
foundation. For "in the beginning was the Word" (Jn 1:1). A Word—the Word of
God—was the origin of the world (Gen 1:3). And a word was the origin of The
Hobbit, and thus its sequel The Lord of the Rings:

All I remember about the start of The Hobbit is sitting correcting School
Certificate papers in the everlasting weariness of that annual task forced on
impecunious academics with children. On a blank leaf I scrawled: "In a hole in
the ground there lived a hobbit." I did not and do not know why.... I did
nothing about it, for a long time.... But it became The Hobbit in the early
1930s. . . . Since The Hobbit was a success, a sequel was called for (Letters,
no. 163, p. 215).

Earlier, Tolkien's whole mythology of The Silmarillion and its offspring The
Lord of the Rings began with words. Tolkien first invented the Elvish language.
Then he needed a race to speak it: Elves. Then they needed a history. It was
the language that suggested the world and its history to Tolkien, not vice
versa.

The same is true of Ents as of Hobbits and Elves: "As usually with me they grew
rather out of their name, than the other way about" (Letters, no. 157, p. 208).

Tolkien discovered that " 'legends' depend on the language to which they
belong. . . . Greek mythology depends far more on the marvelous aesthetic of
its language and so of its nomenclature of persons and places and less on its
content than people realize" (Letters, no. 180, p. 231).

Many readers dislike the plethora of names in The Lord of the Rings and, even
more, in The Silmarillion. One reviewer complained that The Silmarillion
sounded like "a Swedish railway conductor with a head cold announcing
stations". (I would call that a fascinating aural experience!)

The words of much of The Lord of the Rings and all of The Silmarillion are
vertical, and heavy, as Max Picard says of Hebrew:

The architecture of the language was vertical. Each word sank down vertically,
column-wise, into the sentence. In language today we have lost the static
quality of the ancient tongues. The sentence has become dynamic; every word and
every sentence speeds on to the next ...each word comes more from the preceding
word than from the silence and moves on more to the next word in front than to
the silence....

A quiver full of steel arrows, a firmly secured anchor rope, a brazen trumpet
splitting the air with its few piercing tones: that is the Hebrew language—it
can say little, but what it says is like the beating of hammers on the anvil.1

Each word in The Silmarillion seems like a thunderbolt from Heaven, a miracle.
There are many capital letters, in contrast with the fashion of our leveling,
reductionistic age to trim, to decapitalize, to decapitate. And there are many
nouns, both common and proper. It is the Anglo-Saxon style. The words are
solid, like mountains; heavy and slow, like a glacier. The sense of height and
weight of words suggests the sense of ontological height and weight, a
verti-cality, a supernaturalism. The reader is lifted up out of himself into
immense polar skies, into the realm where "great syllables of words that
sounded like castles came out of his mouth" (That Hideous Strength, p. 228).

