# 1 - 1.2 Is the supernatural real?
[Metadata]: # {02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 1.2 Is the supernatural real?
C. S. Lewis explains what supernaturalism means as clearly as anyone has ever
done:

Ever since men were able to think, they have been wondering about what this
universe really is and how it came to be there. And, very roughly, two views
have been held. First, there is what is called the materialist view. People who
take that view think that matter and space just happen to exist, and always
have existed, nobody knows why; and that the matter, behaving in certain fixed
ways, has just happened, by a sort of fluke, to produce creatures like
ourselves who are able to think. . . . The other view is the religious view.
According to it, what is behind the universe is more like a mind than it is
like anything else we know. That is to say, it is conscious, and has purposes,
and prefers one thing to another. And on this view it made the universe ... to
produce creatures like itself—I mean, like itself to the extent of having
minds.4

The supernatural is not the same as the magical. Magic can be part of nature.
There is as much magic in The Hobbit as in The Silmarillion, but The Hobbit is
not about the supernatural, while The Silmarillion is.

What difference does it make whether you are a naturalist or a supernaturalist?
All the difference in the world. It makes a difference to everything. Imagine
you are acting in a play. The supernaturalist is like one who believes that the
play is not the whole of reality, that there is a far greater reality outside
it. The naturalist denies that. Even though the super-naturalist and the
naturalist may speak the same lines in the play, their meaning is not the same.
Context makes a difference, and the supernatural is the ultimate context.

Tolkien, as a Christian, was of course a supernaturalist. As we shall see when
we treat the topic of religion, Tolkien kept the supernatural hidden in The
Lord of the Rings; yet it is ubiquitous, and he himself explicitly told us so.

Tolkien claims that fantasy naturally treats the supernatural:

[F]airy-stories as a whole have three faces: the Mystical towards the
Supernatural, the Magical towards Nature, and the Mirror of scorn and pity
towards Man ("On Fairy-Stories", p. 26).

Fantasy treats the supernatural not because it is fantastic but because it is
real.

C. S. Lewis gives the following "aesthetic" argument for supernaturalism in
Miracles:

As long as one is a Naturalist, "Nature" is only a word for "everything"—And
Everything is not a subject about which anything very interesting can be said
or (save by illusion) felt. . . . But everything becomes different when we
recognize that Nature is a creature, a created thing, with its own particular
tang or flavour. . . .

The Englishness of English is audible only to those who know some other
language as well. In the same way and for the same reason, only
Supernaturalists really see Nature. You must go a little away from her, and
then turn round, and look back. Then at last the true landscape will become
visible. You must have tasted, however briefly, the pure water from beyond the
world before you can be distinctly conscious of the hot, salty tang of Nature's
current.5

The capacity to evoke wonder, which is the great power of fantasy, almost
requires supernaturalism. It is inconceivable that a worldly pragmatist like
John Dewey or Karl Marx could write fantasy. Only a supernaturalistic
metaphysics has room for it. It says that our world has edges, that it is not
all there is, that there is more. In such a world you can never say, with the
bored, jaded author of Ecclesiastes, "I have seen everything" (Eccles 1:14).

In Tolkien's Silmarillion the world is flat (until its fall) and therefore has
an edge. A flat world is a physical symbol for a supernaturalistic metaphysics.
It points to a "beyond" beyond its edges, a "more". But a round world is
self-contained, and absolutely relative. In The Silmarillion the world is
changed from flat to round as a divine punishment. This is far from fantastic;
it is symbolically quite accurate. For, in fact, the divine punishment was that
our worldview, rather than our world, was changed from supernaturalism to
naturalism.

Yet one edge, one absolute, remains even in our round, relative world, though
not in space but in time. There is death, personal time's absolute edge (see
section 5.1).

Supernaturalism's practical payoff is the hope of divine grace. Grace is needed
because evil is powerful (see section ii. 2). We are far too weak to have much
hope without it. Frodo is wise because he knows this. The whole of
Middle-earth—souls as well as bodies—depends on his mission, and he knows he is
not strong enough to fulfill it. Yet, because of an implicit trust in grace, he
volunteers: "I will take the Ring, though I do not know the way" (LOTR, p.
264). It was a Marian moment. St. Luke showed us the same thing at the
Annunciation. Mary's mission was strikingly similar to Frodo's. The salvation
of the whole world depended on it. And the words of her acceptance of her
mission were also similar to Frodo's: "Let it be to me according to your word"
(Lk 1:38).

Neither Tolkien nor St. Luke tells us what invisible force in the soul
motivated this visible choice. But there are only two possibilities: pride or
humility. When we hear "I will take the ring", we may think we hear pride, but
when we hear "though I do not know the way", we know we hear humility. Tolkien
kept explicit religion out of The Lord of the Rings, but here is a powerful
example of implicit religion. No one but an arrogant fool could do what Frodo
did without throwing an anchor out into the deep of supernatural grace.

