# 10 - 10.1 Is small beautiful?
[Metadata]: # {11.02}
[Descriptor]: # {11.02}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 10.1 Is small beautiful?
In general cultural terms, Tolkien is certainly a traditionalist, an
antiprogressive, and an antimodernist. In political terms, is he also a
"conservative" versus a "liberal"?

Yes and no. These two labels change with time, place, culture, and fashion, and
Tolkien would probably be not much more comfortable with the American brand of
conservatism, with its tendency to side with big business and the military and
to ignore the poor and the environment, than he would with the American brand
of liberalism, with its tendency to side with big government and ignore
tradition, religion, morality, family, and the sacredness of individual human
life. He is more of a European conservative, or old conservative, a Schumacher
Small is Beautiful conservative, a

Chestertonian distributist. The Hobbits are certainly quintessentially
"bourgeois" (the spit word for the Left, as "alcohol" is to pious Muslims). But
they are not Babbitts, only peasants.

We could almost call Tolkien an anarchist as well as a monarchist: "My
political opinions lean more and more to Anarchy (philosophically understood,
meaning abolition of control not whiskered men with bombs)—or to
'unconstitutional' Monarchy" (Letters, no. 52, p. 63).

Anarchists are not usually patriots—but Tolkien was. And the reason was
instinctive. It was because his country was to him not an ideological
abstraction but a kind of extension of his concrete family, or at least of his
pious mother, who, he wrote, "was a martyr indeed . . . a mother who killed
herself with labour and trouble to ensure us keeping the faith."1

Cliches about the influence of devout mothers do not begin to describe the
force of an inheritance like this. . . . Chesterton was fond of quoting Cobbett
on England's loss of medieval Catholicism through the Reformation as resembling
one's discovery of one's mother's corpse in a wood. . . . To this extent there
is an analogy with Irish Catholic nationalism. . . . Not only had Christ died
for you: so had your country.... Tolkien, writing of his mother's martyrdom,
would have felt much as Irish Catholics had. . . . Tolkien had seen his mother
dying for his soul with his own eyes (ibid.).

Tolkien's political philosophy had a name: distributism. The term and the
concept came from G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc.2

C. S. Lewis, who also admired this populist, libertarian philosophy, summed it
up this way:

I believe man is happier, and happy in a richer way, if he has "the free-born
mind." But I doubt whether he can have this without economic independence,
which the new society is abolishing. For economic independence allows an
education not controlled by Government; and in adult life it is the man who
needs, and asks, nothing of the Government who can criticize its acts and snap
his fingers at its ideology. . . . Who will talk like that when the State is
everyone's schoolmaster and employer? Admittedly, when man was untamed, such
liberty belonged only to the few. I know. Hence the horrible suspicion that our
only choice is between societies with few freemen and societies with none.3



And that is precisely the problem distributism claims to solve, by maximizing
the distribution of private property.

This populism is not egalitarianism, however. Egalitarian-ism is an ism, an
ideology. And every ideology leaves out something. Men differ in talents, so
there are natural hierarchies as well as unnatural and oppressive hierarchies.
Tolkien is not opposed to hierarchy ("unconstitutional" monarchy) and knows
that much of our opposition to it comes from envy. Saruman embodies this and
reveals it as his deeper motive when he tries to "sell" Gandalf his program of
joining with Sauron: "In time, no one will stand higher than ourselves." (What
he really means, of course, is that "no one will stand higher than I.")

Tolkien's patriotic populism also embraced an individualistic, or libertarian,
tendency at odds with the totalitarianizing tendency of modernity, as did C. S.
Lewis: "Two world wars necessitated vast curtailments of liberty, and we have
grown, though grumblingly, accustomed to our chains. . . . We are tamed animals
. . . and should probably starve if we got out of our cage."4

We have on the one hand a desperate need: hunger, sickness and the dread of
war. We have, on the other, the conception of something that might meet it:
omnicompetent global technocracy. Are not these the ideal opportunity for
enslavement? . . .

Let us not be deceived by phrases about "Man taking charge of his own destiny."
All that can really happen is that some men will take charge of the destiny of
the others. They will be simply men; none perfect; some greedy, cruel and
dishonest. The more completely we are planned the more powerful they will be.
Have we discovered some new reason why, this time, power should not corrupt as
it has done before? (ibid., pp. 342-43).

Or, as Tolkien himself put it, "the proper study of Man is anything but Man;
and the most improper job of any man ... is bossing other men. Not one in a
million is fit for it, and least of all those who seek the opportunity"
(Letters, no. 52, p. 64).

Tolkien's myth of the Ring is not an allegory, but it is utterly "applicable".
He says, "I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but the
one resides in the freedom of the reader, the other in the purposed domination
of the author" (LOTR, p. xvii). Thus we are free to "apply" the concept of the
Ring of power to many things and persons in our own age.

Some of these are obvious, by hindsight: Hitler, Stalin, Mao. But if we are
astute enough to understand the warning that there is a "soft totalitarianism"
as well as a "hard totalitarianism", a Brave New World as well as a 1984, we
will thank Tolkien for the ability to recognize in new forms the same old "one
Ring to rule them all, one Ring to find them, one Ring to bring them all and in
the darkness bind them". And we may even apply the wisdom we have learned from
The Lord of the Rings to our own versions of "The Scouring of the Shire", if
any Shires still remain. Political action cannot keep Middle-earth safe for
Elves, but it can still keep it safe for Hobbits.

