# 7 - 7.3 Is history predictable?
[Metadata]: # {08.03}
[Descriptor]: # {08.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 7.3 Is history predictable?
Tolkien is not a progressivist, but he does not embrace the opposite error
either, the notion that "there is nothing new under the sun", that history is a
set of unending and unchangeable cycles of doom. That was the standard pagan
philosophy of history as fate. Tolkien's Christian philosophy of history avoids
both the false pessimism of pre-Christian paganism and the false optimism of
post-Christian humanism.

Tolkien mentions the importance of individual acts as one of The Lord of the
Rings' major themes:

the place in "world politics" of the unforeseen and unforeseeable acts of will,
and deeds of virtue of the apparently small, ungreat, forgotten in the places
of the Wise and Great (good as well as evil). A moral of the whole . . . is the
obvious one that without the high and noble the simple and vulgar is utterly
mean; and without the simple and ordinary the noble and heroic is meaningless
(Letters, no. 131, p. 160).

In the Christian philosophy of history there are things that are genuinely new
because there is a God above time who can alter history. God says, "Behold, I
am doing a new thing" (Is 43:19). History does not simply repeat itself, and
the future cannot be predicted. Paganism tried to understand history in terms
of the cycles of nature, but the Bible understands nature in terms of history,
as the setting for the drama between man and God and between man and man.

Tom Bombadil shows the relation between nature and history in Tolkien. Tom
seems to be a personification of nature, or a nature spirit. He is probably
Aule, the angel of the earth. In contrast,

The Ring itself is a historical being. It is a product of historical purpose
and action and its meaning is a historical meaning. . . .

In some way he [Bombadil] represents nature, and Tolkien uses him to identify
the essentially historical by contrast. Tom asked about the Ring, but did not
seem to take it very seriously; moreover, it had no power over him. It did not
make him invisible, and, when Frodo put it on, Tom could still see him. The
affair of the Ring was history, and Tom's was not a historical existence. At
the Council of Elrond one of the elves suggested that they ask Tom Bombadil to
take the Ring and hide it in the Old Forest. Gandalf answered that, if Tom
could be persuaded to, he would not understand the need and would soon forget
it or even more likely throw it away. "Such things have no hold on his mind." .
. . Glorfindel said, "I think that in the end, if all else is conquered,
Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then Night will come" (I, 279).
Glorfindel, it should be noted, did not predict such an outcome; the Council
did not despair. But historical decision is ultimately what determines nature
and not the other way round. In Tolkien's "monotheistic world," the mysterious
Authority which is in control of history is One for whom nature itself is a
historical act.5

The theological basis for this is the difference between Men and angels:

The dealings of the Ainur have indeed been mostly with the Elves, for Iluvatar
made them more like in nature to the Ainur, though less in might and stature,
whereas to Men he gave strange gifts. . . . He willed that the hearts of Men
should seek beyond the world and should find no rest therein; but they should
have a virtue to shape their life, amid the powers and chances of the world,
beyond the music of the Ainur, which is as fate to all things else. . . . It is
one with this gift of freedom that the children of Men dwell only a short space
in the world alive, and are not bound to it, and depart soon (The Silmarillion,
pp. 41-42).

Note the connection between (1) the freedom in man's life and history, (2) his
materiality and temporality, (3) his mortality, and (4) his restless longing
(Sehnsucht). Angels are (1) transcendent to history, (2) immaterial, (3)
immortal, and (4) complete.

Paradoxically, our freedom is our doom: we are doomed not only to restlessness
and to death but also to freedom. Our free-dom is a free doom:

"What doom do you bring out of the North? " "The doom of choice," said Aragorn
(LOTR, p. 423).

C. S. Lewis writes about the unpredictability of history too:

About everything that can be called "the philosophy of history" I am a
desperate sceptic. I know nothing of the future, not even whether there will be
any future.... I don't know whether the human tragi-comedy is now in Act I or
Act V, whether our present disorders are those of infancy or old age.6

