# 11 - 11.2 How powerful is evil?
[Metadata]: # {12.03}
[Descriptor]: # {12.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 11.2 How powerful is evil?
Evil is formidable. Its power shocks us. We are surprised to hear Gandalf say,
"I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still" (LOTR, p. 489).
And, from the same Gandalf, after the great victory in the Battle of the
Pelennor Fields, these words:

"Against the Power that has now arisen there is no victory....

"Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first great assault. The next
will be greater. This war then is without final hope, as Denethor perceived.
Victory cannot be achieved by arms. . . . I still hope for victory, but not by
arms" (LOTR, p. 860).

Evil is in fact immortal, since Satan is immortal. Like Ransom in Perelandra,
we can defeat only the temporary bodily forms that evil uses, the Un-men or
Nazgul or Orcs or evil Wizards. We can break the swords but not the Swordsman.
Only One can bruise his head, and only by being bruised in His heel.

All our victories against evil in this world are only temporary. The idea of
progress, central to modernity, is simply false. We have not progressed in
virtue or wisdom, only in power and cleverness. Good and evil are like odd and
even integers; science and technology are only their exponents. They multiply
whatever they are given, good or evil, odd or even.

The Ring is so powerful that no creature can overcome it. (Similarly,
Christianity teaches that sin is so powerful that no creature can overcome it.
Only God can, and only by His own death.)

If the Ring represents Sin, then we would expect that its destruction would be
impossible without the help of grace, and that is indeed what we find in The
Lord of the Rings.... Frodo is, of course, saved by an apparent accident, for
Gollum bites the Ring from his finger and falls into the Fire. This is in fact
the consequence of Frodo's earlier (and freer) decision to spare Gollum's life.
. . . Thus in the end it is not Frodo who saves Middle Earth at all, nor
Gollum. It can only be God himself, working through the love and freedom of his
creatures. The scene is a triumph of Providence over Evil but also a triumph of
Mercy.1

Let us explore the power of evil more exactly. The Ring has two powers: it
enhances whatever natural powers its user already has, and it gives him the new
power of invisibility. What is the connection between these two powers?

If you need deception to be powerful, then you need invisibility. If the Ring
gave you power without invisibility, your evil would be known, and you would be
caught and punished by having your power taken away. So the power of deception,
which is over others' minds (symbolized by the invisibility given by the Ring),
is an essential complement to the power over others' bodies and lives and
actions, which is also given by the Ring. Machiavelli and Hitler both
understood that principle; that's why they knew that propaganda was an
essential part of war. The evil empire that controls modern world media knows
that too, though its aim is not political conquest (like Machiavelli) or
military conquest (like Hitler) but the far more apocalyptic spiritual and
religious conquest of conscience, of souls.

Invisibility also means isolation. God alone can endure this (and only because
He is a Trinity of persons, a society in Himself). He is God alone; there is no
other. Yet He is other in Himself and never alone. God is a community. That is
why He needs no community, as we do.

The Ring cuts us off from community, and contact. We are alone with the Eye.
There is no room for two I's. There is no We in the I, no room for an Other in
the One Ring.

This is why the Ring surrounds emptiness. If We-ness, or Relationship, or Love,
or Trinity is the name of ultimate reality, then the Ring makes us unreal by
isolating us. It plunges us into its own emptiness, like a Black Hole. Its
circular shape is an image of that emptiness: it encloses nothingness with its
all-encompassing circle of power.

It is not a means to any further end. It is Nietzsche's "will to power" as
itself the end. Machiavelli taught that the end justified the means; Nietzsche
taught that the means (power) justified the end. Nietzsche's nihilism is more
demonic than Machiavelli's pragmatism. This philosophy sees life as a bubble:
empty and meaningless within and without; its only meaning is to expand its own
inner emptiness out into the outer emptiness, to make all Middle-earth into
itself, into Mordor. It is the Worm Orouboros, swallowing its own tail, being
its own god. It is the unholy icon of the inner life of Satan made visible.

Thus it images the very essence of sin, the first sin, Satan's sin: "Better to
rule in Hell than serve in Heaven." And when Satan tempted Adam (Man, us) with
it, Adam too tried to become invisible to God, to hide from the light, to give
excuses and pass the blame to the woman, and she to the Devil.

The Ring symbol goes back to Plato, and probably even beyond him. In Plato's
Republic we find the same Ring, with the same two powers. Or rather, Gyges
does. (Gollum has many echoes of Gyges.) Gyges is a little man but the Ring
makes him big. He is able to do anything he wants with impunity, since the Ring
makes him invisible. So he murders the king, marries the queen, inherits the
kingdom, and fools the people. Is he happy? That is the dramatic question of
the Republic. It gives us the answer in the abstract; The Lord of the Rings
gives us the same answer to the same question in the concrete.

Plato uses the Ring as the perfect contrast to Socrates, his Hobbit-like,
Frodo-like model for the wise and humble and therefore happy life. Socrates has
virtue in his soul, refuses to sell any of it for political power or survival,
and consequently is martyred by evil men to whom his inner goodness is
invisible. Socrates has the reality of goodness without the appearances of it
or the rewards of it. Gyges, on the other hand, has no real goodness, no
virtue, but through using the Ring he gets what he wants, which includes
apparent goodness and others' approval. For him, "Image is everything." His
injustice is invisible to others; he controls appearances. And thus he is an
apparent success. For, as Machiavelli argues, "Appearances are more important
than reality for the successful prince. For you alone see what you really are,
while everyone sees what you appear to be." In contrast, Socrates is a
"failure"—like Christ. Like Frodo. Frodo is indeed a "Christ figure". As Plato
used the Ring to contrast Gyges with Socrates, Tolkien uses the same Ring to
contrast Gollum with Frodo, and, ultimately, with Christ.

Plato's great challenge to us in the Republic is this: Why should we be good if
we can get whatever we want by being evil if we use the Ring of power and
remain invisible and unpunished? And his answer is that wanting what you should
is better than getting what you want.

But doesn't power make you happy, if it is the power to get whatever you want?
Isn't the only gap between us and happiness the gap of power? For if we are
unhappy only because we do not get what we want, because we do not have the
power to bridge the gap between desire and satisfaction, and if the Ring would
give us that power, then it follows that the Ring would make us happy. Thus
"injustice is more profitable than justice" if it has a Ring.

The philosophy is profoundly similar to that of Nietzsche's. Gollum is really a
small version of Nietzsche's "Overman". Sauron is a big one. It is no accident
that Nietzsche called his final summary of his philosophy "The Will to Power".
Nor is it a mere coincidence that the artist he found most fascinating was
Wagner, the author of that other artistic masterpiece that centers on the
Ring—exactly the same Ring. Both Plato and Tolkien write their masterpieces
precisely to refute this philosophy. The issue could not be more momentous:
nothing less than the meaning of life, the road to happiness.

Evil and injustice seem to be the secret of happiness sometimes, for they seem
to give us the power to attain our desires. What is missing in this philosophy,
for Plato, is wisdom: the wisdom to know ourselves and our desires. The thief
is a fool: he thinks he is a body, not a soul, and that he will be happy by
spending stolen money, ignoring his conscience. Tolkien would agree with this,
but he goes farther. He knows something else that is missing in this
Nietzschean philosophy: the power of weakness, the thing Nietzsche despised the
most, especially in Christianity. For Tolkien, as for the saints, strength
manifests itself most powerfully not in grasping and using power but in
renouncing it, mortifying desires, yielding, self-sacrifice, and martyrdom.
"The greatest examples of the action of the spirit ...are in abnegation"
(Letters, no. 186, p. 246).

Plato's answer to Gyges was philosophy, the love of wisdom, abstract knowledge.
Tolkien's answer to Nietzsche is sanctity, the sacrificial love of persons,
concrete acts of charity. That is why it is sufficient for Plato to prove his
point in the abstract (with great brilliance and accuracy, let it be added);
but Tolkien must show it concretely in the story that we see as our story.

