# 3 - 3.2 Do we have guardian angels?
[Metadata]: # {04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 3.2 Do we have guardian angels?
The leader of the Fellowship and of the opposition against Sauron is a guardian
angel. Tolkien says of Gandalf,

He was an incarnate "angel" . . . sent to Middle-earth, as the great crisis of
Sauron loomed on the horizon. By "incarnate" I mean they were embodied in
physical bodies capable of pain, and weariness, and of afflicting the spirit
with physical fear, and of being "killed". . . . Why they should take such a
form is . . . precisely to limit and hinder their exhibition of "power" on the
physical plane, and so that they should do what they were primarily sent for:
train, advise, instruct, arouse the hearts and minds of those threatened by
Sauron to a resistance with their own strengths, and not just to do the job for
them (Letters, no. 156, p. 202).

Before September 11, 2001, most of us saw America as the Hobbits saw the Shire,

as a district of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant corner of
the world they plied their well-ordered business of living; and they heeded
less and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to
think that peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the
Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace of the
Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember it (LOTR,
p. 5).

Tolkien believed that we too have guardians, and they are not the CIA or the
FBI. We are guarded not by guardian agents but by guardian angels. And it is
good to know a little about them—but not too much. For, as Pippin says, " 'We
can't live long on the heights.' 'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any
rate. But at least, Pippin, we can now see them, and honour them . . . and not
a gaffer could tend his garden in what he calls peace but for them, whether he
knows about them or not. I am glad I know about them a little' " (LOTR, p.
852). And so are we.

The highest of the "guardian angels" in The Lord of the Rings is Elbereth. At
the most critical juncture in the Quest, Sam is inspired to invoke her by name,
"speaking in tongues" (language is always the clearest indicator of importance
in Tolkien):

A Elbereth Gilthoniel

O menel palan-diriel,

le nallon si di-nguruthos!

A tiro nin, Fanuilos! (LOTR, p. 712)

This translates as: "O Elbereth Starkindler from heaven gazing-afar, to thee I
cry now in the shadow of death. O look towards me, Everwhite."

Indeed, Tolkien writes, "I am a Christian (which can be deduced from my
stories), and in fact a Roman Catholic. The latter 'fact' perhaps cannot be
deduced; though one critic (by letter) asserted that the invocations of
Elbereth, and the character of Galadriel . . . were clearly related to Catholic
devotion to Mary" (Letters, no. 213 , p. 288). Tolkien introduces Elbereth in
The Silmarillion as "Varda, Lady of the Stars, who knows all the regions of Ea.
Too great is her beauty to be declared in the words of Men, or of Elves; for
the light of Iluvatar lives still in her face. In light is her power and her
joy" (Silmarillion, p. 27). He also says of Galadriel: "I think it is true that
I owe much of this character to Christian and Catholic teaching and imagination
about Mary" (Letters, no. 220, p. 407). And he writes to Fr. Robert Murray,
S.J., "I think I know exactly what you mean by the order of Grace; and of
course by your references to Our Lady, upon which all my own small perception
of beauty both in majesty and simplicity is founded" (Letters, no. 142, p.
172).

C. S. Lewis was not a Roman Catholic; in fact, he treated the Roman Catholic
Church as an Irishman afraid of marriage treats a woman. He did not have the
"Marian" dimension that Tolkien had. (Yet a doctoral dissertation entitled "The
Marian Dimension in the Writings of C. S. Lewis" was written at Rome's
Gregorian University.) But he did have the "angelic" dimension Tolkien had,
especially regarding guardian angels. In The Screwtape Letters, Lewis looks
through the eyes of Screwtape, a senior demon writing to his apprentice demon,
Wormwood, whose human patient has just died in the state of grace, and he
imagines what it will be like for us to see our guardian angels when we die,
and to know their role in our lives:

"You have let a soul slip through your fingers. . . . How well I know what
happened at the instant when they snatched him from you! There was a sudden
clearing of the eyes (was there not?) as he saw you for the first time, and
recognized the part you had had in him and knew that you had it no longer. . .
.

"As he saw you, he also saw Them. I know how it was. You reeled back dizzy and
blinded. . . . The degradation of it!—that this thing of earth and slime could
stand upright and converse with spirits before whom you, a spirit, could only
cower. . . . When he saw them he knew that he had always known them and
realized what part each one of them had played at many an hour in his life when
he had supposed himself alone, so that now he could say to them, one by one,
not 'Who are you?' but 'So it was you all the time'. . . . The dim
consciousness of friends about him which had haunted his solitudes from infancy
was now at last explained; that central music in every pure experience which
has always just evaded memory was now at last recovered."3

