# 10 - 10.2 Can war be noble?
[Metadata]: # {11.03}
[Descriptor]: # {11.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 10.2 Can war be noble?
War has always been that function of the State which touches individual human
lives most radically. War is literally a matter of life or death. It is the art
of killing those who want to kill you—but on a collective scale. Only a State
can wage a war. When an individual kills on his own authority, it is called
murder.

The two simplest philosophies of war are, of course, pacifism and militarism.
Pacifism demonizes war, militarism glorifies it. These are the two easy and
obvious philosophies of war, and they are as simplistic as are optimism and
pessimism in answering to the problem of whether man is by nature good or evil.
Tolkien accepts neither. He subscribes to the traditional Just War Theory,
which takes a middle road. It is not a moral compromise; it is just as
moralistic, as idealistic, and as absolutistic, as pacifism or militarism. It
does not believe that "the end justifies the means", or that "all's fair in
love and war."

Faramir expresses Tolkien's philosophy of war perfectly when he says to Frodo
concerning the Ring:

"I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway. Not were Minas Tirith
falling in ruin and I alone could save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark
Lord for her good and my glory. No, I do not wish for such triumphs." . . .

"I would see ...Minas Tirith in peace: Minas Anor again as of old, full of
light, high and fair, beautiful as a queen among other queens: not a mistress
of many slaves, nay, not even a kind mistress of willing slaves. War must be,
while we defend our lives against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do
not love the bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow for its swiftness,
nor the warrior for his glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of
the Men of Numenor; and I would have her loved for her memory, her ancientry,
her beauty, and her present wisdom. Not feared, save as men may fear the
dignity of a man, old and wise" (LOTR, p. 656).

But this philosophy was apparently incomprehensible to the movie makers. Why
else would they gratuitously change Faramir from heroic, honorable medieval
knight to suspicious, uncertain fool who kidnaps Frodo and the Ring (at least
temporarily)? This was the movie's single most substantial change in Tolkien's
text.

Tolkien's distinctive contribution to the philosophy of war consists not just
in the fairly common achievement of avoiding the two extremes of pacifism and
militarism, but in the uncommon achievement of restoring the sense of the glory
of a just war. It is not just a dirty job, or an unfortunate duty, it is a
glorious thing. It is hard for most of us to feel, with the Roman poet, that
"it is a sweet and just thing to die for your country" (dulce et decorum est
pro patria mori). But it is hard not to feel your heart leap with joy at
Theoden's transformation into a warrior and his "last battle" ride with the
Rohirrim to save Gondor:

Theoden could not be overtaken. Fey he seemed, or the battle-fury of his
fathers ran like new fire in his veins, and he was borne up on Snowmane like a
god of old, even as Orome the Great in the battle of the Valar when the world
was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo! It shone like an image of
the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the white feet of his steed. For
morning came, morning and a wind from the sea; and darkness was removed, and
the hosts of Mordor wailed, and terror took them, and they fled, and died, and
the hoofs of wrath rode over them. And then all the host of Rohan burst into
song, and they sang as they slew, for the joy of battle was on them, and the
sound of their singing that was fair and terrible came even to the City (LOTR,
p. 820).

As Lewis says in Mere Christianity, for the ancients a just war could be
glorious, but for us moderns it is just a necessary dirty job, like cleaning
toilets:

The idea of the knight—the Christian in arms for the defense of a good cause—is
one of the great Christian ideas. War is a dreadful thing, and I can respect an
honest pacifist, though I think he is entirely mistaken. What I cannot
understand is this sort of semipacifism you get nowadays which gives people the
idea that though you have to fight, you ought to do it with a long face and as
if you were ashamed of it. . . . I have often thought to myself how it would
have been if, when I served in the first world war, I and some young German had
killed each other simultaneously and found ourselves together a moment after
death. I cannot imagine that either of us would have felt any resentment or
even any embarrassment. I think we might have laughed over it (Mere
Christianity, p. 107).

The ultimate reason for the loss of this vision is cosmo-logical: we have lost
(but Lewis has not) the ancient vision of St. John in the Book of Revelation
and St. Augustine in The City of God, that war on earth is always a
manifestation of war in Heaven. The war between Sauron and Gandalf is a battle
within the older and greater war between Melkor and Iluvatar.

Yet Tolkien believes there is a proper and honorable place for pacifists even
in wartime. He explicitly says so when discussing Tom Bombadil, whom he labels
both a contemplative (rather like a monk or mystic) and a pacifist:

He represents something important. . . . It is a natural pacifist view, which
always arises in the mind when there is a war. But the view of Rivendell seems
to be that it is an excellent thing to have represented, but there are in fact
things with which it cannot cope: and upon which its existence depends.
Ultimately only the victory of the West will allow Bombadil to continue, or
even to survive (Letters, no. 144, pp. 178-79).

Notice the difference between this "natural pacifist view" for special cases,
like monks and mystics (and Bombadil), and ideological pacifism as a universal
moral obligation.

C. S. Lewis's "Why I Am Not a Pacifist", a talk to the Pacifist Society,
summarizes Tolkien's philosophy of war as well as his own. His two most potent
arguments seem to be the following, the first being one of fact and the second
one of religious principle:

The main contention urged as fact by pacifists would be that wars always do
more harm than good. . . . "Wars do no good" involves the proposition that if
the Greeks had yielded to Xerxes and the Romans to Hannibal, the course of
history ever since would have been perhaps better, but certainly no worse than
it actually has been; that a Mediterranean world in which Carthaginian power
succeeded Persian would have been at least as good and happy and as fruitful
for all posterity as the actual Mediterranean world in which Roman power
succeeded Greek. ... On the test of the fact, then, I find the Pacifist
position weak. It seems to me that history is full of useful wars as well as of
useless wars. . . .

It is arguable that a criminal can always be satisfactorily dealt with without
the death penalty. It is certain that a whole nation cannot be prevented from
taking what it wants except by war.... [Pacifism] seems to imply a materialist
ethic, a belief that death and pain are the greatest evils. But I do not think
they are. I think the suppression of a higher religion by a lower, or even a
higher secular culture by a lower, a much greater evil. . . . Of course war is
a very great evil. But that is not the question. The question is whether war is
the greatest evil in the world, so that any state of affairs which might result
from submission is certainly preferable. And I do not see any really cogent
arguments for that view....

The whole Christian case for Pacifism rests on . . . utterances such as "Resist
not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also." . . . I think the text means exactly what it says. . . . No
quarter whatever is given to the voice within us which says, "He's done it to
me, so I'll do the same to him." But the moment you introduce other factors, of
course, the problem is altered. Does anyone suppose that Our Lord's hearers
understood Him to mean that if a homicidal maniac, attempting to murder a third
party, tried to knock me out of the way, I must stand aside and let him get his
victim? . . . Indeed, as the audience were private people in a disarmed nation,
it seems unlikely that they would have ever supposed Our Lord to be referring
to war. War was not what they would have been thinking of. The frictions of
daily life among villagers were more likely to be in their minds. . . .

St. Paul approves of the magistrate's use of the sword (Romans 13:4) and so
does St. Peter (I Peter 2:14). If Our Lord's words are taken in that
unqualified sense which the Pacifist demands, we shall then be forced to the
conclusion that Christ's true meaning, concealed from those who lived in the
same time and spoke the same language, and whom He Himself chose to be His
messengers to the world, as well as from all their successors, has at last been
discovered in our own time.5

