# 8 - Aesthetics
[Metadata]: # {09.01}
[Descriptor]: # {09.01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# Aesthetics
Of all the divisions of philosophy, this one seems the most resistant to
analysis. What is beauty, and why does it move us so? Only a few threads are
clear in this rope that tugs on our hearts. One of them is glory.

8. 1 Why do we no longer love glory or splendor?

Glory and splendor are certainly neither modern nor "familiar". Yet they
contribute not only to beauty but also to joy, to human fulfillment. If we are
created for royal glory, then royal glory will fulfill us, however
unfashionable our ideology makes it.

The things in The Lord of the Rings that reflect this glory are manifold, and
include humble, Hobbit-like things as well as exalted, Elvish things. Words and
language reveal them, and it is not clear whether it is the glory of the things
that justifies the words or the glory of the words that justifies the things.
The original inspiration for The Lord of the Rings was linguistic. "In the
beginning was the Word" for Tolkien as for God.

C. S. Lewis saw The Lord of the Rings as a near miracle largely because of its
high style and its effect on the human spirit. His review of volume one began
thus: "This book is lightning from a clear sky. . . . The names alone are a
feast. .. . They embody that piercing, high, Elvish beauty of which no other
prose writer has captured so much. . . . Here are beauties which pierce like
swords or burn like cold iron; here is a book that will break your heart."1

In fact, Lewis's aesthetic centers on just this: the power to break hearts.

Have you not seen that in our days

Of any whose story, song, or art

Delights us, our sincerest praise

Means, when all's said, 'You break my heart'?2

In An Experiment in Criticism Lewis defines a great book as one that elicits
great reading, and he defines great reading as conjuring up great literary
experiences, such as wonder and joy—exactly why Tolkien said he wrote The Lord
of the Rings; in his foreword to the second edition he wrote, "The prime motive
was the desire of a tale-teller to try his hand at a really long story that
would hold the attention of readers, amuse them, delight them, and at times
maybe excite them or deeply move them" (LOTR, p. xvi).

Lewis explains the high style of epic in A Preface to "Paradise Lost". Though
he is speaking of poetry, especially Milton's, what he says is also true of
epic prose like Tolkien's, especially in The Silmarillion. Epic has

a quality. . . which moderns find difficult to understand. . . . The quality
will be understood by any one who really understands the meaning of the Middle
English word solempne. This means something different, but not quite different,
from modern English solemn. Like solemn it implies the opposite of what is
familiar, free and easy, or ordinary. But unlike solemn it does not suggest
gloom, oppression, or austerity. . . . A great mass by Mozart or Beethoven is
as much a solemnity in its hilarious Gloria as in its poignant crucifixus est.
Feasts are, in this sense, more solemn than fasts. . . . The very fact that
pompous is now used only in a bad sense measures the degree to which we have
lost the old idea of "solemnity." . . . In an age when every one puts on his
oldest clothes to be happy in, you must re-awake the simpler state of mind in
which people put on gold and scarlet to be happy in. Above all, you must be rid
of the hideous idea, fruit of a widespread inferiority complex, that pomp, on
the proper occasions, has any connexion with vanity or self-conceit. A
celebrant approaching the altar, a princess led out by a king to dance a
minuet, a general officer on a ceremonial parade, a major-domo preceding the
boar's head at a Christmas feast—all these wear unusual clothes and move with
calculated dignity. This does not mean that they are vain, but that they are
obedient. . . . The modern habit of doing ceremonial things unceremoniously is
no proof of humility; rather it proves the offender's inability to forget
himself in the rite. . . . We moderns may like dances which are hardly
distinguishable from walking and poetry which sounds as if it might be uttered
ex tempore. Our ancestors did not. They liked a dance which was a dance, and
fine clothes which no one could mistake for working clothes, and feasts that no
one could mistake for ordinary dinners, and poetry that unblushingly proclaimed
itself to be poetry. What is the point of having a poet, inspired by the Muse,
if he tells the stories just as you or I would have told them? . . . When we
are caught up into the experience which a "grand" style communicates, we are,
in a sense, no longer conscious of the style. Incense is consumed by being
used.3

