# Conclusion - Can any one man incarnate every truth and virtue?
[Metadata]: # {15.01}
[Descriptor]: # {15.01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# Can any one man incarnate every truth and virtue?
Throughout the New Testament we find a shocking simplicity: Christ does not
merely teach the truth, He is the truth; He does not merely show us the way, He
is the way; He does not merely give us eternal life, He is that life. He does
not merely teach or purchase our wisdom, our righteousness and sanctification
and redemption, but "God made [Him] our wisdom, our righteousness and
sanctification and redemption" (1 Cor 1:30). How can all these universal values
and truths be really and completely present in one concrete individual person?
Only if that Person is divine (thus universal) as well as human (thus
particular); only by the Incarnation; only by what Lewis calls "myth become
fact".

Tolkien, like most Catholics, saw pagan myths not as wholly mistaken (as most
Protestants do), but as confused precursors of Christianity. Man's soul has
three powers, and God left him prophets for all three: Jewish moralists for his
will, Greek philosophers for his mind, and pagan mythmakers for his heart and
imagination and feelings. Of course, the latter two are not infallible. C. S.
Lewis calls pagan myths "gleams of celestial strength and beauty falling on a
jungle of filth and imbecility" (Perelandra, p. 201). One of the key steps in
Lewis's conversion, as recounted in his autobiography, Surprised by Joy, was
his reading the chapter in Chesterton's The Everlasting Man that showed him the
relationship between Christianity and pagan myths of salvation, death, and
resurrection. Christianity was "myth become fact".

Tolkien's Catholic tradition tends to have a high opinion of pagans who know
and follow the "natural law", for it interprets these pagans not apart from
Christ, but as imperfectly knowing Him. For Christ is not just a
thirty-three-year-old, six-foot-tall Jewish carpenter, but the eternal Logos,
the Mind of God, "the true light that enlightens every man" (Jn 1:9). So Christ
can be present even when not adequately known in paganism. This is exactly what
St. Paul told the Athenians (in Acts 17:23): "What therefore you worship as
unknown, this I proclaim to you." Christ's presence is not limited to the
presence of the explicit knowledge of Christ, or the revelation of Christ. As
the Reformed tradition puts it, there is also "general revelation" as well as
"special revelation".

So even though The Lord of the Rings is not an allegory of the Gospels, we can
find numerous parallels to the Gospels in The Lord of the Rings, since the
Person at the center of the Gospels is omnipresent in hidden ways, not only in
His eternal, universal nature as Truth, Goodness, and Beauty, but even in His
particular historical manifestation, His Incarnation. For instance, Frodo's
journey up Mount Doom is strikingly similar to Christ's Way of the Cross. Sam
is his Simon of Cyrene, but he carries the cross bearer as well as the cross.

There is no one complete, concrete, visible Christ figure in The Lord of the
Rings, like Aslan in Narnia. But Christ is really, though invisibly, present in
the whole of The Lord of the Rings. The Lord of the Rings is like the
Eucharist. Under its appearances we find Christ, who under these (pagan,
universal) figures (symbols, not allegories), is truly hidden: quae sub his
figuris vere latitat.

He is more clearly present in Gandalf, Frodo, and Ara-gorn, the three Christ
figures. First of all, all three undergo different forms of death and
resurrection (see section 5.1). Second, all three are saviors: through their
self-sacrifice they help save all of Middle-earth from the demonic sway of
Sauron. Third, they exemplify the Old Testament threefold Messianic symbolism
of prophet (Gandalf), priest (Frodo), and king (Aragorn). These three "job
descriptions" correspond to the three distinctively human powers of the soul,
as discovered by nearly every psychologist from Plato to Freud: head, heart,
and hands, or mind, emotions, and will. For this reason many great tales have
three protagonists: Gandalf, Frodo, and Aragorn; Mr. Spock, Bones McCoy, and
Captain Kirk; Ivan, Alyosha, and Dmitri Karamazov; St. John the philosophical
mystic, St. James the practical moralist, and St. Peter the courageous leader
and Rock.

A fourth hidden presence of Christ in The Lord of the Rings is in the theme of
divine providence (see section 2. 2); for from the New Testament point of view
Christ is the supreme example in history of divine providenceâ€”in fact, the
single point of all other examples, of all history.

A fifth presence of Christ in The Lord of the Rings is in the creative power of
its language (see sections 9.1 and 9.3). Christ is the Logos, the Word of God.
He is mentioned in the Bible as early as Genesis 1:3 (cf. Jn 1:3), but as a
verb, not a noun.

A sixth presence is ecclesial. Tolkien was a Catholic and called The Lord of
the Rings "a Catholic book" (see section 2. 4). He removed "churches" from The
Lord of the Rings not only to avoid anachronism but also to show the presence,
in the depths of his plot, of the universal ("catholic") Church. For the Church
is not only an organization but also an organism, an invisible, "mystical"
Body, a "fellowship". The word "church", from the Greek ek-klesia, means "the
called-out". A good description of the Fellowship of the Ring.

For the Church, too, is a "fellowship of a ring", but her ring is exactly the
opposite of Sauron's. It is the Eucharist: a little wafer that is equally
round, but full rather than empty; the humble extension of the Incarnation of
God into man rather than the proud self-exaltation of man in order to make
himself God. The Ring takes your life, your blood, like Dracula, a perfect
opposite to Christ, Who comes to give His blood, to give us a blood
transfusion. The two symbols are perfect opposites: the Ring of Power and the
Bread of Weakness, the Lord of the Rings and the Lamb of God.

The whole of history, as revealed in the Bible, is the cosmic jihad between
Christ and Antichrist, martyr and vampire, humility of God versus pride of man.
Throughout the Bible there is vertical symbolism exemplifying this contrast.
Paradise is made in Eden by God's self-giving descent and lost through man's
self-taking, man's succumbing to the devil's temptation to become "like God".
The apparent rise is really the "fall". After Paradise is lost, the City of Man
tries to rise up to Heaven again by its own power, in the Tower of Babel, and
falls. And when Paradise is finally regained, the New Jerusalem of the City of
God descends from Heaven as a grace.

The most fundamental Christian symbol is the Cross. This also is perfectly
opposite to the Ring. The Cross gives life; the Ring takes it. The Cross gives
you death, not power; the Ring gives you power even over death. The Ring
squeezes everything into its inner emptiness; the Cross expands in all four
directions, gives itself to the emptiness, filling it with its blood, its life.
The Ring is Dracula's tooth. The Cross isGod's sword, held at the hilt by the
hand of Heaven and plunged into the world not to take our blood but to give us
His. The Cross is Christ's hypodermic; the Ring is Dracula's bite. The Cross
saves other wills; the Ring dominates other wills. The Cross liberates; the
Ring enslaves.

The Cross works only freely, by the vulnerability of love. Love is vulnerable
to rejection, and thus apparent failure. Frodo offers Gollum free kindness, but
he fails to win Gollum's trust and fails himself, at the Crack of Doom, to
complete his task. But his philosophy does not fail.

He could have used the philosophy of Sauron, of the Ring. He could have used
force and compelled Gollum, or even justly killed him. But no one can make
another person good by controlling his will, not even God. Frodo nearly won
Gollum by his kindness, but Gollum chose not to trust and lost both his body
and his soul. Frodo failed.

There is no room for failure in the philosophy of Sauron. There is room for
failure in the philosophy of Tolkien, for the philosophy of Tolkien is simply
Christianity. And according to Christianity, the most revealing thing that ever
happened in history happened at another Crack of Doom, when Christ "failed",
lost, died. That was how the meek little Lamb defeated the great dragon beast
(see Rev 17, especially verse 14): by His blood. Frodo did what Christ did, and
it "worked" because Christ did it, because it was real, not fantasy, and it was
real because the real world is a "Christian" world. Only in a Christian world
can this "failure" have such power.

It is a very strange philosophy. A few pagan sages like Lao Tzu understood the
principle of the power of weakness, but he did not know it would come from a
literal, bloody event in history. Neither did Frodo. Like Socrates, Buddha, and
Lao Tzu, Frodo did not see Christ, yet somehow believed: "Blessed are those who
have not seen and yet believe" (Jn 20:29).

