# 2 - 2.4 Can we relate to God by "religion"?
[Metadata]: # {03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 2.4 Can we relate to God by "religion"?
Because The Lord of the Rings takes place in pre-Christian times, it could not
be a Christian book without anachronism. But it is religious:

It is a monotheistic world of "natural theology." The odd fact that there are
no churches, temples, or religious rites and ceremonies, is simply part of the
historical climate depicted. . . . I am in any case a Christian, but the "Third
Age" was not a Christian world (Letters, no. 165, p. 220).

Flannery O'Connor defined the Christian novel not as a novel about
Christianity, Christians, or a Christian world, but "one in which the truth as
Christians know it has been used as a light to see the world by".5 Light
"looked along" instead of "looked at": this is exactly Lewis's image in
"Meditation in a Toolshed" (see section 6.2). A universal light from an
invisible source: this is almost exactly the image Sam uses for Lothlorien (see
LOTR, p. 351; see also page 69, below, where it is also the image an agnostic
reader of The Lord of the Rings used in a letter to Tolkien for the theism of
the whole book [Letters, no. 328, p. 413]).

The absence of temples, rites, and ceremonies does not make The Lord of the
Rings nonreligious, but there is one religious act whose absence does seem to
make The Lord of the Rings nonreligious. That act is prayer. Prayer is near the
heart of religion, because "religion" means "relationship", or "binding
relationship", between God and man (or Elf or Hobbit). Prayer touches the life
of everyone except atheists. Therefore, with incredible irony, Hollywood
"corrected" Tolkien here by adding this religious element: Arwen's prayer for
the dying Frodo after the Morgul knife pierced him at Weathertop. Is Hollywood
more religious than Tolkien? No, just more overt. Peter Jackson put prayer back
into the surface of the story because the surface is where movie audiences
live. But he put it into the surface because he sensed that it was already
there at the heart of the story.

We can distinguish four ways a story can be religious, corresponding to
Aristotle's Four Causes. A story can be religious (1) in its material cause, or
subject matter; (2) in its final cause, or purpose; (3) in its formal cause, or
structure; or (4) in its efficient cause, or origin.

1. The Lord of the Rings is not religious in its subject matter: it is not
about religion. But the reason for this, according to Tolkien's explicit
strategy, is to make the story more religious:

The Lord of the Rings is of course a fundamentally religious and Catholic work;
unconsciously so at first but consciously in the revision. I . . . therefore
have cut out practically all references to anything like "religion," to cults
and practices in the imaginary world, for the religious element is absorbed
into the story and the symbolism (Letters, no. 156, p. 201).

I have deliberately written a tale which is built on or out of certain
"religious" ideas, but is not an allegory of them (Letters, no. 211, p. 283).

I have purposely kept all allusions to the highest matters down to mere hints,
perceptible only by the most attentive. . . . So God and the angelic gods, . .
. only peep through in such places as Gandalf's conversation with Frodo:
"behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the
Ring-maker's" or in Faramir's Numenorean grace at dinner (Letters, no. 156, p.
201).

The Lord of the Rings is a myth, and myth is naturally religious. Tolkien
writes, "Something really 'higher' is occasionally glimpsed in mythology:
Divinity, the right to power (as distinct from its possession), the due
worship; in fact 'religion' " ("On Fairy-Stories", p. 25).

To readers or critics who insist that The Lord of the Rings is not a religious
book, and therefore the question of God's existence is irrelevant to it,
Tolkien himself replies that the main character of The Lord of the Rings is
God, and the main issue is God's honor:

In The Lord of the Rings the conflict is not basically about "freedom," though
that is naturally involved. It is about God, and His sole right to divine
honour. . . . Sauron desired to be a God-King. ... If he had been victorious he
would have demanded divine honour from all rational creatures and absolute
temporal power over the whole world (Letters, no. 183, pp. 243-44).

So the most fundamental conflict in The Lord of the Rings is religious? Of
course! Why else is Sauron's desire to play God by using the Ring evil unless
it is contrary to reality, that is, unless God is real and only God is God? It
is a very simple and obvious point, and an absolutely central one to the story
and to its central symbol, the Ring. Yet it will sound shocking to those who
cannot admit loving anything "religious" but cannot help loving The Lord of the
Rings.

2. The Lord of the Rings is not religious in its conscious, originating motive
and purpose. Tolkien did not begin by saying, "Let's see now; I'd like to
convert people or make them saints. How shall I do it? Let's try a story."

Yet he did declare, to one critic, "I would claim . . . to have as one object
the elucidation of truth and the encouragement of good morals in the real world
by the ancient device of exemplifying them in unfamiliar embodiments, that may
tend to 'bring them home' " (Letters, no. 153 , p. 194). This end does not
necessarily require either allegory or conscious "moralism" as its means.

3 . The main way The Lord of the Rings is religious is in its form, its
structure: (a) of its worldview and thus of its world, its setting, the world
of Middle-earth; (b) of the plot, full of providential design and cosmic
justice; and (c) of the characters as manifesting themes like providence,
grace, heroism, hierarchy, glory, resurrection, piety, duty, authority,
obedience, tradition, humility, and "eucatastrophe" (see section 5 . 1). All
these themes (which we will explore later in this book) have a religious
dimension.

If the antireligious person loves this story, he must unconsciously love the
Christian story, not because The Lord of the Rings is an allegory of
Christianity but because its author's mind and philosophy are one with that of
the Author of the Christian story.

Take a specific instance. Nonreligious people usually believe in compassion and
mercy, but not that mercy will be rewarded, if there is no God. But
Christianity knows it will, even in this world, because the plot of human
history is written by a God Who loves mercy. Thus the apparently foolish mercy
that spares Gollum time after time is rewarded at the Crack of Doom. The reader
sees that, at least unconsciously, and if his heart is open to loving that, he
is on the way to believing and loving the God Who is behind that "mercy system"
whose literal Crack of Doom in our world was Calvary.

4. The Lord of the Rings may also be religious in its efficient cause, i.e.,
something like divine inspiration. Tolkien wrote of a visitor who startled him
by saying:

"Of course you don't suppose, do you, that you wrote all that book yourself?"

Pure Gandalf! I was too well acquainted with G. ... to ask what he meant. I
think I said: "No, I don't suppose so any longer." I have never since been able
to suppose so. An alarming conclusion for an old philologist to draw concerning
his private amusement. But not one that should puff any one up who considers
the imperfections of "chosen instruments." . . .

You speak of "a sanity and sanctity" in The L.R. "which is a power in itself."
I was deeply moved. Nothing of the kind had been said to me before. But by a
strange chance, just as I was beginning this letter, I had one from a man, who
classified himself as "an unbeliever, or at best a man of belatedly and dimly
dawning religious feeling. . . . But you," he said, "create a world in which
some sort of faith seems to be everywhere without a visible source, like light
from an invisible lamp." I can only answer: "Of his own sanity no man can
securely judge. If sanctity inhabits his work or as a pervading light illumines
it then it does not come from him but through him. And neither of you would
perceive it in these terms unless it was with you also" (Letters, no. 328, p.
413).

"Light from an invisible lamp"â€”that is almost exactly Sam's description of the
Elvish forest of Lorien:

"If there's any magic about, it's right down deep, where I can't lay my hands
on it, in a manner of speaking."

"You can see and feel it everywhere," said Frodo. "Well," said Sam, "you can't
see nobody working it" (LOTR, p. 351).

Exactly the way God runs the universe.

