# 7 - 7.5 Is human life a tragedy or a comedy?
[Metadata]: # {08.05}
[Descriptor]: # {08.05}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 7.5 Is human life a tragedy or a comedy?
A pessimist like Tolkien can be a happy man. Both Tolkien and Lewis, who were
traditionalists, conservatives, and pessimists rather than progressives, had an
optimistic attitude toward ordinary life. Both lived good lives even in a
purely material sense: they were able to enjoy the simple, best things in life,
such as walking and weather and conversation with friends. We find the opposite
connection on the part of the ideological Left, between their desperately
optimistic philosophy of history and their inability to admit or enjoy
ordinary, earthy Hobbit-like bourgeois pleasures. Indeed, no word is more
despicable in the Marxist vocabulary than "bourgeois".

Tolkien was not an optimist by temperament but by conviction. Had he
philosophized by feeling rather than faith, he would never have been able to
make both halves of this statement, in 1944:

I sometimes feel appalled at the thought of the sum total of human misery. . .
. If anguish were visible, almost the whole of this benighted planet would be
enveloped in a dense dark vapour. . . . But ...evil labours with vast power and
perpetual success—in vain: preparing always only the soil for unexpected good
to sprout in (Letters, no. 64, p. 76).

Tolkien knows this by faith in the God who joins goodness and power in one
being. But he also knows it by philosophical reason, for evil is a parasite on
good; being as such is good. Therefore the more evil a thing is, the more it
approaches nonbeing. Evil is self-destructive.

Whether or not "optimism" is the right word for Tolkien's temperament, it is
the wrong word for his philosophy. The right one is "hope". The chances of
history coming out well seem slim. But it happens. And it is precisely because
the chances of salvation seem so slim that the victory is very precious—as
Tolkien explains in "On Fairy-Stories".

The Eucatastrophe, or Happy Ending, is not only consolation but truth—if the
gospel, the "good news", is not a lie. From the premise that Christianity is
true it follows that the far-off glimpse of joy produced by fantasy is a
glimpse of truth; that a great eucatastrophic tale like The Lord of the Rings
is a gift of divine grace, an opening of the curtain that veils Heaven to
earthly eyes, a tiny telepathic contact with the Mind of God.

There are at least two great eucatastrophes in The Lord of the Rings. The most
dramatic one is at the Crack of Doom. Sam and Frodo are at the end of their
road, utterly hopeless and prepared to die. One of Frodo's fingers has already
fallen into the Crack of Doom, surrounded by the Ring and Gollum's teeth; and
the rest of Frodo and Sam are about to follow when Mount Orodruin erupts. But
Frodo has completed his Quest: this is his joy. As for Sam, Frodo's return from
what could be called spiritual death is his joy. Sam sees Frodo "pale and worn,
and yet himself again. . . . 'Master!' cried Sam, and fell upon his knees. In
all that ruin of the world, for the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The
burden was gone. His master had been saved; he was himself again, he was free"
(LOTR, p. 926).

It is not his physical survival afterward that is the eucatastrophe. Had he
died, as most epic heroes do (e.g., Arthur and Beowulf), the eucatastrophe
would have been unmarred—just as Job would have been happy in the end even if
he had not recovered his health, possessions, and family, so long as he saw
God. The essential triumph is spiritual.

The joy of both Frodo and Sam is pure and poignant because of their unselfish
love: Sam for Frodo, Frodo for the Shire and all of Middle-earth, which he has
saved. They are not "winners". They are wounded and ready to die, and they have
succeeded only by an incredible grace, not by force of mind or body, plans or
arms. Frodo, in fact, failed; it was Gollum who completed the impossible task.
The nearly miraculous outcome leaves the reader no room for pride or
self-righteousness, as many "happy endings" do.

The second eucatastrophe is described more honorifically—in fact, liturgically.
It resembles what we will surely experience in Heaven. This comes just a little
later, after the rescue. Here too it is Frodo's honor that is the source of
Sam's joy:

Gandalf stood before him robed in white. . . . "Well, Master Samwise, how do
you feel?" he said.

But Sam lay back and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between
bewilderment and great joy, he could not answer. At last he gasped: "Gandalf! I
thought you were dead! But then I thought I was dead myself. Is everything sad
going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?"

"A great Shadow has departed," said Gandalf, and then he laughed, and the sound
was like music, or like water in a parched land; and as he listened the thought
came to Sam that he had not heard laughter, the pure sound of merriment, for
days upon days without count. It fell on his ears like the echo of all the joys
he had ever known. And he burst into tears. . . .

And then, to Sam's final and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of
Gondor stood forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold! He said:
". . . I will sing to you of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom."

And when Sam heard that, he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and he stood up
and cried, "O great glory and splendour! And all my wishes have come true!" And
then he wept.

And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment and
tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all men
were hushed. And he sang to them, now in the Elven-tongue, now in the speech of
the West, until their hearts, wounded with sweet words, overflowed, and their
joy was like swords, and they passed in thought out to regions where pain and
delight flow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness (LOTR, pp.
930-931, 933).

We are that laughing and weeping host, and Tolkien is our minstrel.

Eucatastrophe, of course, is almost the opposite of "progressivism". Both are
"happy endings", but the first is sheer grace, while the second is necessity.
We are "surprised by joy" in eucatastrophe, while we are surprised by evil and
failure if we are "progressives".

The locus classicus in Lewis for the refutation of progressivism is "The
Funeral of a Great Myth". The myth he refutes in this essay is not just
historical optimism but also the more general cosmic progressivism,
evolutionism, or optimism that it exemplifies. After praising this cosmic Myth
of Progress for its imaginative power (man, the unlikely hero, evolving from
slime, outlasting dinosaurs, becoming cleverer and cleverer—"Let no one say we
are an unimaginative age: neither the Greeks nor the Norsemen ever invented a
better story"), he gives its logical refutation,

noting the fatal self-contradiction which runs right through it. . . . The Myth
asks me to believe that reason is simply the unforeseen and unintended
by-product of a mindless process at one stage of its endless and aimless
becoming. The content of the Myth thus knocks from under me the only ground on
which I could possibly believe the Myth to be true. If my own mind is a product
of the irrational—if what seem my clearest reasonings are only the way in which
a creature conditioned as I am is bound to feel—how shall I trust my mind when
it tells me about Evolution? . . . The fact that some people of scientific
education cannot by any effort be taught to see the difficulty, confirms one's
suspicion that we here touch a radical disease in their whole style of
thought.7

What accounts for this blind spot? Lewis goes on to explain:

The basic idea of the Myth—that small or chaotic or feeble things perpetually
turn themselves into large, strong, ordered things—may, at first sight, seem a
very odd one. We have never actually seen a pile of rubble turning itself into
a house. But this odd idea commends itself to the imagination by the help of
what seem to be two instances of it within everyone's knowledge. Everyone has
seen individual organisms doing it. Acorns become oaks, grubs become insects,
eggs become birds, every man was once an embryo. And secondly—which weighs very
much in the popular mind during a machine age—everyone has seen Evolution
really happening in the history of machines. We all remember when locomotives
were smaller and less efficient than they are now. These two apparent instances
are quite enough to convince the imagination that Evolution in a cosmic sense
is the most natural thing in the world. [But] ...reason cannot here agree with
imagination. These apparent instances are not really instances of Evolution at
all. The oak comes indeed from the acorn, but then the acorn was dropped by an
earlier oak. Every man begins with the union of an ovum and a spermatozoon, but
the ovum and the spermatozoon came from two fully developed human beings. The
modern express engine came from the Rocket: but the Rocket came, not from
something more elementary than itself but from something much more developed
and highly organized—the mind of a man, and a man of genius (ibid., p. 90).

