# 5 - 5.2 Is romance more thrilling than sex?
[Metadata]: # {06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {06.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 5.2 Is romance more thrilling than sex?
The Lord of the Rings is a touchstone for many things. One of those things is
romance, or, rather, the relation between romance and sex.

The sexual revolution is one of the two things that most radically, even
spectacularly, distinguish our culture from all that went before it. The other
is, of course, technology. The spiritual danger of technology is an obvious
theme in The Lord of the Rings. But to some critics the other seems glaringly
absent.

Edwin Muir wrote in The Observer: "All the characters are boys masquerading as
adult heroes . . . and will never come to puberty.... Hardly one of them knows
anything about women" (November 27, 1955). Does Muir's remark tell us something
remarkable about Tolkien or about Muir and his culture? The best selling
lampoon of The Lord of the Rings, Bored of the Rings, is about nothing but sex
from cover to cover. Do we see an obsession here?

Suppose you read a book review complaining about the absence of missionaries,
churches, and conversions in Julius Caesar's The Conquest of Gaul. Would this
not imply that the critic was a very narrow-minded Fundamentalist and obsessed
with his religion? Why should we draw a different conclusion when the critic's
religious obsession is two feet lower down in the anatomy?

One could defend the absence of sex in The Lord of the Rings by blaming the
Ring. Only when it is destroyed can life be normalized, and Men and Hobbits can
love, marry, and procreate. None who have borne the Ring (except Sam) ever
marry. But there is a deeper defense than this for the absence of sex in The
Lord of the Rings: The Lord of the Rings not only is about a pre-Freudian
culture but also was written by a man of a pre-Freudian culture.

The fact that The Lord of the Rings' natural gravity is not drawn to sex as its
center simply means that it does not come from our culture, just as the fact
that the Odyssey does not mention mystical experience simply means that it did
not come from Hindu culture.

But sex—or rather, romantic love—is there, indeed, though it is not usually
noticed. Purtill noticed it:

We have the heroic love of Aragorn for Arwen ...and the homely, domestic love
of Sam Gamgee and Rosie Cotton. Somewhere in between is the love story of
Eowyn, daughter of King Theoden. She begins with a romantic, unrealistic love
for Aragorn, who has loved Arwen for centuries. (He is of long-lived
human-Elvish stock, and Arwen can choose either Elvish immortality or mortality
with her human lover.) Eventually Eowyn finds happiness with Faramir, son of
Denethor (Purtill, J. R R. Tolkien, p. 105).

How many romances would be enough for the central characters, if not three?

Peter Jackson expanded on the Aragorn-Arwen romance in the movie, and this was
quite in character, not only in spirit but literally, for, as Tolkien himself
writes, "The romance between Aragorn and Arwen, Elrond's daughter, is only
alluded to as a known thing. It is told elsewhere in a short tale, Of Aragorn
and Arwen Undomiel. I think the simple 'rustic' love of Sam and his Rosie
(nowhere elaborated) is absolutely essential to . . . the theme of the relation
of ordinary life (breathing, eating, working, begetting) and quests, sacrifice,
causes, and the 'longing for Elves', and sheer beauty" (Letters, no. 131, p.
161). Sex and romance receive the same treatment as other aspects of life in
The Lord of the Rings, as examples of the interdependency between the high
(Aragorn) and the low (Sam).

Here is Tolkien's philosophy of sex, romance, love, and marriage presented as
directly as anyone could wish, in a letter to his son Michael:

The romantic chivalric tradition . . . can be very good, since it takes . . .
fidelity, and so self-denial, "service," courtesy, honour, and courage. Its
weakness is, of course, that ...its centre was not God, but imaginary Deities,
Love and the Lady. . . . This is, of course, false and at best make-believe....
It takes the young man's eye off women as they are, as companions in shipwreck
not guiding stars. (One result is the observation of the actual to make the
young man turn cynical.) . . . It inculcates exaggerated notions of "true
love," as a fire from without, a permanent exaltation, unrelated to age,
childbearing, and plain life, and unrelated to will and purpose. (One result of
that is to make young folk look for a "love" that will keep them always nice
and warm in a cold world, without any effort of theirs; and the incurably
romantic go on looking even in the squalor of the divorce courts.) . . .

Only the rarest good fortune brings together the man and woman who are really
as it were "destined" for one another, and capable of a very great and splendid
love. The idea still dazzles us, catches us by the throat: poems and stories in
multitudes have been written on the theme, more, probably, than the total of
such loves in real life. . . . In such great inevitable love, often love at
first sight, we catch a vision, I suppose, of marriage as it should have been
in an unfallen world (Letters, no. 43, pp. 48-49, 52).

But, as C. S. Lewis explains in The Four Loves, this is an illusion.

The grim joke is that this Eros whose voice seems to speak from the eternal
realm is not himself necessarily even permanent. He is notoriously the most
mortal of our loves. The world rings with complaints of his fickleness. What is
baffling is the combination of this fickleness with his protestations of
permanency. To be in love is both to intend and to promise lifelong fidelity.
Love makes vows unasked; can't be deterred from making them. "I will be ever
true," are almost the first words he utters. Not hypocritically but sincerely.
No experience will cure him of the delusion. We have all heard of people who
are in love again every few years; each time sincerely convinced that " this
time it's the real thing," that their wanderings are over, that they have found
their true love and will themselves be true till death.

And yet Eros is in a sense right to make this promise. The event of falling in
love is of such a nature that we are right to reject as intolerable the idea
that it should be transitory. In one high bound it has overleaped the massive
wall of our selfhood; it has made appetite itself altruistic, tossed personal
happiness aside as a triviality and planted the interests of another in the
centre of our being. Spontaneously and without effort we have fulfilled the law
(towards one person) by loving our neighbour as ourselves. It is an image, a
foretaste, of what we must become to all if Love Himself rules in us without a
rival. It is even (well used) a preparation for that. Simply to relapse from
it, merely to "fall out of" love again, is—if I may coin the ugly word, a sort
of disredemption. Eros is driven to promise what Eros of himself cannot
perform. . . . Eros, having made his gigantic promise and shown you in glimpses
what its performance would be like, has "done his stuff." He, like a godparent,
makes the vows; it is we who must keep them. . . . We must do the works of Eros
when Eros is not present.3

Another aspect of sex and romance that is often criticized in Tolkien is his
supposed gender stereotyping. His men are true men, his women are true women,
there is no homosexuality, and no confusion of sexual identities or even
roles—except on the part of Eowyn, who willfully demands to be a Joan of Arc
type warrior instead of obeying her king's command to stay home and care for
the women and children:

"Let me ride in your following. For I am weary of skulking in the hills, and
wish to face peril and battle."

"Your duty is with your people," he answered.

"Too often have I heard of duty," she cried. "But am I not of the House of
Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet long
enough. Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not now spend my life as I
will?"

"Few may do that with honour," he answered. "But as for you, lady: did you not
accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? . . ."

"All your words are but to say: you are a woman, and your part is in the house.
. . . But I am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and
wield blade, and I do not fear either pain or death."

"What do you fear, lady?" he asked.

"A cage," she said (LOTR, p. 767).

Tolkien has double sympathies here, for on the one hand the words spoken to her
here by Aragorn are true, and Eowyn's disobedience is nearly punished with
death (but for the intervention of Pippin). But it is eventually rewarded by a
grace, not a justice: it is Eowyn, disguised as the soldier Dernhelm, who slays
the Lord of the Nazgul.

Eowyn is a Joan of Arc figure, but remember that Joan of Arc is very different
from a modern feminist. Like Eowyn, she transcended social gender roles, but
she did not question those roles themselves, like a modern feminist. Like her
society, and like all pre-modern societies, including those in The Lord of the
Rings, she accepted those roles as archetypes, not stereotypes. Archetypes are
natural (or Platonically supernatural) and help construct our identity;
stereotypes are unnatural, and thwart it. Archetypes are discovered by the
sage; stereotypes are invented by the propagandist. Archetypes are utterly and
eternally rational; stereotypes are irrational. Roles change, archetypes do
not. And roles are judged by archetypes, not vice versa.

C. S. Lewis presents the old archetypes of masculinity and femininity that are
embedded in the pre-modern mind and in Tolkien's in a vision at the end of
Perelandra. The protagonist, Ransom (who coincidentally was modeled on
Tolkien), sees the archetypes of Masculine and Feminine, Yang and Yin, Mars and
Venus, concretized and incarnated. The "Oyarsa" mentioned here are both angels
(spirits) and archetypes (Platonic Forms, essences):

The Oyarsa of Mars shone with cold and morning colours, a little metallic—pure,
hard, and bracing. The Oyarsa of Venus glowed with a warm splendour, full of
the suggestion of teeming vegetable life. . . .

Malacandra [Mars] was like rhythm and Perelandra [Venus] like melody.
Malacandra affected him like a quantitative, Perelandra like an accentual,
metre. He thinks that the first held in his hands something like a spear, but
the hands of the other were open, with the palms turned toward him. . . . The
two white creatures were sexless. But he of Malacandra was masculine (not
male); she of Perelandra was feminine (not female). Malacandra seemed to him to
have the look of one standing armed, at the ramparts of his own remote archaic
world, in ceaseless vigilance, his eyes ever roaming the east-ward horizon
whence his danger came long ago. "A sailor's look," Ransom once said to me;
"you know...eyes that are impregnated with distance." But the eyes of
Perelandra opened, as it were, inward, as if they were the curtained gateway to
a world of waves and murmurings and wandering airs, of life that rocked in
winds and splashed on mossy stones and descended as the dew and arose sunward
in thin-spun delicacy of mist. On Mars the very forests are of stone; in Venus
the lands swim. For now he thought of them no more as Malacandra and
Perelandra. He called them by their Tellurian [earthly] names. With deep wonder
he thought to himself, "My eyes have seen Mars and Venus. I have seen Ares and
Aphrodite."4

