# 5 - 5.3 Why do humans have identity crises?
[Metadata]: # {06.04}
[Descriptor]: # {06.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 5.3 Why do humans have identity crises?
This is one of the most remarkable themes in anthropology, and one that
flabbergasts and discombobulates many people, rather like Plato's Theory of
Ideas in metaphysics. The point is that the self is not a given, an object,
whose essential nature is unchangeable. Triangles can never be non-triangular,
and rocks are always guaranteed to be rocky, grass grassy, and dogs doggy—but
humans can be inhuman. We alone can fail to achieve our nature. Our nature is a
task to achieve, not a fact to receive.

The existentialist philosophers have emphasized this theme the most, and some
(notably Sartre) have attached to it questionable corollaries: that we have no
essence, or meaning, that life is therefore meaningless, that we must create
our own values, that we are gods, and that all conformity and receptivity are
threatening and dehumanizing to our freedom. But the point does not require any
of those corollaries. It is quite traditional and is as old as Boethius's
Consolation of Philosophy:

Whatever is must also be [ontologically] good. And it follows from this that
whatever loses its goodness ceases to be. Thus wicked men cease to be what they
were. . . . To give oneself to evil . . . is to lose one's human nature. Just
as virtue can raise a person above human nature, so vice lowers those whom it
has seduced from the condition of men beneath human nature. For this reason,
anyone whom you find transformed by vice cannot be counted a man [or a Hobbit:
Gollum is an ex-Hobbit, a failed Hobbit, as the Ringwraiths are ex-men, or
'Un-men', to use C. S. Lewis's chilling term from Perelandra]. . . . The man
who is driven by avarice ...is like a wolf; the restless, angry man who spends
his life in quarrels you will compare to a dog. The treacherous conspirator who
steals by fraud may be likened to a fox; the man who is ruled by intemperate
anger is thought to have the soul of a lion. The fearful and timid man who
trembles without reason is like a deer; the lazy, stupid fellow is like an ass.
The volatile, inconstant man who continually changes direction is like a bird;
the man who is sunk in foul lust is trapped in the pleasures of a filthy sow.
In this way, anyone who abandons virtue ceases to be a man, since he cannot
share in the divine nature, and instead becomes a beast.5

The theme we will explore in the next section is a much more familiar one in
writers like C. S. Lewis, Augustine, and the Romantics: Sehnsucht, the
mysterious longing for we-know-not-what, our lover's quarrel with the world,
our innate desire for the transcendent, the perfect, the "more". Yet the
foundation for this familiar theme of longing is the unfamiliar one of the
elusiveness and volatility of the self. We cannot help desiring to be other
than we are because we do not yet have our true being; we can gain it or lose
it. Our very being is trembling, not stable. We can lose our selves. Nothing
else can.

This innate desire, this reaching beyond ourselves, can lead us to our true
selves and to God, our Author, as it led C. S. Lewis in Surprised by Joy. But
it can also lead down darker paths of desire: idolatry and fetishism. When the
object we desire is God, or that which God is (truth, goodness, and beauty),
the object is not possessable. And paradoxically, only then are we fulfilled,
when we do not possess the object we desire but it possesses us. But when we
make anything other than God our object of desire, when our goal is
possessable, we are undone. This dark path began in Eden. Once we laid hands on
the fruit we desired, the horrible effect took place immediately: it laid its
hands on us. The self was "unselfed"—not filled but emptied, not enhanced but
devastated. The object grew into a god, and we shrank into slaves. We exchanged
places: we became the objects, the its, and it became the subject, the I. We
found our identity in what was less than ourselves, in what we could possess.
We were possessed by our possession, or by our possessiveness. We who began as
the Adam (Man) became the golem, the "Un-man".

Frodo and Sam illustrate one half of this paradox, Gollum the other. Frodo and
Sam attain and save their selves because they give themselves away for others,
for the world. And not for some abstract cause but for each other and for the
Shire. In contrast, Gollum is obsessed with his "cause": possessing the Ring.
His selfishness is so self-devouring that he almost has no self left. He talks
to himself more than to others; he often makes no distinction between himself
and his "Precious" he is confused about who he is. He speaks of himself in the
third person. ("Don't let them hurt us, Precious!") It is the Ring that is now
the Precious, and Gollum has lost his preciousness, his value. He has become
its slave, and it has become his master. In fact it has become the self, the
person, the subject, the actor, and Gollum has become its passive object, its
IT. He has placed his soul inside the fetish (as Sauron did when he made the
Ring), so that without it his soul is literally torn in two. He is nothing
without the Ring. He cannot distinguish himself from the Ring. He is the Ring.
The person has become a thing. He has lost his soul.

When Sauron forged the Ring, he put into it some of his power, and therefore
some of his identity, since power is what he identified with, or found his
identity in. Thus for him, as for Gollum, to lose the Ring is to lose his self.
And one who has lost his self, who has only emptiness and ashes for his self,
will always demand to reduce all other selves to emptiness and ashes. This is
why Sauron must reduce all Middle-earth to ashes: to his ashes, to himself.

And this is what we do whenever we "identify with" our stuff. George MacDonald
says, "A man is enslaved to whatever he cannot part with that is less than
himself" (Lewis, George MacDonald: An Anthology, no. 57, p. 26).

Sauron is uncomfortably familiar. He is only an exaggeration, a caricature, an
enlargement of ourselves or, rather, of one possibility for ourselves. Down
that road we find the Lieutenant of the Black Gate of Barad-dur: "His name is
remembered in no tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am the
Mouth of Sauron'" (LOTR, p. 870).

This mysterious point about the volatility, or fragility, of selfhood, is put
more clearly by C. S. Lewis in Mere Christianity:

Every time you make a choice you are turning the central part of you, the part
of you that chooses, into something a little different from what it was before.
And taking your life as a whole, with all your innumerable choices, all your
life long you are slowly turning this central thing either into a heavenly
creature or into a hellish creature; either into a creature that is in harmony
with God, and with other creatures, and with itself, or else into one that is
in a state of war and hatred with God, and with its fellow-creatures, and with
itself. To be the one kind of creature is heaven: that is, it is joy and peace
and knowledge and power. To be the other means madness, horror, idiocy, rage,
impotence, and eternal loneliness. Each of us at each moment is progressing to
the one state or the other (Mere Christianity, pp. 86-87).

