# 2 - 2.2 Is life subject to divine providence?
[Metadata]: # {03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 2.2 Is life subject to divine providence?
Two different ways God can act in earthly history are miracles and providence.
There are no miracles in The Lord of the Rings (although there are at least two
in The Silmarillion, at the beginning and the end). But there is a pervasive
presence of providence.

God prefers to act by providence rather than miracles, because He loves the
natures of all the things He created and wants to perfect them rather than
bypass them. He is like a wise, unselfish king Who exalts and empowers His
servants rather than distrusting them and micro-managing His kingdom. "Grace
perfects nature." It is Sauron who is in love with blatant brute force.

It is easy to identify miracles when we see them, whether worked by God or by
evil spirits. But how do we identify divine providence? Where do we find it?
Not in a part but in the whole, in the ordering of the whole, in the
relationships among the parts. The ultimate reason we find God not only in
beings but also in relationships (especially the relationship called love) is
that He is not only a Being but also a Society, a Family, a Trinity of Persons.

Whether God exists and whether God acts in the world are two different
questions. Deism answers Yes to the first and No to the second. So does
pantheism (with a different kind of God). Deism and pantheism are very popular
in modern culture for essentially the same reasons Lewis gives in the excerpt
quoted above from Miracles: "He is there if you wish for Him, like a book on a
shelf. He will not pursue you."

However, deism is philosophically closer to theism than pantheism is because
deism agrees with theism that there is a transcendent First Cause, a Creator.
Both deists and theists use cosmological proofs (proofs from data in the
cosmos) to show how reasonable it is to affirm a transcendent being; for
example:

1. Nothing can begin without being caused to begin. Nothing simply pops into
existence for no reason. That contradicts not only philosophical reason but
even scientific reason. If you saw a tiny green rabbit pop into existence on
top of this page, would you blandly say, "Oh, well, tiny green rabbits just
happen"? Or would you ask, "Why?" Would you look for a cause?

2. And the universe did have a beginning. There were some pretty good
philosophical arguments for this conclusion in the Middle Ages, but they did
not convince everyone. But today, physical science has discovered convincing
evidence that everything—all matter and space and time (which is not absolute
and independent of matter but relative to it)—came into existence about
fifteen-plus billion years ago. This event, like all events, could not have
just happened for no reason at all. It needed a cause adequate to the effect.
If there was a Big Bang, there must have been a Big Banger.

3. A nontranscendent being, an immanent being, a part of the universe, could
not have caused the whole universe.

4. Therefore there is a transcendent Creator who caused the whole universe.

Theists agree with deists so far. But deists go on to say that this First Cause
does not act in the universe. He made the universe and then turned away from
it, like a deadbeat dad. But theists believe the Creator also acts on and in
His creation, in two ways, and Christians add a third:

First, like an author God designs, knows, arranges, and provides ("providence"
= "providing") for everything in His book (the universe). He orders and
coordinates all His creatures. No sparrow or hair falls without His providence.

Second, He can and occasionally does intervene with supernatural acts. Some
deists admit providence but none admit miracles, as theists do.

Third, Christians also claim that God once inserted Himself into His story as
one of His own characters; that Christ was both completely divine and
completely human, both transcendent and immanent, both Creator and creature,
just as such a self-inserting author would be both the single, unique,
transcendent Author outside the book who created it all, and at the same time
one of the many immanent characters in the book.

Miracles and the Incarnation are not in The Lord of the Rings, but providence
certainly is.

If divine providence exists, there should be some evidence for it. Not the kind
of evidence we find in mathematics, where a theorem can be proved or disproved
with certainty, for all time, to everyone's satisfaction; or even the kind of
evidence we find in the physical sciences, where empirical tests can at least
definitively refute some hypotheses (e.g., geocentrism, flat earth, six
thousand-year-old earth, or parthenogenesis) and the same kind of tests can
provide strong empirical evidence, if not certainty, for others (e.g., gravity,
relativity, or the Big Bang). But we do find in The Lord of the Rings a
striking and clearly discernible pattern in the loose threads on the backside
of the tapestry.

That image is from Thornton Wilder's The Bridge of San Luis Rey. God's design
for history is like a tapestry, and only He sees it clearly, from the front,
finished side. But there are enough clues on the backside, enough effects of
divine providence, to elicit and justify a rational faith, though not enough
for proof. Reason leaves this question open so that we can believe if we want
to, so that faith is a free option, but not a compulsion. God seduces our wills
but does not force them. As Blaise Pascal says, there is just enough light for
seekers and not so much that even nonseekers are compelled against their will.

When Christianity displaced paganism in the ancient West, it added many beliefs
and categories, such as monotheism, creation, the Trinity, the Incarnation,
salvation, divine love, and universal human dignity (for all persons are
created in the image of God and destined for eternal union with Him); but it
also subtracted two pagan concepts: fate and chance. In paganism, fate was
believed to be a power above even the gods, and chance was believed to control
many events in life that were not known or designed by either men or gods. But
if an all-knowing God created and designed the entire universe, then blind fate
and blind chance are exiled as much as pagan gods like Zeus and Pan are.
("Great Pan is dead", announced the pagan prophet, because he had been
displaced by Christ—as Nietzsche was to claim, centuries later, that the
Christian "God is dead.") The single divine light is totalizing, and all
darkness flees before it. At the beginning of the Christian era fate and chance
fled before providence.

The commonest examples of divine providence in our experience are remarkable
"coincidences". For instance, the squirrel that just "happened" to drop a nut
onto a fallen leaf in the park just at the right place and time, a century ago,
made the young man who was going to be your grandfather turn his head to the
sound and thus just "happen" to notice for the first time the girl who was
going to be your grandmother, who just "happened" to be walking by, and one
thing led to another so that eventually you were born. Most of us exist only
because such things have "happened"—or been very cleverly and anonymously
arranged. To quote The Bridge of San Luis Rey, "Some say that to the gods we
are like flies idly swatted by boys on a summer day. Others say that not a hair
falls to the ground from our head without the will of the Heavenly Father."2

There is no strict logical proof of divine providence. You "just see it", or
else not, as you see the pattern in the tapestry or hear it in a piece of
music. You can see the hand of providence more clearly if you become more
familiar with it, like the face of a stranger who becomes a friend. It is a
gestalt, a pattern connecting many particular things and events, not a
marked-out particular thing or event. It cannot be assembled or constructed by
analysis, step by step. It becomes much clearer to us after the event than
before; for our hindsight is keener than our foresight. That is why Prometheus
("foresight") is more godlike than Epimetheus ("after-sight").

The Lord of the Rings is chock-full of divine providences. In fact, if there is
any one particular religious doctrine that is as large as a continent in The
Lord of the Rings, this is it. It is "like the sky, spread over everything".3
One could write an entire book on this theme alone. I will make this section
very short precisely because it could be so long.

The most remarkable examples surround evils, events that seem very bad when
they occur, yet which turn out to have been for the best, just as Romans 8:28
asserts. For instance, Frodo rightly sees his finding of the Ring as the worst
thing that has ever happened to him: "I was not made for perilous quests. I
wish I had never seen the Ring. Why did it come to me?" (LOTR, p. 60). Yet
Gandalf sees the providential good even in this evil, in fact, especially in
this:

"It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things. The Ring
left him.... There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying
to get back to its master ...[but behind] that there was something else at
work, beyond any design of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by
saying that Bilbo was meant to find the Ring, and not by its maker. In which
case you also were meant to have it. And that may be an encouraging thought"
(LOTR, pp. 54-55).

Note, in this passage (1)how the interplay between the intentions of Gollum,
Bilbo, Frodo, Sauron, and the Ring itself are all instruments of the intentions
of "something else at work" (2)how the presence of this "something else"
(divine providence) is sensed even when not named; (3)how much more effective
it is for Tolkien not to name it, not to tell but to show, to give us just the
back side of the tapestry, not the cause but the effects, not the explanation
but just the data; and (4)how "encouraging" this is, if this "something else"
is good rather than evil.

Tolkien himself interprets the climax of the plot providentially: "Frodo had
done what he could and spent himself completely (as an instrument of divine
Providence) and had produced a situation in which the object of his quest could
be achieved. His humility (with which he began) and his sufferings were justly
rewarded by the highest honour; and his exercise of patience and mercy toward
Gollum gained him Mercy: his failure (at the Cracks of Doom) was redressed"
(Letters, no. 246, p. 326).

In The Lord of the Rings there are literally hundreds of providential
"coincidences" (see the Concordance, II.A.) Yet they are not preachy,
contrived, unbelievable, forced, or allegorical. They are not a jimmying of the
plot, as in the pious potboilers of Frank Perretti or Tim LaHaye. And this
narrative credibility, this naturalness, is itself a strong argument for the
truth of the doctrine. It is "true to life". This is one of the ways in which
literature can persuade us more powerfully than logic.

For instance, I was never persuaded by any argument of the truth of the
apparently ridiculous idea that each of us is responsible for all the evil done
in the world; but Dostoyevski not only told it but sold it because he showed it
to be true, in The Brothers Karamazov. Reading that book was like meeting an
animal I had thought to be mythical. It was leaping into my life, out of its
picture book: "Good grief! Giant squids aren't myths. There's one of them."

Of course, Tolkien did not set out to write "a book about providence". The
belief structured his unconscious as well as conscious mind, and thus naturally
structured the plot that he allowed to unfold in its own way—a way that
surprised him as well as his readers.

C. S. Lewis articulated the orthodox Christian doctrine of divine providence
thus:

Unless we are to abandon the conception of Providence altogether . . . all
events are equally providential. If God directs the course of events at all
then he directs the movement of every atom at every moment; "not one sparrow
falls to the ground" without that direction. . . .

This may sound excessive, but in reality we are attributing to the Omniscient
only an infinitely superior degree of the same kind of skill which a mere human
novelist exercises daily in constructing his plot. . . .

In the play Hamlet,... [e]very event in the play happens as a result of other
events in the play, but also every event happens because the poet wants it to
happen. . . . "Providence" and Natural causation are not alternatives; both
determine every event (Miracles, pp. 174-75, 179).

