# 7 - 7.4 Is there devolution as well as evolution?
[Metadata]: # {08.04}
[Descriptor]: # {08.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 7.4 Is there devolution as well as evolution?
Throughout The Lord of the Rings, most great things, great deeds, great heroes,
and great ages are in the past.

Clearly Tolkien believed that his century, the twentieth, was spiritually
smaller, in its virtues and even in its vices, than medieval Christendom; less
heroic than the "Dark Ages" that produced Beowulf; and uglier than the
Victorian and Edwardian eras, which Tolkien saw passing away before his eyes.
The Lord of the Rings can be viewed as a mythical history of how tawdry modern
ages like our own come to be.

Devolution is the consequence of violating the Principle of First and Second
Things (see pages 150-51). When beauty is sacrificed for efficiency, the result
is inefficiency. When men worship machines, the proper good not only of man but
also of machines is sacrificed.

Consider the evidence. In the past, there were few machines and many slaves;
and the rich, who could afford many slaves, lived a life of leisure because of
them. Today, when machines have replaced slaves (an obvious advance), those
rich enough to afford the most machines do not have more leisure than they had
before, but less!

Leisure means time, or control over your time, i.e., liberty. Machines were
supposed to give liberty both to the slaves, who were no longer needed, and to
the masters, by maximizing their leisure. Every technological power is a power
over time, a way of saving time, whether for traveling (fast cars), cooking
(microwave ovens), or communicating (computers). Yet everyone complains about
having less leisure, less "free time" than ever before. Our parents had more
time for us than we have for our children; and their parents had more time for
them than they had for us. Most of us spend more time paying for, learning,
relearning, cursing, servicing, updating, and playing with our computers than
we save with them.

But there is hope. After Sauron's defeat Aragorn ushers in a new golden age.
Yet this is only temporary. Every victory over evil is. Aragorn's descendants
gradually lose his nobility, and the pattern repeats.

The pattern is free, yet it is cyclic: (1)divine blessings, (2) consequent
human prosperity, (3) the fall into pride and laziness, (4) consequent decline,
(5) disaster, which stirs (6)repentance, which brings as its result (1)divine
blessings again. This is the repeated pattern of the history of Israel in the
Bible, and it is the universal pattern for the history of all nations. For
Israel, like Christ, is the rule as well as the exception, the key to universal
history as well as the unique center of it.

Whether one's personal temperament is optimistic or pessimistic, any realistic
philosophy of history must account for decline. Universal optimism and the idea
of universal necessary progress are simply silly. As C. S. Lewis puts it, "It
is, indeed, manifestly not the case that there is any law of progress in
ethical, cultural, and social history" {World's Last Night, pp. 103-4).

See also the interaction between Merlin, who is resuscitated to help modern
England in her spiritually darkest hour, as some had hoped King Arthur would do
with the twentieth century, in Lewis's That Hideous Strength (pp. 292-93).

