# 11 - 11.4 How does evil work?
[Metadata]: # {12.05}
[Descriptor]: # {12.05}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 11.4 How does evil work?
The most terrifying thing about the power of evil is that it is not external
but internal. It works only by our cooperation. It removes our freedom, but
only freely; we forge the bonds of our slavery with the strength of our
freedom. The Ring's temptation, in one word, is "addiction". This is also how
Plato analyzed injustice and tyranny in the Republic: enslavement to the master
passion for power.

Freud was wrong; it is not pleasure but power that we want most demandingly.
Kierkegaard saw this and wrote, "If I had a humble servant who, when I asked
him for a glass of water, brought me instead the world's costliest wines
blended in a chalice, I would fire him, to teach him that true pleasure
consists in getting my own way."2 Pleasure is only the sugar on the bait of
power. Any addict knows that. "I've got to have it" is his philosophy. Not I
but It is the Master. Gollum is believable because we know him; he is every
drug addict. In fact, he is every addict, which means every man. For we are all
addicted to something that we cannot part with that is less than God.

We are weak because we no longer understand the power of weakness; we no longer
understand that the greatest power is in self-abnegation, renunciation, and
martyrdom. Even Catholics no longer use words like "mortification" or even
"detachment". But our heart still understands this power; that's why we
recognize it when we meet it in Tolkien, or Buddha, or Lao Tzu, even after our
Christian teachers stopped teaching it to us in the name of Jesus.

Tolkien makes clear the connection between addiction and technology in the
strategy of temptation. We scientific magicians demand not only gratification
but instant gratification.

The Enemy, or those who have become like him, go in for "machinery"—with
destructive and evil effects—be-cause "magicians" . . . use magia for their own
power.... The basic motive for magia ... is immediacy: speed, reduction of
labour, and reduction also to a minimum (or vanishing point) of the gap between
the idea or desire and the result or effect . . . if you have command of
abundant slave-labour or machinery (often only the same thing concealed)
(Letters, no. 155, p. 200).

Self-righteousness and egotism are another part of the temptation. Denethor is
supposed to be Gondor's steward (caretaker, servant). But he identifies Gondor
with himself; when he despairs of victory for Gondor, he commits suicide.
Gandalf, in contrast, is the exact opposite of a suicide: he is a martyr. He
dies for his companions in the Mines of Moria. Gandolf says to Denethor, "The
rule of no realm is mine, neither of Gondor or any other, great or small. But
all worthy things that are in peril as the world now stands, those are my care.
. . . For I also am a steward. Did you not know?" (LOTR, pp. 741-42).

At the nadir of the moral world stands pride, usually counted as the deadliest
sin, the sin of Satan. Pride always includes the self-deception of
self-righteousness. The lowest of all moral states believes it is the highest.
The more this wrong dominates you, the more passionately do you insist that you
are in the right. The weaker you are, under your drug, the more powerful you
feel. The manifestation of this self-delusion and self-righteousness is
self-destruction, literally: Denethor kills himself because he insists that he
is right and reality is wrong: "I would have things as they were all the days
of my life. . . . But if doom denies this to me, then I will have naught"
(LOTR, p. 836). This is the philosophy of pride: my way or the highway, my will
or nothing. It is the philosophy of the totally spoiled child. It is the
philosophy of those on their way to Hell. It is the unforgivable sin:
impenitence. It cannot be forgiven because it will not be forgiven. And it will
not be forgiven because it will not repent. It insists that it cannot be wrong,
that reality must be wrong, whenever it and reality, desire and satisfaction,
do not coincide.

The thing we want the most is life, and therefore the thing we fear the most is
death, so the temptation to have power over even death is the greatest
temptation. And that, according to Tolkien himself, is the central theme of The
Lord of the Rings: "death and the deathless". The false immortality that the
heroes must renounce comes from the false magic of the Ring, which is unlimited
power and thus even the power over death. Power over death is the power to
extend your present self and will indefinitely, not only into space (conquering
all Middle-earth and the wills of all its inhabitants) but also into time
(conquering even death). The Ring turns God's good gift of life into the object
of an evil addiction.

The Ring, of course, gives only a false immortality—that of the Undead, the
Nazgul—just as it gives a false power and a false magic, for ultimately the
Ring is the false Christ, the Antichrist. He is the world's ultimate drug
dealer.

