# 7 - Philosophy of History
[Metadata]: # {08.01}
[Descriptor]: # {08.01}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# Philosophy of History
7.1 Is history a story?

Probably the most important question in the philosophy of history is whether
history is teleological, that is, purposive, providential, plotted, planned, or
predestined. Is it a story, with a meaning, or is it "just one damned thing
after another"?

To see the difference, contrast two famous poetic expressions of the two
opposite answers. One is the Hobbits' humble Walking Song (LOTR, p. 72), which
sees life—the life of the individual, of the community, and of the larger
community of communities that is the world—as a Road, that "goes ever on and
on", that has an objective nature and meaning and direction of its own, and
presents to us tasks so that "I must follow if I can", even though we know
little and "cannot say" the future.

The opposite philosophy is that history is no story at all. That is Macbeth's
philosophy of history:

Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow

Creeps in this petty pace from day to day

To the last syllable of recorded time.

And all our yesterdays have lighted fools

The way to dusty death. Out! Out, brief candle!

Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage

And then is heard no more. It is a tale

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,

Signifying nothing (Macbeth, Act V, scene v).

This is Hell's philosophy of history, for Macbeth is a damned soul, and he is
already seeing life as the damned see it.

Once, when our civilization believed in gods (Zeus, Jupiter, jhwh, Jesus), we
understood our history to be part of a grand story. We pitied poor damned souls
like Macbeth and wrote cautionary tales about them, like Marlowe's Dr. Faustus.
But our culture has turned inside out, so that it is no longer on the outside
of Macbeth, looking in at him with pity and terror, but inside Macbeth's mind,
looking out at a world as objectively meaningless as his, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing. And because our culture is thus not "looking at"
Macbeth but "looking along" him (to use C. S. Lewis's distinction—see pages
124-25), it is not writing moralistic plays like Shakespeare's, but
"naturalistic" novels like Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury, showing what life
looks like when its teleological frame is removed. Goethe also does this in his
great revision of the Faust story by transforming Faust from a damned villain
into a clever hero, by transforming the Christian God of moral goodness into
the pantheistic God beyond good and evil, and by transforming the devil from
God's enemy and Faust's terror into God's own dark side and half of Faust's
fulfillment.

Myth and fantasy show us the significance of our lives, and, when done on a
large and epic scale, of our history. By not showing us particular historical
facts that we all know, a fantasy like The Lord of the Rings shows us more
clearly the grander universal truth that we have forgotten: the truth that
these particulars form a meaningful pattern, like threads on the back of the
tapestry, deliberately, not randomly, arranged. What greater service could
literature perform for us than that? What mythic search is greater than "man's
search for meaning"? What issue is more momentous than whether history is
"chance or the dance"?1

When we see our lives from this higher point of view, we share in a tiny bit of
God's mind. That is ultimately why we love literature, according to Tolkien:

If lit. teaches us anything at all, it is this: that we have in us an eternal
element, free from care and fear, which can survey the things that in "life" we
call evil with serenity (that is not without appreciating their [evil] quality,
but without any disturbance of our spiritual equilibrium). Not in the same way,
but in some such way, we shall all doubtless survey our own story when we know
it (and a great deal more of the Whole Story) (Letters, no. 94, pp. 106-7).

C. S. Lewis points out that the single most important question in morality, in
ethics, is really this question in the philosophy of history, the question of
the meaning of life:

Think of us as a fleet of ships sailing in formation. The voyage will be a
success only, in the first place, if the ships do not collide and get in one
another's way; and, secondly, if each ship is seaworthy and has her engines in
good order. . . .

But there is one thing we have not yet taken into account. We have not asked
where the fleet is trying to get to. . . . However well the fleet sailed, its
voyage would be a failure if it were meant to reach New York and actually
arrived in Calcutta.

Morality, then, seems to be concerned with three things. Firstly, with fair
play and harmony between individuals. Secondly, with what might be called
tidying up or harmonizing the things inside each individual. Thirdly, with the
general purpose of human life as a whole: what man was made for: what course
the whole fleet ought to be on. . . . You may have noticed that modern people
are nearly always thinking about the first thing and forgetting the other two
(Mere Christianity, pp. 70-71).

It is this universal meaning in life and history that gives maximal value to
the life of the individual:

If individuals live only seventy years, then a state, or a nation, or a
civilization, which may last for a thousand years, is more important than an
individual. But if Christianity is true, then the individual is not only more
important but incomparably more important, for he is everlasting and the life
of a state or a civilization, compared with his, is only a moment (ibid., p.
73).

It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to
remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one
day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to
worship, or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all,
only in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree, helping each other to
one or other of these destinations. It is in the light of these overwhelming
possibilities, it is with the awe and circumspection proper to them, that we
should conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves,
all play, all politics. There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to
a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilisations—these are mortal, and
their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke
with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit—immortal horrors or everlasting
splendours.2

