# 4 - 4.3 Is there real magic?
[Metadata]: # {05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {05.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 4.3 Is there real magic?
In Tolkien's cosmology, as in all pre-modern cosmologies, everything is more
alive. Where the modern cosmology reduces the life of a dog to the life of a
complex machine, Tolkien's cosmology expands the life of a mountain ("cruel
Caradharas") to something like the life of an animal. Nothing is mere matter.
Nothing is "mere" anything. Reductionism is repudiated. More than that: there
is so much life in things that we would call it "magic".

Magic is potency, and power. But there are two very different kinds of
magic—and here is one of the absolutely primary purposes of Tolkien's entire
authorship. The two magics are not just different but opposed. In fact they are
at war, and our civilization is in crisis because of the war between these two
kinds of magic. One kind of magic, Enchantment, is our healing, and the
other—the kind exemplified by the Ring—is our destruction.

The closest Tolkien ever comes to defining Faerie is "magic": "Faerie itself
may perhaps most nearly be translated by Magic—but it is magic of a peculiar
mood and power, at the furthest pole from the vulgar devices of the laborious,
scientific, magician" ("On Fairy-Stories", p. 10).

There are the two magics in a single sentence. The magic of Enchantment means
entering the holy city of beauty, truth, and goodness and letting it conquer
you. Ultimately, it means letting God conquer you, since beauty, truth, and
goodness are divine attributes; they are what God is. But the magic of the
"laborious, scientific magician" (that is, technology or, rather, the
philosophy that makes "Man's conquest of Nature" by technology the summum
bonum)) means playing God, like Sauron. It is

a magic of external plans or devices (apparatus) instead of development of the
inherent inner powers or talents . . . bulldozing the real world, or coercing
other wills. The Machine is our more obvious modern form. . . . I have not used
"magic" consistently, and indeed te Elven-queen Galadriel is obliged to
remonstrate with the Hobbits on their confused use of the word both for the
devices and operations of the Enemy, and for those of the Elves . . . the Elves
are there [in my tales] to demonstrate the difference.

Their "magic" is Art. . . . And its object is Art not Power, sub-creation, not
domination and tyrannous re-forming of Creation (Letters, no. 131, p. 146).

Faerian magic is the opposite of reductionism: it is creativity. It makes the
world richer, it glorifies the world for beauty, it amplifies nature into art.
The other magic destroys nature, reduces the world to a machine for the sake of
power.

And the central symbol of The Lord of the Rings, the Ring, is precisely this
second magic.

Both magics have potency. Faerian magic has internal or spiritual potency, the
thing the Chinese call te, the power over the free human spirit of the good,
the true, and the beautiful. Te is the right that makes its own might. The
other magic, manifested in both technologism and totalitarianism, has external
potency, power over bodies, coercive force. It is the might that makes its own
right. The conflict between these two magics, these two relationships between
might and right, is the central drama of the most famous work of philosophy
ever written, Plato's Republic. ("It's all in Plato, all in Plato: bless me,
what do they teach them at these schools!"—The Last Battle, p. 161.)

Here is the most direct sentence Tolkien ever wrote about the philosophy of The
Lord of the Rings: "If I were to 'philosophize' this myth, or at least the Ring
of Sauron, I should say it was a mythical way of representing the truth that
potency . .. has to be externalised and so as it were passes, to a greater or
less degree, out of one's direct control" (Letters, no. 211, p. 279). Surely
this explains why we feel weaker and smaller than our pre-modern ancestors even
while our power over nature has vastly grown.

The two magics have a number of things in common. Both are natural to man. Both
can be either good or (when misused) evil. Technology becomes evil when it is
turned from a means to an end. Fantasy becomes evil when it is turned into a
create-your-own-reality philosophy. The ability to distinguish between reality
and fantasy, between objective and subjective reality, is the first mark of
sanity, and the confusion of the two is the first and most basic mark of
insanity.

The two magics have something else in common: they have a common origin in the
power of abstraction that makes possible the invention of the adjective, as
Tolkien explains in his essay "On Fairy-Stories":

The human mind, endowed with the powers of generalization and abstraction, sees
not only green-grass, discriminating it from other things (and finding it fair
to look upon), but sees that it is green as well as being grass. But how
powerful, how stimulating to the very faculty that produced it, was the
invention of the adjective: no spell or incantation in Faerie is more potent. .
. . The mind that thought of light, heavy, grey, yellow, still, swift, also
conceived of magic that would make heavy things light and able to fly, turn
grey lead into yellow gold, and the still rock into a swift water. If it could
do the one, it could do the other; it inevitably did both. When we can take
green from grass, blue from heaven, and red from blood, we have already an
enchanter's power—upon one plane; and the desire to wield that power in the
world external to our minds awakes ("On Fairy-Stories", p. 22).

But though the two magics are one in their origin, they are opposite in their
end. Enchantment's end is the surrender, or submission, of the soul to the
beauty of nature and art. Technology's end is the conquest of nature by power.
And this can be seen in their opposite relationships to time.

Technological magic works immediately. It attempts to reduce the gap between
desire and satisfaction, to eliminate the "shadow" that falls between the
potency and the act (to quote T. S. Eliot's "The Hollow Men"). But in attacking
the shadow it plunges us deeper into the shadow because time becomes more and
more important to us, and more problematic, as we become more technologized.
For the chief effect upon our lives of all those millions of time-saving
devices with which technology has enriched our lives has been to destroy
leisure rather than to enhance it. No one has any time anymore.

But Enchantment makes time irrelevant. The Hobbits lose track of time in Tom
Bombadil's house, as we do when we read The Lord of the Rings, or when we make
love, or surf, or look at the stars.

Bad enough is the attempt to conquer nature and time by this magic. Worse still
is the attempt to conquer the bodies, minds, and wills of other persons. The
reason this is worse is that technology amplifies potencies, and there is
little or no evil potency in nature, but much in fallen men. Technology removes
the quarantine set by weakness around the disease of sin.

C. S. Lewis argued persuasively, in The Abolition of Man, that all
technological power over nature is always necessarily power over man, that
"man's conquest of nature" must always turn out upon analysis to be some men's
conquest of other men using nature as an instrument. Lewis explained the danger
of technological magic:

There is something which unites magic and applied science while separating both
from the "wisdom" of earlier ages. For the wise men of old the cardinal problem
had been how to conform the soul to reality, and the solution had been
knowledge, self-discipline, and virtue. For magic and applied science
(technology) alike the problem is how to subdue reality to the wishes of men;
the solution is a technique.4

There, in a single sentence, is the central difference between our modern
Western civilization and all others, all that came before it.

Lewis goes on to say:

If we compare the chief trumpeter of the new era (Bacon) with Marlowe's
Faustus, the similarity is striking. You will read in some critics that Faustus
has a thirst for knowledge. In reality, he hardly mentions it. It is not truth
he wants from his devils, but gold and guns and girls. . . . Bacon condemns
those who value knowledge as an end in itself. . . . The true object is to
extend Man's power (ibid., p. 88).

And critics say Tolkien's fantasy is escapist, unrealistic, and irrelevant to
modern social problems! The problem is exactly the opposite: it is far too
relevant for the critic's comfort.

