# 1 - 1.3 Are Platonic Ideas real?
[Metadata]: # {02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04}
[Author]: # {kreeft}

# 1.3 Are Platonic Ideas real?
When students begin to study the history of philosophy, starting with the
ancient Greeks, they are always fascinated with Plato, for two reasons. One is
that Plato is not only the first but also the best writer in the history of
philosophy. But the other reason is his most distinctive doctrine: Platonic
Ideas or Platonic Forms, essences, or archetypes. The theory discombobulates
contemporary students because it shows them not only a new doctrine but also a
new category, not only a new idea but also a new meaning to the word "idea".
They feel like the prisoners in the "cave" as they begin to emerge from their
comfortable little world of shadows into an alarmingly larger world outside. It
is a new metaphysics for them, a new answer to the question "What kinds of
things are real; what does 'real' mean?"

Nearly everyone in our culture believes that concrete, individual, material
things, like rocks and tigers, are real. (Most Buddhists do not.) Most also
believe that there is also another kind of reality, not made of matter: minds,
souls, selves, spirits, egos. (Metaphysical materialists like Marxists do not.)

So most people in our culture recognize two kinds of reality, two metaphysical
categories: objective matter and subjective spirit, or mind. (If they are very
sophisticated they might classify their own bodies as a third category, as
subjective matter, and other people's minds as a fourth category, objective
spirit.) But Plato offers them a third (or fifth) category, which is objective
(unlike minds) but spiritual (unlike material things). And this category is
Platonic Ideas. These Ideas are not subjects of thought, not minds; they are
objects of thought. But they are not material, spatial, or even temporal
objects. For instance, in addition to tigers (material objects) and our
subjective minds with their ideas of tigers, there is also Tigerness, the
essence of tigers. In addition to rocks there is Rockiness. In addition to good
swords and good lawyers and good arguments, there is Goodness itselfâ€”not just
our ideas of goodness, but the true, objective, eternal, universal,
unchangeable essence of goodness itself, which is dimly reflected or shared
("participated in") in different ways by good swords and good lawyers and good
arguments, and by our ideas of them.

Platonic Ideas are not things. But they are objectively real. They are Ideas
but not our ideas, which change and err. They are the real truths that measure
our ideas as erring or true. We usually think of ideas as dependent on minds,
as acts of minds, or as opinions in minds, so Platonic Ideas require a capital
I; they are neither matter nor mind but a third category of reality. They are
real ideals, objective standards.

For instance, when we compare two lines drawn by an artist and judge that one
is straighter than the other, we are using a standard: the ideal line, the
perfectly straight line. No one has ever seen that. Whatever we can see must
reflect light, which requires a molecular structure, and that requires
three-dimensional matter. But a line is one-dimensional. It is not a physical
thing. But it is not a mere subjective idea in our minds either. It judges our
minds. One mind can be wrong and another right about what a straight line is,
or about whether line A or line B is straighter. Straightness, or the Idea of
the straight line, is objective to our minds. It is the perfect standard both
for our minds' ideas, and for material things, both of which are only more or
less straight. But straightness itself is not more or less straight.

All material things are in space and time. All subjective ideas are in time
too, though they are not in space. It takes time to think as well as to
breathe. Platonic Ideas are neither in space nor in time. They are
unchangeable, birthless, and deathless.

If they exist, where are they? Obviously not anywhere in space, nor in our
minds, but in what? Where is their metaphysical home? Plato never took the next
step; he never said these perfect, unchangeable Ideas must exist in a perfect,
unchangeable Mind. But when Christianity entered Greek culture, it supplied the
metaphysical house for Plato's Ideas: the Mind of God, the Word of God, the
Logos. (And according to the central, essential claim of Christianity, the Word
of God is also the Son of God, a divine Person who became incarnate as Jesus
Christ, taking a finite, material, mortal human nature.)

These Platonic Ideas vastly expand our vision of what is real by adding the
world outside the cave, the Mind of God, the realm of Ideas, and also by
transforming this material world into a world of signs, not just things. If
Plato is right, everything we see is a shadow, copy, image, imitation, or sign
of something unseen.

The difference this makes might come clear by a parable: Once there was a race
of rational microorganisms who lived within the index finger on the right hand
of a man. The microorganisms carefully explored their world and discovered many
of its structures and laws by their science. One day, one of them dared to ask
not just a scientific question but a philosophical question; a question about
not the parts but the whole. He pursued this question and found that the world
as a whole had a shape, a structure: that it was a finger. And it was pointing.

Since all the microorganisms were rational, they were capable of philosophical
as well as scientific thinking. Some did not think philosophically at all. Some
did, but failed to see that their world was a finger. And some did and saw that
their world was a finger. But none of them could see with their science what
the finger was pointing to, for all that was visible to their science was the
finger.

The angels can see what the finger points at, but we microorganisms can't. Our
science can't explore the world of Heavenly archetypes, only the world of
material copies. But philosophy can know that this world is a copy of another;
philosophy can know that this world is a finger, a sign. In other words, we
spiritual microorganisms are less than angels but more than scientists. We are
philosophers.

The human experience that helps us best understand Plato's Theory of Ideas is
the experience of artistic creativity. Art is very different from science in
that it creates worlds; it creates meaning and beauty and forms and structures
and natures, while science discovers them. In science, the world is the
standard for our ideas about it. If we believe the earth is flat, we are wrong.
But in art, it is the reverse: the artist's ideas are the standard for the
world he creates. For example, in Tolkien's world, Elves are tall and
formidable; in Shakespeare's world, they are tiny and cute. In art, the world
conforms to the creative idea; in science, the idea conforms to the world.
Truth in science is the reverse of truth in art. If God created the universe,
all science is reading God's art.

Heliocentrism, evolution, and relativity are true ideas only if they conform
the scientist's mind to the objective physical world; but this world is truly
heliocentric, evolutionary, and relative only if it conforms to the divine Idea
and design for it. (And everything does that except man. Only in man is there a
gap between God's eternal design and temporal fact. The word for that gap is
"sin".)

It is because we can look at the things in the universe in this Platonic way
that we can rank them. For example, one lion can seem truer, more leonine, than
another (say, a weak, scruffy, cowardly lion). We say, "He's a true man", or,
"She's a real woman", and that another is false, fake, or inauthentic, like
counterfeit money. Counterfeit money is as physically real as real money, yet
in the most important way it is not real: it does not conform to the Idea of
money.

In the case of money the Idea is not Platonic; it is man-made, temporal, and
changeable. But in the case of "a real man", a real lion, or a really straight
line, the standard is not wholly artificial and relative to different cultures
and different individuals. All cultures and all individuals judge a cowardly
liar or a cowardly lion to be less authentic, less true, less real than he
ought to be. In other words, human minds seem to be in touch with Platonic
Ideas when we make value judgments.

Now, in a work of fiction, such as The Lord of the Rings, the characters and
creatures and landscapes and histories can seem either "fake" (unbelievable,
artificial, contrived, inauthentic) or "real" (believable, natural, convincing,
authentic), not by conforming to the physical world (except in purely realistic
or naturalistic fiction) but by conforming to Platonic Ideas. For instance,
Macbeth's three witches are truer, witchier witches than cartoon witches are;
and Tolkien's Elves are more real, more elvish than any other writer's elves
have ever been. We can't help believing in them. Now, why is that? There are no
physical Elves in this world (although most of the citizens of Iceland would
disagree with that). So how do we know Tolkien's Elves are more real? We must
know the Platonic Idea of Elves, or Elvishness, to be able to use it to compare
Tolkien with Shakespeare, for example, and find Shakespeare "elvishly
challenged".

Take kingship. Though we do not have kings in America, or want them, our
unconscious mind both has them and wants them. We all know what a true king is,
a real king, an ideal king, an archetypal king. He is not a mere politician or
soldier. Something in us longs to give him our loyalty and fealty and service
and obedience. He is lost but longed for and will some day return, like Arthur.
In The Lord of the Rings, Arthur's name is "Aragorn". When we read The Lord of
the Rings, he returns to his throne in our minds. He was always there; The Lord
of the Rings only brings him back into our consciousness from the tomb of the
unconscious, where he was sleeping.

Take Hobbits. Why do they strike us as "real"? Where are they? In the Mind of
God; and Tolkien knows the Hobbit corner of that Mind better than anyone else.
Hobbits are not allegories of English farmers, any more than Elves are
allegories of Finnish minstrels, or Orcs of Nazi soldiers. They are real
because they resemble not physical things or someone's opinions, but Platonic
Ideas.

In The Lord of the Rings everything seems to be more itself, more Platonic. The
earth is more earthy, nature is more natural, the history is more historical,
the genealogies more genealogical, the tragedy more tragic, the joy more
joyful, the caverns more cavernous, the forests more foresty, and the heroes
more heroic. (That is not to say they are more one-dimensional, unflawed, and
untempted.)

Indeed, the four forests mentioned in The Lord of the Rings have more
character, more identity than most human characters in most novels. You could
not possibly confuse the Old Forest, Lothlorien, Fangorn, and Mirkwood
(mentioned in The Lord of the Rings but described in The Hobbit) with each
other. If you found yourself in any one of them, you would instantly know
which. When we read The Lord of the Rings, why do these forests seem "real" or
"true"? Why do we believe them? Not because they are like the forests we have
walked through in this world, but because the forests we have walked through in
this world were a little like them. Tolkien's forests do not remind us of ours;
ours remind us of his.

And this is true of nearly everything in The Lord of the Rings. That is one
reason why so many inanimate things have names (e.g., swords or horns): because
they have individual personalities. The winding Horn of Boromir, the great Horn
of Helm, the shrill fire-alarm Horn of Buckland, and the horns the Hobbits use
to rouse the Shire at the end are all unforgettable. We have heard their sounds
in our hearts, even if we have never heard them in our ears.

Take the sea. To the unimaginative, unpoetic reductionist, the "trousered ape",
it is just trillions of tons of H2O laced with NaCl. But to the poet and the
seer, in other words, the normal human being, it is more; it is more like an
archetype, and it has inspired longing and desire and exaltation and sadness
for millennia. The eye of the poet sees less clearly, but sees farther than the
eye of the scientist. As George MacDonald explains,

Human science is but the backward undoing of the tapestry web of God's science.
... Is oxygen and hydrogen the divine idea of water? There is no water in
oxygen, no water in hydrogen; it comes bubbling fresh from the imagination of
the living God, rushing from under the great white throne of the glacier. The
very thought of it makes one gasp with an elemental joy.6

In The Allegory of Love, C. S. Lewis explained the connection between Platonism
and Symbolism:

Symbolism comes to us from Greece. It makes its first effective appearance in
European thought with the dialogues of Plato. The Sun is the copy of the Good.
Time is the moving image of eternity. All visible things exist just in so far
as they succeed in imitating the Forms.7

[A Platonic myth] reminds you of something you can't quite place. I think the
something is "the whole quality of life as we actually experience it." . . .
I've never met Orcs or Ents or Elvesâ€”but [I have met] the feel of it, the sense
of a huge past, of lowering danger, of heroic feats achieved by the most
apparently unheroic people.8

The most striking example of this Platonic symbolism in Lewis's own writings, I
think, comes at the end of The Last Battle, when the whole world of Narnia dies
and is swallowed up into its Heavenly Platonic archetype:

"Listen, Peter. When Aslan said you could never go back to Narnia, he meant the
Narnia you were thinking of. But that was not the real Narnia. That had a
beginning and an end. It was only a shadow or a copy of the real Narnia, which
has always been here and always will be here: just as our own world, England
and all, is only a shadow or copy of something in Aslan's real world. . . . And
of course it is different; as different as a real thing is from a shadow or as
waking life is from a dream." His voice stirred everyone like a trumpet as he
spoke these words; but when he added under his breath "It's all in Plato, all
in Plato: bless me, what do they teach them at these schools!" the older ones
laughed. It was so exactly like the sort of thing they had heard him say long
ago in that other world where his beard was grey instead of golden. . . .

It was the Unicorn who summed up what everyone was feeling. . . . "I have come
home at last! This is my real country! I belong here. This is the land I have
been looking for all my life, though I never knew it till now. The reason why
we loved the old Narnia is that it sometimes looked a little like this."9

Notice how the Platonic Ideas in Lewis's concrete literary example moved you
more than my abstract philosophical explanations of Plato's Ideas. This is the
strategy of the storyteller: to creep past the "watchful dragons" that guard
the conscious reason that excludes these things as unbelievable; to open the
back door of the heart when the front door of the mind is locked; to appeal to
the wiser, deeper, unconscious mind, what Jung called the "collective
unconscious". A great mythmaker awakens the longing for these Platonic
archetypes, which are buried deep in human knowledge, through using a magic
language: the language of myth.

