How I met my husband

# 
Life is a very interesting thing, and sometimes it is hard to believe that
every circumstance in our life has a purpose behind it.

# 
Many years ago, ( remember exactly what year it was maybe 2008 or
2009 I was on hot summer vacation in Eilat, Israel with my ex boyfriend and
some friends. All of us headed to do some shopping it was insane hot around 100
degrees and I could not wait to make it to the mall. On our way to the mall we
met some people that my ex boyfriend and friends knew, I have never seen them
before and they begun with greeting each other and easy going conversation. I
looked at the couple and thought to myself this guy is very cute but I was so
peased that we stopped and dying from the heat that I did not want to engage in
this conversion and make new friends at the moment.  Years passed by, I
complete forgot about this scenario.

# 
In 2011, I moved in with my new boyfriend and good friend to share an apartment
in Bay Area, California. I had only few more months that I could stay legally
in the states. One evening our friend got a call from Israel from this guy that
I`ve met few years ago on that vacation but I had no idea at that point about
it. During their conversation I could hear that this guy on the other line won
an American green card and still not pretty sure he want to make this big step
to leave everything he has in Israel and immigrate to US.  I immediately
grabbed out the phone from my friend`s hand and without even introducing myself
I told this guy "are you kidding me?" Come here immediately let`s get married I
want to stay so badly in the US. I heard such a funny laugh on the other side
(who knows my husband know that he has such a funny laugh) the guy (I even did
not know his name) told me: "Pay me $30k and I will think about it!"

# 
Few weeks later I could not stand my boyfriend anymore and I decided to leave
to L.A.  I was fortunate to work in a company that had locations in L.A where
they needed an extra hand that summer and they could provide me living there
and pay my flight ticket. WIN WIN!  After spending few months in L.A I saw on
facebook my Brazilian friends from bay area hanging out with some new cute guy,
I did my homework and realized this is the guy that I spoke with few months ago
and he made it to Cali. I did not think twice and sent him a message. We had a
nice chat and that`s it.

# 
Few days later I got a phone call and I was extremely surprised to find out
that on the other line it was Michael. I enjoyed our conversation so much, he
was fun and I felt like I know this guy many years.  Than suddenly he said:
"You should come back to the bay soon, it is much more fun here than in L.A"

# 
Deep down I was afraid to come back to the bay cause I knew we will be working
together and probably live at the same apartment together (he begun to work
with the same company that I worked and most of the employees lived together)
I was not ready to fall in love again and get distracted from the goal that I
came to achieve in the states. 

# 
Few weeks later all my friends that I loved and lived in L.A left home and I
stayed lonely so I decided to come back to the bay area, CA. 

# 
The company that I worked for had 2 employee`s apartments and I ended up to be
at the same apartment with Michael. Woohoo, here is the action begins!

# 
Suddenly, I was so jealous that Michael gives attention to other girls so I
begun being mean to him and he really enjoyed teasing me. About week after I
came back, all of us my roommates & me, two Brazilian girls, Michael and one
more guy went out to a local bar to grab few drinks and shake the booties.
Michael was trying to start with every other girl and I was trying to piss him
by hanging out with other guys even that I did not enjoyed it at all. On the
way back home we were fighting in the car like high school teenagers and kept
fighting as we came back home. At some point he wanted to kiss me but did not
do it as I was so drunk that he was afraid I gonna throw up on him lol... Good
for him because I did throw up few minutes later.

# 
During the week we took a day off together and I asked him if he can help me to
pick up my things from my ex boyfriend that I lived with for a bit before I
left to L.A. He was happy to help and I was so grateful as I did not want to
see the other guy at all. We had such a fun time together that day but nothing
beyond happened.  

# 
Week after all our team wanted to go out to Tiesto party. Michael was the
responsible to organize a Limo and the tickets to the event. At that moment it
was beyond my budget as I was so broke and barely had money for food but I did
not want to be a party pooper and also did not want Michael to go hang out with
out me being close by and watch his moves.  At the night of the event we all
dressed up and were so excited for this party.  (photos) We drove over an hour
and half to Sacramento as we arrived and entered the party we could not
understand what is going on? Where is Tiesto and why so many teenagers are
here. So, here and there what had happened that we arrived to a wrong college
party and Tiesto was performing in San Francisco which was only 30 minutes
drive from where we lived. Bummer! Nothing left to do than to begin enjoy this
party. 

# 
We all were so drunk and trying to tease each other dancing one with another. I
kept watching Michael steps he was trying to catch every possible girl and
meanwhile I  was trying not to give a fuck and dance with other guys that were
our coworkers at that time. Every time Michael was trying to come and dance
near me I was bitching him off but was dying to dance only with him. Honestly,
I do not remember much from this party, but when our time was over there and
the limo came back to pick us up somehow me and Michel ended up sitting next to
each other (I think we were holding hands before getting into the limo) I was
extremely tired and drunk and while driving back home I rested my head on
Michael`s shoulder and somehow we began kissing in from of another 10 people or
so including our managers.

# 
Our mutual friend begun screaming no, no, no do not do it! do not do it! (he
hope that Michael will be his single party buddy) both of us laughed but kept
kissing all the way back home.  As we arrived to our apartment some guys
continued drinking downstairs and me and Michael were laying on the floor  on
the second floor and kept kissing for few more hours till my Brazilian
roommates  grabbed me to the room to sleep.

# 
The next morning as I woke up, I was so embarrassed and did not know what to do
and how to act.  Quietly, I made my way to the kitchen and damn Michael was
already there (he was an early bird until we got married lol) I scramble
somehow "good morning"! he came close to me grabbed me tight and gave me a huge
kiss. Aww, that was a huge release for me as I knew we are on the same page.
Both of us that day took a day off but not quite alone we had another friend
who joined us. I could not wait to spend time alone with him. Week after only
two of us took a day off together and officially had our first date. We drove
all the way to Santa Cruse and this date  was beyond my expectations.

# 
For about a month every night Michael was sneaking into my room after my two
roommates where falling asleep and both of us were scooping on a twin mattress
and falling asleep. About a month later we finally moved into a privet room
together. The love was real and my doubts was real. I had only 1 more month
that I could stay legally in US, what should I do? I was asking myself every
morning, I feel something real with this guys as I`ve never felt before and I
did not want to lose it. I decided to take the chance and to stay. I even was
thinking to get married for papers only so I can stay with Michael. Both of us
begun looking for someone but Michael could not stand it, he was always getting
so irritated with this idea. Eventfully, he said I will marry you as we were
dating only for  two months or so, but every lawyer that we reached said is
impossible until Michael will not become an American citizen which is about in
five years. I surrendered and did not care anymore about this subject. I had a
job where I could work illegally and I was happy with that. 

# 
6 months after dating we decided to move to San Diego, CA  and few weeks after
our move Michael proposed me, 2 months after the proposal we got married. We
did find a good lawyer that said our case is possible just will be much longer
than other cases. We patiently waited about 3 years until I got my green card
so we can go back home and to celebrate our traditional Jewish wedding. So,
basically we got married twice.

# 
Today we are married over 6 years and so far we have been lucky to explore and
enjoy our live together in California where we met. We lived in Hawaii almost
for two years and for almost 3 years we call Texas home where also we were
lucky to bring our baby girl Milena to this world. How interesting is that,
that both of us needed to cross the global to meet each other and to build
life. In Israel we hung out with the same people, I knew pretty well Michael`s
ex-girlfriend, heard about him so many times but never met him except that
random quick meeting in Eilat.

# 
Till today I am laughing and telling Michael, eventually you did married me and
also paid for the whole paperwork process cause I was so damn broke.  And later
on somehow both of us remembered that awkward meeting in Eilat years ago.
Michael told he thought I was a bitch but a hot bitch lol.. 

# 
So, who knew maybe if we would made it to Tiesto that night I would not have
Michael as my husband and would not have my beautiful daughter with this guy.

# 
