# BOOK VI - XXX - § 4
[Metadata]: # {07.01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {07.01.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VI
XXX
§ 4
# § 4
In the year 30 A.D.,[285] while Tiberius, the second emperor, was Emperor of
Rome and Pontius Pilate was procurator of Judea, a little while before the
Feast of the Passover, Jesus of Nazareth came into Jerusalem. Probably he came
then for the first time. Hitherto he had been preaching chiefly in Galilee, and
for the most part round and about the town of Capernaum. In Capernaum he had
preached in the synagogue.

His entry into Jerusalem was a pacific triumph. He had gathered a great
following in Galilee--he had sometimes to preach from a boat upon the Lake of
Galilee, because of the pressure of the crowd upon the shore--and his fame had
spread before him to the capital. Great crowds came out to greet him. It is
clear they did not understand the drift of his teaching, and that they shared
the general persuasion that by some magic of righteousness he was going to
overthrow the established order. He rode into the city upon the foal of an ass
that had been borrowed by his disciples. The crowd accompanied him with cries
of triumph and shouts of “Hosanna,” a word of rejoicing.

He went to the temple. Its outer courts were cumbered with the tables of
money-changers and with the stalls of those who sold doves to be liberated by
pious visitors to the temple. These traders upon religion he and his followers
cast out, overturning the tables. It was almost his only act of positive rule.

Then for a week he taught in Jerusalem, surrounded by a crowd of followers who
made his arrest by the authorities difficult. Then officialdom gathered itself
together against this astonishing intruder. One of his disciples, Judas,
dismayed and disappointed at the apparent ineffectiveness of this capture of
Jerusalem, went to the Jewish priests to give them his advice and help in the
arrest of Jesus. For this service he was rewarded with thirty pieces of silver.
The high priest and the Jews generally had many reasons for dismay at this
gentle insurrection that was filling the streets with excited crowds; for
example, the Romans might misunderstand it or use it as an occasion to do some
mischief to the whole Jewish people. Accordingly the high priest Caiaphas, in
his anxiety to show his loyalty to the Roman overlord, was the leader in the
proceedings against this unarmed Messiah, and the priests and the orthodox mob
of Jerusalem the chief accusers of Jesus.

How he was arrested in the garden of Gethsemane, how he was tried and sentenced
by Pontius Pilate, the Roman procurator, how he was scourged and mocked by the
Roman soldiers and crucified upon the hill called Golgotha, is told with
unsurpassable simplicity and dignity in the gospels.

The revolution collapsed utterly. The disciples of Jesus with one accord
deserted him, and Peter, being taxed as one of them, said, “I know not the
man.” This was not the end they had anticipated in their great coming to
Jerusalem. His last hours of aching pain and thirst upon the cross were watched
only by a few women and near friends. Towards the end of the long day of
suffering this abandoned leader roused himself to one supreme effort, cried out
with a loud voice, “My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me?” and, leaving
these words to echo down the ages, a perpetual riddle to the faithful, died.

It was inevitable that simple believers should have tried to enhance the stark
terrors of this tragedy by foolish stories of physical disturbances similar to
those which had been invented to emphasize the conversion of Gautama. We are
told that a great darkness fell upon the earth, and that the veil of the temple
was rent in twain; but if indeed these things occurred, they produced not the
slightest effect upon the minds of people in Jerusalem at that time. It is
difficult to believe nowadays that the order of nature indulged in any such
meaningless comments. Far more tremendous is it to suppose a world apparently
indifferent to those three crosses in the red evening twilight, and to the
little group of perplexed and desolated watchers. The darkness closed upon the
hill; the distant city set about its preparations for the Passover; scarcely
anyone but that knot of mourners on the way to their homes troubled whether
Jesus of Nazareth was still dying or already dead....

The souls of the disciples were plunged for a time into utter darkness. Then
presently came a whisper among them and stories, rather discrepant stories,
that the body of Jesus was not in the tomb in which it had been placed, and
that first one and then another had seen him alive. Soon they were consoling
themselves with the conviction that he had risen from the dead, that he had
shown himself to many, and had ascended visibly into heaven. Witnesses were
found to declare that they had positively seen him go up, visibly in his body.
He had gone through the blue--to God. Soon they had convinced themselves that
he would presently come again, in power and glory, to judge all mankind. In a
little while, they said, he would come back to them; and in these bright
revivals of their old-time dream of an assertive and temporal splendour they
forgot the greater measure, the giant measure, he had given them of the Kingdom
of God.


§ 5[286]

The story of the early beginnings of Christianity is the story of the struggle
between the real teachings and spirit of Jesus of Nazareth and the limitations,
amplifications, and misunderstandings of the very inferior men who had loved
and followed him from Galilee, and who were now the bearers and custodians of
his message to mankind. The gospels and the Acts of the Apostles present a
patched and uneven record, but there can be little question that on the whole
it is a quite honest record of those early days.

The early Nazarenes, as the followers of Jesus were called, present from the
first a spectacle of a great confusion between these two strands, his teaching
on the one hand, and the glosses and interpretations of the disciples on the
other. They continued for a time his disciplines of the complete subjugation of
self; they had their goods in common, they had no bond but love. Nevertheless,
they built their faith upon the stories that were told of his resurrection and
magical ascension, and the promised return. Few of them understood that the
renunciation of self is its own reward, that it is itself the Kingdom of
Heaven; they regarded it as a sacrifice that entitled them to the compensation
of power and dominion when presently the second coming occurred. They had now
all identified Jesus with the promised Christ, the Messiah so long expected by
the Jewish people. They found out prophecies of the crucifixion in the
prophets--the Gospel of Matthew is particularly insistent upon these
prophecies. Revived by these hopes, enforced by the sweet and pure lives of
many of the believers, the Nazarene doctrine began to spread very rapidly in
Judea and Syria.

And presently there arose a second great teacher, whom many modern authorities
regard as the real founder of Christianity, Saul of Tarsus, or Paul. Saul
apparently was his Jewish and Paul his Roman name; he was a Roman citizen, and
a man of much wider education and a much narrower intellectuality than Jesus
seems to have been. By birth he was probably a Jew, though some Jewish writers
deny this; he had certainly studied under Jewish teachers. But he was well
versed in the Hellenic theologies of Alexandria, and his language was Greek.
Some classical scholars profess to find his Greek unsatisfactory; he did not
use the Greek of Athens, but the Greek of Alexandria; but he used it with power
and freedom.[287] He was a religious theorist and teacher long before he heard
of Jesus of Nazareth, and he appears in the New Testament narrative at first as
the bitter critic and antagonist of the Nazarenes.

The present writer has been unable to find any discussion of the religious
ideas of Paul before he became a follower of Jesus. There must have been a
basis, if only a basis of departure, for his new views, and their phraseology
certainly supplied the colour of his new doctrines. We are almost equally in
the dark as to the teachings of Gamaliel, who is named as the Jewish teacher at
whose feet he sat. Nor do we know what Gentile teachings had reached him. It is
highly probable that he had been influenced by Mithraism. He uses phrases
curiously like Mithraistic phrases. What will be clear to anyone who reads his
various Epistles, side by side with the Gospels, is that his mind was saturated
by an idea which does not appear at all prominently in the reported sayings and
teaching of Jesus, the idea of a sacrificial person, who is offered up to God
as an atonement for sin. What Jesus preached was a new birth of the human soul;
what Paul preached was the ancient religion of priest and altar and
propitiatory bloodshed. Jesus was to him the Easter lamb, that traditional
human victim without spot or blemish who haunts all the religions of the dark
white peoples. Paul came to the Nazarenes with overwhelming force because he
came to them with this completely satisfactory explanation of the disaster of
the crucifixion. It was a brilliant elucidation of what had been utterly
perplexing.

Paul had never seen Jesus. His knowledge of Jesus and his teaching must have
been derived from the hearsay of the original disciples. It is clear that he
apprehended much of the spirit of Jesus and his doctrine of a new birth, but he
built this into a theological system, a very subtle and ingenious system, whose
appeal to this day is chiefly intellectual. And it is clear that the faith of
the Nazarenes, which he found as a doctrine of motive and a way of living, he
made into a doctrine of _belief_. He found the Nazarenes with a spirit and
hope, and he left them Christians with the beginning of a creed.

But we must refer the reader to the Acts of the Apostles and the Pauline
Epistles for an account of Paul’s mission and teaching. He was a man of
enormous energy, and he taught at Jerusalem, Antioch, Athens, Corinth, Ephesus,
and Rome.

Possibly he went into Spain. The manner of his death is not certainly known,
but it is said that he was killed in Rome during the reign of Nero. A great
fire had burnt a large part of Rome, and the new sect was accused of causing
this. The rapid spread of Christian teaching certainly owes more to Paul than
to any other single man. Within two decades of the crucifixion this new
religion was already attracting the attention of the Roman rulers in several
provinces. If it had acquired a theology in the hands of Saint Paul, it still
retained much of the revolutionary and elementary quality of the teachings of
Jesus. It had become somewhat more tolerant of private property; it would
accept wealthy adherents without insisting upon the communization of their
riches, and Saint Paul has condoned the institution of slavery (“Slaves, be
obedient to your masters”),[288] but it still set its face like flint against
certain fundamental institutions of the Roman world. It would not tolerate the
godhead of Cæsar; not even by a mute gesture at the altar would the Christians
consent to worship the Emperor, though their lives were at stake in the matter.
It denounced the gladiatorial shows. Unarmed, but possessing enormous powers of
passive resistance, Christianity thus appeared at the outset plainly as
rebellion, striking at the political if not at the economic essentials of the
imperial system. The first evidences of Christianity in non-Christian
literature we find when perplexed Roman officials began to write to one another
and exchange views upon the strange problem presented by this infectious
rebellion of otherwise harmless people.

Much of the history of the Christians in the first two centuries of the
Christian era is very obscure. They spread far and wide throughout the world,
but we know very little of their ideas or their ceremonies and methods during
that time. As yet they had no settled creeds, and there can be little doubt
that there were wide local variations in their beliefs and disciplines during
this formless period. But whatever their local differences, everywhere they
seem to have carried much of the spirit of Jesus; and though everywhere they
aroused bitter enmity and active counter-propaganda, the very charges made
against them witness to the general goodness of their lives.

During this indefinite time a considerable amount of a sort of theocrasia seems
to have gone on between the Christian cult and the almost equally popular and
widely diffused Mithraic cult, and the cult of Serapis[289]-Isis-Horus. From
the former it would seem the Christians adopted Sun-day as their chief day of
worship instead of the Jewish Sabbath, the abundant use of candles in religious
ceremonies, the legend of the adoration by the shepherds, and probably also
those ideas and phrases, so distinctive of certain sects to this day, about
being “washed in the blood” of Christ, and of Christ being a blood sacrifice.
For we have to remember that a death by crucifixion is hardly a more bloody
death than hanging; to speak of Jesus shedding his blood for mankind is really
a most inaccurate expression. But Mithraism centred upon some now forgotten
mysteries about Mithras sacrificing a sacred and benevolent bull; all the
Mithraic shrines seem to have contained a figure of Mithras killing this bull,
which bleeds copiously, and from this blood a new life sprang. The Mithraist
votary actually bathed in the blood of the sacrificial bull, and was “born
again” thereby. At his initiation he went beneath a scaffolding on which the
bull was killed, and the blood ran down on him.[290]

The contributions of the Alexandrine cult to Christian thought and practices
were even more considerable. In the personality of Horus, who was at once the
son of Serapis and identical with Serapis, it was natural for the Christians to
find an illuminating analogue in their struggles with the Pauline mysteries.
From that to the identification of Mary with Isis, and her elevation to a rank
quasi-divine--in spite of the saying of Jesus about his mother and his brothers
that we have already quoted--was also a very natural step. Natural, too, was it
for Christianity to adopt, almost insensibly, the practical methods of the
popular religions of the time. Its priests took on the head-shaving and the
characteristic garments of the Egyptian priests, because that sort of thing
seemed to be the right way of distinguishing a priest. One accretion followed
another. Almost insensibly the originally revolutionary teaching was buried
under these customary acquisitions. We have already tried to imagine Gautama
Buddha returning to Tibet, and his amazement at the worship of his own image in
Lhassa. We will but suggest the parallel amazement of some earnest Nazarene who
had known and followed his dusty and travel-worn Master through the dry
sunlight of Galilee, restored suddenly to this world and visiting, let us say,
a mass in St. Peter’s at Rome, at learning that the consecrated wafer upon the
altar was none other than his crucified teacher.[291]

Religion in a world community is not many things but one thing, and it was
inevitable that all the living religious faiths in the world at the time, and
all the philosophy and religious thought that came into contact with
Christianity, should come to an account with Christianity and exchange phrases
and ideas. The hopes of the early Nazarenes had identified Jesus with the
Christ; the brilliant mind of Paul had surrounded his career with mystical
significance. Jesus had called men and women to a giant undertaking, to the
renunciation of self, to the new birth into the kingdom of love. The line of
least resistance for the flagging convert was to intellectualize himself away
from this plain doctrine, this stark proposition, into complicated theories and
ceremonies--that would leave his essential self alone. How much easier is it to
sprinkle oneself with blood than to purge oneself from malice and competition;
to eat bread and drink wine and pretend one had absorbed divinity, to give
candles rather than the heart, to shave the head and retain the scheming
privacy of the brain inside it! The world was full of such evasive philosophy
and theological stuff in the opening centuries of the Christian era. It is not
for us here to enlarge upon the distinctive features of Neoplatonism,
Gnosticism, Philonism, and the like teachings which abounded in the Alexandrian
world. But it was all one world with that in which the early Christians were
living. The writings of such men as Origen, Plotinus, and Augustine witness to
the inevitable give and take of the time.

Jesus called himself the Son of God and also the Son of Man; but he laid little
stress on who he was or what he was, and much upon the teachings of the
Kingdom. In declaring that he was more than a man and divine, Paul and his
other followers, whether they were right or wrong, opened up a vast field of
argument. Was Jesus God? Or had God created him? Was he identical with God or
separate from God? It is not the function of the historian to answer such
questions, but he is bound to note them, and to note how unavoidable they were,
because of the immense influence they have had upon the whole subsequent life
of western mankind. By the fourth century of the Christian Era we find all the
Christian communities so agitated and exasperated by tortuous and elusive
arguments about the nature of God as to be largely negligent of the simpler
teachings of charity, service, and brotherhood that Jesus had inculcated.

The chief views that the historian notices are those of the Arians, the
Sabellians, and the Trinitarians. The Arians followed Arius, who taught that
Christ was less than God; the Sabellians taught that he was a mode or aspect of
God; God was Creator, Saviour, and Comforter just as one man may be father,
trustee, and guest; the Trinitarians, of whom Athanasius was the great leader,
taught that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost were three distinct
Persons, but one God. The reader is referred to the Athanasian Creed[292] for
the exact expression of the latter mystery, and for the alarming consequences
to him of any failure to grasp and believe it. To Gibbon he must go for a
derisive statement of these controversies. The present writer can deal with
them neither with awe nor derision; they seem to him, he must confess, a
disastrous ebullition of the human mind entirely inconsistent with the plain
account of Jesus preserved for us in the gospels. Orthodoxy became a test not
only for Christian office, but for Christian trade and help. A small point of
doctrine might mean affluence or beggary to a man. It is difficult to read the
surviving literature of the time without a strong sense of the dogmatism, the
spites, rivalries, and pedantries of the men who tore Christianity to pieces
for the sake of these theological refinements. Most of the Trinitarian
disputants--for it is chiefly Trinitarian documents that survive--accuse their
antagonists, probably with truth, of mean and secondary motives, but they do so
in a manner that betrays their own base spirit very clearly. Arius, for
example, is accused of heretical opposition because he was not appointed Bishop
of Alexandria. Riots and excommunications and banishments punctuated these
controversies, and finally came official persecutions. These fine differences
about the constitution of the Deity interwove with politics and international
disputes. Men who quarrelled over business affairs, wives who wished to annoy
their husbands, developed antagonistic views upon this exalted theme. Most of
the barbarian invaders of the empire were Arians; probably because their simple
minds found the Trinitarian position incomprehensible.

It is easy for the sceptic to mock at these disputes. But even if we think that
these attempts to say exactly how God was related to himself were presumptuous
and intellectually monstrous, nevertheless we are bound to recognize that
beneath these preposterous refinements of impossible dogmas there lay often a
real passion for truth--even if it was truth ill conceived. Both sides produced
genuine martyrs. And the zeal of these controversies, though it is a base and
often malicious zeal, did at any rate make the Christian sects very
energetically propagandist and educational. Moreover, because the history of
the Christian body in the fourth and fifth centuries is largely a record of
these unhappy disputes, that must not blind us to the fact that the spirit of
Jesus did live and ennoble many lives among the Christians. The text of the
gospels, though it was probably tampered with during this period, was not
destroyed, and Jesus of Nazareth, in his own manifest inimitable greatness,
still taught through that text. Nor did these unhappy quarrels prevent
Christianity from maintaining a united front against gladiatorial shows and
against slavery, and against the degrading worship of idols and of the
god-Cæsar.

