# BOOK VIII - XL - § 5
[Metadata]: # {10.05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 5
While all the world to the west of her was changing rapidly, Russia throughout
the nineteenth century changed very slowly indeed. At the end of the nineteenth
century, as at its beginning, she was still a Grand Monarchy, of the later
seventeenth-century type standing on a basis of barbarism, she was still at a
stage where court intrigues and imperial favourites could control her
international relations. She had driven a great railway across Siberia to find
the disasters of the Japanese war at the end of it; she was using modern
methods and modern weapons so far as her undeveloped industrialism and her
small supply of sufficiently educated people permitted; such writers as
Dostoievski had devised a sort of mystical imperialism based on the idea of
Holy Russia and her mission, colored by racial illusions and anti-Semitic
passion; but, as events were to show, this had not sunken very deeply into the
imagination of the Russian masses. A vague, very simple Christianity pervaded
the illiterate peasant life, mixed with much superstition. It was like the
pre-Reformation peasant life of France or Germany. The Russian moujik was
supposed to worship and revere his Tsar and to love to serve a gentleman; in
1913 reactionary English writers were still praising his simple and
unquestioning loyalty. But, as in the case of the western European peasant of
the days of peasant revolts, this reverence for the monarchy was mixed up with
the idea that the monarch and the nobleman had to be good and beneficial, and
this simple loyalty could, under sufficient provocation, be turned into the
same pitiless intolerance of social injustice that burnt the châteaux in the
Jacquerie (see chapter xxxv, § 3) and set up the theocracy in Münster (chapter
xxxv, § 3). Once the commons were moved to anger, there were no links of
understanding in a generally diffused education in Russia to mitigate the fury
of the outbreak. The upper classes were as much beyond the sympathy of the
lower as a different species of animal. These Russian masses were three
centuries away from such nationalist imperialism as Germany displayed.

And in another respect Russia differed from modern Western Europe and
paralleled its mediæval phase, and that was in the fact that her universities
were the resort of many very poor students quite out of touch and out of
sympathy with the bureaucratic autocracy. Before 1917 the significance of the
proximity of these two factors of revolution, the fuel of discontent and the
match of free ideas, was not recognized in European thought, and few people
realized that in Russia more than in any other country lay the possibilities of
a fundamental revolution.[496]

