# BOOK VIII - XXXVII - § 8
[Metadata]: # {10.02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02.06}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICS OF AMERICA AND FRANCE

§ 1. _Inconveniences of the Great Power System._ § 2. _The Thirteen
Colonies before Their Revolt._ § 3. _Civil War is Forced upon the
Colonies._ § 4. _The War of Independence._ § 5. _The Constitution      of the
United States._ § 6. _Primitive Features of the United      States
Constitution._ § 7. _Revolutionary Ideas in France._ § 8.      _The Revolution
of the Year 1789._ § 9. _The French “Crowned      Republic” of ‘89-91._ § 10.
_The Revolutions of the Jacobins._ §      11. _The Jacobin Republic, 1792-94._
§ 12. _The Directory._ § 13.      _The Pause in Reconstruction and the Dawn of
Modern Socialism._


§ 1[418]

When Gibbon, nearly a century and a half ago, was congratulating the world of
refined and educated people that the age of great political and social
catastrophes was past, he was neglecting many signs which we--in the wisdom of
accomplished facts--could have told him portended far heavier jolts and
dislocations than any he foresaw. We have told how the struggle of the
sixteenth and seventeenth-century princes for ascendancies and advantages
developed into a more cunning and complicated struggle of foreign offices,
masquerading as idealized “Great Powers,” as the eighteenth century wore on.
The intricate and pretentious art of diplomacy developed. The “Prince” ceased
to be a single and secretive Machiavellian schemer, and became merely the
crowned symbol of a Machiavellian scheme. Prussia, Russia, and Austria fell
upon and divided Poland. France was baffled in profound schemes against Spain.
Britain circumvented the “designs of France” in America and acquired Canada,
and got the better of France in India. And then a remarkable thing occurred, a
thing very shocking to European diplomacy. The British colonies in America
flatly refused to have further part or lot in this game of “Great Powers.” They
objected that they had no voice and no great interest in these European schemes
and conflicts, and they refused to bear any portion of the burthen of taxation
these foreign policies entailed.

Of course this decision did not flash out complete and finished from the
American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the eighteenth
century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an entire
willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to leave foreign
affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But there was an equally
strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be neither taxed nor interfered
with in their ordinary pursuits. These are incompatible wishes. Common men
cannot shirk world politics and at the same time enjoy private freedom; but it
has taken them countless generations to learn this. The first impulse in the
American revolt against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against the taxation and interference that followed necessarily from
“foreign policy” without any clear recognition of what was involved in that
objection. It was only when the revolt was consummated that the people of the
American colonies recognized at all clearly that they had repudiated the Great
Power view of life. The sentence in which that repudiation was expressed was
Washington’s injunction to “avoid entangling alliances.” From his time until
the year 1917 the united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated
and independent as the United States of America, stood apart altogether from
the blood-stained intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign offices. Soon
after (1810-1823) they were able to extend their principle of detachment to the
rest of the continent, and to make all the New World “out of bounds” for the
scheming expansionists of the old. When at length, in 1917, they were obliged
to re-enter the arena of world politics, it was to bring the new spirit and new
aims their aloofness had enabled them to develop into the tangle of
international relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof.
Since the treaty of Westphalia (1648), the confederated states of Switzerland,
in their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion from the
schemes of kings and empires.

But since the North American peoples are now to play an increasingly important
part in our history, it will be well to devote a little more attention than we
have hitherto given to their development. We have already glanced at this story
in § 8 of the preceding chapter. We will now tell a little more fully--though
still in the barest outline--what these colonies were, whose recalcitrance was
so disconcerting to the king and ministers of Great Britain in their diplomatic
game against the rest of mankind.[419]

# § 8
The first jar to this sense of the secure continuity of life in France came in
1787. Louis XVI (1774-92) was a dull, ill-educated monarch, and he had the
misfortune to be married to a silly and extravagant woman, Marie Antoinette,
the sister of the Austrian emperor. The question of her virtue is one of
profound interest to a certain type of historical writer, but we need not
discuss it here. She lived, as Paul Wiriath[437] puts it, “side by side, but
not at the side” of her husband. She was rather heavy-featured, but not so
plain as to prevent her posing as a beautiful, romantic, and haughty queen.
When the exchequer was exhausted by the war in America (an enterprise to weaken
England of the highest Machiavellian quality), when the whole country was
uneasy with discontents, she set her influence to thwart the attempts at
economy of the king’s ministers, to encourage every sort of aristocratic
extravagance, and to restore the church and the nobility to the position they
had held in the great days of Louis XIV. Non-aristocratic officers were to be
weeded from the army; the power of the church over private life was to be
extended. She found in an upper-class official, Calonne, her ideal minister of
finance. From 1783-87 this wonderful man produced money as if by magic--and as
if by magic it disappeared again. Then in 1787 he collapsed. He had piled loan
on loan, and now he declared that the monarchy, the Grand Monarchy that had
ruled France since the days of Louis XIV, was bankrupt. No more money could be
raised. There must be a gathering of the Notables of the kingdom to consider
the situation.

To the gathering of notables, a summoned assembly of leading men, Calonne
propounded a scheme for a subsidy to be levied upon all landed property. This
roused the aristocrats to a pitch of great indignation. They demanded the
summoning of a body roughly equivalent to the British parliament, the States
General, which had not met since 1610. Regardless of the organ of opinion they
were creating for the discontents below them, excited only by the proposal that
they should bear part of the weight of the financial burthens of the country,
the French notables insisted. And in May, 1789, the States General met.

It was an assembly of the representatives of three orders, the nobles, the
clergy, and the Third Estate, the commons. For the Third Estate the franchise
was very wide, nearly every tax-payer of twenty-five having a vote. (The parish
priests voted as clergy, the small noblesse as nobles.) The States General was
a body without any tradition of procedure. Enquiries were sent to the
antiquarians of the Academy of Inscriptions in that matter. Its opening
deliberations turned on the question whether it was to meet as one body or as
three, each estate having an equal vote. Since the Clergy numbered 308, the
Nobles 285, and the Deputies 621, the former arrangement would put the Commons
in an absolute majority, the latter gave them one vote in three. Nor had the
States General any meeting-place. Should it meet in Paris or in some provincial
city? Versailles was chosen, “because of the hunting.”

It is clear that the king and queen meant to treat this fuss about the national
finance as a terrible bore, and to allow it to interfere with their social
routine as little as possible. We find the meetings going on in salons that
were not wanted, in orangeries and tennis-courts, and so forth.

The question whether the voting was to be by the estates or by head was clearly
a vital one. It was wrangled over for six weeks. The Third Estate, taking a
leaf from the book of the English House of Commons, then declared that it alone
represented the nation, and that no taxation must be levied henceforth without
its consent. Whereupon the king closed the hall in which it was sitting, and
intimated that the deputies had better go home. Instead, the deputies met in a
convenient tennis-court, and there took oath, the Oath of the Tennis Court, not
to separate until they had established a constitution in France.

The king took a high line, and attempted to disperse the Third Estate by force.
The soldiers refused to act. On that the king gave in with a dangerous
suddenness, and accepted the principle that the Three Estates should all
deliberate and vote together as one National Assembly. Meanwhile, apparently at
the queen’s instigation, foreign regiments in the French service, who could be
trusted to act against the people, were brought up from the provinces under the
Marshal de Broglie, and the king prepared to go back upon his concessions.
Whereupon Paris and France revolted. Broglie hesitated to fire on the crowds. A
provisional city government was set up in Paris and in most of the other large
cities, and a new armed force, the National Guard, a force designed primarily
and plainly to resist the forces of the crown, was brought into existence by
these municipal bodies.

The revolt of July, 1789 was really the effective French revolution. The
grim-looking prison of the Bastille was stormed by the people of Paris, and the
insurrection spread rapidly throughout France. Everywhere châteaux belonging to
the nobility were burnt by the peasants, their title-deeds carefully destroyed,
and the nobles murdered or driven away. In a month the ancient and decayed
system of the aristocratic order had collapsed. Many of the leading princes and
courtiers of the queen’s party fled abroad. The National Assembly found itself
called upon to create a new political and social system for a new age.[438]

