# BOOK VI (_Continued_) - XXXIII - § 7
[Metadata]: # {08.02.07}
[Descriptor]: # {08.02.07}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VI (_Continued_)
XXXIII
§ 7
# § 7
The Empire of Charlemagne did not outlive his son and successor, Louis the
Pious. It fell apart into its main constituents. The Latinized Keltic and
Frankish population of Gaul begins now to be recognizable as France, though
this France was broken up into a number of dukedoms and principalities, often
with no more than a nominal unity; the German-speaking peoples between the
Rhine and the Slavs to the east similarly begin to develop an even more
fragmentary intimation of Germany. When at length a real emperor reappears in
Western Europe (962), he is not a Frank, but a Saxon; the conquered in Germany
have become the masters.

It is impossible here to trace the events of the ninth and tenth centuries in
any detail, the alliances, the treacheries, the claims and acquisitions.
Everywhere there was lawlessness, war, and a struggle for power. In 987 the
nominal kingdom of France passed from the hands of the Carlovingians, the last
descendants of Charlemagne, into the hands of Hugh Capet, who founded a new
dynasty. Most of his alleged subordinates were in fact independent, and willing
to make war on the king at the slightest provocation. The dominions of the Duke
of Normandy, for example, were more extensive and more powerful than the
patrimony of Hugh Capet. Almost the only unity of this France over which the
king exercised a nominal authority lay in the common resolution of its great
provinces to resist incorporation in any empire dominated either by a German
ruler or by the Pope. Apart from the simple organization dictated by that
common will, France was a mosaic of practically independent nobles. It was an
era of castle-building and fortification, and what was called “private war”
throughout all Europe.

The state of Rome in the tenth century is almost indescribable. The decay of
the Empire of Charlemagne left the Pope without a protector, threatened by
Byzantium and the Saracens (who had taken Sicily), and face to face with the
unruly nobles of Rome. Among the most powerful of these were two women,
Theodora and Marozia, mother and daughter,[345] who in succession held the
Castle of St. Angelo (§ 1), which Theophylact, the patrician husband of
Theodora, had seized with most of the temporal power of the Pope; these two
women were as bold, unscrupulous, and dissolute as any male prince of the time
could have been, and they are abused by historians as though they were ten
times worse. Marozia seized and imprisoned Pope John X (928), who speedily died
under her care. She subsequently made her illegitimate son pope, under the
title of John XI. After him her grandson, John XII, filled the chair of St.
Peter. Gibbon’s account of the manners and morals of John XII takes refuge at
last beneath a veil of Latin footnotes. This Pope, John XII, was finally
degraded by the new German Emperor Otto, who came over the Alps and down into
Italy to be crowned in 962.[346]

This new line of Saxon emperors, which thus comes into prominence, sprang from
a certain Henry the Fowler, who was elected King of Germany by an assembly of
German nobles, princes, and prelates in 919. In 936 he was succeeded as King by
his son, Otto I, surnamed the Great, who was also elected to be his successor
at Aix-la-Chapelle, and who finally descended upon Rome at the invitation of
John XII, to be crowned emperor in 962. His subsequent degradation of John was
forced upon him by that Pope’s treachery. With his assumption of the imperial
dignity, Otto I did not so much overcome Rome as restore the ancient tussle of
Pope and Emperor for ascendancy to something like decency and dignity again.
Otto I was followed by Otto II (973-983), and he again by a third Otto
(983-1002).[347]

The struggle between the Emperor and the Pope for ascendancy over the Holy
Roman Empire plays a large part in the history of the early Middle Ages, and we
shall have presently to sketch its chief phases. Though the Church never sank
quite to the level of John XII again, nevertheless the story fluctuates through
phases of great violence, confusion, and intrigue. Yet the outer history of
Christendom is not the whole history of Christendom. That the Lateran was as
cunning, foolish, and criminal as most other contemporary courts has to be
recorded; but, if we are to keep due proportions in this history, it must not
be unduly emphasized. We must remember that through all those ages, leaving
profound consequences, but leaving no conspicuous records upon the historian’s
page, countless men and women were touched by that Spirit of Jesus which still
lived and lives still at the core of Christianity, that they led lives that
were on the whole gracious and helpful, and that they did unselfish and devoted
deeds. Through those ages such lives cleared the air and made a better world
possible. Just as in the Moslem world the Spirit of Islam generation by
generation produced its crop of courage, integrity, and kindliness.

