# BOOK II - VIII - § 5
[Metadata]: # {03.01.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE ANCESTRY OF MAN[20]

§ 1. _Man Descended from a Walking Ape._ § 2. _First Traces of
Man-like Creatures._ § 3. _The Heidelberg Sub-man._ § 4. _The      Piltdown
Sub-man._ § 5. _The Riddle of the Piltdown Remains._

# § 5
Upon this question of the Piltdown jaw-bone, it may be of interest to quote
here a letter to the writer from Sir Ray Lankester, discussing the question in
a familiar and luminous manner. It will enable the reader to gauge the extent
and quality of the evidence that we possess at present upon the nature of these
early human and sub-human animals. Upon these fragile Piltdown fragments alone
more than a hundred books, pamphlets, and papers have been written. These
scraps of bone are guarded more carefully from theft and wilful damage than the
most precious jewels, and in the museum cases one sees only carefully executed
_fac-similes_.

“As to the Piltdown jaw-bone, the best study of it is that by Smith Woodward,
who first described it and the canine found later. The jaw is imperfect in
front, but has the broad, flat symphysis of the Apes. G. S. Miller, an American
anthropologist, has made a very good comparison of it with a chimpanzee’s jaw,
and concludes that it is a chimpanzee’s. (His monograph is in the _Am. Jour. of
Phys. Anthrop._, vol. i, no. 1.) The one point in the Piltdown jaw itself
against chimpanzee identification is the smooth, flat, worn surface of the
molars. This is a human character, and is due to lateral movement of the jaw,
and hence rubbing down of the tubercles of the molars. This is not worth much.
But the serious question is, are we to associate this jaw with the cranium
found close by it? If so, it is certainly not chimpanzee nor close to the Apes,
but decidedly hominid. Two other small fragments of crania and a few more teeth
have been found in the gravel two miles from Piltdown, which agree with the
Piltdown cranium in having superciliary ridges fairly strong for a human skull,
but not anything like the great superciliary ridges of Apes. The fact one has
to face is this; here you have an imperfect cranium, very thick-walled and of
small cubical contents (1100 or so), but much larger in that respect than any
ape’s. A few yards distant from it in the same layer of gravel is found a
jaw-bone having rather large pointed canines, a flat, broad symphysis, and
other points about the inner face of the ramus and ridges which resemble those
of the chimpanzee. Which is the more likely: (_a_) that these two novel
fragments tending apewards from man were parts of the same individual; or
(_b_), that the sweeping of the Wealden valley has brought there together a
half-jaw and a broken cranium _both_ more ape-like in character than any known
human corresponding bits, and yet derived from two separate anthropoid beasts,
one (the jaw) more simian, and the other (the cranium) much less so? As to the
probabilities, we must remember that this patch of gravel at Piltdown, clearly
and definitely, is a wash-up of remains of various later tertiary and
post-tertiary deposits. It contains fragments of Miocene mastodon and
rhinoceros teeth. These latter differ entirely in mineral character from the
Eoanthropus jaw and the cranium. But (and this needs re-examination and
_chemical_ analysis) the Piltdown jaw and the Piltdown cranium do not seem to
me to be quite alike in their mineral condition. The jaw is more deeply
iron-stained, and I should say (but not confidently), harder than the cranium.
Now, it is easy to attribute too much importance to that difference, since in a
patch of iron-stained gravel, such as that at Piltdown, the soaking of water
and iron salts into bones embedded may be much greater in one spot than in
another only a yard off, or a few inches deeper!

“So I think we are stumped and baffled! The most prudent way is to keep the jaw
and the cranium apart in all argument about them. On the other hand, on the
principle that hypotheses are not to be multiplied beyond necessity, there is a
case for regarding the two--jaw and cranium--as having been parts of one
beast--or man.”

To which Sir H. H. Johnston adds: “Against the chimpanzee hypothesis it must be
borne in mind that so far no living chimpanzee or fossil chimpanzee-like
remains have been found nearer England than north equatorial Africa or
North-west India, and no remains of great apes at all nearer than Southern
France and the upper Rhine--and those widely different from the _Eoanthropus_
jaw.”

