# BOOK III - XV - § 1
[Metadata]: # {04.01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

THE ARYAN-SPEAKING PEOPLES IN PREHISTORIC TIMES

§ 1. _The Spreading of the Aryan-Speakers._ § 2. _Primitive Aryan
Life._ § 3. _Early Aryan Daily Life._

# § 1
We have spoken of the Aryan language as probably arising in the region of the
Danube and South Russia and spreading from that region of origin. We say
“probably,” because it is by no means certainly proved that that was the
centre; there have been vast discussions upon this point and wide divergences
of opinion. We give the prevalent view. As it spread widely, Aryan began to
differentiate into a number of subordinate languages. To the west and south it
encountered the Basque language, which was then widely spread in Spain, and
also possibly various Hamitic Mediterranean languages.

The Neolithic Mediterranean race, the Iberian race, was distributed over Great
Britain, Ireland, France, Spain, north Africa, south Italy, and, in a more
civilized state, Greece and Asia Minor. It was probably closely related to the
Egyptian. To judge by its European vestiges it was a rather small human type,
generally with an oval face and a long head. It buried its chiefs and important
people in megalithic chambers--_i.e._ made of big stones--covered over by great
mounds of earth; and these mounds of earth, being much longer than they are
broad, are spoken of as the long barrows. These people sheltered at times in
caves, and also buried some of their dead therein; and from the traces of
charred, broken, and cut human bones, including the bones of children, it is
inferred that they were cannibals. These short dark Iberian tribes (and the
Basques also if they were a different race) were thrust back westward, and
conquered and enslaved by slowly advancing waves of a taller and fairer
Aryan-speaking people, coming southward and westward through central Europe,
who are spoken of as the Kelts. Only the Basque resisted the conquering Aryan
speech. Gradually these Keltic-speakers made their way to the Atlantic, and all
that now remains of the Iberians is mixed into the Keltic population. How far
the Keltic invasion affected the Irish population is a matter of debate at the
present time; the Kelts may have been a mere caste of conquerors who imposed
their language on a larger subject population. It is even doubtful if the north
of England is more Aryan than pre-Keltic in blood. There is a sort of short
dark Welshman, and certain types of Irishmen, who are Iberians by race. The
modern Portuguese are also largely of Iberian blood.

The Kelts spoke a language, Keltic,[88] which was also in its turn to
differentiate into the language of Gaul, Welsh, Breton, Scotch and Irish
Gaelic, and other tongues. They buried the ashes of their chiefs and important
people in round barrows. While these Nordic Kelts were spreading westward,
other Nordic Aryan peoples were pressing down upon the dark white Mediterranean
race in the Italian and Greek peninsulas, and developing the Latin and Greek
groups of tongues. Certain other Aryan tribes were drifting towards the Baltic
and across into Scandinavia, speaking varieties of the Aryan which became
ancient Norse--the parent of Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, and Icelandic--Gothic,
and Low and High German.

While the primitive Aryan speech was thus spreading and breaking up into
daughter languages to the west, it was also spreading and breaking up to the
east. North of the Carpathians and the Black Sea, Aryan-speaking tribes were
increasing and spreading and using a distinctive dialect called Slavonian, from
which came Russian, Serbian, Polish, Bulgarian, and other tongues; other
variations of Aryan distributed over Asia Minor and Persia were also being
individualized as Armenian and Indo-Iranian, the parent of Sanscrit and
Persian. In this book we have used the word Aryan for all this family of
languages, but the term Indo-European is sometimes used for the entire family,
and “Aryan” itself restricted in a narrower sense to the Indo-Iranian
speech.[89] This Indo-Iranian speech was destined to split later into a number
of languages, including Persian and Sanscrit, the latter being the language of
certain tribes of fair-complexioned Aryan speakers who pushed eastward into
India somewhen between 3000 and 1000 B.C. and conquered dark Dravidian peoples
who were then in possession of that land.

