# BOOK II - XIV - § 2
[Metadata]: # {03.07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE LANGUAGES OF MANKIND

§ 1. _No one Primitive Language._ § 2. _The Aryan Languages._ § 3.
_The Semitic Languages._ § 4. _The Hamitic Languages._ § 5. _The      Ural
Altaic Languages._ § 6. _The Chinese Languages._ § 7. _Other      Language
Groups._ § 8. _Submerged and Lost Languages._ § 9. _How      Languages may be
Related._

# § 2
The students of languages (philologists) tell us that they are unable to trace
with certainty any common features in all the languages of mankind. They cannot
even find any elements common to all the Caucasian languages. They find over
great areas groups of languages which have similar root words and similar ways
of expressing the same idea, but then they find in other areas languages which
appear to be dissimilar down to their fundamental structure, which express
action and relation by entirely dissimilar devices, and have an altogether
different grammatical scheme.[79] One great group of languages, for example,
now covers nearly all Europe and stretches out to India; it includes English,
French, German, Spanish, Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, Persian, and
various Indian tongues. It is called the Indo-European or ARYAN family. The
same fundamental roots, the same grammatical ideas, are traceable through all
this family. Compare, for example, English _father, mother_, Gothic _fadar,
moutar_, German _vater, mutter_, Latin _pater, mater_, Greek _pater, meter_,
French _père, mère_, Armenian _hair, mair_, Sanscrit _pitar, matar_, etc., etc.
In a similar manner the Aryan languages ring the changes on a great number of
fundamental words, _f_ in the Germanic languages becoming _p_ in Latin, and so
on. They follow a law of variation called Grimm’s Law. These languages are not
different things, they are variations of one thing. The people who use these
languages think in the same way.

At one time in the remote past, in the Neolithic Age, that is to say 6000[80]
years or more ago, there may have been one simple original speech from which
all these Aryan languages have differentiated. Somewhere between central Europe
and western Asia there must have wandered a number of tribes sufficiently
intermingled to develop and use one tongue. It is convenient here to call them
the Aryan peoples. Sir H. H. Johnston has called them “Aryan Russians.” They
belonged mostly to the Caucasian group of races and to the blond and northern
subdivision of the group, to the Nordic race that is.

Here one must sound a note of warning. There was a time when the philologists
were disposed to confuse languages and races, and to suppose that people who
once all spoke the same tongue must be all of the same blood. That, however, is
not the case, as the reader will understand if he will think of the negroes of
the United States who now all speak English, or of the Irish, who--except for
purposes of political demonstration--no longer speak the old Erse language but
English, or of the Cornish people, who have lost their ancient Keltic speech.
But what a common language does do, is to show that a common intercourse has
existed, and the possibility of intermixture; and if it does not point to a
common origin, it points at least to a common future.

But even this original Aryan language, which was a spoken speech perhaps 4000
or 3000 B.C., was by no means a _primordial_ language or the language of a
savage race. Its speakers were in or past the Neolithic stage of civilization.
It had grammatical forms and verbal devices of some complexity. The vanished
methods of expression of the later Palæolithic peoples, of the Azilians, or of
the early Neolithic kitchen-midden people for instance, were probably much
cruder than the most elementary form of Aryan.

Probably the Aryan group of languages became distinct in a wide region of which
the Danube, Dnieper, Don, and Volga were the main rivers, a region that
extended eastward beyond the Ural mountains north of the Caspian Sea. The area
over which the Aryan speakers roamed probably did not for a long time reach to
the Atlantic or to the south of the Black Sea beyond Asia Minor. There was no
effectual separation of Europe from Asia then at the Bosphorus.[81] The Danube
flowed eastward to a great sea that extended across the Volga region of
south-eastern Russia right into Turkestan, and included the Black, Caspian, and
Aral Seas of to-day. Perhaps it sent out arms to the Arctic Ocean. It must have
been a pretty effective barrier between the Aryan speakers and the people in
north-eastern Asia. South of this sea stretched a continuous shore from the
Balkans to Afghanistan.[82] North-west of it a region of swamps and lagoons
reached to the Baltic.

