# BOOK VIII - XXXIX - § 5
[Metadata]: # {10.04.05}
[Descriptor]: # {10.04.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE REALITIES AND IMAGINATIONS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY[457]

§ 1. _The Mechanical Revolution._ § 2. _Relation of the Mechanical      to
the Industrial Revolution._ § 3. _The Fermentation of Ideas,      1848._ § 4.
_The Development of the Idea of Socialism._ § 5.      _Shortcomings of
Socialism as a Scheme of Human Society._ § 6. _How      Darwinism Affected
Religious and Political Ideas._ § 7. _Mr.      Gladstone and the Idea of
Nationalism._ § 8. _Europe between 1848      and 1878._ § 9. _The (Second)
Scramble for Overseas Empires._ § 10.      _The Indian Precedent in Asia._ §
11. _The History of Japan._ § 12.      _Close of the Period of Overseas
Expansion._ § 13. _The British      Empire in 1914._

# § 5
We are all socialists nowadays, said Sir William Harcourt years ago, and that
is loosely true to-day. There can be few people who fail to realize the
provisional nature and the dangerous instability of our present political and
economic system, and still fewer who believe with the doctrinaire
individualists that profit-hunting “go as you please” will guide mankind to any
haven of prosperity and happiness. Great rearrangements are necessary, and a
systematic legal subordination of personal self-seeking to the public good. So
far most reasonable men are socialists. But these are only preliminary
propositions. How far has socialism and modern thought generally gone towards
working out the conception of this new political and social order, of which our
world admittedly stands in need? We are obliged to answer that there is no
clear conception of the new state towards which we vaguely struggle, that our
science of human relationships is still so crude and speculative as to leave us
without definite guidance upon a score of primarily important issues. In 1920
we are no more in a position to set up a scientifically conceived political
system in the world than were men to set up an electric power station in 1820.
They could not have done that then to save their lives.

The Marxist system points us to an accumulation of revolutionary forces in the
modern world. These forces will continually tend towards revolution. But Marx
assumed too hastily that a revolutionary impulse would necessarily produce an
ordered state of a new and better kind. A revolution may stop half way in mere
destruction. No socialist sect has yet defined its projected government
clearly; the Bolsheviks in their Russian experiment seem to have been guided by
a phrase, the dictatorship of the proletariat, and in practice, we are told,
Trotsky and Lenin have proved as autocratic as the less intelligent but equally
well-meaning Tsar, Alexander I. We have been at some pains to show from our
brief study of the French revolution that a revolution can establish nothing
permanent that has not already been thought out beforehand and apprehended by
the general mind. The French republic, confronted with unexpected difficulties
in economics, currency, and international relationships, collapsed to the
egotisms of the newly rich people of the Directory, and finally to the egotism
of Napoleon. Law and a plan, steadily upheld, are more necessary in
revolutionary times than in ordinary hum-drum times, because in revolutionary
times society degenerates much more readily into a mere scramble under the
ascendancy of the forcible and cunning.

If in general terms we take stock of the political and social science of our
age, we shall measure something of the preliminary intellectual task still to
be done by mankind before we can hope to see any permanent constructive
achievements emerging from the mere traditionalism and adventuring that rule
our collective affairs to-day. This Socialism, which professes to be a complete
theory of a new social order, we discover, when we look into it, to be no more
than a partial theory--very illuminating, so far as it goes--about property. We
have already discussed the relationship of social development to the
restriction of the idea of property (chap. xxxvii, § 13). There are various
schools of thought which would restrict property more or less completely.
Communism is the proposal to abolish property altogether, or, in other words,
to hold all things in common. Modern Socialism, on the other hand--or, to give
it a more precise name, “Collectivism”--does clearly distinguish between
personal property and collective property. The gist of the socialist proposal
is that land and all the natural means of production, transit, and distribution
should be collectively owned. Within these limits there is to be much free
private ownership and unrestricted personal freedom. Given efficient
administration, it may be doubted whether many people nowadays would dispute
that proposal. But socialism has never gone on to a thorough examination of
that proviso for efficient administration.

Again, what community is it that is to own the collective property; is it to be
the sovereign or the township or the county or the nation or mankind? Socialism
makes no clear answer. Socialists are very free with the word “nationalize,”
but we have been subjecting the ideas of “nations” and “nationalism” to some
destructive criticism in this _Outline_. If socialists object to a single
individual claiming a mine or a great stretch of agricultural land as his own
individual property, with a right to refuse or barter its use and profit to
others, why should they permit a single nation to monopolize the mines or trade
routes or natural wealth of the territories in which it lives, against the rest
of mankind? There seems to be great confusion in socialist theory in this
matter. And unless human life is to become a mass meeting of the race in
permanent session, how is the community to appoint its officers to carry on its
collective concerns? After all, the private owner of land or of a business or
the like is a sort of public official in so far as his ownership is sanctioned
and protected by the community. Instead of being paid a salary or fees, he is
allowed to make a profit. The only valid reason for dismissing him from his
ownership is that the new control to be substituted will be more efficient and
profitable and satisfactory to the community. And, being dismissed, he has at
least the same claim to consideration from the community that he himself has
shown in the past to the worker thrown out of employment by a mechanical
invention.

This question of administration, the sound and adequate bar to much immediate
socialization, brings us to the still largely unsolved problem of human
association; how are we to secure the best direction of human affairs and the
maximum of willing co-operation with that direction? This is ultimately a
complex problem in psychology, but it is absurd to pretend that it is an
insoluble one. There must be a definite best, which is the right thing, in
these matters. But if it is not insoluble, it is equally unreasonable to
pretend that it has been solved. The problem in its completeness involves the
working out of the best methods in the following departments, and their
complete correlation:--

(i) _Education._--The preparation of the individual for an understanding and
willing co-operation in the world’s affairs.

(ii) _Information._--The continual truthful presentation of public affairs to
the individual for his judgment and approval. Closely connected with this need
for current information is the codification of the law, the problem of keeping
the law plain, clear, and accessible to all.

(iii) _Representation._--The selection of representatives and agents to act in
the collective interest in harmony with the general will based on this
education and plain information.

(iv) _The Executive._--The appointment of executive agents and the maintenance
of means for keeping them responsible to the community, without at the same
time hampering intelligent initiatives.

(v) _Thought and Research._--The systematic criticism of affairs and laws to
provide data for popular judgments, and through those judgments to ensure the
secular improvement of the human organization.

These are the five heads under which the broad problem of human society
presents itself to us. In the world around us we see makeshift devices at work
in all those branches, ill co-ordinated one with another and unsatisfactory in
themselves. We see an educational system meanly financed and equipped, badly
organized and crippled by the interventions and hostilities of religious
bodies; we see popular information supplied chiefly by a venal press dependent
upon advertisements and subsidies; we see farcical methods of election
returning politicians to power as unrepresentative as any hereditary ruler or
casual conqueror; everywhere the executive is more or less influenced or
controlled by groups of rich adventurers, and the pursuit of political and
social science and of public criticism is still the work of devoted and
eccentric individuals rather than a recognized and honoured function in the
state. There is a gigantic task before right-thinking men in the cleansing and
sweetening of the politician’s stable; and until it is done, any complete
realization of socialism is impossible. While private adventurers control the
political life of the State it is ridiculous to think of the state taking over
collective economic interests from private adventurers.

Not only has the socialist movement failed thus far to produce a scientifically
reasoned scheme for the correlation of education, law, and the exercise of
public power, but even in the economic field, as we have already pointed out,
creative forces wait for the conception of a right organization of credit and a
right method of payment and interchange. It is a truism that the willingness of
the worker depends, among other things, upon his complete confidence in the
purchasing power of the currency in which he is paid. As this confidence goes,
work ceases, except in so far as it can be rewarded by payment in goods. But
there is no sufficient science of currency and business psychology to restrain
governments from the most disturbing interferences with the public credit and
with the circulation. And such interferences lead straight to the cessation of
work, that is, of the production of necessary things. Upon such vital practical
questions it is scarcely too much to say that the mass of those socialists who
would recast the world have no definite ideas at all. Yet in a socialist world
quite as much as in any other sort of world, people must be paid money for
their work rather than be paid in kind if any such thing as personal freedom is
to continue. Here too there must be an ascertainable right thing to do. Until
that is determined, history in these matters will continue to be not so much a
record of experiments as of flounderings.[468]

And in another direction the social and political thinking of the nineteenth
century was, in the face of the vastness of the mechanical revolution, timid,
limited, and insufficient, and that was in regard to international relations.
The reader of socialistic literature will find the socialists constantly
writing and talking of the “State,” and never betraying any realization that
the “State” might be all sorts of organizations in all sorts of areas, from the
republic of San Marino to the British Empire. It is true that Karl Marx had a
conception of a solidarity of interests between the workers in all the
industrialized countries, but there is little or no suggestion in Marxist
socialism of the logical corollary of this, the establishment of a democratic
world federal government (with national or provincial “state” governments) as a
natural consequence of his projected social revolution. At most there is a
vague aspiration. But if there is any logic about the Marxist, it should be his
declared political end for which he should work without ceasing. Put to the
test of the war of 1914, the socialists of almost all the European countries
showed that their class-conscious internationalism was veneered very thinly
indeed over their patriotic feelings, and had to no degree replaced them.
Everywhere during the German war socialists denounced that war as made by
capitalist governments, but it produces little or no permanent effect to
denounce a government or a world system unless you have a working idea of a
better government and a better system to replace it.

We state these things here because they are facts, and a living and necessary
part of a contemporary survey of human history. It is not our task either to
advocate or controvert socialism. But it is in our picture to note that
political and social life are, and must remain, chaotic and disastrous without
the development of some such constructive scheme as socialism _sketches_, and
to point out clearly how far away the world is at present from any such scheme.
An enormous amount of intellectual toil and discussion and education and many
years--whether decades or centuries, no man can tell--must intervene before a
new order, planned as ships and railways are planned, runs, as the cables and
the postal deliveries run, over the whole surface of our earth. And until such
a new order draws mankind together with its net, human life, as we shall
presently show by the story of the European wars since 1854, must become more
and more casual, dangerous, miserable, anxious, and disastrous because of the
continually more powerful and destructive war methods the continuing mechanical
revolution produces.


§ 6[469]

While the mechanical revolution which the growth of physical science had
brought about was destroying the ancient social classification of the civilized
state which had been evolved through thousands of years, and producing new
possibilities and new ideals of a righteous human community and a righteous
world order, a change at least as great and novel was going on in the field of
religious thought. That same growth of scientific knowledge from which sprang
the mechanical revolution was the moving cause of these religious disturbances.

In the opening chapters of this _Outline_ we have given the main story of the
Record of the Rocks; we have shown life for the little beginning of
consciousness that it is in the still waiting vastness of the void of space and
time. But before the end of the eighteenth century, this enormous prospect of
the past which fills a modern mind with humility and illimitable hope, was
hidden from the general consciousness of our race. It was veiled by the curtain
of a Sumerian legend. The heavens were no more than a stage background to a
little drama of kings. Men had been too occupied with their own private
passions and personal affairs to heed the intimations of their own great
destiny that lay about them everywhere.

They learnt their true position in space long before they placed themselves in
time. We have already named the earlier astronomers, and told how Galileo was
made to recant his assertion that the earth moved round the sun. He was made to
do so by the church, and the church was stirred to make him do so because any
doubt that the world was the centre of the universe seemed to strike fatally at
the authority of Christianity.

Now, upon that matter the teller of modern history is obliged to be at once
cautious and bold. He has to pick his way between cowardly evasion on the one
hand, and partisanship on the other. As far as possible he must confine himself
to facts and restrain his opinions. Yet it is well to remember that no opinions
can be altogether restrained. The writer has his own very strong and definite
persuasions, and the reader must bear that in mind. It is a fact in history
that the teaching of Jesus of Nazareth had in it something profoundly new and
creative; he preached a new Kingdom of Heaven in the hearts and in the world of
men. There was nothing in his teaching, so far as we can judge it at this
distance of time, to clash or interfere with any discovery or expansion of the
history of the world and mankind. But it is equally a fact in history that St.
Paul and his successors added to or completed or imposed upon or substituted
another doctrine for--as you may prefer to think--the plain and profoundly
revolutionary teachings of Jesus by expounding a subtle and complex theory of
salvation, a salvation which could be attained very largely by belief and
formalities, without any serious disturbance of the believer’s ordinary habits
and occupations, and that this Pauline teaching did involve very definite
beliefs about the history of the world and man. It is not the business of the
historian to controvert or explain these matters; the question of their
ultimate significance depends upon the theologian; the historian’s concern is
merely with the fact that official Christianity throughout the world adopted
St. Paul’s view so plainly expressed in his epistles and so untraceable in the
gospels, that the meaning of religion lay not in the future, but in the past,
and that Jesus was not so much a teacher of wonderful new things, as a
predestinate divine blood sacrifice of deep mystery and sacredness made in
atonement of a particular historical act of disobedience to the Creator
committed by our first parents, Adam and Eve, in response to the temptation of
a serpent in the Garden of Eden. Upon the belief in that Fall as a fact, and
not upon the personality of Jesus of Nazareth, upon the theories of Paul, and
not upon the injunctions of Jesus, doctrinal Christianity built itself.

We have already noted that this story of the special creation of the world and
of Adam and Eve and the serpent was also an ancient Babylonian story, and
probably a still more ancient Sumerian story, and that the Jewish sacred books
were the medium by which this very ancient and primitive “heliolithic” serpent
legend entered Christianity. Wherever official Christianity has gone, it has
taken this story with it. It has tied itself up to that story. Until a century
and less ago the whole Christianized world felt bound to believe and did
believe, that the universe had been specially created in the course of six days
by the word of God a few thousand years before--according to Bishop Ussher,
4004 B.C. (The _Universal History_, in forty-two volumes, published in 1779 by
a group of London booksellers, discusses whether the precise date of the first
day of Creation was March 21st or September 21st, 4004 B.C., and inclines to
the view that the latter was the more probable season.)

Upon this historical assumption rested the religious fabric of the Western and
Westernized civilization, and yet the whole world was littered, the hills,
mountains, deltas, and seas were bursting with evidence of its utter absurdity.
The religious life of the leading nations, still a very intense and sincere
religious life, was going on in a house of history built upon sand.

There is frequent recognition in classical literature of a sounder cosmogony.
Aristotle was aware of the broad principles of modern geology, they shine
through the speculations of Lucretius, and we have noted also Leonardo da
Vinci’s (1452-1519) lucid interpretation of fossils. A Frenchman, Descartes
(1596-1650), speculated boldly upon the incandescent beginnings of our globe,
and an Italian, Steno (1631-87), began the collection of fossils and the
description of strata. But it was only as the eighteenth century drew to its
close that the systematic study of geology assumed such proportions as to
affect the general authority of the Bible version of that ancient Sumerian
narrative. Contemporaneously with the _Universal History_ quoted above, a great
French naturalist, Buffon, was writing upon the Epochs of Nature (1778), and
boldly extending the age of the world to 70,000 or 75,000 years. He divided his
story into six epochs to square with the six days of the Creation story. These
days, it was argued, were figurative days; they were really ages. There was a
general disposition to do this on the part of the new science of geology. By
that accommodating device, geology contrived to make a peace with orthodox
religious teaching that lasted until the middle of the nineteenth century.

We cannot trace here the contributions of such men as Hutton and Playfair and
Sir Charles Lyell, and the Frenchmen Lamarck and Cuvier, in unfolding and
developing the record of the rocks. It was only slowly that the general
intelligence of the Western world was awakened to two disconcerting facts:
firstly, that the succession of life in the geological record did not
correspond to the acts of the six days of creation; and, secondly, that the
record, in harmony with a mass of biological facts, pointed away from the Bible
assertion of a separate creation of each species straight towards a genetic
relation between all forms of life, _in which even man was included_! The
importance of this last issue to the existing doctrinal system was manifest. If
all the animals and man had been evolved in this ascendant manner, then there
had been no first parents, no Eden, and no Fall. And if there had been no fall,
then the entire historical fabric of Christianity, the story of the first sin
and the reason for an atonement, upon which the current teaching based
Christian emotion and morality, collapsed like a house of cards.

It was with something like horror, therefore, that great numbers of honest and
religious-spirited men followed the work of the great English naturalist,
Charles Darwin (1809-82); in 1859 he published his _Origin of Species by Means
of Natural Selection_, a powerful and permanently valuable exposition of that
conception of the change and development of species which we have sketched
briefly in Chapter III; and in 1871 he completed the outline of his work with
the _Descent of Man_, which brought man definitely into the same scheme of
development with the rest of life.

Many men and women are still living who can remember the dismay and distress
among ordinary intelligent people in the Western communities as the invincible
case of the biologists and geologists against the orthodox Christian cosmogony
unfolded itself. The minds of many quite honest men resisted the new knowledge
instinctively and irrationally. Their whole moral edifice was built upon false
history; they were too old and set to rebuild it; they felt the practical truth
of their moral convictions, and this new truth seemed to them to be
incompatible with that. They believed that to assent to it would be to prepare
a moral collapse for the world. And so they produced a moral collapse by not
assenting to it. The universities in England particularly, being primarily
clerical in their constitution, resisted the new learning very bitterly. During
the seventies and eighties a stormy controversy raged throughout the civilized
world. The quality of the discussions and the fatal ignorance of the church may
be gauged by a description in Hackett’s _Commonplace Book_ of a meeting of the
British Association in 1860, at which Bishop Wilberforce assailed Huxley, the
great champion of the Darwinian views, in this fashion.

Facing “Huxley with a smiling insolence, he begged to know, _was it through his
grandfather or grandmother that he claimed his descent from a monkey_? Huxley
turned to his neighbour, and said, ‘The Lord hath delivered him into my hands.’
Then he stood before us and spoke these tremendous words, ‘He was not ashamed
to have a monkey for his ancestor; but he would be ashamed to be connected with
a man who used great gifts to obscure the truth.’” (Another version has it: “I
have certainly said that a man has no reason to be ashamed of having an ape for
his grandfather. If there were an ancestor whom I should feel ashamed in
recalling, it would rather be a man of restless and versatile intellect who
plunges into scientific questions with which he has no real acquaintance, only
to obscure them by an aimless rhetoric and distract the attention of his
audience from the real point at issue by eloquent digressions and skilled
appeals to prejudice.”) These words were certainly spoken with passion. The
scene was one of great excitement. A lady fainted, says Hackett.... Such was
the temper of this controversy.

The Darwinian movement took formal Christianity unawares, suddenly. Formal
Christianity was confronted with a clearly demonstrable error in her
theological statements. The Christian theologians were neither wise enough nor
mentally nimble enough to accept the new truth, modify their formulæ, and
insist upon the living and undiminished vitality of the religious reality those
formulæ had hitherto sufficed to express. For the discovery of man’s descent
from sub-human forms does not even remotely touch the teaching of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Yet priests and bishops raged at Darwin; foolish attempts were made
to suppress Darwinian literature and to insult and discredit the exponents of
the new views. There was much wild talk of the “antagonism” of religion and
science. Now in all ages there have been sceptics in Christendom. The Emperor
Frederick II was certainly a sceptic; in the eighteenth century Gibbon and
Voltaire were openly anti-Christian, and their writings influenced a number of
scattered readers. But these were exceptional people.... Now the whole of
Christendom became as a whole sceptical. This new controversy touched everybody
who read a book or heard intelligent conversation. A new generation of young
people grew up, and they found the defenders of Christianity in an evil temper,
fighting their cause without dignity or fairness. It was the orthodox theology
that the new scientific advances had compromised, but the angry theologians
declared that it was religion.

In the end men may discover that religion shines all the brighter for the loss
of its doctrinal wrappings, but to the young it seemed as if indeed there had
been a conflict of science and religion, and that in that conflict science had
won.

The immediate effect of this great dispute upon the ideas and methods of people
in the prosperous and influential classes throughout the westernized world was
very detrimental indeed. The new biological science was bringing nothing
constructive as yet to replace the old moral stand-bys. A real de-moralization
ensued. The general level of social life in those classes was far higher in the
early twentieth than in the early seventeenth century, but in one respect, in
respect to disinterestedness and conscientiousness in these classes, it is
probable that the tone of the earlier age was better than the latter. In the
owning and active classes of the seventeenth century, in spite of a few
definite “infidels,” there was probably a much higher percentage of men and
women who prayed sincerely, who searched their souls to find if they had done
evil, and who were prepared to suffer and make great sacrifices for what they
conceived to be right, than in the opening years of the twentieth century.
There was a real loss of faith after 1859. The true gold of religion was in
many cases thrown away with the worn-out purse that had contained it for so
long, and it was not recovered. Towards the close of the nineteenth century a
crude misunderstanding of Darwinism had become the fundamental mindstuff of
great masses of the “educated” everywhere. The seventeenth-century kings and
owners and rulers and leaders had had the idea at the back of their minds that
they prevailed by the will of God; they really feared Him, they got priests to
put things right for them with Him; when they were wicked, they tried not to
think of Him. But the old faith of the kings, owners, and rulers of the opening
twentieth century had faded under the actinic light of scientific criticism.
Prevalent peoples at the close of the nineteenth century believed that they
prevailed by virtue of the Struggle for Existence, in which the strong and
cunning get the better of the weak and confiding. And they believed further
that they had to be strong, energetic, ruthless, “practical,” egotistical,
because God was dead, and had always, it seemed, been dead--which was going
altogether further than the new knowledge justified.

They soon got beyond the first crude popular misconception of Darwinism, the
idea that every man is for himself alone. But they stuck at the next level.
Man, they decided, is a social animal like the Indian hunting dog. He is much
more than a dog--but this they did not see. And just as in a pack it is
necessary to bully and subdue the younger and weaker for the general good, so
it seemed right to them that the big dogs of the human pack should bully and
subdue. Hence a new scorn for the ideas of democracy that had ruled the earlier
nineteenth century, and a revived admiration for the overbearing and the cruel.
It was quite characteristic of the times that Mr. Kipling should lead the
children of the middle and upper-class British public back to the Jungle, to
learn “the law,” and that in his book _Stalky and Co._ he should give an
appreciative description of the torture of two boys by three others, who have
by a subterfuge tied up their victims helplessly before revealing their hostile
intentions.

It is worth while to give a little attention to this incident in _Stalky and
Co._, because it lights up the political psychology of the British Empire at
the close of the nineteenth century very vividly. The history of the last half
century is not to be understood without an understanding of the mental twist
which this story exemplifies. The two boys who are tortured are “bullies,” that
is the excuse of their tormentors, and these latter have further been incited
to the orgy by a clergyman. Nothing can restrain the gusto with which they (and
Mr. Kipling) set about the job. Before resorting to torture, the teaching seems
to be, see that you pump up a little justifiable moral indignation, and all
will be well. If you have the authorities on your side, then you cannot be to
blame. Such, apparently, is the simple doctrine of this typical imperialist.
But every bully has to the best of his ability followed that doctrine since the
human animal developed sufficient intelligence to be consciously cruel.

Another point in the story is very significant indeed. The head master and his
clerical assistant are both represented as being privy to the affair. They want
this bullying to occur. Instead of exercising their own authority, they use
these boys, who are Mr. Kipling’s heroes, to punish the two victims. Head
master and clergyman turn a deaf ear to the complaints of an indignant mother.
All this Mr. Kipling represents as a most desirable state of affairs. In this
we have the key to the ugliest, most retrogressive, and finally fatal idea of
modern imperialism; the idea of a _tacit conspiracy between the law and illegal
violence_. Just as the Tsardom wrecked itself at last by a furtive
encouragement of the ruffians of the Black Hundreds, who massacred Jews and
other people supposed to be inimical to the Tsar, so the good name of the
British Imperial Government has been tainted--and is still tainted--by an
illegal raid made by Doctor Jameson into the Transvaal before the Boer War, and
by the adventures, which we shall presently describe, of Sir Edward Carson and
Mr. F. E. Smith (now Lord Birkenhead) in Ireland. By such treasons against
their subjects, empires destroy themselves. The true strength of rulers and
empires lies not in armies and emotions, but in the belief of men that they are
inflexibly open and truthful and legal. So soon as a government departs from
that standard, it ceases to be anything more than “the gang in possession,” and
its days are numbered.

It was just this dignity of government which the crude Darwinism and the
Kiplingism of the later Victorian years were destroying. Competition and
survival were accepted as the basal facts of life. “War is the natural state of
nations,” said a popular London men’s weekly[470] the other day, with an air of
repeating something universally known. “Peace is only the interval of rest and
preparation between wars.” In accordance with such ideas the growing boy was
exhorted to be “loyal” to his school and contemptuous of other schools, “loyal”
to his class against other classes, “loyal” to his nation and contemptuous and
fierce towards other nations, “loyal” to the English-speaking peoples and
contemptuous and hostile to the German or French-speaking. His instinct for
brotherhood was narrowed and debased. The universal brotherhood of mankind was
laughed to scorn. All life was bickering, he was taught; and yet the whole
course of history has shown that the bickering nations perish, and that the
alliances and coalescences of peoples and nations ensure the life they
comprehend.

So the Darwinian crisis continued that destruction of Christian prestige which
the narrowness of priestcraft and the consequent division of Christendom among
the monarchist and national Protestant churches of the Reformation had begun,
and at a time when man’s need for pacifying and unifying ideas was greater than
it had ever been. Just when men of different races and languages and political
ideas were being brought by the mechanical revolution to a closeness of contact
and a power of mutual injury undreamt of before, the authority of the doctrines
by which men had hitherto transcended tribal and local limitations was
undermined. Just when different classes were being aroused to a fierce
realization of mutual economic antagonism, the fundamental teaching of
brotherhood was discredited and a pseudo-scientific sanction given to
self-seeking and oppression.[471] From this stage onward the historian can tell
no longer of ordinary clerical Christianity as a power in men’s affairs. In
politics and social questions the appeal to its standards ceased. Yet never was
there so imperative a demand in the world of men for a common basis upon which
they could work together, a common conception of aim in which they could lose
themselves. We shall find great masses of people inspired to passionate
devotion, by ideas of nationalism, of imperialism, of class-conscious
socialism. But official and orthodox Christianity no longer inspired. Men would
no longer live by it or die for it.

This paradoxical final decline of a universal faith in the Westernized world,
just when men were being drawn together by the mechanical revolution into one
inseparable political and economic system, may have been due entirely to the
coincidence of that revolution with destructive scientific discovery, or it may
also have been accelerated by the irritations produced by the sudden close
clashing with unfamiliar peoples and races. It may have been a merely temporary
decline due to the need for a sloughing-off of the out-worn theology and
antique sacerdotalism which confined its appeal to the western world,
preparatory to a reconstruction of religious statement upon simpler world-wide
lines. It may have been merely a cleansing of the teachings of Jesus of
Nazareth from theological and ceremonial accretions. Upon such “may have beens”
we can speculate here, but we cannot decide. History can deal with the small
beginnings in the past of the great things of the present, but in the present
only with what is plain and obvious. We cannot tell what seeds of the future
may not be germinating already amidst our present confusions.

