# BOOK IV - XXII - § 1
[Metadata]: # {05.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
JUDEA, GREECE, AND INDIA

THE GREEKS AND THE PERSIANS[169]

§ 1. _The Hellenic Peoples._ § 2. _Distinctive Features of Hellenic
Civilization._ § 3. _Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy in Greece._ § 4. _The
Kingdom of Lydia._ § 5. _The Rise of the Persians in the East._ § 6. _The Story
of Crœsus._ § 7. _Darius Invades Russia._ § 8. _The Battle of Marathon._ § 9.
_Thermopylæ and Salamis._ § 10. _Platæa and Mycale._

# § 1
And now our history must go back again to those Aryan-speaking peoples of whose
early beginnings we have given an account in Chapters XIV and XV. We must, for
the sake of precision, repeat here two warnings we have already given the
reader: first, that we use the word Aryan in its widest sense, to express all
the early peoples who spoke languages of the “Indo-Germanic” or “Indo-European”
group; and, secondly, that when we use the word Aryan we do not imply any
racial purity.

The original speakers of the fundamental Aryan language, 2000 or 3000 years
B.C., were probably a specialized and distinctive Nordic race of fair white
men, accustomed to forests and cattle, who wandered east of the Rhine and
through the forests of the Danube valley, the Balkan peninsula, Asia Minor, and
eastward to the north and west of the great Central Asian Sea; but very early
they had encountered and mixed themselves extensively, and as they spread they
continued to mix themselves with other races, with races of uncertain
affinities in Asia Minor and with Iberian and Mediterranean peoples of the
dark-haired white race. For instance, the Aryans, spreading and pressing
westward in successive waves of Keltic-speaking peoples through Gaul and
Britain and Ireland, mixed more and more with Iberian races, and were affected
more and more by that Iberian blood and their speech by the characteristics of
the language their Keltic tongue superseded. Other waves of Keltic peoples
washed with diminishing force into Spain and Portugal, where to this day the
pre-Keltic strain is altogether dominant although the languages spoken are
Aryan. Northward, in Europe, the Aryan peoples were spreading into hitherto
uninhabited country, and so remaining racially more purely Nordic blonds. They
had already reached Scandinavia many centuries B.C.

From their original range of wandering, other Aryan tribes spread to the north
as well as to the south of the Black Sea, and ultimately, as these seas shrank
and made way for them, to the north and east of the Caspian, and so began to
come into conflict with and mix also with Mongolian peoples of the Ural-Altaic
linguistic group, the horse-keeping people of the grassy steppes of Central
Asia. From these Mongolian races the Aryans seem to have acquired the use of
the horse for riding and warfare. There were three or four prehistoric
varieties or sub-species of horse in Europe and Asia, but it was the steppe or
semi-desert lands that first gave horses of a build adapted to other than food
uses.[170] All these peoples, it must be understood, shifted their ground
rapidly, a succession of bad seasons might drive them many hundreds of miles,
and it is only in a very rough and provisional manner that their “beats” can
now be indicated. Every summer they went north, every winter they swung south
again. This annual swing covered sometimes hundreds of miles. On our maps, for
the sake of simplicity, we represent the shifting of nomadic peoples by a
straight line; but really they moved in annual swings, as the broom of a
servant who is sweeping out a passage swishes from side to side as she
advances. Spreading round the north of the Black Sea, and probably to the north
of the Caspian, from the range of the original Teutonic tribes of Central and
North-central Europe to the Iranian peoples who became the Medes and Persians
and (Aryan) Hindus, were the grazing lands of a confusion of tribes, about whom
it is truer to be vague than precise, such as the Cimmerians, the Sarmatians,
and those Scythians who, together with the Medes and Persians, came into
effective contact with the Assyrian Empire by 1000 B.C. or earlier.

East and south of the Black Sea, between the Danube and the Medes and Persians,
and to the north of the Semitic and Mediterranean peoples of the sea coasts and
peninsulas, ranged another series of equally ill-defined Aryan tribes, moving
easily from place to place and intermixing freely--to the great confusion of
historians. They seem, for instance, to have broken up and assimilated the
Hittite civilization, which was probably pre-Aryan in its origin. They were,
perhaps, not so far advanced along the nomadic line as the Scythians of the
great plains.

The general characteristics of the original Aryan peoples we have already
discussed in Chapter XV. They were a forest people, not a steppe people, and,
consequently, wasteful of wood; they were a cattle people and not a horse
people. The Greeks appear in the dim light before the dawn of history (say 1500
B.C.), as one of the wandering imperfectly nomadic Aryan peoples who were
gradually extending the range of their pasturage southward into the Balkan
peninsula and coming into conflict and mixing with that preceding Ægean
civilization of which Cnossos was the crown.

[Illustration: Map showing Distribution of

ARYAN-SPEAKING PEOPLES between about 1,000 & 500 B.C.]

[Illustration: Distribution of the Hellenic Races 1000 to 800 B.C.]

In the Homeric poems these Greek tribes speak one common language, and a common
tradition upheld by the epic poems keeps them together in a loose unity; they
call their various tribes by a common name, _Hellenes_. They probably came in
successive waves. Three main variations of the ancient Greek speech are
distinguished; the Ionic, the Æolic, and the Doric. There was a great variety
of dialects in Greece, almost every city having its own output of
literature.[171] The Doric apparently constituted the last and most powerful
wave of the migration. These Hellenic tribes conquered and largely destroyed
the Ægean civilization that had preceded their arrival; upon its ashes they
built up a civilization of their own. They took to the sea and crossed by way
of the islands to Asia Minor; and, sailing through the Dardanelles and
Bosphorus, spread their settlements along the south, and presently along the
north borders of the Black Sea. They spread also over the south of Italy, which
was called at last Magna Græcia, and round the northern coast of the
Mediterranean. They founded the town of Marseilles on the site of an earlier
Phœnician colony. They began settlements in Sicily in rivalry with the
Carthaginians as early as 735 B.C.

In the rear of the Greeks proper came the kindred Macedonians and Thracians; on
their left wing, the Phrygians crossed by the Bosphorus into Asia Minor.

[Illustration: An early Greek sea-fight. From a painted vase, about 550 B.C.]

We find all this distribution of the Greeks effected before the beginnings of
written history. By the seventh century B.C.--that is to say, by the time of
the Babylonian captivity of the Jews--the landmarks of the ancient world of the
pre-Hellenic civilization in Europe have been obliterated. Tiryns and Cnossos
are unimportant sites; Mycenæ and Troy survive in legend; the great cities of
this new Greek world are Athens, Sparta (the capital of Lacedemon), Corinth,
Thebes, Samos, Miletus. The world our grandfathers called “Ancient Greece” had
arisen on the forgotten ruins of a still more Ancient Greece, in many ways as
civilized and artistic, of which to-day we are only beginning to learn through
the labours of the excavator. But the newer Ancient Greece, of which we are now
telling, still lives vividly in the imaginations and institutions of men
because it spoke a beautiful and most expressive Aryan tongue akin to our own,
and because it had taken over the Mediterranean alphabet and perfected it by
the addition of vowels, so that reading and writing were now easy arts to learn
and practise, and great numbers of people could master them and make a record
for later ages.[172]

