# BOOK III - XIX - § 1
[Metadata]: # {04.05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.05.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

GODS AND STARS, PRIESTS AND KINGS

§ 1. _Nomadic and Settled Religion._ § 2. _The Priest Comes into
History._ § 3. _Priests and the Stars._ § 4. _Priests and the Dawn      of
Learning._ § 5. _King against Priest._ § 6. _How Bel-Marduk      Struggled
against the Kings._ § 7. _The God-Kings of Egypt._ § 8.      _Shi Hwang-ti
Destroys the Books._

# § 1
We have already told what there is to tell of the social life of the Aryan
tribes when they were settling down to the beginnings of civilized life; we
have seen how they were associated in great households, grouped together under
tribal leaders, who made a sort of informal aristocracy rather like that of the
sixth form and prefects in an English boys’ school; we have considered the rôle
of the bards in the creation of an oral tradition, and we have glanced at their
not very complex religious ideas. We may note one or two points of difference
from the equivalent life of the nomadic Semites.

Like the early Aryan life, it was a life in a sort of family-tribe household.
But it had differences due originally perhaps to the warmer, drier climate.
Though both groups of races had cattle and sheep, the Aryans were rather
herdsmen, the Semites, shepherds. The Semites had no long winter evenings and
no bardic singing. They never sat in hall. They have consequently no epics.
They had stories, camp-fire stories, but not verbally beautified
story-recitations. The Semite also was more polygamous than the Aryan, his
women less self-assertive,[135] and the tendency of his government more
patriarchal. The head of the household or the tribe was less of a leader and
more of a master, more like the Palæolithic Old Man. And the Semitic nomads
were closer to the earlier civilizations, a thing that fitted in with their
greater aptitude for trade and counting. But the religion of the nomadic Semite
was as little organized as the religion of the Aryan. In either case the
leading man performed most of the functions of the priest. The Aryan gods were
little more than a kind of magical super-prince; they were supposed to sit in
hall together, and to talk and make scenes with one another under Jupiter or
Thor. The early Semitic gods, on the other hand, were thought of as tribal
patriarchs. As peoples develop towards nomadism, they seem to lose even such
primitive religion and magic as their Neolithic ancestors professed. Nomadism
cuts men off from fixed temples and intense local associations; they take a
broader and simpler view of the world. They tend towards religious
simplification.

We write here of the nomadic peoples, the Aryan herdsmen and Semitic shepherds,
and we write in the most general terms. They had their undercurrent of fables
and superstitions, their phases of fear and abjection and sacrificial fury.
These people were people like ourselves, with brains as busy and moody and
inconsistent, and with even less training and discipline. It is absurd to
suppose--as so many writers about early religion do seem to suppose--that their
religious notions can be reduced to the consistent logical development of some
one simple idea. We have already glanced, in Chapter XII, at the elements of
religion that must have arisen necessarily in the minds of those early peoples.
But for most of the twenty-four hours these nomads were busy upon other things,
and there is no sign that their houses, their daily routines, their ordinary
acts, were dominated or their social order shaped, by any ideas that we should
now call religious. As yet life and its ideas were too elementary for that.

But directly we turn our attention to these new accumulations of human beings
that are beginning in Egypt and Mesopotamia, we find that one of the most
conspicuous objects in every city is a temple or a group of temples. In some
cases there arises beside it in these regions a royal palace, but as often the
temple towers over the palace. This presence of the temple is equally true of
the Phœnician cities and of the Greek and Roman as they arise. The palace of
Cnossos, with its signs of comfort and pleasure-seeking, and the kindred cities
of the Ægean peoples, include religious shrines, but in Crete there are also
temples standing apart from the palatial city-households. All over the ancient
civilized world we find them; wherever primitive civilization set its foot in
Africa, Europe, or western Asia, a temple arose, and where the civilization is
most ancient, in Egypt and in Sumer, there the temple is most in evidence. When
Hanno reached what he thought was the most westerly point of Africa, he set up
a temple to Hercules. We have, in fact, come now to a new stage in the history
of mankind, the temple stage.

