# BOOK II - X - § 2
[Metadata]: # {03.03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE LATER POSTGLACIAL PALÆOLITHIC MEN, THE FIRST TRUE MEN

(Later Palæolithic Age)

§ 1. _The Coming of Men Like Ourselves._ § 2. _Subdivision of the
Later Palæolithic._ § 3. _The Earliest True Men Were Splendid      Savages._ §
4. _Hunters Give Place to Herdsmen._ § 5. _No Sub-men      in America._

# § 2
Archæologists distinguish at present three chief stages in the history of these
newer Palæolithic men in Europe, and we must name these stages here. But it may
be as well to note at the same time that it is a matter of the utmost
difficulty to distinguish which of two deposits in different places is the
older or newer. We may very well be dealing with the work of more or less
contemporary and different races when we think we are dealing with successive
ones. We are dealing, the reader must bear in mind, with little disconnected
patches of material, a few score all together. The earliest stage usually
distinguished by the experts is the _Aurignacian_ (from the grotto of
Aurignac); it is characterized by very well-made flint implements, and by a
rapid development of art and more particularly of statuettes and wall
paintings. The most esteemed of the painted caves is ascribed to the latter
part of this the first of the three subdivisions of the newer Palæolithic. The
second subdivision of this period is called the _Solutrian_ (from Solutré), and
is distinguished particularly by the quality and beauty of its stone
implements; some of its razor-like blades are only equalled and not surpassed
by the very best of the Neolithic work. They are of course unpolished, but the
best specimens are as thin as steel blades and almost as sharp. Finally, it
would seem, came the _Magdalenian_ (from La Madeleine) stage, in which the
horse and reindeer were dwindling in numbers and the red deer coming into
Europe.[38] The stone implements are smaller, and there is a great quantity of
bone harpoons, spearheads, needles, and the like. The hunters of the third and
last stage of the later Palæolithic Age appear to have supplemented a
diminishing food supply by fishing. The characteristic art of the period
consists of deep reliefs done upon bone and line engraving upon bone. It is to
this period that the designs drawn round bones belong, and it has been
suggested that these designs upon round bones were used to print coloured
designs upon leather. Some of the workmanship on bone was extraordinarily fine.
Parkyn quotes from de Mortillet, about the Reindeer Age (Magdalenian) bone
needles, that they “are much superior to those of later, even historical,
times, down to the Renaissance. The Romans, for example, never had needles
comparable to those of the Magdalenian epoch.”

[Illustration: TIME DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE TRUE HUMAN
PERIODS.

This time diagram again is on a larger scale than its predecessors.
The time diagram on page 60, if it were on this scale, would be      nearly 4
feet long, and the diagram of the whole geological time on      page 14,
between 500 and 5000 feet long (or perhaps even as much as      10,000 feet
long). ]

It is quite impossible at present to guess at the relative lengths of these
ages. We are not even positive about their relative relationship. Each lasted
perhaps for four or five more thousand years, more than double the time from
the Christian Era to our own day.

At last it would seem that circumstances began to turn altogether against these
hunting Newer Palæolithic people who had flourished for so long in Europe. They
disappeared. New kinds of men appeared in Europe, replacing them. These latter
seem to have brought in bow and arrows; they had domesticated animals and
cultivated the soil. A new way of living, the Neolithic way of living, spread
over the European area; and the life of the Reindeer Age and of the races of
Reindeer Men, the Later Palæolithic men, after a reign vastly greater than the
time between ourselves and the very earliest beginnings of recorded history,
passed off the European stage.

