# BOOK IV - XXIII - § 2
[Metadata]: # {05.03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK IV
XXIII
§ 2
# § 2
Another leading figure in this Athenian movement, a figure still more out of
harmony with the life around him, and quite as much an original source and
stimulant of the enduring greatness of his age, was a man called Socrates, the
son of a stone-mason. He was born about sixteen years later than Herodotus, and
he was beginning to be heard of about the time when Pericles died. He himself
wrote nothing, but it was his custom to talk in public places. There was in
those days a great searching for wisdom going on; there was a various multitude
of teachers called sophists who reasoned upon truth, beauty, and right living,
and instructed the developing curiosities and imaginations of youth. This was
so because there were no great priestly schools in Greece. And into these
discussions this man came, a clumsy and slovenly figure, barefooted, gathering
about him a band of admirers and disciples.

His method was profoundly sceptical; he believed that the only possible virtue
was true knowledge; he would tolerate no belief, no hope that could not pass
the ultimate acid test. For himself this meant virtue, but for many of his
weaker followers it meant the loss of beliefs and moral habits that would have
restrained their impulses. These weaklings became self-excusing, self-indulging
scoundrels. Among his young associates were Plato, who afterwards immortalized
his method in a series of philosophical dialogues, and founded the
philosophical school of the Academy, which lasted nine hundred years, Xenophon,
of the Ten Thousand, who described his death, and Isocrates, one of the wisest
of Greek political thinkers; but there were also Critias, who, when Athens was
utterly defeated by Sparta, was leader among the Thirty Tyrants appointed by
the Spartans to keep the crushed city under;[186] Charmides, who was killed
beside Critias when the Thirty were overthrown; and Alcibiades, a brilliant and
complex traitor, who did much to lead Athens into the disastrous expedition
against Syracuse which destroyed her strength, who betrayed her to the
Spartans, and who was at last assassinated while on his way to the Persian
court to contrive mischief against Greece. These latter pupils were not the
only young men of promise whose vulgar faith and patriotism Socrates destroyed,
to leave nothing in its place. His most inveterate enemy was a certain Anytus,
whose son, a devoted disciple of Socrates, had become a hopeless drunkard.
Through Anytus it was that Socrates was at last prosecuted for “corrupting” the
youth of Athens, and condemned to death by drinking a poisonous draught made
from hemlock (399 B.C.).

His death is described with great beauty in the dialogue of Plato called by the
name of Phædo.

