# BOOK II - VIII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {03.01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
VIII
§ 4
# § 4
We must turn over the Record for, it may be, another 100,000 years for the next
remains of anything human or sub-human. Then in a deposit ascribed to the Third
Interglacial period, which may have begun 100,000 years ago and lasted 50,000
years,[27] the smashed pieces of a whole skull turn up. The deposit is a gravel
which may have been derived from the washing out of still earlier gravel strata
and this skull fragment may be in reality as old as the First Glacial period.
The bony remains discovered at Piltdown in Sussex display a creature still
ascending only very gradually from the sub-human.

The first scraps of this skull were found in an excavation for road gravel in
Sussex. Bit by bit other fragments of this skull were hunted out from the
quarry heaps until most of it could be pieced together. It is a thick skull,
thicker than that of any living race of men, and it has a brain capacity
intermediate between that of Pithecanthropus and man. This creature has been
named _Eoanthropus_, the dawn man. In the same gravel-pits were found teeth of
rhinoceros, hippopotamus, and the leg-bone of a deer with marks upon it that
may be cuts. A curious bat-shaped instrument of elephant bone has also been
found.[28]

There was, moreover, a jaw-bone among these scattered remains, which was at
first assumed naturally enough to belong to _Eoanthropus_, but which it was
afterwards suggested was probably that of a chimpanzee. It is extraordinarily
like that of a chimpanzee, but Dr. Keith, one of the greatest authorities in
these questions, assigns it, after an exhaustive analysis in his _Antiquity of
Man_ (1915), to the skull with which it is found. It is, as a jaw-bone, far
less human in character than the jaw of the much more ancient _Homo
Heidelbergensis_, but the teeth are in some respects more like those of living
men.

[Illustration: DIAGRAM TO ILLUSTRATE THE RIDDLE OF THE PILTDOWN SUB-MAN.]

Dr. Keith, swayed by the jaw-bone, does not think that _Eoanthropus_, in spite
of its name, is a creature in the direct ancestry of man. Much less is it an
intermediate form between the Heidelberg man and the Neanderthal man we shall
presently describe. It was only related to the true ancestor of man as the
orang is related to the chimpanzee. It was one of a number of sub-human running
apes of more than ape-like intelligence, and if it was not on the line royal,
it was at any rate a very close collateral.

After this glimpse of a skull, the Record for very many centuries gives nothing
but flint implements, which improve steadily in quality. A very characteristic
form is shaped like a sole, with one flat side stricken off at one blow and the
other side worked. The archæologists, as the Record continues, are presently
able to distinguish scrapers, borers, knives, darts, throwing stones, and the
like. Progress is now more rapid; in a few centuries the shape of the hand-axe
shows distinct and recognizable improvements. And then comes quite a number of
remains. The Fourth Glacial Age is rising towards its maximum. Man is taking to
caves and leaving vestiges there; at Krapina in Croatia, at Neanderthal near
Düsseldorf, at Spy, human remains have been found, skulls and bones of a
creature that is certainly a man. Somewhere about 50,000 years ago, if not
earlier, appeared _Homo Neanderthalensis_ (also called _Homo antiquus_ and
_Homo primigenius_), a quite passable human being. His thumb was not quite
equal in flexibility and usefulness to a human thumb, he stooped forward, and
could not hold his head erect, as all living men do, he was chinless and
perhaps incapable of speech, there were curious differences about the enamel
and the roots of his teeth from those of all living men, he was very thick-set,
he was, indeed, not quite of the human species; but there is no dispute about
his attribution to the genus _Homo_. He was certainly not descended from
Eoanthropus, but his jaw-bone is so like the Heidelberg jaw-bone as to make it
possible that the clumsier and heavier _Homo Heidelbergensis_, a thousand
centuries before him, was of his blood and race.

