# BOOK II - XIV - § 7
[Metadata]: # {03.07.07}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.07}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
XIV
§ 7
# § 7
In addition the following other great language families are distinguished by
the philologist. All the American-Indian languages, which vary widely among
themselves, are separable from any Old World group. Here we may lump them
together not so much as a family as a miscellany.[85] There is one great group
of languages in Africa, from a little way north of the equator to its southern
extremity, the BANTU, and in addition a complex of other languages across the
centre of the continent about which we will not trouble here.[86] There are
also two probably separate groups, the DRAVIDIAN in South India, and the
MALAY-POLYNESIAN stretched over Polynesia, and also now including Indian
tongues.

Now it seems reasonable to conclude from these fundamental differences that
about the time when men were passing from the Palæolithic to Neolithic
conditions, and beginning to form rather larger communities than the family
herd, when they were beginning to tell each other long stories and argue and
exchange ideas, human beings were distributed about the world in a number of
areas which communicated very little with each other. They were separated by
oceans, seas, thick forests, deserts or mountains from one another. There may
have been in that remote time, it may be 10,000 years ago or more, Aryan,
Semitic, Hamitic, Turanian, American, and Chinese-speaking tribes and families,
wandering over their several areas of hunting and pasture, all at very much the
same stage of culture, and each developing its linguistic instrument in its own
way. Probably each of these original tribes was not more numerous altogether
than the Indians in Hudson Bay Territory to-day. Agriculture was barely
beginning, and until agriculture made a denser population possible men may have
been almost as rare as the great apes have always been.

In addition to these early Neolithic tribes, there must have been various
varieties of still more primitive forest folk in Africa and in India. Central
Africa, from the Upper Nile, was then a vast forest, impenetrable to ordinary
human life, a forest of which the Congo forests of to-day are the last shrunken
remains.

Possibly the spread of men of a race higher than primitive Australoids into the
East Indies,[87] and the development of the languages of the Malay-Polynesian
type came later in time than the origination of these other language groups.

The language divisions of the philologist do tally, it is manifest, in a broad
sort of way with the main race classes of the ethnologist, and they carry out
the same idea of age-long separations between great divisions of mankind. In
the Glacial Age, ice, or at least a climate too severe for the free spreading
of peoples, extended from the north pole into central Europe and across Russia
and Siberia to the great tablelands of central Asia. After the last Glacial
Age, this cold north mitigated its severities very slowly, and was for long
without any other population than the wandering hunters who spread eastward and
across Bering Strait. North and central Europe and Asia did not become
sufficiently temperate for agriculture until quite recent times, times that is
within the limit of 12,000 or possibly even 10,000 years, and a dense forest
period intervened between the age of the hunter and the agricultural clearings.

This forest period was also a very wet period. It has been called the Pluvial
or Lacustrine Age, the rain or pond period. It has to be remembered that the
outlines of the land of the world have changed greatly even in the last hundred
centuries. Across European Russia, from the Baltic to the Caspian Sea, as the
ice receded there certainly spread much water and many impassable swamps; the
Caspian Sea and the Sea of Aral and parts of the Desert of Turkestan, are the
vestiges of a great extent of sea that reached far up to the Volga valley and
sent an arm westward to join the Black Sea. Mountain barriers much higher than
they are now, and the arm of the sea that is now the region of the Indus,
completed the separation of the early Caucasian races from the Mongolians and
the Dravidians, and made the broad racial differentiation of those groups
possible.

Again the blown-sand Desert of Sahara--it is not a dried-up sea, but a wind
desert, and was once fertile and rich in life--becoming more and more dry and
sandy, cut the Caucasians off from the sparse primitive Negro population in the
central forest region of Africa.

The Persian Gulf extended very far to the north of its present head, and
combined with the Syrian desert to cut off the Semitic peoples from the eastern
areas, while on the other hand the south of Arabia, much more fertile than it
is to-day, may have reached across what is now the Gulf of Aden towards
Abyssinia and Somaliland. The Mediterranean and Red Sea were probably still
joined at Suez. The Himalayas and the higher and vaster massif of central Asia
and the northward extension of the Bay of Bengal up to the present Ganges
valley divided off the Dravidians from the Mongolians, the canoe was the chief
link between Dravidian and Southern Mongol, and the Gobi system of seas and
lakes which presently became the Gobi desert, and the great system of mountain
chains which follow one another across Asia from the center to the north-east,
split the Mongolian races into the Chinese and the Ural-Altaic language groups.

Bering Strait, when this came into existence, before or after the Pluvial
Period, isolated the Amer-Indians.

These ancient separations must have remained effectual well into Neolithic
times. The barriers between Africa, Asia, and Europe were lowered or bridged by
that time, but mixing had not gone far. The practical separation of the west
from Dravidian India and China continued indeed down almost into historical
times; but the Semite, the Hamite, and the Aryan were already in close contact
and vigorous reaction again in the very dawn of history.

We are not suggesting here, be it noted, that these ancient separations were
absolute separations, but that they were effectual enough at least to prevent
any great intermixture of blood or any great intermixture of speech in those
days of man’s social beginnings. There was, nevertheless, some amount of
meeting and exchange even then, some drift of knowledge that spread the crude
patterns and use of various implements, and the seeds of a primitive
agriculture about the world.

