# BOOK VIII - XL - § 15
[Metadata]: # {10.05.13}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.13}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 15
This _Outline_ of our history would not be complete without at least a few
words by way of a stock-taking of the state of mind in which we leave mankind
to-day. For the history of our race for the last few thousand years is no more
than a history of the development and succession of states of mind and of acts
arising out of them. Human history is in essence a history of ideas, and these
tremendous experiences of the war constitute a crowning epoch. In the past six
years there must have been a destruction of fixed ideas, prejudices, and mental
limitations unparalleled in all history. Never before can there have been so
great and so universal an awakening from assumed and accepted things. Never
before have men stood so barely face to face with the community of their
interests and their common destiny. We do not begin to realize yet how much of
the pre-war world is done with for good and all, and how much that is new is
beginning. Few of us have attempted to measure yet the change in our own minds.

And on the whole and in spite of much eddying and backwash of motives and
thought, there does seem to have been a step forward towards the consciousness
of a collective need and of the possibility of a collective effort embracing
all mankind. Death, waste, hunger, and disease are very rife to-day; the world
is full of physical evils, but there is this mental awakening to set against
them.

In all material things the year 1913 seems now, to a European at least, a year
of amazing and unattainable plenty. But it was a year of great social
discontent and of waste, of vice and an extravagant search for personal
indulgence on the part of the free and wealthy classes. The Great War was
visibly approaching; yet there was neither will nor understanding to prevent
the catastrophe; smart and fashionable life capered to nigger dance tunes, and
that hectic generation was disposed to welcome even a universal war as a fresh
and crowning excitement. War did not seem real to the moods of that time;
nothing seemed real to the moods of that time. It was a world of lost or faded
beliefs. It did not believe even in the florid nationalisms and imperialisms
which waved their flags and filled half the world with the stir and glitter of
great armies. But it set itself in the form of these things because they
trampled and glittered very entertainingly and because they promised
sensational adventures. The catastrophe of the war was not an unnecessary
disaster; it was a necessary fulfilment of such an age of drift. Only through a
catastrophe, it may be, could a new phase of human thought and will have become
possible.

This graver world of 1920 does seem to be awakening to the truth that there are
realities worth seeking and evils not to be tolerated. The mental and moral
backgrounds of hundreds of millions of minds have been altered and are being
altered by the stern lessons of this age. Brotherhood through sorrow, sorrow
for common sufferings and for irreparable mutual injuries, is spreading and
increasing throughout the world. There are no doubt great countervailing evils,
a wild scramble for the diminishing surplus of wealth, a propaganda, but a
failing propaganda, of division and hatred. The dominating fact, nevertheless,
is a new sanity....

What a wonderful and moving spectacle is this of our kind to-day! Would that we
could compress into one head and for the use of one right hand the power of ten
thousand novelists and playwrights and biographers and the quintessence of a
thousand histories, to render the endless variety, the incessant multitudinous
adventure, and at the same time the increasing unity of this display.
Everywhere, with a mysterious individual difference, we see youth growing to
adolescence and the interplay of love, desire, curiosities, passionate
impulses, rivalries. As the earth spins from darkness into the light, the
millions wake again to a new day in their life of toil, anxiety, little
satisfactions, little chagrins, rivalries, spites, generosities. From tropic to
the bleakest north, the cocks crow before the advancing margin of dawn. The
early toiler hurries to his work, the fox and the thief slink home, the tramp
stretches his stiff limbs under the haystack, and springs up alert before the
farmer’s man discovers him, the ploughman is already in the field with his
horses, the fires are lit in the cottage and the kettle sings. The hours warm
as the day advances; the crowded trains converge upon the city centres, the
traffic thickens in the streets, the breakfast-table of the prosperous home is
spread, the professor begins his lecture, the shop assistants greet their first
customers.... Outwardly it is very like the world before the war. And yet it is
profoundly different. The sense of inevitable routines that held all the world
in thrall six years ago has gone. And the habitual assurance of security has
gone too. The world has been roused--for a time at least--to great dangers and
great desires. These minds, this innumerable multitude of minds, are open to
fresh ideas of association and duty and relationship as they were never open
before. The old confused and divided world is condemned; it is going on
provisionally under a sentence of great and as yet incalculable change.

Every one of these hundred of millions of human beings is in some form seeking
happiness, is driven by complex and conflicting motives, is guided by habits,
is swayed by base cravings, by endless suggestions, by passions and affections,
by vague exalted ideas. Every one of them is capable of cruelties and fine
emotions, of despairs and devotions and self-forgetful effort. All of them
forget; all of them become slack with fatigue and fearful or mean or incapable
under a sufficient strain. The follies of vanity entrap them all into
absurdities. Not one is altogether noble nor altogether trustworthy nor
altogether consistent; and not one is altogether vile. Every one of them can be
unhappy, every one can feel disappointment and remorse. Not a single one but
has at some time wept. And in every one of them is a streak of divinity. Each
one for all the obsessions of self is yet dimly aware of something in common,
of something that could make a unity out of our infinite diversity. And they
are everyone more aware of this than in 1913. Through all the world grows the
realization that there can be no securely happy individual life without a
righteous general life. Through all the world spreads the suspicion that this
scheme of things might be remade, and remade better, and that our present evils
need not be. Our lives, we see with a growing certitude, are fretted and
shadowed and spoilt because there is as yet no worldwide law, no certain
justice. Yet there is nothing absolutely unattainable in world law and world
justice. More men are capable of realizing this than was ever possible at any
previous time. And to be aware of a need is to be half-way towards its
satisfaction. We call this stir towards a new order, this refusal to drift on
in the old directions, unrest, but rather is it hope which disturbs the world.

What real driving force is there in all this aspiration towards a new and wider
order? What directive forces are these stirring millions likely to encounter?
What accidents and subtle suggestions may not waylay them and cheat them? An
age is closing and an age begins. This chapter of history which tells of the
Great Powers into which Christendom broke up and of the unbridled national and
individual self-seeking which ensued, has culminated in a world catastrophe and
is at its end. What will be the next stage in history?

