# BOOK VIII - XL - § 9
[Metadata]: # {10.05.08}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.08}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 9
Early in 1917 Russia collapsed.

By this time the enormous strain of the war was telling hardly upon all the
European populations. There had been a great disorganization of transport
everywhere, a discontinuance of the normal repairs and replacements of
shipping, railways, and the like, a using-up of material of all sorts, a
dwindling of food production, a withdrawal of greater and greater masses of men
from industry, a cessation of educational work, and a steady diminution of the
ordinary securities and honesties of life. Nowhere was the available directive
ability capable of keeping a grip upon affairs in the face of the rupture of
habitual bonds and the replacement of the subtle disciplines of peace by the
clumsy brutalities of military “order.” More and more of the European
population was being transferred from surroundings and conditions to which it
was accustomed, to novel circumstances which distressed, stimulated, and
demoralized it. But Russia suffered first and most from this universal pulling
up of civilization from its roots. The Russian autocracy was dishonest and
incompetent. The Tsar, like several of his ancestors, had now given way to a
crazy pietism, and the court was dominated by a religious impostor, Rasputin,
whose cult was one of unspeakable foulness, a reeking scandal in the face of
the world. Beneath the rule of this dirty mysticism, indolence and scoundrelism
mismanaged the war. The Russian common soldiers were sent into battle without
guns to support them, without even rifle ammunition; they were wasted by their
officers and generals in a delirium of militarist enthusiasm. For a time they
seemed to be suffering mutely as the beasts suffer; but there is a limit to the
endurance even of the most ignorant. A profound disgust for the Tsardom was
creeping through these armies of betrayed and wasted men. From the close of
1915 onwards Russia was a source of deepening anxiety to her Western allies.
Throughout 1916 she remained largely on the defensive, and there were rumours
of a separate peace with Germany. She gave little help to Roumania.

On December 29th, 1916, the monk Rasputin was murdered at a dinner-party in
Petrograd, and a belated attempt was made to put the Tsardom in order. By March
things were moving rapidly; food riots in Petrograd developed into a
revolutionary insurrection; there was an attempted suppression of the Duma, the
representative body, attempted arrests of liberal leaders, the formation of a
provisional government under Prince Lvoff, and an abdication (March 15th) by
the Tsar. For a time it seemed that a moderate and controlled revolution might
be possible--perhaps under a new Tsar. Then it became evident that the
destruction of confidence in Russia had gone too far for any such adjustments.
The Russian people were sick to death of the old order of things in Europe, of
Tsars and of wars and great powers; it wanted relief, and that speedily, from
unendurable miseries. The Allies had no understanding of Russian realities;
their diplomatists were ignorant of Russian; genteel persons, with their
attention directed to the Russian Court rather than Russia, they blundered
steadily with the new situation. There was little goodwill among the
diplomatists for republicanism, and a manifest disposition to embarrass the new
government as much as possible. At the head of the Russian republican
government was an eloquent and picturesque leader, Kerensky, who found himself
assailed by the deep forces of a profounder revolutionary movement, the “social
revolution,” at home and cold-shouldered by the Allied governments abroad. His
allies would neither let him give the Russian people land nor peace beyond
their frontiers. The French and the British press pestered their exhausted ally
for a fresh offensive, but when presently the Germans made a strong attack by
sea and land upon Riga, the British Admiralty quailed before the prospect of a
Baltic expedition in relief. The new Russian republic had to fight unsupported.
In spite of their great naval predominance and the bitter protests of the great
English admiral, Lord Fisher (1841-1920), it is to be noted that the Allies,
except for some submarine attacks, left the Germans the complete mastery of the
Baltic throughout the war.

The Russian masses were resolute to end the war. There had come into existence
in Petrograd a body representing the workers and common soldiers, the Soviet,
and this body clamoured for an international conference of socialists at
Stockholm. Food riots were occurring in Berlin at this time, war weariness in
Austria and Germany was profound, and there can be little doubt, in the light
of subsequent events, that such a conference would have precipitated a
reasonable peace on democratic lines in 1917 and a German revolution. Kerensky
implored his Western allies to allow this conference to take place, but,
fearful of a worldwide outbreak of socialism and republicanism, they refused,
in spite of the favourable response of a small majority of the British Labour
Party. Without either moral or physical help from the Allies, the “moderate”
Russian republic still fought on and made a last desperate offensive effort in
July. It failed after some preliminary successes and another great slaughtering
of Russians.

The limit of Russian endurance was reached. Mutinies broke out in the Russian
armies, and particularly upon the northern front, and upon November 7th, 1917,
Kerensky’s government was overthrown and power was seized by the Soviet
Government, dominated by the Bolshevik socialists under Lenin, and pledged to
make peace regardless of the Western powers. Russia passed definitely “out of
the war.”

In the spring of 1917 there had been a costly and ineffective French attack
upon the Champagne front which had failed to break through and sustained
enormous losses. Here, then, by the end of 1917, was a phase of events
altogether favourable to Germany, had her government been fighting for security
and well-being rather than for pride and victory. But to the very end, to the
pitch of final exhaustion, the people of the Central Powers were held to the
effort to realize an impossible world imperialism.

To that end it was necessary that Britain should be not merely resisted, but
subjugated, and in order to do that Germany had already dragged America into
the circle of her enemies. Throughout 1916 the submarine campaign had been
growing in intensity, but hitherto it had respected neutral shipping. In
January, 1917, a complete “blockade” of Great Britain and France was
proclaimed, and all neutral powers were warned to withdraw their shipping from
the British seas. An indiscriminate sinking of the world’s shipping began which
compelled the United States to enter the war in April (6th), 1917. Throughout
1917, while Russia was breaking up and becoming impotent, the American people
were changing swiftly and steadily into a great military nation. And the
unrestricted submarine campaign, for which the German imperialists had accepted
the risk of this fresh antagonist, was far less successful than had been hoped.
The British navy proved itself much more inventive and resourceful than the
British army; there was a rapid development of anti-submarine devices under
water, upon the surface, and in the air; and after a month or so of serious
destruction, the tale of submarine sinkings declined. The British found it
necessary to put themselves upon food rations; but the regulations were well
framed and ably administered, the public showed an excellent spirit and
intelligence, and the danger of famine and social disorder was kept at arm’s
length.

[Illustration: Time Chart of the Great War, 1914-18 (Western Front)]

[Illustration: Time Chart of the Great War, 1914-18 (Eastern Front)]

Yet the German imperial government persisted in its course. If the submarine
was not doing all that had been expected, and if the armies of America gathered
like a thunder-cloud, yet Russia was definitely down; and in October the same
sort of Autumn offensive that had overthrown Serbia in 1915 and Roumania in
1916 was now turned with crushing effect against Italy. The Italian front
collapsed after the Battle of Caporetto, and the Austro-German armies poured
down into Venetia and came almost within gunfire of Venice. Germany felt
justified, therefore, in taking a high line with the Russian peace proposals,
and the peace of Brest Litovsk (March 2nd, 1918) gave the Western allies some
intimation of what a German victory would mean to them. It was a crushing and
exorbitant peace, dictated with the utmost arrogance of confident victors.

All through the winter German troops had been shifting from the Eastern to the
Western front, and now, in the spring of 1918, the jaded enthusiasm of hungry,
weary, and bleeding Germany was lashed up for the one supreme effort that was
really and truly to end the war. For some months American troops had been in
France, but the bulk of the American army was still across the Atlantic. It was
high time for the final conclusive blow upon the Western front, if such a blow
was ever to be delivered. The first attack was upon the British in the Somme
region. The not very brilliant cavalry generals who were still in command of a
front upon which cavalry was a useless encumbrance, were caught napping; and on
March 21st, in “Gough’s Disaster,” a British army was driven back in such
disorder as no British army had ever known before. Thousands of guns were lost,
and scores of thousands of prisoners. Many of these losses were due to the
utter incompetence of the higher command. No less than a hundred tanks were
abandoned _because they ran out of petrol_! The British were driven back almost
to Amiens.[510] Throughout April and May the Germans rained offensives on the
Allied front. They came near to a break through in the north, and they made a
great drive back to the Marne, which they reached again on May 30th, 1918.

This was the climax of the German effort. Behind it was nothing but an
exhausted homeland. Fresh troops were hurrying from Britain across the Channel,
and America was now pouring men into France by the hundred thousand. In June
the weary Austrians made a last effort in Italy, and collapsed before an
Italian counter-attack. Early in June the French began to develop a
counter-attack in the Marne angle. By July the tide was turning and the Germans
were reeling back. The Battle of Château Thierry (July 18th) proved the quality
of the new American armies. In August the British opened a great and successful
thrust into Belgium, and the bulge of the German lines towards Amiens wilted
and collapsed. Germany had finished. The fighting spirit passed out of her
army, and October was a story of defeat and retreat along the entire Western
front. Early in November British troops were in Valenciennes and Americans in
Sedan. In Italy also the Austrian armies were in a state of disorderly retreat.
But everywhere now the Hohenzollern and Habsburg forces were collapsing. The
smash at the end was amazingly swift. Frenchmen and Englishmen could not
believe their newspapers as day after day they announced the capture of more
hundreds of guns and more thousands of prisoners.

In September a great allied offensive against Bulgaria had produced a
revolution in that country and peace proposals. Turkey had followed with a
capitulation at the end of October, and Austro-Hungary on November 4th. There
was an attempt to bring out the German Fleet for a last fight, but the sailors
mutinied (November 7th).

The Kaiser and the Crown Prince bolted hastily, and without a scrap of dignity,
into Holland. It was like welshers bolting from a racecourse to escape a
ducking. On November 11th an armistice was signed, and the war was at an
end....

For four years and a quarter the war had lasted, and gradually it had drawn
nearly everyone, in the Western world at least, into its vortex. Upwards of ten
millions of people had been actually killed through the fighting, another
twenty or twenty-five million had died through the hardships and disorders
entailed. Scores of millions were suffering and enfeebled by under-nourishment
and misery. A vast proportion of the living were now engaged in war work, in
drilling and armament, in making munitions, in hospitals, in working as
substitutes for men who had gone into the armies and the like. Business men had
been adapting themselves to the more hectic methods necessary for profit in a
world in a state of crisis. The war had become, indeed, an atmosphere, a habit
of life, a new social order. Then suddenly it ended.

In London the armistice was proclaimed about midday on November 11th. It
produced a strange cessation of every ordinary routine. Clerks poured out of
their offices and would not return, assistants deserted their shops, omnibus
drivers and the drivers of military lorries set out upon journeys of their own
devising with picked-up loads of astounded and cheering passengers going
nowhere in particular and careless whither they went. Vast vacant crowds
presently choked the streets, and every house and shop that possessed such
adornments hung out flags. When night came, many of the main streets, which had
been kept in darkness for many months because of the air raids, were brightly
lit. It was very strange to see thronging multitudes assembled in an artificial
light again. Everyone felt aimless, with a kind of strained and aching relief.
It was over at last. There would be no more killing in France, no more air
raids--and things would get better. People wanted to laugh, and weep--and could
do neither. Youths of spirit and young soldiers on leave formed thin noisy
processions that shoved their way through the general drift, and did their best
to make a jollification. A captured German gun was hauled from the Mall, where
a vast array of such trophies had been set out, into Trafalgar Square, and its
carriage burnt. Squibs and crackers were thrown about. But there was little
concerted rejoicing. Nearly everyone had lost too much and suffered too much to
rejoice with any fervour.[511]

