# BOOK IV - XXII - § 6
[Metadata]: # {05.02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02.06}
[Author]: # {wells}
JUDEA, GREECE, AND INDIA

THE GREEKS AND THE PERSIANS[169]

§ 1. _The Hellenic Peoples._ § 2. _Distinctive Features of Hellenic
Civilization._ § 3. _Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy in Greece._ § 4. _The
Kingdom of Lydia._ § 5. _The Rise of the Persians in the East._ § 6. _The Story
of Crœsus._ § 7. _Darius Invades Russia._ § 8. _The Battle of Marathon._ § 9.
_Thermopylæ and Salamis._ § 10. _Platæa and Mycale._

# § 6
But one monarch in the world was alive to the threat of the new power that lay
in the hands of Cyrus. This was Crœsus, the Lydian king. His son had been
killed in a very tragic manner, which Herodotus relates, but which we will not
describe here. Says Herodotus:

“For two years then, Crœsus remained quiet in great mourning, because he was
deprived of his son; but after this period of time, the overthrowing of the
rule of the son of Cyaxares by Cyrus, and the growing greatness of the
Persians, caused Crœsus to cease from his mourning, and led him to a care of
cutting short the power of the Persians if by any means he might, while yet it
was in growth and before they should have become great.”

He then made trial of the various oracles. His method of trial we will not
relate here, but it led him to the belief that the Delphi Oracle was alone
trustworthy. What follows is rather a lengthy passage, but it is so
characteristic of the garrulousness and wonder-loving mind of the Father of
History, and with such a pleasant touch of spite against the Lacedemonians,
that it is impossible to resist the quotation.

[Illustration: Map showing the relation of the MEDIAN and second BABYLONIAN
(Chaldean) EMPIRES in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar the Great]

“After this, with great sacrifices, he endeavoured to win the favour of the god
at Delphi: for of all the animals that are fit for sacrifice he offered three
thousand of each kind, and he heaped up couches overlaid with gold and overlaid
with silver, and cups of gold, and robes of purple, and tunics, making of them
a great pyre, and this he burnt up, hoping by these means the more to win over
the god to the side of the Lydians; and he proclaimed to all the Lydians that
every one of them should make sacrifice with that which each man had. And when
he had finished the sacrifice, he melted down a vast quantity of gold, and of
it he wrought half-plinths, making them six palms in length and three in
breadth, and in height one palm; and their number was one hundred and
seventeen. Of these four were of pure gold weighing two talents and a half
each, and the others of gold alloyed with silver weighing two talents. And he
caused to be made also an image of a lion of pure gold weighing ten talents;
which lion, when the temple at Delphi was being burnt down, fell from off the
half-plinths, for upon these it was set, and is placed now in the treasury of
the Corinthians, weighing six talents and a half, for three talents and a half
were melted away from it. So Crœsus, having finished all these things, sent
them to Delphi, and with them these besides: two mixing-bowls of great size,
one of gold and the other of silver, of which the golden bowl was placed on the
right hand as one enters the temple, and the silver on the left, but the places
of these also were changed after the temple was burnt down.... Moreover, Crœsus
sent four silver wine-jars, which stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, and
two vessels for lustral water, one of gold and the other of silver, of which
the gold one is inscribed ‘from the Lacedemonians,’ who say that it is their
offering; therein, however, they do not speak rightly, for this also is from
Crœsus, but one of the Delphians wrote the inscription upon it, desiring to
gratify the Lacedemonians; and his name I know, but I will not make mention of
it.... And many other votive offerings Crœsus sent with these, not specially
distinguished, among which are certain castings of silver of a round shape, and
also a golden figure of a woman three cubits high, which the Delphians say is a
statue of the baker of Crœsus. Moreover, Crœsus dedicated the ornaments from
his wife’s neck and her girdles....

“To the Lydians who were to carry these gifts to the temples Crœsus gave charge
that they should ask the Oracles this question also: whether Crœsus should
march against the Persians, and, if so, whether he should join with himself any
army of men as his friends. And when the Lydians had arrived at the places to
which they had been sent and had dedicated the votive offerings, they inquired
of the Oracles, and said: ‘Crœsus, king of the Lydians and of other nations,
considering that these are the only true Oracles among men, presents to you
gifts such as your revelations deserve, and asks you again now whether he shall
march against the Persians, and, if so, whether he shall join with himself any
army of men as allies.’ They inquired thus, and the answers of both the Oracles
agreed in one, declaring to Crœsus that if he should march against the Persians
he should destroy a great empire.... So when the answers were brought back and
Crœsus heard them, he was delighted with the Oracles, and expecting that he
would certainly destroy the kingdom of Cyrus, he sent again to Pytho, and
presented to the men of Delphi, having ascertained the number of them, two
staters of gold for each man: and in return for this the Delphians gave to
Crœsus and to the Lydians precedence in consulting the Oracle and freedom from
all payments, and the right to front seats at the games, with this privilege
also for all time, that any one of them who wished should be allowed to become
a citizen of Delphi.”

But here we may not run on as Herodotus loved to do. Suffice it to say that
Crœsus made a defensive alliance both with the Lacedemonians and the Egyptians.
We will not quote the story of how a great bronze mixing-bowl that the
Lacedemonians sent to Crœsus went astray, but we will note a light on the life
of the Medes and Persians of that time.

“Thus, then, it happened about the mixing-bowl; but meanwhile Crœsus, mistaking
the meaning of the Oracle, was making a march into Cappadocia, expecting to
overthrow Cyrus and the power of the Persians; and while Crœsus was preparing
to march against the Persians, one of the Lydians, who even before this time
was thought to be a wise man, but in consequence of this opinion got a very
great name for wisdom among the Lydians, had advised Crœsus as follows: ‘O
king, thou art preparing to march against men who wear breeches of leather, and
the rest of their clothing is of leather also; and they eat food not such as
they desire, but such as they can obtain, dwelling in a land which is rugged;
and, moreover, they make no use of wine but drink water; and no figs have they
for dessert, nor any other good thing. On the one hand, if thou shalt overcome
them, what wilt thou take away from them, seeing they have nothing? and, on the
other hand, if thou shalt be overcome, consider how many good things thou wilt
lose; for once having tasted our good things, they will cling to them fast, and
it will not be possible to drive them away. I, for my own part, feel gratitude
to the gods that they do not put it into the minds of the Persians to march
against the Lydians.’ Thus he spoke not persuading Crœsus; for it is true
indeed that the Persians before they subdued the Lydians had no luxury nor any
good thing.”

Crœand Cyrus fought an indecisive battle at Pteria, from which Crœretreated.
Cyrus followed him up, and he gave battle outside his capital town of Sardis.
The chief strength of the Lydians lay in their cavalry; they were excellent, if
undisciplined, horsemen, and fought with long spears.

“Cyrus, when he saw the Lydians being arrayed for battle, fearing their
horsemen, did on the suggestion of Harpagos, a Mede, as follows: All the camels
which were in the train of his army carrying provisions and baggage he gathered
together, and he took off their burdens and set men upon them provided with the
equipment of cavalry; and, having thus furnished them, forth he appointed them
to go in front of the rest of the army towards the horsemen of Crœsus; and
after the camel-troop he ordered the infantry to follow; and behind the
infantry he placed his whole force of cavalry. Then, when all his men had been
placed in their several positions, he charged them to spare none of the other
Lydians, slaying all who might come in their way, but Crœsus himself they were
not to slay, not even if he should make resistance when he was being captured.
Such was his charge: and he set the camels opposite the horsemen for this
reason--because the horse has a fear of the camel and cannot endure either to
see his form or to scent his smell; for this reason then the trick had been
devised, in order that the cavalry of Crœsus might be useless, that very force
wherewith the Lydian king was expecting most to shine. And as they were coming
together to the battle, so soon as the horses scented the camels and saw them,
they turned away back, and the hopes of Crœsus were at once brought to nought.
The Lydians, however, for their part did not upon that act as cowards, but when
they perceived what was coming to pass, they leapt from their horses and fought
with the Persians on foot. At length, however, when many had fallen on either
side, the Lydians turned to flight; and having been driven within the wall of
their fortress, they were besieged by the Persians.”

In fourteen days Sardis was stormed and Crœsus taken prisoner....

“So the Persians having taken him brought him into the presence of Cyrus; and
he piled up a great pyre and caused Crœsus to go up upon it bound in fetters,
and along with him twice seven sons of Lydians, whether it was that he meant to
dedicate this offering as first-fruits of his victory to some god, or whether
he desired to fulfil a vow, or else had heard that Crœsus was a god-fearing
man, and so caused him to go up on the pyre because he wished to know if any
one of the divine powers would save him, so that he should not be burnt alive.
He, they say, did this; but to Crœsus as he stood upon the pyre there came,
although he was in such evil case, a memory of the saying of Solon, how he had
said with divine inspiration that no one of the living might be called happy.
And when this thought came into his mind, they say that he sighed deeply and
groaned aloud, having been for long silent, and three times he uttered the name
of Solon. Hearing this, Cyrus bade the interpreters ask Crœsus who was this
person on whom he called; and they came near and asked. And Crœsus for a time,
it is said, kept silence when he was asked this, but afterwards, being pressed,
he said: ‘One whom more than much wealth I should have desired to have speech
with all monarchs.’ Then, since his words were of doubtful import, they asked
again of that which he said; and as they were urgent with him and gave him no
peace, he told how once Solon, an Athenian, had come and having inspected all
his wealth had made light of it, with such and such words; and how all had
turned out for him according as Solon had said, not speaking at all especially
with a view to Crœsus himself, but with a view to the whole human race, and
especially those who seem to themselves to be happy men. And while Crœsus
related these things, already the pyre was lighted and the edges of it round
about were burning. Then they say that Cyrus, hearing from the interpreters
what Crœsus had said, changed his purpose and considered that he himself also
was but a man, and that he was delivering another man, who had been not
inferior to himself in felicity, alive to the fire; and, moreover, he feared
the requital, and reflected that there was nothing of that which men possessed
which was secure; therefore, they say, he ordered them to extinguish as quickly
as possible the fire that was burning, and to bring down Crœsus and those who
were with him from the pyre; and they, using endeavours, were not able now to
get the mastery of the flames. Then it is related by the Lydians that Crœsus,
having learned how Cyrus had changed his mind, and seeing that every one was
trying to put out the fire, but that they were no longer able to check it,
cried aloud, entreating Apollo that if any gift had ever been given by him
which was acceptable to the god, he would come to his aid and rescue him from
the evil which was now upon him. So he with tears entreated the god, and
suddenly, they say, after clear sky and calm weather clouds gathered and a
storm burst, and it rained with a very violent shower, and the pyre was
extinguished. Then Cyrus, having perceived that Crœsus was a lover of the gods
and a good man, caused him to be brought down from the pyre and asked him as
follows: ‘Crœsus, tell me who of all men was it who persuaded thee to march
upon my land and so to become an enemy to me instead of a friend?’ And he said:
‘O king, I did this to thy felicity and to my own misfortune, and the causer of
this was the god of the Hellenes, who incited me to march with my army. For no
one is so senseless as to choose of his own will war rather than peace, since
in peace the sons bury their fathers, but in war the fathers bury their sons.
But it was pleasing, I suppose, to the divine powers that these things should
come to pass thus.’”

But Herodotus is too alluring a companion for one who would write an Outline of
History; and the rest of the life of Crœsus, and how he gave wise counsels to
Cyrus, must be read in his ampler page.

When Lydia was subdued, Cyrus turned his attention to Nabonidus in Babylon. He
defeated the Babylonian army, under Belshazzar, outside Babylon, and then laid
siege to the town. He entered the town (538 B.C.), probably as we have already
suggested, with the connivance of the priests of Bel.

