# Fine
[Metadata]: # {12}
[Descriptor]: # {12}
[Author]: # {wells}
# Fine
TIME CHARTS

AND

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE

[Illustration: TIME CHART]

[Illustration: TIME CHART]

[Illustration: TIME CHART]

[Illustration: TIME CHART]

[Illustration: TIME CHART]




CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE


To conclude this _Outline_, we give here a Table of Leading Events from the
year 800 B.C. to 1920 A.D. With it we give five time diagrams covering the
period from 1000 B.C. onward, which present the trend of events in a graphic
form.

It is well that the reader should keep in mind an idea of the true proportions
of historical to geological time. The scale of these five diagrams is such that
by it the time diagram on page 196, vol. i, would be about 8½ times as long,
that is to say about 4 feet; that on page 97, showing the length of time since
the first true men, about 55 feet long; that on page 60, showing the interval
since the Eoliths, 555 feet; and that on page 14, representing the whole of
geological time, would be somewhere between 12 and, at the longest and most
probable estimate, 260 miles! Let the reader therefore take one of these
chronological tables we give, and imagine it extended upon a long strip of
paper to a distance of 55 feet. He would have to get up and walk about that
distance to note the date of the painting of the Altamira caves, and he would
have to go ten times that distance by the side of the same narrow strip to
reach the earlier Neanderthalers. A mile or so from home, but probably much
further away, the strip might be recording the last of the dinosaurs. And this
on a scale which represents the time from Columbus to ourselves by three inches
of space!

Chronology only begins to be precise enough to specify the exact year of any
event after the establishment of the eras of the First Olympiad and the
building of Rome.

About the year 1000 B.C. the Aryan peoples were establishing themselves in the
peninsulas of Spain, Italy, and the Balkans, and they were established in North
India, Cnossos was already destroyed and the spacious times of Egypt, of
Thothmes III, Amenophis III, and Rameses II were three or four centuries away.
Weak monarchs of the XXIst Dynasty were ruling in the Nile Valley. Israel was
united under her early kings; Saul or David or possibly even Solomon may have
been reigning. Sargon I (2750 B.C.) of the Akkadian Sumerian Empire was a
remote memory in Babylonian history, more remote than is Constantine the Great
from the world of the present day. Hammurabi had been dead a thousand years.
The Assyrians were already dominating the less military Babylonians. In 1100
B.C. Tiglath Pileser I had taken Babylon. But there was no permanent conquest;
Assyria and Babylonia were still separate empires. In China the new Chow
Dynasty was flourishing. Stonehenge in England was already a thousand years
old.

The next two centuries saw a renascence of Egypt under the XXIInd Dynasty, the
splitting up of the brief little Hebrew kingdom of Solomon, the spreading of
the Greeks in the Balkans, South Italy, and Asia Minor, and the days of
Etruscan predominance in Central Italy. We may begin our list of ascertainable
dates with--

B.C.

800.  The building of Carthage.

790.  The Ethiopian conquest of Egypt (founding the XXVth         Dynasty).

776.  First Olympiad.

753.  Rome built.

745.  Tiglath Pileser III conquered Babylonia and founded the         New
Assyrian Empire.

738.  Menahem, king of Israel, bought off Tiglath Pileser III.

735.  Greeks settling in Sicily.

722.  Sargon II armed the Assyrians with iron weapons.

721.  He deported the Israelites.

704.  Sennacherib.

701.  His army destroyed by pestilence on its way to Egypt.

680.  Esarhaddon took Thebes in Egypt (overthrowing the Ethiopian         XXVth
Dynasty).

667.  Sardanapalus.

664.  Psammetichus I restored the freedom of Egypt and founded         the
XXVIth Dynasty (to 610). He was assisted against         Assyria by Lydian
troops sent by Gyges.

608.  Necho of Egypt defeated Josiah, king of Judah, at the Battle         of
Megiddo.

606.  Capture of Nineveh by the Chaldeans and Medes. Foundation         of the
Chaldean Empire.

604.  Necho pushed to the Euphrates and was overthrown by
Nebuchadnezzar II. Josiah fell with him.

586.  Nebuchadnezzar carried off the Jews to Babylon. Many         fled to
Egypt and settled there.

550.  Cyrus the Persian succeeded Cyaxares the Mede.       Cyrus conquered
Crœsus.       Buddha lived about this time. So also did Confucius and
Lao Tse.

539.  Cyrus took Babylon and founded the Persian Empire.

527.  Peisistratus died.

525.  Cambyses conquered Egypt.

521.  Darius I, the son of Hystaspes, ruled from the Hellespont to         the
Indus.       His expedition to Scythia.

490.  Battle of Marathon.

484.  Herodotus born. Æschylus won his first prize for tragedy.

480.  Battles of Thermopylæ and Salamis.

479.  The Battles of Platæa and Mycale completed the repulse of         Persia.

474.  Etruscan fleet destroyed by the Sicilian Greeks.

470.  Voyage of Hanno.

466.  Pericles.

465.  Xerxes murdered.

438.  Herodotus recited his History in Athens.

431.  Peloponnesian War began (to 404).

428.  Pericles died. Herodotus died.

427.  Aristophanes began his career. Plato born. He lived to 347.

401.  Retreat of the Ten Thousand.

390.  Brennus sacked Rome.

366.  Camillus built the Temple of Concord.

359.  Philip became king of Macedonia.

338.  Battle of Chæronea.

336.  Macedonian troops crossed into Asia. Philip murdered.

334.  Battle of the Granicus.

333.  Battle of Issus.

332.  Alexander in Egypt.

331.  Battle of Arbela.

330.  Darius III killed.

323.  Death of Alexander the Great.

321.  Rise of Chandragupta in the Punjab. The Romans completely         beaten
by the Samnites at the battle of the         Caudine Forks.

303.  Chandragupta repulsed Seleucus.

285.  Ptolemy Soter died.

281.  Pyrrhus invaded Italy.

280.  Battle of Heraclea.

279.  Battle of Ausculum.

278.  Gauls’ raid into Asia Minor and settlement in Galatia.

275.  Pyrrhus left Italy.

264.  First Punic War. (Asoka began to reign in Behar--to         227.) First
gladiatorial games in Rome.

260.  Battle of Mylæ.

256.  Battle of Ecnomus.

246.  Shi-Hwang-ti became king of Ch’in.

242.  Battle of Ægatian Isles.

241.  End of First Punic War.

225.  Battle of Telamon. Roman armies in Illyria.

220.  Shi-Hwang-ti became emperor of China.

219.  Second Punic War.

216.  Battle of Cannæ.

214.  Great Wall of China begun.

210.  Death of Shi-Hwang-ti.

202.  Battle of Zama.

201.  End of Second Punic War.

200-197.  Rome at war with Macedonia.

192.  War with the Seleucids.

190.  Battle of Magnesia.

149.  Third Punic War. (The Yueh-Chi came into Western         Turkestan.)

146.  Carthage destroyed. Corinth destroyed.

133. Attalus bequeathed Pergamum to Rome. Tiberius Gracchus        killed.

121.  Caius Gracchus killed.

118.  War with Jugurtha.

106.  War with Jugurtha ended.

102.  Marius drove back Germans.

100.  Triumph of Marius. (Wu-ti conquering the Tarim Valley.)

91.  Social war.

89.  All Italians became Roman citizens.

86.  Death of Marius.

78.  Death of Sulla.

73.  The revolt of the slaves under Spartacus.

71.  Defeat and end of Spartacus.

66.  Pompey led Roman troops to the Caspian and Euphrates.         He
encountered the Alani.

64.  Mithridates of Pontus died.

53.  Crassus killed at Carrhæ. Mongolian elements with Parthians.

48.  Julius Cæsar defeated Pompey at Pharsalos.

44.  Julius Cæsar assassinated.

31.  Battle of Actium.

27.  Augustus Cæsar princeps (until 14 A.D.).

4.  True date of birth of Jesus of Nazareth.


A.D.  Christian Era began.

6.  Province of Mœsia established.

9.  Province of Pannonia established. Imperial boundary         carried to
the Danube.

14.  Augustus died. Tiberius emperor.

30.  Jesus of Nazareth crucified.

37.  Caligula succeeded Tiberius.

41.  Claudius (the first emperor of the legions) made emperor by
pretorian guard after murder of Caligula.

54.  Nero succeeded Claudius.

61.  Boadicea massacred Roman garrison in Britain.

68.  Suicide of Nero. (Galba, Otho, Vitellus, emperors in succession.)

69.  Vespasian began the so-called Flavian dynasty.

79.  Titus succeeded Vespasian.

81.  Domitian.

84.  North Britain annexed.

96.  Nerva began the so-called dynasty of the Antonines.

98.  Trajan succeeded Nerva.

102.  Pan Chau on the Caspian Sea. (Indo-Scythians invading         North
India.)

117.  Hadrian succeeded Trajan. Roman Empire at its greatest         extent.

138.  Antoninus Pius succeeded Hadrian.         (The Indo-Scythians at this
time were destroying the         last traces of Hellenic rule in India.)

150.  [About this time Kanishka reigned in India, Kashgar, Yarkand,         and
Kotan.]

161.  Marcus Aurelius succeeded Antoninus Pius.

164.  Great plague began, and lasted to the death of M. Aurelius         (180).
This also devastated all Asia.

180.  Death of Marcus Aurelius.         (Nearly a century of war and disorder
began in the Roman         Empire.)

220.  End of the Han dynasty. Beginning of four hundred years         of
division in China.

227.  Ardashir I (first Sassanid shah) put an end to Arsacid line         in
Persia.

242.  Mani began his teaching.

247.  Goths crossed Danube in a great raid.

251.  Great victory of Goths. Emperor Decius killed.

260.  Sapor I, the second Sassanid shah, took Antioch, captured         the
Emperor Valerian, and was cut up on his return from         Asia Minor by
Odenathus of Palmyra.

269.  The Emperor Claudius defeated the Goths at Nish.

270.  Aurelian became emperor.

272.  Zenobia carried captive to Rome. End of the brief glories         of
Palmyra.

275.  Probus succeeded Aurelian.

276.  Goths in Pontus. The Emperor Probus forced back Franks         and
Alemanni.

277.  Mani crucified in Persia.

284.  Diocletian became emperor.

303.  Diocletian persecuted the Christians.

311.  Galerius abandoned the persecution of the Christians.

312.  Constantine the Great became emperor.

313.  Constantine presided over a Christian Council at Arles.

321.  Fresh Gothic raids driven back.

323.  Constantine presided over the Council of Nicæa.

337.  Vandals driven by Goths obtained leave to settle in         Pannonia.
Constantine baptized on his death-bed.

354.  St. Augustine born.

361-3.  Julian the Apostate attempted to substitute Mithraism         for
Christianity.

379.  Theodosius the Great (a Spaniard) emperor.

390.  The statue of Serapis at Alexandria broken up.

392.  Theodosius the Great, emperor of east and west.

395.  Theodosius the Great died. Honorius and Arcadius redivided         the
empire with Stilicho and Alaric as their masters         and protectors.

410.  The Visigoths under Alaric captured Rome.

425.  Vandals settling in south of Spain. Huns in Pannonia,         Goths in
Dalmatia. Visigoths and Suevi in Portugal and         North Spain. English
invading Britain.

429.  Vandals under Genseric invaded Africa.

439.  Vandals took Carthage.

448.  Priscus visited Attila.

451.  Attila raided Gaul and was defeated by Franks, Alemanni,         and
Romans at Troyes.

453.  Death of Attila.

455.  Vandals sacked Rome.

470.  Ephthalites’ raid into India.

476.  Odoacer, king of a medley of Teutonic tribes, informed Constantinople
that there was no emperor in the West. End         of the Western Empire.

480.  St. Benedict born.

481.  Clovis in France. The Merovingians.

483.  Nestorian church broke away from the Orthodox Christian         church.

493.  Theodoric, the Ostrogoth, conquered Italy and became King         of
Italy, but was nominally subject to Constantinople.         (Gothic kings in
Italy. Goths settled on special confiscated         lands as a garrison.)

527.  Justinian emperor.

528.  Mihiragula, the (Ephthalite) Attila of India, overthrown.

529.  Justinian closed the schools at Athens, which had flourished
nearly a thousand years. Belisarius (Justinian’s general)         took Naples.

531.  Chosroes I began to reign.

543.  Great plague in Constantinople.

544.  St. Benedict died.

553.  Goths expelled from Italy by Justinian. Cassiodorus         founded his
monastery.

565.  Justinian died. The Lombards conquered most of North         Italy
(leaving Ravenna and Rome Byzantine). The         Turks broke up the
Ephthalites in Western Turkestan.

570.  Muhammad born.

579.  Chosroes I died.         (The Lombards dominant in Italy.)

590.  Plague raged in Rome. (Gregory the Great--Gregory I--and         the
vision of St. Angelo.) Chosroes II began to         reign.

610.  Heraclius began to reign.

619.  Chosroes II held Egypt, Jerusalem, Damascus, and had         armies on
Hellespont. Tang dynasty began in China.

622.  The Hegira.

623.  Battle of Badr.

627.  Great Persian defeat at Nineveh by Heraclius. The Meccan         Allies
besieged Medina. Tai-tsung became Emperor of         China.

628.  Kavadh II murdered and succeeded his father, Chosroes II.
Muhammad wrote letters to all the rulers of the earth.

629.  Yuan Chwang started for India. Muhammad entered         Mecca.

631.  Tai-tsung received Nestorian missionaries.

632.  Muhammad died. Abu Bekr Caliph.

634.  Battle of the Yarmuk. Moslems took Syria. Omar second         Caliph.

637.  Battle of Kadessia.

638.  Jerusalem surrendered to Omar.

642.  Heraclius died.

643.  Othman third Caliph.

645.  Yuan Chwang returned to Singan.

655.  Defeat of the Byzantine fleet by the Moslems.

656.  Othman murdered at Medina.

661.  Ali murdered.

662.  Moawija Caliph. (First of the Omayyad caliphs.)

668.  The Caliph Moawija attacked Constantinople by sea--Theodore         of
Tarsus became Archbishop of Canterbury.

675.  Last of the sea attacks by Moawija on Constantinople.

687.  Pepin of Heristhal, mayor of the palace, reunited Austrasia         and
Neustria.

711.  Moslem army invaded Spain from Africa.

714.  Charles Martel mayor of the palace.

715.  The domains of the Caliph Walid I extended from the         Pyrenees to
China.

717-18. Suleiman, son and successor of Walid, failed to take
Constantinople. The Omayyad line passed its climax.

732.  Charles Martel defeated the Moslems near Poitiers.

735.  Death of the Venerable Bede.

743.  Walid II Caliph,--the unbelieving Caliph.

749.  Overthrow of the Omayyads. Abdul Abbas, the first Abbasid         Caliph.
Spain remained Omayyad. Beginning         of the break-up of the Arab Empire.

751.  Pepin crowned King of the French.

755.  Martyrdom of St. Boniface.

768.  Pepin died.

771.  Charlemagne sole king.

774.  Charlemagne conquered Lombardy.

776.  Charlemagne in Dalmatia.

786.  Haroun al Raschid Abbasid Caliph in Bagdad (to 809).

795.  Leo III became Pope (to 816).

800.  Leo crowned Charlemagne Emperor of the West.

802.  Egbert, formerly an English refugee at the court of Charlemagne,
established himself as King of Wessex.

810.  Krum of Bulgaria defeated and killed the Emperor Nicephorus.

814.  Charlemagne died, Louis the Pious succeeds him.

828.  Egbert became first King of England.

843.  Louis the Pious died, and the Carlovingian Empire went to         pieces.
Until 962 there was no regular succession of Holy         Roman Emperors,
though the title appeared intermittently.

850.  About this time Rurik (a Northman) became ruler of Novgorod         and
Kieff.

852.  Boris first Christian King of Bulgaria (to 884).

865.  The fleet of the Russians (Northmen) threatened Constantinople.

886.  The Treaty of Alfred of England and Guthrum the Dane,
establishing the Danes in the Danelaw.

904.  Russian (Northmen) fleet off Constantinople.

912.  Rolf the Ganger established himself in Normandy.

919.  Henry the Fowler elected King of Germany.

928.  Marozia imprisoned Pope John X.

931.  John XI Pope (to 936).

936.  Otto I became King of Germany in succession to his father,         Henry
the Fowler.

941.  Russian fleet again threatened Constantinople.

955.    John XII Pope.

960.  Northern Sung Dynasty began in China.

962.  Otto I, King of Germany, crowned Emperor (first Saxon         Emperor) by
John XII.

963.  Otto deposed John XII.

969.  Separate Fatimite Caliphate set up in Egypt.

973.  Otto II.

983.  Otto III.

987.  Hugh Capet became King of France. End of the Carlovingian         line of
French kings.

1013.  Canute became King of England, Denmark, and Norway.

1037.  Avicenna of Bokhara, the Prince of Physicians, died.

1043.  Russian fleet threatened Constantinople.

1066.  Conquest of England by William, Duke of Normandy.

1071.  Revival of Islam under the Seljuk Turks. Battle of          Melasgird.

1073.  Hildebrand became Pope (Gregory VII) to 1085.

1082.  Robert Guiscard captured Durazzo.

1084.  Robert Guiscard sacked Rome.

1087-99.  Urban II Pope.

1094.  Pestilence.

1095.  Urban II at Clermont summoned the First Crusade.

1096.  Massacre of the People’s Crusade.

1099.  Godfrey of Bouillon captured Jerusalem. Paschal II          Pope (to
1118).

1138.  Kin Empire flourished. The Sung capital shifted from          Nanking to
Hang Chau.

1147.  The Second Crusade. Foundation of the Christian Kingdom          of
Portugal.

1169.  Saladin Sultan of Egypt.

1176.  Frederick Barbarossa acknowledged supremacy of the          Pope
(Alexander III) at Venice.

1187.  Saladin captured Jerusalem.

1189.  The Third Crusade.

1198.  Averroes of Cordoba, the Arab philosopher, died. Innocent          III
Pope (to 1216). Frederick II (aged four), King          of Sicily, became his
ward.

1202.  The Fourth Crusade attacked the Eastern Empire.

1204.  Capture of Constantinople by the Latins.

1206.  Kutub founded Moslem state at Delhi.

1212.  The Children’s Crusade.

1214.  Jengis Khan took Peking.

1215.  Magna Carta signed.

1216.  Honorius III Pope.

1218.  Jengis Khan invaded Kharismia.

1221.  Failure and return of the Fifth Crusade. St. Dominic died.          (The
Dominicans.)

1226.  St. Francis of Assisi died. (The Franciscans.)

1227.  Jengis Khan died, Khan from the Caspian to the Pacific,          and was
succeeded by Ogdai Khan.

1227.  Gregory IX Pope.

1228.  Frederick II embarked upon the Sixth Crusade, and acquired
Jerusalem.

1234.  Mongols completed conquest of the Kin Empire with the          help of
the Sung Empire.

1239.  Frederick II excommunicated for the second time.

1240.  Mongols destroyed Kieff. Russia tributary to the Mongols.

1241.  Mongol victory at Liegnitz in Silesia.

1244.  The Egyptian Sultan recaptured Jerusalem. This led to          the
Seventh Crusade.

1245.  Frederick II re-excommunicated. The men of Schwyz          burnt the
castle of New Habsburg.

1250.  St. Louis of France ransomed. Frederick II, the last
Hohenstaufen Emperor, died. German interregnum until          1273.

1251.  Mangu Khan became Great Khan. Kublai Khan governor          of China.

1258.  Hulagu Khan took and destroyed Bagdad.

1260.  Kublai Khan became Great Khan. Ketboga defeated in          Palestine.

1261.  The Greeks recaptured Constantinople from the Latins.

1269.  Kublai Khan sent a message of inquiry to the Pope by the          older
Polos.

1271.  Marco Polo started upon his travels.

1273.  Rudolf of Habsburg elected Emperor. The Swiss formed          their
Everlasting League.

1280.  Kublai Khan founded the Yuan Dynasty in China.

1292.  Death of Kublai Khan.

1293.  Roger Bacon, the prophet of experimental science, died.

1294.  Boniface VIII Pope (to 1303).

1295.  Marco Polo returned to Venice.

1303.  Death of Pope Boniface VIII after the outrage of Anagni          by
Guillaume de Nogaret.

1305.  Clement V Pope. The papal court set up at Avignon.

1308.  Duns Scotus died.

1318.  Four Franciscans burnt for heresy at Marseilles.

1347.  Occam died.

1348.  The Great Plague, the Black Death.

1358.  The Jacquerie in France.

1360.  In China the Mongol (Yuan) Dynasty fell, and was succeeded          by
the Ming Dynasty (to 1644).

1367.  Timurlane assumed the title of Great Khan.

1377.  Pope Gregory XI returned to Rome.

1378.  The Great Schism. Urban VI in Rome, Clement VII at          Avignon.

1381.  Peasant revolt in England. Wat Tyler murdered in the          presence
of King Richard II.

1384.  Wycliffe died.

1398.  Huss preached Wycliffism at Prague.

1405.  Death of Timurlane.

1414-18.  The Council of Constance. Huss burnt (1415).

1417.  The Great Schism ended, Martin V Pope.

1420.  The Hussites revolted. Martin V preached a crusade          against
them.

1431.  The Catholic Crusaders dissolved before the Hussites at
Domazlice. The Council of Basle met.

1436.  The Hussites came to terms with the church.

1439.  Council of Basle created a fresh schism in the church.

1445.  Discovery of Cape Verde by the Portuguese.

1446.  First printed books (Coster in Haarlem).

1449.  End of the Council of Basle.

1453.  Ottoman Turks under Muhammad II took Constantinople.

1480.  Ivan III, Grand-duke of Moscow, threw off the Mongol
allegiance.

1481.  Death of the Sultan Muhammad II while preparing for the
conquest of Italy. Bayazid II Turkish Sultan (to 1512).

1486.  Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope.

1492.  Columbus crossed the Atlantic to America. Rodrigo Borgia,
Alexander VI, Pope (to 1503).

1493.  Maximilian I became Emperor.

1498.  Vasco da Gama sailed round the Cape to India.

1499.  Switzerland became an independent republic.

1500.  Charles V born.

1509.  Henry VIII King of England.

1512.  Selim Sultan (to 1520). He bought the title of Caliph.          Fall of
Soderini (and Machiavelli) in Florence.

1513.  Leo X Pope.

1515.  Francis I King of France.

1517.  Selim annexed Egypt. Luther propounded his theses at
Wittenberg.

1519.  Leonardo da Vinci died. Magellan’s expedition started to          sail
round the world. Cortez entered Mexico city.

1520.  Suleiman the Magnificent, Sultan (to 1566), who ruled from
Bagdad to Hungary. Charles V Emperor.

1521.  Luther at the Diet of Worms. Loyola wounded at Pampeluna.

1525.  Baber won the battle of Panipat, captured Delhi, and          founded
the Mogul Empire.

1527.  The German troops in Italy, under the Constable of Bourbon,
took and pillaged Rome.

1529.  Suleiman besieged Vienna.

1530.  Pizarro invaded Peru. Charles V crowned by the Pope.          Henry VIII
began his quarrel with the Papacy.

1532.  The Anabaptists seized Münster.

1535.  Fall of the Anabaptist rule in Münster.

1539.  The Company of Jesus founded.

1543.  Copernicus died.

1545.  The Council of Trent (to 1563) assembled to put the          church in
order.

1546.  Martin Luther died.

1547.  Ivan IV (the Terrible) took the title of Tsar of Russia.
Francis I died.

1549.  First Jesuit missions arrived in South America.

1552.  Treaty of Passau. Temporary pacification of Germany.

1556.  Charles V abdicated. Akbar Great Mogul (to 1605).          Ignatius of
Loyola died.

1558.  Death of Charles V.

1563.  End of the Council of Trent and the reform of the Catholic
Church.

1564.  Galileo born.

1566.  Suleiman the Magnificent died.

1567.  Revolt of the Netherlands.

1568.  Execution of Counts Egmont and Horn.

1571.  Kepler born.

1573.  Siege of Alkmaar.

1578.  Harvey born.

1583.  Sir Walter Raleigh’s expedition to Virginia.

1601.  Tycho Brahe died.

1603.  James I King of England and Scotland. Dr. Gilbert died.

1605.  Jehangir Great Mogul.

1606.  Virginia Company founded.

1609.  Holland independent.

1618.  Thirty Years War began.

1620.  Mayflower expedition founded New Plymouth. First negro          slaves
landed at Jamestown (Va.).

1625.  Charles I of England.

1626.  Sir Francis Bacon (Lord Verulam) died.

1628.  Shah Jehan Great Mogul. The English Petition of Right.

1629.  Charles I of England began his eleven years of rule without          a
parliament.

1630.  Kepler died.

1632.  Leeuwenhoek born. Gustavus Adolphus killed at the          Battle of
Lützen.

1634.  Wallenstein murdered.

1638.  Japan closed to Europeans (until 1865).

1640.  Charles I of England summoned the Long Parliament.

1641.  Massacre of the English in Ireland.

1642.  Galileo died. Newton born.

1643.  Louis XIV began his reign of seventy-two years.

1644.  The Manchus ended the Ming dynasty.

1645.  Swine pens in the inner town of Leipzig pulled down.

1648.  Treaty of Westphalia. Thereby Holland and Switzerland          were
recognized as free republics and Prussia became          important. The treaty
gave a complete victory neither to          the Imperial Crown nor to the
Princes.        War of the Fronde; it ended in the complete victory          of
the French crown.

1649.  Execution of Charles I of England.

1658.  Aurungzeb Great Mogul. Cromwell died.

1660.  Charles II of England.

1674.  Nieuw Amsterdam finally became British by treaty and          was
renamed New York.

1683.  The last Turkish attack on Vienna defeated by John III          of
Poland.

1688.  The British Revolution. Flight of James II. William          and Mary
began to reign.

1689.  Peter the Great of Russia (to 1725).

1690.  Battle of the Boyne in Ireland.

1694.  Voltaire born.

1701.  Frederick I first King of Prussia.

1704.  John Locke, the father of modern democratic theory, died.

1707.  Death of Aurungzeb. The empire of the Great Mogul
disintegrated.

1713.  Frederick the Great of Prussia born.

1714.  George I of Britain.

1715.  Louis XV of France.

1727.  Newton died. George II of Britain.

1732.  Oglethorpe founded Georgia.

1736.  Nadir Shah raided India. (The beginning of twenty years          of
raiding and disorder in India.)

1740.  Maria-Theresa began to reign. (Being a woman, she          could not be
empress. Her husband, Francis I, was emperor          until his death in 1765,
when her son, Joseph II,          succeeded him.)

1740.  Accession of Frederick the Great, King of Prussia.

1741.  The Empress Elizabeth of Russia began to reign.

1755-63.  Britain and France struggled for America and India.          France
in alliance with Austria and Russia against Prussia          and Britain
(1756-63); the Seven Years’ War.

1757.  Battle of Plassey.

1759.  The British general Wolfe took Quebec.

1760.  George III of Britain.

1762.  The Empress Elizabeth of Russia died. Murder of the          Tsar Paul,
and accession of Catherine the Great of Russia          (to 1796).

1763.  Peace of Paris; Canada ceded to Britain. British dominant          in
India.

1764.  Battle of Buxar.

1769.  Napoleon Bonaparte born.

1774.  Louis XVI began his reign. Suicide of Clive. The          American
revolutionary drama began.

1775.  Battle of Lexington.

1776.  Declaration of Independence by the United States of          America.

1778.  J. J. Rousseau, the creator of modern democratic sentiment,
died.

1780.  End of the reign of Maria-Theresa. The Emperor Joseph          (1765 to
1790) succeeded her in the hereditary Habsburg          dominions.

1783.  Treaty of Peace between Britain and the new United States          of
America. Quaco set free in Massachusetts.

1787.  The Constitutional Convention of Philadelphia set up the
Federal Government of the United States. France discovered          to be
bankrupt. The Assembly of the Notables.

1788.  First Federal Congress of the United States at New York.

1789.  The French States-General assembled. Storming of the          Bastille.

1791.  The Jacobin Revolution. Flight to Varennes.

1792.  France declared war on Austria; Prussia declared war on          France.
Battle of Valmy. France became a republic.

1793.  Louis XVI beheaded.

1794.  Execution of Robespierre and end of the Jacobin republic.          Rule
of the Convention.

1795.  The Directory. Bonaparte suppressed a revolt and went          to Italy
as commander-in-chief.

1797.  By the Peace of Campo Formio Bonaparte destroyed the          Republic
of Venice.

1798.  Bonaparte went to Egypt. Battle of the Nile.

1799.  Bonaparte returned. He became First Consul with enormous
powers.

1800.  Legislative union of Ireland and England enacted January          1st,
1801.

1800.  Napoleon’s campaign against Austria. Battles of Marengo          (in
Italy) and Hohenlinden (Moreau’s victory).

1801.  Preliminaries of peace between France, England, and Austria
signed.

1803.  Bonaparte occupied Switzerland, and so precipitated war.

1804.  Bonaparte became Emperor. Francis II took the title of          Emperor
of Austria in 1805, and in 1806 he dropped the          title of Holy Roman
Emperor. So the “Holy Roman          Empire” came to an end.

1805.  Battle of Trafalgar. Battles of Ulm and Austerlitz.

1806.  Prussia overthrown at Jena.

1807.  Battles of Eylau and Friedland and Treaty of Tilsit.

1808.  Napoleon made his brother Joseph King of Spain.

1810.  Spanish America became republican.

1811.  Alexander withdrew from the “Continental System.”

1812.  Moscow.

1814.  Abdication of Napoleon. Louis XVIII.

1815.  The Waterloo campaign. The Treaty of Vienna.

1819.  The First Factory Act passed through the efforts of Robert
Owen.

1821.  The Greek revolt.

1824.  Charles X of France.

1825.  Nicholas I of Russia.

1827.  Battle of Navarino.

1829.  Greece independent.

1830.  A year of disturbance. Louis Philippe ousted Charles X.          Belgium
broke away from Holland. Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha          became king of
this new country, Belgium.          Russian Poland revolted ineffectually.
First          railway (Liverpool to Manchester).

1832.  The First Reform Bill in Britain restored the democratic
character of the British Parliament.

1835.  The word socialism first used.

1837.  Queen Victoria.

1840.  Queen Victoria married Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.

1848.  Another year of disturbance. Republics in France and          Rome. The
Pan-slavic conference at Prague. All Germany          united in a parliament at
Frankfort. German unity          destroyed by the King of Prussia.

1851.  The Great Exhibition of London.

1852.  Napoleon III Emperor of the French.

1854.  Perry (second expedition) landed in Japan. Nicholas I          occupied
the Danubian provinces of Turkey.

1854-56.  Crimean War.

1856.  Alexander II of Russia.

1857.  The Indian Mutiny.

1858.  Robert Owen died.

1859.  Franco-Austrian war. Battles of Magenta and Solferino.

1861.  Victor Emmanuel First King of Italy. Abraham Lincoln          became
President U.S.A. The American Civil War began.

1863.  British bombarded a Japanese town.

1864.  Maximilian became Emperor of Mexico.

1865.  Surrender of Appomattox Court House. Japan opened to          the world.

1866.  Prussia and Italy attacked Austria (and the south German          states
in alliance with her). Battle of Sadowa.

1867.  The Emperor Maximilian shot.

1870.  Napoleon III declared war against Prussia.

1871.  Paris surrendered (January). The King of Prussia became          William
I, “German Emperor.” The Hohenzollern Peace          of Frankfort.

1875.  The “Bulgarian atrocities.”

1877.  Russo-Turkish War. Treaty of San Stefano. Queen Victoria          became
Empress of India.

1878.  The Treaty of Berlin. The Armed Peace of forty-six years          began
in western Europe.

1881.  The Battle of Majuba Hill. The Transvaal free.

1883.  Britain occupied Egypt.

1886.  Gladstone’s first Irish Home Rule Bill.

1888.  Frederick II (March), William II (June), German          Emperors.

1890.  Bismarck dismissed. Heligoland ceded to Germany by          Lord
Salisbury.

1894-95.  Japanese war with China.

1895.  “Unionist” (Imperialist) government in Britain.

1896.  Battle of Adowa.

1898.  The Fashoda quarrel between France and Britain. Germany
acquired Kiau-Chau.

1899.  The war in South Africa began (Boer war).

1900.  The Boxer risings in China. Siege of the Legations at Peking.

1904.  The British invaded Tibet.

1904-5.  Russo-Japanese war.

1906.  The “Unionist” (Imperialist) party in Great Britain defeated          by
the Liberals upon the question of tariffs.

1907.  The Confederation of South Africa established.

1908.  Austria annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina.

1909.  M. Bleriot flew in an aeroplane from France to England.

1911.  Italy made war on Turkey and seized Tripoli.

1912.  China became a republic.

1913.  The Balkan league made war on Turkey. Bloodshed at          Londonderry
in Ireland caused by “Unionist” gun          running.

1914.  The Great War in Europe began (for which see special time          chart
on pp. 528-29).

1917.  The two Russian revolutions. Establishment of the Bolshevik
régime in Russia.

1919-20.  The Clemenceau Peace of Versailles.

1920.  First meeting of the League of Nations, from which Germany,
Austria, Russia, and Turkey were excluded, and          at which the United
States was not represented.

And here our _Outline_ breaks off.




INDEX


KEY TO PRONUNCIATION

VOWELS

ä     as in far (fär), father (fä’ thũr), mikado (mi kä’ dō).

ă     “  “  fat (făt), ample (ămpl), abstinence (ăb’ stin ens).

ā     “  “  fate (fāt), wait (wāt), deign (dān), jade (jād).

aw    “  “  fall (fawl), appal (a pawl’), broad (brawd).

â     “  “  fair (fâr), bear (bâr), where (hwâr).


e     “  “  bell (bel), bury (ber’ i).

ē     “  “  beef (bēf), thief (thēf), idea (ī dē’ ă), beer (bēr),
casino (kă sē’ nō).


i     “  “  bit (bit), lily (lil’ ī), nymph (nimf), build (bild).

ī     “  “  bite (bīt), analyze (ăn’ ă līz), light (līt).


o     “  “  not (not), watch (woch), cough (kof), sorry (sor’ i).

ō     “  “  no (nō), blow (blō), brooch (brōch).

ô     “  “  north (nôrth), absorb (ăb sôrb’).

oo    “  “  food (food), do (doo), prove (proov), blue (bloo), strew (stroo).


u     “  “  bull (bul), good (gud), would (wud).

ŭ     “  “  sun (sŭn), love (lŭv), enough (ē nŭf’).

ū     “  “  muse (mūs), stew (stū), cure (kūr).

ũ     “  “  her (hũr), search (sũrch), word (wũrd), bird (bũrd).



ou    “  “  bout (bout), bough (bou), crowd (kroud).

oi    “  “  join (join), joy (joi), buoy (boi).

A short mark placed over italic a, e, o, or u (_ă_, _ĕ_,      _ŏ_, _ŭ_),
signifies that the vowel has an obscure,      indeterminate, or slurred sound,
as in:--

advice (_ă_d vīs, current (kŭr’ _ĕ_nt), notion (nō’ sh_ŭ_n),   breakable
(brā’ k_ă_ bl), sailor (sā’ l_ŏ_r), pleasure (plezh’ _ŭ_r).

CONSONANTS

“s” is used only for the sibilant “s” (as in “toast,” tōst,      “place,”
plās); the sonant “s” (as in “toes,” “plays”) is      printed “z” (tōz, plāz).

“c” (except in the combinations “ch” and “_ch_”), “q” and “x” are      not
used.

b, d, f, h (but see the combinations below), k, l, m, n (see _n_
below), p, r, t, v, z, and w and y when used as consonants have      their
usual values.

ch    as in  church (chũrch), batch (băch), capriccio (kä prē’ chō).

_ch_  “  “   loch (lo_ch_), coronach (kor’ o nä_ch_), clachan (klă_ch_’ än).



g     “  “   get (get), finger (fing’ gũr).

j     “  “   join (join), judge (jŭj), germ (jũrm), ginger (jin’ jĕr).



gh   (in List of Proper Names only) as in Ludwig (lut’ vigh).

hl   (    “         “     “    “  ) “  “  Llandeilo (hlăn dī’ lō).

hw   as in white (hwīt), nowhere (nō’ hwâr).


_n_   “  “  cabochon (kä bō sho_n_’), congé (ko_n_’ shā).


sh    “  “  shawl (shawl), mention (men’ shŭn).

zh    “  “  measure (mezh’ _ŭ_r), vision (vizh’ _ŏ_n).


th    “  “  thin (thin), breath (breth).

_th_  “  “  thine (_th_īn), breathe (brē_th_).

The accent (’) _follows_ the syllable to be stressed.


Aar (ār) VALLEY, ii, 199

Aaronson, Aaron, i, 184

Abbasids (_ă_ băs’ īdz), ii, 30-36, 61, 64, 70, 106, 126, 613

Abbott, E., i, 6

Abbott, W. J. Lewis, i, 68

Abd Manif (äbd män ēf’), ii, 5

Abdal Malik (äbd äl mä’ lik), ii, 28

Abelard, P., ii, 171

Aboukir (ä boo kēr’), ii, 352, 353

_Aboukir_, cruiser, ii, 520

Abraham the Patriarch, i, 196, 278, 282, 293-94, 576, ii, 6

Absolution, ii, 216

Abu Bekr (ä’ boo bek’ _ĕ_r), ii, 6, 7, 8, 13-22, 34, 612

Abul Abbas, ii, 30, 31, 613

Abul Fazl (ā’ bool fā’ zl), ii, 135

Abydos (_ă_ bī’ dos), i, 335, 340

Abyssinia, i, 156, 160, 359, ii, 461

Abyssinian Christians, i, 603, 618, ii, 3, 8;   language, i, 154

Académie des Sciences, ii, 239

Academy, Greek, i, 351, 354-57

Academy of Inscriptions, ii, 312

Achilles (ä kil’ ēz), i, 177

Acre, i, 212, ii, 353

Acropolis (ă krop’ ŏ lis), i, 306, 337

Act of Union, ii, 492

Actium (ăk’ ti _ŭ_m), battle of, i, 514, ii, 609

Acts of the Apostles, i, 587, 589

Adam and Eve, ii, 418

Adams, Prof. G. B., ii, 46

Adams, John, ii, 300, 303

Adams, Samuel, ii, 290, 303

Adams, W. P., ii, 532

Adams, William, ii, 465

Addington, ii, 359

Aden, i, 160, 197, ii, 32, 471

Adowa (ă’ dō wă), battle of, ii, 461, 469, 500, 624

Adrianople, i, 554, ii, 122, 502;   Treaty of, ii, 382

Adriatic, i, 274, 389, 452, 461, 471, 540, 561, 606, 616, ii, 54, 80, 364, 509

Adriatic river, i, 119, 120

Ægatian Isles, i, 471, ii, 608

Ægean (ē jē’ _ă_n), cities, i, 234;   civilization, i, 213-16, 281, 300;   Dark
Whites, i, 447;   hunters, i, 317

Ægina (ē jī’ n_ă_), i, 337

Æneid (ē’ nē id), the, i, 448

Æolic dialect, i, 300

Aeroplanes, i, 5, ii, 392, 519, 523

Æschylus (ēs’ ki l_ŭ_s), i, 221, 355, ii, 607

Afghanistan, i, 153, 201, 396, 431, 433, 627-28, 643, ii, 133, 257

Africa, i, 57, 74, 109, 120, 145, 154-56, 162, 281, 489, 509,   ii, 114, 139,
153;   peoples of, i, 86, 109, 138, 141, 149, 158-60, 195-201, 206, 234;
languages of, i, 161-62;   early trade with, i, 217, 273;   Moslems in, i, 217,
565, ii, 22, 24, 30, 31, 41, 51, 64, 65, 613;   voyages and travels in, i, 218,
509, ii, 185-88, 252;   Phœnicians in, i, 448, 482-84, 513, 570, 640;   Roman,
i, 470, 478-79, 498, 540, 560, 606;   Vandals in, i, 556, 606, 615, ii, 611;
slavery in, ii, 193, 225, 306;   modern exploitation of, ii, 451, 458-60, 484

Africa, Central, i, 158, 558;   East, i, 42, 178;   South (_see_ South Africa);
West, i, 219, ii, 193

African lung fish, i, 25

Aga Khan (ä’ gä kän’), ii, 473

Agincourt, ii, 179

Agriculture, early, i, 104, 108, 113-14, 116, 133, 137, 158,   171, 190, 254,
317;   slaves in, i, 259;   Arab knowledge of, ii, 38;   in Great Britain, ii,
272, 273

Agriculturists, i, 264, 267, 271

Agrigentum (ăg ri gen’ t_ŭ_m), i, 469

Agrippina (ăg ri pī’ n_ă_), i, 525

Ahriman (ă’ ri män), i, 625, 626

Ainu (ī’ noo), i, 139, 148, ii, 262, 464

Air, the, i, 5, 23, 36

Air Force, ii, 570

Aisne (ān), ii, 515;   battle of the, ii, 48

Aix-la-Chapelle, ii, 60, 63

Akbar (äk’ bũr), ii, 133-37, 256, 618

Akhnaton (äk nä’ ton). (_See_ Amenophis IV)

Akkadia (and Akkadians), i, 191, 245

Akkadian-Sumerian Empire, i, 196, 279, ii, 606

Akki, i, 279

_Alabama_, the, ii, 443-44

Alamanni, i, 553, ii, 48, 610

Alans, i, 549-54, 627-28, ii, 609

Alaric (ăl’ _ă_ rik), i, 554, 561, ii, 611

Alaska, ii, 505

Alban, St., ii, 50

Alban Mount, i, 448

Albania, ii, 522

Albert, Prince Consort, ii, 436, 486, 622

Albertus Magnus, ii, 171

Albigenses (ăl bi jen’ sēz), ii, 92, 95, 219

Alcarez (ăl cär’ ez), ii, 208

Alchemists, ii, 174

Alcibiades (ăl si bī’ _ă_ dēz), i, 351

Alcmæonidæ (ălk mē on’ i dē), i, 314

Alcohol, discovery of, ii, 38

Alcuin (ăl’ kwin), ii, 59

Alemanni. (_See_ Alamanni)

Aleppo, ii, 76

Alexander the Great, i, 133, 195, 198, 200, 205, 217,   252, 253, 277, 345,
352, 357-59, 366-99, 412, 428,   430, 445, 452, 467, 484, 507, 510,   512, 522,
542, 546, 562, 597, 615-16, 643,   ii, 20, 51, 78, 114, 145, 199, 303, 608;
empire of (maps), i, 393, 398;   mother of, i, 452

Alexander, son of Alexander the Great, i, 394

Alexander II, king of Egypt, i, 500

Alexander I, tsar of Russia, ii, 362-66, 370-76, 382, 405, 411, 476-77, 622

Alexander II, tsar of Russia, ii, 623

Alexander III (pope), ii, 97, 615

Alexander VI (pope), ii, 195, 617

Alexandretta, i, 379, 383

Alexandria, i, 13, 383, 389, 395-96, 428, 463   497, 515, 532, 538, 562, 587,
601, 602, 604, ii, 36, 91, 168, 351, 611;   museum at, i, 359, 402-13, 476,
490, 636;   culture and religion of, i, 401-14,   590-91, 602, ii, 37;
library at, i, 405, 411;   Serapeum, i, 413, 414

Alexandrian cities, i, 273

Alexius Comnenus (ă lek’ si ŭs kom nē’n_ŭ_s), ii, 72-80

Alfred, king, ii, 54, 148, 614

Algæ, i, 10

Algebra (ăl’ je br_ă_), i, 219, ii, 37, 88

Algeria, i, 102, 217, 565, ii, 501

Algiers, ii, 126, 225, 470

Ali (ā’ lē), nephew of Muhammad, ii, 6-8, 13, 26-31, 64, 613

Alkmaar (älk mär’), siege of, ii, 230-32

Allah, ii, 9-20, 24, 26

Alleghany mountains, ii, 280

Allen, Grant, i, 131

Allen, W. A. C., i, 294

Alp Arslan (älp ärs län’), ii. 72

Alphabets, i, 228, 304, 422, 627, 638-40

Alpine race, i, 146

Alps, the, i, 35, 52, 75, 471, 475, 508, 606, ii, 58, 63, 69, 194

Alsace, i, 553, ii, 200, 236, 244, 446

Alstadt, ii, 180

Altai (äl’ tī), the, i, 546, 633

Altamira (al tă mër’ ă), cave of, i, 93, ii, 605

Aluminium, ii, 389

Alva, General, ii, 229-32

Alyattes (ă li ăt’ ēz), i, 316

Amadis (ăm’ _ă_ dis) de Gaul, ii, 165, 166

Ambar, ii, 136

Amber, i, 105, 532

Amenophis (ăm _ĕ_ nō’ fis) III, i, 200, 220, 245, 250, 288

Amenophis IV, i, 196, 220, 245, 250, 251, 255, 281, 288, 412, 446, ii, 605

America, i, 56, 59, 100, 219, ii, 254, 400;   prehistoric, i, 100, 102-03, 107,
148, 207, 208;   races of, i, 100, 102-03, 138, 141, 158;   languages of, i,
150, 158, 164;   discovery of, i, 635, 640, ii, 53, 84, 117,   185 _sqq._, 193,
251-52, 269, 617;   European settlements in, ii, 252-55, 271,   273, 278-94,
304, 619.   (_See also_ United States)

America, Central, drawings, i, 207

America, South, i, 207, ii, 166, 187,   192-93, 200, 378, 457, 622

American Indians, i, 113, 124, 137, 143,   157-60, 207, 225, ii, 166, 187, 189,
254, 292, 304-05, 464

American king-crab, i, 10;   picture writing, i, 207

Amiens, ii, 530;   Peace of, ii, 355, 359

Amir, ii, 124

Amman (Philadelphia), i, 621-22

Ammianus, i, 607

Ammon, i, 249-52, 383, 399, 412, 602

Ammonites, i, 46

Ammonites, a people, i, 294

Amœba (_ă_ mē’ bȧ), i, 16

Amorites, i, 191, 279

Amos the prophet, i, 294

Amphibia, i, 26, 28, 38, 52, 55

Amphictyonies (ăm fik’ ti _ŏ_n iz), i, 313, ii, 3, 8

_Amphion_, cruiser, ii, 512

Amphipolis (ăm fip’ _ŏ_ lis), i, 371, 372

Amritzar (ăm rit’ s_ă_r), ii, 456

Amur (ă moor´), ii, 261

Anabaptists, ii, 156, 157, 162, 618

Anabasis (_ă_ năb´ _ă_ sis), the, i, 342

Anagni (ä nän´ yē), ii, 99, 616

Anatolia, ii, 72, 121

Anatolian peninsula, i, 623

Anatomy, i, 402-04, ii, 177

Anaxagoras (ăn _ă_k săg´ _ŏ_ răs), i, 349, 358, 364

Andaman (ăn´ d_ă_ măn) Islands, i, 139

Andes, i, 35, 52

Andronicus (ăn dr_ŏ_ nī´ k_ŭ_s), ii, 124

Angelo, St., ii, 612

Angles, i, 554, 605, ii, 50, 54, 66

Anglia, East, ii, 40

Anglicanism, ii, 163

Anglo-Norman feudalism, ii, 43

“Anglo-Saxon,” ii, 487-88

Anglo-Saxons, i, 564, 605, 612, ii, 47, 130, 149

Animals, i, 10, 16-23, 25-27,   52-57, 64, 66, 67, 102, 105,   112, 116, 128,
254. (_See also_ Mammals)

Anio, the, i, 458, 610

Anna Comnena (kom nē´ n_ă_), ii, 79

Annam, i, 634, 640, ii, 262, 467, 470

Anne, queen, ii, 226

Anselm, St., ii, 171

Antarctic birds, i, 44

Antigonus (ăn tig´ ō n_ŭ_s), i, 395

Antimony, i, 106

Antioch, i, 529, 589, 598, 604, 617-21, ii, 19, 78-81, 610

Antiochus (ăn tī´ ȯ k_ŭ_s) III, i, 474, 482, 483

Antiochus IV, i, 572

Antonines, i, 526-31, 537-40, ii, 610

Antoninus (ăn tō nī´ n_ŭ_s), Marcus Aurelius, i, 526-28, 540, ii, 153, 610

Antoninus Pius, i, 526, 530, ii, 610

Antony, i, 512, 514, 515

Antwerp, ii, 180, 184

Anu, i, 245

Anubis (_ă_ nū´ bis), Egyptian god, i, 236

Anytus(ăn´ i t_ŭ_s), i, 352

Apamea (ăp _ă_ mē´ _ă_), i, 621

Apes, i, 65-67, 230;   anthropoid, i, 57, 63, 65-66, 73

Aphelion, i, 30-34

Apion, i, 500

Apis (ā´ pis), i, 382, 412, 413, 590

Apollinaris Sidonius, i, 607

Apollo, i, 313, 325, 376, 611

Apollonius (ă p_ŏ_ lō´ ni _ŭ_s), i, 402

Appian Way, i, 461, 505

Apples, i, 113

Appomattox Court House, ii, 444, 623

Apuleius (ăp ū lē´ _ŭ_s), i, 607

Aquileia (ă kwē lā´ y_ă_), i, 461, 559

Aquinas (_ă_ kwī´ n_ă_s), ii, 168, 171

Arabia, i, 37, 109, 121, 154, 156, 160, 184, 196,   197, 218, 229, 273, 281,
295,   401, 533, 618, 624, 634, ii, 1-6, 11, 17, 18, 24,   51, 75, 105. (_See
also_ Arabs)

Arabian Nights, the, ii, 32

Arabic language and literature, i, 148, 153,   530-31, 623, ii, 3-4, 22, 29,
31, 34-35, 159

Arabs, i, 188, 217, 327, 565, 570, 634, ii,   1-8, 15-21, 28, 32, 39, 41, 61,
67, 114, 149, 159, 257, 613;   culture of, i, 636, ii, 34-39, 88, 149, 168,
174-75

Aral sea, i, 153, 159, 387

Aral-Caspian region, i, 317

Arameans, i, 192, 218, 258, 259, 265, 570, 631, ii, 1

Arbela (är bē´ l_ă_), battle of, i, 384, 479, ii, 608

Arcadius, i, 554, ii, 611

Archæopteryx (är kē op´ t_ĕ_r iks), i, 45

Archæozoic (är kē ō zō´ ik) period, i, 9. (_See also_ Azoic)

Archer, William, ii, 473

Archers, i, 370

Archimedes (är ki mē´ dēz), i, 402, 476, 534

Architecture, ii, 60, 179

Arctic birds, i, 44;   Circle, i, 632;   Ocean, i, 153;   seas, ii, 142

Ardashir (ar dă shēr´) I, i, 617, 625, ii, 610

Ardennes, ii, 514

Argentine republic, i, 161, ii, 457

Argon, ii, 119

Argonne, ii, 329

Argos, i, 453, 454

Ariadne (ăr i ăd´ ni), i, 216

Arians (är´ i _ă_nz), i, 592, 601

Aridæus (ăr i dē´ _ŭ_s), i, 375, 394

Aristagoras (ăr is tăg´ _ŏ_ răs), i, 341, 342

Aristarchus, i, 384

Aristides (ăr is tī´ dēz), i, 312, 313, 337, 346

Aristocracy, i, 188, 265, 308

Aristodemus (ăr is t_ŏ_ dē´ m_ŭ_s), i, 336

Aristophanes (ăr is tof´ _ă_ nēz), i, 221, 355, ii, 607

Aristotle, i, 220, 305, 314, 357-59, 379, 383, 392,   397, 402, 411, 434, 493,
530, 562,   ii, 35, 37, 88, 146, 168-69, 173, 245, 419, 432;   _Politics_ of,
i, 308, 309, 462, 467, ii, 169

Arithmetic, i, 219

Arius (ȧ rī´ ŭs), i, 592, 600, 648

Arizona, ii, 505

Ark of bulrushes, i, 209

Ark of the Covenant, i, 245, 284-88

Arles (arl), i, 600, 601, 609, ii, 611

Armadillo, giant, i, 102, 207

Armenia (and the Armenians), i, 169, 318, 395,   505, 523, 526, 548, 549, 603,
616, 620,   ii, 21, 64, 72, 114, 118, 121, 125, 153

Armenian language, i, 151, 169, ii, 138

Arno, i, 451, 460, 461

Arras, ii, 324, 517

Arrow, i, 508, 549

Arrow heads, i, 104, 107, 114, 130

Arrow straighteners, i, 90, 99

Arsacids (ăr săs’ idz), i, 523, 616, ii, 610

Arses, i, 342

Art, Buddhist, i, 428;   Cretan, i, 215;   Neolithic, i, 130;   Palæolithic, i,
92-99, 123

Artabanus (ăr tă bā’ nŭs), i, 335

Artaxerxes II, i, 342, 363

Artaxerxes III, i, 342

Arthur, king, i, 531

Artillery, i, 372, ii, 124

Artisans, i, 264-269

Artois (ă twă’), Count of. (_See_ Charles X)

Aryan, definition of, i, 298;   languages and literature, i, 133, 151-55,
161-64, 167-69,   173, 298, 387, 446, ii, 247;   peoples and civilisations, i,
152, 160, 167 _sqq._,   189, 194, 201, 232-33, 243-44, 247, 281-82, 298-300,
305,     315-18, 387, 415-16,   446-48, 545, 549-51, 558, ii, 144, 168, 184,
190, 490, 605

Aryan Way, the, i, 417, 424, 433, 440, 449

As, Roman coin, i, 471

Ascalon, i, 282

Asceticism, i, 418, 420

Ashdod, i, 245, 282

Ashley, Sir W., ii, 287

Ashtaroth (ăsh’ tă roth), i, 282, 286, 288

Asia, general and early period, i, 56, 59, 75, 77,   86, 100, 102, 108, 109,
118, 153, 157-160, 195, 273,   299, 317, 318, 536, 542-49, 551, 557, 624, 627,
ii,   69, 98, 105-08, 114, 153, 168, 185, 247, 449, 464, 610;   Greeks in, i,
327, 375, 390, 396;   Romans in, i, 397, 482, 501, 533, 539;   tribes and
people of, i, 508, 545-52, ii, 113, 127, 134, 137, 259, 266;   Christianity in,
i, 517, 597, 604, 617, ii, 79, 114, 116, 117;   Turks in, i, 618-23, ii, 24,
28, 51, 64, 66, 121, 123;   voyages and travels in, i, 627-29, 642-43, ii, 187,
193, 194, 462

Asia, Central, i, 102, 138, 159, 160, 298, 541, 547, ii, 32, 139, 194, 261;
tribes, people, and civilization of, i, 184, 387, 507, 604, ii, 127

Asia, Eastern, i, 140-41

Asia, South-eastern, languages of, i, 157

Asia, Western, i, 89, 145, ii, 106, 168;   tribes, people, and civilization of,
i, 141, 145, 218, 234, ii, 168

Asia Minor, i, 107, 109, 153, 196, 220, 265, 298, 318,   327, 395, 503-06, 509,
617, 622, ii, 28, 114, 137, 153;   tribes and people of, i, 189, 213, 298,
315-17, 388, 447-48;   Greeks in, i, 300, 302, 304, 308, 315-16, 340, ii, 606;
Gauls in, i, 395, 449, ii, 608;   Turks in, ii, 31, 33, 72, 106, 114, 121

Asiatics, intellectual status of, ii, 462

Asoka (ă shō’ ka), King, i, 196, 411, 431, 432, 489,   628, 646, ii, 133, 608

Aspasia (ăs pā’ shi ȧ), i, 345-6, 349-50, 355

Asquith, Rt. Hon. H. H., ii, 432, 496, 518

Ass, wild, i, 217

Assam, ii, 453

Assisi (ă sē’ zi), ii, 93

Assur, i, 192, 412

Assurbanipal. (_See_ Sardanapalus)

Assyria (and Assyrians), i, 192-94, 199, 205, 216, 225, 240,   243-47, 256,
262, 277, 290-95, 300, 315-17, 319, 327, 342,   383, 384, 446, 526, 570, ii, 1,
244, 606

Assyrian language and writing, i, 153, 228

Asteroids, i, 4

Astrologers, ii, 175

Astronomy, i, 5, 240, 364, ii, 37, 114, 175-76

Athanasius, i, 592, 601, 648

Atheism, ii, 333

Athene (ă thē’ nē), i, 348

Athens, i, 262, 302-13, 330-52,   372, 378, 385, 457, 461, 467, 536, 589, 623,
ii, 483, 502, 524;   social and political, i, 220, 309-12, 348, 352-57, 368,
460, ii, 147;   literature and learning, i, 343-66, 404, 405, 409, 613,
618, 637, 645, ii, 54, 612

Atkinson, C. F., ii, 332

Atkinson, J. J., i, 79, 125, 257, ii, 341

Atlantic Ocean, i, 75-76, 119, 120, 138, 153, 532, 640, ii, 22, 84, 193, 267;
navigation of, i, 217, ii, 185-88, 192, 387, 617

Atlantosaurus (ăt lăn to saw’ rŭs), i, 42

Atmosphere, i, 4, 5, 34

Aton (ä’ ton), Egyptian god, i, 250

Atonement, i, 575, 588

Attalus (ăt’ _ă_ l_ŭ_s), i, 375

Attalus I, i, 396

Attalus III, i, 397, 483, 499, ii, 609

Attica (ăt’ i k_ă_), i, 332-33, 457

Attila (ăt’ i l_ă_), i, 174, 557-59, 608, 628-29, ii, 42, 611

Aughrim, battle of, ii, 492

Augsburg, ii, 206, 210

Augurs, Roman, i, 464

Augustine, St., Bishop of Hippo, i, 592, 598, 604, 607, 612, ii, 56, 73, 611

Augustus Cæsar, Roman Emperor, i, 513-18, 522, 523, 535, 542, 598, ii, 75, 609

Aurangzeb. (_See_ Aurungzeb)

Aurelian, emperor, i, 528, 535, 553, 602, 617, ii, 610

Aurignac, i, 96

Aurignacian (aw rig nā’ sh_ŭ_n) age, i, 96, 97, 173

Aurochs (aw’ roks), i, 76, 92, 101

Aurungzeb (aw rŭng zāb’), ii, 133, 256, 453, 620

Ausculum, battle of, i, 453, ii, 608

Ausonius (aw sō’ ni ŭs), i, 607

Austerlitz, ii, 362, 622

Austin, Mary, i, 264

Australia, i, 37, 82, 206, 635, ii, 451, 456, 471, 472;   aborigines of, i, 98,
139-40, 172

Australian language, i, 162;   lung-fish, i, 25;   throwing-stick, i, 90

Australoids, i, 139, 141, 148, 159, 206

Austrasia, ii, 45, 47, 48, 613

Austria, ii, 200, 204, 233, 240-44, 251, 278, 314, 320, 327,     378-80, 400,
446-47;   wars with France, ii, 327, 332, 351, 355, 361, 368, 441, 621;   war
with Prussia, ii, 442-45, 623;   in Great War, ii, 510, 531, 566, 624

Autocracy, i, 342, ii, 220

Automobiles, ii, 392

Avars, i, 560, 564, 616, 620, ii, 24, 48, 69, 113

Avebury, i, 110, 183, 196, 448

Avebury, Lord, i, 80, 106-07, 110, 115, 118, 134, ii, 426

Averroes (ă ver’ ō ēz), ii, 37, 88, 168, 171, 615

Avicenna (ăv i sen’ ă), ii, 37, 168, 614

Avignon (ă vē nyo_n_’), ii, 84, 99, 127, 148, 617

Axes, ancient, i, 104-07, 112-14, 132

Axis of earth, i, 57

Ayesha (I’ _ĕ_ shă), ii, 12, 26

Azilian age, i, 90, 94, 97, 101, 120, 133, 152

Azoic (ă zo’ ik) period, i, 9, 14, 17, 30

Azores, ii, 185

Aztecs, ii, 189-90


B

Baal, i, 237, 283, 292

Baalbek (bäl bek’), i, 621, ii, 3

Babel, Tower of, i, 190

Baber, ii, 133, 200, 256, 618

Baboons, i, 65, 67, 230

Babylon (and Babylonia), i, 192-201, 218-23, 228, 245-60,     263-67, 277-79,
290-95,    315, 317, 319-20, 326, 342, 364, 383, 385, 389, 394, 411-12, 416,
424,    436, 449, 483, 497, 508, 509, 533, 570, 583, 619-23, 631, 632,     ii,
1, 71, 130, 276, 342, 606, 607;   religion of, i, 238-42, 245-48, 278, 296,
400, 431

Bacchus, i, 515

Bacharach, ii, 180

Back Bay, ii, 290

Bacon, Francis, Lord Verulam, i, 358, ii, 166, 176, 619

Bacon, Roger, ii, 168, 172-77, 385, 616

Bactria (and Bactrians), i, 385, 387-90, 396, 549, 616, ii, 138

Baden, ii, 445

Badr (bäd’ _ĕ_r), battle of, ii, 8, 28, 612

Baedeker, ii, 242

Baganda, i, 206

Bagaudæ, ii, 157

Bagdad, ii, 31-38, 61, 64, 70, 71, 76, 80, 106, 113, 126, 130, 522, 613, 618

Bagoas (bă gō’ ăs), i, 342

Bahamas, ii, 254, 255, 471

Baikal (bī käl’), ii, 108

Baldwin of Flanders, ii, 81, 168, 229

Balearic Isles, i, 556

Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J., ii, 552

Balkan peninsula, i, 102, 153, 196, 298, 300, 317, 395, 451,     ii, 58, 122,
139, 184, 446, 501, 509, 606, 624

Balkash, lake, ii, 108

Balkh, ii, 118

Ball, Dyer, i, 642

Ball, John, ii, 155, 156

Ball, Sir Robert, i, 30

Balliol College, ii, 96

Balloons, i, 5

Baltic Sea, i, 59, 102, 153, 159, 171, 510, 533, 539,     549-53, 641, ii, 53,
65, 71, 129, 182, 233, 235-36, 251, 266, 526

Baltimore, Lord, ii, 281

Baluchistan. (_See_ Beluchistan)

Bambyce (băm bī´ sē), i, 621

Bannockburn, ii, 175

Bantu, i, 158, 162, 189

Barbados, ii, 254

Barbarians, ii, 267-69

Barbarossa, Frederick. (_See_ Frederick I, emperor)

Barber, M. H., ii, 503

Barbusse, ii, 513

Barca family, i, 472, 473

Barcelona, ii, 51, 180

Bards, i, 172, 230

Baring, Maurice, ii, 503

Barley, i, 113, 172, 558

Baroda (bă rō´ d_ă_), ii, 257

Barons, Revolt of the, ii, 219

Barras (bä rä´), ii, 339, 350

Barrows, i, 109, 117, 144, 168, 171, 175, 176, 183, 196, 197

Barry, Comtesse du. (_See_ Du Barry)

Basle, Council of, ii, 100, 153, 617

Basque language, i, 161, 162, 167, 189;   race, i, 161, 162, 168, ii, 490

Basra, ii, 36, 522

Bassett, ii, 282

Bassompierre, ii, 318

Bastille, ii, 313, 621

Basu, Bhupendranath, i, 179, 181, 182

Basutoland, ii, 472

Batavian Republic, ii, 347

Bateman, T., i, 134

Bats, i, 43

Bauer, i, 359

Bauernstand, i, 268

Bavaria (and Bavarians), ii, 48, 57, 178, 445, 485

Bayezid (bï _ĕ_ zēd´) II, Sultan, ii, 126, 617

Baylen, ii, 364

Bazaine, General, ii, 445

Beaconsfield, Earl of, ii, 227, 426, 430, 436, 447, 455, 487

Beal, i, 642                                            \

Bears, i, 69, 76, 78, 93, 94

Beauharnais, Josephine de, ii, 350, 364, 374

Beauty, artistic, i, 215

Beaver, European, i, 69

Beazley, Raymond, ii, 67, 129, 185

Bede, the Venerable, i, 608, ii, 50, 613

Bedouins, i, 264, 278, 622, ii, 3, 8, 10, 17, 24

Beech, fossil, i, 51

Beer, G. L., ii, 287

Bees, i, 51

Behar, ii, 608

Behring Straits, i, 57, 102, 159, 160

Bektashi, order of dervishes, ii, 122

Bel, i, 245, 246, 283, 326

Belgium, ii, 46, 78, 199, 230, 327, 331, 332, 339, 347, 371, 381, 509-14, 622

Belisarius, i, 611, ii, 612

Bellarmine (bel´ ăr mēn), card., ii, 164

_Bellerophon_ (b_ĕ_ ler´ _ŏ_ fon), frigate, ii, 372

Bel-Marduk (bel mär´ dook), i, 245-52, 385, 412, 602

Belshazzar, i, 247, 326

Beluchistan (bel oo chi stän´), ii, 471;   languages of, i, 189

Benaiah, i, 287

Benares (be nä´ rēz), i, 417-22, 427, 449, 548, 628

Benedict, St., i, 610-14, ii, 35, 97, 611, 612

Benedictines, i, 612-13, ii, 149, 165

Beneventum, i, 454

Bengal, i, 181, 388, 416, 419, ii, 133, 257, 258

Bengal, Bay of, i, 160

Benin, i, 489

Benjamin, tribe of, i, 284

Benson, Hugh, i, 591

Beowulf (bā´ ō wulf), i, 176, 182, 198

Berar, ii, 133

Berber language, i, 154, 161, 168

Berbers, i, 206, 472, 565, ii, 41

Bergen, ii, 180, 182, 185

Berkeley, George, ii, 492

Berlière, i, 612

Berlin, Treaty of, ii, 447, 475, 558, 623

Bermuda, ii, 471

Bernard, brother, ii, 94

Bes, Egyptian god, i, 236

Bessemer process, ii, 388

Bessus, satrap, i, 385-86

Bethlehem, i, 574

Beth-shan, i, 286

Bhurtpur (bhũrt poor´), ii, 256

Bible, the, i, 193, 281, 282, 290, 402, 411, 570, 572,     ii, 60, 92, 96, 150,
151,     159, 162, 167, 211, 244

Bigg, C., i, 625

Birch tree, i, 51

Birds, i, 5, 43, 44, 45, 54

Birkenhead, Lord. (_See_ Smith, Sir F. E.)

Birkett, ii, 129

Birth-rate in ancient Athens, i, 314

Biscay, Bay of, ii, 361

Bismarck, Prince, ii, 442-46, 482, 483, 623

Bison (bī´ s_ŏ_n), i, 69, 70, 76, 92, 93, 101, 207

Bithynia, i, 395, 483, 500-06, 511, 560, 600

Black Death, ii, 153-54, 617

Black Friars, ii, 95

Black Hundred, ii, 424

Black lead, i, 9

Black Prince, ii, 179

Black Sea, i, 120, 153, 159, 196, 260, 299, 300, 316,     340, 346, 395, 508,
510, 549-53, 600, 606, 621, ii, 66, 71, 76, 110

Blake, Admiral, ii, 225, 257

Bleriot, M., ii, 624

Blind bards, i, 174

Blood sacrifice, i, 588, 590, ii, 149

Blue Mountains, ii, 280

Blücher, Marshal, ii, 371

Blues, faction of the, ii, 247

Blumenbach, i, 141

Blunt, W. S., i, 146, ii, 500

Bo Tree, i, 421, 432

Boadicea (bō ă di sē´ ă), i, 526, ii, 609

Boars, i, 69

Boats, i, 209-12.   (_See also_ Ships)

Body, painting of, i, 93, 99, 100

Bœtia (bē ō´ shi ă), i, 337

Boer Republics, ii, 460, 483, 489

Boer War, i, 485, ii, 424, 460, 623

Boethius (bō ē´ thi ŭs), ii. 37

Bohemia (and Bohemians), i, 554, ii, 51, 76, 152, 153, 162, 234

Bohemond, ii, 79

Bokhara (bō khä´ rä), i, 546, ii, 37, 110, 118

Boleyn, Anne, ii, 206

Bolivar (bol´ i vär), General, ii, 378

Bologna (bō lōn´ yă), ii, 167, 168, 180, 205

Bolshevists, ii, 411, 527, 536, 539, 624

Bombay, ii, 258

Bonaparte, Joseph, ii, 361, 364, 378, 622

Bonaparte, Louis, ii, 361

Bonaparte, Lucien, ii, 354

Bonaparte, Napoleon.   (_See_ Napoleon I)

Boncelles (bo_n_ sel´), i, 67

Bone carvings, i, 95-99;   implements, i, 90, 96-99, 114

Boniface, St., ii, 48, 51, 613

Boniface VIII, Pope, ii, 99, 616

Boniface, Roman Governor, i, 556

Book-keeping, Aramean, i, 258

Books, i, 253, 405-09, ii, 159.   (_See also_ Printing)

Bordeaux, ii, 180

Borgia, Alexander.   (_See_ Alexander VI, Pope)

Borgia, Cæsar and Lucrezia, ii, 195-96

Boris, king of Bulgaria, ii, 70, 614

Borneo, i, 147, 148, 640

Bosnia, ii, 484, 624

Bosphorus, i, 120, 153, 302, 303,     315, 327, 329, 334, 340, 380,    395,
561, 600, 619, 621, ii, 29, 31, 78, 122

Bosses, American, i, 308

Boston, Mass., ii, 289-94

Bostra, i, 623

Botany Bay, ii, 451

Botticelli (bot i chel’ i), ii, 184

Boulogne, ii, 180, 362

Bourbon, Constable of, ii, 204, 618

Bourbon, Duke of, ii, 314

Bourbons, ii, 327, 356, 370, 371

Bourgeois (boor zhwä’), Léon, ii, 560

Bournville, ii, 406

Bow and arrow, i, 98, 114, 507-08

Bowmen, Mongol, ii, 119

Boxer rising, ii, 463, 624

Boyle, Robert, ii, 390, 492

Boyne, battle of the, ii, 492, 620

Brachiopods (brăk’ i ō podz), i, 10, 21

Brachycephalic (brăk i s_ĕ_ făl’ ik) skull, i, 142, 143

Brahe (brä’ h_ĕ_), Tycho, ii, 175, 619

Brahma, i, 437, ii, 134

Brahminism (and Brahmins),     i, 269-72, 416-17, 427, 430, 440, 629, 645-48,
ii, 108, 137, 256, 454

Brailsford, ii, 543

Brain, i, 56, 79, 87

Brandenburg, elector of, ii, 236

Brass, i, 106

Brazil, ii, 192, 193, 200, 444

Bread in Neolithic Age, i, 113

Bread-fruit tree, i, 51

Breasted, J. H., i, 248, 256, 294

Breathing, i, 23-28

Bréhier, L., ii, 61

Bremen, ii, 69, 180, 182

Brennus, i, 450, ii, 607

Breslau, ii, 180

Brest-Litovsk (brest lē tovsk’), ii, 530

Breton language, i, 168

Briareus (brī’ ă roos), i, 274

Brienne, ii, 349

Brindisi (brēn’ dē zē), ii, 67

Bristol, ii, 154

Britain, i, 59, 113, 145, 196, 273, 489, 534, 613, ii, 41, 51, 66;   invasions
of, ii, 554, 605, ii, 130, 610, 611;   Roman, i, 219, 507, 509, 522, 525, 526,
564, i, 40, 50, 610;   Keltic, i, 299, 554.   (_See also_ England _and_ Great
Britain)

British Army, officers of, ii, 516

British Association, ii, 420

British Channel, i, 170

British Civil Air Transport Commission, ii, 392

British Empire   (1815), ii, 451;   (1914), ii, 470-72

British Empire, political life of, i, 493

British Museum, i, 630, ii, 398

“British” nationality, ii, 488-89

“British schools,” ii, 396

Britons, ancient.   (_See_ Britain)

Brittany, i, 147, 171, 554, ii, 52, 200

Broglie, Marshal de, ii, 313

Brontosaurus (bron tö saw’ rŭs), i, 40

Bronze, i, 106, 118, 172, 173, 207;   Chinese vessels of, i, 204;   ornaments,
i, 114;   weapons, i, 106

Bronze Age, i, 97, 108, 132, 133, 196, 197, 213

Brown, Campbell, ii, 38

Browne, Jukes, i, 50, 119

Bruce, Robert the, ii, 179

Bruges (broozh), ii, 180, 182, 229

Brunellesco (broo ne les’ kō), ii, 183

Brunswick, Duke of, ii, 327, 330

Brussels, ii, 331, 514

Brutus, i, 490, 513

Bryce, ii, 54

Bubonic plague, i, 608

Buch, C. D., i, 300

Bucknall, i, 50

Buda-Pesth (boo’ dă pest), ii, 205

Buddha (bood’ă), i, 196, 270, 420, 422, 433, 438, 449, 533,     573-74, 582,
586, 591, 610, 624,     626, 645, 646-47, ii, 13, 93, 263, 296, 607;   life of,
i, 416 _sqq._;   teaching of, i, 422 _sqq._, 436, ii, 16, 402

Buddhism, i, 270, 411, 416 _sqq._, 582, 610, 626, 629,     632, 639, 645, 646,
ii, 6,    106, 108, 114, 119, 127, 261.   (_See also_ Buddha)

Buddhist art, i, 428

Budge, Wallis, i, 197, 198, 249

Buffon, Comte de, ii, 419, 426

Building, i, 197

Bulgaria (and Bulgarians), i, 328, 522, 553, 606, ii, 24,     58, 69-72, 92,
97, 122-24, 130, 446, 501, 502, 522, 531, 614

Bulgarian atrocities, ii, 623

Bulgarian language, i, 168

Bull fights, Cretan, i, 274

Bunbury, i, 217

Bürgerstand, i, 268

Burgoyne, General, ii, 292

Burgundy (and Burgundians), i, 554, 606, ii, 48, 178, 200, 229, 244, 320

Burial, early, i, 84. 93, 109, 117, 123, 130, 167, 171, 175, 197, 545

Burke, Edmund, ii, 289, 492

Burmah (and Burmese), i, 114, 203, ii, 119, 262, 471

Burmese language, i, 157

Burnet, i, 349

Burning the dead, i, 171

Burrell, Prof., i, 6

Burton, Richard, i, 189

Bury, J. B., i, 305, 327, 454, 464, ii, 112

Bushman language, i, 162

Bushmen, i, 68, 95, 98, 141, 224

Butler, M. E., i, 85

Butler, Samuel, i, 150

Butter in Neolithic Age, i, 112

Butterflies, i, 17, 51

Buxar, ii, 258, 621

Byng, L. C., i, 541

Byzantine architecture, ii, 60

Byzantine church.   (_See_ Greek Church)

Byzantine Empire, i, 522, 562, 606, 617, 636, ii, 17-21,     24, 28, 39, 42,
53, 58,   60, 64-69, 72, 76, 79, 80, 81, 182, 613, 614

Byzantium (bi zăn’ tyŭm), i, 380,     634, ii, 18, 31, 35, 57, 62, 74, 105,
126, 129,    247.  (_See also_ Constantinople)


Cabul (kä’ bul), i, 386, ii, 133

Cadbury, Messrs., ii, 406

Cadiz (kā’ diz), ii, 352

Caen (kā_n_), ii, 325

Cæsar, title, etc., i, 526, 564, 581, 589, 594, ii, 56, 59

Cæsar, Julius, i, 113, 133, 196, 399,     465, 487, 493, 505, 510-17, 529, 534,
542,     ii, 51, 351, 353, 609

Cæsars, the, i, 526, 538, 560

Cahors, ii, 202

Caiaphas (kī’ _ă_ făs), i, 585

Caillaux, M., ii, 510

Cainozoic (kī n_ŏ_ zō’ ik) period, i, 12, 13, 14, 35, 37, 46, 49-56, 66

Cairo, ii, 36, 37

Calabria, i, 476, ii, 67, 68

Calcutta, ii, 258;   University Commission, ii, 137

Calder, Admiral, ii, 362

Calendar, the, i, 129

Calicut, ii, 187, 257

California, i, 264

Californian Indians, i, 98

Caligula (kă lig’ ū lă), i, 525, ii, 609

Caliphs, ii, 17, 18, 24-34, 41, 61, 64, 71, 126, 144, 612, 613, 618

Callicratidas (kă li krā’ ti dăs), i, 378

Callimachus (kă lim´ ă kŭs), i, 405

Callisthenes (kă lis´ th_ĕ_ nēz), i, 392

Calmette, ii, 510

Calonne, ii, 312, 323

Calvinism, ii, 164

Cambodia, i, 640

Cambridge, ii, 180;   University of, i, 530, ii, 437, 486

Cambridge, Mass., ii, 291

“Cambulac,” ii, 118

Cambyses (kăm bī´ sēz), i, 326, 382, ii, 607

Camels, i, 56, 217, 323

Camillus (că mil´ ŭs), i, 459, 483, 499, 502, ii, 607

Campanella, ii, 211

Campo Formio, peace of, ii, 351, 621

Camptosaurus (kămp tō saw´ rus) i, 40

Canaan (and the Canaanites), i, 278-83, ii, 1

Canada, i, 9, 161, ii, 254, 279, 285, 292, 451, 457, 471, 472, 621

Canadian dawn animal, i, 9

Canary Isles, ii, 185

Candahar, i, 389

Candles, ceremonial, i, 413, 414

Candolle (kä_n_ dōl´), de, i, 184

Cannæ (kăn´ ē), battle of, i, 476, 479, ii, 608

Cannes, ii, 371

Cannibalism, i, 167, ii, 156, 189, 190

Canning, George, ii, 436

Cannon, ii, 235, 268

Canoes, i, 210

Canterbury, ii, 50;   archbishops of, ii, 50, 613

Canton, i, 634, 642, 647

Canusium (că nūz´ i ŭm), i, 536

Canute, ii, 66, 614

Cape Colony, ii, 460

Capernaum, i, 584

Capet (kă pā´), Hugh, ii, 62, 178, 614

Capitalism, ii, 168, 276, 398-99, 407-08, 535

Caporetto, battle of, ii, 529

Cappadocia, i, 323, 395, 620, 623

Capua (kăp´ ū ă), i, 476, 505

Carboniferous rocks, i, 29

Cardinals, ii, 100, 127

Caria (kā´ ri ă), i, 375, 621

Caribou (kăr i boo´), i, 78, 124, 137

Carlovingians, ii, 62, 614

Carlyle, Thomas, ii, 240, 307, 313 _sqq._, 336

Carnac, i, 109, 171

Carnivores, early type of, i, 56

Carnivorous animals, i, 43

Carnot (kär nō´), L. N. M., ii, 339, 350

Carolana, ii, 282

Carolina, ii, 253, 282, 283, 284, 290

Carpathians, ii, 69

Carrhæ, i, 508, 540, 616, ii, 609

Carson, Sir Edward, i, 312, ii, 424, 497, 498, 499

Carthage (and the Carthaginians), i, 196, 212, 216-18, 241,     274, 294, 303,
352, 382, 401, 445, 448, 453, 497,     509-14, 532, 550, 556, 560, 569, 571,
ii, 41, 89, 144c, 184, 606, 608;   war with Rome, i, 453, 467-85

Carvings, Palæolithic.   (_See_ Art)

Casement, Sir Roger, ii, 499

Cash, Chinese, i, 631

Caspian Sea, i, 120, 153, 159, 196, 299, 317, 318,     327, 387, 507, 509, 542,
549,     553, 627, 634, ii, 67, 110, 154, 609, 610, 615

Caspian-Pamir region, i, 549

Cassander, i, 395

Cassiodorus (kăs i ō dōr´ ŭs), i, 612, 614, ii, 36, 40, 612

Cassiterides (kăs i ter´ i dēz), i, 217

Cassius, Spurius, i, 458

Caste, i, 268-71, 416, 431

Castelmaine, Lady, ii, 226

Castile, ii, 188, 200

Cat, i, 56, 230

Catalonians, ii, 185

Catapult, i, 372

Caterpillars, i, 83

Cathars, ii, 92

“Cathay,” ii, 118

Catherine the Great, ii, 242, 264, 267, 303, 620

Catherine II, ii, 251, 363

Catholicism, ii, 142, 147-50, 160 _sqq._,     164, 171, 194, 211, 234, 239,
248,    281, 490-94

Catiline, i, 511

Cato, Marcus Porcius, i, 473, 477, 479, 486, 489, 498, 528

Cattle, i, 69, 105, 219.   (_See also_ Animals)

Caucasian languages, i, 151, 189

Caucasians, i, 141-42, 151-159, ii, 142

Caucasus (kaw´ kă sŭs), i, 106, 141, 161, 327, 620

Caudine Forks, ii, 608

Cavaliers, ii, 222-23

Cavalry, i, 370

Cave drawings, i, 93, 94;   dwellings, i, 167;   men, i, 66, 72, 76, 78, 88

Cavour, ii, 441

Cawnpore, ii, 455

Caxton, William, ii, 159

Celebes (sel’ e bēz), pile dwellings, i, 109

Celibacy, i, 414, ii, 74, 149

Celsus, i, 403

Celt-Iberian script, i, 228

Celtic. (_See_ Keltic)

Celts, bronze, i, 132

Cenotaph (Whitehall), ii, 568

Cephalus (sef’ ă lŭs), i, 306

Ceremonies, early use of, i, 127

Cervantes (sũr văn’ tēz), ii, 140

Ceylon, i, 421, 432, 533, 643, ii, 257, 471

Chadwick, i, 177

Chæronea (kēr ō nē’ ă), battle of, i, 369, 372, ii, 607

Chalcedon (kăl sē’ d_ŏ_n), i, 602, 618

Chaldea (and the Chaldeans), i, 194, 200, 247, 265, 291,     319, 344, 385,
508, ii, 1, 607

Chaldean writing, i, 228

Chalons, ii, 322

Champagne, depart., ii, 330, 517, 527

Chancellor, Lord, of England, ii, 162

Chandernagore, ii, 258

Chandragupta (chăn dră goop’ t_ă_), i, 430, 445, ii, 608

Chang Daoling, i, 433

Chang-tu, i, 434

Channa, the charioteer, i, 417

Channing, ii, 278, 280, 294, 338

Chapman, G., i, 175

Charcoal, ii, 275

Chariots, i, 177, 192, 370, 384

Charlemagne, emperor, i, 433, 560, 632, 633,     ii, 47-48, 51-54, 56-62, 69,
97, 98,    116, 133, 148, 199, 208, 215, 238, 360, 361, 614

Charles V, emperor, ii, 140, 164, 182, 199 _sqq._,     229, 232, 242, 376, 618

Charles I, king of England, ii, 217-25, 236, 240,     253, 281-82, 317, 376

Charles II, king of England, ii, 177, 225, 238,     243, 253, 281-82, 376

Charles VII, king of France, ii, 179

Charles IX, king of France, ii, 282

Charles X, king of France, ii, 314, 378, 622

Charles III, king of Spain, ii, 267

_Charlotte Dundas_, steamboat, ii, 387

Charmides (kär’ mi dēz), i, 351

Charon, i, 489

Charter House, London, ii, 154

Château Thierry, ii, 531

Châteauroux, Duchess of, ii, 240

Chatham, Earl of.   (_See_ Pitt, William)

Chaucer, ii, 160

Cheese, i, 112

Chellean age, i, 60, 70, 78-81, 87

Chelles, i, 78

Chemistry, ii, 38

Chemosh (kē’ mosh), i, 288

Chen, L. Y., i, 208, 211, 253, 641

Chen Tuan, i, 433

Cheops (kē’ ops), i, 198

Chephren (kef’ ren), i, 198, 248-49

Cherry-tree, i, 505

Chieftains, i, 134, 178

Child labour, ii, 404-05

Chimpanzee, i, 63, 67-74, 218

Chin, absence of, i, 72

China, i, 83, 106, 114, 160, 432, 532, 626, 627,     ii, 17, 117, 134, 179,
194, 261-62;   history (_early history and Great age of_), i,     196, 201-06,
252-53, 271-72, 388, 449, 508, 528,     541-43, 545-50, 617, 630-36, ii, 606,
610, 612;   (_10th to 18th century_), ii, 106, 108-14, 127-28,     130, 134,
154, 261-62, 266,    616, 617;   (_20th century_), ii, 461-69, 624;
Christianity in, i, 604, ii, 116-17, 119, 166;   civilization and culture, i,
147, 148, 183, 196,     201-03, 208, 271-72, 307, 408,    541, 543, 626-27,
630-31, 633 _sqq._, ii, 38, 106, 147, 159;   other religions of, i, 252,
428-29, 433, 437, ii, 261;   social, i, 181, 269-70, 271-72, 497, 630, ii, 464.
(_See also_ Chow, Han, Kin, Ming, Shang, Sung, Suy,     Tang, Tsing, Wei, and
Yuan dynasties)

China, Great Wall of, i, 205, 272, 526, 643, ii, 608

Chinese, the, i, 63, 157;   classics, i, 225, 639;   coinage, i, 631;
emperor, i, 240, 252, 557;   language, i, 157, 158, 162, 224-26, 638;   script,
i, 224-27, 272, 638-40, ii, 262

Chios (kī’ os), ii, 79

Chnemu, Egyptian god, i, 239

Chosroes (koz’ rō ēz) I, i, 618, ii, 22, 211, 612

Chosroes II, i, 523, 618-19, 624, ii, 3, 17, 82, 612

Chow dynasty, i, 196, 204, 205, 253, 433, ii, 606

Christ. (_See_ Jesus of Nazareth)

Christ Church, Oxford, ii, 427

Christian IX, ii, 442

Christian era, ii, 609

Christian science, ii, 169

Christianity, i, 296, 519, 569, 617, ii, 129, 161, 244, 264-65, 421, 422;
history (_early_), i, 491, 586 _sqq._, 601-05, ii, 51, 53-54, 611;   (_middle
ages_), ii, 50 _sqq._, 63, 71-75, 84-86, 95-96, 151-53;   and Buddhism, i, 429,
441;   and Islam, ii, 14-16, 20-21, 28-34, 41 _sqq._, 63-64, 80 _sqq._, 114-15,
149;   and Judaism, ii, 149;   and learning, i, 609 _sqq._;   missions and
propaganda, i, 488, 617, 625, 634, ii, 3-6, 48-54,     70, 114-22, 126-27, 134,
146-47, 357, 394-96, 465;   official, i, 601 _sqq._, ii, 54, 265, 418, 425;
ritual of, i, 413-14, 441, 538-39, 591-92, ii, 90-91, 148-152;   sects, i, 592,
ii, 35, 106, 116-17;   spirit of, i, 414, 538-39, 576-77, ii, 157-58, 402.
(_See also_ Jesus of Nazareth)

Chronicles, book of the, i, 282

Chronology, ii, 51

Ch’u, state of, i, 205

Chu Hsi, i, 641

Church, the, i, 600-05, ii, 38, 85-88, 91, 92, 97-101,     150, 164, 176,
177-78, 272, 617

Church, Sir A. H., i, 7

Churches, orientation of, i, 238

Churchill, Rt. Hon. Winston, ii, 523

Cicero, M. Tullius, i, 131, 487, 491, 513, 516

Cilicia, i, 487, 620, ii, 72, 79, 118

Cilician Gates, ii, 32, 78

Cimmerians, i, 300, 316, 318, 388, 543, ii, 121

Cincinnatus, Order of, ii, 357

Circumcision, i, 147

Cistercian order, ii, 150

Citizenship, i, 309, 311-12

City States, Chinese, i, 204;   Greek, i, 305-14, 362, 363, 370, 454;
Sumerian, i, 191

Civilization, i, 635 _sqq._, ii, 138, 144, 157-58, 216;   Aegean, i, 213-16;
Hellenic, i, 302 _sqq._;   prehistoric, i, 145, 169 _sqq._, 175-78;
primitive, i, 182-208, ii, 143.   (_See also_ Culture)

Clans, i, 171

Class consciousness, ii, 399, 407-08;   distinction, i, 188, 267-68;   war, i,
168

Classes, social, i, 263-72

Classics, study of the, ii, 390, 428

Classification, ii, 169

Claudian, the historian, i, 607

Claudius, emperor (A.D. 41-54), i, 525, 528, ii, 609

Claudius, emperor (A.D. 268-270), i, 553, ii, 610

Claudius, Appius, decemvir, i, 458

Claudius, Appius, the Censor, i, 461-466

Claudius, Consul, i, 468

Clay documents, i, 190, 197-98, 246;   modelling, Palæolithic, i, 95, 99

Clemenceau, G. B., ii, 552-56, 566, 624

Clement V (pope), ii, 99, 616

Clement VII (anti-pope), ii, 100, 617

Cleon, i, 350

Cleopatra, i, 510-15

Cleopatra (wife of Philip II), i, 374, 376

Clergy, taxation of, ii, 86

Clermont, ii, 74, 615

_Clermont_, steamer, ii, 387

Cleveland, President, ii, 505

Climate, change of, i, 18, 20, 30-37, 46,     51, 52, 57, 100, 108, 170, 177,
317, 545, 550;   effect of, i, 35-36, 232, 317

Clitus (klī’ tŭs), i, 392, ii, 145

Clive, Robert, Lord, ii, 258, 453, 487, 621

Clodius, i, 511

Clothing, i, 99, 109, 114

Clovis, ii, 46, 47, 611

Cluniac order, ii, 150

Clyde, Firth of, ii, 387

Cnossos (nos’ os), i, 196, 213-16, 223, 234, 257,     264, 281, 300, 303, 315,
318, 354, 446, 447, ii, 605

Coal, i, 28, 29, 34, 38, 635, ii, 275, 386, 392

Cockroaches, i, 28

Code Napoléon, ii, 358

Cogul, i, 354

Coinage, earliest, i, 220;   Athenian, i, 220;   Bactrian, i, 396;
Carthaginian, i, 468;   Ephthalite, i, 629;   Lydian, i, 316;   pre-Roman
British, i, 396;   Roman, i, 455, 471

Coinage of stamped leather, ii, 89

Coke, ii, 275

Cole, Langton, i, 212

Collectivism, ii, 412

Cologne, ii, 60, 180, 182

Colonies, British, ii, 279-83, 471;   scramble for, ii, 449-61

Colorado, i, 39

Colosseum, i, 609, ii, 41

Columba, St., ii, 50

Columbus, Bartholomew, ii, 186

Columbus, Christopher, ii, 185 _sqq._, 200, 605, 617

Comedy, Greek, i, 363

Comet, i, 4, 608

Commagene (kom _ă_ jē’ nē), i, 621

Commodus (kom’ _ŏ_ dŭs), i, 527-29

Commons, House of, ii, 219-28, 236, 286, 298, 313, 400

Commune, French Revolution, ii, 328, 336

Communism, ii, 153-58, 270 _sqq._, 341, 410, 412

Communities, i, 171, ii, 142-48

Community of obedience, ii, 296;   of will, ii, 296

Comnena, Anna.   (_See_ Anna)

Comnenus, Alexius.   (_See_ Alexius)

“Companions,” equestrian order, i, 369, 371

Compass, i, 635, ii, 193

Concert of Europe, ii, 373, 377, 384

Concord, Mass., ii, 290, 294

Concord, Temple of, i, 499, ii, 607

Condor, the, i, 5

Condorcet (ko_n_ dôr sā’), ii, 358

Confucianism, i, 433-40, 642

Confucius, i, 196, 270, 433-40, 449, 582, 618, 624, 636, ii, 607

Congo, i, 159, ii, 460

Congregationalism, ii, 163

Congress, American, ii, 300

Congress, 1st Colonial, ii, 290

Conifers, i, 38

Connecticut, ii, 281, 282, 290, 296

Conrad II, ii, 63

Conrad III, ii, 63, 80

Constance, ii, 151

Constance, Council of, ii, 96, 100, 151, 617

Constantine I the Great, i, 433, 488, 517,     529, 553, 560, 594, 597, 602,
615, 617, 618, 625, 647, 648,     ii, 82, 133, 136, 268, 611, 612

Constantine, King of Greece, ii, 524

Constantinople, i, 554, 557, 559-65, 600-08, 614-19,     ii, 2, 18-20, 24, 28,
57, 67, 70-72, 76-82, 97, 110,     118-24, 141, 168, 182, 247, 440, 483,
502, 509, 611, 612, 613, 614, 615, 616, 617.   (_See also_ Byzantium)

Consuls, Roman, i, 455

Convicts sent to New England, ii, 284

Cooking, i, 105, 106, 113

Co-operative Societies, ii, 406

Copernicus (kō per’ ni kŭs), ii, 175, 618

Copper, i, 4, 105, 207, 217, ii, 189, 389

Copper axes, i, 132

Coptic language, i, 154

Coracles, i, 209

Corday, Charlotte, ii, 325

Cordoba (kôr’ dō bă), ii, 36, 37

Corfinium, i, 464

Corfu (kôr foo’), ii, 180

Corinth (and Corinthians), i, 303,     321, 336, 375, 382, 485, 491, 497, 509,
511, 536, 560, 589, ii, 608

Corinth, isthmus of, i, 336

Cornish people, i, 152

“Cornstalks,” i, 143

Cornwall, i, 106, 217, 605, ii, 40, 51, 225

Cornwallis, General, ii, 292

Corrosive sublimate, ii, 38

Corsets, i, 214

Corsica, i, 471, 556, ii, 348-49

Cortez, ii, 189-90, 618

Corvus, the, i, 470

Cossacks, ii, 129, 244, 259-61

Coster, printer, ii, 159, 617

Cotton industry, ii, 275

Cotylosaur (kot’ i lō sawr), i, 27

Councils, Church, ii, 74, 95, 100, 151, 153, 167, 611, 617

Counting, i, 151

“Counts of Asia Minor,” ii, 137

Court system, i, 263

Couvade (ku väd’), i, 147

Cow, sacred to Brahmins, ii, 454

Cow deities, i, 237

Cox, Hippesley, i, 110

Crab-apples, i, 113

Crabs, i, 10

Crabtree, Rev. W., i, 189

Cranach, ii, 203

Cranium, of apes, i, 72;   Piltdown.   (_See_ Piltdown)

Crassus, i, 352, 478, 507-11, 549, 616, ii, 19, 609

Crawley, A. E., i, 131

Creation, story of, i, 278, 293, ii, 418-20

Crécy, ii, 179

Crediton, ii, 51

Creeds, Christian, i, 592, 609, ii, 73, 611

Cremation, i, 171

_Cressy_, cruiser, ii, 520

Cretan Labyrinth, i, 214-16;   language, i, 162, 289;   script, i, 228

Crete (and Cretans), i, 104, 189, 196, 212-16, 234, 274, 282, 315, 316

Crimea, ii, 118, 153

Crimean War, ii, 440, 623

Criminals, Roman, i, 490-91;   used for vivisection, i, 403, 404

Crispus, son of Constantine, i, 599

Critias, i, 331

Croatia, i, 616

Crocodiles, i, 41, 46

Crœsus (krē’ sŭs), i, 220, 314, 320-26, 416, ii, 607

Croll, i, 30

Cro-Magnon race, i, 87, 88-95, 99-100

Cromwell, Oliver, ii, 222-25, 284, 287, 491

Cromwell, Thomas, ii, 197

Cross, in Buddhist ritual, i, 429;   true, i, 618, ii, 21, 82

Crown, the power of the, ii, 228

Crucifixion, i, 550, 590

Crusades, ii, 34, 75 _sqq._, 80-84, 94, 97,     124, 152, 179, 229, 397, 615,
616, 617

Crustaceans, i, 25

Crystal Palace, ii, 437

Crystals, i, 9, 17

Ctesiphon (tes’ i fon), i, 618, 622, 624, 626, 634, ii, 22, 31, 82, 129, 522

Cuba, ii, 193, 451, 506

Cubit, length of, i, 290

Culture, Aryan, i, 171-82;   Heliolithic, i, 147-49, 162, 171, 177, 184,
188, 196, 201, 207-13, 223, 415;   Neolithic, i, 104-5, 107-8, 110 _sqq._, 128,
146, 149, 152, 172-73, 184-88, 197, 203, 205-8, 415;   prehistoric and
primitive, i, 76 _sqq._, 122 _sqq._   (_See also_ Civilization)

Cumont, i, 412, 590

Cuneiform (kū’ nē i fôrm), i, 191, 227, 274

Cup, pebble, i, 90

Currency, ii, 342-47, 385, 406, 413, 535

Cusæans, i, 394

Custozza, ii, 445

Cuvier (ku vyā), ii, 419

Cyaxares (si ăk’ să rēz), i, 319, ii, 607

Cycads (sī’ kădz), i, 38, 51

Cynics, i, 360

Cyprus, i, 106, 213, 331, 340, 380, 395, ii, 447

Cyrenaica (sir ē nā’ i kă), i, 500

Cyrene (sī rē’ nē), i, 529

Cyrus, the Great, i, 194, 196, 220, 248,     260, 278, 292, 314, 320-26, 370,
389,     416, 445, 523, 542, 622, 624, ii, 607

Cyrus, the Younger, i, 342

Czecho-Slovaks, ii, 380

Czechs (cheks), i, 554, ii, 153


Dacia, i, 526, 553, 564, ii, 71

Dædalus (dē’ d_ă_ lŭs), i, 215

Dagon, i, 245, 412

Dalai Lama (dä lī’ lă’ mä), i, 438

Dalmatia, i, 37, 554, 606, 616, ii, 51, 57, 564, 611, 613

Damascus, i, 102, 218, 273, 523, 618, 623, ii, 1, 18, 20, 28, 31, 37, 154, 612

Damask, i, 273

Damietta, ii, 82

Damon, friend of Pericles, i, 349

Dancing, i, 174, 354

Danelaw, ii, 54, 614

Danes, ii, 53, 54, 66, 228, 614

Daniel, book of, i, 277

Danish language, i, 168

Dante, ii, 160

Danton, ii, 324, 329-36

Dantzig, ii, 180, 251, 564

Danube, i, 153, 298, 300, 327-31, 372, 377, 387, 507, 508, 523, 526,     533,
539, 545, 549, 551, 553, 557, 558, 564,     606, 616, 627, ii, 51, 69, 76, 142,
266, 522, 610

Danubian provinces, ii, 382, 440

Dardanelles, i, 302, ii, 121, 521

Darius (dă rī’ ŭs) I, i, 248, 326-32, 334, 339, 386, ii, 607

Darius II, i, 342

Darius III, i, 379-80, 384-87, 390, 394, 507,     542, ii, 20, 122, 366-67, 608

Dark ages, the, i, 607

Darling region, i, 143

Dartmouth, Lord, ii, 305

Darwin, Charles, i, 67, ii, 420, 427

Darwin, Prof. G. H., i, 31

Darwinism, ii, 420-27

David, King, i, 286-89, 293, 569, 574, 580, ii, 156, 606

Davids, Rhys, i, 415, 420, 421, 428, 430

Davidson, J. L. Strachan, i, 513

Davis, i, 603

Davis, J. W., ii, 507-08

Davis, Stearns, ii, 475

Dawes, ii, 290

Dawson, Sir William, i, 9

Day, length of, i, 6, 51

Dead, eating the, i, 197

Dead Sea, i, 120

Debtor, slavery as fate of, i, 257

Déchelette, i, 111

Decimal notation, ii, 37

Decius, Emperor, i, 528, 553, 594, ii, 610

Declaration of Independence, ii, 293, 296

_Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_ (Gibbon), ii, 263-69

Deer, i, 70

Defoe, Daniel, ii, 235, 272, 305, 394

Deformities, i, 147

Delaware, ii, 283, 290

Delcassé, ii, 484

Delhi, ii, 108, 132, 256, 257, 454, 455, 615

Delian League, i, 314, 346

Delos, Island of, i, 311, 313

Delphi, i, 313, 320-22, 370, 395, 536

Delphi, oracle of, i, 305, 321-23

Delphic amphictyony, i, 372

Demeter (de më’ t_ĕ_r), i, 354, 374, 538

Democracy, i, 309-13, 456, ii, 163, 164, 273, 298, 326

Demos, i, 309

Demosthenes (d_ĕ_ mos’ th_ĕ_ nēz), i, 358, 363, 368, 376, 387, 473, 513

Deniker, i, 102, 103

Denmark, i, 109, 110, 539, ii, 51, 65, 66, 162, 206, 225,     242, 252-53, 257,
266, 381, 442, 451, 614

Deportation, i, 193

Dervishes, ii, 122

Descartes (dā kart’), ii, 419

Deshima, ii, 465, 466

Deuteronomy, book of, i, 281

Devon, ii, 225

Dewlish, i, 78

Dialects, i, 300

Diaspora (dī ăs’ p_ŏ_ r_ă_), i, 411, 569-71

Diaz (dē’ äs), ii, 185, 617

Dicasts, i, 310

Dickens, Charles, ii, 180

Dickinson, Lowes, ii, 543

Dicrorerus (dī kr_ŏ_ rē’ rŭs), i, 58

Dictator, Roman, i, 459

Diderot (dēd rō’), ii, 308

Diet (assembly), ii, 234, 250

Dillon, Dr., ii, 543, 551, 553

Dinosaurs (dī’ n_ŏ_ sawrz), i, 41, 46

Dinothere (dī’ n_ŏ_ thēr), i, 58

Diocletian, i, 529, 561, 594, 599-600, ii, 611

Dionysus, god, i, 354, 373

Dionysius of Syracuse, i, 434, 468

Diplodocus (dip lod’ _ŏ_ kŭs), i, 40

Disease, infectious, i, 126

Dispensations, papal, ii, 86, 93

Disraeli, Benjamin.   (_See_ Beaconsfield, Earl of)

Divans, ii, 32

Divination, i, 464

Divine right, ii, 164, 377

Divus Cæsar, i, 526

Dixon line, ii, 282, 284

Dnieper (nē’ p_ĕ_r), i, 153, 510, 553, ii, 110, 260

Doctors, i, 235

Dog, the, i, 56, 105, 108, 112, 116, 230

Dolichocephalic (dol i kō s_ĕ_ făl’ ik) skull, i, 142-46

Dolmens, i, 109

Domazlice, ii, 152, 617

Dominic, St., ii, 95-96, 615

Dominican Order, ii, 95-96, 116, 127, 193, 465, 615

Domitian, i, 526, ii, 610

Don, river, i, 153, 549, ii, 261

Don Cossacks, ii, 260

Donatello, ii, 183

Dordogne (dör dō’ ny_ĕ_), i, 100

Doric dialect, i, 300

Dorset, i, 78

Dortmund, ii, 182

Dostoievski (dos to ef’ ski), ii, 502

Doubs, i, 100

Douglas, Sir R. K., i, 253

Dover, ii, 180

Dover, Straits of, i, 507

Dragon flies, i, 28

Dragonnades, ii, 239, 253

Dravidian civilization, i, 196, 203, 415, ii, 142;   language, i, 158, 189

Dravidians, i, 146, 159, 160, 169, 182, 270, 315, ii, 134

Drepanum (drep’ _ă_ nŭm), i, 470

_Dresden_, cruiser, ii, 520

Dresden, battle of, ii, 368

Driver, S. R., i, 288

Drogheda, ii, 224

Druids, i, 135

Drums, Neolithic, i, 115

Drusus, Livius, i, 503

Dryopithecus (drī _ŏ_ pi thē’ kŭs), i, 66

Dubarry, Comtesse, ii, 240

Dublin, ii, 492, 493, 498, 499

Duma, the, ii, 525

Dumouriez (du moo ryā’), General, ii, 329

Dunbar, battle of, ii, 225

Dunce, derivation of, ii, 172

Dunkirk, ii, 226

Duns Scotus, ii, 171, 616

Dunstan, ii, 150

Dupleix (du plā’), ii, 258

Durazzo (du rad’ zō), i, 561, ii, 67, 72, 80, 616

Durham, ii, 396;   University of, ii, 437

Durham, Lord, ii, 293

Düsseldorf, i, 72

Dutch language, ii, 47, 228;   people, ii, 47;   Republic, ii, 228-33, 380;
settlements and seamanship, i, 84, ii, 188, 253, 282-83, 461, 465-66.   (_See
also_ Holland)

Duyvendak, Mr., i, 630, 641

Dwellings, Neolithic, i, 114

Dyeing, ii, 38

Dynamics, ii, 176

_Dynasts, The_, i, 335, ii, 348


Earth, the, i, 3-8, 13-15, 29-34, 56-59

East, orientation to, i, 238

East India Company, ii, 258, 289, 451, 453

Easter, feast of, i, 129

Easter lamb, i, 588

Eastern (Greek) Empire.   (_See_ Byzantine Empire)

Eastlake, ii, 404

Ebenezer, i, 283

Ebro, river, i, 354, 472, 475

Ecbatana (ek băt’ _ă_ n_ă_), i, 626

Ecclesiastes, book of, i, 277

Echidna (e kid’ n_ă_), i, 54

Economists, French, ii, 309

Economus (ē kon’ ō mŭs), battle of, i, 470, ii, 608

Eden, garden of, i, 293, ii, 418

Eder, ii, 513

Edessa, i, 621, ii, 78, 80

Edgar, ii, 150

Edom, ii, 244

Education, i, 267, 270, 272, 408-9, 612-13,     ii, 137, 146, 147, 166, 270
_sqq._, 302,     357, 385, 390-92, 396-97, 413, 428-31

Edward I, ii, 219

Edward VI, ii, 218, 220

Edward VII, ii, 228, 488

Edward, Prince of Wales, son of George V, ii, 498

Egbert, ii, 51, 53, 614

Egerton, H. E., ii, 377

Eggs, i, 39, 53, 54, 114

Egibi (ē gē’ bē), i, 265

Eginhard, ii, 59

Egmont, Count of, ii, 229

Egypt, i, 106, 154, 156, 395, 522, 561,     570, 572, 574, 618, ii, 1, 30, 83,
84, 94, 139, 153, 612;   history (_early_), i, 133, 148, 183-86,     195-98,
200-01, 204, 209-13, 220, 228,     229, 233-34, 246, 248, 256, 261, 265, 267,
274, 277-82, 289, 290-95, 307, 315-16, 323,     326-27, 334, 340, 342, 359,
522, ii, 1, 189, 605, 606;   (_and Greece_), i, 382, 389, 401-02, ii, 607;
(_and Rome_), i, 480, 500, 510-12, 533;   (_and Islam_), ii, 21-24, 29-32, 37,
64, 71,     82-84, 106, 114, 118, 122, 126, 132, 614, 618;   (_modern period_),
ii, 351, 353, 359, 453, 460, 471, 500, 621, 623;   Christianity in, i, 604,
610, ii, 74, 149;   Jews in, i, 402, 436, 572, ii, 607;   Kingship in, i,
248-52, 263, 520;   religious systems, i, 197-98, 236-42, 248-52,     296,
382-83, 404, 410-14, 431, 538, 590-91

Egyptian language, i, 154

Egyptian script, i, 208, 228

Egyptian shipping, i, 273

“Egyptians” (Gipsies), ii, 137

Elam (ē’ lăm), i, 189, 318

Elamite language, i, 162

Elamites, i, 189, 194, 245, 385, ii, 105

Elba, ii, 371, 374

Elbe, ii, 80

Elections, i, 494, ii, 302

Electricity, ii, 388, 389-90

Electrum, i, 220

Elephants, i, 57, 70, 76, 78, 102, 207, 210, 317, 386, 453, 455, 470-79, ii, 20

Eli, judge, i, 283-85

Elixir of life, ii, 174

Elizabeth, Queen of England, ii, 218, 220, 232, 258, 280

Elizabeth, Empress of Russia, ii, 242, 620

El-lil, i, 190

_Emden_, cruiser, ii, 520

Emesa (em´ ē s_ă_), i, 621

Emigration, ii, 76

Emirs, ii, 31

Emmet, Robert, ii, 493

Emperor, title of, i, 565

Emperors of Germany, ii, 199

Employers and employed, ii, 276, 397-98

Enclosure Acts, ii, 272-76

“Encyclopædists,” the, ii, 309

England, i, 605, ii, 64, 66, 178, 200, 433, 470-71;   history (_early_), i, 52,
101, 645, ii, 40, 50-54, 66, 614;   (_under the Normans_), ii, 67, 615;   (_in
the 13th and 14th centuries_), ii, 176-77;   (_Civil war_), ii, 218, 221-25,
281;   (_war with Holland_), ii, 225-26, 282;   (_war with Spain_), ii, 220,
225;   (_reign of Charles II_), ii, 225-26;   (_in 18th century_), ii, 226-28;
(_and America_), ii, 253-54;   (_union with Ireland_), ii, 621;   _political
and constitutional_, i, 463,     465, ii, 194, 216-17, 219-21, 226-28, 236;
religion, i, 642, ii, 49-54, 99, 150,     162, 206, 220, 221, 225, 252, 253,
282;   social, ii, 154-56, 244, 271-73, 324, 334, 617.   (_See also_ Britain,
Great Britain, _and_ the Great War)

English, the, ii, 50, 58, 66-67, 611

English language, i, 151, 564, 638, ii, 50, 160

English seamen, ii, 188

Entelodont (en tel´ ō dont), i, 53

Eoanthropus (ē ō ăn thrō´ pŭs), i, 60, 70-74.   (_See also_ Man)

Eocene (ē´ ō sēn) period, i, 52-59

Eohippus, i, 56

Eolithic age, i, 75

Eoliths, i, 68, 102, ii, 605

Eozoon (ē ō zō´ _ŏ_n) Canadense, i, 9

Ephesus (ef´ ē sŭs), i, 340, 379, 589, ii, 79

Ephesus, Council of, i, 602

Ephthalite (ef´ th_ă_ līt) coins, i, 329

Ephthalites, i, 628-30, 646, ii, 611, 612

Epics, i, 173, 175, 232

Epictetus (ep ik tē´ tŭs), i, 492

Epicureans (ep i kū rē´ _ă_nz), i, 360, 363, 632

Epirus (ē pī´ rŭs), i, 375, 376, 452, 454, ii, 67, 122

Equality, ii, 16, 296

Equator, i, 31-33

Equinoxes, i, 31

Equisetums (ek wi sē´ tŭmz), i, 27

Erasistratus (er ă sis´ tră tŭs), i, 404

Eratosthenes (er ă tos´ th_ĕ_ nēz), i, 13, 402, 405, 408

Erech, i, 190

Eretria, i, 332

Erfurt, ii, 364

Eridu (ā´ ri doo), i, 133, 190, 195, 196, 210, ii, 130

Ervine, St. John, ii, 499

Esarhaddon (ē săr hăd´ _ŏ_n), i, 246, 291, 319, ii, 606

Essad Pasha, ii, 554

Essenes (e sēnz´), i, 610

Essex, i, 623, ii, 40

Esthonians, ii, 244

Ethiopia (and Ethiopians), i, 200, 250, 383, ii, 606

Ethiopian dynasty, i, 195, ii, 606

Ethiopic language, i, 154

Ethnologists, i, 141

Etiquette in China, i, 434

Eton College, ii, 427

Etruria, i, 450, 460, 475

Etruscans, i, 447-50, 459, 464, ii, 91, 146, 606, 607

Eucharist, the, i, 591

Euclid, i, 364, 402, ii, 37

Euphrates, i, 148, 184-90, 194, 199, 203,     209, 238, 250, 291, 317, 507,
508, 523,     540, 562, 616, 622, ii, 2, 607

Euripides (ū rip´ i dēz), i, 351, 355, 369, 392

Europe, i, 151, 159-62;   Christianity in, i, 517, 603-05, 609, ii,     51,
84-86, 90, 96, 99-101, 114, 148,     159-63, 166-67, 206, 234, 244, 246, 270;
common cause in, ii, 74-77;   Concert of, ii, 373, 377, 378, 384, 385;
feudalism in, ii, 42 _sqq._;   history (general), i, 334, 544, 605-06, 625,
ii, 42-43, 54-57, 107, 140, 181, 200, 202, 206,     216, 232-36, 240-53,
262-63, 269-72, 360 _sqq._, 367, 370, 377-82, 431;   Huns in, i, 559, 628;
Imperialism in, ii, 469-70, 475 _sqq._;   industrial revolution in, ii,276;
intellectual development in, ii, 37-39, 88-89, 147, 167-69, 174-76;   languages
of, i, 161;   literature of, ii, 160;   “Marriage with Asia,” i, 390;
mechanical revolution in, ii, 393 _sqq._;   monarchy in, ii, 211, 230, 236-43,
253;   Mongolians in, i, 549, ii, 112, 168;   Moslems in, ii, 24, 28-32, 41,
47, 65, 121, 184, 186;   natural political map of, ii, 383, 446, 449, 566;
peoples and races of, i, 104, 138-39, 141, 145,     298-99, 546-48, ii, 137,
266;   Powers of, ii, 242-43, 278-79, 474;   prehistoric, i, 59, 69, 75-77,
87-89, 95-105,     108, 118, 132-33, 140, 145, 149,     172-76, 183-84, 196,
206, 234, 240, 317, ii, 189;   social development in, ii, 140, 157, 176
_sqq._, 200, 215-16, 217, 246, 269-77, 400-401.   (_See also_ Great War)

Europeans descended from Neolithic man, i, 105

Euryptolemus (ū rip tol’ _ĕ_ mŭs), i, 347

Eusebius (ū sē’ bi ŭs), i, 600

Evans, i, 21

Evans, Sir Arthur, i, 104, 150, 212, 228

Evans, Sir John, i, 137

Everlasting League, ii, 199, 616

Evolution of the Earth, i, 5-6

Examinations, i, 270, 640

Excommunication, ii, 81

Executive, the, ii, 414

Exodus, book of, i, 279, 281

Experience, i, 230

Exploration, i, 217-18

“Expropriated,” the, ii, 398

ex votos, i, 235, 414

Eylau (I’ lou), battle of, ii, 362, 622

Ezekiel, i, 292, 294


Fabian Society, ii, 409

Fabius, i, 477-78

Factories, growth of, ii, 275-77

Factory Act, ii, 404, 405, 622

Factory system, ii, 394, 405

Fairies, i, 182

Faith, decline of a universal, ii, 425

Faizi (fä’ i zi), ii, 135

Falkland Isles, battle of, ii, 520

Families, noble and plebeian, i, 267-68

Family groups, i, 79, 110, 178-82

Faraday, M., ii, 387, 427

Farming, Arab knowledge of, ii, 38

Farrand, i, 158

Farrar, F. W., i, 527

Fashoda (fä shō’ dă), ii, 460, 500, 624

Fatepur-sikri (fŭt ē poor’ sik’ ri), ii, 135, 136

Fatima (făt’ i mă), ii, 26, 31, 64

Fatimite caliphate, ii, 64, 76, 126, 614

Fauna, early, i, 101

Fausta, i, 599

Faustina (faws tī’ nă), i, 527

Fayle, C. E., ii, 543

Fear, i, 125

Feasts, Aryan, i, 172-73

Feathers, i, 43-44, 48-49

Ferdinand I, emperor, ii, 207, 210, 233

Ferdinand, king of Bulgaria, ii, 501, 509, 524

Ferdinand, king of Spain, ii, 186, 200

Ferguson, i, 252, 410

Fermentation, i, 172

Ferns, i, 24, 27

Ferrero (fer rā’ rō), i, 455, 493, 502

Fetishism, i, 123, 129

Feudal system, the, i, 43 _sqq._

Fezzan, i, 118

Fiefs, ii, 43

Field of the Cloth of Gold, i, 202

Fielding, H., ii, 272, 394

Fiji, ii, 471

Filmer, ii, 164

Finance, i, 496-98, ii, 202, 216

Finland (and the Finns), i, 549, 606, ii, 366, 375, 380

Finland, Gulf of, ii, 266

Finnish language, i, 156

Finno-Ugrian language, i, 560

Fire, early use of, i, 78-80

Fire-arms, i, 565

Fish, i, 10, 24, 25, 52

Fisher, Lord, ii, 526

Fisher, Osmond, i, 78

Fishing, i, 96-97, 114

Fiske, ii, 282

Fiume (fū’ mā), ii, 566

Five Classics, the, i, 227

Flame projectors, ii, 516

Flanders, ii, 66, 78, 208, 329

Flavian dynasty, i, 526, ii, 609

Flax, i, 114

Fleming, Bishop, ii, 96

Flemings, the, ii, 47, 81, 178

Flemish language, ii, 47

Flint implements, i, 60, 68-69, 71, 78-82, 88, 91, 94, 99, 107, 114, 137

Flood, story of the, i, 278, 293

Florence, ii, 180, 182-83, 195-97, 202, 239, 242, 618

Florentine Society, ii, 392

Florida, ii, 282

Flowers, Cainozoic, i, 51

Flying machines, i, 215, ii, 173, 174, 175, 392

Fontainebleau (fo_n_ tān blō’), ii, 361, 368

Food, i, 16, 20, 78-84, 113, 116, 186-87

Fools, i, 172

Foot of apes, men, and monkeys, i, 63-66

Forbes, ii, 129

Ford businesses, ii, 406

Forests, i, 37, 100-04

Fort St. Augustine, ii, 282

Fossils, i, 8-13, 26, 46-51, 57, 66, ii, 175, 419

Foucher, i, 429

“Fourteen Points,” the, ii, 546-48, 556

Fowl, domesticated, i, 113, 114

Fowler, W. Warde, i, 148, 510

Fox, the, as food, i, 113

France, i, 74, 108;   history (_to Revolutionary period_), i, 88, 93, 146,
217, 522, 554, 606, 627, ii, 24, 41, 46-48, 51, 53,     62, 69, 75, 78-82, 87,
92, 98, 99, 127, 156-57, 166,     178, 179, 180, 193-205, 215-29, 234-39,
243-51, 267,     272, 279, 620, 621;   (_Revolutionary period_), ii, 157, 164,
242-47, 621;   (_Napoleonic period_), ii, 248-74, 621;   (_to Great War_), ii,
370-73, 382, 400, 438-46, 484,     486, 509, 622, 623;   (_Great War_), ii, 48,
513 _sqq._;   Imperialism, ii, 470, 500;   overseas dominions, ii, 251-54,
279-86, 292, 363, 364,     451, 467.   (_See also_ Franks, Gaul)

Francis, St., of Assisi, ii, 94-96, 161, 263, 615

Francis I, emperor, ii, 620

Francis II, emperor, ii, 622

Francis I, king of France, ii, 200-06, 618

Francis Ferdinand, archduke, ii, 510

Franciscan Order, ii, 94-96, 148, 171, 173, 193, 615, 616

Frankfort, ii, 180, 439, 623;   Peace of, ii, 446-47, 477, 623

Franklin, Benj., ii, 303, 324

Franks, the, i, 552, 559, 564, 606,     609, ii, 41, 42, 46-52, 57-62, 69, 78,
130, 144, 610

Frazer, Sir J. G., i, 116, 117, 125, 130-131, 249

Frederick I (Barbarossa), emperor,     ii, 80, 86, 87, 89, 97, 615

Frederick II, emperor, ii, 80, 82,     86 _sqq._, 112, 117, 148, 160-61, 199,
232, 421, 615, 616

Frederick III, emperor, ii, 200

Frederick I, king of Prussia, ii, 240, 620

Frederick II (the Great), king of Prussia, ii, 240, 248,     264, 267, 300,
303, 620

Frederick III, king of Prussia, ii, 482

Frederick, don, ii, 230

Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg, ii, 152

Free discussion, ii, 158;   trade in Athens, i, 460

Free intelligence, i, 262

Freedom, i, 259-60, ii, 279

Freeman’s Farm, ii, 292

French language, i, 151, 564, ii, 47, 54, 66, 160, 199, 228

Freud, Sigismund, i, 127

Freya (frī’ ă), ii, 49

Friars, the, ii, 164, 172.   (_See also_ Franciscan Order)

Friedland (frēd’ lănt), battle of, ii, 362, 622

Frisian coast, i, 539; language, ii, 228

Frisians, the, ii, 49-51

Frog, the, i, 26

Froissart (frwä sär’), ii, 155

Fronde, the, ii, 234-36

Fu, S. N., i, 630-32, 641-42

Fuggers, the, ii, 202, 204, 271

Fulas, i, 206

Fuller, Colonel, ii, 571

Fulton, R., ii, 387

Furnace, blast, ii, 388; electric, ii, 389

Future life, belief in, i, 123, 538


Gaelic, i, 168, ii, 490

Gage, General, ii, 290, 294

Galatia, i, 449, ii, 608

Galatians, i, 395, 397, ii, 121

Galba, i, 526, ii, 609

Galerius, i, 594, 596, ii, 611

Galicia, ii, 518

Galilee, i, 571, 584, 587, 591, 621

Galileo (găl i lē’ ō), Galilei, ii, 176, 417, 618, 619

Gallas, language of the, i, 154

Galleys, i, 259

Galvani, ii, 387

Gama, Vasco da (văs kō’ dä gä’ mä), ii, 187-88, 257, 617

Gamaliel, i, 588

Gambia, i, 218

Games, i, 314

Gametes (găm ēts’), i, 24

Gandhara (gän d hä’ rä), i, 428

Ganesa (gă nā’ shă), i, 439

Gang labour, i, 265, 287

Ganges, i, 160, 201, 269, 270, 386, 388, 415, 430, ii, 106

Gardner, Alice, i, 625

Garibaldi, ii, 441

Gas, i, 170, 635

Gas in warfare, ii, 516, 569

_Gaspee_, vessel, ii, 289

Gath, i, 282

Gaul (and the Gauls), i, 196,     299, 388, 395, 450-51, 458-60, 471, 475, 500,
502-07, 509, 542, 553, 559, 564, 605, 613, ii, 41, 46, 61, 266, 608, 611

Gaulish language, i, 168

Gautama (gou´ tă mă).   (_See_ Buddha)

Gaza, i, 261, 282, 379, 382

Gazelle, i, 56

Gaztelu, ii, 207, 208

Genesis, book of, i, 129, 277-82

Geneva, ii, 163, 199, 264, 559

Genoa (jen’ ō ă) and the Genoese, ii, 76, 80, 117, 153, 180, 182, 185, 347

Genseric (jen’ s_ĕ_r ik), i, 556, 557, ii, 611

Gentiles, the, i, 580

Geography, i, 5

Geology, i, 5, 8, ii, 419

Geomancers (jē ō măn’ s_ĕ_rs), i, 635

Geometry, ii, 37

George I, ii, 227, 620

George II, ii, 227, 620

George III, ii, 227, 288, 293, 314, 338, 620

George IV, ii, 228

George V, ii, 144, 228, 488, 498

George, Lloyd, ii, 499, 518, 534-38, 552-53, 557, 566

Georgia, ii, 282, 290, 443, 620

Gerasa (jer’ ă să), i, 621

Gerash, i, 623

Gerbert (gār’ ber), ii, 37

German language, i, 151, 168, ii, 47, 160, 228;   songs and tales, ii, 61

Germany, i, 101, 108, 318;   history (_to Saxon kings_), i, 502, 507, 509, 510,
522, 534, 539, 540,     552, 557, 603, ii, 46-47, 51, 57, 61-62, 144, 150, 609;
(_Saxon kings to Napoleonic period_), ii, 61, 69, 75, 80,     86, 87, 98-100,
112,   116, 138, 156, 157-62, 179, 180, 182, 188, 199-210,     216, 228,
232-36, 244-48, 253, 256, 266-67, 283, 285, 292, 304,     339, 361-66, 614,
616, 618;   (_War of Liberation to the Great War_), ii, 367-68,     381-82,
390-91, 396-401, 438-46, 467, 469-70, 476 _sqq._, 623;   (_Great War_), ii, 499
_sqq._;   class distinction in, i, 268;   Imperialism of, ii, 470, 479-86, 508

Gesture language, i, 163

Gethsemane, i, 585

Ghent, ii, 180, 199, 229

Gibbon, Edward, i, 531-35, 557, 558, 592, 595, 599, 608, 618,     ii, 30, 42,
60, 62,    67, 69, 78, 82, 112, 227, 263-73, 277, 278, 308, 421

Gibbons (animal), i, 67

Gibbs, Philip, ii, 513, 516, 518, 530, 572

Gibraltar, i, 67, 120, 217, 532, ii, 41, 451, 471

Gideon, i, 283

Gigantosaurus (jī găn tō saw’ rŭs), i, 42

Gilbert, Dr., ii, 176, 619

Gilboa, Mount, i, 285

Gills, i, 23, 25, 52

Gin, i, 219

Giotto (jot’ ō), ii, 183

Gipsies, ii, 137, 138

Gipsy language, ii, 138

Giraffe, i, 56

Girondins, ii, 328

Gizeh (gē’ z_ĕ_), i, 198, 238

Glacial Age.   (_See_ Ice Age)

Gladiators, i, 489-91, 505, 529, 533, 589, 594, 609, ii, 608, 609

Gladstone, Sir John, ii, 427

Gladstone, W. E., i, 345, ii, 426-33, 447, 481, 495, 499, 623

Glasfurd, A. I. R., i, 114, 126

Glass, ii, 38

Glastonbury, i, 110, 171

Glaucia, i, 503

Glyptodon (glip’ tō don), i, 102, 207

_Gneisenau_ (gnī’ z_ĕ_ nou), cruiser, ii, 520

Gneiss (nīs), fundamental, i, 8

Gnosticism (nos’ ti sizm), i, 592, 603

Goats in lake dwellings, i, 112

Gobi Desert, i, 160, 545, 634, 643, 644

God, i, 583, 592, 602, ii, 29, 171, 174;   idea of one true, i, 295-96, 400,
424, 436,     538, 569, 572, 576, ii, 5-7, 11, 18, 136;   of Judaism, i, 219,
282 _sqq._, 361, 412, ii, 16;   Kingdom of, ii, 90, 97, 116, 149, 246

Godfrey of Bouillon, ii, 78, 228, 615

Gods, i, 234-39, 240, 245-46, 411-12, 483;   Aryan, i, 233-34, 305;   Egyptian,
i, 236-39, 248-52;   Greek, i, 305, 361-62, 483;   Japanese, i, 429;   Semitic,
i, 233;   tribal, i, 134, 295

Goethe, ii, 324

Gold, i, 105, 118, 220, ii, 89, 344

Golden Horde, the, ii, 134, 259

Goldsmith, Oliver, i, 376, ii, 273, 492, 493, 553

Golgotha, i, 585

Gooch, G. P., ii, 475

Good Hope, Cape of, ii, 257, 451, 617

_Good Hope_, cruiser, ii, 520

Goods, consumable, ii, 344

Goose, i, 113

Gorham, Nathaniel, ii, 300

Gorilla, i, 63, 67, 218

“Gorillas,” i, 218

Goritzia (gō rē t’ sē _ă_), ii, 519

Goshen, land of, i, 279

Gospels, the, i, 573, 576, 585-88, 593, 601, ii, 150, 418

Gotha (gō’ t_ă_) aeroplane, ii, 519

Gothic architecture, ii, 179;   language, i, 168

Goths, i, 528, 543, 549, 553, 556,     560-64, 606, 609, 611, 612, 615,     ii,
41, 46, 57, 66, 610, 611, 612

Gough, General, ii, 530

Gould, Baring, i, 610

Gourgaud (goor gō’), ii, 358

Government, i, 232-33, 241-42, 462-64, ii, 147, 385

Gowland, Dr., i, 106

Gracchi, the, i, 502, ii, 147

Gracchus, Caius, i, 502, ii, 609

Gracchus, Tiberius, i, 483, 496-501, ii, 609

Graham, Cunninghame, ii, 193

Grain, as food, i, 113-17, 184

Granada, ii, 186

Grand Remonstrance, ii, 221

Granicus (gră nī’ kŭs), battle of the, i, 379, ii, 608

Grape, i, 172

Graphite, i, 9

Grasses, i, 51, 56

Gravelotte (gräv lot’), ii, 445

Gravesend, ii, 226

Gravitation, law of, ii, 176

Gray, G. B., i, 281

Gray, Thomas, ii, 227

Great Britain, history (_general_), ii, 244, 470;   (_and India_), ii, 134-37,
254-59;   (_and America_), ii, 253-54, 273, 279-82, 285-94, 621;   (_and French
Revolution_), ii, 327, 331-32;   (_in Napoleonic period_), ii, 351-54, 359,
361, 366, 372, 621;   (_war with Turkey_), ii, 382;   (_Crimean war_), ii, 440;
(_suspicion of Russia_), ii, 447;   (_in alliance against Germany_), ii,
484-86;   (_the Great War_), ii, 510 _sqq._;   (_effect of Great War on_), ii,
533-34 _sqq._;   constitutional, political, and social,     i, 495, ii, 271-73,
298, 306-07, 321,     338, 388-89, 400, 486-87, 622;   expansion and
Imperialism, ii, 246-47, 451-60, 463, 469, 470-72, 486-99, 624.   (_See also_
Britain _and_ England)

Great Exhibition, the, ii, 436, 623

Great Mogul, ii, 256, 258

Great ox. (_See_ Aurochs)

Great Schism. (_See_ Papal Schism)

Great War, the, ii, 48, 166, 221, 235, 251, 510 _sqq._, 624

Greatness, ii, 303

Greece (and the Greeks), i, 86, 108, 114, 281, 313-18, 446-47,     ii, 144,
160, 190;   history (_to war with Persia_), i, 13, 176-78, 213-16, 234,
281, 300 _sqq._, ii, 606;   (_war with Persia_), i, 314-15, 327-42, ii, 607;
(_to 15th century_), i, 343-45, 357, 362-64, 367-72, 377-78,     395, 449, 554,
611, 621, ii, 79, 98, 121-26, 616;   (_modern_), ii, 382, 502, 521-22, 524,
622;   civilization, i, 304-14, 352-53, 363-64, 455, 491-92, 623;
constitutional, i, 305-15, 360-64, 369, 378, 455, 488;   religion, i, 240,
304-06, 354-55, 374, 412, 483, ii, 48;   thought and learning, i, 359-65,
399-404, 408-09, 488, 618, 636, ii, 35, 168

Greek, alphabet, i, 228-29;   archipelago, i, 119, 260;   Church, i, 603, 617,
ii, 58, 60, 73, 74, 78, 81, 98, 380, 611;   islands, i, 171, ii, 65;   language
and literature, i, 151, 168, 173-76, 194, 300, 348,     354-56, 359-62, 402,
411, 530, 535, 562, 588, 614-15, 621,     ii, 31, 35, 36, 50, 61, 73, 159, 211;
warfare, i, 370

Greek (Eastern) Empire, _see_ Eastern (Greek) Empire

Green, J. R., ii, 154

Green flag, ii, 64

Greenland, i, 75, ii, 53, 185

“Greens,” faction of the, ii, 247

Gregorovius, ii, 63

Gregory, Sir R. A., ii, 176, 384, 427

Gregory I, the Great, i, 612, 642, ii, 41, 50, 72, 97, 153, 167, 612

Gregory VII, ii, 72, 73, 74, 84, 149, 167, 615

Gregory IX, ii, 83, 87, 148, 616

Gregory XI, ii, 100, 127, 617

Grenfell, i, 137

Grey, Sir Edward, ii, 511

Grey Friars.   (_See_ Franciscan Order)

Grimaldi race, i, 88, 90-95, 120

Grimm’s Law, i, 152

Grisons, i, 564

Grote, i, 351

Growth, i, 16

Guadalquivir (gaw dăl kwiv’ _ĕ_r), ii, 188

Guianas, the, ii, 451

Guilds, i, 267

Guillemard, ii, 188

Guillotine, ii, 333

Guiscard (gēs kăr’), Robert, ii, 67, 69, 79, 615

Gulf Stream, i, 20

Gum-tree, i, 51

Gunpowder, i, 635, ii, 109, 121, 179, 268

Guptas (goop’ t_ă_z), i, 629

Gurkhas, ii, 455

Gustavus Adolphus, ii, 235, 236, 253

Gutenberg, ii, 159

Guthrum, ii, 54, 614

Gwalior, ii, 257

Gyges (gī’ jēz), i, 316, ii, 606


Haarlem (här’ lem), ii, 159, 229, 231, 617

Habsburgs, ii, 63, 98, 140, 167, 199-202, 232, 235, 243, 248, 370, 371

Hackett, ii, 420-21

Hadrian, i, 526, 536, ii, 610

Hadrian, tomb of, i, 609, ii, 41

Hadrian’s wall, i, 526-27

Hague Conferences, ii, 476-77

Haig, Sir Douglas, ii, 523

Hair, i, 49-54

Halicarnassus (hăl i kăr näs’ ŭs), i, 260, 262, 340, 379, 380

Hall, i, 218

Hall, H. R., i, 184

Ham, son of Noah, i, 140

Hamburg, ii, 180, 182

Hamilcar, i, 471, 475

Hamilton, Alexander, ii, 303

Hamilton, Sir Ian, ii, 521

Hamilton, Sir William, ii, 390

Hamites, i, 158, 176, 189, 203, 244, ii, 41

Hamitic languages, i, 154, 155, 161, 162, 167;   ships, i, 212

Hammond, ii, 269, 270

Hammurabi (hăm moo rä’ bē), i, 191, 196, 199, 201, 245, 258, 279, 385, ii, 606

Han, men of, i, 634

Han dynasty, i, 205, 253, 270, 433, 508, 509, 542, 543, 548, 630, 631, ii, 610

Hancock, ii, 290

Hang Chau (hăng’ chou), ii, 108, 615

Hannibal, i, 473-79, 483

Hanno, i, 196, 217-18, 221, 234, 241, 472, 509, 532, ii, 185, 607

Hanover, ii, 338

Hanover, elector of.   (_See_ George I.)

Hanoverian dominions, ii, 244

Hanoverian dynasty, ii, 228, 236

Hansa towns, ii, 182-88

Hanse merchants, ii, 266

Harcourt, Sir William, ii, 411

Hardy, Thomas, i, 335, ii, 349

Hare, the, i, 113

Hariti, i, 428

Harnack, ii, 174

Haroun-al-Raschid (hä roon ăl ră shēd´), ii, 32, 33, 61, 613

Harpagos (här´ pă gŏs), i, 323

Harpalus (här´ pă lŭs), i, 375, 387

Harpoons, i, 90, 96

Harran, i, 622

Harris, H. Wilson, ii, 543, 560

Harrison, Benjamin, i, 68

Harvey, John, ii, 177, 619

Hasan, son of Ali, ii, 27, 30

Hasdrubal, i, 472-76

Hastings, Warren, ii, 259, 453, 487

Hatasu (hä´ tă soo), Queen of Egypt, i, 200

Hathor, i, 239, 249, 412, 413

Hatra, i, 622

Hatred, i, 472

Hauran, i, 623, ii, 2

Haverfield, F. J., i, 461, 605

Hawk gods, i, 237

Head, deformation of, i, 147

Headlam, J. W., ii, 377

Hearths, i, 171

Heaven, Kingdom of, i, 575-79, 582, 587, ii, 417.   (_See also_ God)

Hébert, ii, 335

Hebrew language, i, 153, 155, 164, 570, 572;   literature, i, 293-94; prophets,
i, 601;   thought, i, 361;   moral teaching, i, 219.   (_See also_ Jewish)

Hebrews, i, 245, 279-283, ii, 1.   (_See also_ Jews)

Hecataeus (hek _ă_ tē´ ŭs), i, 221

Hecker, ii, 154

Hector, i, 175, 183

Hedgehogs, i, 56

Hegira (hej´ i ră), ii, 8, 12, 14, 17, 612

Heidelberg man, i, 60, 64, 69, 70-71, 84

Hekt, i, 239

Helen of Troy, i, 216

Helena, Empress, i, 618, ii, 82

Helena, mother of Constantine, i, 599

Heligoland, ii, 484, 623

Heliolithic (hē li ō lith´ ik) culture, i, 147-49, 162, 171,     177, 184, 188,
196,     201, 207-13, 223, 415, ii, 189, 465

Heliolithic peoples, i, 206

Heliopolis (hē li op’ ō lis), (Baalbek), i 621, ii, 3

Hellé, André, ii, 513

Hellenes, i, 300

Hellenic civilization, i, 302 _sqq._, ii, 22, 168;   tradition, i, 562

Hellenism, i, 353, 430, 570

Hellespont, i, 334-35, 339, 340, 362, 372, 379, 523,     621, ii, 20, 79, 137,
607, 612

Helmolt, H. F., i, 192, 541, 556, 635, ii, 18, 22, 136, 180

Helmont, van, i, 170

Helots, i, 305

Hen.   (_See_ Fowl, domesticated)

Henriot, ii, 336

Henry II, German Emperor, ii, 63

Henry V, German Emperor, ii, 63

Henry VI, German Emperor, ii, 86

Henry II, King of England, ii, 490

Henry III, King of England, ii, 219

Henry V, King of England, ii, 178

Henry VII, King of England, ii, 186, 218, 220

Henry VIII, King of England, ii, 163, 197, 200, 204, 206, 218, 220, 618

Henry of Prussia, Prince, ii, 300

Henry the Fowler, ii, 63, 70, 614

Henry, Patrick, ii, 287, 303

Hephaestion (hē fes’ ti_ŏ_n), i, 392, 394, 510

Hephaestus, i, 173

Heraclea (her ă klē’ _ă_), i, 453, ii, 608

Heraclius (her ă klī’ ŭs), i, 615, 618, 623, 634, ii, 17-20, 82, 612, 613

Heraldry, i, 268

Herat, i, 386, 604

Herbivorous animals, i, 41, 43

Hercules, demi-god, i, 399, 515

Hercules, son of Alexander, i, 394

Hercules, temple of, i, 234

Herdsmen, i, 264, 267

Hereditary rule, ii, 144

Heredity, i, 230

Heretic, ii, 95

Heristhal, ii, 47

Hermon, Mount, i, 113, 184

Herne Island, i, 217

Hero, i, 402, 540

Herodes Atticus (her ō’ dēz ăt’ i kŭs), i, 535, 536

Herodians, i, 579

Herodotus (hē rod’ ō tŭs), i, 186, 218, 221, 241, 260-62,     267, 296, 314,
319-26,   332, 340, 342, 347, 350, 355, 356, 370, 399, 405, 497, 532, 615, 642,
ii, 20, 607

Herods, the, i, 571, 574, 580, ii, 4

Heroic Age, i, 177

Herophilus (hē rof’ i lŭs), i, 403, 404

Herzegovina (hert s_ĕ_ gov’ _ĕ_ nă), ii, 484, 624

Hesperornis (hes p_ĕ_r ôr’ nis), i, 48

Hesse (hes’ _ĕ_) and Hessians, ii, 51, 205, 445

Hezekiah, King, i, 291

Hieratic script, i, 228

Hiero (hī’ _ĕ_r ō), i, 468, 469, 476

Hieroglyphics, i, 208, 211, 227, 228

Hieronymus (hī er on’ i mŭs) of Syracuse, i, 476

Hildebrand.   (See Gregory VII)

Himalayas, i, 35, 52, 160, 546

Hindu deities, i, 437, 439;   priests, i, 180;   schools, ii, 137

Hindu Kush, ii, 133

Hindus, i, 169, 179-81, 269-70, 299, 538, ii, 134, 137, 256

Hindustan, ii, 108, 133

Hipparchus, i, 402

Hippias, i, 332

Hippo, i, 556, 604

Hippopotamus, i, 38, 69, 70, 76

Hippopotamus deities, i, 197, 236

Hira, ii, 18, 20

Hirai, K., i, 157

Hiram, King of Sidon, i, 287-90

Hirth, i, 435, 541, 582, 635

Histiæus, i, 330-31, 341, 561

Hittites, i, 192, 196, 200, 219, 278, 282, 283, 300, 327, ii, 121

Hi-ung-nu.   (_See_ Huns)

Hobson, J. A., ii, 543

Hoche, General, ii, 374

Hogarth, D. G., i, 367, 392

Hogarth, William, ii, 227

_Hogue_, cruiser, ii, 520

Hohenlinden, battle of, ii, 355, 622

Hohenstaufens (hō en stou’ fenz), ii, 63, 98, 182, 199, 232, 616

Hohenzollerns, ii, 236, 240, 370, 442, 445, 479, 480

Holkham Hall, i, 13

Holland, i, 541, 605, ii, 47, 51, 159, 163, 182, 188,     193, 224, 229-30,
233, 236, 251, 257, 258, 282,     331, 339, 347, 359, 361, 368, 380, 381, 451,
457, 622

Holland, Rev. W. E. S., ii, 473

Holly, i, 51

Holmes, i, 615

Holmes, A., i, 13

Holmes, Rice, i, 104

Holstein, ii, 381

Holy Alliance, ii, 372, 377, 382, 400, 430, 476, 477

Holy Land.   (_See_ Crusades and Palestine)

Holy Roman Empire, ii, 58, 63, 69, 130, 182, 198,     202 _sqq._, 210, 215,
238, 256, 614, 622

Homage, ii, 44

Home Rule Bill, i, 312

Homer, i, 114, 174-82, 196, 216, 219, 229, 300, 304, 508, 531

Homo antiquus.   _See_ Neanderthal man;   Heidelbergensis, _see_ Heidelberg
man;   Neanderthalensis, _see_ Neanderthal man;   primigenius, _see_
Neanderthal man;   sapiens, _see_ Man, true

Homs, i, 621

Honduras (hon dūr´ ăs), British, ii, 254

Honey, i, 172

Honoria, i, 557

Honorius, i, 554, ii, 611

Honorius III, pope, ii, 87, 615

Hope in religion, i, 125

Hopf, Ludwig, i, 80, 118, 130

Hophni, i, 284

Horace, i, 407

Horn, Count of, ii, 229

Horn implements, i, 90, 107, 116

Horrabin, F., i, 119

Horses, i, 58, 64, 69, 70, 92-100, 105, 170, 177, 192, 299, 551

Horsuv Tyn, ii, 152

Horticulture, i, 254

Horus, i, 249, 252, 412-14, 429, 590, 591

Hose, i, 148

Hotel Cecil, i, 621

Hottentot language, i, 162

Households, growth of, i, 258

Houses, stone, i, 171

Howard, the philanthropist, ii, 338

Howe, F. C., ii, 543

Howorth, H. H., i, 541

Howth, ii, 498

Hrdlicka, Dr., i, 102

Hsia, Empire of, ii, 110

Hubbard, i, 536, 642

Huc, i, 429, 440

Hudson Bay Company, ii, 254, 451

Hudson Bay Territory, i, 158

Hudson River, ii, 292, 387

Hueffer, F. M., ii, 480

Hugo, Victor, ii, 355

Huguenots, ii, 244, 253, 282

Hulagu, ii, 114, 118, 120, 130, 154, 616

Human association, ii, 413

Human sacrifice, i, 116-17, 130-31, 134, ii, 91, 190

Humayun (hoo mä´ yoon), ii, 133

Hungary (and the Hungarians), i, 106, 553, 558, 560,     600, ii, 51, 69, 70,
77, 100, 113, 122, 126, 139,     184, 204, 205, 233, 260, 380, 400, 446, 618.
(_See also_ Austria)

Huns, i, 196, 203-05, 253, 272, 388, 508, 533,     539, 541, 543-52, 554, 557,
559, 618, 627-32,     644, ii, 66, 71, 106, 108, 113, 142, 266, 611

Hunter Commission, ii, 456

Hunting, i, 91, 92, 96-104, 112, 124, 317, 318

Husein, son of Ali, ii, 27, 30

Huss, John, ii, 100, 151, 202, 263, 272, 615

Hussites, ii, 152-56, 617

Hut urns, i, 115

Hutchinson, i, 162

Hutchinson, H. N., i, 50

Hutton, ii, 419

Huxley, Prof., i, 13, 146, ii, 420-21, 426

Hwang-ho (hwăng’ hō), river, i, 205, 542, 641, ii, 108, 118

Hyæna cave, i, 76

Hyænodon (hī ē’ nō don), i, 53

Hyde Park, ii, 437

Hyksos, i, 196, 199, ii, 1

Hyracodon (hī răk’ ō don), i, 53

Hystaspes (his tăs’ pēz), i, 326, ii, 607


Iberian language, i, 167

Iberians, i, 101, 146, 167, 171, 176, 196, 213, 281, 298, 446, ii, 247.   (_See
also_ Mediterranean race)

Ibex, i, 93

Ibn Batuta (ibn bä too’ tä), ii, 154

Ibn-rushd.   (_See_ Averroes)

Ibrahim, son of Muhammad, ii, 13

Icarus (ik’ ă rŭs), i, 215

Ice, effect of, i, 59

Ice Age, i, 52, 57-60, 68-72, 77, 82, 87, 119, 120, 159, 317

Iceland, ii, 53, 185, 252

Icelandic language, i, 168

I-chabod, i, 285

Ichthyosaurs (ik’ thi ō sawrz), i, 41, 45

Iconium, ii, 72

Ideograms, i, 224-26

Ideographs, i, 226

Idumeans, i, 570

Ignatius, St., of Loyola, ii, 164-66, 263, 618

Iliad, the.   (_See_ Homer)

Ilkhan, Empire of, ii, 114, 118, 127, 130

Illyria, i, 372, 375, 377, 472, 480, ii, 122, 608

Immortality, idea of, i, 124, 413, 423-24, 538-39

Imperator, title of, i, 565

Imperial preference, ii, 488

Imperialism, i, 311, ii, 424, 436, 461, 475 _sqq._, 498-502

Implements, bone, i, 99;   bronze, i, 132;   Chellean, i, 70;   copper, i, 105;
earliest use of, i, 67-68;   flint, i, 71, 76-81, 88, 91, 96, 99, 107, 114;
horn, i, 90, 107, 116;   iron, i, 107;   Neolithic, i, 104-05, 114, 132;
Palæolithic, i, 76, 104, 137;   Pliocene, i, 68-69;   stone, i, 57, 67, 69, 75,
80, 88, 96, 104, 106, 273;   use of by animals, i, 67;   wooden, i, 76

Inca of Peru, ii, 190

Independency, ii, 163

India, i, 37, 74, 106, 109, 114, 160, 181-82, 206, 327, 396,     432, 489, 509,
532,     548, 626, ii, 27, 33, 109, 133, 139, 144, 268, 351;   history
(_Alexander in_), i, 379, 386, 388, 428, 510;   (_Indo-Scythians in_), i, 548,
617, 628, ii, 610;   (_Ephthalites in_), i, 629, ii, 611;   (_Mongols in_), i,
550, 557, ii, 114, 133-37;   (_17th and 18th centuries_), ii, 254, 256-58, 262;
(_British in_), ii, 133-37, 254-59, 279, 285, 451-56, 471, 487, 620, 621;
civilization, social development, and culture,     i, 147, 171, 179, 183, 196,
201,     268-70, 272, 307, 415-16, 430, ii, 136, 145, 455;   European
settlements in, ii, 254-59, 279, 285, 620;   languages of, i, 158, 169, 189,
ii, 139-40;   peoples and races, i, 138-39, 145, 158-60,     196, 201, 203,
317, 386, 629, ii, 106, 190;   religions of, i, 270, 416 _sqq._, 440, 604,
610, 625, ii, 108, 114, 136, 166;   trade of, i, 401, 533, 640, ii, 257;
travels and voyages to, i, 533, 642, 645,     ii, 119, 185-87, 465, 612, 617

Indian corn, i, 113

Indian ocean, i, 47, 108, 118, 210, ii, 187

Indian sign-language, i, 150

Indians, American.   (_See_ American Indians)

Indies, East, i, 46, 148, 159, 162, 206, 210, 273, ii, 257, 451, 461

Indies, West, ii, 187, 252, 305, 306, 451

Individual, the free, i, 259

Individuality, in reproduction, i, 17

Indo-European languages.   (_See_ Aryan languages)

Indo-Iranian language, i, 169;   people, i, 538

Indonesian life, i, 177

Indore, ii, 257

Indo-Scythians, i, 548, 617, 628, ii, 610

Indulgences, ii, 93, 202

Indus, i, 159, 182, 201, 327, 385-89, 395, 430, 507, 523, ii, 22, 132, 607

Industrial Revolution, ii, 276, 393-98, 405

Industrialism, ii, 273-75

Infanticide, i, 134

Influenza, ii, 384

Information, ii, 413

Infusoria, i, 21

Inge, Dean, i, 583, 587, ii, 416

Innes, A. D., ii, 218

Innocent III, pope, ii, 82, 86-98, 167, 615

Innocent IV, ii, 81, 88, 116

Inns, early, i, 220

Innsbruck, ii, 207

Inquisition, the, ii, 95, 117, 166, 209, 378

Insects, i, 5, 28

Instruments, Neolithic musical, i, 115

Interglacial period, i, 60, 68-70, 75-76

“International,” the, ii, 409

International relationship, ii, 347

Internationalism, ii, 432

Intoxicants, i, 172, 182

Investitures, ii, 44, 74, 85

Ion, poet, i, 347

Iona, ii, 50

Ionian Islands, ii, 351

Ionians, i, 314-16, 327-32, 337-40, ii, 121

Ionic dialect, i, 300

Ipsus (ip’ sŭs), battle of, i, 395

Irak, ii, 33

Iran (ē rän’), i, 508, 626

Iranians, i, 299, 627

Ireland, i, 86, 102, 105, 110, 182, 209, 299, 312, 603,     ii, 40, 50, 66, 97,
178,   224-26, 424, 432, 471, 488-99, 621, 623, 624

Irene (ī rē’ nē), Empress, ii, 58

Irish, Catholics, ii, 222, 224, 244;   language, i, 152, 168;   prisoners, ii,
284;   race, i, 167

Irish sea, i, 75

Iron, i, 4, 79, 133;   as currency, i, 219-20;   use of, i, 107, 187, 196, 205,
207, ii, 275, 387-89, 606

Iron Age, i, 97, 108, 133

Ironsides, ii, 223

Iroquois (ir ō kwoi’) tribes, ii, 285

Irrigation, i, 37, 190

Irving, Washington, ii, 253

Isaac, patriarch, i, 278-79

Isabella of Castile, ii, 186, 200

Isaiah, i, 578

Ishmael, i, 279

Ishtar, i, 232, 245, 279, 283

Isis, i, 239, 249, 412-14, 428-29, 538, 575, 590-91

Iskender, i, 389

Islam, i, 296, 441, 583, 624, 636, ii, 4 _sqq._, 113, 142, 194;   and
Christianity, ii, 34, 35, 64, 114, 149;   propaganda of, ii, 15-16, 28, 51,
108, 116, 127, 142, 256, 396, 397;   teaching of, ii, 14 _sqq._, 64, 136, 146,
402.   (_See also_ Moslems, _and_ Muhammadanism)

Isocrates (ī sok’ ră tēz), i, 351, 357, 363, 367, 373, 390, 397

Ispahan (is pă hän’), ii, 132

Israel, Kingdom of (and Israelites), i, 193, 277 _sqq._,     316, ii, 144, 244,
606.   (_See also_ Jews)

Issik Kul (is’ ik kool), i, 643

Issus, battle of, i, 380-84, ii, 20, 78, 608

Italian language, i, 151, 446, ii, 160, 199

Italy (and Italians), i, 106, 196, 213, 281,     388, 446-47, 526, 611, ii,
121, 144, 608;   history (_Greeks in_), i, 302, 304, 346, 447, 451-52, ii,
606-08;   (_Gauls in_), i, 388, 449, 471;   (_Roman_), i, 453, 460, 494,
499-505, ii, 147;   (_invasion by Hannibal_), i, 475-77;   (_Goths in_), i,
553, 606, ii, 46, 65, 612;   (_Huns in_), i, 559, 608;   (_Lombards in_), i,
606, 616, ii, 57, 153, 612;   (_Charlemagne in_), ii, 57-58;   (_Germans in_),
ii, 58, 618;   (_Normans in_), ii, 67, 69, 76;   (_Saracens in_), ii, 67;
(_Magyars in_), ii, 69;   (_13th-18th cent._), ii, 83, 87-89, 97-98, 126, 127,
182-84, 195-97, 204, 216, 233, 236, 621-22;   (_Napoleonic period_), ii,
332, 339, 347, 350-55, 359, 364, 622;   (_to unification of_), ii, 380-82, 400,
432;   (_Kingdom of_), ii, 440-45, 461, 469-70, 500-01, 519, 622, 624;
imperialism of, ii, 470, 500.   (_See also_ Rome _and_ Great War)

Ivan III, ii, 129, 617; IV (_the Terrible_), ii, 129, 618

Ivory, trade in, i, 273

Ivy, fossil, i, 51


Jackson, Sir Louis, ii, 567 _sqq._

Jackson, T. G., ii, 61

Jacob, patriarch, i, 278 _sq._

Jacobins, French, ii, 324, 333 _sqq._, 342, 349, 621

Jacquerie, ii, 156, 502, 621

Jade, i, 118

Jaffa, ii, 353

Jaipur (jī poor’), ii, 256

Jamaica, ii, 254, 451, 471

James I, i, 110, ii, 216 _sqq._, 237, 253, 280

James II, ii, 226, 491

James, St., i, 580

James, Henry, ii, 550

Jameson, Dr., ii, 424

Jamestown, ii, 284, 305

Janissaries, ii, 122, 132

Japan, i, 139, 429, 432, 642, ii, 119, 185, 187, 261-62, 463-70, 623, 624

Japanese, i, 66, 147, 636, ii, 464;   language and writing, i, 156, 638

Japhet, i, 140

Jarandilla, ii, 207

Jarrow, ii, 50

Java, i, 68, ii, 187

Jaw, chimpanzee, i, 72;   human, _ib._; Piltdown (_see_ Piltdown)

Jefferson, Tho., ii, 293, 303 _sqq._

Jehad (jē häd’), “holy war,” ii, 80

Jehan (jē hăn’), Shah, ii, 133

Jehangir, ii, 133

Jehovah, i, 282, 287, 293, 307, 412

Jena (yā’ nă), battle of, ii, 362, 364, 476, 622

Jengis Khan (jen’ gis kän), ii, 106, 108, 109 _sq._,     116 _sq._, 121, 128
_sqq._,     261, 615

Jenné, i, 565

Jerboas, ii, 154

Jerome of Prague, ii, 151

Jerusalem, i, 247, 278, 288-93, 411, 523, 571-72,     575, 578, 580-81, 584-86,
589,     604, 618-19, 623, ii, 11, 21, 22, 64, 75, 78-84, 97, 229, 483, 612,
615

Jesuits, ii, 117, 127, 164 _sq._, 193, 309, 390, 465, 618 _sq._

Jesus, spirit and teaching of, i, 296, 492, 572 _sqq._,     601, 617, 626, ii,
6, 13 _sqq._, 54, 64, 85,     90 _sqq._, 116, 127, 149 _sq._, 158, 163, 263,
296,     342, 360, 376, 402, 417, 426, 609 _sq._

Jet, i, 105

Jevons, F. B., i, 118

Jewellery, iron, i, 107

Jewish religion and sacred books, i, 278, 294-96, 400,     411, 440, 538,
571-72, 576, ii, 36, 417

Jews, i, 200, 247, 278, 292-97, 303, 402, 411, 569-72,     609-10, ii, 3-9, 18,
29, 32, 36, 41, 71,     77, 88, 121, 147, 242, 248, 424, 607.   (_See also_
Judaism)

“Jingo,” ii, 447

Jingo, queen, ii, 465

Joab, i, 287

Joan of Arc, ii, 179

Job, Book of, i, 114, 294

Jodhpore (jōd poor’), Raja of, ii, 135

John, king of England, ii, 81, 219

John II, king of Portugal, ii, 186

John III, king of Poland.   (_See_ Sobiesky, John)

John X, pope, ii, 62, 614

John XI, pope, ii, 62, 614

John XII, pope, ii, 62 _sq._, 73, 97, 614

John of Leyden, ii, 156

John, Prester, ii, 119

John, St., ii, 580, 598;   Gospel of, i, 573, ii, 30, 50

Johnson, i, 238

Johnson, Samuel, ii, 493

Johnston, R. M., ii, 348

Jones, F. Wood, i, 63

Jones, H. Stuart, i, 454, 516, 522, 534, 609

Joppa, i, 282

Jordan, river, i, 278, ii, 19

Joseph, St., i, 574

Joseph II, emperor, ii, 240, 620 _sq._

Josephine, empress.   (_See_ Beauharnais)

Josephus, i, 500, 571 _sq._

Joshua, i, 282

Josiah, king of Judah, i, 292, ii, 607 _sq._

Judah, kingdom of, i, 289 _sqq._, ii, 244

Judaism, i, 440, 570, 583, ii, 16, 142, 149.   (_See also_ Jews)

Judas, i, 585

Judea, i, 196, 278, 365, 436, 538, 569 _sqq._, 584 _sqq._, ii, 4, 27

Judges, Book of, i, 282 _sq._

Judges of Israel, i, 467, ii, 144

Jugo-Slavs (ū’ gō slävz).   (_See_ Yugo-Slavs)

Jugurtha (joo gũr’ th_ă_), i, 502 _sq._, ii, 609

Julian the Apostate, i, 625, ii, 611

Julius III, ii, 208

Jung, i, 361

Jungle fowl, i, 114

Juno, i, 218, 483

Junot, Mme., ii, 349

Jupiter, i, 233, 412 _sq._, 448, ii, 49

Jupiter, planet, i, 4

Jupiter Ammon, i, 252

Jupiter Serapis, i, 412

Justinian, i, 606, 608, 611, 613, 633, ii, 46, 57 _sq._, 124, 153, 384, 612

Jutes, i, 554, 605, ii, 54, 66

Jutland, battle of, ii, 520

Kaaba (kä’ ă bă), ii, 5 _sqq._, 11, 27

Kadessia, battle of, ii, 20, 613

Kadija (kă dē’ j_ă_), ii, 6 _sqq._

Kaffirs, i, 219

Kaisar-i-Hind, i, 565, ii, 134

Kaisar-i-Roum, i, 565

Kaiser, Austrian, i, 565;   German, i, 565

Kali (kă’ lē), i, 439

Kalifa.   (_See_ Caliph)

Kalinga, i, 431

Kalmucks (käl’ mŭks), i, 137, 143, 545, ii, 128

Kanishka (kă nish’ k_ă_), i, 628, 646, ii, 610

Kao-chang, i, 644

Karakorum (kä rä kōr’ ăm), ii, 110 _sqq._, 134

Karma (kär’ mă), doctrine of, i, 425

Karnak, i, 200

Kashgar (kăsh gär’), i, 546, 628, 643, ii, 22, 109, 118, 610

Kashmir, Buddhists in, i, 432

Kautsky, ii, 510

Kavadh, i, 624, 634, ii, 1, 366, 612

Kazan (kă zän’), ii, 118

Keane, A. H., i, 118, 161

Keith, Dr. A., i, 63, 71 _sq._

Keltic languages, i, 168, 182, 299, 446, 605

Keltic race, i, 110, 168, 176, 182, 196, 299,     388, 395, 554, ii, 40, 48,
228, 490

Kelvin, Lord, i, 13

Kent, Duke of, ii, 405

Kent, Kingdom of, ii, 40

Kepler, ii, 176, 619

Kerensky, ii, 526-27

Kerne Island, i, 217

Ketboga, ii, 114, 132, 616

Keynes, J. M., ii, 541, 557, 560

Khalid (kä lēd’), ii, 18 _sq._

Khans, i, 644, ii, 108 _sqq._, 126 _sqq._, 144, 615 _sq._

Kharismia, ii, 106, 109, 615

Khazars (kä zärz’), ii, 70, 71

Khedive, the, of Egypt, ii, 471

Khitan people, ii, 109, 118

Khiva (kē’ vă), ii, 106, 108

Khokand (kō kănd’), i, 546, ii, 110

Khorasan (kō ră sän’), ii, 31, 37

Khotan (kō tän’), i, 628, ii, 118, 610

Khyber Pass, i, 386, 548, 643, ii, 257

Kiau-Chau (kyou’ chou’), ii, 469 _sq._, 564, 624

Kidnapped children sent to New England, ii, 284

Kieff, ii, 67, 110 _sq._, 129, 134, 614;   Grand Duke of, ii, 110

Kin Empire, ii, 108-09 _sq._, 128, 261, 615

Kings, book of, i, 193, 282, 287, 289, 291

Kings (and kingship), i, 134, 178, 218, 240 _sqq._,     248 _sqq._, 263, 285
_sqq._,     305 _sq._, 430, ii, 142, 194, 233-34, 286, 375 _sq._;   divine
right of, ii, 216, 221

Kioto (kyō´ tō), ii, 467

Kipchak, Empire, ii, 114, 128 _sq._

Kipling, Rudyard, ii, 423, 462, 488

Kirghis (kir gēz´), ii, 109;   steppe, i, 634

Kitchen-middens, i, 109, 110, 152

Kiwi, i, 207

Knighthood, i, 465, ii, 202

Knights, i, 268, ii, 179;   of the Shire, i, 463, ii, 218

Knipe, H. R., i, 50

Knives, flint, i, 96

Knots, records by means of, i, 208

Knowledge, diffusion of, i, 296, 397 _sqq._, 487, ii, 168-69

Konia, ii, 72, 78

Königsberg, ii, 180, 367

Koran, ii, 9 _sq._, 15, 29 _sq._, 257

Korea, i, 633, 638 _sq._, ii, 261, 465 _sqq._

Korean alphabet, i, 638;   language, i, 156

Kosciusko (kos i ŭs´ kō), ii, 251

Krapina, i, 72

Kremlin, the, ii, 242

Krishna (krish´ nă), i, 439

Kropotkin, ii, 425

Krüdener, Baroness von, ii, 372

Krum, Prince of Bulgaria, ii, 58, 69, 614

Krupp, firm of, ii, 514

Kshatriyas (kshä trē´ yăz), i, 269, 270

Kuan-yin, i, 429

Kublai Khan (koo´ blī kän), ii, 108 _sqq._, 126 _sq._, 144, 616 _sq._

Kuen-lun (kwen loon´) mountains, i, 201, 546, 548, 643

Kufa, ii, 36

Kushan (koo shän´) dynasty, i, 628

Kusinagara, i, 646

Kut, ii, 522

Kutub, ii, 108, 615


Labour, i, 255, 265, 271, ii, 154-56, 157-58, 193, 404 _sqq._, 478

Labour Colleges, i, 487

Labourers, Statute of, ii, 156

Labrador, i, 78, 124, 137, ii, 435

Labyrinth, Cretan, i, 214, 216

Lacedemon (läs _ĕ_ dē´ m_ŏ_n), i, 303

Lacedemonians, i, 307, 322, 332

Ladé, i, 331

Ladrones (lä drōnz´), ii, 187

Ladysmith, i, 485

Lafayette (lä fā yet´), General, ii, 292, 316, 318, 324, 327

Lagash(lā´ găsh), i, 195

Lahore, ii, 110

Lake dwellings, i, 109-112, 133.   (_See also_ Pile dwellings)

La Madeleine, i, 96

Lamas, Grand, i, 429

Lamballe, princesse de, ii, 329

Lamps, Palæolithic, i, 95

Lance head, bronze, i, 132

Land, tenure of, i, 256, 271

Lanfranc, Archbishop, ii, 150

Lang, Andrew, i, 79

Langley, Prof., ii, 392

Languages of mankind, i, 126, 133, 150-64, 167-74, 189, 227, 298, 446

Lankester, Sir Ray, i, 50, 63, 68, 72-74

Laodicea (lā ō di sē´ ă), ii, 79

Lao Tse (lä´ ot z_ĕ_), i, 433, 436, 582, 632, 641, 647, ii, 106, 402, 607

Laplace, i, 31

Lapland, i, 156

Larsa, i, 195

Las Casas (läs kä´ säs), ii, 193, 305

Lateran, the, ii, 57, 63, 73, 84, 90, 92, 97

Latin, emperors, ii, 97, 229;   language and literature, i, 168, 169, 189, 461,
530, 534-5, 564, 605, 613, ii,     60, 71, 73, 130, 160

Latins, the, i, 445-454, ii, 616

Latium, i, 447

Laud, Archbishop, ii, 221

Laughter, ii, 373

Law, i, 309, 616, ii, 46

Lawrence, Colonel, i, 188

Lawrence, General, ii, 455

Leaf, Walter, i, 216

League of Nations, ii, 545, 548-49, 557-564, 624

Learning, i, 240-41, 609, ii, 114

Leather, Arabian, ii, 38;   money, i, 220, ii, 89;   as clothing, i, 408

Lebanon, i, 287, 621, 623

Lecky, i, 426

Lecointre (l_ĕ_ kwäntr´), ii, 318

Lee, General, ii, 301, 444

Leeuwenhoek (lā´ vĕn huk), ii, 177

Legge, i, 401, 413, 538, 595

Legion of Honour, ii, 357

Legrain, L., i, 241

Leicestershire, ii, 156

Leiden, ii, 229

Leipzig (līp´ sik), ii, 180;   battle of, ii, 368

_Leipzig_, cruiser, ii, 520

Lemberg, ii, 518

Lemming, i, 58

Le Moustier, i, 78

Lemurs, i, 56-57, 65

Lena, river, ii, 267

Lenin (len’ in), ii, 409-11, 527

Leo I, i, 559; III, ii, 57, 58, 60, 97, 613;   X, ii, 200-203, 618

Leo the Isaurian, ii, 29

Leonidas (lē on’ i dăs), i, 336

Leopold I, of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, ii, 381, 436, 622

Leopold, king of Belgium, ii, 438

Lepanto, battle of, ii, 140, 184

Lepers, ii, 94

Lepidus (lep’ i dŭs), i, 514

Levant, the, i, 598, ii, 194

Levantine lake, i, 210

Leverhulme, Lord, ii, 406

Levites, i, 288

Leviticus, Book of, i, 281

Lex Valeria, i, 457

Lexington, ii, 290-91, 621

Lhassa, i, 438, 591

Liang-chi-chao, i, 205

Liao-tung (lē ou’ toong’), ii, 469

Liberal Party, ii, 489

Liberia, i, 217, ii, 461

Libraries, i, 246, 292, 405-09

Libyan script, i, 228

Licinian Rogations and Laws, i, 459,   499, 631

Licinius, i, 459

Liége (1ē āzh’), ii, 513, 514

Liegnitz (lēg’ nits), battle of, ii, 112, 616

Life, i, 6, 16; early forms of, i, 7-15, 19-22, 38 _sqq._;   intellectual
development of human, i, 229-31

Light, essential to plants, i, 24

Ligny (1ē nyē’), ii, 371

Ligurian republic, ii, 347

Lilybæum, i, 469, 470

Limerick, Treaty of, ii, 492

Lincoln, Abraham, i, 345, ii, 443, 623

Lion, the, i, 69, 70, 76, 102, 178, 317

Lippi, Filippo, ii, 183

Lisbon, i, 529, ii, 80, 180, 187, 207, 257

Lissa, battle of, ii, 445

Literature, prehistoric, i, 173

Lithuania, ii, 129, 244

Liu Yu, i, 633

Liverpool, ii, 386, 622

Lizards, i, 46

Llama, i, 56, 207

Lloyd, i, 346, 446

Lloyd, L., i, 174

Lob Nor, ii, 118

Lochau (lō chou’), ii, 206

Locke, John, ii, 288, 309, 620

Lockyer, Sir Norman, i, 240

Logic, study of, ii, 168

Loire (lwär), the, ii, 46

Lombardy (and Lombards), i, 143, 564, 606, 608,     612, 616, ii, 46, 57, 153,
361, 441, 612

London, ii, 154, 156, 180, 182, 221, 222, 249,     259, 289, 361, 370, 398,
437, 470, 483,     492, 520, 532, 623

London, Royal Society.   (_See_ Royal Society of London)

London, University of, ii, 437

Londonderry, ii, 497-98, 624

Longinus (lon jī’ nŭs), i, 535

Long Island Sound, ii, 281

Longwy (lo_n_ vē’), ii, 329

Loos, ii, 517

Lopez de Recalde, Inigo.   (_See_ Ignatius, St., of Loyola)

Lords, House of, i, 466, 489, ii, 219, 224-26, 236, 298

Loreburn, Lord, ii, 510

Lorraine, ii, 446, 487

Lost Ten Tribes, i, 193

Louis the Pious, ii, 47, 60-61, 614

Louis VII, ii, 80; IX, ii, 84, 116, 616;   XI, ii, 179; XIV, ii, 226, 236,
237-39, 249, 253, 311, 331, 356, 376;   XV, ii, 239-40, 243-44, 264, 332, 356,
620;   XVI, ii, 240, 243, 267, 308, 311 _sqq._, 337, 370, 621; XVII, ii, 370;
XVIII, ii, 370, 378, 622

Louis Philippe, ii, 379, 622

Louisiana, ii, 254, 286

Lourdes, i, 591

Louvain University, ii, 553

Low, Sidney, ii, 473

Loyalty, modern conceptions of, ii, 424

Loyola (lō-yō’ l_ă_, loi ō’ l_ă_), St.   (_See_ Ignatius, St., of Loyola)

Lu, i, 434

Lubbock, Sir John.   (_See_ Avebury, Lord)

Lubeck, ii, 182

Lucerne, Lake of, ii, 198

Lu-chu Islands, i, 631

Lucknow, ii, 257, 455

Lucretius (lū krē’ shi ŭs), i, 488, 534, ii, 419

Lucullus (lū kŭl’ ŭs), i, 505

Luke, St., i, 573

Lull, Prof., i, 6, 7

Lunar month, i, 129

Lung-fish, i, 25

Lungs, i, 25, 55

“Lur,” bronze, i, 132

_Lusitania_, liner, ii, 520

Luther, Martin, ii, 160, 162-63, 171, 202-03, 206, 618

Lutterworth, ii, 96

Lützen (lut’ s_ĕ_n), ii, 236

Lutsow, Count, ii, 152

Luxembourg, ii, 381, 445, 511

Luxembourg Palace, ii, 354

Luxor, i, 200, 250

Lvoff, Prince, ii, 525

Lyceum, Athens, i, 357, 359

Lycia, sea-battle of, ii, 28

Lycurgus (lī kũr’ gŭs), i, 221

Lydia (and Lydians), i, 220, 314-16, 320 _sqq._, 326-7, 370, 395,    416, 482,
ii, 121, 606

Lydian language, i, 162;   script, i, 228

Lyell, Sir C., i, 50, ii, 419

Lynd, ii, 499

Lyons, i, 560, ii, 333

Lysias (lis’ i ăs), orator, i, 306

Lysimachus (lī sim’ _ă_ kŭs), i, 395


Macallister, Stewart, i, 168

Macaulay, Lord, i, 450, ii, 270, 273, 428

Macaulay Island, i, 218

Maccabeans, i, 571, ii, 4

McCurdy, ii, 513

MacDougall, i, 148

Macedon, i, 622

Macedonia (and the Macedonians), i, 213, 303, 308, 331, 340, 363,    367
_sqq._, 386-95, 401-2, 430, 452, 476, 480,    ii, 2, 43, 122, 145, 268, 380,
607

Machiavelli (mä kē ā vel’ ē), N., ii, 195-98, 202, 210, 240, 479, 618

Machinery, ii, 275, 395

Mac Neilh, i, 168

Madagascar, i, 207

Madeira, ii, 185

Madelin, ii, 307

_Madhurattha Vilasini_ (măd’ hoorāt’ t’h_ă_ vi lä’ si nē), i, 421

Madison, ii, 303

Madras, i, 179, 431, ii, 142, 258

Mæander (mē ăn’ dĕr), ii, 79

Mælius, Spurius, i, 458, 500

Magdalenian Age, i, 96, 97;   clothing, i, 408;   hunters, i, 317

Magdeburg, ii, 180, 235

Magellan, Ferdinand, ii, 187-88, 618

Magenta, ii, 441, 623

Magic and magicians, i, 134, 235

Magna Carta, ii, 219, 615

Magna Græcia, i, 302, 316, 451, 452

Magna Mater, i, 483

Magnesia, i, 397, 482, ii, 608

Magnetism, ii, 176

Magyar language, i, 156, 560, ii, 70

Magyars (môd´ yôrz, mă jărz´), i, 560, 606, ii, 69, 113

Mahaffy, i, 357, 389, 401, 404

Mahan, ii, 352

Mahrattas, ii, 257

Maillard, ii, 316-17

Maimonides (mī mon´ i dēz), ii, 36

Maine, ii, 281, 282

Mainz (mīnts), ii, 60, 159, 180, 331

Maize, i, 113, 207

Majuba, ii, 460, 489, 623

Malabar, i, 533

Malay-Polynesian languages, i, 158

Malays, i, 203, ii, 465

Malleson, ii, 133

Mallet, ii, 309

Malory, Sir Thomas, i, 175

Malta, ii, 225, 351, 359, 451, 470

Mamelukes, ii, 122, 126, 132

Mammals, i, 46-50, 58-59, 64 _sqq._   (_See also_ Animals)

Mammoth, i, 58, 64, 69, 76, 78, 92, 95, 99, 101

Man, i, 5, 17, 21, 37, 41, 63-67, 101, 105-109, 110, 134-35;   ancestry of, i,
49, 56-59, 63-69, ii, 420;   brotherhood of, i, 584;   early, i, 57, 85-88, 91,
100-09, 115, 122-35, 145, 149, 273, 407, ii, 341;   Eoanthropus, i, 60, 70-74;
Heidelberg, i, 60, 69, 71, 84;   life of common, i, 255;   as mechanical
power, ii, 394;   Neanderthal, i, 60, 72, 90, 91-95, 97, 108, 122-25;
primeval, i, 76-84;   and the State, ii, 244-45

Manchester, ii, 386, 404, 622

Manchu (măn choo´) language, i, 156

Manchuria, i, 546, 641, ii, 261, 463-69, 484

Manchus, ii, 128, 261, 464

Mandarins, i, 270, 272

Mangu Khan, ii, 113, 116, 616

Mani (mä´ nē), i, 626-27, ii, 6, 13, 14, 91-92, 611

Manichæans (măn i kē´ _ă_nz), i, 603, 626, ii, 29, 91-92

Manichæism, i, 626

Manif (mä nēf), ii, 5, 11

Mankind, i, 136-149, 295-7, 365;   brotherhood of, ii, 246

Manlius, Marcus, i, 458, 473, 500

Manny, Sir Walter, ii, 154

Manresa (män rā’ s_ă_), Abbey of, ii, 165

Mansfield, Lord, ii, 306

Mansur, ii, 31

Mantinea (măn ti nē’ _ă_), i, 378

Mantua (măn’ tyū _ă_), ii, 332

Manuscripts, i, 407, 627, ii, 159

“Manzi,” ii, 118

Manzikert (măn’ zi kũrt), ii, 72

Mara, Indian god, i, 418

Marat (mä rä’), ii, 324-33, 374

Marathon, i, 332-7, 345, 346, ii, 607

Marchand, Colonel, ii, 460

Marcus Aurelius.   (_See_ Antoninus)

Mardonius (mär dō ni ŭs), i, 339, 340

Marduk (mär dook), a god, i, 237

Marengo, ii, 355, 622

Margoliouth, D. S., ii, 1

Maria Theresa, ii, 240, 251, 620, 621

Marie Antoinette, ii, 311

Marie Louise, Archduchess, ii, 365, 374

Mariner’s compass, i, 635, ii, 121

Maritime power, i, 215-16

Marius (mär’ i ŭs), i, 486, 502-05, ii, 511, 609

Mark, St., i, 573, 578, 579, 580

Marly, ii, 317

Marmots, i, 47

Marne, ii, 515, 530

Marozia, ii, 62, 614

Marriage and intermarriage, i, 179, 237, 250, 267

Mars, god, ii, 49

Mars, planet, i, 4, 5

Marseillaise, the, ii, 331

Marseilles (mär sālz’), i, 203, 447, 475, ii, 82, 94, 180, 204, 333, 616

Marston Moor, ii, 223

Martel, Charles, ii, 45, 47-48, 614

Martin V, Pope, ii, 96, 100, 152, 617

Marvin, F. S., i, 401, ii, 90, 384

Marx, Karl, ii, 398, 399, 408, 409, 411, 415-16, 485

Marxists, i, 268

Mary, the Egyptian, ii, 13

Mary, the Virgin, i, 575, 591

Mary I, Queen of England, ii, 218, 220

Mary II, Queen of England, ii, 226

Maryland, ii, 282, 283, 284, 290

Mas d’Azil, i, 101

Masai hunters, i, 318

Masked Tuaregs, i, 154

Mason, Capt. John, ii, 282

Mason, Otis T., i, 63, 104

Mason and Dixon line, ii, 282, 284

Maspero, i, 250, 252

Mass, the, ii, 149

Massachusetts, ii, 281, 282, 290, 296, 300, 306, 338, 621

Massage, i, 147

Massinissa, King, i, 479

Mastodon (măs’ tō don), i, 58, 73

Mathematics, ii, 35-36, 37, 114

Matheson, i, 445

Matthew, St., i, 573, 577, 587

Maulvi Muhammad Ali, ii, 9

Mauritius, ii, 257

Maxentius, i, 597

Maximilian, Emperor of Mexico, ii, 444, 623

Maximilian I, ii, 200, 617

Maximin, i, 557

Maya (mä’ yä) writing, i, 208

Mayence.   (See Mainz)

_Mayflower_, the, ii, 253, 281, 284

Mayor, i, 491

Mayor of the Palace, ii, 47

Mazarin, Cardinal, ii, 236, 237, 246

Mazdaism, i, 627, ii, 16

Mead, i, 558

Mecca, ii, 3-17, 24-30

Meccan allies, ii, 612

Mechanical Revolution, the, ii, 386-96, 415, 425, 437,    449, 453, 461, 476,
541

Medes, i, 194, 200, 248, 291, 299, 315, 318-23, 332,    335, 342, 344, 387,
449, 543, ii, 607

Media (mē’ di ă), i, 193, 293, 319, 327, 387, 508, 523

Medici (med’ i chē) family, ii, 182, 195, 196

Medicine, i, 402 _sqq._, ii, 35, 37

Medina (me dē’ n_ă_), i, 624, 634, ii, 1, 3, 7-11, 14,     17, 18, 21, 24, 26,
27, 612

Mediterranean, i, 153, 160, 184, 190, 210, 212, 216, 218,     278, 304, 396,
445-6, 468, 508, 529, 540, 542, 560,     570, 621, 641, ii, 28, 53, 65, 139-40,
182, 184, 189, 194, 225

Mediterranean, alphabets, i, 228, 304, 638;   civilization, i, 84, 149, 196,
228, 273, 562, ii, 1;   early navigation of, i, 210, 211, 216, 512;   race and
peoples, i, 101, 108, 138, 141-45, 154, 160-62,     168, 176, 206, 281, 298,
300, 313, 445,     471-72, 538, ii, 122, 149, 490;   valley, i, 75, 108, 118,
119, 120, 184, 196

Medway, ii, 226

Meerut, ii, 454

Megabazus (meg _ă_ bā’ zŭs), i, 331

Megalithic monuments, i, 109, 110, 125, 147, 240

Megara (meg’ _ă_ r_ă_), i, 337

Megatherium, i, 102, 207

Megiddo, i, 291, ii, 607

Meillet, A., i, 300

Melanesia, i, 148, 149

Melasgird, ii, 72, 615

Memphis, i, 326, 364, 382, 412

Menahem (men’ _ă_ hem), i, 291, ii, 606

Mendicants, i, 221

Menelaus (men _ĕ_ lā’ ŭs), i, 176

Menes (mē’ nēz), i, 196, 204

Mengo, ii, 460

Menhir, i, 128

Mercator’s projection, i, 546, ii, 451

Mercenary armies, ii, 197

Merchants, i, 264-67, 271

Mercia, ii, 40, 50, 54

Mercury, god, i, 457

Mercury, planet, i, 4

Merodach (mer’ ō dăk), i, 245

Merovingians, ii, 46-47, 228

Merv, i, 604

Merycodus (mer i kō’ dŭs), i, 58

Mesopotamia, i, 102, 133, 183-86, 191, 196-99, 209,     233, 244, 252, 265,
304, 389,     509, 526, 561, 565, 616, 619, 622, ii, 1, 18, 21,     31, 118,
128, 130, 145, 522

Mesozoic (mes ō zö’ ik) period, i, 12, 14, 37-55, 66, 67, ii, 140

Messiah, i, 293, 538, 569, 575, 580-86

Messina (me sē’ n_ă_), Straits of, i, 454, 460, 468, 469

Metallurgy, ii, 388

Metals, i, 105, 106, 205, 207, 219, ii, 174

Metaurus, i, 476

Methodist revival, ii, 263

Methuselah, i, 129

Metternich, ii, 378, 400

Metz, ii, 317, 318, 445, 446

Mexico (and the Mexicans), i, 147, 203, 207, 208,     ii, 186, 189, 190, 193,
444, 445, 618

Mey, Peter van der, ii, 230

Michael VII, emperor, ii, 72

Michael VIII.   (_See_ Palæologus, Michael)

Michelangelo, ii, 183

Michelin guides, i, 224

Micklegarth, ii, 53

Microscope, ii, 177

Middelburg, ii, 182

Midianites, i, 283

Midsummer day, i, 240

Midwinter day, i, 240

Migrations, i, 105, 548-52

Mihiragula (mi her ă goo’ lă), i, 629, ii, 612

Miklagord, ii, 53

Milan, i, 559, 560, ii, 180, 182, 197, 200, 204, 205, 361, 380

Miletus (mī lē’ tŭs), i, 303, 312, 330, 340, 379

Military organization, i, 190;   service, i, 311;   tactics, ii, 234

Milk, i, 92, 112, 187, 545

Miller, G. S., i, 72

Millet, i, 558

Milligan, Joseph, i, 163

Miltenburg, ii, 180

Miltiades (mil tī’ _ă_ dēz), i, 330, 346

Milvian Bridge, i, 597

Minerals, i, 9

Ming dynasty, i, 227, 635, 637, 641-42, ii, 117, 128, 166, 261, 617

Minos (mī’ nos), i, 196, 214, 216, 257, 316

Minotaur (min’ ō tawr), i, 214, 216

Minstrels, i, 174

Miocene (mī’ ō sēn) period, i, 52, 58-59, 66, 73

Mirabeau (mē rä bō), ii, 314, 319-24

Misraim and Misrim, i, 281

Missionaries (and missions), i, 432, ii, 48, 50, 116, 166, 460, 618

Mississippi, ii, 285

Mitanni, i, 192

Mithraic inscriptions, i, 492

Mithraic Sun-day, i, 575

Mithraism, i, 538, 588, 590, 625, ii, 91, 149, 611

Mithras, i, 413, 538, 590, 625

Mithridates (mith ri dā’ tēz), i, 504, 505, ii, 609

Mo Ti, i, 582

Moa, i, 207

Moab (and Moabites), i, 283, 294, ii, 244

Moawija.   (_See_ Muawija)

Modestov, i, 446

Moerbeke (moor’ bā k_ĕ_), William of, ii, 168

Mœsia, i, 564, ii, 71, 609

Mogul, Great, ii, 471, 620

Mogul dynasty, ii, 133, 618

Mohammed.   (_See_ Muhammad)

Mokanna, ii, 31

Moloch, i, 288

Moltke, Count, ii, 481

Moluccas, ii, 187

Mommsen, i, 454, 464, 480, 483, 500

Monarchy, i, 263, 357, ii, 143, 211, 215, 216-17,     230, 236, 248, 251, 307,
339, 372

Monasteries (and monasticism), i, 609 _sqq._, ii, 50, 106, 150

Monastir (mō nas tēr’), ii, 522

Money, i, 219, 220, 265, 445, 457, 496, 629-30, ii, 344-45.   (_See also_
Currency)

Mongolia, i, 541, 543, 640, ii, 110-20, 261-62

Mongolian languages, i, 156, 162;   races and peoples, i, 100, 141-49, 158,
160, 174,     205, 299, 316, 387, 388, 507,     508, 543-51, 606, ii, 121-22,
139, 142, 247, 261, 262, 464

Mongoloid tribes, i, 207, ii, 189

Mongols, i, 541, 545, 551, 558, ii, 83, 106 _sqq._,     114, 122, 127, 128,
129, 130,     140, 142, 143, 168, 184, 193, 261, 268, 616, 617

Monitors, i, 46

Monkeys, i, 56, 57, 65, 67

Monks.   (_See_ Monasteries)

_Monmouth_, cruiser, ii, 520

Monosyllabic language, i, 157

Monotheism, ii, 15

Monroe, President, ii, 378, 444

Monroe Doctrine, ii, 444, 458, 505

Mons, ii, 514

Monte Cassino, i, 611, 612

Montefiore, C. G., i, 586

Montelius, i, 104

Montesquieu, ii, 309

Montezuma (mon tē zoo’ m_ă_, ii, 190

Montfort, Simon de, ii, 219

Montreal, ii, 254

Montserrat, ii, 165

Moon, i, 6, 128, 129

Moorish buffoon, i, 558

Moorish paper, ii, 159

Moors, i, 490, 565, ii, 193

Moose, i, 70

Moral ideas, i, 296

Moravia, i, 554

More, Sir Thomas, ii, 211, 394

Moreau, General, ii, 355, 374, 622

Morelly, ii, 309

Morgan, W., i, 587

Morley, Lord, ii, 427

_Morning Post_, ii, 405

Mornington, Lord, ii, 453

Morocco, i, 217, 565, ii, 142, 461, 470, 484, 500

Morris, William, ii, 311

Mortar, pebble, i, 90

Morte d’Arthur, i, 175

Mortillet, de, i, 96

Mosasaurs (mō’ s_ă_ sawrz), i, 41, 45

Moscow, ii, 129, 134, 242, 366, 622

Moscow, Grand Duke of, ii, 129, 617

Moscow, Tsar of, ii, 259

Moses, i, 196, 200, 209, 244, 279, 293, 626

Moslem schools, ii, 137;   universities, ii, 36;   year, ii, 8

Moslems, the, ii, 19-29, 34, 64, 70, 74, 80-84, 94,     108, 113, 128, 136,
140, 159,     453, 613, 615;   in Europe, ii, 28-32, 41, 47, 51, 57, 67, 88,
186, 242, 613, 615.   (_See also_ Crusades _and_ Islam)

Mosses, i, 24, 27

Mosso, i, 210

Most, ii, 152

Mosul, ii, 78, 132

Motley, ii, 230, 232

Mounds, i, 109, 117, 125

Mountains (and mountaineering), i, 5, 35, 36, 52

Mousterian Age (and implements), i, 60, 78, 81, 87, 97

Muawija (moo ă wē’ yă), ii, 24-28, 613

Mudfish, i, 26, 55

Muehlon, Herr, ii, 551

Muhammad (mu hăm’ ăd), prophet, i, 296, 573, 583, 624,     634, 642, ii, 1,
126, 136,     149;   life of, ii, 4 _sqq._, 26-27;   teaching of, ii, 13-16, 29

Muhammad II, sultan, ii, 124, 197, 617

Muhammad-Ibn-Musa, ii, 37

Muhammadan communistic movement, ii, 157

Muhammadanism, ii, 29, 42, 135.   (_See also_ Islam _and_ Muhammad)

Mulberry tree, i, 530

Mules, i, 140

Mülhausen (mul’ hou zen), ii, 347

Müller, Max, i, 235

Mummies, i, 147

Mummius, i, 483

Munich (mū’ nik), ii, 180

Münster (mun’ ster), ii, 156, 157, 503, 618

Münster, Bishop of, ii, 156

Munzuk, i, 559

Murad I, ii, 124

Murat (mu rä’), ii, 367

Murray, John, ii, 263

Murzuk, i, 118

Muscovites, ii, 244

Muscovy, empire of, ii, 242

Musical instruments, i, 115

Musk ox, i, 58, 64, 76, 101

Muskets, ii, 234

Mycale (mik’ _ă_ lē), i, 340, 343, ii, 607

Mycenæ (mī sē’ nē), i, 106, 303, 315, 317

Mycenean (mī sē nē’ _ā_n) architecture, i, 448

Mycerinus (mis ũ rī’ nŭs), i, 198

Mylæ, i, 470, ii, 608

Myos-hormos, i, 533

Myres, J. L., i, 228

Myriapods (mir’ i _ă_ podz), i, 28

Myrina (mi rī’ nă), i, 450

Myron, i, 346

Myrtalis (mũr’ tă lis), i, 376

Mysteries, religious, i, 373

Myth-making, i, 129

Mythology, i, 130, 361


Nabatean Kings, i, 622

Nabonidus (năb ō nī’ dŭs), i, 247-50, 255, 278, 288,     292, 320, 326, 385,
416, 483

Nadir Shah (nä´ dēr shä’), ii, 257, 620

Nagasaki (nä gă sä’ kē), ii, 465

Nalanda, i, 645

Nanking, i, 642, ii, 108, 615

Naples, i, 451, 510, 611, ii, 88, 98, 180, 211, 347, 378, 441, 612

Napoleon I, ii, 89, 210, 327, 332, 339, 348-82, 384, 386, 453, 621, 622;   III,
i, 565, ii, 436, 438-45, 448, 623

Narbonne, ii, 180

Naseby, ii, 223

Nasmyth, ii, 388

Natal, ii, 460

Nathan, i, 287

“National Schools,” ii, 396

Nationalism, ii, 431-36, 439, 448, 498-500

Nationalization, ii, 412

Natural History Museum, i, 50

Natural rights, ii, 156; selection, i, 18

Nautilus, Pearly, i, 47

Naval tactics, Roman, i, 469-71

Navarino (năv ă rē’ nō), battle of, ii, 382, 622

Navigation, early, i, 170, 209-18

Nazarenes, i, 587-91

Neanderthal (nā ăn’ der täl) man, i, 60, 71-87, 91, 92,     97, 108, 123, 124,
489, 496

Nebuchadnezzar (neb ū kăd nez’ _ă_r) (the Great) II, i,     194, 200, 217, 277,
290,     291, 319, 380, 385, ii, 607

Nebulæ, i, 3

Necho (nē’ kō), Pharaoh, i, 200, 218, 291, 401, 509, 532, ii, 185, 607

Necker, ii, 318

Needles, bone, i, 90, 96-97

Negritos, ii, 465

Negroes, i, 63, 68, 141, 146, 197, 206, 533, ii, 193, 284-85, 305, 306

Negroid race, i, 88, 139-40, 145, 148, 160, 189, 195

Nehemiah, i, 294

Nelson, Horatio, ii, 352, 361-62

Neohipparion, i, 58

Neolithic Age, i, 75, 97-110, 112-16, 152-54, 158-62, 169 _sqq._, 196-97;
agriculture, i, 113-17, 130, 189, 254, 317;   civilization and culture, i,
104-16, 124-25, 129-34, 145-49, 151-53, 171-76,     181-88, 195, 197, 201-03,
206-08, 209-13;   man, 100-06, 126-30, 131-35, 140, 145, 158-60, 167-72, 223,
273-74, ii, 301

Neo-platonism, i, 592, ii, 169

Nepal (nē pawl’), i, 416, 640, 643, ii, 262

Nephthys (nef’ this), i, 249

Neptune, planet, i, 4

Nero, i, 525-26, 589, 610, ii, 609

Nerva, i, 526, ii, 610

Nestorian Christians, i, 604, 617, 627, 634, 647, ii, 35, 106, 117-19, 611, 612

Netherlands, the, ii, 200, 207, 217, 228-33, 238, 253, 380, 381.   (_See also_
Dutch Republic _and_ Holland)

Nets, flax, i, 114

Neustadt (noi’ stăt), ii, 180

Neustria, ii, 46, 47, 48, 613

Neva, river, ii, 242

New Amsterdam, ii, 253, 282-83

Newark, ii, 430

New England, i, 59, 143, ii, 185, 253, 281-84

Newfoundland, ii, 254, 471

New Guinea, i, 139, 141, 162

New Habsburg, ii, 199, 616

New Hampshire, ii, 281, 290

New Harmony (U. S. A.), ii, 405

New Jersey, ii, 283, 290, 298, 543-44

New Lanark, ii, 404-06

Newmarket, ii, 226

New Mexico, ii, 505

New Orleans, ii, 254

New Plymouth, ii, 281

Newton, Sir Isaac, i, 408, 534, ii, 176, 620

Newts, i, 26

New Year, festival of, i, 240

New York, i, 495, ii, 180, 253, 283, 290, 292, 301, 387, 621

New Zealand, i, 207, ii, 457, 471-72

Niarchus, i, 375

Nibelungenlied (nē’ b_ĕ_ lung en lēt), i, 177

Nicæa (nī sē’ _ă_), i, 600-01, ii, 72, 78, 79, 611

Nice, Province of, ii, 440

Nicene (nī’ sēn) Creed, i, 601, ii, 60, 611

Nicephorus (nī sef’ ō rŭs), ii, 58, 614

Nicholas I, tsar, ii, 377, 382, 405, 440, 622;   II, ii, 476, 477

Nicholas of Myra, i, 600

Nicholson, Gen. John, ii, 455

Nickel, i, 4, ii, 389

Nicomedes (nik ō mē’ dēz), King of Bithynia, i, 500

Nicomedia, i, 560, 595, 600

Niemen (nē’ men), ii, 362

Nietzsche (nē’ ch_ĕ_), ii, 481

Nieuw Amsterdam.   (_See_ New Amsterdam)

Niger, river, i, 565

Nile, the, i, 119, 121, 137, 158, 200, 206, 210, 211, 274,     304, 359, 533,
ii, 142, 460;   battle of, ii, 352, 621;   delta, i, 197, 218, 238;   valley,
195, 273, ii, 605, 612

Nineveh (nin’ _ĕ_ v_ĕ_), i, 192-96, 200, 246, 292, 319, 384,     616, 619, 622,
624, ii, 130, 607

Nippur (nip poor’), i, 133, 184-85, 190, 196, 274, ii, 130

Nirvana (nir vä’ nä), i, 423, 425, 431

Nish, i, 528, 553, 558, 599, ii, 610

Nisibin, i, 622

Nitrate of silver, ii, 38

Nitric acid, ii, 38

Noah, i, 140

Nobility, i, 258, 263

Nogaret, Guillaume de, ii, 99, 616

Nomadism (and Nomads), i, 105, 112, 137, 148, 177, 186-88,     206, 232-33,
387-88, 507-08, 545-52, 555, 627-28, 641,     ii, 1, 105, 108-10, 128-30,
137-39, 143-45, 189

Nominalism, ii, 169 _sqq._

Nonconformity, ii, 168

Nordic race, i, 146-154, 206, 298, 315, 368, 373, 387,     548, ii, 43, 66,
122, 144,     149, 168, 247, 262, 490

Normandy (and the Normans), ii, 54, 66-67, 69, 72, 74,     76, 78, 150, 157,
178, 185, 320, 615;   dukedom of, ii, 62, 66

Norse language, i, 168, ii, 54

North, Lord, ii, 293

Northmen, i, 539, ii, 53-54, 64, 66, 71, 149, 490

North Pole, i, 31

North Sea, the, i, 75, 539, ii, 66, 182, 185

Northumberland, ii, 396

Northumbria, kingdom of, ii, 40, 50

Norway, i, 102, 605, ii, 51, 66, 97, 162, 206, 252, 380, 614

Norwegian language, i, 168

Norwich, ii, 154

Norwood, i, 355

Nottingham, ii, 222, 386

Nova Scotia, ii, 185

Novgorod (nov gō rod’), ii, 66, 129, 180, 182, 259, 614

Noyes, J. H., ii, 403

Nubia, i, 259

Nubian wild ass, i, 217

Numbers, Book of, i, 281

Numbers, use of, i, 128

Numerals, Arabic, i, 219, ii, 37, 88

Numidia (and Numidians), i, 474, 479, 484, 502, 534

Nuns, ii, 149

Nuremberg, ii, 180;   Peace of, ii, 206

_Nürnberg_ (nurn’ ber_ch_), cruiser, ii, 520


Oak, i, 59

Oars, i, 211

Obedience and will, ii, 140-43

Obi (ō’ bē), river, i, 387, ii, 267

Occam, ii, 171, 172, 174, 617

Ocean, i, 5, 36

Oceania, i, 206

Octavian.   (_See_ Augustus)

Odenathus (od ē nā’ thŭs), i, 617, ii, 3, 610

Odin, ii, 49

Odoacer (ō dō ā’ s_ĕ_r), ii, 58, 611

Odysseus, i, 508

Odyssey.   (_See_ Homer)

Œcumenical councils, i, 601

Offerings, i, 234

Ogdal Khan, ii, 110, 113, 615

Oglethorpe, ii, 282, 620

Ohio (ō hī’ ō), i, 59, ii, 285

Okakura, i, 641

“Old Man” in religion, i, 125, 131-35, ii, 341

Oligarchies, i, 307-10

Oligocene (ol’ i gō sēn) period, i, 52, 53, 66, 67

Olney, Mr., ii, 505, 562

Olympiad, first, i, 314, ii, 606

Olympian games, i, 314

Olympias, i, 373, _sqq._, 387, 394, 402, 452

Olympus, mount, i, 335

Omani (ō mä’ ni) Arabs, i, 565

Omar I, caliph, ii, 18-26, 83, 613

Omayyads (ō mī’ yădz), ii, 24-36, 61, 64, 613

Oneida community, ii, 403-04, 415

O’Neil of Tyrone, i, 110

Opossum, i, 56

Oracles, i, 252, 305, 321-23

Orange, house of, ii, 232

Orange, Duke of, ii, 232

Orange River, ii, 460

Orang-outang, i, 63, 67

Orbit of earth, i, 30-33, 57

_Orient_, ship, ii, 352

Orientation of temples, i, 238, 240

Origen (or’ i j_ĕ_n), i, 592

Orissa, i, 440

Orlando, Signor, ii, 552, 556

Orleans, i, 559, ii, 180, 400

Ormonde, Duke of, ii, 271

Ormuz, ii, 118

Ormuzd (ôr’ mŭzd), i, 625, 626

Ornaments, i, 114

Ornithorhynchus (ôr nith ō ring’ kŭs), i, 54

Orpheus (ôr’ fūs), i, 354, 538

Orphic cult, i, 354, 373

Orsini (ôr sē’ nē) family, ii, 99

Orthodox Church.   (_See_ Greek Church)

Osborn, Prof. H. F., i, 7, 13, 50, 59, 63, 86, 96, 100, 534

Osiris (ō sīr’ is), i, 249, 412, 413, 590

Osman, House of, ii, 123

Ostia, i, 497

Ostracism, i, 312

Ostrogoths, i, 550, 553, 606, ii, 66, 612

Othman, ii, 24, 26, 613

Otho, Emperor, i, 526, ii, 609

Otis, James, ii, 287

Otranto, ii, 126

Otters, i, 38, 69

Otto I, ii, 63, 68, 70, 97, 614

Otto II, ii, 63, 614

Otto III, ii, 63, 614

Otto of Bavaria, ii, 382

Ottoman Empire, ii, 121-25, 131, 132, 136, 139, 184, 617.   (_See also_ Turkey
_and_ Turks)

Oudh (oud), ii, 256, 258, 453

Oundle School, ii, 429

Ovid, i, 13

Owen, Robert, ii, 404-09, 623

Ownership, ii, 341

Ox, great, i, 101

Ox-carts, i, 282

Oxen, i, 112, 170, 178, 217

Oxford, i, 530, ii, 37, 96, 153,     168, 171, 172, 180, 222, 264, 271, 288,
317, 427-30, 437, 486

Oxide of iron, i, 9

Oxus, i, 629

Oxydactylus (ok si dăk’ ti lŭs), i, 58

Oxygen (ok’ si j_ĕ_n), i, 23


Pacific Ocean, i, 47, 82, 148, 206,     273, ii, 110, 142, 187, 189, 261, 484

Paddling in navigation, i, 211

Padua, i, 559

Paine, Tom, ii, 293, 303

Painted pebbles, i, 94, 101

Painting, Palæolithic, i, 93, 94, 95

Paionia, i, 339

Palæoanthropus Heidelbergensis (păl ē ō ăn thrō’ pŭs hī’     del bũrg en’ sis),
i, 57, 69-73, 84

Palæolithic age, i, 25-27, 34, 56-60, 75-85, 91, 96-100, 108, 158, 171, 197;
art, i, 92-100, 123, 129;   implements, i, 76, 80, 104, 105, 107, 137;   man,
i, 82-85, 96-97, 102-06, 115-17, 128-30, 134-35,     137-38, 145, 148-52, 162,
169, 206, 223, 233, 273, 354, 408, ii, 142, 189, 341

Palæologus (păl ē ol’ ō gŭs), Michael (Michael VIII), ii, 98;   Zoe, ii, 129

Palæopithecus (păl ē ō pi thē’ kŭs), i, 67

Palæozoic (păl ē ō zō’ ik) period, i, 9-15, 25, 27, 28,     29, 39, 49, 55

Palais Royal, ii, 315

Palawan (p_ă_ lä’ w_ă_n), ii, 507

Palermo (p_ă_ ler’ mō), i, 470

Palestine, i, 184, 261, 278, 280, 289, 447, 569,     ii, 2, 71, 74, 80, 94,
106, 114, 118, 132, 483, 616

Pali (pä’ lē) language, i, 417

Palmerston, Lord, ii, 438

Palms, Cainozoic, i, 51

Palmyra (pă mī’ ră), i, 617, 621 _sqq._, ii, 3, 610

Palos (pä’ lōs), ii, 186

Pamir (pā mēr’) Plateau, i, 387

Pamirs, i, 643, ii, 24, 109, 118, 128, 184

Pampeluna (păm pĕ loo’ n_ă_), ii, 164, 618

Pamphylia (păm fil’ i _ă_), ii, 79

Panama Canal, ii, 507

Panama, Isthmus of, ii, 187, 190

Pan-American Conferences, ii, 447, 505

Pan Chau, i, 549, ii, 610

Pan-German movement, ii, 483

Panipat (pä’ nē pŭt), ii, 133, 618

Pannonia (pă nō’ ni _ă_), i, 553-54, 606, ii, 609

Panther in Europe, i, 318

Papacy (incl. popes), policy of, ii, 90;   outline of, ii, 96;   and the Great
War, ii, 167;   and world dominion, ii, 252;   miscellaneous, i, 603-05, 612,
ii, 41, 47, 56 _sqq._, 67,     72, 80 _sqq._, 92, 95, 99, 114 _sq._,     124
_sqq._, 147 _sq._, 161, 166-67, 188, 203, 246, 400, 618.   (_See also_ Rome,
Church of)

Papal Schism, ii, 99-100, 127, 151, 617

Paper, introduction and use of, i, 198, 408, ii, 38, 121,     158 _sq._, 194

Papua (pä’ pu _ă_), type of mankind in, i, 139

Papuan speech, i, 162

Papyrus (pă pī’ rŭs), i, 198, 408, ii, 38

Parchment, ii, 38

Parchment promissory notes, ii, 89

Pariahs, i, 269

Paris, Peace of, ii, 286, 621; during the Revolution, ii, 313 _sqq._;
Napoleon in, ii, 348, 360, 368, 371;   capitulation of, ii, 368;   rising
against Charles X, ii, 378-79;   revolution of 1848, ii, 400-01;   siege of,
ii, 446;   Zeppelin raids on, ii, 519;   Peace Conference at, ii, 543-58,
560-66;   miscellaneous, ii, 180, 294, 356, 398, 621

Paris, University of, ii, 37, 166 _sq._, 173, 271

Parisian artificers, ii, 114

Parker, E. H., i, 541, 542

Parkyn, i, 63, 96

Parliament, government by, ii, 194;   English, ii, 219-28, 248, 259, 287 _sq._,
492 _sq._, 622;   Polish, ii, 251

Parliamentary Monarchy in Europe, ii, 243

Parma, ii, 88

Parmenio (pär mē’ ni ō), i, 375, 391

Parricide, i, 637

Parsees, i, 625, ii, 137

Parthenon (pär’ th_ĕ_ non), i, 346

Parthia (and Parthians), i, 388 _sq._, 396, 506     _sqq._, 523, 526, 540, 543
_sq._,     616, 621 _sq._, ii, 609

Paschal II, ii, 615

Passau (päs’ ou), Treaty of, ii, 207, 618

Passover, Feast of the, i, 586 _sq._

Passy (pă sē’), ii, 319

Pasteur (păs tũr’), i, 408

Pastor, L. v., ii, 127

Patriarchal groups, i, 110

Patricians, Roman, i, 454-63

Patrick, St., ii, 50

Patriotism, i, 310, 460, ii, 246

Patroclus (pă trō’ klŭs), i, 177

Pattison, Prof. Pringle, ii, 172

Patzinaks, ii, 71

Paul, St., i, 395, 462, 491, 583, 586 _sqq._, ii, 418

Paul, Tsar of Russia, ii, 620

Paulicians, i, 603

Pauline epistles, i, 588 _sq._

Pauline mysteries, i, 591

Pavia (pă vē’ _ă_), ii, 204

Payne, E. S., i, 158

Peace, universal, i, 296-97, ii, 90

Peace Conference.   (_See_ Paris)

Peas, as food, i, 113

Peasant revolts, ii, 154 _sq._, 203, 271, 397-98, 617

Peasants, i, 151, 257

Pecunia, i, 219

Pecus, i, 219

Pedantry, advent of, i, 409

Peel, Lord, ii, 567

Peel, Sir Robert, ii, 428

Peep-o’-Day Boys, ii, 492

Peers, Council of, ii, 221

Peet, i, 446

Pegu (pē goo’), ii, 119

Peisistratidæ (pī sis trä’ ti dē), i, 314

Peisistratus (pī sis’ tr_ă_ tŭs), i, 308, 332, 337, 354, 457, ii, 607

Peisker, T., i, 105

Pekinese language, i, 157

Peking, i, 240, 642, ii, 108, 109, 117 _sq._, 134, 242, 261, 463, 615

Pelham, i, 454

Pella (pel’ _ă_), i, 373

Peloponnesian War, i, 306, 343, ii, 607

Pelycosaurs (pel’ i kō sawr_z_), i, 27

Penck, Albrecht, i, 59, 70

Pendulum, invention of, ii, 37

Penelope, i, 179

Penn, William, ii, 282

Pennsylvania, ii, 282, 283, 290, 297 _sq._, 304

Pennsylvania, University of, i, 184

Pentateuch, i, 278 _sqq._, 293

Pepi, i, 199, 401, ii, 211

Pepin (pep’ in), I, ii, 47, 48, 51, 69, 613;   son of Charlemagne, ii, 57;   of
Heristhal, ii, 47, 613

Pepys, Samuel, ii, 226

Perdiccas (pũr dik’ ăs), i, 370

Pergamum (pũr’ g_ă_ mŭm), i, 395-96, 499 _sq._, 507, ii, 609

Pericles (per’ i klēz), i, 309, 342 _sqq._,    364, 460, 528 _sq._, ii, 153,
182, 184, 607;   Age of, i, 355 _sq._, 364

Perihelion, i, 30 _sqq._, 57

Peripatetic school, i, 402

Periplus of Hanno, i, 217, 241

Perkins, ii, 478

Permian rocks, i, 29

Perry, Commodore, ii, 466, 623

Perry, Mr., i, 172

Persepolis (pũr sep’ ō lis), i, 364, 385, ii, 18

Persia (and the Persians), i, 109, 139, 169, 182,     218, 247, 248, 291-92,
299, 317, 372, 377, 389,     394-95, 452, 507, 510, 533, 538, 542, 543, 551,
622, 623, 627-28, 634-37, ii, 2, 3, 17-21, 67, 71,     105, 109, 113-19, 128,
139, 157, 179, 257, 268, 610;   history (_rise of_) i, 194, 198-200, 206, 247,
260, 308, 311-15, 318-23;   (_Empire_) i, 523, ii, 607, (_war with Greece_) i,
327 _sqq._, (_war with Alexander_) i, 379-80, 383-89,     ii, 608,
(_Sassanid Empire_) i, 528, 616-18, 625, ii,     31, 610, (_Islam and Persia_)
ii,     20-31, 64, (_Mongol Empire_) ii, 113, 130-34;   religion of, i, 412-13,
597, 604, 617-18, 624-27, 634, ii, 136

Persian Gulf, i, 160, 186, 190, 210, 387, ii, 118

Persian language, i, 151, 169, 189, 194, ii, 136, 138

Peru, i, 147, 203, 207-08, ii, 189-90, 192, 465, 618

Peshawar (p_ĕ_ shawr’), i, 428, 643

Pessinus (pes’ i nŭs), i, 483

Pestilence, i, 101, 528, 542, 607, 612,     616, 619, 632, ii, 41, 46, 57, 76,
153-54, 384, 617 _sqq._

Peter, St., i, 114, 585, ii, 57, 99;   the Great, ii, 243 _sq._, 259, 440, 620;
the Hermit, ii, 75 _sq._

Peterhof, ii, 242

Petition of Right, ii, 220

Petra (pē’ tr_ă_), ii, 2

Petrie, Flinders, i, 143, 197, 213, 552

Petrograd, i, 630, ii, 242, 525 _sq._, 568

Petronius (p_ĕ_ trō’ ni ŭs), i, 530

Petschenegs, ii, 71 _sq._

Phalanx, i, 370 _sq._, 453

Phanerogams, i, 26

Pharaohs, the, i, 199, 214, 248 _sq._, 256 _sqq._,     279, 388, 401 _sq._,
509, 532

Pharisees, i, 572, 578-79

Pharsalos (fär sā’ lŏs), battle of, i, 511, 512, ii, 609

Pheidippides (fī dip’ i dēz), i, 332

Phidias (fid’ i ăs), i, 346 _sq._

Philadelphia (ancient), i, 621, ii, 79;   U.S.A., ii, 282, 290 _sq._, 300, 387,
621

Philip, of Hesse, ii, 206

Philip of Macedon, i, 343, 358, 367 _sqq._,     390 _sq._, 397, 401-02, 434,
561, ii,     607

Philip, King of France, ii, 99

Philip II, King of Spain, ii, 207, 229 _sq._, 233, 242, 292, 376

Philip, Duke of Orleans, ii, 315, 337, 379

Philippine Islands, ii, 187, 451, 465, 506

Philistia (and Philistines), i, 196, 245, 282 _sqq._, 447

Phillimore, Sir Walter, ii, 543

Phillips, W. A., ii, 373, 377

Philo (fī’ lō), the Jew, i, 410

Philonism, i, 592

Philosophers, at court of Frederick II, ii, 88

Philosophy, primitive, i, 122-23;   Greek, i, 357-60, 410;   medicinal, ii, 168
_sqq._;   experimental, ii, 176

Philotas (fi lō’ tăs), i, 375, 391

Phinehas, i, 284

Phocians (fō’ shi _ă_nz), i, 372

Phocis (fō’ sis), i, 378

Phœnicia (fē nish’ _ă_), and Phœnicians,     i, 212 _sqq._, 223, 234, 273, 279
_sq._,     287, 290 _sqq._, 331, 337, 380, 395, 401, 570, 640, ii, 1;
language and script, i, 153, 228;   colonies, i, 303, 447

Phœnix, i, 177

_Phœnix_, steamship, ii, 387

Phonetic spelling, i, 639

Phonograms, i, 225 _sq._

Phrygia (frij’ i _ă_), and Phrygians, i, 303, 315, 388, 395, 448, ii, 121

Phrygian mysteries, i, 477

Phrygius, i, 375

Physics, ii, 37

Physiocrats, ii, 309

Piacenza (pyä chen’ ts_ă_), ii, 74

Pictographs, i, 224 _sqq._

Picts, i, 532

Picture writing, i, 197, 207, 224-28

Piedmont, ii, 332

Pig, i, 56, 224;   unclean to Moslems, ii, 454

Pigtails, Chinese, ii, 128, 261, 464

Pilate, Pontius, i, 585

Pile dwellings, i, 106, 171, 186.   (_See also_ Lake dwellings)

Pilgrim Fathers, ii, 305

Pilgrims, i, 221, ii, 67, 75

Pillnitz, ii, 327

Piltdown skull, i, 60, 70 _sqq._

Pindar (pin’ d_ă_r), i, 378

Pins, bone, i, 114

Piracy, ii, 182

Pirsson, L. V., i, 50

Pisa, ii, 176, 180

Pithecanthropus (pith e kăn thrō’ pŭs) erectus, i, 60, 65 _sqq._

Pitt, William, 1st Earl of Chatham, ii, 289, 332, 359

Pius VII, ii, 360

Pixodarus (pik sō där’ ŭs), i, 375

Pizarro (pi zär’ ō), ii, 190, 618

Placentia (plă sen’ shi _ă_).   (_See_ Piacenza)

Plague.   (_See_ Pestilence)

Plaiting, Neolithic, i, 105

Planets, i, 3 _sq._, 30

Plants, i, 10 _sqq._

Plassey, battle of, ii, 258, 620

Plataea (plă tē’ _ă_), battle of, i, 336, 340 _sqq._,     348, ii, 607

Plato, i, 306, 344, 351, 355 _sqq._, 397, 399, 434,     468, 562, 618, ii, 169,
211,     403, 408, 607

Playfair, ii, 419

Plebeians, Roman, i, 455 _sqq._, 486, 487

Pleistocene (plīs’ tō sēn) Age, i, 52, 59, 60, 64 _sq._, 102, 156, 255

Plesiosaurs (plē’ zi ō sawrz), i, 40, 45, 50

Pliny, the elder, i, 186;   the younger, i, 535, ii, 38

Pliocene (plī’ ō sēn) Age, i, 52, 58, 60, 68 _sq._, 273

Plotinus (plō tī’ nūs), i, 410, 592

Plunkett, Sir Horace, ii, 499

Plutarch, i, 313, 346 _sq._, 373, 374, 378, 390,     394, 474, 501, 505, 512
_sqq._,     598, ii, 351

Pluvial Age, i, 159 _sq._, 177

Plymouth, ii, 372; (New England), ii, 305

Plymouth Company, ii, 281

Po, valley of the, i, 388, 449, 461, 471

Pocahontas (pō kă hon’ t_ă_s), ii, 280

Pocock, R. I., i, 28, 67, 95

Pocock, Roger, i, 299, 551

Podmore, F., ii, 405

Poitiers, ii, 47, 179, 613

Poland, ii, 71, 100, 112, 126, 129, 130, 179,     236, 244, 248-51, 260, 266,
274, 278, 320,     327, 363-66, 372, 375, 380-382, b400, 566, 620, 622

Polish language, i, 168

Political ideas, common, i, 519

Politics (and Politicians), i, 496, ii, 140, 245

Polo, Maffeo, ii, 117

Polo, Marco, i, 541, ii, 117, 120-21, 185, 195, 616

Polo, Nicolo, ii, 117

Polyclitus (pol i klī’ tŭs), i, 346

Polygamy, i, 232

Polynesia, i, 147, 162;   languages of, i, 158, 164;   peoples of, i, 109, 148,
159, 177, 353

Pompadour, Madame de, ii, 240

Pompeii (pom pā’ yē), i, 489

Pompey, i, 505, 509-14, 538-42, 549, 572, 625, ii, 609

Pondicherry, ii, 258

Pontifex maximus, ii, 56

Pontus, i, 395, 504 _sq._, 553, 620, ii, 609 _sq._

Poole, Ernest, ii, 503

Poor, the, ii, 269 _sq._

Poor Laws, ii, 211

Pope, Alex., ii, 493

Popes.   (_See_ Papacy)

Poplicola (pop lik’ ō l_ă_), Valerius, i, 457

Poppaea (po pē’ _ă_), i, 525

Popular education, Christianity and, ii, 139 _sqq._

Port Arthur, ii, 462, 469

Port Sunlight, ii, 406

Porto Rico, ii, 506

Portugal (and Portuguese), i, 168, 217, 299,     554, 564, 565, ii, 80, 100,
364, 490, 611, 617;   overseas trade and expansion of, ii, 184-88,     192-93,
251, 252, 257, 306, 451, 457, 465

Porus (pō’ rŭs), king, i, 386 _sq._, 430

Posen, ii, 367, 400, 446, 487

Post horses in ancient Persia, i, 327

Potash, ii, 38

Potato, i, 208

Potomac, river, ii, 301

Potsdam, ii, 240

Pottery, i, 105, 112 _sq._, 130 _sq._, 147, 448, ii, 38

Poultry.   (_See_ Fowl)

Powers, Great, ii, 216 _sqq._, 246-47, 252, 278-79, 380, 440, 447, 500

Prague, ii, 151, 152, 175, 400 _sq._, 617, 623;   University of, ii, 151

Prayer-flags, Buddhist, i, 438

Prayer-wheels, i, 438

Precession of the equinoxes, i, 31

_Prehistoric Peeps_, i, 50

Presbyterianism, ii, 163, 221

Prescott, ii, 207 _sq._

Press, free, ii, 302; in politics, i, 463

Prester, John, ii, 119

Priam (prī’ ăm), i, 335

Pride, Colonel, ii, 224 _sq._

Priestcraft (incl. Priesthood and Priests),     i, 127, 130, 134, 178, 182,
190, 204,     232-53, 263, 266, 285, 305, 430, ii, 16,     85, 149-51, 246, 425

Primal law, i, 79

Prince, character of a, ii, 195 _sqq._

Princes, an exclusive class, i, 267

Princeton, Univ. of, ii, 543

Printing, i, 231, 407-08, 463, ii, 121,     158 _sq._, 167, 174, 617;
Chinese, i, 631

Priscus (pris’ kŭs), i, 557 _sq._, ii, 42, 611

Prisoners as slaves, ii, 305

Prisons, English, ii, 338

Private enterprise, ii, 273 _sq._, 535 _sqq._;   ownership, ii, 274;
property, ii, 228

Probus (prō’ bŭs), emperor, i, 528, 553, ii, 610

Production, distribution and profits of, ii, 274;   of machinery, ii, 275-76

Profit, ii, 334

Profiteers, ii, 541

Prokop the Great, ii, 152

Proletariat, i, 268, 456, ii, 398, 408 _sqq._

Promissory notes, early, i, 220

Property, i, 259, 265, ii, 146, 217, 308, 338 _sqq._, 385, 398 _sq._, 411

Prophets, Jewish, i, 294 _sq._

Propitiation, i, 127, 134

Proterozoic (prot er ō zō’ ik) period, i, 10, 14, 17, 25 _sq._

Protestantism, ii, 150, 160-67, 206, 209, 218-25, 229,     233, 239, 242,
252-53, 265, 269-71, 281-83, 465, 490-95

Provence, ii, 368

Proverbs, book of, i, 294

Providence, Rhode I., ii, 289

Prussia, ii, 236, 240, 243-53, 278, 314,     320, 327, 362, 364-67, 371, 381,
441-46,     478-80, 619 _sqq._

Przemysl (pshem’ isl), ii, 518-19

Psalms, i, 277, 294

Psammetichus (sä met’ i kŭs), i, 200, 291, 316, ii, 606

Pskof, ii, 180

Ptah-hetep (ptä’ het ep), tomb of, i, 260

Pteria (tē’ ri _ă_), i, 323

Pterodactyls (ter ō dăk’ tilz), i, 40 _sqq._

Ptolemies, i, 395, 401, 432, 571, 636

Ptolemy (tol’ _ĕ_ mi), I, i, 375, 401-02, 404, 409-13, ii, 608;   Ptolemy II,
i, 404;   Ptolemy III, i, 404

Public opinion, growth of, ii, 148

Public schools.   (_See_ Schools, public)

“Pul,” Assyrian monarch, i, 290

Pultusk, ii, 362

Punch, ii, 397, 435, 487

Punic (pū’ nik), language, i, 528;   wars, i, 196, 454 _sq._, 460, 466 _sqq._,
ii, 608

Punjab, i, 201, 388, 428 _sq._, ii, 114, 132 _sq._, 257, 608

Puritan Revolution, ii, 217

Puritans, ii, 226, 282

Pyramids, i, 133, 198 _sq._, 238, 261, 274;   battle of the, ii, 351

Pyrenees, i, 160, 554, ii, 28, 41, 46 _sq._, 51, 238, 368, 613

Pyrrhus (pir’ ŭs), i, 452 _sqq._, 467, ii, 67, 608

Pytho (pī’ thō), i, 322


Quaco, ii, 467, 621

Quadrupedal reptiles, i, 41

Quartz, i, 9

Quartzite implements, i, 137

Quaternary rocks, i, 12

Quebec, ii, 254, 620

Quinquereme (kwin’ kw_ĕ_ rēm), i, 469

Quipus, i, 208

Quixada (kë hä’ dä), ii, 207, 208


Ra, i, 250

Races of mankind, i, 87 _sqq._, 89, 95, 100-101, 120, 136-49

Radiolaria, i, 10

Ragusa (rä goo’ z_ă_), ii, 180

Rahab, month of, ii, 8

Rai, Lajpat, ii, 454, 473

Railways, ii, 386, 622

Rajgir, i, 420

Rajput (räj poot’) clans, i, 629

Rajput princes, ii, 256

Rajputana, i, 629, ii, 179, 256

Raleigh, Sir Walter, ii, 280

Ramah, i, 285

Rambouillet (ro_n_ boo yä’), ii, 317

Rameses (răm’ ē sēz) II, i, 196, 200, 279, 281-82, 289, 401, ii, 605

Rameses III, i, 249, 282

Raphael, ii, 183

Rasputin (răs poot’ in), ii, 525

Ratisbon, Diet of, ii, 206

Ratzel, i, 153, 208, 541, 551

Ravenna, i, 554, 557, 561, 606, ii, 60, 612

Realism (and Realists), ii, 169 _sqq._

Rebus, i, 227

Reconstruction, Ministry of, ii, 534

Red Cross, ii, 199

Red deer, i, 96

Red Indians, i, 546, ii, 285

Red Sea, i, 156, 160, 184, 210, 211, 279, 281, 287, 290, 401, 529, 533

“Red Sea” river, i, 119, 121

Redmond, John, ii, 496, 498

Reed, E. T., i, 50

Reed pipes, i, 115

Reeds, C. A., i, 59

Reform Bill, ii, 400, 622

Reformation, the, i, 596, ii, 161-64, 167, 204, 270, 272

Regicide, ii, 225

Reinach, Salomon, i, 6, 401

Reindeer, i, 64, 76, 78, 90, 93, 101, 115

Reindeer Age, i, 81, 90, 93-98

Reindeer men, i, 105, 108, 115, 118, 123, 124, 133, 170

Religion, i, 124, 127, 131-33, 178, 232, 235-37,     411-14, 582 _sqq._, ii,
163, 165, 309, 422;   “Old Man” in, i, 125, 131, 134

Religious dances, i, 355

Religious wars, ii, 206-07

Remus (rē’ mŭs) and Romulus (rom’ ū lŭs), i, 448

Renaissance, ii, 139, 184

Renan, ii, 169

Renascence, ii, 139

Rent, i, 255-56, 264

Reparation, i, 219

Representation, political, i, 494-95, ii, 298, 414

Reproduction, i, 16-18; of amphibia, i, 26;   of mammals, i, 54

Reptiles, i, 26, 28, 38 _sqq._

Republicanism, i, 519, ii, 248, 264, 347

Republics, i, 307-08, ii, 142

Retailers, i, 265

Revelation, Book of, i, 598

Revere, Paul, ii, 290, 294

“Revisionists,” ii, 409

Revolution, ii, 403, 411

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, ii, 227, 493

Rhine, i, 74, 206, 298, 507, 508, 523, 526, 539,     549, 552, 553, 557, ii,
61, 69,     203, 236, 238, 266, 330, 368, 441

Rhineland, i, 605, ii, 41, 47, 61, 67, 77, 82, 228

Rhinoceros, i, 56, 58, 64, 69, 70, 76

Rhode Island, ii, 281, 282, 289, 290, 296, 300

Rhodes, i, 396, ii, 79

Rhodesia, i, 174, ii, 472

Rhondda, Lord, ii, 533

Rhone Valley, i, 606, ii, 82

Rhys, Sir John, i, 168

Rice, i, 646

Richard I, Cœur de Lion, ii, 81, 219

Richard II, ii, 156, 617

Richelieu, Cardinal, ii, 237, 246, 253

Richmond, ii, 443

Ridgeway, W., i, 106, 298

Riga, ii, 180, 182, 526

Righteousness, i, 400

Rio de Oro (rē’ ō dā ō’ rō), i, 217

Ripley, i, 143

Ritual, ii, 149.   (_See also_ Christianity)

Rivers, i, 37

Rivers, W. H. R. i, 148

Riviera (rē vē ār’ă), French, i, 447;   Italian, ii, 347

Rivoira, ii, 61

Robert of Sicily.   (_See_ Guiscard, Robert)

Robertson, ii, 208

Robespierre (rō bes pyâr’), ii, 324, 333-336, 349, 621

Robinson, J. H., ii, 99, 253

Roch, ii, 518

Rochefort, ii, 372

“Rocket,” the, ii, 386

Rocks, i, 8-13, 27-30

Rocquain, ii, 308

Roger I, King of Sicily, ii, 86

Rolf the Ganger, ii, 54, 66, 614

Roman coins, i, 455

Roman Empire, i, 517 _sqq._;   social and political state of, i, 529, 534-42,
550;   fall of, i, 550 _sqq._;   separation into Eastern and Western Empires,
i, 554 _sqq._;   later Roman Empire (Western), i, 597, 605, 614,     619, 632,
633, ii, 42, 54, 56,     58, 64, 157, 265, 268, 611.   (_See also_ Eastern
(Greek) Empire)

Roman law, i, 458, 615-16;   roads, i, 461, 540

Roman Republic (19th century), ii, 347, 622-23

Romansch language, ii, 47, 199

Rome, i, 407, 504, 510, 519, 548, 564-65, 572,     589, 606-11, 615-18, 621,
633, ii,     2, 50, 126, 182, 195, 202, 276, 441, 445, 483;   early history of,
i, 445-51, 458, ii, 607-08; war with Carthage, i, 454;   social and political
state of, i, 352, 454-66,     473, 480-503, 505, 515-16, 630-31, ii, 145, 343,
394, 607 _sqq._;   assemblies of, i, 462-66, 486, 488-89, 494, 507;
patricians and plebeians, i, 454-62, 486-88;   Senate, i, 455, 459, 463-66,
482, 483-87, 493-505, 511-16, 525;   Consuls of i, 455, 466;   colonies of, i,
458, 461, 471-72;   Punic wars, i, 196, 454 _sq._, 460, 466 _sqq._, ii, 608;
assimilation of, i, 483, 509;   military system of, i, 485, 502, 505, 520;
bequests to, i, 500, ii, 609;   Social war, i, 503, ii, 609;   monarchy in, and
the fall of the Republic, i, 509-21;   Roman Empire (_see above_);   plague in,
i, 608, ii, 41, 612;   true cross at, i, 618, ii, 82;   “duke of,” ii, 41;
Pepin crowned at, ii, 57;   in 10th century, ii, 62;   sacked by Guiscard, ii,
69, 615;   Germans raid, ii, 204, 618;   Charlemagne crowned at, ii, 215

Rome, Church of (inc. general Christian associations), i, 589 _sqq._,
603-05, 612, ii, 41, 50, 53-58, 73, 74, 85, 90-101,     127, 130, 197, 202,
215, 226, 356.   (_See also_ Catholicism _and_ Papacy)

Romulus and Remus, i, 448

Roosevelt, President, ii, 504, 506, 544, 551

Rose, Holland, ii, 348, 353, 358

Roses, Wars of the, ii, 179

Ross, i, 541, ii, 30

Rostro-carinate implements, i, 60, 81, 273

Roth, H. L., i, 85, 103

“Roum,” Empire of, ii, 122

Roumania (and the Roumanians), i, 564, ii, 71, 113, 122, 380, 382, 502, 524

Rousseau (roo sō’), J. J., ii, 163, 310, 324, 333, 349, 621

Rowing, i, 211, 469

Roxana, i, 390, 394

Royal Asiatic Society, i, 646

Royal families, marriage of, i, 267

Royal Society of London, i, 637, ii, 177, 239, 392

Rubicon (roo’ bi k_ŏ_n), the, i, 511

Rudolf I, German Emperor, ii, 63, 98, 199, 616

Rulers, deification of, i, 484

Ruling families, i, 307-08

Rumansch language.   (_See_ Romansch language)

Rump Parliament, ii, 224

Rurik, ii, 67, 614

Russia, i, 102, 151, 159, 196, 294, 317, 327, 387, 507,     539, 541, 545, 549,
553, 561, 570, 600, ii, 17, 53,     64, 66-67, 70, 110-14, 127, 128, 129, 130,
134, 139,     157, 179, 236, 244-53, 259-61, 266, 267, 278, 320, 361,     366,
380, 410, 411, 440, 447, 463-69, 484, 485, 502, 509,     510, 524-27, 620-24.
(_See also_ Great War)

Russian language, i, 151, 168, 638

Russo-Japanese war, i, 642

Rustam, ii, 20, 21

Rusticiano, ii, 117-21

Ruth, Book of, i, 282

Rutilius, P. Rufus, i, 503


Saar (sär) Valley, ii, 566

Sabatier, P., ii, 94

Sabbath, Jewish, i, 572, 575, 579, 590

Sabellians, i, 592

Sachsenhausen (sach’ sen hou zen), ii, 180

Sacraments, i, 130-31

Sacrifice, i, 116, 134, 178, 204-05, 234, ii, 190, 418;   human, i, 117, 130,
134, 352-54, 489

Sadducees, i, 572

Sadowa (sä’ dō vä), battle of, ii, 445-46, 623

Safiyya (sä fyē’ jă), ii, 13

Sagas, i, 173, ii, 53

Saghalien (sä gä lēn’), ii, 469

Sahara, i, 75, 160, 206, 217, 228, ii, 501

Sails, use of, i, 210-11

St. Andrew’s, ii, 324

St. Angelo, castle of, ii, 41, 62, 84, 205

St. Gall, monastery of, ii, 69

Saint-Germain-en-Laye, ii, 317

St. Gothard Pass, ii, 182

St. Helena, ii, 372, 374, 471

St. Just, ii, 334

St. Lawrence river, ii, 254

St. Médard, ii, 48

St. Peter’s, Rome, i, 238, 591, ii, 202

St. Petersburg. (_See_ Petrograd)

St. Sophia, Church of, i, 615, ii, 124

Sainte Menehould, ii, 323

Sakas (sä’ käs), i, 628

Sakya (sä’ kyä) clan, i, 416

Saladin (săl’ _ă_ din), ii, 80, 106, 615

Salamis (săl’ _ă_ mis), i, 337-39, 344, 348, 469, ii, 20, 607

Salerno, ii, 89

Salian dynasty, ii, 63

Salisbury, Lord, ii, 623

Salmon of Reindeer Age, i, 94

Salonika, ii, 522, 524

Salt, i, 118

Salvation, Christian theory of, ii, 418

Salvation Army, i, 413, ii, 166

Samaria, i, 193, 293

Samarkand, i, 386, 390, 546, 604, 643, 645, ii, 110, 132, 133, 159

Samnites, i, 452, ii, 608

Samoan Islands, ii, 505

Samos, i, 303, 346

Samothrace (săm’ ō thrās), i, 373

Samoyed (săm’ ō yed) language, i, 156

Samson, i, 283, 293

Samuel, Book of, i, 282-86

Samurai (săm’ u rī), i, 642, ii, 466

San Casciano, ii, 195

Sanderson, F. W., ii, 271

Sandracottus.   (_See_ Chandragupta)

Sandstone, i, 7

Sandwich Islands, ii, 505

Sandys, ii, 169

Sanskrit, i, 169, 182, 639, 647, ii, 36, 136

Sans Souci (san soo sē’), park of, ii, 240

San Stefano, treaty of, ii, 447, 475, 623

_Santa Maria_, ship, ii, 186

Sapor I, i, 617, 626, ii, 610

Saracens, i, 565, ii, 3, 64-69

Sarajevo (să rī’ vō), ii, 435, 510

Saratoga, ii, 292

Sardanapalus (sär d_ă_ n_ă_ pā’ lŭs), i, 194, 246, 290, 292, 316, ii, 606

Sardes, ii, 79

Sardinia, i, 217, 471, 556, ii, 200, 380, 440

Sardis, i, 316, 324, 331, 334, 340, 379

Sargon, I, i, 133, 191-95, 196, 247, 274, 279, 599, ii, 211, 606;   II, i, 193,
196, 200, 246, 290, 318, ii, 606

Sarmatians, i, 300, 543, ii, 71

Sarum, Old, ii, 227

Sassanids (săs’ ă nidz), i, 523, 625, ii, 31, 35, 610.   (_See also_ Persia)

Saturn, planet, i, 4

Saturninus (săt ũr nī’ nŭs), i, 503

Saul, king of Israel, i, 286, ii, 606

Saul of Tarsus.   (_See_ Paul, St.)

Savannah, ii, 254, 282

_Savannah_, steamship, ii, 387

Save, river, i, 560

Savoy, ii, 225, 242, 331, 380, 440

Saxe-Coburg-Gotha family, ii, 482

Saxony (and the Saxons), i, 554, 605,     ii, 24, 48, 49, 51-54, 62, 66, 144,
236, 242, 368

Saxony, Duke of, ii, 152;   Elector of, ii, 203

Sayce, Prof., i, 186, 190, 210, 257, 265

Scandinavia, i, 102, 143, 299, 533, 539, 549

_Scharnhorst_, cruiser, ii, 520

Scheldt, the, ii, 76, 331

Schism, the Great, ii, 100, 127, 151, 617

Schleswig-Holstein, ii, 442

Schmalkalden, ii, 205

Schmalkaldic league, ii, 205

Schmidt, Dr., ii, 136

Schmit, E., ii, 135

Scholars, i, 409

Scholasticism, ii, 167 _sqq._

Schools, monastic, i, 613, ii, 60;   public, ii, 269 _sq._, 428-30

Schrader, O., i, 118, 169

Schuchert, C., i, 50

Schurtz, Dr., i, 556, ii, 18, 22

Schwill, ii, 37, 51, 377

Schwyz (shvēts), ii, 199, 616

Science, i, 397 _sqq._, ii, 35, 174 _sqq._;   exploitation of, ii, 388-91, 410;
and religion, i, 584, ii, 174, 177, 421-22

Science and Art Department, ii, 437

Scientific research, ii, 171

Scilly Isles, i, 217

Scind (sind), ii, 113

Scipio, Lucius, i, 482

Scipio, P Cornelius, i, 475

Scipio (sip’ i ō) Africanus, the Elder, i, 477-79, 483, 486, 499, 540

Scipio Africanus Minor, i, 477, 483, 501

Scipio Nasica (nă sī’ kă), i, 483, 501

Scorpion, i, 25, 28

Scorpion, sea.   (_See_ Sea-scorpion)

Scotch colonists, i, 110

Scotland, i, 59, 102, 109, 110, 532,     ii, 40, 66, 100, 162, 163, 178, 221,
225, 244, 261, 433, 471

Scott, E. F., i, 581

Scott, Michael, ii, 88

Scott, Sir Walter, ii, 487

Scriptures, Arabic, ii, 22; Christian, i, 627, 634

Scythia (sith’ i _ă_) and the Scythians,     i, 247, 261, 291, 300-01, 319,
327-30,     377, 388, 396, 490, 507, 510, 532-33,     543-45, 558, ii, 66, 71,
113, 128, 367, 607

Sea, depth of, i, 5

Sea fights, ancient, i, 337-40

Sea power, ancient, i, 379-80, ii, 28

Sea trade, ii, 182

Seamanship, early, i, 209-11, 216-17, 218, 266, 272-73, ii, 185 _sqq._

Seas, primordial, i, 8, 10, 16, 21-24, 46

Sea-scorpion, i, 10, 21, 24

Seasons, the, i, 30-33, 127, 128-29

Seaweed, i, 23

Sebastiani Report, ii, 359

Secunderabad (sē kŭn d_ĕ_r _ă_ băd’), i, 389

Sedan, ii, 445, 531

Seek, i, 598

Seeley, Sir J. R., ii, 140

Seignobos (sen yō bō’), ii, 384

Seine, the, i, 137

Seleucia, i, 622

Seleucid (s_ĕ_ lū’ sid) dynasty, i, 395-97,     428, 432, 480, 523, 571-72,
616, ii, 608

Seleucus (s_ĕ_ lū’ kŭs) I, i, 395, 430

Selfishness, i, 423

Selim (sā lēm’), sultan, ii, 126, 618

Seljuks (sel jooks’), ii, 33, 71-72, 106, 114, 121, 615.   (_See also_ Turks)

Semites (and Semitic peoples), i, 148, 153-60, 188     _sqq._, 212, 218-19,
228, 232-233, 237, 242,     264-65, 300, ii, 1, 2, 21, 105, 122, 143, 168, 249

Semitic languages, i, 153-55, 164

Seneca (sen’ ē k_ă_), i, 491

Senegal river, i, 217

Sennacherib (sē năk’ er ib), i, 193-94, 200, 246, 291, ii, 606

Sepulchre, Holy, ii, 61, 64, 74, 78, 118

Sequoias (sē kwoi’ _ă_z), i, 51

Serapeum (ser _ă_ pē’ ŭm), i, 413, 414, ii, 149

Serapis (sē rā’ pis), i, 412-14, 428, 538, 590-91, 602, ii, 611

Serbia (and the Serbs), i, 528, 553, 606,     616, ii, 24, 122, 224, 382, 502,
508-11, 524

Serbian language, i, 168

Serfdom, i, 600

Sergius III, Pope, ii, 63

Serpent in religion, i, 130, 147, ii, 418

Servants, domestic, i, 265

Set, Egyptian god, i, 236

Seton-Karr, Sir H. W., i, 137

Seven Years War, ii, 332, 620

Severus (sē vēr’ ŭs), Septimus, i, 528

Seville, ii, 188

Sex, i, 131

Seyffert, i, 464, 490, 491

Shakespeare, W., i, 173

Shale, i, 7

Shalmaneser (shăl mă nē’ zũr), i, 193, 291

Shamanism, ii, 114, 128, 146

Shamash, i, 245

Shang dynasty, i, 196, 204

Shanghai (shăng hī’), ii, 470

Shang-tung, ii, 469

Sharifian emperors, i, 565

Sharpe, S., i, 249

Shaving the face, i, 391

Sheep in lake dwellings, i, 112

Shekel, i, 220, 265

Sheldonian Theatre, ii, 271

Shell Age, supposed, i, 68

Shellfish, i, 9, 10

Shells as implements, i, 68;   as ornaments, i, 88

Shem, i, 140

Shen-si, i, 632

Sherbro Island, i, 218

Sherman, General, ii, 443

Shi-Hwang-ti, emperor, i, 196, 205, 253, 542-43, 548, 642, ii, 211, 608

Shiites (shē’ īts), ii, 27, 30, 64, 70, 72, 80, 134, 256

Shiloh, i, 284

Shimei, i, 287

Shimonoseki (shē’ m_ŏ_ nō sāk’ _ĕ_), Straits of, ii, 467

Shipbuilding, ii, 66, 388-89

Ships, earliest, i, 209-11

Shishak (shī’ shăk), i, 200, 388

Shrines, i, 234, 313

Siam (and Siamese), i, 203, 640

Siamese language, i, 157

Siberia, i, 100-02, 156-59, 532, 546, 632, ii, 114, 132, 261

Siberian railway, ii, 469, 502

Sicilies, Two, ii, 200, 364

Sicily, i, 213, 217, 303, 308, 382, 447, 449,     451-54, 471, 480, 486, 498,
505, 566,     ii, 62, 64, 69, 78, 83, 86-88, 97, 182,     353, 380, 441, 615

Sickles, earthenware, i, 189

Siddhattha Gautama (sid hät’ t’h_ă_ gou’ t_ă_ m_ă_).   (_See_ Buddha)

Sidon, i, 196, 212, 216, 266, 279, 290, 331, 380

Sieyès (syā yes’), ii, 354

Sign-language, i, 150

Sikhs (sēks), ii, 257, 453

Silbury, i, 110, 135

Silesia, ii, 112, 251

Silk, i, 273, 530, ii, 238

Silver as standard of value, i, 220

Sin, idea of, ii, 190

Sinai, i, 259

Sind, ii, 453

Singan, i, 642, 644, 647, ii, 613

Singer, Dr., i, 403

Singing, i, 115

Sinope (sī nō’ pē), i, 621

Siris, i, 339

Sirius (sir’ i ŭs), a star, i, 238

Sirmium, i, 560

Sistrum, i, 413, 425

Siva, i, 437

Sivapithecus (si v_ă_ pi thē kŭs), i, 67

Siwalik Hills, i, 67

Skins, use of, as clothing, i, 80, 99, 114;   inflated, as boats, i, 209

Skrine, i, 541, ii, 30

Skull, shapes of, i, 100, 142-46

Slate, i, 7

Slavery (and slaves), i, 255-59, 305-09, 352, 363, 455,     489-92, 529, 589,
594, 631, ii, 15, 33, 130,     146, 193, 225, 276, 284-85, 293, 304-05 _sqq._;
American, ii, 342, 619

Slavic tribes, i, 527

Slavonian dialect, i, 168

Slavonic languages, ii, 69

Slavs, i, 616, ii, 24, 49, 57, 61, 69, 128

Sloth, i, 102, 207

Smelting, i, 106, 107

Smerdis, i, 326

Smilodon (smī’ lō don), i, 56

Smith, A. L., ii, 88

Smith, Elliot, i, 69, 84, 146, 147, 189, 207

Smith, Rt. Hon. F. E., ii, 424, 497-99

Smith, John, ii, 280

Smith, Worthington, i, 63, 79, ii, 310

Smithsonian Institution, ii, 392

Smyrna, ii, 79

Snails, i, 28

Sobiesky (sō byes’ ki), John (John III), ii, 249, 620

Social Contract, ii, 296, 310

Social Democrats, ii, 485

Social War, the, i, 503, ii, 609

Socialism, ii, 157, 310, 339-46, 403 _sqq._, 622

Society, beginning of human, i, 178

Socrates (sok’ r_ă_ tēz), i, 114, 350, 355-56, 364, 420, 436

Soddy, Prof., ii, 410

Soderini, ii, 195-96, 618

Soil, protection of, i, 37

Soissons, ii, 47, 48

Solar year, i, 129

Solent, the, i, 137

Solferino (sol fe rē’ nō), battle of, ii, 441, 623

Solis, ensign, ii, 231

Sollas, Prof., i, 63, 69, 84, 100

Solomon, King, i, 200, 287-94, 569, ii, 606

Solon, i, 221, 324-25

Solutré, i, 92, 96, 124

Solutrian Age, i, 96, 97, 317, ii, 189

Somaliland, i, 137, 160, 217

Somalis, language of, i, 154

Somersett, J., ii, 306

Somme, the, i, 137; battle of, ii, 338, 530

Sonnino, Baron, ii, 552

Sonoy, Governor, ii, 231

Soothsayers, i, 305

Sophists, Greek, i, 350

Sophocles (sof’ ō klēz), i, 351, 355

Soudan, tribes of, i, 118

Soul, the, i, 131

South Africa, i, 485, ii, 460, 471, 472, 489, 495, 623-24

South Kensington, Natural History Museum, i, 50

South Sea Islanders, i, 68, 353

Southampton, ii, 180

Soviets (sov’ yets), ii, 410, 526, 539

Sowing, and burial, i, 130;   and human sacrifice, i, 117, 134

Space, i, 3, 4, 15

Spain, i, 37, 93, 106, 108, 146, 161, 196,     213, 217, 299, 446-48, 589, 615,
ii, 41, 100, 140, 159, 179, 246;   history (_Carthaginians in_), i, 472-79;
(_Romans in_), i, 480, 485-86, 499-502, 509, 522, 540, 569;   (_Vandals in_),
i, 554, 556, ii, 611;   (_under the Goths_), i, 606, ii, 46, 66, 613;   (_Moors
in_), i, 565, ii, 24-25, 31, 36-37, 57, 61, 64, 194, 242, 613;   (_15th-16th
cent._), ii, 186, 188, 193-95, 197, 200-04;   (_17th-18th cent._), ii, 216,
218, 220, 225,     229, 233, 239, 242-43, 251-52, 279, 292;   (_19th cent._),
ii, 362, 378, 445, 506;   overseas dominions, i, 208, ii, 187-94;   colonial
expansion, ii, 251-54, 282, 286, 292, 306, 378, 451, 470

Spanish language, i, 151, 564, ii, 160, 190

Sparta, i, 303-07, 332-36, 343, 349-50, 369, 378, 460

Spartacus (spar’ t_ă_ kŭs), i, 505, ii, 609

Spearheads, bone, i, 96

Species, i, 17-22, 25, 29, 138-40

Speech, development of, i, 72, 79, 124-27, 129, 130, 150, 151, 162-63, 223-26

Spelling, need for reform of, i, 282-83

Spence, L., ii, 190

Sphinx, the, i, 238

Spices, Oriental, ii, 257

Spiders, early, i, 28

Spinden, i, 207

Spinnerets of spiders, i, 28

Spoleto (spō lā’ tō), i, 610

Spores, i, 24

Spurrell, H. G. F., i, 63, 98

Spy, i, 72

Stag, i, 94, 101

Stagira (st_ă_ jīr’ _ă_), i, 357

_Stalky and Co._, ii, 423

Stallybrass, Dr. C. O., ii, 154, 543

Stambul (stăm bool’), ii, 126

Stamp Acts, ii, 289

Stamps used for signatures, i, 408

Stars, i, 4; and early man, i, 127, 238, 240

State, the, i, 488 _sqq._, 519, ii, 142, 163, 197, 244, 415

States-General, the, ii, 234, 312, 621

Steam, use of, ii, 386, 392

Steamboat, introduction of the, ii, 387

Steam-engine, invention of, i, 540, ii, 275, 386

Steam-hammer, ii, 388

Steam-power, ii, 275

Steel, i, 273, ii, 388

“Steel Boys,” the, ii, 492

Stegosaurus (steg ō saw’ rŭs), i, 40

Stein, Freiherr von, ii, 364

Steno, ii, 419

Stephenson, G., ii, 386

Stern, Q. B., ii, 433

Stettin, ii, 180

Stilicho (stil’ i kō), i, 554, 561, ii, 611

Stockholm, ii, 526

Stockmar, Baron, ii, 438-39

Stoicism, i, 360, 363, 588

Stone, early use of, i, 171

Stone, Major-Gen., ii, 570

Stone Age, i, 60, 68, 75, 81, 96, 97, 104-13, b197, 213, 274

Stonehenge, i, 109-10, 147, 171, 196, 240, ii, 606

Stopes, Dr. Marie, i, 38

Story-telling, primitive, i, 129

Strabo (strā’ bō), i, 13

Strafford, Earl of, ii, 221-22, 491

Strata, geological, i, 7 _sqq._

Strikes in ancient Rome, i, 457-58, 496

Stuart dynasty, ii, 163, 225-26

Stubbs, Bishop, ii, 54

Sturdee, Admiral, ii, 520

Styria, ii, 200

Subiaco (soo bē ä’ kō), i, 611

Submarine warfare, ii, 520, 527

Subutai, ii, 112

Sudan, the, ii, 471

Sudras, i, 269, 270, 645

Suetonius (swē tō’ ni ŭs), i, 525, 598

Suevi (swē’ vī), i, 554, 606, ii, 46, 611

Suez, i, 156, 160, 195, 218

Suffering, cause of, i, 423

Suffrage, manhood, ii, 297

Sugar, ii, 38

Suleiman (soo lā măn’) the Magnificent, ii, 24, 28, 126, 200, 205, 613

Sulla, i, 503-04, 511, ii, 609

Sulphuric acid, ii, 38

Sulpicius (sŭl pish’ i ŭs), i, 504

Sultan, Turkish, i, 565

Sumatra, i, 635, ii, 120

Sumer (incl. Sumeria and Sumerians), i, 133, 188-96,     203, 208, 210, 212,
218,     227-28, 232, 234, 242-48, 254, 259, 274, 297, 307,     319, 370, 522,
ii, 1, 105, 130, 189

Sumerian language and writing, i, 133, 162, 189, 198, 227, 229, 279, 408, 638

Sun, the, i, 3-4, 30, 34;   worship, i, 130, 147, 235-38, 412-13

Sunday, i, 575, 590, ii, 149;   schools, ii, 396

Sung dynasty, i, 634-35, 641, ii, 108, 112-13, 118, 614

Sunnites, ii, 27, 71, 80, 136

“Sunstone,” i, 147

Superior, Lake, i, 225

Surrey, ii, 275

Susa, i, 104, 189, 260, 318, 326-31, 337-38, 364, 385-87, 390

Sussex, i, 70, ii, 40, 275

Suy dynasty, i, 632

Swabians, ii, 47, 63

Swansea, Lord, i, 106

Swastika (swăs’ ti k_ă_, i, 147, 176

Sweden (and the Swedes), i, 102, 553, 605,     ii, 51, 53, 162, 206, 225, 234,
242, 244, 249, 257, 266, 283, 368, 380

Swedish language, i, 168

Swift, Dean, ii, 492, 493

Swift, Fletcher H., i, 297

Swimming-bladder, i, 25, 52, 55

Swine, keeping of, i, 112, ii, 180

Switzerland (including the Swiss), i, 106-09,     113, 115, 171, 186, 564, ii,
69, 198 _sq._,     204, 236, 280, 319, 328, 339, 347, 359, 380, 616, 617

Swords, bronze, i, 132

Sykes, Ella and Percy, i, 548

Sykes, Sir Mark, i, 619, ii, 5, 9, 29-30, 121-23

Syndicalism, ii, 409

Synœcism of gods, i, 483-84

Syracuse, i, 351, 449, 452, 468, 476, 497, 534

Syria (and Syrians), i, 102, 160, 192, 194, 200,     250, 265, 278, 290, 292,
326, 342, 380, 500,     569-70, 587, 598, 604, 617, 619-21,     ii, 1-2, 4, 7,
17-21, 71, 74, 79, 97, 106,     113, 130-32, 149, 359, 440, 500

Syrian language, i, 530, 627, ii, 35


Tabriz, ii, 120

Tabu, i, 113, 125-29

Tachov (tăk’ hov), ii, 152

Tacitus (tăs’ i tŭs), i, 491, ii, 144

Tadpoles, i, 26, 52

Taft, President, ii, 544, 551

Tagus valley, ii, 207

_Tain_, an Irish epic, i, 182

Tai-tsung, i, 634, 642, 647, ii, 106, 612

Talleyrand, ii, 370, 374

Tallien, ii, 336

Tallies, i, 128

Tammany, i, 495

Tancred, ii, 79

Tang dynasty, i, 630-33, 641, ii, 106, 612

Tangier, ii, 484

Tanks, ii, 515-16, 523, 530, 569, 571

Tannenberg, ii, 515, 518

Taoism (tou’ izm), i, 433, 438, 641

Tapir, i, 56

Tarentum, i, 452, 476

Tarim (tä rēm’) valley, i, 201-02, 387, 546, ii, 109, 609

Tarpeian Rock, i, 459

Tarquins, the, i, 450, 456

Tartar language, i, 156, ii, 119

Tartars (and Tartary), i, 388, 542,     545, 627, ii, 109, 112, 119, 129, 244,
260, 267

Tashkend, i, 643

Tasmania (and Tasmanians), i, 82, 84, 85, 138, 148, ii, 189, 451;   language,
i, 162

Tattooing, i, 147

Taurus mountains, i, 395-97, ii, 21, 28, 34, 42, 122

Taxation, i, 255, 264, 310, ii, 217-18

Taxilla, i, 645

Tayf (tī’ if), ii, 7

Taylor, H. O., ii, 172

Tea, i, 630, ii, 289

Teeth, i, 44, 69-73, 86, 87

Telamon (tel’ _ă_ mon), battle of, i, 471, 475, ii, 608

Telegraph, electric, ii, 387

Tel-el-Amarna (tel el ä mär’ nă), i, 200, 220, 245, 250, 288

Telescope, invention of the, ii, 176

Tell, William, ii, 199

Tempe (tem’ pē), vale of, i, 335

Temples, i, 190, 234-41, 250, 304

Ten Thousand, Retreat of the, ii, 607

Ten Tribes, the, i, 193

Teneriffe, ii, 225

Tennyson, Lord, i, 175, 531, ii, 438

Tertullian (tũr tŭl’ y_ă_n), i, 403

Testament, Old, i, 114, 277, 292, 294;   New, i, 114

Tetrabelodon (tet r_ă_ bel’ ō don), i, 58

Teutonic Knights, ii, 266

Teutonic tribes, i, 299, 509, 527, 552, ii, 611

Texel, ii, 332

Textile fabrics, Arab, ii, 38

Thames, the, i, 59, 137, ii, 182, 226, 512

Thatcher, ii, 37, 51, 377

Thebes (thēbz) and Thebans, i, 252, 274, 303, 336, 343, 370-71, ii, 606

Themistocles (thē mis’ tō klēz), i, 313, 337

Theocrasia, i, 412, 414, 538, 590, 626, ii, 149

Theodora, Empress, i, 615

Theodora, sister of Marozia, ii, 62

Theodore of Tarsus, ii, 50, 613

Theodoric (thē od’ ō rik) the Goth, i, 560, 606, ii, 37, 612

Theodosius (thē ō dō’ shi ŭs), the Great, i, 554, 602, 615, ii, 611

Theodosius II, i, 557-59

Theophrastus (thē ō frăs’ tŭs), i, 13

Theophylact, ii, 62

Theriodont (thē’ ri ō dont) reptiles, i, 54

Theriomorpha, i, 41, 47, 48

Thermopylæ (thũr mop’ i lē), i, 335, 336, 474, 536, ii, 607

Theseus (thē’ sūs), i, 216

Thespians, i, 336

Thessalus (thes’ ă lŭs), i, 375

Thessaly (and Thessalians), i, 335-40, 384, 453, 511

Thibet, i, 432, 628

Thien Shan, i, 546, 643

Thiers (tyâr), ii, 353

Thirty Tyrants, i, 351

Thirty Years’ War, ii, 235, 262, 292, 511

Thomas, Albert, ii, 439

Thompson, R. Campbell, i, 189

Thor, i, 233, ii, 49

Thoth-lunus (thoth’ lū’ nŭs), Egyptian god, i, 239

Thothmes (thoth’ mēz), i, 199, 289, 317, 401, 445, ii, 605

Thought and research, i, 122-35, 352-53, 360-62, ii, 414

Thrace (thrās) and Thracians, i, 303, 328-31, 340, 372, 377, 395, ii, 20, 123

Three Teachings, the, i, 436

Throwing sticks, i, 90

Thucydides (thū sid’ i dēz), i, 344, 360, 399, 460

Thuringians, ii, 51

Tian Shan, i, 549

Tiber, river, i, 447, 448, 454, 458, ii, 41

Tiberius Cæsar, i, 523, 572, 584, ii, 609

Tibet, i, 206, 438, 545-47, 591, 640, ii, 113, 128, 262, 463, 624

Tibetan language, i, 157

Tides, i, 8

Tiger, sabre-toothed, i, 56, 64, 69, 70, 76

Tiglath Pileser (tig’ lăth pi lē’ z_ĕ_r), I, i, 192, 196;   III, i, 193, 200,
246, 290, 318, ii, 606

Tigris, i, 186, 192, 210, 238, 260, 616, ii, 2, 106

Tii, Queen, i, 250

Tille, Dr., ii, 180

Tilly, ii, 235

Tilsit, Treaty of, ii, 363, 622

Timbuktu, i, 565

Time, i, 13-15, 128-29, ii, 605

_Times_, the, ii, 405

Timon (tī’ mon), i, 515

Timurlane, ii, 132-33, 137, 154, 261, 617

Tin, i, 4, 106, 217, 273, ii, 389

Tinstone, i, 106

Tiryns (tī’ rinz), i, 303

Titanothere (tī’ tăn ō thēr), i, 53, 56

Titus, i, 526, 571, ii, 610

Tobacco, i, 170, 219, ii, 281, 284

Toe, great, i, 66

Tolstoy, ii, 367

Tonkin, ii, 467, 470

Torr, Cecil, i, 210, 259

Tortoises, i, 40, 46

Torture, use of, ii, 338

Tory Party, ii, 489

Totila (tot’ i lă), i, 611

Toulon, ii, 333, 349, 351

Tours, ii, 47, 180

Towers of Silence, i, 625

Town life, European, ii, 180 _sqq._

_Town Topics_, ii, 424

Townshend, General, ii, 522

Township, primitive, i, 256

Tracheal tubes, i, 25

Trachodon (trăk’ ō don), i, 42

Trade, early, i, 118, 208-22, 257, 264-65;   routes, ii, 76, 183; sea, ii,
184-85

Trade Unions, i, 487, 536, ii, 407

Tradition, i, 55, 124-29, 230

Trafalgar, battle of, ii, 362, 622

Trajan (trā’ jăn), i, 524, 526, 614, 623, ii, 2, 610

Transmigration of souls, i, 424, 427

Transport, ii, 386, 569

Transubstantiation, ii, 150-51, 171

Transvaal, ii, 424, 460, 623.   (_See also_ South Africa)

Transylvania, i, 526, ii, 112

Trasimene, Lake, i, 475

Travels, early, i, 221, ii, 386

Trebizond, ii, 120

Trees, i, 27, 37

Trench warfare, ii, 515

Trent, Council of, ii, 167, 618

Tresas, i, 336

Trevithick, ii, 386

Trianon, the, ii, 317

Tribal system, i, 177, ii, 128

Trilobites, i, 10, 21-24

Triceratops (trī ser’ ă tops), i, 42

Trieste, ii, 445

Trigonometry, ii, 37

Trinidad, ii, 471

Trinil, i, 68-69

Trinitarians, i, 592-93, 601-02

Trinity, doctrine of the, i, 575, 592, 602, 625-26, ii, 171

Trinity College, Dublin, ii, 492

Tripoli, i, 228, ii, 470, 500, 624;   Treaty of, ii, 294

Trireme, i, 469

Trojans, i, 216, 448, ii, 121

Tröltsch, i, 604

Trotsky, ii, 411

Troy, i, 216, 303, 318, 335, 446

Troyes (trwä), battle of, i, 559, ii, 611

Trumpet, bronze, i, 132

Tsar, title of, i, 565, ii, 129

Tshushima (tsoo shē’ mă), Straits of, ii, 469

Ts’i (dynasty and state), i, 205, 508

Ts’in (dynasty and state), i, 205, 253

Tuaregs, i, 154, 206

Tudor, ii, 287

Tuileries, ii, 319, 322, 328, 329

Tulip tree, i, 51

Tunis, i, 470, ii, 84, 470, 500

Turanian language. (_See_ Ural-Altaic languages)

Turanians, i, 158, 620, 627, ii, 29, 69, 122

Turkestan, i, 153, 159, 206, 273, 317,     386, 387, 388, 428, 433, 546, 548,
549, 603, 618, 620, 627-29, 644,     ii, 17, 24, 33, 71, 109, 113, 121,
127-28, 132, 261, 262, 608, 612

Turkey, ii, 208, 366, 382, 440, 446, 483, 484, 500, 502, 521-22, 531, 623, 624.
(_See also_ Turks)

Turkey, Great, ii, 114

Turkhan Pasha, ii, 554

Turkish fleet, ii, 140;   language and literature, i, 156, 627, ii, 122;
peoples, i, 541, 570, 627, ii, 28, 64, 66-72, 139-40, 261 (_see also_ Turks);
princes, ii, 106, 124

Turko-Finnic language, ii, 70

Turko-Finnish peoples, i, 560, 606

Turkomans, i, 551, ii, 132-33, 261, 471

Turks, i, 388, 545, 618, 627, 629, 644, ii, 24, 34-35, 61, 106, 121-22, 617;
and the Crusades, ii, 78 _sqq._;   Ottoman, i, 615, ii, 121 _sqq._,     138-40,
182-84, 193-94, 197, 200, 204-06, 233,     240, 249, 353, 447, 617, 620;
Seljuk, ii, 34, 39, 70, 114, 121, 615

Turtles, i, 40, 46

Tuscany, ii, 225, 236, 242

Tusculum, i, 473

Tushratta, King, i, 192, 200, 245

Twelve Tables, the, i, 458, 487

Tyler, Wat, ii, 156, 617

Tylor, E. B., i, 131

Tyndale, Bible of, i, 282

Typhon (tī’ fon), Egyptian god, i, 236

Tyrannosaurus (tī răn ō saw’ rŭs), i, 42

Tyrants, i, 308

Tyre, i, 196, 212, 216, 261, 264, 266,     279, 294, 331, 379, 380, 382-84,
401, 468,     569, 571, ii, 144, 244

Tyrol, ii, 283, 564


Uganda, i, 206, ii, 51, 460

Uhud, battle of, ii, 9

Uigurs (wē’ goorz), ii, 109

Uintathere (ū in’ tă thēr), i, 53, 56

Ukraine Cossacks, ii, 260

Ukrainia (and Ukrainians), ii, 128-29, 244

Ulm, ii, 362, 622

Ulster, i, 110, ii, 432, 489-98

Uncleanness, i, 126, 131

“Unionist” party, ii, 495

United Provinces.   (_See_ Holland)

United Service Institution, ii, 567, 571

United States, i, 37, 546, ii, 294, 297 _sqq._;   constitution, i, 225, 520,
ii, 293 _sq._, 314, 378, 621;   political and social conditions, i, 268, 308,
493, ii, 292-96, 326, 338, 344, 386-87, 395, 551;   slavery in, ii, 193, 293;
Declaration of Independence, ii, 293, 621;   treaty with Britain, ii, 293-94,
621;   Civil War, ii, 443, 623;   unity of, ii, 476;   modern foreign policy
of, ii, 503-07;   in Great War, ii, 527, 583, 560-62.   (_See also_ America)

_Universal History_, the, ii, 418, 419

Universal law, ii, 215

Universals, ii, 174

Universe, ii, 418

Universities, i, 613, ii, 37, 88, 168, 270, 390, 427

University Commission, ii, 437

Unterwalden (oon’ ter val den), ii, 199

Ur, i, 195

Ural mountains, i, 153, 549

Ural-Altaic languages, i, 155, 156, 160, 164, 174, 299, 560;   people, i, 203

Uranus (ūr’ ă nŭs), i, 4

Urban II (pope), ii, 72, 74, 84, 97, 167, 615

Urban VI (pope), ii, 100, 617

Urfa, i, 621

Uri, ii, 199

Urns, i, 115

Uruk, i, 195

Urumiya (ū rū mē’ yă), lake, i, 318

Ussher, Bishop, ii, 418

Usury, i, 265

Utica (ū’ ti k_ă_), i, 212

Utopias, i, 358, ii, 211

Utrecht, ii, 229


Vaisyas (vīs’ yăz), i, 269, 270

Valais, i, 564

Valenciennes, ii, 531

Valens, Emperor, i, 554

Valerian, Emperor, i, 528, 617, ii, 610

Valladolid, ii, 207-09

Valmy, battle of, ii, 330, 621

Valona, ii, 524

Value, i, 219, 220

Van, i, 318

Vandals, i, 540, 553, 556, 564, 606, 615, ii, 22, 611

Varangians (vă răn’ ji ănz), ii, 67

Varennes (vă ren’), ii, 323-25, 621

Varro, i, 476

Vasa (vä’ să), Gustava, ii, 234

Vases, i, 213

Vassalage, ii, 44

Vatican, ii, 57, 84, 100

Vaughan, ii, 310

Vedas (vā’ dăz), i, 173, 182, 417, ii, 257

Vegetarians, i, 182, 416

Vegetation, i, 37, 38

Veii (vē’ yī), i, 450, 459, 483, 485

Vendée, ii, 333, 351

Venetia, ii, 441, 445, 529

Venezuela, ii, 505

Venice (and the Venetians), ii, 76, 80, 81, 97,     117, 120, 126, 139, 180,
182, 184,     257, 351, 380, 529, 616, 621

Venizelos (ven i zē’ los), ii, 522

Venus, goddess, ii, 49

Venus, planet, i, 4, 5

Vera Cruz, ii, 444

Verbal tradition, i, 230

Verde, Cape, ii, 617

Verde, Cape, Islands, ii, 188

Verdun, ii, 329, 330, 509

Verona, ii, 180, 332

Versailles, ii, 238, 242, 248, 312-22, 446, 477, 556;   Peace of, ii, 560
_sqq._, 624

Verulam, Lord.   (_See_ Bacon, Sir Francis)

Vespasian (ves pā’ zhi ăn), i, 526, 535, 571, ii, 609

Vessels of stone, i, 213

Vesuvius, i, 505

Via Flaminia, i, 471

Victims, human, i, 588

Victor Emmanuel, ii, 441, 623

Victoria, Queen of Great Britain, i, 175, 531,     ii, 228, 437, 438, 455, 482,
487, 622, 623

_Victory_, flagship, ii, 362

Vienna, ii, 126, 140, 205, 249, 371, 483, 568, 618, 620;   Congress of, ii,
370, 378, 379, 431, 436, 440, 453, 557, 622

Vigilius, i, 558, 559

Vikings (vik’ ingz), ii, 53, 67

Village, the, i, 109, 256

Vilna, ii, 386, 519

Vimiero (vē mā’ ē roo), ii, 364

Vinci (vin’ chē), Leonardo da, i, 13, 534, ii, 175, 183, 419, 523, 618

Vindhya (vind’ yă) mountains, i, 420

Vinland, ii, 185

Virgil, i, 407, 448, 531

Virginia, ii, 280, 283, 290, 292, 296, 300, 305, 306, 443

Virtue, i, 351

Visé, ii, 512

Vishnu, i, 180, 437

Visigoths, i, 550, 553, 559, 606, ii, 66, 611

Vistula, ii, 112

Vitellus, i, 526, ii, 609

_Vittoria_, ship, ii, 188

Viviparous animals, i, 54-55

Vivisection, i, 403, 404, 490

Vocabulary of man, i, 151

Volga, i, 153, 159, 432, 560, 606, ii, 267

Volscians, i, 458

Volta, ii, 387

Voltaire, F. M. A. de, ii, 238, 240, 264, 421, 620

Votes, ii, 147

Vowels, i, 304

Voyages, i, 217-18, ii, 191

Vulgate, the, i, 307


Wages, i, 258, ii, 156

Wagons, i, 170

Waldenses, ii, 92, 94

Waldo, ii, 92, 94

Wales, i, 209, 605, ii, 40, 178

Waley, Arthur, i, 157

Walid (wa lēd’) I, ii, 28, 613

Walid II, ii, 28, 613

Wallace, William, ii, 178

Wallenstein, ii, 235

Walpole, Sir Robert, ii, 227

Wang Yang Ming, i, 642

War, Great.   (_See_ Great War)

War and warfare, i, 171, 254, 256, 306, 370-72, ii, 234, 424, 475-76, 481, 513
_sqq._, 567-70

War of American Independence, ii, 291 _sqq._

Warsaw, ii, 382

Warwick, Lord, ii, 222

Washington, i, 520, ii, 279, 301, 357, 392, 443

Washington, George, ii, 292, 301, 303, 307, 353

Water, i, 23, ii, 275

Waterloo, ii, 371, 624

Watt, James, ii, 275, 386, 392

Watters, i, 541, 642, 645

Wealden Valley, i, 73

Weale, Putnam, ii, 461

Weapons, i, 78, 108, 114, 196, 205

Weaving, i, 105

Wedmore, Treaty of, ii, 52, 54

Wei dynasty, later, i, 633

Wei-hai-wei (wā hī wā’), ii, 462, 469

Wellesley, Marquis.   (_See_ Mornington, Lord)

Wellesley, Sir Arthur.   (_See_ Wellington, Duke of)

Wellington, Duke of, ii, 364, 371

Wells, J., i, 458, 467, 470

Welsh, the, ii, 244

Welsh language, i, 168

Wends, the, ii, 80

Were-wolf, i, 124

Wessex, ii, 40, 51, 614

Western civilization, i, 636

Westminster, i, 463, 489, ii, 159, 182, 222, 225, 228

Westphalia, Peace of, ii, 232, 236, 280

Weyl, ii, 543

Whales, i, 41

Wheat, i, 113, 184, 186

Wheeler, B. I., i, 359, 362, 367

Whigs, ii, 288-89, 332

Whistles, i, 115

White Man’s Burthen, ii, 462

Whitehall, ii, 222, 224, 568

Wilberforce, Bishop, ii, 420

Wilhelm I, German Emperor, ii, 482

Wilhelm II, German Emperor, ii, 59, 60, 482-86, 623

Wilhelm, Crown Prince of Germany, ii, 486

Will and obedience, ii, 142-48

William I, etc., Emperors of Germany.   (_See_ Wilhelm)

William the Conqueror, i, 408, ii, 54, 66, 150, 615

William III, Prince of Orange, ii, 226, 491-92, 620

William IV, King of England, ii, 228

William the Silent, ii, 229

Williams, Harold, ii, 71

Williams, S. Wells, i, 541

Wilson, W., President of U. S. A., ii, 221, 284, 543-46, 550-57, 564-67

Wiltshire, i, 110, 135

Winckler, H., i, 192, 195, 246, 342

Windsor, ii, 222

Wine, ii, 281

Wiriath, ii, 311, 326

Wisby, ii, 180

Witchcraft, i, 126, 374

Withington, E. T., i, 403

Wittenberg, ii, 156, 203, 618

Woden, ii, 144

Wolfe, General, ii, 254, 620

Wolsey, Cardinal, ii, 202

Wolves, i, 69, 448

Women, i, 95, 99, 181, 232, 251, 309, ii, 13, 297

Wood, i, 76

Wood Age, i, 68

Wood blocks, for printing, ii, 159

Woodruff, Prof. L. L., i, 7

Woodward, G. M., i, 50

Woodward, Smith, i, 72

Woolf, L. S., ii, 377, 543

Woollen industry, ii, 275

Workmen, ii, 404-407

World (geographical), i, 341, 405, 406, ii, 187, 188, 191, 605;   (political),
i, 397, 399, 400, ii, 278, 381, 385, 431, 449

World, Old, nursery of mankind, i, 103

World dominion (and unity), i, 374, 397,     399, ii, 72, 90, 211, 243, 246,
252,     261-262

Worms, town, ii, 60

Worms, Diet of, ii, 203, 618

Worship, i, 130

Wörth (vũrt), ii, 445

Wright, W. B., i, 30, 63, 78, 96, 100, 101, 120

Writing, i, 174, 176, 189, 197, 198, 207-208,     214, 223-31, 296, 421, 639,
ii, 59

Written word, i, 293

Wu Ti, i, 548, ii, 609

Wu Wang, i, 204

Württemberg, i, 102, ii, 445

Wycliffe, John, and his followers, ii, 96,     100, 150-53, 160, 171, 174, 202,
270, 272, 617


Xavier (zā’ vi ũr), Francis, ii, 465

Xenophanes (ze nof’ _ă_ nēz), i, 13

Xenophon, i, 342, 351, 357, 363, 399

Xerxes (zũrk’ sēz), i, 334-42, 362, 385, 542, ii, 122, 607


Yanbu, i, 634

Yang-chow, ii, 119

Yang-tse valley, i, 205, 542

Yang-tse-kiang (yäng tsē kyäng’), i, 201, 641

Yarkand, i, 628, 643, ii, 610

Yarmuk, ii, 18, 613

Year, Moslem, ii, 8; solar, i, 129

Yeast, i, 172

Yedo bay, ii, 466

Yeliu Chutsai, ii, 110

Yemen, i, 618, 624, ii, 3-4

York, i, 529, ii, 221

Yorkshire, ii, 154

Yorktown, ii, 292

Ypres (ē’ pr), ii, 229, 515, 516

Yuan Chwang, i, 541, 642 _sqq._, ii, 22, 34, 106, 118, 612-13

Yuan dynasty, ii, 114, 117, 127, 617

Yucatan, i, 308, ii, 190

Yueh-Chi, i, 548, 628, 643, ii, 618

Yugo-Slavia (and Yugo-Slavs), i, 616, ii, 122, 380 _sq._, 484, 564, 566

Yule, i, 541

Yuste (yoos’ tā), ii, 207-09


Zadok, i, 287

Zaid (zā’ id), ii, 12

Zainib, ii, 12

Zama (zā’ m_ă_), i, 476-80, 482, ii, 608

Zanzibar, ii, 187

Zara, ii, 81

Zarathustra (zā ră thoos’ tr_ă_).   (_See_ Zoroaster)

Zebedee, i, 580

Zeid (zīd), a slave, ii, 6

Zend Avesta, i, 624

Zenobia, i, 535, 617, ii, 610

Zeppelin raids, ii, 519

Zeus (zūs), i, 396, 412

Zeuxis (zūk’ sis), i, 369

Zimbabwe (zēm băb’ wā), ii, 459

Zimmern, i, 305, 310, 343

Zinc, i, 106

Ziska, ii, 152

Zodiac, i, 240

Zollverein (tsol’ fer īn), ii, 488

Zoroaster (zō rō ăs’ tũr) and Zoroastrianism,     i, 533, 538, 617, 618, 624,
625,     626, 627, ii, 4, 14, 16, 29, 137

Zoroastrian language, i, 626

Zosimus (zōs’ i mŭs), i, 599

Zulus, i, 219, 370

Zyp, the, ii, 230

Printed in the United States of America.

*       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[1] See upon this an excellent pamphlet by F. J. Gould, _History, the Supreme
in the Instruction of the Young_ (Watts & Co.).

[2] A compact and inspiring book to be noted here is Fairgrieve’s _Geography
and World Power_. Another very suggestive book is Andrew Reid Cowan’s _Master
Clues in World History_.

[3] For a convenient recent discussion of the origin of the earth and its early
history before the seas were precipitated and sedimentation began, the student
should consult Professor Burrell’s contribution to the Yale lectures, _The
Evolution of the Earth and Its Inhabitants_ (1918), edited by President Lull.

[4] Here in this history of life we are doing our best to give only known and
established facts in the broadest way, and to reduce to a minimum the
speculative element that must necessarily enter into our account. The reader
who is curious upon this question of life’s beginning will find a very good
summary of current suggestions done by Professor L. L. Woodruff in President
Lull’s excellent compilation _The Evolution of the Earth_ (Yale University
Press). Professor H. F. Osborn’s _Origin and Evolution of Life_ is also a very
vigorous and suggestive book upon this subject, but it demands a fair knowledge
of physics and chemistry. Two very stimulating essays _for the student_ are A.
H. Church’s _Botanical Memoirs_. No 183, Ox. Univ. Press.

[5] Theophrastus, quoting Xenophanes.

[6] There is a discussion of fossils in the Holkham Hall Leonardo MS.

[7] An admirable recent book, short and written in a style intelligible to the
general reader, is Arthur Holmes, _The Age of the Earth_. He gives a good
summary of this most interesting discussion, and sustains the maximum estimate
of 1600 million years.

[8] It might be called with more exactness the _Survival of the Fitter_.

[9] See Evans, The Sudden Appearance of the Cambrian Fauna. (_Proc. of XIe
Congrès Geolog. Inst., 1910_) for a discussion of this.

[10] Phanerogams.

[11] Deciduous trees.

[12] This, says Mr. R. I. Pocock, has to be qualified. There were Carboniferous
spiders with spinnerets, though they may have used the silk only for egg cases.
And he thinks that the Carboniferous myriapods point to _ground_ beneath the
trees.

[13] See Sir R. Ball’s _Causes of the Great Ice Age_, and Dr. Croll’s _Climate
and Time_. These are sound books to read still, but the reader will find many
of their conclusions modified in Wright’s _The Quaternary Ice Age_, which is a
quarter of a century more recent.

[14] Dr. Marie Stopes, _Monograph on the Constitution of Coal_.

[15] See article “Cephalopoda” in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ for its
anatomy.

[16] And here the genius of a great humorous artist (E. T. Reed) obliges us to
add a footnote to clear away a common misconception. He was the creator of a
series of fantastic pictures, _Prehistoric Peeps_, which have had a deserved
and immense vogue, and it was his whim to represent primitive men as engaged in
an unending wild struggle with great Plesiosaurs and the like. His fantasy has
become a common belief. As we shall see, millions of years elapsed between the
vanishing of the last great Mesozoic reptile and the first appearance of man
upon this earth. Early man had as contemporaries some monstrous animals, as we
shall note, but not these extreme monsters.

In these opening six chapters we have been much indebted, in addition to the
books already named in the text or in footnotes, to Ray Lankester’s _Extinct
Animals_, Osborne’s _Age of Mammals_, Jukes Browne’s, Lyell’s and Pirsson and
Schuchert’s textbooks of geology, and the collections and catalogues of the
Natural History Museum at South Kensington. H. R. Knipe’s _From Nebula to Man_
and his _Evolution in the Past_ have also been very useful and suggestive.
These two books are full of admirable illustrations of extinct monsters by Miss
G. M. Woodward and Mr. Bucknall. There are good figures also in _Extinct
Monsters_ and _Creatures of Other Days_ by H. N. Hutchinson.

[17] They secrete a nutritive fluid on which the young feeds from glands
scattered over the skin. But the glands are not gathered together into mammæ
with nipples for suckling. The stuff oozes out, the mother lies on her back,
and the young browse upon her moist skin.

[18] _Die Alpen in Eiszeitalters_, vol. iii.

[19] “Graphic Projection of the Pleistocene,” “Climatic Oscillations,” in
_Bulletin of Geological Soc. Am._, vol. xxvi.

[20] In this and the next chapters the writer has used Osborn’s _Men of the
Stone Age_, Sollas’ _Ancient Hunters_, Dr. Keith’s _Antiquity of Man_, W. B.
Wright’s _The Quaternary Ice Age_, Worthington Smith’s _Man, the Primeval
Savage_, F. Wood Jones’ _Arboreal Man_, H. G. F. Spurrell’s _Modern Man and his
Forerunners_, O. T. Mason’s _Origins of Invention_, Parkyn’s _History of
Prehistoric Art_, Salomon Reinach’s _Repertoire de l’Art Quaternaire_, and
various of the papers in Ray Lankester’s _Science from an Easy Chair_.

[21] Darwin’s _Descent of Man_.

[22] In _Conquest_ for February, 1920, Mr. R. I. Pocock published a very useful
criticism of this section as it stood in the first version of the _Outline_. It
has been carefully modified in accordance with his views. In addition, we take
the liberty of quoting the following:

“It was formerly held, I believe, that, so far as habits are concerned, the
transitional steps in man’s descent were to be traced from an active arboreal
monkey to the equally active arboreal gibbon, and thence to the less active,
but still mainly arboreal, orang-utang; from the latter to the half arboreal,
half terrestrial chimpanzee, thence, through the mainly terrestrial gorilla, to
wholly terrestrial man. In other words, the stages of man’s evolution were a
series of structural modifications resulting from the gradual dropping of the
ancestral habit of living in trees in favour of life on the ground. But such a
conception leaves unexplained the great differences between monkeys and gibbons
in arboreal and terrestrial activity. Were it correct, we should expect the
gibbons to show a transition between monkeys and other apes in their method of
moving through trees and on the ground. They show no such transition. It is
necessary, therefore, to formulate another theory.

“Since all the active climbing monkeys have well-developed tails, and since the
tail tends to shorten or disappear in species of less active habits which live,
like the monkey of Gibraltar, on rocky hillsides, the absence of the tail in
apes suggests very forcibly that their ancestor had to a great extent given up
living in trees. Moreover, the short broad foot of the apes, their ability to
stand and walk erect, their peculiar way of climbing, all point to the
conclusion that they are descended, not from a truly arboreal ape, but from an
ape which had already taken to terrestrial life, with partly bipedal, partly
quadrupedal progression; an ape which, while still retaining the power to
ascend trees for purposes of feeding and escaping from carnivorous foes, was,
at best, probably a slow, inactive climber, certainly not an arboreal leaper
like a monkey. A large ape of that mode of life, with hands and feet not very
different from those of a chimpanzee or gorilla, but with stronger legs and
shorter arms, is my conception of the ancestor of existing apes and of man. And
the progenitor of that hypothetical ancestor was probably a big ground monkey.”

[23] Among the earlier pioneers of the latter view was Mr. Harrison, a grocer
of Ightham in Kent, one of those modest and devoted observers to whom British
geology owes so much. At first his “Eoliths” were flouted and derided by
archæologists, but to-day he has the scientific world with him in the
recognition of the quasi-human origin of many of his specimens. With him we
must honour Mr. W. J. Lewis Abbott, a jeweller of St. Leonards, whose intimate
knowledge of stone structure has been of the utmost value in these discussions.
See “Occ. Papers,” No. 4, of the Royal Anthropl. Inst., for a description by
Sir E. R. Lankester of one of the better formed of these early implements.

[24] Some writers suppose that a Wood and Shell age preceded the earliest Stone
Age. South Sea Islanders, Negroes, and Bushmen still make use of wood and the
sharp-edged shells of land and water molluscs as implements.

[25] For some interesting suggestions on the origin of flint implements see
Elliot Smith’s presidential address to the Anthropl. Sect. of the Brit. Assn.,
1912.

[26] Sollas’ _Ancient Hunters_, p. 40.

[27] We follow Penck.

[28] For sixpence and postage the reader can get from the British Museum, South
Kensington, a very fully illustrated pamphlet _A Guide to the Fossil Remains of
Man_, showing the Piltdown material in great detail.

[29] Three phases of human history before the knowledge and use of metals are
often distinguished. First there is the so-called Eolithic Age (dawn of stone
implements), then the Palæolithic Age (old stone implements), and finally an
age in which the implements are skilfully made and frequently well finished and
polished (Neolithic Age). The Palæolithic period is further divided into an
earlier (sub-human) and a later (fully human) period. We shall comment on these
divisions later.

[30] From Chelles and Le Moustier in France.

[31] Osmond Fisher, quoted in Wright’s _Quaternary Ice Age_.

[32] _Social Origins_, by Andrew Lang, and _Primal Law_, by J. J. Atkinson.
(Longmans, 1903.)

[33] This first origin of fire was suggested by Sir John Lubbock (_Prehistoric
Times_), and Ludwig Hopf, in _The Human Species_, says that “Flints and pieces
of pyrites are found in close proximity in palæolithic settlements near the
remains of mammoths.”

[34] But compare Sollas’ _Ancient Hunters_. Elliot Smith (_Primitive Man_,
Proceedings Brit. Acad., vol. vii) says they approach the Neanderthal type.

[35] What is known of the Tasmanian Old Stone men is to be found in Roth and
Butler’s _Aborigines of Tasmania_. See also footnote on the Tasmanian language
to Chapter XIII.

[36] The opinion that the Neanderthal race (_Homo Neanderthalensis_) is an
extinct species which did not interbreed with the true men (_Homo sapiens_) is
held by Professor Osborn, and it is the view to which the writer inclines and
to which he has pointed in the treatment of this section; but it is only fair
to the reader to note that many writers do not share this view. They write and
speak of living “Neanderthalers” in contemporary populations. One observer has
written in the past of such types in the west of Ireland; another has observed
them in Greece. These so-called “living Neanderthalers” have neither the
peculiarities of neck, thumb, nor teeth that distinguish the Neanderthal race
of pro-men. The cheek teeth of true men, for instance, have what we call fangs,
long fangs; the Neanderthaler’s cheek tooth is a _more complicated and
specialized_ cheek tooth, a long tooth with short fangs, and his canine teeth
were _less_ marked, _less_ like dog-teeth, than ours. Nothing could show more
clearly that he was on a different line of development. We must remember that
so far only western Europe has been properly explored for Palæolithic remains,
and that practically all we know of the Neanderthal species comes from that
area (see Map, p. 89). No doubt the ancestor of _Homo sapiens_ (which species
includes the Tasmanians) was a very similar and parallel creature to _Homo
Neanderthalensis_. And we are not so far from that ancestor as to have
eliminated not indeed “Neanderthal,” but “Neanderthaloid” types. The existence
of such types no more proves that the Neanderthal species, the makers of the
Chellean and Mousterian implements, interbred with _Homo sapiens_ in the
European area than do monkey-faced people testify to an interbreeding with
monkeys; or people with faces like horses, that there is an equine strain in
our population.

[37] R. I. Pocock.

[38] See Osborn in his _Men of the Old Stone Age_. But see Wright’s _Quaternary
Ice Age_ for a different view of the Magdalenian Age.

[39] See, for example, H. G. F. Spurrell, _Modern Man and His Forerunners_, end
of Chapter III.

[40] Upon this question W. J. Sollas’ _Ancient Hunters_ is very full and
suggestive.

[41] From the cave of Mas d’Azil.

[42] But our domestic cattle are derived from some form of aurochs--probably
from some lesser Central Asiatic variety.--H. H. J.

[43] “The various finds of human remains in North America for which the
geological antiquity has been claimed have been thus briefly passed under
review. In every instance where enough of the bones is preserved for
comparison, the evidence bears witness against the geological antiquity of the
remains and for their close affinity to or identity with the modern Indians.”
(Smithsonian Institute, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 33. Dr.
Hrdlicka.)

But J. Deniker quotes evidence to show that eoliths and early palæoliths have
been found in America. See his compact but full summary of the evidence and
views for and against in his _Races of Man_, pp. 510, 511.

[44] “Questioned by some authorities,” says J. Deniker in _The Races of Man_.

[45] A good account of Palæolithic and Neolithic man is to be found in Rice
Holmes’ _Ancient Britain_, 1907. Otis T. Mason’s _Origins of Invention_ also
illuminates this period.

[46] The deposits at Susa show neolithic remains perhaps more than 20,000 years
old. See Montelius _Congrès Internat. d’Anthrop. Prehist._, 1906, p. 32. Sir
Arthur Evans says the neolithic age began in Crete more than 14,000 years
ago.--G. Wh.

[47] See Peisker, _Cambridge Medieval History_, Vol. I, for some interesting
views upon domestication.--E. B.

[48] Native copper is still found to-day in Italy, Hungary, Cornwall, and many
other places.

[49] This view of the origin of bronze is that of Dr. Gowland, _The Metals
Antiquity_ (Huxley Lecture, 1912). But Lord Avebury quotes the verbal opinion
of the late Lord Swansea against this view, and sets it aside without further
argument.

[50] Ridgeway (_Early Age of Greece_) says a lump of tin has been found in the
Swiss pile-dwelling deposits.

[51] Tin was known as a foreign import in Egypt under the XVIIIth Dynasty;
there is (rare) Mycenæan tin, and there are (probably later, but not clearly
dated) tin objects in the Caucasus. But it is very difficult to distinguish tin
from antimony. There is a good deal of Cyprus bronze which contains antimony; a
good deal which seems to be tin is antimony--the ancients trying to get tin,
but actually getting antimony and thinking it was tin.--J. L. M.

[52] In connection with iron, note the distinction of ornamental and useful
iron. Ornamental iron, a rarity, perhaps meteoric, as jewellery or magical
stuff, occurs in east Europe sporadically in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty.
This must be distinguished from the copious useful iron which appears in Greece
much later from the North.--J. L. M.

[53] People were probably healthier and longer lived in the Bronze than in the
Neolithic age. The disparity of stature between male and female was much
less.--G. Wh.

[54] Lord Avebury. For a good account of Avebury, Stonehenge, and the traces of
a well-developed social system in England before the coming of the Keltic
peoples, see Hippesley Cox, _The Green Roads of England_.

[55] Caesar _de Bello Gallico_ says the Britons tabooed hare, fowl and
goose.--G. Wh.

[56] All Old World peoples who had entered upon the Neolithic stage grew and
ate wheat, but the American Indians must have developed agriculture
independently in America after their separation from the Old World populations.
They never had wheat. Their cultivation was maize, Indian corn, a new-world
grain.

[57] Poultry and hens’ eggs were late additions to the human cuisine, in spite
of the large part they now play in our dietary. The hen is not mentioned in the
Old Testament (but note the allusion to an egg, Job vi, 6) nor by Homer. Up to
about 1300 B.C. the only fowls in the world were jungle denizens in India and
Burmah. The crowing of jungle cocks is noted by Glasfurd in his admirable
accounts of tiger shooting as the invariable preliminary of dawn in the Indian
jungle. Probably poultry were first domesticated in Burmah. They got to China,
according to the records, only about 1100 B.C. They reached Greece via Persia
before the time of Socrates. In the New Testament the crowing of the cock
reproaches Peter for his desertion of the Master.

[58] Later Palæolithic bone whistles are known. One may guess that reed pipes
were an early invention.

[59] In addition to authorities already cited, we have used for this and the
following chapters Lord Avebury’s _Prehistoric Times_, Schrader and Jevons’
_Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan Peoples_, and A. H. Keane’s _Man Past and
Present_.

[60] Among other books we have used Jukes Browne’s _Building of the British
Isles_.

[61] _The Quaternary Ice Age._

[62] Our treatment of this chapter is written for the general reader and is
broad and general. But the student who wishes to go more thoroughly into the
development of the civilized mentality out of the elements of the primitive
human mind should read and study very carefully that very illuminating book,
Jung’s _Psychology of the Unconscious_ (English translation by Beatrice M.
Hinckle), and especially the opening two chapters. That book is a most
important contribution to the mental history of mankind.

[63] J. J. Atkinson’s _Primal Law_.

[64] See Sir J. G. Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_.

[65] Glasfurd’s _Rifle and Romance in the Indian Jungle_, 1915.

[66] For some interesting suggestions here see Sigismund Freud, _Totem and
Taboo, Resemblances between the Psychic Life of Savages and Neurotics_.

[67] Ludwig Hopf, in _The Human Species_, calls the later Palæolithic art
“masculine” and the Neolithic “feminine.” The pottery was made by women, he
says, and that accounts for it. But the arrowheads were made by men, and there
was nothing to prevent Neolithic men from taking scraps of bone or slabs of
rock and carving them--had they dared. We suggest they did not dare to do so.

[68] But Cicero says relegere, “_to read over_,” and the “binding” by those who
accept _religare_ is often written of as being merely the binding of a vow.

[69] Bateman, _Ten Years’ Digging in Celtic and Saxon Gravehills_, quoted by
Lord Avebury in _Prehistoric Times_, p. 176.

[70] Cabot in _Labrador_, by Grenfell and others. Macmillan, New York.

[71] Quoted in _Ency. Brit._, vol. ix, p. 850.

[72] This is not a good name, and may perhaps drop out of use later. Blumenbach
chose a particular skull as the “type” of this race and it happened to be a
skull from the Caucasus.--G. S.

[73] The skull shape of the Lombards, says Flinders Petrie, changed from
dolichocephalic to brachycephalic in a few hundred years. See his Huxley
Lecture for 1906, _Migrations_, published by the _Anthropological Institute_.
Ripley is the great authority on the other side.

[74] _My Diaries_, under date of July 25, 1894.

[75] “Sunstone” culture because of the sun worship and the megaliths. This is
not a very happily chosen term. It suggests a division equivalent to
palæolithic (old stone) and neolithic (new stone), whereas it is a development
of the Neolithic culture.

[76] Megalithic monuments have been made quite recently by primitive Indian
peoples.

[77] For some interesting suggestions in this matter, see W. H. R. Rivers,
“_Sun Cult and Megaliths in Oceana_” (_American Anthropologist_ (N.S.), vol.
xvii). Hose and MacDougall, _The Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, contains some very
interesting parallelisms between the culture of modern Borneo and the
prehistoric culture of southern Europe. See also Dr. W. Warde Fowler’s “Ancient
Italy and Modern Borneo” in the _Journal of Roman Studies_ (1916).

[78] Sir Arthur Evans suggests that in America sign-language arose before
speech, because the sign-language is common to all Indians in North America,
whereas the languages are different. See his _Anthropology and the
Classics_.--G. M.

Samuel Butler (_Note Books_) suggests that language was “originally confined to
a few scholars.”--G. Wh.

[79] See article “Grammar” in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[80] Sir H. H. Johnston gives this estimate in his _Comparative Study of the
Bantu and Semi-Bantu Languages_.

[81] Greek--ox-ford.

[82] Ratsel (quoted in the _Ency. Brit._, art. “Caspian”).

[83] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Japan.”

[84] The four characters indicating “Affairs, query, imperative, old,” placed
in that order, for example, represent “Why walk in the ancient ways?” The
Chinaman gives the bare cores of his meaning; the Englishman gets to it by a
bold metaphor. He may be talking of conservatism in cooking or in bookbinding,
but he will say: “Why walk in the ancient ways?” Mr. Arthur Waley, in the
interesting essay on Chinese thought and poetry which precedes his book, _170
Chinese Poems_ (Constable, 1918), makes it clear how in these fields Chinese
thought is kept practical and restricted by the limitations upon metaphor the
linguistic structure of Chinese imposes. See also Hirst, _Ancient History of
China_, ch. vii.

[85] See Farrand, _The American Nation_, and E. S. Payne, _History of the New
World called America_, and note footnote to § 1 of this chapter.

[86] These are discussed compactly, but with very special knowledge, by Sir
Harry Johnston in his little book on _The Opening up of Africa_, in the Home
University Library. The student who finds this subject of philological history
interesting, should read the introduction to the same writer’s _Comparative
Study of the Bantu and Semi-Bantu Languages_.

[87] The Polynesians appear to be a later eastward extension of the dark whites
or brown peoples. See again § 4 of chap. xiii.

[88] “The Keltic group of languages, of which it has been said that they
combined an Aryan vocabulary with a Berber (or Iberian) grammar.” Sir Harry
Johnston. See also Sir John Rhys, The Welsh People, Mac Neilh’s _Phases in
Irish History_, and various articles by Prof. Stewart Macalister in the _Irish
Monthly_ (1917-1919).

[89] See Schrader (translated by Jevons), _Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan
Peoples_, p. 404. But though the word Aryan was undoubtedly in its original
application the name only of the Indo-Iranian people, it has been used in
modern discussion for more than half a century in the wider sense. A word was
badly wanted for that purpose, and “Aryan” was taken; failing “Aryan” we should
be obliged to fall back on “Indo-Germanic” or “Indo-European,” terms equally
open to objection and ugly and clumsy to employ.

[90] But these may have been an originally Semitic people who learnt an Aryan
speech.

[91] On this point see Perry, _An Ethnological Study of Warfare_, vol. lxi.,
Mem. Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc., and also published separately 1917.--G.
Wh.

[92] Fools, I think, were not wits, but deformed idiots, whom the company
teased and laughed at. Certainly so in Roman and mediæval times. They do not
occur in the Hellenic Age, except at courts in Asia Minor; but they must have
been present in pre-Hellenic kingdoms; cf. end of _Iliad I._, where the gods
laugh consumedly not at Hephaestus’ wit, but at his lameness. The idealized
Fool of Shakespeare is, like the idealized Hermit of the romances, the
invention of later days.--G. M

[93] The Aryans developed their languages and their ballads and epics between
10,000 B.C. and the historical period. Very much later in time, probably within
the last 3,000 years, the nomadic Mongolian peoples of Asia began to develop
their Ural-Altaic speech, under similar conditions, by similar poetic uses.
Later we shall note the presence of bards at the court of Attila the Hun.

[94] It is suggested in the text that blind men became bards: Myres says that
bards were (artificially) blinded to stop them from going elsewhere--the tribe
wanted to keep them. The poetic touch is that “the Muses” blind the poet. Not a
bit of it. (Homer, being a blind bard, describes things by sound--the twanging
arrow, the far-thundering sea, the noise of the chariot going through the gate.
He is audile, not visual.)--E. B.

But in this matter note the adjectives in the passage quoted here from the
_Iliad_; they are all visual.--G. H. M.

Mr. L. Lloyd, of the experimental station at Cheshunt, tells me he has seen in
Rhodesia the musician and singer of a troupe of native dancers who had been
blinded by his chief to prevent him leaving the village.--H. G. W.

[95] G.M.

[96] The _Iliad_ describes what Chadwick calls a Heroic Age: _i.e._ a time when
the barbarians or nomads are breaking up an old civilization. Men are led by
chiefs who live by plunder and conquest and make themselves kingdoms. The tribe
is broken up; instead comes the comitatus of casual men who attach themselves
to a particular chief, as Phœnix or Patroclus to Achilles. Religion is broken
up, being by origin local. Hence there is almost no religion in the _Iliad_ or
the _Nibelungenlied_. Almost no magic. No family life. Tremendous booty, and
_la carrière ouverte aux talents_ with a vengeance.--G. M.

[97] _Some Aspects of Hindu Life in India._ Paper read to the Royal Society of
Arts, Nov. 28, 1918.

[98] No Greek heroes, in Homer or the heroic tradition, ever get drunk. In the
comic tradition they do, and of course centaurs and barbarians do.--G. M.

[99] Babylonian expedition of the University of Pennsylvania.

[100] H. R. Hall, _Ancient History of the Near East_, says it has been found in
Palestine.--S. H.

The late Mr. Aaron Aaronson found a real wild wheat upon the slopes of Mt.
Hermon. See Bulletin 274, Plant Indus. Bureau, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture; and
Stapf in Suppl. to the _Jour. of the Board of Agri., Lond._, vol. xvii, No.
3.--E. J. R.

[101] We shall use “Mesopotamia” here loosely for the Euphrates-Tigris country
generally. Strictly, of course, as its name indicates, Mesopotamia (mid rivers)
means only the country _between_ those two great rivers. That country in the
fork was probably very marshy and unhealthy in early times (Sayce), until it
was drained by man, and the early cities grew up west of the Euphrates and east
of the Tigris. Probably these rivers then flowed separately into the Persian
Gulf.

[102] My friend Colonel Lawrence tells me that the movement among the Arabs is
somewhat as follows: (1) the sessile village cultivators are pushed out by
over-population into the desert--very reluctantly; (2) they wander in the
desert for a thousand years or so--as a stick pushed into the water gets
carried about for a long way; (3) they are pushed again out of the desert, back
again into sessile life by starvation--very reluctantly (they have learned to
love the desert); and when they come back into sessile life they are on the
other side--_i.e._ having started in west Arabia, they land in Mesopotamia.
Thus they wander a thousand years or so, and end up thousands of miles from
where they started.--E. B.

[103] Sir H. H. Johnston is inclined to believe that a common late Neolithic
and early bronze culture spread widely in this primitive world. He links the
Dravidian languages of India--some of which group are to be found in
Beluchistan and the eastern fringe of Persia--with certain languages in the
Caucasian Mountains, and these again with Basque. He would bring the Sumerians,
the early Cretans, and the early peoples of Asia Minor into this early “brown”
or dark white culture before the Aryans, Semites, or Hamites developed their
language cultures and thrust across this band of primordial civilization. He
connects these “class and prefix” languages with the creation of the African
Bantu, but that is a speculation beyond the scope of this present work. A
series of articles on this subject by the Rev. W. Crabtree will be found in the
_Journal of the African Society_. The connection of Sumerian and Bantu was
first suggested by Sir Richard Burton in 1885. These views are in complete
accordance with Elliot Smith’s suggestion of a widespread heliolithic culture
already dealt with in chap. xiii, § 4, p. 146

[104] Excavations conducted at Eridu by Capt. R. Campbell Thompson during the
recent war have revealed an early Neolithic agricultural stage, before the
invention of writing or the use of bronze, beneath the earliest Sumerian
foundations. The crops were cut by sickles of earthenware. Capt. Thompson
thinks that these pre-Sumerian people were not of Sumerian race, but
proto-Elamites. Entirely similar Neolithic remains have been found at Susa,
once the chief city of Elam.

[105] Sayce, in _Babylonian and Assyrian Life_, estimates that in 6500 B.C.
Eridu was on the seacoast.

[106] Authorities vary upon this date. Some put back Sargon I to 3750 B.C. This
latter was his traditional date based on Babylonian records.

[107] Of unknown language and race, “neither Sumerians nor Semites,” says
Sayce. Their central city was Susa. Their archæology is still largely an
unworked mine. They are believed by some, says Sir H. H. Johnston, to have been
negroid in type. There is a strong negroid strain in the modern people of Elam.

[108] For most of these dates here Winckler in _Helmolt’s World History_ has
been followed.

[109] II. Kings xv. 29, and xvi. 7 _et seq._

[110] II. Kings xvii. 3.

[111] To be murdered by his sons.

[112] Winckler (Craig), _History of Babylonia and Assyria_.

[113] “The original home or centre of development of this ‘Dynastic’ Egyptian
type seems to have been in southern or south-western Arabia. This region of
south-western and southern Arabia, ten to fifteen thousand years ago, was
probably an even better favoured province than it is at the present day, when
it still bears the Roman designation of Arabia Felix--so much of the rest of
this gaunt, lava-covered, sand-strewn peninsula being decidedly ‘infelix.’ It
has high mountains--a certain degree of rainfall on them, and was anciently
clothed in rich forests before the camels, goats, and sheep of Neolithic and
Bronze Age man nibbled away much of this verdure. Above all there grew trees
oozing with delicious-scented resins or gums. These, when civilization dawned
on the world, became very precious and an offering of sweet savour to the
civilized man’s gods, because so grateful to his own nostrils.” _Africa_, by
Sir H. H. Johnston.

[114] 3733 B.C., Wallis Budge.

[115] But compare the citation of _Beowulf_ in Chap. XV, § 2.--R. L. C.

[116] The great pyramid is 450 feet high and its side 700 feet long. It is
calculated (says Wallis Budge) to weigh 4,883,000 tons. All this stone was
lugged into place chiefly by human muscle.

[117] There are variants to these names, and to most Egyptian names, for few
self-respecting Egyptologists will tolerate the spelling of their colleagues.
One may find, for instance, Thethmosis, Thoutmosis, Tahutmes, Thutmose, or
Thethmosis; Amunothph, Amenhotep or Amenothes. A pleasing variation is to break
up the name, as, for instance, Amen Hetep. This particular little constellation
of variants is given here not only because it is amusing, but because it is
desirable that the reader should know such variations exist. For most names the
rule of this book has been to follow whatever usage has established itself in
English literature, regardless of the possible contemporary pronunciation.
Amenophis, for example, has been so written in English books for two centuries.
It came into the language by indirect routes, but it is now as fairly
established as is Damascus as the English name of a Syrian town. Nevertheless,
there are limits to this classicism. The writer, after some vacillation, has
abandoned Oliver Goldsmith and Dr. Johnson in the case of “Peisistratus” and
“Keltic,” which were formerly spelt “Pisistratus” and “Celtic.”

[118] _China and the League of Nations_, a pamphlet by Mr. Liang-Chi-Chao.
(_Pekin Leader_ Office.)

[119] Here we touch on highly controversial matters. The reader interested in
the question of the separate origin of the American civilization should consult
_Nature_, Jan. 27, 1916, Spinden and Elliot Smith in discussion.

[120] F. Ratzel, _History of Mankind_.

[121] Sayce.

[122] Mosso, _The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization_.--R. L. G.

[123] Cecil Torr, _Ancient Ships_.

[124] See Evans’ _Prehistoric Tombs of Cnossos_.

[125] This is, I think, too dogmatic about Helen. True, raids on women were a
real cause of war, but they were also a very favourite _ficelle_ of fiction. A
war with Troy might easily arise by the carrying off of a woman. But why was
Troy destroyed six several times? It looks to me as if there was some strong
motive for building just there, and an equally strong motive for great
confederacies destroying the city when built.--G. M.

Walter Leaf in his _Homer and History_ is in agreement with G. M. on this
point.--G. Wh.

[126] There were no domesticated camels in Africa until after the Persian
conquest of Egypt. This must have greatly restricted the desert routes. (See
Bunbury, _History of Ancient Geography_, note to Chap. VIII.) But the Sahara
desert of 3000 or 2000 years ago was less parched and sterile than it is
to-day. From rock engravings we may deduce the theory that the desert was
crossed from oasis to oasis by riding oxen and by ox-carts: perhaps, also, on
horses and asses. The camel as a beast of transport was seemingly not
introduced into North Africa till the Arab invasions of the seventh century
A.D. The fossil remains of camels are found in Algeria, and wild camels may
have lingered in the wastes of the Sahara and Somaliland till the domesticated
camel was introduced. The Nubian wild ass also seems to have extended its range
to the Sahara.--H. H. J.

[127] There was Sumerian trade organized round the temples before the Semites
got into Babylonia. See Hall and King, _Archæological Discoveries in Western
Asia_.--E. B.

[128] Iron bars of fixed weight were used for coin in Britain. Cæsar, _De Bello
Gallico_.--G. Wh.

[129] The earliest coinage of the west coast of Asia Minor was in electrum, a
mixture of gold and silver, and there is an interesting controversy as to
whether the first issues were stamped by cities, temples, or private
bankers.--P. G.

[130] Small change was in existence before the time of Alexander. The Athenians
had a range of exceedingly small silver coins running almost down to the size
of a pinhead, which were generally carried in the mouth; a character in
Aristophanes was suddenly assaulted, and swallowed his change in
consequence.--P. G.

[131] There is an inn-keeper in Aristophanes, but it may be inferred from the
circumstance that she is represented as letting lodgings in hell that the early
inn left much to be desired.--P. G.

[132] See the _Encyclopædia Brit._, Article _China_, p. 218.

[133] The writer’s friend, Mr. L. Y. Chen, thinks that this is only partially
true. He thinks that the emperors insisted upon a minute and rigorous study of
the set classics in order to check intellectual innovation. This was especially
the case with the Ming emperors, the first of whom, when reorganizing the
examination system on a narrower basis, said definitely, “This will bring all
the intellectuals of the world into my trap.” The Five Classics and the Four
Books have imprisoned the mind of China.

[134] The Libyan alphabet survived in North Africa until a century ago, and was
still used then for correspondence. It was supposed to be extinct, but in 1897
Sir Arthur Evans and Mr. J. L. Myres saw what looked like ancient Cretan
lettering on some dyed skins from the Sahara in the bazaar at Tripoli. It was
the ancient alphabet still in use for commercial signs.--E. B.

[135] The Sumerians allowed much more freedom and authority to women than the
Semites. They had priestess-queens, and one of their great divinities was a
goddess, Ishtar.

[136] See Johnson’s _Byeways of British Archæology_.

[137] Many Christian churches, almost all, indeed, built between the fifth
century and the Renaissance, are oriented to the east. St. Peter’s at Rome is
oriented east and west.

[138] In his _Dawn of Astronomy_.

[139] Legrain’s _Le Temps des Rois d’Ur_ (Bibliothèque de l’Ecole des Hautes
Etudes) was useful here.

[140] Cp. Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.

[141] According to Winckler, Sargon II, unlike his son, was pro-priest, and his
usurpation of the throne was the result of an intrigue of the Babylonian
priests against the feudal Assyrian military system of Tiglath Pileser III.

[142] See the last two verses of the Second Book of Chronicles, and Ezra, ch.
i.

[143] A book of the utmost interest and value here is Breasted’s _Religion and
Thought in Ancient Egypt_.

[144] See S. Sharpe’s _Egyptian Mythology and Egyptian Christianity_.

[145] Akhnaton lost some or all his father’s Syrian conquests.--G. W. B.

[146] Many authorities regard Alexander as a man with the ideas of a pushful
nineteenth-century (A.D.) monarch, and consider this visit to Jupiter Ammon as
a master-stroke of policy. He was, we are asked to believe, deliberately and
cynically acquiring divinity as a “unifying idea.” The writer is totally unable
to accept anything of the sort. For a discussion of the question, see
Ferguson’s _Greek Imperialism_.

[147] “His reforming zeal made him unpopular with the upper classes. Schoolmen
and pedants held up to the admiration of the people the heroes of the feudal
times and the advantages of the system they administered. Seeing in this
propaganda danger to the state, Shi Hwang-ti determined to break once and for
all with the past. To this end he ordered the destruction of all books having
reference to the past history of the empire, and many scholars were put to
death for failing in obedience to it.”--The late Sir R. K. Douglas in the
_Encyclopædia Brit._, article _China_.

Mr. L. Y. Chen does not agree with Sir R. K. Douglas here. He thinks that the
motives of Shi Hwang-ti were obscurantist. His object was the intellectual
slavery of the people. He collected a library for his own use.

[148] There were literary expressions of social discontent in Egypt before 2000
B.C. See “Social Forces and Religion” in Breasted’s _Religion and Thought in
Ancient Egypt_ for some of the earliest complaints of the common man under the
ancient civilizations.

[149] The student should compare with this J. J. Atkinson’s account (in his
_Primal Law_) of the significance of marriage by capture and his theory of the
origin of marriage.

[150] See also his shorter _Social Life of the Babylonians and Assyrians_.

[151] See Mary Austin, _The Flock_.

[152] J. L. M. says this is the view of a Londoner. In a village or small town
where everyone knows everyone, long credits are possible with barter. In Asia
Minor there is much reckoning with quite imaginary money of account.

[153] From _casta_, a word of Portuguese origin; the Indian word is _varna_,
colour.

[154] In the time of Confucius classes were much more fixed than later. Under
the Han Dynasty the competitive examination system was not yet established.
Scholars were recommended for appointments by local dignitaries, etc.--L. Y. C.

[155] The Grand Canal of China, the longer portion of which was made in the
sixth century A.D., has a total length of nearly 900 miles. It was begun in the
fifth century B.C. “Between Su-chow and Chin-kiang the canal is often 100 feet
wide and its sides are, in many places, faced with stone. It is spanned by fine
stone bridges, and near its banks are many memorial arches and lofty pagodas.”
The Great Wall of China, which was begun in the third century B.C., was built
originally to defend China against the Huns. It is about 1500 miles long; its
average height is between 20 and 30 feet, and every 200 yards there are towers
40 feet high.

[156] Damascus was already making Damask, and “Damascening” steel.

[157] _The Encyclopædia Biblica_ has been of great use here.

[158] This is probably much too early an estimate. The Book of Daniel was not
written until 167-5 B.C. Ecclesiastes and several Psalms are later than
Alexander.--G. W. B.

[159] See also G. B. Gray, _A Critical Introduction to the Old Testament_.

[160] This may seem to contradict Genesis xx. 15, and xxi. and xxvi. various
verses, but compare with this the _Encyclopædia Biblica_ article _Philistines_.

[161] So this name should be spelt in English. It is now the fashion among the
learned and among the sceptical to spell it Yahwe or Jahveh or Jahve, or in
some such fashion. There is a justification for this in the fact that at first
only the consonants were written in Hebrew, and then, for reasons into which we
will not enter here, the wrong vowels were inserted in this name. But ever
since the days of Tyndale’s Bible, Jehovah has been established in English
literature as the name of the God of Israel, and it is not to be lightly
altered. There is at present a deplorable tendency to strange spelling among
historians. Attention has already been called to the confusion that is being
accumulated in people’s minds by the variable spelling of Egyptologists, but
the tendency is now almost universal among historical writers. In an otherwise
admirable little book, _The Opening-up of Africa_, by Sir H. H. Johnston, for
example, one finds him spelling Saul as Sha’ul and Solomon as Shelomoh;
Jerusalem becomes Yerusalim and the Hebrews, Habiru or Ibrim. Historians do not
realize how the mind of the general reader is distressed and discouraged by
these constantly fluctuating attempts to achieve phonetic exactitude. This
treatment of old forms has much the same effect as the dazzle-painting of ships
that went on during the submarine warfare. It is dazzle-spelling. The ordinary
educated man is so confused that he fails altogether to recognize even his
oldest friends under their modern disguises. He loses his way in the story
hopelessly. The old events occur to novel names in unfamiliar places. He
conceives a disgust for history in which no record seems to tally with any
other record. Still more maddening and confusing is the variable spelling of
Chinese names. A large part of the popular indifference to Chinese history may
be due to the impossibility of holding on to the thread of a story in which one
narrator talks of T’sin and another of Sin, and both forms mix themselves with
Chin and T’chin. A boldly Europeanized name, such as Confucius, is far more
readily grasped. Modern writers in their zeal for phonetics seem to have lost
their sense of proportion. It is of far more importance not merely to
civilization, but to the welfare, respect, and endowment of historians, that
the general community should form clear and sound ideas of historical
processes, than that it should pronounce the name Jehovah exactly as this or
that learned gentleman believes it was pronounced by the Hebrews of the days of
Ezra. A day may come in the future for one final, conclusive reform in the
spelling of historical names. Meanwhile, it will probably save school teachers
of history from endless confusion and muddle if they adhere firmly to the
time-established spelling. Yet we have attempted no pedantic classicalism. The
reader will find Peisistratus for Goldsmith’s Pisistratus, the Arabic spelling
of Muhammad, Kelt for Celt, and Habsburg taking the place of the older
Hapsburg.

[162] Figures certainly exaggerated.--G. M.

[163] That is, where is the glory?

[164] But upon the question whether its “Centralization” was the work of
Solomon or a much later idea, cp. S. R. Driver, _Deuteronomy_ (Int. Crit.
Commentary).--G. W. B.

[165] Estimates of the cubit vary. The greatest is 44 inches. This would extend
the width to seventy-odd feet.

[166] But one version of the Creation story and the Eden story, though
originally from Babylon, seem to have been known to the Hebrews before the
Exile.--G. W. B.

[167] For early Egyptian anticipations of the idea of a Messiah and of the
prophetic style, see Breasted’s _Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt_. A very good book on the Hebrew prophets is W. A. C. Allen’s _Old
Testament Prophets_.

[168] Fletcher H. Swift’s _Education in Ancient Israel from Earliest Times to
A.D. 70_ is an interesting account of the way in which the Jewish religion,
because it was a literature-sustained religion, led to the first efforts to
provide elementary education for all the children in the community.

[169] Ridgeway’s _Early History of Greece_ has been used here, and Gilbert
Murray’s _Rise of the Greek Epic_.

[170] Roger Pocock’s _Horses_ is a good and readable book on these questions.

[171] This is a little misleading. I may quote from C. D. Buch, _Introduction
to the Study of Greek Dialects_ (_a_) “The great majority of the dialects play
no rôle whatever in literature” (p. 14); (_b_) “In the course of literary
development the dialects” (in a mixed and artificial form, _e.g._ the “epic”
dialect) “came to be characteristic of certain classes of literature; and their
rôle once established, the choice usually depended upon this factor, rather
than upon the native dialect of the author.” (p. 12.) Speaking generally, each
class of literature preserved the dialect of the region where it was first
cultivated.

The following work is a most illuminating one on this subject: A. Meillet,
_Aperçu d’une Histoire de la Langue Grecque_ (Paris, 1913).--H. L. J.

[172] Vowels were less necessary for the expression of a Semitic language. In
the early Semitic alphabets only A, I, and U were provided with symbols, but
for such a language as Greek, in which many of the inflectional endings are
vowels, a variety of vowel signs was indispensable.

[173] See Zimmern’s _Greek Commonwealth_, Bury’s _History of Greece_, and
Barker’s _Greek Political Theory_.

[174] “For them the state did not exist.” This needs qualification. Cephalus,
at whose house the conversation of Plato’s _Republic_ is placed, was a resident
alien. He was a wealthy man in the best society, and taken as a type of the
“happy man.” His son, Lysias, was a leading orator. Even in the matter of the
slaves: the Old Oligarch, in the “Constitution of Athens,” complains that the
Athenian slaves had no distinctive dress or manners, and so a gentleman could
not even push one of them! In the _Republic_ itself there is a description of
the Democratic State, in which the slaves push you off the pavement. Moreover,
even during the Peloponnesian War, there was no persecution of aliens and no
expulsion of aliens from Athens. They were evidently a loyal and contented
class. True, in time of food shortage, the claims of everybody to true
citizenship were scrutinized more and more closely; but that was
unavoidable.--G. M.

[175] I do not agree with “hereditary barristers” or “fee-hunting.” The
Athenian dicasts were not barristers, but judges: they sat in panels (sometimes
a panel of some hundreds) and judged. They had to be paid for attendance as
judges (don’t we pay jurymen?) because it took them away from their work as
potters, dyers, and stone-masons. Pay was a genuine and good democratic
institution; it was just what made possible the ordinary citizen’s co-operation
in the life of the state, and stopped its business from being the perquisite of
the rich. I feel strongly that the text is unjust to Athens.--E. B.

See Zimmern’s _Greek Commonwealth_, and Barker’s _Greek Political Theory_, pp.
29-30.

[176] From ostrakon, a tile; the voter wrote the name on a tile or shell.

[177] 776 B.C. is the year of the First Olympiad, a valuable starting-point in
Greek chronology.

[178] It is, at least, doubtful whether any change of climate expelled either
lion or elephant from southeast Europe and Asia Minor; the cause of their
gradual disappearance was--I think--nothing but Man, increasingly well armed
for the chase. Lions lingered in the Balkan peninsula till about the fourth
century B.C., if not later. Elephants had perhaps disappeared from western Asia
by the eighth century B.C. The lion (much bigger than the existing form) stayed
on in southern Germany till the Neolithic period. The panther inhabited Greece,
southern Italy, and southern Spain likewise till the beginning of the
historical period (say 1000 B.C.).--H. H. J.

[179] But a thousand years earlier the Hittites seem to have had paved high
roads running across their country.

[180] But cp. Bury’s _History of Greece_, ch. vi., § 5.

[181] Winckler, in Helmolt’s _Universal History_.

[182] See in relation to this chapter, Zimmern’s _Greek Commonwealth_. A very
handy book for the student in this section is Abbott’s _Skeleton Outline of
Greek History_.

[183] _Ancient Greek Literature_, by Gilbert Murray (Heinemann, 1911).

[184] _Plutarch._

[185] For an account of his views, see Burnet’s _Early Greek Philosophy_.
Gomperz, _Greek Thinkers_ is also a good book for this section.

[186] “But it was not only against the lives, properties, and liberties of
Athenian citizens that the Thirty made war. They were not less solicitous to
extinguish the intellectual force and education of the city, a project so
perfectly in harmony both with the sentiment and practice of Sparta, that they
counted on the support of their foreign allies. Among the ordinances which they
promulgated was one, expressly forbidding any one ‘to teach the art of words.’
The edict of the Thirty was, in fact, a general suppression of the higher class
of teachers or professors, above the rank of the elementary (teacher of letters
or) grammatist. If such an edict could have been maintained in force for a
generation, combined with the other mandates of the Thirty--the city out of
which Sophocles and Euripides had just died, and in which Plato and Isocrates
were in vigorous age, would have been degraded to the intellectual level of the
meanest community in Greece. It was not uncommon for a Grecian despot to
suppress all those assemblies wherein youths came together for the purpose of
common training, either intellectual or gymnastic, as well as the public
banquets and clubs or associations, as being dangerous to his authority,
tending to elevation of courage, and to a consciousness of political rights
among the citizens.”--Grote’s _History of Greece_.

[187] A very good and useful account of this great literature for the reader
who is not a classical student is Norwood’s _Greek Tragedy_.

[188] Mahaffy.

[189] There is not a single sentence in praise of Alexander, no dedication, no
compliments, in all Aristotle. On the other hand, he never mentions Demosthenes
nor quotes him in the Rhetoric.--G. M.

[190] Wheeler.

[191] Bauer, in _Vom Griechentum zum Christentum_, says that Alexander sent a
mission of exploration to Abyssinia to enable Aristotle to settle the question
of the cause of the Nile inundations (melting of mountain snows), and that he
also had tropical flora and other material collected for him--E. B.

[192] _Ancient Greek Literature._

[193] Jung in his _Psychology of the Unconscious_ is very good in his chapter I
on the differences between ancient (pre-Athenian) thought and modern thought.
The former he calls Undirected Thinking, the latter Directed Thinking. The
former was a thinking in images, akin to dreaming; the latter a thinking in
words. Science is an organization of directed thinking. The Antique spirit
(before the Greek thinkers, _i.e._) created not science but mythology. The
ancient human world was a world of subjective fantasies like the world of
children and uneducated young people to-day, and like the world of savages and
dreams. Infantile thought and dreams are a re-echo of the prehistoric and
savage. Myths are the mass dreams of peoples, and dreams the myths of
individuals. The work of hard and disciplined thinking by means of carefully
analyzed words and statements which was begun by the Greek thinkers and resumed
by the scholastic philosophers of whom we shall tell in the middle ages, was a
necessary preliminary to the development of modern science.

[194] “For the proper administration of justice and for the distribution of
authority it is necessary that the citizens be acquainted with each other’s
characters, so that, where this cannot be, much mischief ensues, both in the
use of authority and in the administration of justice; for it is not just to
decide arbitrarily, as must be the case with excessive population.” Aristotle’s
_Politics_, quoted by Wheeler, who adds, “Aristotle comes to the conclusion
that the natural ‘limit to the size of the state must be found in the
capability of being easily taken in at a glance.’” But Murray notes that the
word Eusunopton means also “capable of being comprehended as a unity”--a very
different and wider idea.

[195] Benjamin Ide Wheeler’s _Alexander the Great_ and G. D. Hogarth’s _Philip
and Alexander_ have been very useful here.

[196] To the common Athenians, that is. But to many thoughtful Greeks the rôle
of Macedonia in their future was a matter of earnest speculation. Herodotus
(viii. 137) tells a long story of a prophecy by which the inheritance of
Perdiccas, the ancestor of the Macedonian kings, was to embrace at last the
whole round world. This was written a hundred years before Philip and
Alexander.

[197] Goldsmith’s _History of Greece_. The picturesque disposition of the
novelist rather than the austere method of the historian, is apparent here.

[198] But Phocis was treated in the same way by Philip and his friends in 346,
and Mantinea by Sparta in 385. It was a regular Greek punishment of a city to
break it up into villages; and as for selling into slavery, Callicratidas the
Spartan, in the Peloponnesian War, was held to be very noble when he said he
would not sell Greeks into slavery. Anyhow, the destruction of Thebes was due
to the _Greek_ enemies of Thebes, who pressed it on Alexander.--E. B.

[199] Mahaffy. Their names have undergone various changes--_e.g._ Candahar
(Iskender) and Secunderabad.

[200] D. G. Hogarth.

[201] The stages by which Bactria degenerated into Afghanistan may be studied
neatly in the progressive deterioration of its coinage from a decent standard
of Hellenic accomplishment into the vague flourishes of Orientalism; it began
by displaying a Heracles of pure Greek blood and a pair of horsemen who would
hardly have seemed out of place on the frieze of the Parthenon, and it fell
steadily to a level of incompetence only equalled by the crude imitations of
Roman currency that were being made in pre-Roman Britain about the same
time.--P. G.

[202] Before that time. But such speculation was going on then. There is some
interesting economic theory in Plato’s _Republic_, and Aristotle was writing
the _œconomica_. Xenophon wrote on Athenian revenues and other economic
matters. Thucycides wrote an excellent passage on the Greek past, and Aristotle
dealt with barbaric customs.--E. B.

[203] _Vide_ Mahaffy’s _Greek Life and Thought and his Progress of Hellenism in
Alexander’s Empire_, Marvin’s _Living Past_, Legge’s _Forerunners and Rivals of
Christianity_, and Reinach’s _Orpheus_.

[204] The question whether the vivisection of human beings, or, indeed, whether
any vivisection at all occurred at Alexandria, is one of considerable
importance because of the light it throws upon the moral and intellectual
quality of the time. One of the editors of this book was inclined to throw
doubt upon it, as a thing antipathetic to the Greek spirit. The writer has
taken some pains to find out the facts of the case, and he has been so
fortunate as to have the help of Dr. Singer, one of the greatest living
authorities upon the history of medicine. There are statements made by
Tertullian (_De Anima_, chap. xxv.), but he was a biased and untrustworthy
witness. The conclusive passage is taken from Celsus, who wrote during the
reign of Tiberius, three centuries after the great days of Alexandria. “If you
are to have one witness,” writes Dr. Singer, “you could hardly have a better.
In my own mind I am satisfied with the evidence of Celsus, and I have asked Dr.
E. T. Wittrington, our best authority on Greek medicine, and he also is
satisfied.”

The following is a translation of the passage in Celsus, _De Re Medica_. One
school says that “it is necessary to dissect the bodies of the dead, and to
examine their viscera and intestines. Herophilus and Erasistratus adopted by
far the best method, for they obtained criminals from prison by royal
permission, and dissected them alive, and they examined, while they still
breathed, the parts which Nature had concealed, noting their position, warmth
(or possibly ‘colour’--_colorem_ instead of _calorem_), shape, size, relation,
hardness, softness, smoothness, and feel; also the projections and depressions
of each and how they fit into one another. For if there happen any inward pain,
he who has not learned where the viscera and intestines are placed, cannot know
where the pain is; nor can the diseased part be cured by one who does not know
what part it is. Again, if the viscera of any one are exposed by a wound, he
who is ignorant of the natural colour of that part in the healthy state cannot
know whether it be sound or corrupted, and therefore cannot cure the corrupted
part. Moreover remedies can be applied more appropriately externally when the
position, shape, and size of the internal parts is known, and the same argument
holds for all the other matters that we have mentioned. Nor is it a cruel act,
as many would have it, to seek remedies for innocent mankind throughout the
ages by torture of a few criminals.”

Against this view, says Celsus, the other school argues that “to cut open the
abdomen and thorax of living men, and thus to turn that art which concerns
itself with the health of mankind not only into an instrument of death
(_pestem_--lit. ‘a plague’), but (death) in its most horrible form, and this
although some of the things that we seek thus barbarously can by no means be
known, while others may be learned without cruelty. For the colour, smoothness,
softness, hardness, and all their like are not the same when the body is cut
open as when it is whole; and, moreover, even in bodies that have not been thus
ravaged, these properties are often changed by fear, grief, want of food, or of
digestion, fatigue and a thousand other lesser causes. It is thus more likely
that the inner organs, which are more tender, and to which the light is a new
experience, are changed by serious wounds and by mangling.

“Further, nothing can be more foolish than to think that any things are the
same in a live man as in a moribund one, or, rather, in one practically dead.
It is indeed true that the abdomen, with which our argument is less concerned,
can be opened while a man yet lives, but as soon as the knife reaches the
thorax (præcordium), and outs the transverse septum, which is a membrane
dividing the superior parts from the inferior and called diaphragma by the
Greeks, the man at once gives up the ghost, and thus it is the breast and its
viscera of a dead and not a living man which the murderous physician examines.
He has thus but performed a cruel murder, and has not learned what the viscera
of a living man are like.”

Celsus’ own judgment is given a little later: “To dissect a living body is both
cruel and unnecessary; to dissect dead bodies is necessary.”

It is to be noted, says Professor Murray, that Herophilus and Erasistratus were
not living in a Greek city state, but under an _oriental despot_.

[205] Mahaffy.

[206] It has been suggested that new books were perhaps dictated to a roomful
of copyists, and so issued in a first edition of some hundreds at least. In
Rome, Horace and Virgil seem to have been issued in quite considerable
editions.

[207] See Ferguson’s _Hellenistic Athens_.

[208] Serapis sounds like a compound of Apis and Osiris, but there is reason
for supposing that the name is really of Chaldean origin. See Cumont, _Oriental
Religions in Roman Paganism_.

[209] Legge, _Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity_.

[210] See for much light on the syncretic religions before Christianity Franz
Cumont, _Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism_. This is a very able and
thoroughly interesting book.

[211] Rhys Davids’ _Buddhism_ and other writings by him have been our chief
guide here.

[212] Pronounced Ashoka.

[213] The _Burmese Chronicle_, quoted by Rhys Davids.

[214] The _Madhurattha Vilasini_, quoted by Rhys Davids.

[215] Rhys Davids, _Buddhism_.

[216] See R.F. Johnston, _Buddhist China_.--L.C.B.

[217] Hue’s _Travels in Tartary, Tibet, and China_.

[218] Rhys Davids. He was the son of a king by a low-caste mother.

[219] See Giles, _Confucianism and its Rivals_.

[220] S. N. Fu.

[221] Hirth’s _The Ancient History of China_.

[222] The reader will find a footnote to Chap. XXXI, § 8, signed L. C. B.,
which gives the main differences between the teachings of Confucius and Lao
Tse.

[223] See Hue’s _Travels in Tartary, Thibet, and China_.

[224] A very convenient handbook for this and the next two chapters is
Matheson’s _Skeleton Outline of Roman History_.

[225] For Italian pre-history see Modestov’s _Introduction à l’histoire
Romaine_, and Peet’s _Stone and Bronze Age in Italy and Sicily_.

[226] See Lloyd’s _Making of the Roman People_.

[227] Latin _Pœni_ = Carthaginians. _Punicus (adj.)_ = Carthaginian, _i.e._
Phœnician.

[228] See Pelham, _Outlines of Roman History_; Mommsen, _History of Rome_; and
the histories of the Roman Empire by Bury, H. Stuart Jones, and W. E. Heitland.

[229] Ferrero, _The Greatness and Decline of Rome_.

[230] J. Wells, _Short History of Rome to the Death of Augustus_.

[231] J. Wells.

[232] But note that Athens had (1) no taxes on foreigners, and inflicted no
disabilities on them except absence of citizenship. No “expulsions of aliens”
such as were regular at Sparta, and common in most places. This is a frequent
Athenian boast. Cp. Thucydides, ii. 39, “Our city is thrown open to the world.
We never expel a foreigner or prevent him from seeing and learning anything of
which the secret, if revealed, might be useful to an enemy.” (2) Practically
Free Trade; only a general 5 per cent. import duty. (3) Great interest in
foreign places, constitutions, customs, etc. Athens was very oppressive--by
modern standards--to its subject-allies; chiefly because there was no
representation, and because she was so much at war. But even here, after her
defeat in 404, they voluntarily gathered to her again. The second Athenian
Empire was not in any way forced upon them.--G. M.

[233] Haverfield says--and I think he is right--that Rome had a great advantage
in her imperial development--viz., that she was a city and not a nation. A
nation implies some unity of race, and race prejudice. A city is based on the
mere fact of citizenship. We should have said to St. Paul: “Citizen or no
citizen, you are only a Levantine Jew.” But a Roman, apparently, did not think
of saying so. Hence the great freedom with which emperors and senators are
taken from other races.--G. M.

[234] The point raised here that Rome never developed representation is a very
interesting one. There was a golden chance in the Social War (90 B.C.). The
allies of Rome (socii) revolted, and set up a counter Rome in Corfinium. Now,
to our minds, the obvious thing for them to do was (1) to make Corfinium just a
capital; (2) to set up a parliament there, consisting of representatives drawn
from the allies, who lived, of course, all over Italy. Not a bit of it. They
made Corfinium a city state (not a capital), and feigned themselves all to be
citizens of it, meeting in a primary assembly there. They also set up, it is
true, a senate of 500; but this was just a copy of the Roman senate, and not a
representative body (see Mommsen, vol. iii. pp. 237-8, Eng. trans.). Under the
Roman Empire there were germs of representation in provincial assemblies: see
Bury, _Student’s Roman Empire_, on the _concilium Lugdunense_ in Gaul and τἁ
κοιγἁ in Asia Minor.--E. B.

[235] Seyffert’s _Dictionary of Classical Antiquities_. (Nettleship Sandys.)

[236] Aristotle, _Politics_, Bk. ii. ch. xi.; and J. Wells, _Rome to the Death
of Augustus_.

[237] J. Wells, _op. cit._

[238] Plutarch, _Life of Cato_.

[239] Mommsen says the other provinces cost as much as they paid.

[240] But it was this Scipio Nasica who was responsible for the killing of
Tiberius Gracchus. On the whole, he seems to have been a statesman of very
distinguished abilities. He was the means of bringing the Asiatic Great Mother
Goddess to Rome. “People at Rome generally were beginning to see that they
would have to take over Asia. Had they any right? Nasica was sent on a mission
to invite the Magna Mater at Pessinus to come to Rome. Her image nodded ‘yes.’
She was brought and installed in Rome. Now this is a policy of peaceful
assimilation. Just as in Babylon you get gods of other cities brought to
Babylon, just as Nabonidus (see Chap. xix. § 6) was trying to get an amicable
pantheon as a way of peaceful assimilation, and failing to do so because he did
not bring the priesthoods as well as the gods, so Rome was at this time
thinking on the same lines. Camillus had shown the way when he suggested the
invitation of Juno of Veii to Rome. Now Nasica, it may be suggested, wanted to
treat Carthage in the same fashion. He opposed the destruction of Carthage in
146 (Mommsen, iii. p. 23, p. 39). If he had had his way, one may guess, he
would have invited the Carthaginian gods to Rome, and the corollary would have
been the enfranchisement of the Carthaginian population--the treatment of the
Carthaginians as equals, whose gods had been received in Rome, and stood in
Rome. Mummius did the same in carrying off the statues of Greek gods to Rome,
only, being stupid, he did not understand why (146 B.C.).”

Nasica’s visit to Pessinus was as important as the testament of Attalus. His
policy is not the policy of Rome the conqueror, but Rome the assimilator. He is
trying to get a nexus by a common pantheon. If this had been done, the Republic
might have survived. As it was, the deification of the ruler had to provide the
nexus, as in Alexander’s empire. The “Synœcism of gods” or the “deification of
rulers,” those are the only ways of amalgamating peoples. It is a pity
Alexander and Rome did not attempt the former.--J. L. M. and E. B.

[241] The intervening Scipio was a man of learning and high character who died
young.--G. M.

[242] Julius Cæsar (60 B.C.) caused the proceedings of the Senate to be
published by having them written up upon bulletin boards, _in albo_ (upon the
white). It had been the custom to publish the annual edict of the prætor in
this fashion. There were professional letter-writers who sent news by special
courier to rich country correspondents, and these would copy down the stuff
upon the Album (white board). Cicero, while he was governor in Cilicia, got the
current news from such a professional correspondent. He complains in one letter
that it was not what he wanted; the expert was too full of the chariot races
and other sporting intelligence, and failed to give any view of the political
situation. Obviously this news-letter system was available only for public men
in prosperous circumstances.

[243] Seyffert, _op. cit._

[244] Authorities differ here. Mayor says thumbs up (to the breast) meant death
and thumbs down meant “Lower that sword.” The popular persuasion is that thumbs
down meant death. Seyffert’s _Dict. Class. Antiq._ gives this view. See the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Gladiators.”

[245] “A little more needs to be said on this matter. The Greeks cited
gladiatorial shows as a reason for regarding the Romans as _Barbaroi_, and
there were riots when some Roman proconsul tried to introduce them in Corinth.
Among Romans, the better people evidently disliked them, but a sort of shyness
prevented them from frankly denouncing them as cruel. For instance, Cicero,
when he had to attend the Circus, took his tablets and his secretary with him,
and didn’t look. He expresses particular disgust at the killing of an elephant;
and somebody in Tacitus (Drusus, Ann. 1. 76) was unpopular because he was too
fond of gladiatorial bloodshed--“_quamquam vili sanguine nimis gaudens_”
(“rejoicing too much in blood, worthless blood though it was”). The games were
unhesitatingly condemned by Greek philosophy, and at different times two Cynics
and one Christian gave their lives in the arena, protesting against them,
before they were abolished.

“I do not think Christianity had any such relation to slavery as is here
stated. St. Paul’s action in sending back a slave to his master, and his
injunction, ‘Slaves, obey your masters,’ were regularly quoted on the
pro-slavery side, down to the nineteenth century; on the other hand, both the
popular philosophies and the Mystery religions were against slavery in their
whole tendency, and Christianity of course in time became the chief
representative of these movements. Probably the best test is the number of
slaves who occupied posts of honour in the religious and philosophic systems,
like Epictetus, for instance, or the many slaves who hold offices in the
Mithraic Inscriptions. I do not happen to know if any slaves were made
Christian bishops, but by analogy I should think it likely that some were. In
all the Mystery religions, as soon as you entered the community, and had
communion with God, earthly distinctions shrivelled away.”--G. M.

The Spirit of Jesus is something different from formal Christianity, which I
regard as the vehicle, the largely unsympathetic vehicle, by which that spirit
was carried about the world.--H. G. W.

[246] _Greatness and Decline of Rome_, bk. i. ch. xi.

[247] There is no evidence of forgery and no contemporary suggestion of the
sort. The bequest of Attalus, even if it was a forgery (Mommsen accepts it,
iii. p. 55), is of importance, as showing that a great many people did think
that Rome was the best administrator. Otherwise, the story (if it is only a
story) could not have caught on. _A priori_ there seems good reason for the
testament. The Attalid dynasty was “petering out”; there were troublesome Gauls
about (Mommsen, iii. p. 53).--J. L. M. and E. B.

[248] Ferrero.

[249] Ferrero.

[250] Plutarch. To which, however, G. M. adds the following note. “It is
generally believed that Sulla died through bursting a blood-vessel in a fit of
temper. The story of abominable vices seems to be only the regular slander of
the Roman mob against anyone who did not live in public.”

[251] Plutarch.

[252] The bow was probably the composite bow, so called because it is made of
several plates (five or so) of horn, like the springs of a carriage: it
discharges a high-speed arrow with a twang. This was the bow the Mongols used.
This short composite bow (it was not a long bow) was quite old in human
experience. It was the bow of Odysseus; the Assyrians had it in a modified
form. It went out in Greece, but it survived as the Mongol bow. It was quite
short, very stiff to pull, with a flat trajectory, a remarkable range, and a
great noise (cp. Homer’s reference to the twang of the bow). It went out in the
Mediterranean because the climate was not good for it, and because there were
insufficient animals to supply the horn.--J. L. M.

[253] For a good compact account of Cæsar, much more appreciative of him than
our text, see Warde Fowler’s _Julius Cæsar_.

[254] See Strachan Davidson’s _Cicero_, or, better, his own letters to Atticus.

[255] H. S. Jones, in _The Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Rome.” His
contribution is admirably verified and exact, and we are greatly indebted to
it.

[256] The best book in a compact compass for expanding this chapter is H.
Stuart Jones’s _The Roman Empire_.

[257] Gibbon.

[258] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Rome.”

[259] See _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Longinus.” The Syrian queen
referred to by Gibbon is Zenobia. Longinus was put to death by Aurelian. See
ch. xxxii., § 2.

[260] The natural result of a plutocratic rule above was a vigorous
trade-unionism intent only on short hours and high wages below, and as
indifferent as the rich to the common weal. See Hubbard’s _Fate of Empires_, a
very stimulating book, differing widely in its spirit and conclusions from
those of the writer.

[261] See Legge, _Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity_.

[262] No really good, full, and popular descriptive history, with maps and
illustrations, of early and medieval China, nor of the Mongol (Hun) and Turkish
peoples, seems to exist in the English language. The writer has consulted
Skrine and Ross’s _Heart of Asia_, Hirth’s _Ancient History of China_, S. Wells
Williams’ _History of China_, _A Thousand Years of the Tartars_, by E. H.
Parker, H. H. Howorth’s History of the Mongols, and has found much useful
material scattered through Ratzel and Helmolt. He has later on made a useful
section from Watters’ translation and commentary upon the _Travels of Yuan
Chwang_, supplemented by the _Life of Yuan Chwang_, edited by L. Cranmer Byng.
Yule’s edition of Marco Polo has also been a very inspiring source of material.

[263] E. H. Parker, _A Thousand Years of the Tartars_.

[264] Even in eastern Turkestan there are still strong evidences of Nordic
blood in the physiognomy of the people. See Ella and Percy Sykes, _Through
Deserts and Oases of Central Asia_.

[265] See Roger Pocock, _Horses_, a very interesting and picturesque little
book.

[266] _The History of Mankind_, book v., C.

[267] _The History of Mankind_, book v., C.

[268] See _Migrations_, by Flinders Petrie, the 1906 Huxley Lecture of the
Royal Anthrop. Institute.

[269] E. B.

[270] In Helmolt’s _History of the World_.

[271] E. B. disagrees with this view. He regards it as the pro-Teutonic view of
the German historians.

[272] Gibbon.

[273] Gibbon.

[274] The spread and the vitality of the place-name “Rome” were even greater
than the vogue of the title “Cæsar.” All the countries which had formed part of
the Eastern and Western divisions of the Roman Empire (excepting the ephemeral
extension of Roman rule over Mesopotamia) were known to the Saracens, the
Arabs, the Berbers as “Rum,” and their peoples as “Rumis,” “Rumas.” And this
name was applied without, in all cases, carrying with it the signification of
“Christian” or “Christendom.” Thus the Spanish Moors were, and their
descendants are, styled by the Moroccan Moors and the Algerians and Tunisians:
“Rumas.” When expelled from Spain most of them took service under the Sharifian
Emperors of Morocco, and brought with them a European knowledge of fire-arms.
Thus you are told in Algeria that “Romans” (_i.e._ Spanish Moors) conquered the
Upper Niger basin for Morocco in the seventeenth century; their descendants
remain there till to-day between Jenné and Timbuktu, still known to the French
as “Roumas.” Some Spanish Moors even penetrated to the coast of eastern
equatorial Africa and carried the name of “Rome” into the fierce expulsion of
the Portuguese from those parts which was begun by the Omani Arabs.--H. H. J.

[275] Josephus.

[276] See _Encyclopædia Biblica_; article “Jesus.”

[277] Matt. xii. 46-50.

[278] Mark x. 17-25.

[279] Mark. vii. 1-9.

[280] Mark xii. 13-17.

[281] Mark x. 35-45.

[282] For the connexion of Jesus with the Messiah idea, see E. F. Scott’s
_Kingdom of the Messiah_.

[283] Hirth, _The Ancient History of China_. Chap. viii.

[284] “St. Paul understood what most Christians never realize, namely, that the
Gospel of Christ is not a religion, but religion itself in its most universal
and deepest significance.”--Dean Inge in _Outspoken Essays_.

[285] Authorities vary considerably upon this date, and upon most of the dates
of the life of Jesus. See _Encyclopædia Biblica_, art. “Chronology.”

[286] See _Judaism and St. Paul_, by C. G. Montefiore, for some interesting
speculations on the religion of Paul before his conversion. See also the very
interesting paper on St. Paul in Dean Inge’s _Outspoken Essays_ already quoted
in a footnote. An excellent book widely divergent from the opinions expressed
in the text is W. Morgan’s _Religion and Theology of St. Paul_.

[287] Paul’s Greek is very good. He is affected by the philosophical jargon of
the Hellenistic schools and by that of Stoicism. But his mastery of sublime
language is amazing.--G. M.

[288] The spirit of Jesus, the animating spirit of Christianity, which breathes
through the gospels, was flatly opposed both to private property and slavery,
but the attitude of the Christians was never so definite. Generally they
ameliorated rather than abolished.--H. G. W.

Patristic theory justified slavery as a result of the Fall. See Carlyle,
_Medieval Political Theory in the West_.--E. B.

[289] Serapis was a synthesis of Osiris and Apis.

[290] See Legge, _Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity_, chap. xii. See also
Cumont’s _Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism_ for a very clear account of the
gradual development of Roman Paganism into a religion very similar to
Christianity _pari passu_ with the development of Christianity.

[291] Cp. Father Hugh Benson’s account of the procession of the Host in his
book _Lourdes_.

[292] In any prayer book of the Episcopalian Church. The Athanasian Creed
embodies the view of Athanasius, but probably was not composed by him.

[293] Gibbon, _The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, chap. xvi.

[294] Here, from another point of view, are some remarks upon the acceptance of
Christianity by the empire. Let us remember that the Church, an object so
familiar to us, was to the decent Roman a very strange thing. It was a vast
society for mutual help, quite outside the state and the recognized
corporations; it was secret (hence the frequent inquisitions and the praise
given by Church historians to those who “confessed Christ”); it drew its main
strength from a class “not well thought of by the police, the proletariat of
the big manufacturing towns of Syria and the Levant, like Antioch.” Alternately
proscribed and connived at, much subjected to pogroms, it gradually increased
in strength. Diocletian summoned his two associated Cæsars to a conference on
the subject, and they decided to crush the society by a drastic persecution.
They persecuted and failed, and Diocletian resigned. Constantine the Great, the
next claimant to the empire, made terms with the society and succeeded. He
established it as official, and overcame its hatred of Rome by showering wealth
and power on it. Eventually, when in fear of death, he got baptized. All modern
analogies are fallacious, but if you imagine a blend of pacifist international
socialists with some mystical Indian sect, drawing its supporters mainly from
an oppressed and ill-liked foreign proletariat, such as the “hunkey” population
of some big American towns, full of the noblest moral professions but at the
same time alien, or even hostile, to the whole established order of society, I
think you will get the sort of impression that the Christian society made on a
Roman. The conception of the blameless and saintly Early Christian is, I think,
hugely romance. Of course, like most religious reformers, they were in the main
seekers after righteousness and above the average of their contemporaries. Also
the Christian writers are apt to have more life and vision than their
conventional or reactionary Pagan contemporaries. But consider the appalling
accusations made by all the Christian sects against each other, and the furious
denunciation of the turbulent Christian monastics by Augustine. Also consider
what a spirit lies behind the Book of Revelation! Read especially Chapters
17-19, a series of elaborate and horrific curses upon Rome (including repeated
threats of its destruction by fire, which the Christians were believed to have
attempted), or the end of Chapter 14 where the ministers of the Son of Man
tread the winepress of the world till the blood comes “even to the bridles of
the horses.” If we found such a book now circulating in India, with England
taking the place of Rome, I fear there would be some shooting and hanging. The
fact that the Christians actually prayed for the destruction of the whole world
by fire seemed to the average non-Christian evidence of almost maniacal
wickedness.

I do not of course write to blame the Revelationist; such visions of hatred are
the natural outcome of persecution and great suffering. I am merely trying to
make intelligible the dislike and even dread of the Christians which seems to
have been commonly felt. (See also Seek, _Untergang der Antiken Welt_, vol. 3,
esp. the notes.)--G.M.

[295] q.v., _The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, chap. xiv.

[296] On the rise of dogma or tradition in the Church, especially at Rome, see
Davis, _Mediæval Europe_ (Home University Library).--E. B.

[297] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, art. “Church History,” p. 336.

[298] E. B. (quoted from Tröltsch).

[299] See Haverfield. _The Romanization of Roman Britain_.--E. B.

[300] No literature! I demur entirely. Apuleius, Ammianus, St. Augustine, the
Vulgate, Claudian, Sidonius Apollinaris, Ausonius--I mention but a few
names--are not these literature?--E. B.

I forgot the _Golden Ass_ and St. Augustine as coming into the Imperial period,
but do these two names save the situation? E. B. ekes out with one second-rate
historian, a translation, three court poets. Yet we are dealing here with the
literature of a “world” empire.--H. G. W.

[301] A very interesting and suggestive book bearing on this question of
disease in relation to political history is _Malaria: a Neglected Factor in the
History of Greece and Rome_, by W. H. S. Jones.

[302] Baring Gould’s _Lives of the Saints_.

[303] On Benedictinism, see Dom. Berlière’s _L’Ordre Monastique_.--E. B.

[304] See Holmes’ _Justinian and Theodora_.--E. B.

[305] Great importance is attached to this task by historians, including one of
the editors of this history. We are told that the essential contribution of
Rome to the inheritance of mankind is the idea of society founded on law, and
that this exploit of Justinian was the crown of the gift. The writer is
ill-equipped to estimate the peculiar value of Roman legalism to mankind.
Existing law seems to him to be based upon a confused foundation of
conventions, arbitrary assumptions, and working fictions about human
relationship, and to be a very impracticable and antiquated system indeed; he
is persuaded that a time will come when the whole theory and practice of law
will be recast in the light of a well-developed science of social psychology in
accordance with a scientific conception of human society as one developing
organization and in definite relationship to a system of moral and intellectual
education. He contemplates the law and lawyers of to-day with a temperamental
lack of appreciation. This may have made him negligent of Justinian and unjust
to Rome as a whole.

[306] _The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, chap. xxiii.

[307] Turanians from Turkestan or Avars from the Caucasus.

[308] There is a good account of Mithraism in C. Bigg’s _The Church’s Task in
the Roman Empire_.--E. B.

[309] Julian was not so much a Mithraist as a syncretist. See Alice Gardner,
_Julian the Apostate_.--E. B.

[310] The Ephthalites on the Oxus produced a coinage in silver and copper
consisting of three denominations: heavy silver, light silver, and copper.
Thirteen specimens are known to survive, the light silver denomination being
represented by two specimens in the British Museum and one at Petrograd, until
I was fortunate enough to add two to their number by a _trouvaille_ in Oxford
Street.--P. G.

Our illustration shows one of these two coins. It may have been struck in India
in some state under Ephthalite dominion. Its interest for us lies in the figure
it gives of a Hun horseman. He seems to wear a feather head-dress, reminding
one of a Red Indian or a Moscow hotel porter, and his leg gear suggests an
American cow-boy. Note his great quiver of arrows.--H. G. W.

[311] I am greatly indebted to Mr. S. N. Fu and to Mr. Duyvendak for much
information and criticism upon the matter of this and the next section. They
have both been rewritten since the appearance of the _Outline_ in parts.

[312] There were girl slaves who did domestic work and women who were bought
and sold.--J.J.L.D.

[313] It is doubtful if the Chinese knew of the mariner’s compass. Hirth,
_Ancient History of China_, p. 126 sqq. comes to the conclusion, after a
careful examination of all data, that, although it is probable something like
the compass was known in high antiquity, the knowledge of it was lost for a
long time afterwards, until, in the Middle Ages, it reappears as an instrument
in the hands of geomancers (people who selected favourable sites for graves,
etc). The earliest unmistakable mention of its use as a guide to mariners
occurs in a work of the 12th century and refers to its use on foreign ships
trading between China and Sumatra. Hirth is rather inclined to assume that Arab
travellers may have seen it in the hands of Chinese geomancers and applied its
use to navigation, so that it was afterwards brought back by them to China as
the “mariner’s compass.”--J. J. L. D.

[314] Helmolt.

[315] The reason for the stationariness of China goes, we think, deeper than a
script. China has formed a social-economic system which (1) cannot be
transplanted, and (2) cannot be changed without tremendous effort. She lives by
agriculture--rice-growing. (There is some tea among the foot hills, but it has
to grow _with_ rice to support the population.) Towns exist--on the edge of the
rice-fields, for their needs. The town is dependent on the country, not, as
elsewhere, country on town. There are small properties; all the hands are
wanted, and can be absorbed, in old ancestral agricultural jobs. A state of
small peasants, tilling, tilling, tilling, has no source of initiative towards
change. If coal is to be mined in the future, and China industrialized, then a
society that has not fundamentally changed for thousands of years may be
changed. China is like an Egypt or Sumeria, so big that the nomads--those
terrible agents of change--beat on its mass in vain. What the nomads have not
done, modern industrialism may do.--J. L. M. and E. B.

Both Mr. Chen and Mr. Fu lay considerable stress upon the institution of the
patriarchal Chinese family clan, which retains its sons at home, marrying them
at an early age before they achieve economic independence, as a retarding
influence upon Chinese progress. Mr. Chen and Mr. Duyvendak are also inclined
to lay stress upon the paralyzing effect of the classical examinations upon the
Chinese mind. These examinations have subdued or rejected all innovating
intelligences. Mr. Duyvendak also points out that J. L. M. and E. B. have
overlooked the fact that rice is grown only in South China.

L. C. B. disagrees with J. L. M. and E. B. in his analysis of the Chinese
problem. His sympathies are with the south; with the philosophy of Lao Tse. He
writes as follows:--

“In order to answer the question--why China achieved so much under the T’ang,
Sung, and Ming dynasties, and thereafter failed to achieve more, it is
necessary to consider what were the principal factors of culture and progress
under these dynasties, and how they came to be extinguished.

“From the earliest times there have always been two widely differing types of
Chinese mind--the Northern or Confucian, and the Southern or Taoist. As Mr.
Okakura has pointed out, the Yangtse-Kiang and the Hwang-Ho rivers are
respectively, from the point of view of thought and culture, the Mediterranean
and the Baltic of China. Taoism was the idealism of the south, Confucianism the
practice of the north. Both stood for adjustment; but the adjustment of
Confucius was the adjustment of the individual in his social and ceremonial
relations to others, while that of Lao Tse was the adjustment of the individual
soul in its relation to the Infinite. The history of China is bound up with the
struggle of those two forces, culminating in the practically complete defeat of
Taoism after centuries of ebb and flow. Chu Hsi, A.D. 1130-1200, was the later
St. Paul of modern Confucianism. During the T’ang, Sung, and Ming dynasties
China was temporarily united, and free play was allowed to the thought of both
schools. Each played its part and each reacted upon the other, to the great
benefit of the Empire. Yet both systems carried within them the seeds of decay.
Taoism, divorced from the affairs of everyday life and the education of the
people, lost itself in art, literature, and mythology. Confucianism added layer
after layer of hard shell about the inert organism of social life. The end was
finally reached in 1421 under the Mings with the transference of the capital
from Nanking to Peking, and the dominance of the Confucian party who had
brought it about. Only in the later Ming period does the great solitary figure
of Wang Yang Ming arise. His central doctrine that thought and learning are of
small value unless translated into action had little immediate effect in China,
but it fell upon Japanese soil, quickened the drooping Samurai spirit, and
reached maturity with the Russo-Japanese war and the advance of modern Japan.

“The imprisonment of the Chinese mind in the ancient script is merely one
aspect of Confucianism in its bondage to the past. The statement of J. L. M.
and E. B. that China is a nation of peasants is incomprehensible to me. There
has always been a great urban industrialism and a great commerce. ‘The
Chinese,’ as Dyer Ball says, ‘are pre-eminently a trading race.... Nor has the
trade of China been simply a modern affair. From remote antiquity the Chinese
have been true to their commercial instincts, and have not only been the
civilizers of Eastern Asia, supplying them with their letters and literature’
[and artistic products], ‘but they have also provided for their more material
wants, and received in exchange the commodities which they required from the
neighbouring nations.’ Trade with India was developed to a great extent in the
ninth century A.D.”

This interesting question is also discussed very ably and interestingly in
Hubbard’s _The Fate of Empires_.

In discussing §§ 7 and 8, Mr. S. N. Fu has pointed out that little or nothing
is said in this Outline of the period of confusion before Shi-Hwang-ti. It was
an age of political division indeed, but of very great intellectual
initiatives. Unhappily there exists as yet little or no material in Europe
available for the purposes of this history, upon this equivalent to the
Athenian period of mental vigour in Europe.

[316] See Watters’ _Travels of Yuan Chwang_ and Beal’s _Life of Hiuen Tsiang_
(= Yuan Chwang).

[317] There is some little doubt about this identification. See Watters.

[318] The _British Encyclopædia_ article (Hsuan Tsang) is full and good on his
Indian travels.

[319] See Margoliouth’s _Mahommedanism_ and his _Life of Mahomet_.--E. B.

[320] Should be spelt Mădina and Măkka.--H. H. J.

[321] Mark Sykes.

[322] Should be spelt and pronounced Hijra.--H. H. J.

[323] From the year of this flight (= Hegira) from Mecca through the desert to
Medina, the Moslem world dates its era. The Moslem year is a year of twelve
lunar months (354 days), and is therefore shorter than the year of Western
chronology by eleven days. A.H. (the Moslem reckoning) gains a year on A.D.
once in every 33 years (about). A.D. 1920 is A.H. 1338 until September 15, when
A.H. 1339 begins. A.D. 20,526 and A.H. 20,526 will be partly coincident.

[324] Published by the _Islamic Review_.

[325] But Schurtz, in Helmolt’s _History of the World_, says that the private
life of the gallant Khalid was a scandal to the faithful. He committed
adultery, a serious offence in a world of polygamy.

[326] At Ctesiphon.

[327] Paraphrased from Schurtz in Helmolt’s _History of the World_.

[328] Mark Sykes.

[329] St. John’s Gospel, chap. i. 1.

[330] Thus Sykes. But Skrine and Ross say only that seventy members of the
Omayyad family were invited to a feast under promise of amnesty, and then
massacred by the attendants. Gibbon gives eighty victims, and tells his story
thus: “Four score of the Omayyads, who had yielded to the faith or clemency of
their foes, were invited to a banquet at Damascus. The laws of hospitality were
violated by a promiscuous massacre; the board was spread over their fallen
bodies; and the festivity of their guests were enlivened by the music of their
dying groans.” History is not yet an exact science.

[331] Harun-ar-Rashid = Aaron the Just.--H. H. J.

[332] _The Caliph’s Last Heritage._

[333] _A General History of Europe._

[334] Alcohol as “spirits of wine” was known to Pliny (100 A.D.) The studentof
the history of science should consult Campbell Brown’s _History of Chemistry_
and check these statements in the text.

[335] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Feudalism,” by Professor G. B. Adams.

[336] The Franks differed from the Swabians and South Germans, and came much
nearer the Anglo-Saxons in that they spoke a “Low German” and not a “High
German” dialect. Their language resembled plattdeutsch and Anglo-Saxon, and was
the direct parent of Dutch and Flemish. In fact, the Franks where they were not
Latinized became Flemings and “Dutchmen” of South Holland (North Holland is
still Friesisch--_i.e._ Anglo-Saxon). The “French” which the Latinized Franks
and Burgundians spoke in the seventh to the tenth centuries was remarkably like
the Rumansch language of Switzerland, judging from the vestiges that remain in
old documents.--H. H. J.

[337] _A General History of Europe_, Thatcher and Schwill.

[338] N. B.--Vik-ings, not Vi-kings. Vik = a fiord or inlet.

[339] _Vide_ Stubbs’ _History of Germany in the Middle Ages_, and Bryce’s _Holy
Roman Empire_.

[340] The Lateran was the earlier palace of the Popes in Rome. Later they
occupied the Vatican.

[341] Eginhard’s _Life of Karl the Great_. (Glaister.)

[342] The addition was discreetly opposed by Leo III. “In the correspondence
between them the Pope assumes the liberality of a statesman and the prince
descends to the prejudice and passions of a priest.”--Gibbon, chap. lx.

[343] The Byzantine style in Gaul is, I fancy, much earlier than Charlemagne,
and goes back to the 4th century or earlier. See Rivoira’s _History of Lombard
Architecture_, or T. G. Jackson’s _History of Gothic Architecture_.--E. B.

[344] See L. Brechier, _L’Eglise et l’Orient au Moyen Age_.

[345] Gibbon mentions a second Theodora, the sister of Marozia.

[346] This period is a tangled one. The authority is Gregorovius, _History of
the City of Rome in the Middle Ages_ (an excellent general book from A.D. 400
to 1527), vol. iii of the Eng. trans., p. 249 seq. John X owed the tiara to his
mistress, the elder Theodora, but he was “the foremost statesman of his age”
(Gregorovius, p. 259). He fell in 928 owing to Marozia. John XI became Pope in
931 (after two Popes had intervened in the period 928-931); he was Marozia’s
son, possibly by Pope Sergius III. John XII did not come at once after John XI,
who died in 936; there were several Popes in between; and he became Pope in
955.--E. B.

[347] There were three dynasties of emperors in the early Middle Ages:

Saxon: Otto I (962) to Henry II, ending 1024.

Salian: Conrad II to Henry V, ending about 1125.

Hohenstaufen: Conrad III to Frederic II, ending in 1250.

The Hohenstaufens were Swabian in origin. Then came the Habsburgs with Rudolph
I in 1273, who lasted until 1918.

[348] These dates are from Gibbon. Beazley gives 865, 904-7, 935, 944, 971-2.
(_History of Russia_, Clarendon Press.)

[349] “A Turkish people whose leaders had adopted Judaism,” says Harold
Williams.

[350] For the development of the papacy, see H. W. C. Davis, _Mediæval Europe_.

[351] E. Barker, art. “Crusades,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[352] Technically only twice, the excommunication of 1245 was a renewal by
Innocent IV of that of 1239.--E. B.

[353] “The custody of the _True Cross_, which on Easter Sunday was solemnly
exposed to the people, was entrusted to the Bishop of Jerusalem; and he alone
might gratify the curious devotion of the pilgrims, by the gift of small
pieces, which they encased in gold or gems, and carried away in triumph to
their respective countries. But, as this gainful branch of commerce must soon
have been annihilated, it was found convenient to suppose that the marvellous
wood possessed a secret power of vegetation, and that its substance, though
continually diminished, still remained entire and unimpaired.”--Gibbon.

[354] The Popes inhabited the palace of the Lateran until 1305, when a French
Pope set up the papal court at Avignon. When the Pope returned to Rome in 1377
the Lateran was almost in ruins, and the palace of the Vatican became the seat
of the papal court. It was, among other advantages, much nearer to the papal
stronghold, the Castle of San Angelo.

[355] He was crowned emperor in 1220 by Honorius III, the successor of
Innocent.

[356] Some authorities deny his authorship of this letter. See A. L. Smith’s
_Church and State in the Middle Ages_.

[357] Perhaps parchment, rather than leather. Such promises on parchment were
also used by the Carthaginians. Was Frederick’s money an inheritance from an
old tradition living on in Sicily since Carthaginian times?--E. B.

[358] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, art. “Frederick II.”

[359] In relation to this section, see the chapter on the “Unity of the Middle
Ages” in F. S. Marvin’s _Unity of Western Civilization_.

[360] See Paul Sabatier’s _Vie de S. Francois d’Assise_ (English trans. by
Houghton).

[361] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, art. “Dominic.”

[362] J. H. Robinson.

[363] Sir Mark Sykes, _The Caliphs’ Last Heritage_.

[364] Sir Mark Sykes, _The Caliphs’ Last Heritage_.

[365] But see Pastor, _History of the Popes_, Vol. I.

[366] See Beazley, Forbes and Birkett’s _Russia_ for a fuller account of the
Cossacks and also see later chap. xxxvi, § 10.

[367] See Malleson’s _Akbar_, in the _Rulers of India_ series.

[368] “Mogul” is our crude rendering of the Arabic spelling Mughal, which
itself was a corruption of Mongol, the Arabic alphabet having no symbol for
_ng_.--H. H. J.

[369] Dr. Schmit in Helmolt’s _History of the World_.

[370] I do not think this is fair. See _Edinburgh Review_ for January, 1920,
article on Calcutta University Commission.--E. B.

But popular education!--H. G. W.

[371] Renascence here means rebirth, and it is applied to the recovery of the
entire Western world. It is not to be confused with “the Renaissance,” an
educational, literary, and artistic revival that went on in Italy and the
Western world affected by Italy during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
The Renaissance was only a part of the Renascence of Europe. The Renaissance
was a revival due to the exhumation of classical art and learning; it was but
one factor in the very much larger and more complicated resurrection of
European capacity and vigour, with which we are dealing in this chapter.

[372] The early Frankish and other German kings were not elective. They were
hereditary; but as there was no primogeniture, there was either partition among
the sons, or a struggle to decide which son or relative should succeed. In such
a struggle the nobles might take part, and this might mean some form of
election. But heredity is the thing: _reges ex nobilitate sumunt_, says
Tacitus: the king must have the nobility of being Woden-born, or he cannot be
king. The genealogies of our early Saxon kings all go back to Woden, and George
V is Woden-born.--E. B.

[373] But the Jews were already holding their community together by systematic
education at least as early as the beginning of the Christian era.

[374] The Greeks had this idea.--E. B.

[375] I do not think this is just. The Anglo-Saxons were not anti-monastic.
They were converted by Benedictine monks in 600; just after 700 they sent out
monks to convert Germany; about 960, under Dunstan and Edgar, they experienced
a monastic revival. The Normans after 1066 introduced the Cluniac and
Cistercian orders, and spread monasticism, while the earlier Northmen, after
900, were quite favourable to the Church in England.

Note that Gregory’s imposition of celibacy on the clergy was accepted, and
willingly accepted, by the contemporary lay world. William the Conqueror,
through Archbishop Lanfranc, enforced celibacy in England.--E. B.

[376] Wycliffe believed in a real presence--but he held that it was spiritual
and not substantial. The host was two things--bread, and at the same time a
spiritual Christ. This is not the “memorial” view.--E. B.

[377] Lützow’s _Bohemia_.

[378] Dr. C. O. Stallybrass says that this plague reached China thirty or forty
years after its first appearance in Europe. Ibn Batuta, the Arab traveller, who
was in China from 1342 to 1346, first met with it on his return to Damascus.
The Black Death is the human form of a disease endemic among the jerboas and
other small rodents in the districts round the head of the Caspian Sea.

[379] The seeds of conflict which grew up into the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381
were sown upon ground which is strangely familiar to any writer in 1920. A
European catastrophe had reduced production and consequently increased the
earnings of workers and traders. Rural wages had risen by 48 per cent in
England, when an unwise executive endeavored to enforce in the Ordinance and
Statute of Labourers (1350-51) a return to the pre-plague wages and prices of
1346, and aimed a blow in the Statute of 1378 against labour combinations. The
villeins were driven to desperation by the loss of their recent increase of
comfort, and the outbreak came, as Froissart saw it from the angle of the
Court, “all through the too great comfort of the commonalty.” Other ingredients
which entered into the outbreak were the resentment felt by the new working
class at the restrictions imposed on its right to combine, the objection of the
lower clergy to papal taxes, and a frank dislike of foreigners and landlords.
There was no touch of Wycliffe’s influence in the rising. It was at its
feeblest in Leicestershire, and it murdered one of the only other Liberal
churchmen in England.--P. G.

[380] See article “Typography” in the _Encyclo. Brit._

[381] Standard Italian dates from Dante (1300); standard English from Chaucer
and Wycliffe (1380); standard German from Luther (1520).--E. B.

[382] But Nonconformity was stamped out in Germany. See § 11 B of this chapter.

[383] “If I were writing a history of democracy,” comments E. B., “I should
deal first with democracy in religion, which is Calvinism, founded by a great
Frenchman at Geneva, and then with democracy in politics, which is the French
Revolution, inaugurated by another great Frenchman at Geneva, Rousseau. (The
parallel of these two is striking--both typical exponents of the French genius,
in its ardent logic and its apostolic fervour which gives in a burning lava to
the world the findings of its logic.) It is noticeable in England how democracy
in religion (Presbyterianism, which is simply Calvinism, plus Independency or
Congregationalism) leads straight under the Stuarts to the English democratic
ideas of the seventeenth century. I do not think the democratic element in
Protestantism is sufficiently appreciated in the text. Even Luther, in the
early days of 1520, could write _The Freedom of a Christian Man_ and champion
the priesthood of each believer and his direct access to his Maker. Luther, it
is true, changed by 1525, and became a monarchist, the apostle of a state
religion, under a godly prince who was _summus episcopus_. Anglicanism was from
the first a monarchist religion, under a Henry VIII who was _supremum caput_.
But if Lutheranism became, and Anglicanism was from the first, a religion of
the State, Calvinism was always the religion of resistance to the State--in
Holland and in Scotland most especially. The Reformation thus produced two
opposite effects in politics; so far as it was Lutheran and Anglican it was
monarchist; so far as it was Calvinistic, it was democratic. It is at first
sight curious, but it is really quite natural, that the Catholics of the
counter-reformation should also have been democratic. The Catholics could not
admit the control of the monarch in the sphere of religion any more than the
Calvinist; and here, as in other things (_e.g_. in the claim to possession of
infallible truth), the Catholic priest and the Calvinistic presbyter were
agreed. Filmer, an exponent of Anglican monarchism, expresses this well when he
says, in speaking of the doctrine of a social contract, that ‘Cardinal
Bellarmine and Calvin both look asquint this way.’ For the doctrine of a social
contract was the democratic doctrine put forward by Catholics and Calvinists in
opposition to the Lutheran and Anglican doctrine of divine right.”

[384] Aristotle’s _Organon_, or logic, had always been in part known to the
West and was known as a whole after about 1130. In the thirteenth century the
rest of his writings became known, in two ways. One way was that of direct
translation from the Greek into Latin: it was in this way that St. Thomas
Aquinas knew the _Ethics_ and the _Politics_ (the latter translated about 1260
by William of Moerbeke, Archbishop of Corinth in the Latin Empire of
Constantinople started under Baldwin of Flanders in 1204, and a Fleming
himself). The other way was that of indirect translation, that is to say, of
translations of Arabic paraphrases of, or commentaries on, the works of
Aristotle, such as had been made by Averroes and by Avicenna before him. It was
Aristotle’s _Physics_ and (I think) _Metaphysics_ that first became known in
this way. In this latter way the West received a version of Aristotle which,
like Bottom the Weaver, was strangely “translated.” Sometimes translations were
made direct from Arabic into Latin; sometimes they were made first into Hebrew,
and then new translations were made from Hebrew into Latin. As the Arabic
version of Aristotle was not always itself direct, but sometimes made from
Syriac versions of the Greek, confusion became confounded. The Latin
translations of the Arabic Aristotle sometimes contained not translation, but
_transliteration_ of Arabic words or sentences; and Roger Bacon very naturally
objected to their unintelligibility. What is more, Aristotle’s views, as well
as his words, were transmogrified in the process. But the important thing is
that for Aristotle’s _Organon_, _Ethics_, and _Politics_ there were direct
translations from the Greek. (See Sandys’ _History of Classical Scholarship_
and Renan’s _Averroes et l’Averroisme_.)--E. B.

[385] I do not agree with this paragraph. In the first sentence things are
alleged about Realism which are not justified. It was the philosophy of the
priests and most humane thinkers of the Middle Ages, of St. Anselm and of John
Wycliffe. Nor is it true that Realism was the philosophy of the church. It was,
in the early Middle Ages; but after Occam (1330) Nominalism triumphed, and was
the philosophy of the church till the Reformation. Luther denounced
Nominalism.--E. B.

[386] _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article “Scholasticism.”

[387] _The Medieval Mind_, by Henry Osborn Taylor.

[388] This gives a wrong impression about Nominalism, that it was banned in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The contrary is the case. The attempt of
1339 came to nothing; that of 1473 was belated and unsuccessful. Except
Wycliffe, there is no considerable thinker of these centuries, so far as I
know, who is not Nominalist. The triumph of Nominalism was no unmixed benefit.
Its insistence on study of the individual was indeed favourable to natural
science; and Harnack says that it led to good work in psychology. But its
nescience about Universals led to obscurantism in theology. Wycliffe as a
Realist could hold that God acted _secundum rationes exemplares_, by certain
and known universal rules; the Nominalists reduced God to inscrutable
omnipotence. They went on to add that He could therefore only be known at all
by the miraculous intervention of the mass through the priesthood. Their
scepticism about Universals thus overleapt itself, and fell on the other side,
into obscurantist ecclesiasticism.--E. B.

[389] _Cp._ chap. ii, § 1, towards the end.

[390] See Gregory’s _Discovery_, chap. vi.

[391] Not from 1340-1360, under Edward III, but later under Henry V,
1413-1422.--E. B.

Edward had Flemish and Bavarian allies.--H. G. W.

[392] From Dr. Tille in Helmolt’s _History of the World_.

[393] Charles Dickens in his _American Notes_ mentions swine in Broadway, New
York, in the middle nineteenth century.

[394] In these maritime adventures in the eastern Atlantic and the west African
coast the Portuguese were preceded in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and early
fifteenth centuries by Normans, Catalonians, and Genoese. See Raymond Beazley,
_History of Exploration in the Middle Ages_.--H. H. J.

[395] See Guillemard’s _Ferdinand Magellan_.

[396] For an interesting account of these American civilizations, see L.
Spence, _The Civilization of Ancient Mexico and Myths of Mexico and Peru_.

[397] See Prescott’s _History of the Conquest of Mexico_ and his _History of
the Conquest of Peru_.

[398] See Cunninghame Graham’s _A Vanished Arcadia_.

[399] Machiavelli examines the causes of Cæsar’s collapse, but he holds that it
was due to _fortuna_, against which Cæsar’s _virtú_ could not prevail.--E. B.

[400] E. B. writes as follows: “I think better of Machiavelli than you do, and
especially on two points. (1) He raises a real issue--whether, when a crisis
besets the State, the ruler is not bound to abandon the rules of private
morality, if by doing so he can preserve the State. If he abandons those rules,
he does _wrong_--and Machiavelli admits that--but, at the same time, as the
agent and organ of the State, he does _right_ by preserving it, so far, at any
rate, as it is right that it should be preserved. This is a real issue, which
one cannot simply dismiss. _E.g._, all war is wrong, by the rules of private
morality, because it is killing; but it may have a qualified and conditioned
rightness if it is necessary to preserve the State, and if the State, as a
scheme of good life, ought to be preserved. (2) Machiavelli did believe in the
people. He only exalts the _new_ prince, who arises to restore order and
security in a troubled State. In normal times he believes that the people is a
good judge of men: that ‘better than many fortresses is not to be hated by the
people’; that the trite proverb, ‘He who founds himself on the people founds
himself on mud,’ is untrue, except as applied to demagogues.”

[401] But he had a better reason for doing this in the fact that there was no
heir to the throne. The Wars of the Roses, a bitter dynastic war, were still
very vivid in the minds of English people.--F. H. H.

[402] Prescott’s Appendix to Robertson’s _History of Charles V._

[403] Prescott.

[404] It was private _conscience_, rather than private property, that
quarrelled with and limited princes. The Puritan Revolution in England
(1640-1660) was a puritan revolution--it sprang from the religious motive first
and foremost. The economic motive was secondary. The “economic interpretation
of history” is always tempting, but men’s souls have always mattered more than
their pockets. Englishmen fought Charles I for the sake of free consciences
rather than for the sake of free pockets. This is a large issue, on which much
could be written; but I feel sure that religion came first in our Civil
War.--E. B.

I do not agree. Loath as I am to differ from E. B., I can find no evidence of
any religious issue as important as the issue of taxation either in the English
Civil War or the American War of Independence.--H. G. W.

I did not mention the Americans. I will surrender them to H. G. W.--E. B.

[405] Englishmen did try to control the foreign policy of James I, because it
involved questions of religion, and because their primary concern was
religious. They wanted foreign policy to be directed to the militant defence of
Protestantism. James I, a good internationalist (in his way), and at any rate a
lover of peace, wanted to secure European peace by diplomacy--and failed to do
so. His parliaments, and all seventeenth-century parliaments, were vitally
interested in foreign policy.--E. B.

[406] A very good general history of Great Britain, too little known as yet, is
A. D. Innes’ _History of the British Nation_ (1912).

[407] This is not the same Simon de Montfort as the leader of the crusades
against the Albigenses, but his son.

[408] But Sir Joshua Reynolds, Hogarth, Gray, Gibbon, for instance!--G. M. And
the golden age of the great cabinet-makers!--P. G.

Exactly! Culture taking refuge in the portraits, libraries, and households of a
few rich people. No national culture in the court, nor among the commonalty; a
steady decay.--H. G. W.

[409] _Rise of the Dutch Republic._

[410] See his fragment of autobiography (_The Autobiography of Edward Gibbon_,
edited by John Murray).

[411] Frederick the Great of Prussia.

[412] Catherine the Great of Russia.

[413] Louis XVI of France and Charles III of Spain.

[414] Gibbon forgets here that cannon and the fundamentals of modern military
method came to Europe with the Mongols.

[415] See for the expansion of the topics of this section, Hammond’s _Town
Labourer_, _Village Labourer_, and _Skilled Labourer_. These three books are
too little known to the general reader. They are not dry-as-dust compilations
of statistics, but full of interesting matter and delightfully well written.

[416] “Our present public school system is candidly based on training a
dominant master class. But the uprising of the workers and modern conditions
are rapidly making the _dominant method_ unworkable.... The change in the aim
of schools will transform all the organizations and methods of schools, and my
belief is that this change will make the new era.”--F. W. Sanderson, Head
Master of Oundle, in an address at Leeds, February 16, 1920.

[417] The student who looks up the _Encyclopædia Britannica_, article
“Goldsmith,” instead of going to the poem itself, will find some hostile
comments thereon which are themselves now literature and history; they were
written by Lord Macaulay (1800-59).

[418] Channing’s excellent new _History of the United States_ to vol. iv. has
been our handbook here.

[419] You are, I think, unjust to Great Britain and her “great power game.” She
was not playing that game--or, so far as she was, she was acting against
“France” to liberate the colonies from the French menace in the hinterland
which alarmed them. Once liberated, they broke loose, somewhat selfishly,
refusing to pay the piper, though they had enjoyed, and done much to call, the
tune. Great Britain was indeed to blame, not on the “great power” ground, but
on the “sovereignty” ground, which made her stickle for the “sovereignty” of
the British parliament over colonial legislature. It wasn’t diplomatists, it
was lawyers in both countries, who precipitated the struggle of 1776.--E. B.

But see §§ 2 and 3.--H. G. W.

[420] See Channing’s _History of the United States_, vol. ii.

[421] _John Smith’s Travels._

[422] There is some doubt about the name of Carolina. Channing, in his short
history, says it was named in honour of Charles II. Bassett says it was named
originally Carolana, in honour of Charles I, in 1629, and kept the name, under
the new form of Carolina in honour of Charles II. Fiske, _Old Virginia and Her
Neighbors_, vol. i. p. 265, speaks of Carolina, in 1629, as named “either in
honour of Charles I or because the name had been given by Huguenots in 1562 in
honour of Charles IX of France.” Another authority speaks of the name as used
before, and now no doubt retained in honour of the English king; but, according
to him, the name had not been used for the country (called, by the French,
Florida), but for a fort in it, the arx Carolana. He adds that in 1629 the name
Carolana is used, but Carolina appears afterwards, and becomes normal after
1662.--E. B.

[423] From the Spanish word Sabaña = “meadow.”--H. H. J.

[424] See for the fundamental differences of north and south, W. Wilson, _The
State_, the historical sections at the beginning of the chapter on the United
States Government.--E. B.

[425] An admirable account of negro slavery is to be found in Sir H. H.
Johnston’s _The Negro in the New World_.

[426] I disbelieve in this “commercial selfishness” emphasized in the text.
Modern American historians, such as Beer, themselves rebut the charge. On the
whole, English commercial policy was fair. (1) If the colonists could only
export certain “enumerated” commodities to England, the English market was the
best, and they were given privileges there; while non-enumerated commodities
could be exported anywhere, and even “enumerated” articles were in practice
smuggled everywhere. (2) If the colonists had to import from England, it was
their best market, and they got “drawbacks” on dutiable goods imported into
England from the Continent when they took them out of England; while again in
practice they freely smuggled goods from any country to America. (3) The
English navigation laws, in the long run, encouraged American shipbuilding; and
if some colonial manufactures were stopped in order that they might not compete
with English manufactures, the amount of such restriction was slight. On all
this, see Sir William Ashley, _Surveys Historic and Economic_, pp. 300
_seqq._--E. B.

[427] See Tudor’s _Life of James Otis_.

[428] I disagree entirely with this. George, with the bulk of Parliament behind
him, was out to insist on the sovereignty of the British Parliament (not of
himself) over the colonists. Nor was it the Whig noblemen who opposed him, but
Burke (conservatively inclined, and therefore up in arms for the traditional
rights of the colonial legislatures) and Chatham (liberally inclined, and
therefore up in arms for the principle of “no representation, no
taxation”).--E. B.

[429] This again in my view is wrong. The system proposed, I read in an
American writer, meant cheaper tea in the colonies. The objection taken by the
colonists was legal.--E. B.

[430] I think this gives an erroneous impression that there was no real chance
of reconciliation in 1776. There was. And indeed the whole separation was far
from inevitable. If the British had (1) recognized the autonomy in each colony
of its legislature, and (2) granted to the colonies cabinet government in place
of government by governors sent from England, there would have been no schism.
By 1839, the time of Lord Durham’s report, the British had learned to make the
recognition and the grant; and with greater wisdom they could have made both in
1776. A great statesman in 1776 could have stopped the separation, and made
history different. I am inclined to say that nothing is inevitable in
history--except that when you don’t have good men, you don’t get good results.
And that was the position under George III and Lord North.--E. B.

[431] The Tripoli Treaty, see Channing, vol. iii. chap. xviii.

[432] Wells, _The Future in America_.

[433] In 1776 Lord Dartmouth wrote that the colonists could not be allowed “to
check or discourage a traffic so beneficent to the nation.”

[434] A very readable and remarkably well-illustrated book for the general
reader upon the French Revolution is Wheeler’s _French Revolution_. Carlyle’s
_French Revolution_ has some splendid passages, but it is often unjust and
evil-spirited. Madelin’s _French Revolution_ is a good recent book.

[435] But see Rocquain’s _L’Esprit révolutionnaire avant la Révolution_. He
traces the growth of a revolutionary spirit in the 18th century, and points to
many predictions of a debacle in 18th-century French literature.--E. B.

[436] I disagree utterly and entirely with this view of Rousseau, which is
quite unfair to the man who wrote _Du Contrat Social_. (1) He did _not_ believe
in the “state of nature”; he believed in the State, which had lifted man from
being a brute that followed its nose into a reasoning being and a man. (2) He
did not write to excuse breakers of the covenant. On the contrary, he wrote to
preach the sovereignty of the general will, and he believed in the entire
control of the individual by that will. Rousseau has been much misrepresented,
and the text follows the misrepresentations. See Vaughan, _The Political
Writings of Rousseau_, introduction to _Du Contrat Social_.--E. B.

[437] Article “France,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[438] There is a very picturesque account of the storming of the Bastille in
Carlyle’s _French Revolution_, book v, chap. vi.

[439] Carlyle is at his best on this flight, _French Revolution_, book iv,
chaps. iv and v.

[440] Wiriath.

[441] The Declaration of Pillnitz was a diplomatic _démarche_ that failed.
Great Britain had definitely refused to intervene in favour of the French
monarchy, and Austrian statesmanship proposed to save the collective face of
European monarchy by a sounding announcement of sympathy with the French
Bourbons, followed by a proviso that unanimity should be secured before
intervention was attempted. French opinion (and most historians) concentrated
on the announcement and overlooked the proviso.--P.G.

[442] The sour grapes of Champagne spread dysentery in the Prussian army.--P.G.

[443] The intelligence of the French army of the Revolution was largely due to
a period of intelligent military thinking and writing which set in among French
soldiers after the defeats of the army of Louis XV in the Seven Years War.
Napoleon himself was full of traces of this inspiration.--P. G.

[444] I cannot agree that England was ever, at any moment, “a prospective ally”
of France. There was a deep divergence of interests; and it is impossible to
think of Pitt and the Whig nobles being in any way the allies of the France of
1793.--E. B.

[445] In his article, “French Revolutionary Wars,” in the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_.

[446] In the thirteen months before June, 1794, there were 1220 executions; in
the following seven weeks there were 1376.--P. G.

[447] Channing, vol. iii. chap. xviii.

[448] Two very useful books have been Holland Rose’s _Personality of Napoleon_
and his _Life of Napoleon I_. A compact and convenient biography, with good
battle maps, is R. M. Johnston’s _Napoleon_. Thomas Hardy’s great epic-drama,
_The Dynasts_, is a magnificent picture of Napoleon’s career, historically very
exact. It is one of the great stars of English literature, too little known as
yet to the general public.

[449] See Mahan’s _Life of Nelson_.

[450] Gourgaud quoted by Holland Rose.

[451] The resumption of war was more directly due to the publication in France
of the Sebastiani Report, a full account by the staff officer of the ports and
strong places of Egypt and Syria. The alarm occasioned by this document
hardened the determination of the British government to retain a garrison at
Malta in spite of the obligation to evacuate it imposed by the Peace of
Amiens.--P. G.

[452] All this is admirably told in Tolstoy’s wonderful _War and Peace_.

[453] The best textbook to follow in expanding this chapter is W. A. Phillips’
_Confederation of Europe_.

[454] See J. W. Headlam’s _Life of Bismarck_.

[455] W. A. Phillips’ _Confederation of Europe_ is the leading textbook here.
H. E. Egerton’s _British Foreign Policy in the Nineteenth Century_ and L. S.
Woolf’s _International Government_ are very illuminating. See also Thatcher and
Schwill’s convenient _General History of Europe_ and Philip Guedalla’s
_Partition of Europe; 1715-1815_.

[456] The Dukes of Savoy (ancestors of the present Italian kings) had been
astride the Alps, ruling in France and Italy, for centuries; and their
strategic position had long given them a European importance. The Dukes of
Savoy had been kings since 1713, first as Kings of Sicily, 1713-20, and then
(when Sicily was exchanged for Sardinia in 1720) as Kings of Sardinia.--E. B.

[457] An excellent book on the substance of this chapter is F. S. Marvin’s
_Century of Hope_. Another is R. A. Gregory’s _Discovery_. See also Seignobos’
_Political History of Contemporary Europe_.

[458] But note Boyle and Sir Wm. Hamilton as conspicuous scientific men who
were Irishmen.

[459] It is worth noting that nearly all the great inventors in England during
the eighteenth century were working men, that inventions proceeded from the
workshop, and not from the laboratory. It is also worth noting that only two of
these inventors accumulated fortunes and founded families.--E. B.

[460] Here America led the old world.

[461] In Northumberland and Durham in the early days of coal mining they were
so cheaply esteemed that it was unusual to hold inquests on the bodies of men
killed in mine disasters.

[462] It is sometimes argued against Marx that the proportion of people who
have savings invested has increased in many modern communities. These savings
are technically “capital” and their owners “capitalists” to that extent, and
this is supposed to contradict the statement of Marx that property concentrates
into few and fewer hands. Marx used many of his terms carelessly and chose them
ill, and his ideas were better than his words. When he wrote property he meant
“property so far as it is power.” The small investor has remarkably little
power over his invested capital.

[463] See J. H. Noyes, _History of American Socialisms_, and Eastlake, _The
Oneida Community_.

[464] See his _A New View of Society, or Essays on the Principles of the
Formation of the Human Character_.

[465] See F. Podmore, _Life of Robert Owen_, or his own _Life of Robert Owen,
Written by Himself_.

[466] Increases or diminutions of the passive shareholding class would not
affect this concentration very materially. A shareholder has very little power
over his property.

[467] I find in a book of essays and addresses by Professor Soddy an
interesting and compact statement of certain resemblances in spirit between
scientific research and modern socialism. I venture to quote a passage here
because of its great significance at the present time.

“The immense acquisition,” he says, “to the wealth and resources of mankind
which has been the result of the past century of science, should have been the
golden opportunity of statesmen and humanitarians and the raw material out of
which the sum total of human happiness could have been augmented. Instead, it
has but revealed a growing incapacity and failure on the part of the altruist
to appreciate the nature and power of the new weapon that science has placed in
his hands, and an ever-increasing rapacity and far-sightedness on the part of
the egotist to secure it for his own ends.

“For many a decade now, owing primarily and indisputably to the intellectual
achievements of a comparative handful of men of communistic and cloisteral
habit of thought, a steady shower of material benefits has been raining down
upon humanity, and for these benefits men have fought in the traditional manner
of the struggle when the fickle sunlight was the sole hazardous income of the
world. The strong have fed and grown fat upon a larger and ever larger share of
the manna. Initial slight differences of strength and sagacity have become so
emphasized by the virile stream that the more successful are becoming
monstrously so, and the unsuccessful less and less able to secure a full meal
than before the shower began.

“Already it savours of indelicacy and tactlessness to recall that the
exploiters of all this wealth are not its creators; that the spirit of
acquisitiveness which has ensured success to them, rather than to their
immediate neighbours, is the antithesis of the spirit by which the wealth was
won.

“Amid all the sneers at the impracticability and visionary character of
communist schemes, let it not be forgotten that science is a communism, neither
theoretical nor on paper, but actual and in practice. The results of those who
labour in the fields of knowledge for its own sake are published freely and
pooled in the general stock for the benefit of all. Common ownership of all its
acquisitions is the breath of its life. Secrecy or individualism of any kind
would destroy its fertility.”

So far Professor Soddy, but let the writer add that there is this point about
the scientific world not to be overlooked. Every worker in the latter is a
specially educated man, and he is free to leave the communism of science if he
thinks fit. This is very different from a communism imposed upon an unprepared
mass of people containing large recalcitrant minorities or majorities. A
communism sustained by a community of will based on education--an extension,
that is, of the communism of scientific research to human affairs generally--is
the ideal underlying the political ideas of most intelligent modern men.

[468] We may note a very interesting experiment in wages payment here that has
been made by the American Oneida silver company. A committee on which the
workers are strongly represented makes a summary week by week of the current
prices of staple commodities and common necessities. Week by week it is noted
that prices are so much per cent, above the normal figure of January, 1914 (or
some such date), which is taken as the standard. On pay-day every worker
receives his wages _plus_ a percentage representing the higher prices, so that
though the actual sums paid vary week by week, the purchasing power of the
wages paid remains practically constant. Here, perhaps, we have a germ of a
system that may grow to considerable importance. The burthen of rising prices
is shifted to the employer, who can take them into account in fixing his
prices.

[469] For a closely parallel view of religion to that given here, see that
admirable book, _Outspoken Essays_, by Dean Inge, Essays VIII and IX on _St.
Paul_ and on _Institutionalism and Mysticism_.

[470] _Town Topics_, November 26th, 1919.

[471] Kropotkin’s _Mutual Aid_ is worth noting here as one of the earliest
correctives to these popular misconceptions of Darwinism.--G. M.

[472] Morley’s _Life of Gladstone_.

[473] R. A. Gregory’s _Discovery_.

[474] The great Oxford school of _Literæ Humaniores_, which means a serious
study of Ancient Philosophy and Ancient History, was already thirty years old
in Gladstone’s time, and was a really serious training in solid philosophy and
solid history. It was all the more serious, as every candidate for Honours had
to take _two_ schools and to offer Mathematics as well as _Literæ Humaniores_.
Both Peel (about 1810) and Gladstone (about 1830) took these two schools, and
both gained Firsts in both. (This, by the way, is the only true and genuine
“double first.”) Men with such a training were genuinely and nobly trained for
statesmanship.--E. B.

With no knowledge of ethnology, no vision of history as a whole, misconceiving
the record of geology, ignorant of the elementary ideas of biological science,
of modern political, social, and economic science and modern thought and
literature!--H. G. W.

[475] The old classical training had great faults, but not quite those which
are here imputed to it. It was the education of an aristocratic leisured class
who had not to earn their living. Hence it was (1) entirely idealist and
non-utilitarian. It aimed not at fitting people for a paid profession, but at
culture and inner development. (2) It depended enormously on _leisure_. The
work done in compulsory work-hours was small in range, but severe, almost
entirely classics and mathematics. These were intended as a training of the
mind and a test of ability, but were not the real field of ambition. That lay
in the large amount of time allotted to _free study_. Peel, Gladstone,
Macaulay, Hallam, etc., show what was expected of the best men. Literature,
modern history, French and Italian, theology and philosophy, and even a good
deal of generalised science, were things you read in your free time. Think what
Macaulay’s “schoolboy” was supposed to know, and reflect that practically none
of it was taught in school hours! Some of the best papers on English literature
that I ever read were done by a certain sixth form which had, I was told, no
time at all given to the subject in the time-table. As the Head Master told me,
“A good man was rather laughed at if he did not know Shakespeare and Milton.”

This conception of a small hard nucleus of compulsory work, combined with a
wide margin of leisure, was very good for the best men, who used their free
time in the right way, but left the weak men thoroughly uneducated. The
reaction against it came with long hours, wide curriculum, and compulsory
games, leaving no leisure either for study or for mischief.

The modern idea that school should teach _all_ that a boy ought to know, is
educationally disastrous; but it is the natural result of boys coming from
uneducated homes. The home, not the school, is the real key to the wider and
higher side of education. But this raises large questions.--G. M.

G. M., I submit, has not grasped the modern idea in education. The modern idea
of a public school as exemplified in such a case as Oundle does not fill up the
time of the boy with prescribed work and games; it leaves large spaces for
self-development; but also it provides museums, a good collection of pictures,
libraries, and an abundance of good music in addition to the mere “playing
fields” of the old type of public school. And it inquires into the use a boy is
making of his free energies. The phase of “cram” is over, but the new schools
do provide good pasture, show the way thither, and “vet” a boy who displays no
appetite. G. M. ignores entirely the clear statement in the text that Gladstone
was a grossly _ignorant_ man, and the instances given of the feebleness and
worthlessness of the “generalized science” these boys of the old persuasion
picked up. So far from the old classical training being the education of an
aristocratic class, it was, as G. M. admits within a line or so, the education
of a few individuals, the rest of the class remaining barbarians. It may have
aimed at culture and inner development, but it missed its aim. Consequently,
the bright lads of the Gladstone-Macaulay-Peel type who did not pick up a few
enlightened ideas by accident or at home, were quite unable to carry their own
class with them; it remained politically boorish. They had to appeal for
understanding to classes whose education had been free from “classical”
pretentiousness....

These notes submitted to E. B. at this stage provoked him to a warm protest.
His sympathies were “heart and soul with G. M.,” and Mr. Gladstone, he declared
with emphasis, was not an ignorant man. A little more must be said on this
question. If the reader realize, what we have been trying to make clear in this
history, that human progress is largely mental progress, a clearing and an
enlargement of ideas, then he will understand why it is that the compiler of
this _Outline_ has given so much space here to these controversial notes upon
the education of Mr. Gladstone. For the education of Mr. Gladstone was typical
of that ruling-class education which has dominated British and European
affairs, so far as they have been dominated by ideas, up to the present time.
It is most significant of the differences and difficulties of our age that the
statement, which seemed to the writer a simple statement of an obvious fact,
that Mr. Gladstone was a profoundly ignorant man, should have so scandalized
two of the editors of this work. No doubt Mr. Gladstone knew much and knew many
things, and it is just because he did so and was in many respects the fine
flower of the education of his period, that his ignorance is so interesting to
us. Many Chinese mandarins knew much and many things--beautifully. And were
ignorant men. Mr. Gladstone’s was not the ignorance of deficiency, but the
ignorance of excess, a copious ignorance; it was not a failure to know this or
that particular fact, an ignorance excusable enough, but a profound and
sought-after and established ignorance of reality, so that he did not grasp the
bearing of definite facts presented to him or of far-reaching ideas put before
him, upon the great issues with which he was concerned. He lived, as it were,
in a luminous and blinding cloud. That cloud, which I call his ignorance, my
two editors call his wonderful and abounding culture. It was a culture that
wrapped about and adorned the great goddess Reality. But indeed he is not to be
adorned but stripped. She ceases to be herself or to bless her votary unless
she is faced stark and faced fearlessly.--H. G. W.

[476] The impression made on me, an old Gladstonian, by Gladstone’s politics,
was mainly twofold. (1) A strong assertion that politics were (as Aristotle
said) a development of ethics, and concerned with discovering and doing what is
Right, not what is convenient or profitable to any particular class or nation.
(2) A strong subconscious suggestion that the highest education and culture and
knowledge were useful for politics, which was in fact a very high practical
art, demanding the highest qualities. Hence largely the horror we had of Dizzy.
(3) A general sanguine conviction that Honesty was the best policy; that what
was right would also prove to be ultimately the most profitable, so that there
was no real conflict.

I do not say that Mr. G. acted consistently up to these principles, or that
they could be acted up to; but they formed the milk of the word for most of
us.--G. M.

I cannot agree that Gladstone was a prophet of nationalism. He was a prophet of
Liberalism, and, as such, a hater of oppression. He protested against Bourbon
oppression in Naples or Turkish oppression in Bulgaria or Armenia; but to
protest against oppression is not to champion nationalism. Gladstone championed
not nationalism, but internationalism; he emphasized the idea that “public
right” should control the relations of states. The fine words which Mr. Asquith
used to state the British cause in August, 1914, were (unless I am mistaken) an
echo of Gladstone’s own words. A noble objection to oppression; a noble
championing of the rule of public right--these were the staples of Gladstone’s
prophecy. The pity was that, when it came to the actual handling of foreign
affairs (_e.g._ in Egypt about 1884), Gladstone could not translate his ideals
into practice.--E. B.

[477] G. B. Stern’s _Children of No Man’s Land_ is a novel of this topic of
British nationality in relation to German Jews written with great insight.

[478] The doctrine of nationalities was in reality a legacy of French
revolutionary theory. From the men of the First Republic, who found it a useful
excuse for a forward foreign policy in the best Richelieu tradition, it passed
into the possession of Napoleon, who gave more attention to it at St. Helena
than he had ever done at the Tuileries. Thence it came naturally into the
political inheritance of Napoleon III, who sacrificed France to his belief in
it. Gladstone only got it by a side wind, the theory having drifted into the
British tradition by reason of the accident of Canning’s anti-interventionist
foreign policy during the Spanish-American War of Independence.--P. G.

[479] This is a paradox to which I cannot subscribe. Please put me down as
convinced of the opposite.--E. B.

[480] Albert Thomas in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[481] There were also hopes of an Italian alliance for France, and these,
combined with the anti-Prussian direction of Austrian policy, and the
Franco-Russian _rapprochement_ which had followed the Crimean War, almost
justified Napoleon in believing that he would not be left entirely alone.--P.
G.

[482] Hence “Jingo” for any rabid patriot.

[483] See _England’s Debt to India_ by Lajpat Rai for a good statement of
India’s economic grievance.

[484] Now a French Protectorate.--P. G.

[485] See Putnam Weale’s _Indiscreet Letters from Pekin_, a partly fictitious
book, but true and vivid in its effects.

[486] With the exception of one wretched Dutch factory on the minute island of
Deshima in the harbour of Nagasaki. The Dutch were exposed to almost
unendurable indignities. They had no intercourse with any Japanese except the
special officials appointed to deal with them.

[487] A new and much more liberal Maltese constitution was promulgated in June,
1920, practically putting Malta on the footing of a self-governing colony.

[488] All intelligent Englishmen or Englishwomen with a vote owe it to the
Empire and themselves to read at least one book dealing with India or Egypt
from the native point of view. For India, Lajpat Rai’s Political Future of
India is to be recommended. A compact book running counter to the views in this
text, and giving the Church missionary point of view, is the Rev. W. E. S.
Holland’s Goal of India. William Archer’s _India and the Future_ is an
interesting display of the temperamental clash of a Nordic writer with things
Dravidian. It sustains the argument that even the most high-minded Nordic type
cannot be trusted to govern other races sympathetically. (See also in that
matter Archer’s _In Afro-America_.) The Aga Khan’s _India in Transition_ gives
very admirably the views of a liberal Indian gentleman. Sidney Low’s _A Vision
of India_ is still not yet superseded as a picture of India in 1905-6, when the
present stir was only brewing.

[489] A very good book for the expansion of this chapter is Stearns Davis’
(with Anderson and Tyler) _Armed Peace_, a history of Europe from 1870 to 1914.
Even more illuminating is G. P. Gooch’s _History of Our Time (1885-1911)_. This
is quite a tiny book, but very clear and thorough. It was revised in its
present form in February, 1914, so that its title is misleading; it comes up to
1914. It contains an excellent student’s bibliography.

[490] See F. M. Hueffer’s able but badly named book, _When Blood is their
Argument_. It gives an admirable account of just how the pressure was applied
to the teaching organization.

[491] These quotations are from Sir Thomas Barclay’s article “Peace” in _The
Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[492] St. John Ervine’s novel, _Changing Winds_, gives a good account of the
mentality of this time.

[493] See the various publications of the Irish Dominion League, St. Stephen’s
Green, Dublin. A good recent account of Irish ideas is to be found in Lynd’s
_Ireland a Nation_ (1919).

[494] Wilfred Scawen Blunt regards the English remaining in Egypt, when they
had pledged themselves to go, as the greatest cause of the troubles that
culminated in 1914. To pacify the French over Egypt, England connived at the
French occupation of Morocco, which Germany had looked upon as her share of
North Africa. Hence Germany’s bristling attitude to France, and the _revival_
in France of the _revanche_ idea, which had died down. See Blunt’s _My
Diaries_, vol. i, September 30th, 1891.--A. C. W.

[495] It should not be forgotten that Italian action against Turkey was
precipitated by the granting of a charter by the Sultan to an Austro-German
company or syndicate for the “taking over” of the Tripolitaine: a process which
could only have ended by the hoisting of the Imperial German flag on the
southern shores of the Mediterranean, opposite Italy. Also, that through
Morocco the Germans were attempting to undermine the French position in Algeria
and Tunis by supplying the Moroccans with arms and money, and inducing them to
attack French rule separately in Western Algeria, and even by way of Saharan
oases in Southern Tunis. The writer of this note has actually witnessed this
process going on between 1898 and 1911. He asserts that, whether from right or
wrong motives, Germany forced France to tackle the thorny problem of Morocco.
Either she had to do so or prepare for the evacuation of Algeria. France may
have made a few mistakes, but she has conferred enormous benefits on North
Africa. Under her control the indigenous population has increased
remarkably.--H. H. J.

[496] The general reader who wants some picture in his mind of the recent state
of Russia should read Ernest Poole’s _The Village_. Pre-revolutionary Russia is
admirably sketched in Maurice Baring’s _Mainsprings of Russia_, _The Russian
People_, and _A Year in Russia_. A small, very illuminating book on the Russian
revolution is M. H. Barber’s _A British Nurse in Bolshevik Russia_.

[497] One very good reason for the provisional retention of the Philippines
under American control is the certainty that the “Moros,” the Muhammadan
peoples of Palawan, and the southern islands of the main groups would proceed
to conquer the “Christian” Filipinos, and that after a welter of civil war and
destruction, Japan or some other outside power would be appealed to to
intervene.--H. H. J.

[498] An unfriendly critic might denounce the treaty-making power of the United
States, and the machinery by which it operates, as complicated and cumbersome,
ill adapted to the complex demands of international intercourse, slow in action
and uncertain in outcome. The requirement of a two-thirds rather than a
majority vote in the Senate he might criticize not unjustly as a dubious excess
of caution.... Believe me, the American people are like for many years to
accomplish through this means their compacts with mankind. The checks and
balances by which it is surrounded, the free and full debate which it allows,
are in their eyes virtues rather than defects. They rejoice in the fact that
all engagements which affect their destinies must be spread upon the public
records, and that there is not, and there never can be, a secret treaty binding
them either in law or in morals. Looking back upon a diplomatic history which
is not without its chapters of success, they feel that on the whole the scheme
the fathers builded has served the children well. With a conservatism in
matters of government as great perhaps as that of any people in the world, they
will suffer much inconvenience and run the risk of occasional misunderstanding
before they make a change.--J. W. Davis (U. S. A. Ambassador to Britain), _The
Treaty Making Power of the United States_. (Oxf. Univ. Brit. Am. Club. Paper
No. 1.)

[499] I think his policy was quite clear. He said to Germany, “If you bring on
war, you must expect England to support France and Russia.” To France and
Russia he said: “If you are unreasonable, do not expect England to support
you.” He thus brought pressure to bear on both sides.--G. M.

An illuminating book on the causes of the war is Lord Loreburn’s _How the War
Came_.--H. H. J.

[500] Kautsky’s report on the origin of the war.

[501] For the common soldier’s view of the war there is no better book than _Le
Feu_ by Barbusse. An illustrated book of great quaintness, beauty, and veracity
is André Hellé’s _Le Livre des Heures_. No other book recalls so completely the
_feel_ and effect of the phases of the war. An admirably written and very wise
book is Philip Gibbs’ _Realities of War_. Some light upon the peculiar
difference of the fighting of the Great War from any previous warfare will be
found in McCurdy’s _War Neuroses_ and Eder’s book on the same subject.

[502] “What mainly was wrong with our generalship was the system which put the
High Command into the hands of a group of men belonging to the old school of
war, unable by reason of their age and traditions to get away from rigid
methods, and to become elastic in face of new conditions. Our Staff College had
been hopelessly inefficient in its system of training, if I am justified in
forming such an opinion from specimens produced by it, who had the brains of
canaries and the manners of Potsdam. There was also a close corporation among
the officers of the Regular Army, so that they took the lion’s share of Staff
appointments, thus keeping out brilliant young men of the New Armies, whose
brain power, to say the least of it, was on a higher level than that of the
Sandhurst standard.” Philip Gibbs, _Realities of War_.

[503] “The smart society of G.H.Q. was best seen at the Officers’ Club at
dinnertime. It was as much like musical comedy as any stage setting of war at
the Gaiety. The band played rag-time and light music while the warriors fed,
and all these generals and staff officers, with their decorations and Army
bands, and polished buttons and crossed swords, were waited upon by little
W.A.A.C.s., with the G.H.Q. colours tied up in bows on their hair, and khaki
stockings under their short skirts, and fancy aprons. Such a chatter! Such
bursts of light-hearted laughter! Such whisperings of secrets, of intrigues,
and scandals in high places! Such callous-hearted courage when British soldiers
were being blown to bits, gassed, blinded, maimed, and shell-shocked in places
that were far, so very far, from G.H.Q.”--Phillip Gibbs, _The Realities of
War_.

[504] But see Roch, _Mr. Lloyd George and the War_, and Arthur’s _Life of Lord
Kitchener_.

[505] “The want of an unlimited quantity of high explosives was a fatal bar to
our success.”--_The Times_, May 14th, 1915.

[506] But compare the British bombardment of Japanese towns noted in Chap.
xxxix, § 11. And aeroplane bombs and machine-gun fire have since been used by
the British military authorities against Indian village crowds _suspected_ of
sedition.

[507] _E.g._ in hand grenades.

[508] For the flighty incapacity of the British military authorities in this
adventure, see Sir Ian Hamilton’s _Gallipoli Diary_. It is only fair to the
British commander to add that the incapacity was that of the home authorities
to understand his demands for men and material.--P. G.

[509] See Stern, _Tanks 1914-1918_. See also Fuller, _Tanks in the Great War_.

[510] “I found a general opinion among officers and men under the command of
the Fifth Army that they had been victims of atrocious staff work, tragic in
its consequence. From what I saw of some of the Fifth Army staff officers, I
was of the same opinion. Some of these young gentlemen, and some of the elderly
officers, were arrogant and supercilious, without revealing any sign of
intelligence. If they had wisdom, it was deeply camouflaged by an air of
inefficiency. If they had knowledge, they hid it as a secret of their own.
General Gough in Flanders, though personally responsible for many tragic
happenings, was badly served by some of his subordinates, and battalion
officers and divisional staffs raged against the whole of the Fifth Army
organization, or lack of organization, with an extreme passion of
speech.”--Philip Gibbs, _Realities of War_.

[511] A very good account of the state of mind of Paris during and after the
war is in W. P. Adams’ _Paris Sees it Through_.

[512] _The Times_, December 8th, 1919.

[513] Authorities vary between 250,000 and a million houses.

[514] J. M. Keynes, _op. cit._

[515] They debauched the currency, _i.e._ and wasted money recklessly.

[516] Mr. Keynes ignores the fortunes made by deliberately cornering and
withholding commodities in a time of shortage.

[517] Among the books consulted here, for this and the two following sections,
were Dr. Dillon’s _Peace Conference_; H. Wilson Harris’s _The Peace in the
Making_ and _President Wilson, his Problems and his Policy_; J. M. Keynes’s
_Economic Consequences of the Peace_; Weyl’s _The End of the War_;
Stallybrass’s _Society of States_; Brailsford’s _A League of Nations_; F. C.
Howe’s _Why War?_ L. S. Woolf’s _International Government_; J. A. Hobson’s
_Towards International Government_; Lowes Dickinson’s _The Choice before Us_;
Sir Walter Phillimore’s _Three Centuries of Treaties_, and C. E. Fayle’s _Great
Settlement_.

[518] “The Allied Governments,” the effective passage ran, “have given careful
consideration to the correspondence which has passed between the President of
the United States and the German Government. Subject to the qualifications
which follow, they declare their readiness to make peace with the Government of
Germany on the terms of peace laid down in the President’s Address to Congress
of January 8th, 1918, and the principles of settlement enunciated in his
subsequent Addresses.”

(Note transmitted to the German Government by the Allies through the Swiss
Minister on November 5th, 1918.)

[519] In his book, _The Peace Conference_.

[520] Dillon.

[521] Dillon. And see his _The Peace Conference_, Chapter III, for instances of
the amazing ignorance of various delegates.

[522] See _Clemenceau_, by C. Ducray.

[523] He wrote several novels. They are not very good novels; they incline to
sentimental melodrama. _Le Plus Fort_ is now available to English readers in a
translation under the title of “The Stronger.” It is tawdry and dull. A
cinematograph version has been shown.

[524] Keynes.

[525] Checked by subsequent comparison with the published article in the _Jour.
of the Roy. United Service Institution_, vol. lxv., No. 457, February, 1920.

[526] Cp. Psalm cxxxvi.

[527] Here is another glimpse of the agreeable dreams that fill the
contemporary military mind. It is from Fuller’s recently published _Tanks in
the Great War_. Colonel Fuller does not share that hostility to tanks
characteristic of the older type of soldier. In the next war, he tells us:
“Fast-moving tanks, equipped with tons of liquid gas ... will cross the
frontier and obliterate every living thing in the fields and farms, the
villages, and cities of the enemy’s country. Whilst life is being swept away
around the frontier, fleets of aeroplanes will attack the enemy’s great
industrial and governing centres. All these attacks will be made, at first, not
against the enemy’s army ... but against the civil population, in order to
compel it to accept the will of the attacker.”

For a good, well-balanced account of what modern war really means, see Philip
Gibbs, _Realities of War_, already cited in two footnotes to § 8.

[528] A suggestive book here containing a good account of the drift of modern
religious thought is G. W. Cooke’s _Social Evolution of Religion_.

[529] Compare Basil Thompson, _The Fijians, a Study of the Decay of Custom_;
Introduction and opening chapters. This is a fine study of an ancient
“heliolithic” culture breaking up under modernization.

*       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

Volume I.

parellel=> parellel {pg 618}

Justianian=> Justinian {pg 618}

Kaniska=> Kanishka {pg 646}

Volume II.

agressive=> aggressive {pg 503}

completer=> complete {pg 527}

Arisona=> Arizona {index}

Vimeiro=> Vimiero {index}






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Outline of History: Being a Plain
History of Life and Mankind, by Herbert George Wells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 45368-0.txt or 45368-0.zip ***** This and all
associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/3/6/45368/

Produced by Chuck Greif, Adam Buchbinder and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a
United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy
and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying
copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge
for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you do not charge
anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy.  You
may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research.  They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR
USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution
of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply
with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with
this file or online at http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement,
you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of
or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few things that you can do with
most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full
terms of this agreement.  See paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things
you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms
of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the
public domain in the United States.  If an individual work is in the public
domain in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying
or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to
Project Gutenberg are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this
agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in
the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you
share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what
you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your
country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying,
displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this
work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
outside the United States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any
copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated)
is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the
terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from
the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to
anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.  If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either
with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in
paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with
the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by
the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright
holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other
work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently
displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or
hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a
Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm
web site (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla
ASCII" or other form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project
Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with
paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from      the
use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method      you already
use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is      owed to the owner of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he      has agreed to donate royalties
under this paragraph to the      Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments      must be paid within 60 days following each date on which
you      prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and      sent to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the      address specified
in Section 4, "Information about donations to      the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies      you
in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he      does not
agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm      License.  You must
require such a user to return or      destroy all copies of the works possessed
in a physical medium      and discontinue all use of and all access to other
copies of      Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the      electronic
work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days      of receipt of the
work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free      distribution
of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section
3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort
to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.  Despite these efforts,
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be
stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete,
inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other
medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark,
and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under
this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses,
including legal fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE,
STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK
OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF
YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in
this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the
person you received the work from.  If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.  The person
or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy in lieu of a refund.  If you received the work electronically,
the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without
further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES
OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable
to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum
disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.  The invalidity
or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all
liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a)
distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration,
modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and
(c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists because of the efforts
of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they
need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that
the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for
generations to come.  In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project
Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 501(c)(3)
educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi
and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.  The
Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.  Its
501(c)(3) letter is posted at http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. Fairbanks,
AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations.  Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake
City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links
and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site
and official page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:      Dr. Gregory B. Newby      Chief
Executive and Director      gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public
support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine
readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment.  Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to
maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and
charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.  Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork
and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements.  We do not solicit
donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of
compliance.  To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not
met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting
unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to
donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and
addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks,
online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept
of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.  For
thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only
a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with
any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to
make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to
help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to
hear about new eBooks.

