# BOOK II - IX - § 2
[Metadata]: # {03.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE NEANDERTHAL MEN, AN EXTINCT RACE

(The Early Palæolithic Age[29])

§ 1. _The World 50,000 Years Ago._ § 2. _The Daily Life of the      First
Men._ § 3. _The Last Palæolithic Men._

# § 2
In Worthington Smith’s _Man the Primeval Savage_ there is a very vividly
written description of early Palæolithic life, from which much of the following
account is borrowed. In the original, Mr. Worthington Smith assumes a more
extensive social life, a larger community, and a more definite division of
labour among its members than is altogether justifiable in the face of such
subsequent writings as J. J. Atkinson’s memorable essay on Primal Law.[32] For
the little tribe Mr. Worthington Smith described there has been substituted,
therefore, a family group under the leadership of one Old Man, and the
suggestions of Mr. Atkinson as to the behaviour of the Old Man have been worked
into the sketch.

Mr. Worthington Smith describes a squatting-place near a stream, because
primitive man, having no pots or other vessels, must needs have kept close to a
water supply, and with some chalk cliffs adjacent from which flints could be
got to work. The air was bleak, and the fire was of great importance, because
fires once out were not easily relit in those days. When not required to blaze
it was probably banked down with ashes. The most probable way in which fires
were started was by hacking a bit of iron pyrites with a flint amidst dry dead
leaves; concretions of iron pyrites and flints are found together in England
where the gault and chalk approach each other.[33] The little group of people
would be squatting about amidst a litter of fern, moss, and such-like dry
material. Some of the women and children would need to be continually gathering
fuel to keep up the fires. It would be a tradition that had grown up. The young
would imitate their elders in this task. Perhaps there would be rude wind
shelters of boughs on one side of the encampment.

The Old Man, the father and master of the group, would perhaps be engaged in
hammering flints beside the fire. The children would imitate him and learn to
use the sharpened fragments. Probably some of the women would hunt good flints;
they would fish them out of the chalk with sticks and bring them to the
squatting-place.

There would be skins about. It seems probable that at a very early time
primitive men took to using skins. Probably they were wrapped about the
children, and used to lie upon when the ground was damp and cold. A woman would
perhaps be preparing a skin. The inside of the skin would be well scraped free
of superfluous flesh with trimmed flints, and then strained and pulled and
pegged out flat on the grass, and dried in the rays of the sun.

[Illustration: EARLY STONE IMPLEMENTS.

The Mousterian Age implements, and all above it, are those of
Neanderthal men or, possibly in the case of the rostro-carinates,      of
sub-men. The lower row (Reindeer Age) are the work of true men.      The
student should compare this diagram with the time diagram      attached to
Chapter VII, § 6, and he should note the relatively      _large size_ of the
pre-human implements. ]

Away from the fire other members of the family group prowl in search of food,
but at night they all gather closely round the fire and build it up, for it is
their protection against the wandering bear and such-like beasts of prey. The
Old Man is the only fully adult male in the little group. There are women, boys
and girls, but so soon as the boys are big enough to rouse the Old Man’s
jealousy, he will fall foul of them and either drive them off or kill them.
Some girls may perhaps go off with these exiles, or two or three of these
youths may keep together for a time, wandering until they come upon some other
group, from which they may try to steal a mate. Then they would probably fall
out among themselves. Some day, when he is forty years old perhaps or even
older, and his teeth are worn down and his energy abating, some younger male
will stand up to the Old Man and kill him and reign in his stead. There is
probably short shrift for the old at the squatting-place. So soon as they grow
weak and bad-tempered, trouble and death come upon them.

What did they eat at the squatting-place?

“Primeval man is commonly described as a hunter of the great hairy mammoth, of
the bear, and the lion, but it is in the highest degree improbable that the
human savage ever hunted animals much larger than the hare, the rabbit, and the
rat. Man was probably the hunted rather than the hunter.

[Illustration: AUSTRALIA & the Western Pacific in the Glacial Age]

“The primeval savage was both herbivorous and carnivorous. He had for food
hazel-nuts, beech-nuts, sweet chestnuts, earth-nuts, and acorns. He had
crab-apples, wild pears, wild cherries, wild gooseberries, bullaces, sorbs,
sloes, blackberries, yewberries, hips and haws, water-cress, fungi, the larger
and softer leaf-buds, Nostoc (the vegetable substance called ‘fallen stars’ by
country-folk), the fleshy, juicy, asparagus-like rhizomes or subterranean stems
of the _Labiatæ_ and like plants, as well as other delicacies of the vegetable
kingdom. He had birds’ eggs, young birds, and the honey and honeycomb of wild
bees. He had newts, snails, and frogs--the two latter delicacies are still
highly esteemed in Normandy and Brittany. He had fish, dead and alive, and
fresh-water mussels; he could easily catch fish with his hands and paddle and
dive for and trap them. By the seaside he would have fish, mollusca, and
seaweed. He would have many of the larger birds and smaller mammals, which he
could easily secure by throwing stones and sticks, or by setting simple snares.
He would have the snake, the slow-worm, and the crayfish. He would have various
grubs and insects, the large larvæ of beetles and various caterpillars. The
taste for caterpillars still survives in China, where they are sold in dried
bundles in the markets. A chief and highly nourishing object of food would
doubtlessly be bones smashed up into a stiff and gritty paste.

“A fact of great importance is this--primeval man would not be particular about
having his flesh food over-fresh. He would constantly find it in a dead state,
and, if semi-putrid, he would relish it none the less--the taste for high or
half-putrid game still survives. If driven by hunger and hard pressed, he would
perhaps sometimes eat his weaker companions or unhealthy children who happened
to be feeble or unsightly or burthensome. The larger animals in a weak and
dying state would no doubt be much sought for; when these were not forthcoming,
dead and half-rotten examples would be made to suffice. An unpleasant odour
would not be objected to; it is not objected to now in many continental hotels.

“The savages sat huddled close together round their fire, with fruits, bones,
and half-putrid flesh. We can imagine the old man and his women twitching the
skin of their shoulders, brows, and muzzles as they were annoyed or bitten by
flies or other insects. We can imagine the large human nostrils, indicative of
keen scent, giving rapidly repeated sniffs at the foul meat before it was
consumed; the bad odour of the meat, and the various other disgusting odours
belonging to a haunt of savages, being not in the least disapproved.

“Man at that time was not a _degraded_ animal, for he had never been higher; he
was therefore an exalted animal, and, low as we esteem him now, he yet
represented the highest stage of development of the animal kingdom of his
time.”

That is at least an acceptable sketch of a Neanderthal squatting-place. But
before extinction overtook them, even the Neanderthalers learnt much and went
far.

Whatever the older Palæolithic men did with their dead, there is reason to
suppose that the later _Homo Neanderthalensis_ buried some individuals at least
with respect and ceremony. One of the best-known Neanderthal skeletons is that
of a youth who apparently had been deliberately interred. He had been placed in
a sleeping posture, head on the right fore-arm. The head lay on a number of
flint fragments carefully piled together “pillow fashion.” A big hand-axe lay
near his head, and around him were numerous charred and split ox bones, as
though there had been a feast or an offering.

To this appearance of burial during the later Neanderthal age we shall return
when we are considering the ideas that were inside the heads of primitive men.

This sort of men may have wandered, squatted about their fires, and died in
Europe for a period extending over 100,000 years, if we assume, that is, that
the Heidelberg jaw-bone belongs to a member of the species, a period so vast
that all the subsequent history of our race becomes a thing of yesterday. Along
its own line this species of men was accumulating a dim tradition, and working
out its limited possibilities. Its thick skull imprisoned its brain, and to the
end it was low-browed and brutish.

