# BOOK V - XXIX - § 3
[Metadata]: # {06.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {06.03.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE RISE AND COLLAPSE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

THE CÆSARS BETWEEN THE SEA AND THE GREAT PLAINS OF THE OLD WORLD[256]

§ 1. _A Short Catalogue of Emperors._ § 2. _Roman Civilization at      its
Zenith._ § 3. _Limitations of the Roman Mind._ § 4. _The Stir      of the Great
Plains._ § 5. _The Western (true Roman) Empire      crumples up._ § 6. _The
Eastern (revived Hellenic) Empire._

# § 3
We have already shown reason for our statement that the Roman imperial system
was a very unsound political growth indeed. It is absurd to write of its
statecraft; it had none. At its best it had a bureaucratic administration which
kept the peace of the world for a time and failed altogether to secure it.

Let us note here the main factors in its failure.

The clue to all its failure lies in the absence of any free mental activity and
any organization for the increase, development, and application of knowledge.
It respected wealth and it despised science. It gave government to the rich,
and imagined that wise men could be bought and bargained for in the slave
markets when they were needed. It was, therefore, a colossally ignorant and
unimaginative empire. It foresaw nothing.

It had no strategic foresight, because it was blankly ignorant of geography and
ethnology. It knew nothing of the conditions of Russia, Central Asia, and the
East. It was content to keep the Rhine and Danube as its boundaries, and to
make no effort to Romanize Germany. But we need only look at the map of Europe
and Asia showing the Roman Empire to see that a willing and incorporated
Germany was absolutely essential to the life and security of Western Europe.
Excluded, Germany became a wedge that needed only the impact of the Hunnish
hammer to split up the whole system.

Moreover, this neglect to push the boundaries northward to the Baltic left that
sea and the North Sea as a region of experiment and training and instruction in
seamanship for the Northmen of Scandinavia, Denmark, and the Frisian coast. But
Rome went on its way quite stupidly, oblivious to the growth of a newer and
more powerful piracy in the north.

The same unimaginative quality made the Romans leave the seaways of the
Mediterranean undeveloped. When presently the barbarians pressed down to the
warm water, we read of no swift transport of armies from Spain or Africa or
Asia to the rescue of Italy and the Adriatic coasts. Instead, we see the
Vandals becoming masters of the western Mediterranean without so much as a
naval battle.

The Romans had been held at the Euphrates by an array of mounted archers. It
was clear that as the legion was organized it was useless in wide open country,
and it should have been equally clear that sooner or later the mounted nomads
of east Germany, south Russia, or Parthia were bound to try conclusions with
the empire. But the Romans, two hundred years after Cæsar’s time, were still
marching about, the same drilled and clanking cohorts they had always been,
easily ridden round and shot to pieces. The empire had learnt nothing even from
Carrhæ.

The incapacity of the Roman imperialism for novelty in methods of transport
again is amazing. It was patent that their power and unity depended upon the
swift movement of troops and supplies from one part of the empire to another.
The republic made magnificent roads; the empire never improved upon them. Four
hundred years before the Antonines, Hero of Alexandria had made the first
steam-engine. Beautiful records of such beginnings of science were among the
neglected treasures of the rich men’s libraries throughout the imperial
domains. They were seed lying on stony ground. The armies and couriers of
Marcus Aurelius drudged along the roads exactly as the armies of Scipio
Africanus had done three centuries before them.

The Roman writers were always lamenting the effeminacy of the age. It was their
favourite cant. They recognized that the free men of the forest and steppes and
desert were harder and more desperate fighters than their citizens, but the
natural corollary of developing the industrial power of their accumulations of
population to make a countervailing equipment never entered their heads.
Instead they took the barbarians into their legions, taught them the arts of
war, marched them about the empire, and returned them, with their lesson well
learnt, to their own people.

In view of these obvious negligences, it is no wonder that the Romans
disregarded that more subtle thing, the soul of the empire altogether, and made
no effort to teach or train or win its common people into any conscious
participation with its life. Such teaching or training would indeed have run
counter to all the ideas of the rich men and the imperial officials. They had
made a tool of religion; science, literature, and education they had entrusted
to the care of slaves, who were bred and trained and sold like dogs or horses;
ignorant, pompous, and base, the Roman adventurers of finance and property who
created the empire lorded it with a sense of the utmost security while their
destruction gathered without the empire and within.

By the second and third centuries A.D. the overtaxed and overstrained imperial
machine was already staggering towards its downfall.


§ 4[262]

And now it is necessary, if we are to understand clearly the true situation of
the Roman Empire, to turn our eyes to the world beyond its northern and eastern
borders, the world of the plains, that stretches, with scarcely a break, from
Holland across Germany and Russia to the mountains of Central Asia and
Mongolia, and to give a little attention to the parallel empire in China that
was now consolidating and developing a far tougher and more enduring moral and
intellectual unity than the Romans ever achieved.

“It is the practice,” says Mr. E. H. Parker, “even amongst our most highly
educated men in Europe, to deliver sonorous sentences about being ‘masters of
the world,’ ‘bringing all nations of the earth under her sway,’ and so on, when
in reality only some corner of the Mediterranean is involved, or some ephemeral
sally into Persia and Gaul. Cyrus and Alexander, Darius and Xerxes, Cæsar and
Pompey, all made very interesting excursions, but they were certainly not on a
larger scale or charged with greater human interest than the campaigns which
were going on at the other end of Asia. Western civilization possessed much in
art and science for which China never cared, but, on the other hand, the
Chinese developed a historical and critical literature, a courtesy of
demeanour, a luxury of clothing, and an administrative system of which Europe
might have been proud. In one word, the history of the Far East is quite as
interesting as that of the Far West. It only requires to be able to read it.
When we brush away contemptuously from our notice the tremendous events which
took place on the plains of Tartary, we must not blame the Chinese too much for
declining to interest themselves in the doings of what to them appear
insignificant states dotted round the Mediterranean and Caspian, which, at this
time, was practically all the world of which we knew in Europe.”[263]

We have already mentioned (in chap. xvi. and elsewhere) the name of
Shi-Hwang-ti, who consolidated an empire much smaller, indeed, than the present
limits of China, but still very great and populous, spreading from the valleys
of the Hwang-ho and the Yang Tse. He became king of Ch’in in 246 B.C. and
emperor in 220 B.C., and he reigned until 210 B.C., and during this third of a
century he effected much the same work of consolidation that Augustus Cæsar
carried out in Rome two centuries later. At his death there was dynastic
trouble for four years, and then (206 B.C.) a fresh dynasty, the Han,
established itself and ruled for two hundred and twenty-nine years. The opening
quarter century of the Christian era was troubled by a usurper; then what is
called the Later Han Dynasty recovered power and ruled for another century and
a half, until China, in the time of the Antonines, was so devastated by an
eleven-year pestilence as to fall into disorder. This same pestilence, we may
note, also helped to produce a century of confusion in the Western world (see §
1). But altogether, until this happened, for more than four hundred years
Central China was generally at peace, and on the whole well governed, a cycle
of strength and prosperity unparalleled by anything in the experience of the
Western world.

Only the first of the Han monarchs continued the policy of Shi-Hwang-ti against
the _literati_. His successor restored the classics, for the old separatist
tradition was broken, and in the uniformity of learning throughout the empire
lay, he saw, the cement of Chinese unity. While the Roman world was still blind
to the need of any universal mental organization, the Han emperors were setting
up a uniform system of education and of literary degrees throughout China that
has maintained the intellectual solidarity of that great and always expanding
country into modern times. The bureaucrats of Rome were of the most
miscellaneous origins and traditions; the bureaucrats of China were, and are
still, made in the same mould, all members of one tradition. Since the Han days
China has experienced great vicissitudes of political fortune, but they have
never changed her fundamental character; she has been divided, but she has
always recovered her unity; she has been conquered, and she has always absorbed
and assimilated her conquerors.

But from our present point of view, the most important consequences of this
consolidation of China under Shi-Hwang-ti and the Hans was in its reaction upon
the unsettled tribes of the northern and western border of China. Throughout
the disordered centuries before the time of Shi-Hwang-ti, the Hiung-nu or Huns
had occupied Mongolia and large portions of northern China, and had raided
freely into China and interfered freely in Chinese politics. The new power and
organization of the Chinese civilization began to change this state of affairs
for good and all.

[Illustration: Map of ASIA (with EUROPE) to illustrate the general conditions
of life during the Historical Period.]

We have already, in our first account of Chinese beginnings, noted the
existence of these Huns. It is necessary now to explain briefly who and what
they were. Even in using this word Hun as a general equivalent for the
Hiung-nu, we step on to controversial ground. In our accounts of the
development of the Western world we have had occasion to name the Scythians,
and to explain the difficulty of distinguishing clearly between Cimmerians,
Sarmatians, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Goths, and other more or less nomadic,
more or less Aryan peoples who drifted to and fro in a great arc between the
Danube and Central Asia. While sections of the Aryans were moving south and
acquiring and developing civilization, these other Aryan peoples were
developing mobility and nomadism; they were learning the life of the tent, the
wagon, and the herd. They were learning also to use milk as a food basis, and
were probably becoming less agricultural, less disposed to take even snatch
crops, than they had been. Their development was being aided by a slow change
in climate that was replacing the swamps and forests and parklands of South
Russia and Central Asia by steppes, by wide grazing lands that is, which
favoured a healthy, unsettled life, and necessitated an annual movement between
summer and winter pasture. These peoples had only the lowest political forms;
they split up, they mingled together; the various races had identical social
habits; and so it is that the difficulty, the impossibility of sharp
distinctions between them arises. Now the case of the Mongolian races to the
north and north-west of the Chinese civilization is very parallel. There can be
little doubt that the Hiung-nu, the Huns, and the later people called the
Mongols, were all very much the same people, and that the Turks and Tartars
presently branched off from this same drifting Mongolian population. Kalmucks
and Buriats are later developments of the same strain. Here we shall favour the
use of the word “Hun” as a sort of general term for these tribes, just as we
have been free and wide in our use of “Scythian” in the West.

The consolidation of China was a very serious matter for these Hunnish peoples.
Hitherto their overflow of population had gone adventuring southward into the
disorders of divided China as water goes into a sponge. Now they found a wall
built against them, a firm government, and disciplined armies cutting them off
from the grass plains. And though the wall held them back, it did not hold back
the Chinese. They were increasing and multiplying through these centuries of
peace, and as they increased and multiplied, they spread steadily with house
and plough wherever the soil permitted. They spread westward into Tibet and
northward and north-westwardly, perhaps to the edge of the Gobi desert. They
spread into the homes and pasturing and hunting-grounds of the Hunnish nomads,
exactly as the white people of the United States spread westward into the
hunting-grounds of the Red Indians. And in spite of raid and massacre they were
just as invincible because they had the pressure of numbers and a strong
avenging government behind them. Even without the latter support the
cultivating civilization of China has enormous powers of permeation and
extension. It has spread slowly and continuously for three thousand years. It
is spreading in Manchuria and Siberia to-day. It roots deeply where it spreads.

Partly the Huns were civilized and assimilated by the Chinese. The more
northerly Huns were checked and their super-abundant energies were turned
westward. The southern Huns were merged into the imperial population.

If the reader will examine the map of Central Asia, he will see that very great
mountain barriers separate the Southern, Western, and Eastern peoples of Asia.
(But he should be wary of forming his ideas from a map upon Mercator’s
projection, which enormously exaggerates the areas and distances of Northern
Asia and Siberia.) He will find that from the central mountain masses three
great mountain systems radiate eastward; the Himalayas going south-eastward,
south of Tibet, the Kuen Lun eastward, north of Tibet, and the Thien Shan
north-eastward to join the Altai mountains. Further to the north is the great
plain, still steadily thawing and drying. Between the Thien Shan and the Kuen
Lun is an area, the Tarim Basin (= roughly Eastern Turkestan), of rivers that
never reach the sea, but end in swamps and intermittent lakes. This basin was
much more fertile in the past than it is now. The mountain barrier to the west
of this Tarim Basin is high, but not forbidding; there are many practicable
routes downward into Western Turkestan, and it is possible to travel either
along the northern foothills of the Kuen Lun or by the Tarim valley westward
from China to Kashgar (where the roads converge), and so over the mountains to
Kokand, Samarkand, and Bokhara. Here then is the natural meeting-place in
history of Aryan and Mongolian. Here or round by the sea.

[Illustration: Map of CENTRAL ASIA in the 2nd & 1st Centuries B.C.]

We have already noted how Alexander the Great came to one side of the barrier
in 329 B.C. High among the mountains of Turkestan a lake preserves his name.
Indeed, so living is the tradition of his great raid, that almost any stone
ruin in Central Asia is still ascribed to “Iskander.” After this brief glimpse,
the light of history upon this region fades again, and when it becomes bright
once more it is on the eastern and not upon the western side. Far away to the
east Shi-Hwang-ti had routed the Huns and walled them out of China proper. A
portion of these people remained in the north of China, a remnant which was
destined to amalgamate with Chinese life under the Hans, but a considerable
section had turned westward and (second and first centuries B.C.) driven before
them a kindred people called the Yueh-Chi, driving them from the eastern to the
western extremity of the Kuen Lun, and at last right over the barrier into the
once Aryan region of Western Turkestan.[264] These Yueh-Chi conquered the
slightly Hellenized kingdom of Bactria, and mixed with Aryan people there.
Later on these Yueh-Chi became, or were merged with Aryan elements into, a
people called the Indo-Scythians, who went on down the Khyber Pass and
conquered northern portions of India as far as Benares (100-150 A.D.), wiping
out the last vestiges of Hellenic rule in India. This big splash over of the
Mongolian races westward was probably not the first of such splashes, but it is
the first recorded splash. In the rear of the Yueh-Chi were the Huns, and in
the rear of the Huns and turning them now northward was the vigorous Han
Dynasty of China. In the reign of the greatest of the Han monarchs, Wu-Ti
(140-86 B.C.), the Huns had been driven northward out of the whole of Eastern
Turkestan or subjugated, the Tarim Basin swarmed with Chinese settlers, and
caravans were going over westward with silk and lacquer and jade to trade for
the gold and silver of Armenia and Rome.

The splash over of the Yueh-Chi is recorded, but it is fairly evident that much
westward movement of sections of the Hunnish peoples is not recorded. From 200
B.C. to 200 A.D. the Chinese Empire maintained a hard, resolute, advancing
front towards nomadism, and the surplus of the nomads drifted steadily west.
There was no such settling down behind a final frontier on the part of the
Chinese as we see in the case of the Romans at the Rhine and Danube. The drift
of the nomads before this Chinese thrust, century by century, turned southward
at first towards Bactria. The Parthians of the first century B.C. probably
mingled Scythian and Mongolian elements. The “singing arrows” that destroyed
the army of Crassus came, it would seem, originally from the Altai and the Tian
Shan. After the first century B.C. the line of greater attraction and least
resistance lay for a time towards the north of the Caspian. In a century or so
all the country known as Western Turkestan was “Mongolized,” and so it remains
to this day. A second great thrust by China began about 75 A.D., and
accelerated the westward drift of the nomads. In 102, Pan Chau, a great Chinese
general, was sending explorers from his advanced camp upon the Caspian (or, as
some authorities say, the Persian Gulf) to learn particulars of the Roman
power. But their reports decided him not to proceed.

By the first century A.D. nomadic Mongolian peoples are in evidence upon the
eastern boundaries of Europe, already greatly mixed with Aryan nomads and with
uprooted Aryan elements from the Caspian-Pamir region. There are Hunnish
peoples established between the Caspian Sea and the Urals. West of them were
the Alans, probably also a Mongolian people with Aryan elements; they had
fought against Pompey the Great when he was in Armenia in 65 B.C. These are as
yet the furthest westward peoples of the new Mongolian advance, and they made
no further westward push until the fourth century A.D. To the north-west the
Finns, a Mongolian people, had long been established as far west as the Baltic.

West of the Huns, beyond the Don, there were Aryan tribes, the Goths. These
Goths had spread south-eastward from their region of origin in Scandinavia.
They were a Teutonic people, and we have already marked them crossing the
Baltic in the map on page 301. They continued to move south-eastward across
Russia, using the rivers and never forgetting their Baltic watercraft. No doubt
they assimilated much Scythian population as they spread down to the Black Sea.
In the first century A.D. they were in two main divisions, the Ostrogoths, the
East Goths, who were between the Don and the Dnieper, and the Visigoths, or
West Goths, west of the Dnieper. During the first century there was an air of
quiescence over the great plains, but population was accumulating and the
tribes were fermenting. The second and third centuries seem to have been a
phase of comparatively moist seasons and abundant grass. Presently in the
fourth and fifth centuries the weather grew drier and the grass became scanty,
and the nomads stirred afresh.

But it is interesting to note that in the opening century of the Christian era,
the Chinese Empire was strong enough to expel and push off from itself the
surplus of this Mongolian nomadism to the north of it which presently conquered
North India and gathered force and mingled with Aryan nomadism, and fell at
last like an avalanche upon the weak-backed Roman Empire.

Before we go on to tell of the blows that now began to fall upon the Roman
Empire and of the efforts of one or two great men to arrest the collapse, we
may say a few words about the habits and quality of these westward-drifting
barbaric Mongolian peoples who were now spreading from the limits of China
towards the Black and Baltic Seas. It is still the European custom to follow
the lead of the Roman writers and write of these Huns and their associates as
of something incredibly destructive and cruel. But such accounts as we have
from the Romans were written in periods of panic, and the Roman could lie about
his enemies with a freedom and vigour that must arouse the envy even of the
modern propagandist. He could talk of “Punic faith” as a byword for perfidy
while committing the most abominable treacheries against Carthage, and his
railing accusations of systematic cruelty against this people or that were
usually the prelude and excuse for some frightful massacre or enslavement or
robbery on his own part. He had quite a modern passion for self-justification.
We must remember that these accounts of the savagery and frightfulness of the
Huns came from a people whose chief amusement was gladiatorial shows, and whose
chief method of dealing with insurrection and sedition was nailing the offender
to a cross to die. From first to last the Roman Empire must have killed
hundreds of thousands of men in that way. A large portion of the population of
this empire that could complain of the barbarism of its assailants consisted of
slaves subject practically to almost any lust or caprice at the hands of their
owners. It is well to bear these facts in mind before we mourn the swamping of
the Roman Empire by the barbarians as though it was an extinction of all that
is fine in life by all that is black and ugly.

The facts seem to be that the Hunnish peoples were the eastern equivalent of
the primitive Aryans of whom we have given an account in Chapter XV, and that,
in spite of their profound racial and linguistic differences, they mixed with
the nomadic and semi-nomadic residuum of the Aryan races north of the Danube
and Persia very easily and successfully. Instead of killing, they enlisted and
intermarried with the peoples they invaded. They had that necessary gift for
all peoples destined to political predominance, tolerant assimilation. They
came rather later in time, and their nomadic life was more highly developed
than that of the primitive Aryans. The primitive Aryans were a forest and
ox-wagon people who took to the horse later. The Hunnish peoples had grown up
with the horse. Somewhen about 1200 or 1000 years B.C. they began to ride the
horse. The bit, the saddle, the stirrup, these are not primitive things, but
they are necessary if man and horse are to keep going for long stretches. It is
well to bear in mind how modern a thing is riding. Altogether man has not been
in the saddle for much more than three thousand years.[265] We have already
noted the gradual appearance of the war-chariot, the mounted man, and finally
of disciplined cavalry in this history. It was from the Mongolian regions of
Asia that these things came. To this day men in Central Asia go rather in the
saddle than on their proper feet. Says Ratzel,[266] “Strong, longnecked horses
are found in enormous numbers on the steppes. For Mongols and Turcomans riding
is not a luxury; even the Mongol shepherds tend their flocks on horseback.
Children are taught to ride in early youth; and the boy of three years old
often takes his first riding-lesson on a safe child’s saddle and makes quick
progress.”

It is impossible to suppose that the Huns and the Alans could have differed
very widely in character from the present nomads of the steppe regions, and
nearly all observers are agreed in describing these latter as open and pleasant
people. They are thoroughly honest and free-spirited. “The character of the
herdsmen of Central Asia,” says Ratzel,[267] “when unadulterated, is ponderous
eloquence, frankness, rough good-nature, pride, but also indolence,
irritability, and a tendency to vindictiveness. Their faces show a considerable
share of frankness combined with amusing naïveté.... Their courage is rather a
sudden blaze of pugnacity than cold boldness. Religious fanaticism they have
none. Hospitality is universal.” This is not an entirely disagreeable picture.
Their personal bearing, he says further, is quieter and more dignified than
that of the townsmen of Turkestan and Persia. Add to this that the nomadic life
prevents any great class inequalities or any extensive development of slavery.

Of course these peoples out of Asia were totally illiterate and artistically
undeveloped. But we must not suppose, on that account, that they were primitive
barbarians, and that their state of life was at the level from which the
agricultural civilization had long ago arisen. It was not. They too had
developed, but they had developed along a different line, a line with less
intellectual complication, more personal dignity perhaps, and certainly with a
more intimate contact with wind and sky.

