# BOOK III - XVI - § 1
[Metadata]: # {04.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

THE FIRST CIVILIZATIONS

§ 1. _Early Cities and Early Nomads._ § 2A. _The Riddle of the
Sumerians._ § 2B. _The Empire of Sargon the First._ § 2C. _The      Empire of
Hammurabi._ § 2D. _The Assyrians and their Empire._ § 2E.      _The Chaldean
Empire._ § 3. _The Early History of Egypt._ § 4. _The      Early Civilization
of India._ § 5. _The Early History of China._ §      6. _While the
Civilizations were Growing._

# § 1
When the Aryan way of speech and life was beginning to spread to the east and
west of the region in which it began, and breaking up as it spread into a
number of languages and nations, considerable communities of much more
civilized men were already in existence in Egypt and in Mesopotamia, and
probably also in China and in (still purely Dravidian) India. Our story has
overshot itself in its account of the Aryans and of their slow progress from
early Neolithic conditions to the heroic barbarism of the Bronze Age. We must
now go back. Such a pre-Keltic gathering as we sketched at Avebury would have
happened about 2000 B.C., and the building of the barrow for Hector as the
_Iliad_ describes it, 1300 B.C. or even later. It is perhaps natural for a
European writer writing primarily for English-reading students to overrun his
subject in this way. No great harm is done if the student does clearly grasp
that there has been an overlap.

Here then we take up the main thread of human history again. We must hark back
to 6000 B.C. or even earlier. But although we shall go back so far, the people
we shall describe are people already in some respects beyond the Neolithic
Aryans of three thousand years later, more particularly in their social
organization and their material welfare. While in Central Europe and Central
Asia the primitive Neolithic way of life was becoming more migratory and
developing into nomadism, in the great river valleys it is becoming more
settled and localized. It is still doubtful whether we are to consider
Mesopotamia or Egypt the earlier scene of the two parallel beginnings of
settled communities living in towns. By 4000 B.C., in both these regions of the
earth, such communities existed, and had been going on for a very considerable
time. The excavations of the American expedition[99] at Nippur have unearthed
evidence of a city community existing there at least as early as 5000 B.C., and
probably as early as 6000 B.C., an earlier date than anything we know of in
Egypt. De Candolle asserts that it is only in the Euphrates-Tigris district
that wheat has ever been found growing wild.[100] It may be that from
Mesopotamia as a centre the cultivation of wheat spread over the entire eastern
hemisphere. Or it may be that wheat grew wild in some regions now submerged.
There may have been a wild wheat region in what is now the sea bottom of the
eastern Mediterranean. But cultivation is not civilization; the growing of
wheat had spread from the Atlantic to the Pacific with the distribution of the
Neolithic culture by perhaps 10,000 or 9000 B.C., before the beginnings of
civilization. Civilization is something more than the occasional seasonal
growing of wheat. It is the settlement of men upon an area continuously
cultivated and possessed, who live in buildings continuously inhabited with a
common rule and a common city or citadel. For a long time civilization may
quite possibly have developed in Mesopotamia without any relations with the
parallel beginnings in Egypt. The two settlements may have been quite
independent, arising separately out of the widely diffused Heliolithic
Neolithic culture. Or they may have had a common origin in the region of the
Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and southern Arabia.

[Illustration: Map of The CRADLE of WESTERN CIVILIZATION

6,000 to 4,000 B.C.

J.F.H.]



The first condition necessary to a real settling down of Neolithic men, as
distinguished from a mere temporary settlement among abundant food, was of
course a trustworthy all-the-year-round supply of water, fodder for the
animals, food for themselves, and building material for their homes. There had
to be everything they could need at any season, and no want that would tempt
them to wander further. This was a possible state of affairs, no doubt, in many
European and Asiatic valleys; and in many such valleys, as in the case of the
Swiss lake-dwellings, men settled from a very early date indeed; but nowhere,
of any countries now known to us, were these favourable conditions found upon
such a scale, and nowhere did they hold good so surely year in and year out as
in Egypt and in the country between the upper waters of the Euphrates and
Tigris and the Persian Gulf.[101] Here was a constant water supply under
enduring sunlight; trustworthy harvests year by year; in Mesopotamia wheat
yielded, says Herodotus, two hundredfold to the sower; Pliny says that it was
cut twice and afterwards yielded good fodder for sheep; there were abundant
palms and many sorts of fruits; and as for building material, in Egypt there
was clay and easily worked stone, and in Mesopotamia a clay that becomes a
brick in the sunshine. In such countries men would cease to wander and settle
down almost unawares; they would multiply and discover themselves numerous and
by their numbers safe from any casual assailant. They multiplied, producing a
denser human population than the earth had ever known before; their houses
became more substantial, wild beasts were exterminated over great areas, the
security of life increased so that ordinary men went about in the towns and
fields without encumbering themselves with weapons, and, among themselves at
least, they became peaceful peoples. Men took root as man had never taken root
before.

But in the less fertile and more seasonal lands outside these favoured areas,
there developed on the other hand a thinner, more active population of peoples,
the primitive nomadic peoples. In contrast with the settled folk, the
agriculturists, these nomads lived freely and dangerously. They were in
comparison lean and hungry men. Their herding was still blended with hunting;
they fought constantly for their pastures against hostile families. The
discoveries in the elaboration of implements and the use of metals made by the
settled peoples spread to them and improved their weapons. They followed the
settled folk from Neolithic phase to Bronze phase. It is possible that, in the
case of iron, the first users were nomadic. They became more warlike with
better arms, and more capable of rapid movements with the improvement of their
transport. One must not think of a nomadic stage as a predecessor of a settled
stage in human affairs. To begin with, man was a slow drifter, following food.
Then one sort of men began to settle down, and another sort became more
distinctly nomadic. The settled sort began to rely more and more upon grain for
food; the nomad began to make a greater use of milk for food. He bred his cows
for milk. The two ways of life specialized in opposite directions. It was
inevitable that nomad folk and the settled folk should clash, that the nomads
should seem hard barbarians to the settled peoples, and the settled peoples
soft and effeminate and very good plunder to the nomad peoples. Along the
fringes of the developing civilizations there must have been a constant raiding
and bickering between hardy nomad tribes and mountain tribes and the more
numerous and less warlike peoples in the towns and villages.

For the most part this was a mere raiding of the borders. The settled folk had
the weight of numbers on their side; the herdsmen might raid and loot, but they
could not stay. That sort of mutual friction might go on for many generations.
But ever and again we find some leader or some tribe amidst the disorder of
free and independent nomads, powerful enough to force a sort of unity upon its
kindred tribes, and then woe betide the nearest civilization. Down pour the
united nomads on the unwarlike, unarmed plains, and there ensues a war of
conquest. Instead of carrying off the booty, the conquerors settle down on the
conquered land, which becomes all booty for them; the villagers and townsmen
are reduced to servitude and tribute-paying, they become hewers of wood and
drawers of water, and the leaders of the nomads become kings and princes,
masters and aristocrats. They too settle down, they learn many of the arts and
refinements of the conquered, they cease to be lean and hungry, but for many
generations they retain traces of their old nomadic habits, they hunt and
indulge in open-air sports, they drive and race chariots, they regard work,
especially agricultural work, as the lot of an inferior race and class.

This in a thousand variations has been one of the main stories in history for
the last seventy centuries or more. In the first history that we can clearly
decipher we find already in all the civilized regions a distinction between a
non-working ruler class and the working mass of the population. And we find too
that after some generations, the aristocrat, having settled down, begins to
respect the arts and refinements and law-abidingness of settlement, and to lose
something of his original hardihood. He intermarries, he patches up a sort of
toleration between conqueror and conquered; he exchanges religious ideas and
learns the lessons upon which soil and climate insist. He becomes a part of the
civilization he has captured. And as he does so, events gather towards a fresh
invasion by the free adventurers of the outer world.[102]


§ 2A

[Illustration: A very early Sumerian stone carving showing Sumerian warriors in
phalanx]

This alternation of settlement, conquest, refinement, fresh conquest,
refinement, is particularly to be noted in the region of the Euphrates and
Tigris, which lay open in every direction to great areas which are not arid
enough to be complete deserts, but which were not fertile enough to support
civilized populations. Perhaps the earliest people to form real cities in this
part of the world, or indeed in any part of the world, were a people of
mysterious origin called the Sumerians. They were neither Semites nor Aryans,
and whence they came we do not know. Whether they were dark whites of Iberian
or Dravidian affinities is less certainly to be denied.[103] They used a kind
of writing which they scratched upon clay, and their language has been
deciphered.[104] It was a language more like the unclassified Caucasic language
groups than any others that now exist. These languages may be connected with
Basque, and may represent what was once a widespread group extending from Spain
and western Europe to eastern India, and reaching southwards to Central Africa.
These people shaved their heads and wore simple tunic-like garments of wool.
They settled first on the lower courses of the great river and not very far
from the Persian Gulf, which in those days ran up for a hundred and thirty
miles[105] and more beyond its present head. They fertilized their fields by
letting water run through irrigation trenches, and they gradually became very
skilful hydraulic engineers; they had cattle, asses, sheep, and goats, but no
horses; their collections of mud huts grew into towns, and their religion
raised up towerlike temple buildings.

Clay, dried in the sun, was a very great fact in the lives of these people.
This lower country of the Euphrates-Tigris valleys had little or no stone. They
built of brick, they made pottery and earthenware images, and they drew and
presently wrote upon thin tile-like cakes of clay. They do not seem to have had
paper or to have used parchment. Their books and memoranda, even their letters,
were potsherds.

At Nippur they built a great tower of brick to their chief god, El-lil (Enlil),
the memory of which is supposed to be preserved in the story of the Tower of
Babel. They seem to have been divided up into city states, which warred among
themselves and maintained for many centuries their military capacity. Their
soldiers carried long spears and shields, and fought in close formation.
Sumerians conquered Sumerians. Sumeria remained unconquered by any stranger
race for a very long period of time indeed. They developed their civilization,
their writing, and their shipping, through a period that may be twice as long
as the whole period from the Christian era to the present time.

The first of all known empires was that founded by the high priest of the god
of the Sumerian city of Erech. It reached, says an inscription at Nippur, from
the Lower (Persian Gulf) to the Upper (Mediterranean or Red?) Sea. Among the
mud heaps of the Euphrates-Tigris valley the record of that vast period of
history, that first half of the Age of Cultivation, is buried. There flourished
the first temples and the first priest-rulers that we know of among mankind.


§ 2B

Upon the western edge of this country appeared nomadic tribes of
Semitic-speaking peoples who traded, raided, and fought with the Sumerians for
many generations. Then arose at last a great leader among these Semites, Sargon
(2750 B.C.),[106] who united them, and not only conquered the Sumerians, but
extended his rule from beyond the Persian Gulf on the east to the Mediterranean
on the west. His own people were called the Akkadians and his empire is called
the Sumerian Akkadian Empire. It endured for over two hundred years.

But though the Semites conquered and gave a king to the Sumerian cities, it was
the Sumerian civilization which prevailed over the simpler Semitic culture. The
newcomers learnt the Sumerian writing (the “cuneiform” writing) and the
Sumerian language; they set up no Semitic writing of their own. The Sumerian
language became for these barbarians the language of knowledge and power, as
Latin was the language of knowledge and power among the barbaric peoples of the
middle ages in Europe. This Sumerian learning had a very great vitality. It was
destined to survive through a long series of conquests and changes that now
began in the valley of the two rivers.


§ 2C

As the people of the Sumerian Akkadian Empire lost their political and military
vigour, fresh inundations of a warlike people began from the east, the
Elamites,[107] while from the west came the Semitic Amorites, pinching the
Sumerian Akkadian Empire between them. The Amorites settled in what was at
first a small up-river town, named Babylon; and after a hundred years of
warfare became masters of all Mesopotamia under a great king, Hammurabi (2100
B.C.), who founded the first Babylonian Empire.

Again came peace and security and a decline in aggressive prowess, and in
another hundred years fresh nomads from the east were invading Babylonia,
bringing with them the horse and the war chariot, and setting up their own king
in Babylon....


§2D

Higher up the Tigris, above the clay lands and with easy supplies of workable
stone, a Semitic people, the Assyrians, while the Sumerians were still
unconquered by the Semites, were settling about a number of cities of which
Assur and Nineveh were the chief. Their peculiar physiognomy, the long nose and
thick lips, was very like that of the commoner type of Polish Jew to-day. They
wore great beards and ringletted long hair, tall caps and long robes. They were
constantly engaged in mutual raiding with the Hittites to the west; they were
conquered by Sargon I and became free again; a certain Tushratta, King of
Mitanni, to the north-west, captured and held their capital, Nineveh, for a
time; they intrigued with Egypt against Babylon and were in the pay of Egypt;
they developed the military art to a very high pitch, and became mighty raiders
and exacters of tribute; and at last, adopting the horse and the war chariot,
they settled accounts for a time with the Hittites, and then, under Tiglath
Pileser I, conquered Babylon for themselves (about 1100 B.C.[108]). But their
hold on the lower, older, and more civilized land was not secure, and Nineveh,
the stone city, as distinguished from Babylon, the brick city, remained their
capital. For many centuries power swayed between Nineveh and Babylon, and
sometimes it was an Assyrian and sometimes a Babylonian who claimed to be “king
of the world.”

For four centuries Assyria was restrained from expansion towards Egypt by a
fresh northward thrust and settlement of another group of Semitic peoples, the
Arameans, whose chief city was Damascus, and whose descendants are the Syrians
of to-day. (There is, we may note, no connection whatever between the words
Assyrian and Syrian. It is an accidental similarity.) Across these Syrians the
Assyrian kings fought for power and expansion south-westward. In 745 B.C. arose
another Tiglath Pileser, Tiglath Pileser III, the Tiglath Pileser of the
Bible.[109] He not only directed the transfer of the Israelites to Media (the
“Lost Ten Tribes” whose ultimate fate has exercised so many curious minds), but
he conquered and ruled Babylon, so founding what historians know as the New
Assyrian Empire. His son, Shalmaneser IV,[110] died during the siege of
Samaria, and was succeeded by a usurper, who, no doubt to flatter Babylonian
susceptibilities, took the ancient Akkadian Sumerian name of Sargon, Sargon II.
He seems to have armed the Assyrian forces for the first time with iron
weapons. It was probably Sargon II who actually carried out the deportation of
the Ten Tribes.

Such shiftings about of population became a very distinctive part of the
political methods of the Assyrian new empire. Whole nations who were difficult
to control in their native country would be shifted en _masse_ to unaccustomed
regions and amidst strange neighbours, where their only hope of survival would
lie in obedience to the supreme power.

[Illustration: Assyrian warrior

(Bas-relief from the palace of Sargon II)]

Sargon’s son, Sennacherib, led the Assyrian hosts to the borders of Egypt.
There Sennacherib’s army was smitten by a pestilence, a disaster described in
the nineteenth chapter of the Second Book of Kings.

“And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote
in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand; and when
they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So
Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at
Nineveh.”[111]



Sennacherib’s grandson, Assurbanipal (called by the Greeks Sardanapalus), did
succeed in conquering and for a time holding lower Egypt.


§2E

The Assyrian Empire lasted only a hundred and fifty years after Sargon II.
Fresh nomadic Semites coming from the south-east, the Chaldeans, assisted by
two Aryan peoples from the north, the Medes and Persians, combined against it,
and took Nineveh in 606 B.C.

The Chaldean Empire, with its capital at Babylon (Second Babylonian Empire),
lasted under Nebuchadnezzar the Great (Nebuchadnezzar II) and his successors
until 539 B.C., when it collapsed before the attack of Cyrus, the founder of
the Persian power....

So the story goes on. In 330 B.C., as we shall tell later in some detail, a
Greek conqueror, Alexander the Great, is looking on the murdered body of the
last of the Persian rulers.

The story of the Tigris and Euphrates civilizations, of which we have given as
yet only the bare outline, is a story of conquest following after conquest, and
each conquest replaces old rulers and ruling classes by new; races like the
Sumerian and the Elamite are swallowed up, their languages vanish, they
interbreed and are lost, the Assyrian melts away into Chaldean and Syrian, the
Hittites become Aryanized and lose distinction, the Semites who swallowed up
the Sumerians give place to Aryan rulers, Medes and Persians appear in the
place of the Elamites, the Aryan Persian language dominates the empire until
the Aryan Greek ousts it from official life. Meanwhile the plough does its work
year by year, the harvests are gathered, the builders build as they are told,
the tradesmen work and acquire fresh devices; the knowledge of writing spreads,
novel things, the horse and wheeled vehicles and iron, are introduced and
become part of the permanent inheritance of mankind; the volume of trade upon
sea and desert increases, men’s ideas widen, and knowledge grows. There are
set-backs, massacres, pestilence; but the story is, on the whole, one of
enlargement. For four thousand years this new thing, civilization, which had
set its root into the soil of the two rivers, grew as a tree grows; now losing
a limb, now stripped by a storm, but always growing and resuming its growth.
After four thousand years the warriors and conquerors were still going to and
fro over this growing thing they did not understand, but men had now (330 B.C.)
got iron, horses, writing and computation, money, a greater variety of foods
and textiles, a wider knowledge of their world.

The time that elapsed between the empire of Sargon I and the conquest of
Babylon by Alexander the Great was as long, be it noted, at the least estimate,
as the time from Alexander the Great to the present day. And before the time of
Sargon, men had been settled in the Sumerian land, living in towns, worshipping
in temples, following an orderly Neolithic agricultural life in an organized
community for at least as long again. “Eridu, Lagash, Ur, Uruk, Larsa, have
already an immemorial past when first they appear in history.”[112]

One of the most difficult things for both the writer and student of history is
to sustain the sense of these time intervals and prevent these ages becoming
shortened by perspective in his imagination. Half the duration of human
civilization and the keys to all its chief institutions are to be found
_before_ Sargon I. Moreover, the reader cannot too often compare the scale of
the dates in these latter fuller pages of man’s history with the succession of
countless generations to which the time diagrams given on pages 14, 60, and 89
bear witness.

