# BOOK III - XIX - § 2
[Metadata]: # {04.05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.05.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

GODS AND STARS, PRIESTS AND KINGS

§ 1. _Nomadic and Settled Religion._ § 2. _The Priest Comes into
History._ § 3. _Priests and the Stars._ § 4. _Priests and the Dawn      of
Learning._ § 5. _King against Priest._ § 6. _How Bel-Marduk      Struggled
against the Kings._ § 7. _The God-Kings of Egypt._ § 8.      _Shi Hwang-ti
Destroys the Books._

# § 2
In all these temples there was a shrine; dominating the shrine there was
commonly a great figure, usually of some monstrous half-animal form, before
which stood an altar for sacrifices. This figure was either regarded as the god
or as the image or symbol of the god, for whose worship the temple existed. And
connected with the temple there were a number, and often a considerable number,
of priests or priestesses, and temple servants, generally wearing a distinctive
costume and forming an important part of the city population. They belonged to
no household, as did the simple priest of the primitive Aryan; they made up a
new kind of household of their own. They were a caste and a class apart,
attracting intelligent recruits from the general population.

The primary duty of this priesthood was concerned with the worship of and the
sacrifices to the god of the temple. And these things were done, not at any
time, but at particular times and seasons. There had come into the life of man
with his herding and agriculture a sense of a difference between the parts of
the year and of a difference between day and day. Men were beginning to
work--and to need days of rest. The temple, by its festivals, kept count. The
temple in the ancient city was like the clock and calendar upon a writing-desk.

But it was a centre of other functions. It was in the early temples that the
records and tallies of events were kept and that writing began. And there was
knowledge there. The people went to the temple not only _en masse_ for
festivals, but individually for help. The early priests were also doctors and
magicians. In the earliest temples we already find those little offerings for
some private and particular end, which are still made in the chapels of
Catholic churches to-day, _ex votos_, little models of hearts relieved and
limbs restored, acknowledgment of prayers answered and accepted vows.

It is clear that here we have that comparatively unimportant element in the
life of the early nomad, the medicine-man, the shrine-keeper, and the memorist,
developed, with the development of the community and as a part of the
development of the community from barbarism to civilized settlement, into
something of very much greater importance. And it is equally evident that those
primitive fears of (and hopes of help from) strange beings, the desire to
propitiate unknown forces, the primitive desire for cleansing and the primitive
craving for power and knowledge have all contributed to crystallize out this
new social fact of the temple.

The temple was accumulated by complex necessities, it grew from many roots and
needs, and the god that dominated the temple was the creation of many
imaginations and made up of all sorts of impulses, ideas, and half ideas. Here
there was a god in which one sort of ideas predominated, and there another. It
is necessary to lay some stress upon this confusion and variety of origin in
gods, because there is a very abundant literature now in existence upon
religious origins, in which a number of writers insist, some on this leading
idea and some on that--we have noted several in our Chapter XII on “Early
Thought”--as though it were the only idea. Professor Max Müller in his time,
for example, harped perpetually on the idea of sun stories and sun worship. He
would have had us think that early man never had lusts or fears, cravings for
power, nightmares or fantasies, but that he meditated perpetually on the
beneficent source of light and life in the sky. Now dawn and sunset are very
moving facts in the daily life, but they are only two among many.

[Illustration:

Set Egyptian god of darkness.

Anubis darkness god.

Typhon wife of Anubis, also known as the Terrible One

The cheerful Bes

J.F.H.]



Early men, three or four hundred generations ago, had brains very like our own.
The fancies of our childhood and youth are perhaps the best clue we have to the
ground-stuff of early religion, and anyone who can recall those early mental
experiences will understand very easily the vagueness, the monstrosity, and the
incoherent variety of the first gods. There were sun gods, no doubt, early in
the history of temples, but there were also hippopotamus gods and hawk gods;
there were cow deities, there were monstrous male and female gods, there were
gods of terror and gods of an adorable quaintness, there were gods who were
nothing but lumps of meteoric stone that had fallen amazingly out of the sky,
and gods who were mere natural stones that had chanced to have a queer and
impressive shape. Some gods, like Marduk of Babylon and the Baal (= the Lord)
of the Phœnicians, Canaanites, and the like, were quite probably at bottom just
legendary wonder beings, such as little boys will invent for themselves to-day.
The early Semites, it is said, as soon as they thought of a god, invented a
wife for him; most of the Egyptian and Babylonian gods were married. But the
gods of the nomadic Semites had not this marrying disposition. Children were
less eagerly sought by the inhabitants of the food-grudging steppes.

Even more natural than to provide a wife for a god is to give him a house to
live in to which offerings can be brought. Of this house the knowing man, the
magician, would naturally become the custodian. A certain seclusion, a certain
aloofness, would add greatly to the prestige of the god. The steps by which the
early temple and the early priesthood developed so soon as an agricultural
population settled and increased are all quite natural and understandable, up
to the stage of the long temple with the image, shrine and altar at one end and
the long nave in which the worshippers stood. And this temple, because it had
records and secrets, because it was a centre of power, advice, and instruction,
because it sought and attracted imaginative and clever people for its service,
naturally became a kind of brain in the growing community. The attitude of the
common people who tilled the fields and herded the beasts towards the temple
would remain simple and credulous. There, rarely seen and so imaginatively
enhanced, lived the god whose approval gave prosperity, whose anger meant
misfortune; he could be propitiated by little presents and the help of his
servants could be obtained. He was wonderful, and of such power and knowledge
that it did not do to be disrespectful to him even in one’s thoughts. Within
the priesthood, however, a certain amount of thinking went on at a rather
higher level than that.


§ 3[136]

And now we have to note a very interesting fact about the chief temples of
Egypt and, so far as we know--because the ruins are not so distinct--of
Babylonia, and that is that they were “oriented”--that is to say, that the same
sort of temple was built so that the shrine and entrance always faced in the
same direction.[137] In Babylonian temples this was most often due east, facing
the sunrise on March 21st and September 21st, the equinoxes; and it is to be
noted that it was at the spring equinox that the Euphrates and Tigris came down
in flood. The Pyramids of Gizeh are also oriented east and west, and the Sphinx
faces due east, but very many of the Egyptian temples to the south of the delta
of the Nile do not point due east, but to the point where the sun rises at the
longest day--and in Egypt the inundation comes close to that date. Others,
however, pointed nearly northward, and others again pointed to the rising of
the star Sirius or to the rising-point of other conspicuous stars. The fact of
orientation links up with the fact that there early arose a close association
between various gods and the sun and various fixed stars. Whatever the mass of
people outside were thinking, the priests of the temples were beginning to link
the movements of those heavenly bodies with the power in the shrine. They were
thinking about the gods they served and thinking new meanings into them. They
were brooding upon the mystery of the stars. It was very natural for them to
suppose that these shining bodies, so irregularly distributed and circling so
solemnly and silently, must be charged with portents to mankind.

[Illustration:

Thoth-lunus god of letters and all learning

Hathor (Isis) the Egyptian cow goddess ...

Chnemu creator-god, married to Hekt, a frog goddess. ]



Among other things, this orientation of the temples served to fix and help the
great annual festival of the New Year. On one morning in the year, and one
morning alone, in a temple oriented to the rising-place of the sun at Midsummer
Day, the sun’s first rays would smite down through the gloom of the temple and
the long alley of the temple pillars, and light up the god above the altar and
irradiate him with glory. The narrow, darkened structure of the ancient temples
seems to be deliberately planned for such an effect. No doubt the people were
gathered in the darkness before the dawn; in the darkness there was chanting
and perhaps the offering of sacrifices; the god alone stood mute and invisible.
Prayers and invocations would be made. Then upon the eyes of the worshippers,
sensitized by the darkness, as the sun rose behind them, the god would suddenly
shine.

So, at least, one explanation of orientation is found by such students of
orientation as Sir Norman Lockyer.[138] Not only is orientation apparent in
most of the temples of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, and the east, it is found in
the Greek temples; Stonehenge is oriented to the midsummer sunrise, and so are
most of the megalithic circles of Europe; the Temple of Heaven in Peking is
oriented to midwinter. In the days of the Chinese Empire, up to a few years
ago, one of the most important of all the duties of the Emperor of China was to
sacrifice and pray in this temple upon midwinter’s day for a propitious year.

The Egyptian priests had mapped out the stars into the constellations, and
divided up the zodiac into twelve signs, by 3000 B.C. ...

