# INTRODUCTION
[Metadata]: # {01}
[Descriptor]: # {01}
[Author]: # {wells}
# INTRODUCTION
“_A philosophy of the history of the human race, worthy of its name, must begin
with the heavens and descend to the earth, must be charged with the conviction
that all existence is one--a single conception sustained from beginning to end
upon one identical law._”--FRIEDRICH RATZEL.


This _Outline of History_ is an attempt to tell, truly and clearly, in one
continuous narrative, the whole story of life and mankind so far as it is known
to-day. It is written plainly for the general reader, but its aim goes beyond
its use as merely interesting reading matter. There is a feeling abroad that
the teaching of history considered as a part of general education is in an
unsatisfactory condition, and particularly that the ordinary treatment of this
“subject” by the class and teacher and examiner is too partial and narrow. But
the desire to extend the general range of historical ideas is confronted by the
argument that the available time for instruction is already consumed by that
partial and narrow treatment, and that therefore, however desirable this
extension of range may be, it is in practice impossible. If an Englishman, for
example, has found the history of England quite enough for his powers of
assimilation, then it seems hopeless to expect his sons and daughters to master
universal history, if that is to consist of the history of England, plus the
history of France, plus the history of Germany, plus the history of Russia, and
so on. To which the only possible answer is that universal history is at once
something more and something less than the aggregate of the national histories
to which we are accustomed, that it must be approached in a different spirit
and dealt with in a different manner. This book seeks to justify that answer.
It has been written primarily to show that _history as one whole_ is amenable
to a more broad and comprehensive handling than is the history of special
nations and periods, a broader handling that will bring it within the normal
limitations of time and energy set to the reading and education of an ordinary
citizen. This outline deals with ages and races and nations, where the ordinary
history deals with reigns and pedigrees and campaigns; but it will not be found
to be more crowded with names and dates, nor more difficult to follow and
understand. History is no exception amongst the sciences; as the gaps fill in,
the outline simplifies; as the outlook broadens, the clustering multitude of
details dissolves into general laws. And many topics of quite primary interest
to mankind, the first appearance and the growth of scientific knowledge for
example, and its effects upon human life, the elaboration of the ideas of money
and credit, or the story of the origins and spread and influence of
Christianity, which must be treated fragmentarily or by elaborate digressions
in any partial history, arise and flow completely and naturally in one general
record of the world in which we live.

The need for a common knowledge of the general facts of human history
throughout the world has become very evident during the tragic happenings of
the last few years. Swifter means of communication have brought all men closer
to one another for good or for evil. War becomes a universal disaster, blind
and monstrously destructive; it bombs the baby in its cradle and sinks the
food-ships that cater for the non-combatant and the neutral. There can be no
peace now, we realize, but a common peace in all the world; no prosperity but a
general prosperity. But _there can be no common peace and prosperity without
common historical ideas_. Without such ideas to hold them together in
harmonious co-operation, with nothing but narrow, selfish, and conflicting
nationalist traditions, races and peoples are bound to drift towards conflict
and destruction. This truth, which was apparent to that great philosopher Kant
a century or more ago--it is the gist of his tract upon universal peace--is now
plain to the man in the street. Our internal policies and our economic and
social ideas are profoundly vitiated at present by wrong and fantastic ideas of
the origin and historical relationship of social classes. A sense of history as
the common adventure of all mankind is as necessary for peace within as it is
for peace between the nations.

Such are the views of history that this _Outline_ seeks to realize. It is an
attempt to tell how our present state of affairs, this distressed and
multifarious human life about us, arose in the course of vast ages and out of
the inanimate clash of matter, and to estimate the quality and amount and range
of the hopes with which it now faces its destiny. It is one experimental
contribution to a great and urgently necessary educational reformation, which
must ultimately restore universal history, revised, corrected, and brought up
to date, to its proper place and use as the backbone of a general education. We
say “restore,” because all the great cultures of the world hitherto, Judaism
and Christianity in the Bible, Islam in the Koran, have used some sort of
cosmogony and world history as a basis. It may indeed be argued that without
such a basis any really binding culture of men is inconceivable. Without it we
are a chaos.

Remarkably few sketches of universal history by one single author have been
written. One book that has influenced the writer very strongly is Winwood
Reade’s _Martyrdom of Man_. This _dates_, as people say, nowadays, and it has a
fine gloom of its own, but it is still an extraordinarily inspiring
presentation of human history as one consistent process. Mr. F. S. Marvin’s
_Living Past_ is also an admirable summary of human progress. There is a good
_General History of the World_ in one volume by Mr. Oscar Browning. America has
recently produced two well-illustrated and up-to-date class books, Breasted’s
_Ancient Times_ and Robinson’s _Medieval and Modern Times_, which together give
a very good idea of the story of mankind since the beginning of human
societies. There are, moreover, quite a number of nominally Universal Histories
in existence, but they are really not histories at all, they are encyclopædias
of history; they lack the unity of presentation attainable only when the whole
subject has been passed through one single mind. These universal histories are
compilations, assemblies of separate national or regional histories by
different hands, the parts being necessarily unequal in merit and authority and
disproportionate one to another. Several such universal histories in thirty or
forty volumes or so, adorned with allegorical title pages and illustrated by
folding maps and plans of Noah’s Ark, Solomon’s Temple, and the Tower of Babel,
were produced for the libraries of gentlemen in the eighteenth century.
Helmolt’s _World History_, in eight massive volumes, is a modern compilation of
the same sort, very useful for reference and richly illustrated, but far better
in its parts than as a whole. Another such collection is the _Historians’
History of the World_ in 25 volumes. _The Encyclopædia Britannica_ contains, of
course, a complete encyclopædia of history within itself, and is the most
modern of all such collections.[1] F. Ratzel’s _History of Mankind_, in spite
of the promise of its title, is mainly a natural history of man, though it is
rich with suggestions upon the nature and development of civilization. That
publication and Miss Ellen Churchill Semple’s _Influence of Geographical
Environment_, based on Ratzel’s work, are quoted in this _Outline_, and have
had considerable influence upon its plan. F. Ratzel would indeed have been the
ideal author for such a book as our present one. Unfortunately neither he nor
any other ideal author was available.[2]

The writer will offer no apology for making this experiment. His
disqualifications are manifest. But such work needs to be done by as many
people as possible, he was free to make his contribution, and he was greatly
attracted by the task. He has read sedulously and made the utmost use of all
the help he could obtain. There is not a chapter that has not been examined by
some more competent person than himself and very carefully revised. He has
particularly to thank his friends Sir E. Ray Lankester, Sir H. H. Johnston,
Professor Gilbert Murray, and Mr. Ernest Barker for much counsel and direction
and editorial help. Mr. Philip Guedalla has toiled most efficiently and kindly
through all the proofs. Mr. A. Allison, Professor T. W. Arnold, Mr. Arnold
Bennett, the Rev. A. H. Trevor Benson, Mr. Aodh de Blacam, Mr. Laurence Binyon,
the Rev. G. W. Broomfield, Sir William Bull, Mr. L. Cranmer Byng, Mr. A. J. D.
Campbell, Mr. A. Y. Campbell, Mr. L. Y. Chen, Mr. A. R. Cowan, Mr. O. G. S.
Crawford, Dr. W. S. Culbertson, Mr. R. Langton Cole, Mr. B. G. Collins, Mr. J.
J. L. Duyvendak, Mr. O. W. Ellis, Mr. G. S. Ferrier, Mr. David Freeman, Mr. S.
N. Fu, Mr. G. B. Gloyne, Sir Richard Gregory, Mr. F. H. Hayward, Mr. Sydney
Herbert, Dr. Fr. Krupicka, Mr. H. Lang Jones, Mr. C. H. B. Laughton, Mr. B. I.
Macalpin, Mr. G. H. Mair, Mr. F. S. Marvin, Mr. J. S. Mayhew, Mr. B. Stafford
Morse, Professor J. L. Myres, the Hon. W. Ormsby-Gore, Sir Sydney Olivier, Mr.
R. I. Pocock, Mr. J. Pringle, Mr. W. H. R. Rivers, Sir Denison Ross, Dr. E. J.
Russell, Dr. Charles Singer, Mr. A. St. George Sanford, Dr. C. O. Stallybrass,
Mr. G. H. Walsh, Mr. G. P. Wells, Miss Rebecca West, and Mr. George Whale have
all to be thanked for help, either by reading parts of the MS. or by pointing
out errors in the published parts, making suggestions, answering questions, or
giving advice. The amount of friendly and sympathetic assistance the writer has
received, often from very busy people, has been a quite extraordinary
experience. He has met with scarcely a single instance of irritation or
impatience on the part of specialists whose domains he has invaded and
traversed in what must have seemed to many of them an exasperatingly impudent
and superficial way. Numerous other helpful correspondents have pointed out
printer’s errors and minor slips in the serial publication which preceded this
book edition, and they have added many useful items of information, and to
those writers also the warmest thanks are due. But of course none of these
generous helpers are to be held responsible for the judgments, tone,
arrangement, or writing of this _Outline_. In the relative importance of the
parts, in the moral and political implications of the story, the final decision
has necessarily fallen to the writer. The problem of illustrations was a very
difficult one for him, for he had had no previous experience in the production
of an illustrated book. In Mr. J. F. Horrabin he has had the good fortune to
find not only an illustrator but a collaborator. Mr. Horrabin has spared no
pains to make this work informative and exact. His maps and drawings are a part
of the text, the most vital and decorative part. Some of them, the hypothetical
maps, for example, of the western world at the end of the last glacial age,
during the “pluvial age” and 12,000 years ago, and the migration map of the
Barbarian invaders of the Roman Empire, represent the reading and inquiry of
many laborious days.

The index to this edition is the work of Mr. Strickland Gibson of Oxford.
Several correspondents have asked for a pronouncing index and accordingly this
has been provided.

The writer owes a word of thanks to that living index of printed books, Mr. J.
F. Cox of the London Library. He would also like to acknowledge here the help
he has received from Mrs. Wells. Without her labour in typing and re-typing the
drafts of the various chapters as they have been revised and amended, in
checking references, finding suitable quotations, hunting up illustrations, and
keeping in order the whole mass of material for this history, and without her
constant help and watchful criticism, its completion would have been
impossible.

[Illustration: H. G. Wells]




SCHEME OF CONTENTS


BOOK I

THE MAKING OF OUR WORLD

PAGE
CHAPTER I. THE EARTH IN SPACE AND TIME                                 3

CHAPTER II. THE RECORD OF THE ROCKS

§ 1. The first living things                                           7

§ 2. How old is the world?                                            13

CHAPTER III. NATURAL SELECTION AND THE CHANGES OF SPECIES             16

CHAPTER IV. THE INVASION OF THE DRY LAND BY LIFE

§ 1. Life and water                                                   23

§ 2. The earliest animals                                             25

CHAPTER V. CHANGES IN THE WORLD’S CLIMATE

§ 1. Why life must change continually                                 29

§ 2. The sun a steadfast star                                         34

§ 3. Changes from within the earth                                    35

§ 4. Life may control change                                          36

CHAPTER VI. THE AGE OF REPTILES

§ 1. The age of lowland life                                          38

§ 2. Flying dragons                                                   43

§ 3. The first birds                                                  43

§ 4. An age of hardship and death                                     44

§ 5. The first appearance of fur and feathers                         47

CHAPTER VII. THE AGE OF MAMMALS

§ 1. A new age of life                                                51

§ 2. Tradition comes into the world                                   52

§ 3. An age of brain growth                                           56

§ 4. The world grows hard again                                       57

§ 5. Chronology of the Ice Age                                        59


BOOK II

THE MAKING OF MEN

CHAPTER VIII. THE ANCESTRY OF MAN

§ 1. Man descended from a walking ape                                 62

§ 2. First traces of man-like creatures                               68

§ 3. The Heidelberg sub-man                                           69

§ 4. The Piltdown sub-man                                             70

§ 5. The riddle of the Piltdown remains                               72

CHAPTER IX. THE NEANDERTHAL MEN, AN EXTINCT RACE. (THE EARLY PALÆOLITHIC AGE)

§ 1. The world 50,000 years ago                                       75

§ 2. The daily life of the first men                                  79

§ 3. The last Palæolithic men                                         84

CHAPTER X. THE LATER POSTGLACIAL PALÆOLITHIC MEN, THE FIRST TRUE MEN. (LATER
PALÆOLITHIC AGE)

§ 1. The coming of men like ourselves                                 86

§ 2. Subdivision of the Later Palæolithic                             95

§ 3. The earliest true men were clever savages                        98

§ 4. Hunters give place to herdsmen                                  101

§ 5. No sub-men in America                                           102

CHAPTER XI. NEOLITHIC MAN IN EUROPE

§ 1. The age of cultivation begins                                   104

§ 2. Where did the Neolithic culture arise?                          108

§ 3. Everyday Neolithic life                                         109

§ 4. How did sowing begin?                                           116

§ 5. Primitive trade                                                 118

§ 6. The flooding of the Mediterranean Valley                        118

CHAPTER XII. EARLY THOUGHT

§ 1. Primitive philosophy                                            122

§ 2. The Old Man in religion                                         125

§ 3. Fear and hope in religion                                       126

§ 4. Stars and seasons                                               127

§ 5. Story-telling and myth-making                                   129

§ 6. Complex origins of religion                                     130

CHAPTER XIII. THE RACES OF MANKIND

§ 1. Is mankind still differentiating?                               136

§ 2. The main races of mankind                                       140

§ 3. Was there an Alpine race?                                       142

§ 4. The Heliolithic culture of the Brunet peoples                   146

§ 5. How existing races may be related to each other                 148

CHAPTER XIV. THE LANGUAGES OF MANKIND

§ 1. No one primitive language                                       150

§ 2. The Aryan languages                                             151

§ 3. The Semitic languages                                           153

§ 4. The Hamitic languages                                           154

§ 5. The Ural-Altaic languages                                       156

§ 6. The Chinese languages                                           157

§ 7. Other language groups                                           157

§ 8. Submerged and lost languages                                    161

§ 9. How languages may be related                                    163


BOOK III

THE DAWN OF HISTORY

CHAPTER XV. THE ARYAN-SPEAKING PEOPLES IN PREHISTORIC TIMES

§ 1. The spreading of the Aryan-speakers                             167

§ 2. Primitive Aryan life                                            169

§ 3. Early Aryan daily life                                          176

CHAPTER XVI. THE FIRST CIVILIZATIONS

§ 1. Early cities and early nomads                                   183

§ 2A. The riddle of the Sumerians                                    188

§ 2B. The empire of Sargon the First                                 191

§ 2C. The empire of Hammurabi                                        191

§ 2D. The Assyrians and their empire                                 192

§ 2E. The Chaldean empire                                            194

§ 3. The early history of Egypt                                      195

§ 4. The early civilization of India                                 201

§ 5. The early history of China                                      201

§ 6. While the civilizations were growing                            206

CHAPTER XVII. SEA PEOPLES AND TRADING PEOPLES

§ 1. The earliest ships and sailors                                  209

§ 2. The Ægean cities before history                                 213

§ 3. The first voyages of exploration                                217

§ 4. Early traders                                                   218

§ 5. Early travellers                                                220

CHAPTER XVIII. WRITING

§ 1. Picture writing                                                 223

§ 2. Syllable writing                                                227

§ 3. Alphabet writing                                                228

§ 4. The place of writing in human life                              229

CHAPTER XIX. GODS AND STARS, PRIESTS AND KINGS

§ 1. Nomadic and settled religion                                    232

§ 2. The priest comes into history                                   234

§ 3. Priests and the stars                                           238

§ 4. Priests and the dawn of learning                                240

§ 5. King against priests                                            241

§ 6. How Bel-Marduk struggled against the kings                      245

§ 7. The god-kings of Egypt                                          248

§ 8. Shi Hwang-ti destroys the books                                 252

CHAPTER XX. SERFS, SLAVES, SOCIAL CLASSES, AND FREE INDIVIDUALS

§ 1. The common man in ancient times                                 254

§ 2. The earliest slaves                                             256

§ 3. The first “independent” persons                                 259

§ 4. Social classes three thousand years ago                         262

§ 5. Classes hardening into castes                                   266

§ 6. Caste in India                                                  268

§ 7. The system of the Mandarins                                     270

§ 8. A summary of five thousand years                                272


BOOK IV

JUDEA, GREECE, AND INDIA

CHAPTER XXI. THE HEBREW SCRIPTURES AND THE PROPHETS

§ 1. The place of the Israelites in history                          277

§ 2. Saul, David, and Solomon                                        286

§ 3. The Jews a people of mixed origin                               292

§ 4. The importance of the Hebrew prophets                           294

CHAPTER XXII. THE GREEKS AND THE PERSIANS

§ 1. The Hellenic peoples                                            298

§ 2. Distinctive features of the Hellenic civilization               304

§ 3. Monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy in Greece                  307

§ 4. The kingdom of Lydia                                            315

§ 5. The rise of the Persians in the East                            316

§ 6. The story of Crœsus                                             320

§ 7. Darius invades Russia                                           326

§ 8. The battle of Marathon                                          332

§ 9. Thermopylæ and Salamis                                          334

§ 10. Platæa and Mycale                                              340

CHAPTER XXIII.  GREEK THOUGHT AND LITERATURE

§ 1. The Athens of Pericles                                          343

§ 2. Socrates                                                        350

§ 3. What was the quality of the common Athenians?                   352

§ 4. Greek tragedy and comedy                                        354

§ 5. Plato and the Academy                                           355

§ 6. Aristotle and the Lyceum                                        357

§ 7. Philosophy becomes unworldly                                    359

§ 8. The quality and limitations of Greek thought                    360

CHAPTER XXIV. THE CAREER OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

§ 1. Philip of Macedonia                                             367

§ 2. The murder of King Philip                                       373

§ 3. Alexander’s first conquests                                     377

§ 4. The wanderings of Alexander                                     385

§ 5. Was Alexander indeed great?                                     389

§ 6. The successors of Alexander                                     395

§ 7. Pergamum a refuge of culture                                    396

§ 8. Alexander as a portent of world unity                           397

CHAPTER XXV. SCIENCE AND RELIGION AT ALEXANDRIA

§ 1. The science of Alexandria                                       401

§ 2. Philosophy of Alexandria                                        410

§ 3. Alexandria as a factory of religions                            410

CHAPTER XXVI. THE RISE AND SPREAD OF BUDDHISM

§ 1. The story of Gautama                                            415

§ 2. Teaching and legend in conflict                                 421

§ 3. The gospel of Gautama Buddha                                    422

§ 4. Buddhism and Asoka                                              426

§ 5. Two great Chinese teachers                                      433

§ 6. The corruptions of Buddhism                                     438

§ 7. The present range of Buddhism                                   440


BOOK V

THE RISE AND COLLAPSE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

CHAPTER XXVII. THE TWO WESTERN REPUBLICS

§ 1. The beginnings of the Latins                                    445

§ 2. A new sort of state                                             454

§ 3. The Carthaginian republic of rich men                           466

§ 4. The First Punic War                                             467

§ 5. Cato the Elder and the spirit of Cato                           471

§ 6. The Second Punic War                                            475

§ 7. The Third Punic War                                             480

§ 8. How the Punic War undermined Roman liberty                      485

§ 9. Comparison of the Roman republic with a modern state            486

CHAPTER XXVIII. FROM TIBERIUS GRACCHUS TO THE GOD EMPEROR IN ROME

§ 1. The science of thwarting the common man                         493

§ 2. Finance in the Roman state                                      496

§ 3. The last years of republican politics                           499

§ 4. The era of the adventurer generals                              505

§ 5. Caius Julius Cæsar and his death                                509

§ 6. The end of the republic                                         513

§ 7. Why the Roman republic failed                                   516

CHAPTER XXIX. THE CÆSARS BETWEEN THE SEA AND THE GREAT PLAINS OF THE OLD WORLD

§ 1. A short catalogue of emperors                                    52

§ 2. Roman civilization at its zenith                                529

§ 3. Limitations of the Roman mind                                   539

§ 4. The stir of the great plains                                    541

§ 5. The Western (true Roman) Empire crumples up                     552

§ 6. The Eastern (revived Hellenic) Empire                           560


BOOK VI

CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM

CHAPTER XXX. THE BEGINNINGS, THE RISE, AND THE DIVISIONS OF CHRISTIANITY

§ 1. Judea at the Christian era                                      569

§ 2. The teachings of Jesus of Nazareth                              573

§ 3. The universal religions                                         582

§ 4. The crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth                            584

§ 5. Doctrines added to the teachings of Jesus                       586

§ 6. The struggles and persecutions of Christianity                  594

§ 7. Constantine the Great                                           598

§ 8. The establishment of official Christianity                      601

§ 9. The map of Europe, A.D. 500                                     605

§ 10. The salvation of learning by Christianity                      609

CHAPTER XXXI. SEVEN CENTURIES IN ASIA (CIRCA 50 B.C. TO A.D. 650)

§ 1. Justinian the Great                                             614

§ 2. The Sassanid Empire in Persia                                   616

§ 3. The decay of Syria under the Sassanids                          619

§ 4. The first message from Islam                                    623

§ 5. Zoroaster and Mani                                              624

§ 6. Hunnish peoples in Central Asia and India                       627

§ 7. The great age of China                                          630

§ 8. Intellectual fetters of China                                   635

§ 9. The travels of Yuan Chwang                                      642




LIST OF MAPS AND ILLUSTRATIONS


PAGE

Life in the Early Palæozoic                                           11

Time-chart from Earliest Life to 40,000,000 Years Ago                 14

Life in the Later Palæozoic Age                                       19

Australian Lung Fish                                                  26

Some Reptiles of the Late Palæozoic Age                               27

Astronomical Variations Affecting Climate                             33

Some Mesozoic Reptiles                                                40

Later Mesozoic Reptiles                                               42

Pterodactyls and Archæopteryx                                         45

Hesperornis                                                           48

Some Oligocene Mammals                                                53

Miocene Mammals                                                       58

Time-diagram of the Glacial Ages                                      60

Early Pleistocene Animals, Contemporary with Earliest Man             64

The Sub-Man Pithecanthropus                                           65

The Riddle of the Piltdown Sub-Man                                    71

Map of Europe 50,000 Years Ago                                        77

Neanderthal Man                                                       78

Early Stone Implements                                                81

Australia and the Western Pacific in the Glacial Age                  82

Cro-magnon Man                                                        87

Europe and Western Asia in the Later Palæolithic Age                  89

Reindeer Age Articles                                                 90

A Reindeer Age Masterpiece                                            93

Reindeer Age Engravings and Carvings                                  94

Diagram of the Estimated Duration of the True Human Periods           97

Neolithic Implements                                                 107

Restoration of a Lake Dwelling                                       111

Pottery from Lake Dwellings                                          112

Hut Urns                                                             115

A Menhir of the Neolithic Period                                     128

Bronze Age Implements                                                132

Diagram Showing the Duration of the Neolithic Period                 133

Heads of Australoid Types                                            139

Bushwoman                                                            141

Negro Types                                                          142

Mongolian Types                                                      143

Caucasian Types                                                      144

Map of Europe, Asia, Africa 15,000 Years Ago                         145

The Swastika                                                         147

Relationship of Human Races (Diagrammatic Summary)                   149

Possible Development of Languages                                    155

Racial Types (after Champollion)                                     163

Combat between Menelaus and Hector                                   176

Archaic Horses and Chariots                                          178

The Cradle of Western Civilization                                   185

Sumerian Warriors in Phalanx                                         189

Assyrian Warrior (_temp._ Sargon II)                                 193

Time-chart 6000 B.C. to A.D.                                         196

The Cradle of Chinese Civilization (Map)                             202

Boats on Nile about 2500 B.C.                                        211

Egyptian Ship on Red Sea, 1250 B.C.                                  212

Ægean Civilization (Map)                                             214

A Votary of the Snake Goddess                                        215

American Indian Picture-Writing                                      225

Egyptian Gods--Set, Anubis, Typhon, Bes                              236

Egyptian Gods--Thoth-lunus, Hathor, Chnemu                           239

An Assyrian King and His Chief Minister                              243

Pharaoh Chephren                                                     248

Pharaoh Rameses III as Osiris (Sarcophagus relief)                   249

Pharaoh Akhnaton                                                     251

Egyptian Peasants (Pyramid Age)                                      257

Brawl among Egyptian Boatmen (Pyramid Age)                           260

Egyptian Social Types (From Tombs)                                   261

The Land of the Hebrews                                              280

Aryan-speaking Peoples 1000-500 B.C. (Map)                           301

Hellenic Races 1000-800 B.C. (Map)                                   302

Greek Sea Fight, 550 B.C.                                            303

Rowers in an Athenian Warship, 400 B.C.                              306

Scythian Types                                                       319

Median and Second Babylonian Empires (in Nebuchadnezzar’s Reign)     321

The Empire of Darius                                                 329

Wars of the Greeks and Persians (Map)                                333

Athenian Foot-soldier                                                334

Persian Body-guard (from Frieze at Susa)                             338

The World According to Herodotus                                     341

Athene of the Parthenon                                              348

Philip of Macedon                                                    368

Growth of Macedonia under Philip                                     371

Macedonian Warrior (bas-relief from Pella)                           373

Campaigns of Alexander the Great                                     381

Alexander the Great                                                  389

Break-up of Alexander’s Empire                                       393

Seleucus I                                                           395

Later State of Alexander’s Empire                                    398

The World According to Eratosthenes, 200 B.C.                        405

The Known World, about 250 B.C.                                      406

Isis and Horus                                                       413

Serapis                                                              414

The Rise of Buddhism                                                 419

Hariti                                                               428

Chinese Image of Kuan-yin                                            429

The Spread of Buddhism                                               432

Indian Gods--Vishnu, Brahma, Siva                                    437

Indian Gods--Krishna, Kali, Ganesa                                   439

The Western Mediterranean, 800-600 B.C.                              446

Early Latium                                                         447

Burning the Dead: Etruscan Ceremony                                  449

Statuette of a Gaul                                                  450

Roman Power after the Samnite Wars                                   451

Samnite Warriors                                                     452

Italy after 275 B.C.                                                 453

Roman Coin Celebrating the Victory over Pyrrhus                      455

Mercury                                                              457

Carthaginian Coins                                                   468

Roman _As_                                                           471

Rome and its Alliances, 150 B.C.                                     481

Gladiators                                                           489

Roman Power, 50 B.C.                                                 506

Julius Cæsar                                                         512

Roman Empire at Death of Augustus                                    518

Roman Empire in Time of Trajan                                       524

Asia and Europe: Life of the Period (Map)                            544

Central Asia, 200-100 B.C.                                           547

Tracks of Migrating and Raiding Peoples, 1-700 A.D.                  555

Eastern Roman Empire                                                 561

Constantinople (Maps to show value of its position)                  563

Galilee                                                              571

Map of Europe, 500 A.D.                                              608

The Eastern Empire and the Sassanids                                 620

Asia Minor, Syria, and Mesopotamia                                   622

Ephthalite Coin                                                      629

Chinese Empire, Tang Dynasty                                         633

Yuan Chwang’s Route from China to India                              643

