# BOOK VIII - XXXVII - § 12
[Metadata]: # {10.02.10}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02.10}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICS OF AMERICA AND FRANCE

§ 1. _Inconveniences of the Great Power System._ § 2. _The Thirteen
Colonies before Their Revolt._ § 3. _Civil War is Forced upon the
Colonies._ § 4. _The War of Independence._ § 5. _The Constitution      of the
United States._ § 6. _Primitive Features of the United      States
Constitution._ § 7. _Revolutionary Ideas in France._ § 8.      _The Revolution
of the Year 1789._ § 9. _The French “Crowned      Republic” of ‘89-91._ § 10.
_The Revolutions of the Jacobins._ §      11. _The Jacobin Republic, 1792-94._
§ 12. _The Directory._ § 13.      _The Pause in Reconstruction and the Dawn of
Modern Socialism._


§ 1[418]

When Gibbon, nearly a century and a half ago, was congratulating the world of
refined and educated people that the age of great political and social
catastrophes was past, he was neglecting many signs which we--in the wisdom of
accomplished facts--could have told him portended far heavier jolts and
dislocations than any he foresaw. We have told how the struggle of the
sixteenth and seventeenth-century princes for ascendancies and advantages
developed into a more cunning and complicated struggle of foreign offices,
masquerading as idealized “Great Powers,” as the eighteenth century wore on.
The intricate and pretentious art of diplomacy developed. The “Prince” ceased
to be a single and secretive Machiavellian schemer, and became merely the
crowned symbol of a Machiavellian scheme. Prussia, Russia, and Austria fell
upon and divided Poland. France was baffled in profound schemes against Spain.
Britain circumvented the “designs of France” in America and acquired Canada,
and got the better of France in India. And then a remarkable thing occurred, a
thing very shocking to European diplomacy. The British colonies in America
flatly refused to have further part or lot in this game of “Great Powers.” They
objected that they had no voice and no great interest in these European schemes
and conflicts, and they refused to bear any portion of the burthen of taxation
these foreign policies entailed.

Of course this decision did not flash out complete and finished from the
American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the eighteenth
century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an entire
willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to leave foreign
affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But there was an equally
strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be neither taxed nor interfered
with in their ordinary pursuits. These are incompatible wishes. Common men
cannot shirk world politics and at the same time enjoy private freedom; but it
has taken them countless generations to learn this. The first impulse in the
American revolt against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against the taxation and interference that followed necessarily from
“foreign policy” without any clear recognition of what was involved in that
objection. It was only when the revolt was consummated that the people of the
American colonies recognized at all clearly that they had repudiated the Great
Power view of life. The sentence in which that repudiation was expressed was
Washington’s injunction to “avoid entangling alliances.” From his time until
the year 1917 the united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated
and independent as the United States of America, stood apart altogether from
the blood-stained intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign offices. Soon
after (1810-1823) they were able to extend their principle of detachment to the
rest of the continent, and to make all the New World “out of bounds” for the
scheming expansionists of the old. When at length, in 1917, they were obliged
to re-enter the arena of world politics, it was to bring the new spirit and new
aims their aloofness had enabled them to develop into the tangle of
international relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof.
Since the treaty of Westphalia (1648), the confederated states of Switzerland,
in their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion from the
schemes of kings and empires.

But since the North American peoples are now to play an increasingly important
part in our history, it will be well to devote a little more attention than we
have hitherto given to their development. We have already glanced at this story
in § 8 of the preceding chapter. We will now tell a little more fully--though
still in the barest outline--what these colonies were, whose recalcitrance was
so disconcerting to the king and ministers of Great Britain in their diplomatic
game against the rest of mankind.[419]

# § 12
It witnesses to the immense vitality and the profound rightness of the flood of
new ideals and intentions that the French Revolution had released into the
world of practical endeavour, that it could still flow in a creative torrent
after it had been caricatured and mocked in the grotesque personality and
career of Robespierre. He had shown its deepest thoughts, he had displayed
anticipations of its methods and conclusions, through the green and distorting
lenses of his preposterous vanity and egotism, he had smeared and blackened all
its hope and promise with blood and horror, and the power of these ideas was
not destroyed. They stood the extreme tests of ridiculous and horrible
presentation. After his downfall, the Republic still ruled unassailable.
Leaderless, for his successors were a group of crafty or commonplace men, the
European republic struggled on, and presently fell and rose again, and fell and
rose and still struggles, entangled but invincible.

And it is well to remind the reader here of the real dimensions of this phase
of the Terror, which strikes so vividly upon the imagination and which has
therefore been enormously exaggerated relatively to the rest of the revolution.
From 1789 to late in 1791 the French Revolution was an orderly process, and
from the summer of 1794 the Republic was an orderly and victorious state. The
Terror was not the work of the whole country, but of the town mob which owed
its existence and its savagery to the misrule and social injustice of the
ancient régime; and the explosion of the Terror could have happened only
through the persistent treacherous disloyalty of the royalists which, while it
raised the extremists to frenzy, disinclined the mass of moderate republicans
from any intervention. The best men were busy fighting the Austrians and
royalists on the frontier. Altogether, we must remember, the total of the
killed in the Terror amounted to a few thousands, and among those thousands
there were certainly a great number of active antagonists whom the Republic, by
all the standards of that time, was entitled to kill. It included such traitors
and mischief-makers as Philip, Duke of Orleans, of the Palais Royal, who had
voted for the death of Louis XVI. More lives were wasted by the British
generals alone on the opening day of what is known as the Somme offensive of
July, 1916, than in the whole French revolution from start to finish. We hear
so much about the martyrs of the French Terror because they were notable,
well-connected people, and because there has been a sort of propaganda of their
sufferings. But let us balance against them in our minds what was going on in
the prisons of the world generally at that time. In Britain and America, while
the Terror ruled in France, far more people were slaughtered for offences--very
often quite trivial offences--against property than were condemned by the
Revolutionary Tribunal for treason against the State. Of course, they were very
common people indeed, but in their rough way they suffered. A girl was hung in
Massachusetts in 1789 for forcibly taking the hat, shoes, and buckles of
another girl she had met in the street.[447] Again, Howard the philanthropist
(about 1773) found a number of perfectly innocent people detained in the
English prisons who had been tried and acquitted, but were unable to pay the
gaoler’s fees. And these prisons were filthy places under no effective control.
Torture was still in use in the Hanoverian dominions of his Britannic majesty
King George III. It had been in use in France up to the time of the National
Assembly. These things mark the level of the age. It is not on record that
anyone was deliberately tortured by the French revolutionaries during the
Terror. Those few hundreds of French gentlefolk fell into a pit that most of
them had been well content should exist for others. It was tragic, but not, by
the scale of universal history, a great tragedy. The common man in France was
more free, better off, and happier during the “Terror” than he had been in
1787.

The story of the Republic after the summer of 1794 becomes a tangled story of
political groups aiming at everything from a radical republic to a royalist
reaction, but pervaded by a general desire for some definite working
arrangement even at the price of considerable concessions. There was a series
of insurrections of the Jacobins and of the royalists, there seems to have been
what we should call nowadays a hooligan class in Paris which was quite ready to
turn out to fight and loot on either side; nevertheless the Convention produced
a government, the Directory of five members, which held France together for
five years. The last, most threatening revolt of all, in October, 1795, was
suppressed with great skill and decision by a rising young general, Napoleon
Bonaparte.

The Directory was victorious abroad, but uncreative at home; its members were
far too anxious to stick to the sweets and glories of office to prepare a
constitution that would supersede them, and far too dishonest to handle the
task of financial and economic reconstruction demanded by the condition of
France. We need only note two of their names, Carnot, who was an honest
republican, and Barras, who was conspicuously a rogue. Their reign of five
years formed a curious interlude in this history of great changes. They took
things as they found them. The propagandist zeal of the revolution carried the
French armies into Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, south Germany, and north
Italy. Everywhere kings were expelled and republics set up. But such
propagandist zeal as animated the Directorate did not prevent the looting of
the treasures of the liberated peoples to relieve the financial embarrassment
of the French Government. Their wars became less and less the holy war of
freedom, and more and more like the aggressive wars of the ancient régime. The
last feature of Grand Monarchy that France was disposed to discard was her
tradition of foreign policy, grasping, aggressive, restless, French-centred.
One discovers it still as vigorous under the Directorate as if there had been
no revolution.

