# BOOK III - XX - § 2
[Metadata]: # {04.06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.06.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

SERFS, SLAVES, SOCIAL CLASSES, AND FREE INDIVIDUALS

§ 1. _The Common Man in Ancient Times._ § 2. _The Earliest Slaves._      §
3. _The first “Independent” Persons._ § 4. _Social Classes Three      Thousand
Years Ago._ § 5. _Classes Hardening into Castes._ § 6.      _Caste in India._ §
7. _The System of the Mandarins._ § 8. _A      Summary of Five Thousand Years._

# § 2
[Illustration: Egyptian peasants seized for non-payment of taxes ... (Pyramid
Age)]

The earlier wars did not involve remote or prolonged campaigns, and they were
waged by levies of the common people. But war brought in a new source of
possessions, plunder, and a new social factor, the captive. In the earlier,
simpler days of war, the captive man was kept only to be tortured or sacrificed
to the victorious god; the captive women and children were assimilated into the
tribe. But later many captives were spared to be slaves because they had
exceptional gifts or peculiar arts. It would be the kings and captains who
would take these slaves at first, and it would speedily become apparent to them
that these men were much more their own than were the peasant cultivators and
common men of their own race.[149] The slave could be commanded to do all sorts
of things for his master that the quasi-free common man would not do so
willingly because of his attachment to his own patch of cultivation. From a
very early period the artificer was often a household slave, and the
manufacture of trade goods, pottery, textiles, metal ware, and so forth, such
as went on vigorously in the household city of the Minos of Cnossos, was
probably a slave industry from the beginning. Sayce, in his _Babylonians and
Assyrians_,[150] quotes Babylonian agreements for the teaching of trades to
slaves, and dealing with the exploitation of slave products. Slaves produced
slave children, enslavement in discharge of debts added to the slave
population; it is probable that as the cities grew larger, a larger part of the
new population consisted of these slave artificers and slave servants in the
large households. They were by no means abject slaves; in later Babylon their
lives and property were protected by elaborate laws. Nor were they all
outlanders. Parents might sell their children into slavery, and brothers their
orphan sisters. Free men who had no means of livelihood would even sell
themselves into slavery. And slavery was the fate of the insolvent debtor.
Craft apprenticeship, again, was a sort of fixed-term slavery. Out of the slave
population, by a converse process, arose the freed-man and freed-woman, who
worked for wages and had still more definite individual rights. Since in
Babylon slaves could themselves own property, many slaves saved up and bought
themselves. Probably the town slave was often better off and practically as
free as the cultivator of the soil, and as the rural population increased, its
sons and daughters came to mix with and swell the growing ranks of artificers,
some bound, some free.

As the extent and complexity of government increased, the number of households
multiplied. Under the king’s household grew up the households of his great
ministers and officials, under the temple grew up the personal households of
temple functionaries; it is not difficult to realize how houses and patches of
land would become more and more distinctly the property of the occupiers, and
more and more definitely alienated from the original owner-god. The earlier
empires in Egypt and China both passed into a feudal stage, in which families,
originally official, became for a time independent noble families. In the later
stages of Babylonian civilization we find an increasing propertied class of
people appearing in the social structure, neither slaves nor peasants nor
priests nor officials, but widows and descendants of such people, or successful
traders and the like, and all _masterless_ folk. Traders came in from the
outside. Babylon was full of Aramean traders, who had great establishments,
with slaves, freed-men, employees of all sorts. (Their book-keeping was a
serious undertaking. It involved storing a great multitude of earthenware
tablets in huge earthenware jars.) Upon this gathering mixture of more or less
free and detached people would live other people, traders, merchants, small
dealers, catering for their needs. Sayce (_op. cit._) gives the particulars of
an agreement for the setting up and stocking of a tavern and beerhouse, for
example. The passer-by, the man who happened to be about, had come into
existence.

But another and far less kindly sort of slavery also arose in the old
civilization, and that was gang slavery. If it did not figure very largely in
the cities, it was very much in evidence elsewhere. The king was, to begin
with, the chief _entrepreneur_. He made the canals and organized the irrigation
(_e.g._ Hammurabi’s enterprises noted in the previous chapter). He exploited
mines. He seems (at Cnossos, _e.g._) to have organized manufactures for export.
The Pharaohs of the 1st Dynasty were already working the copper and turquoise
mines in the peninsula of Sinai. For many such purposes gangs of captives were
cheaper and far more controllable than levies of the king’s own people. From an
early period, too, captives may have tugged the oars of the galleys, though
Torr (_Ancient Ships_) notes that up to the age of Pericles (450 B.C.) the free
Athenians were not above this task. And the monarch also found slaves
convenient for his military expeditions. They were uprooted men; they did not
fret to go home, because they had no homes to go to. The Pharaohs hunted slaves
in Nubia, in order to have black troops for their Syrian expeditions. Closely
allied to such slave troops were the mercenary barbaric troops the monarchs
caught into their service, not by positive compulsion, but by the bribes of
food and plunder and under the pressure of need. As the old civilization
developed, these mercenary armies replaced the national levies of the old order
more and more, and servile gang labour became a more and more important and
significant factor in the economic system. From mines and canal and wall
building, the servile gang spread into cultivation. Nobles and temples adopted
the gang slave system for their works. Plantation gangs began to oust the patch
cultivation of the labourer-serf in the case of some staple products....

