# BOOK III - XIX - § 6
[Metadata]: # {04.05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {04.05.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK III
XIX
§ 6
# § 6
In the early days of Sumeria and Akkadia the city-kings were priests and
medicine-men rather than kings, and it was only when foreign conquerors sought
to establish their hold in relation to existing institutions that the
distinction of priest and king became definite. But the god of the priests
remained as the real overlord of the land and of priest and king alike. He was
the universal landlord; the wealth and authority of his temples and
establishments outshone those of the king. Especially was this the case within
the city walls. Hammurabi, the founder of the first Babylonian Empire, is one
of the earlier monarchs whom we find taking a firm grip upon the affairs of the
community. He does it with the utmost politeness to the gods. In an inscription
recording his irrigation work in Sumeria and Akkadia, he begins: “When Anu and
Bel entrusted me with the rule of Sumer and Akkad----.” We possess a code of
laws made by this same Hammurabi--it is the earliest known code of law--and at
the head of this code we see the figure of Hammurabi receiving the law from its
nominal promulgator, the god Shamash.

An act of great political importance in the conquest of any city was the
carrying off of its god to become a subordinate in the temple of its conqueror.
This was far more important than the subjugation of king by king. Merodach, the
Babylonian Jupiter, was carried off by the Elamites, and Babylon did not feel
independent until its return. But sometimes a conqueror was afraid of the god
he had conquered. In the collection of letters addressed to Amenophis III and
IV at Tel-Amarna in Egypt, to which allusion has already been made, is one from
a certain king, Tushratta, King of Mitani, who has conquered Assyria and taken
the statue of the goddess Ishtar. Apparently he has sent this statue into
Egypt, partly to acknowledge the overlordship of Amenophis, but partly because
he fears her anger. (Winckler.) In the Bible is related (Sam. i. v. 1) how the
Ark of the Covenant of the God of the Hebrews was carried off by the
Philistines, as a token of conquest, into the temple of the fish god, Dagon, at
Ashdod, and how Dagon fell down and was broken, and how the people of Ashdod
were smitten with disease. In the latter story particularly the gods and
priests fill the scene; there is no king in evidence at all.

Right through the history of the Babylonian and Assyrian empires no monarch
seems to have felt his tenure of power secure in Babylon until he had “taken
the hand of Bel”--that is to say, that he had been adopted by the priesthood of
“Bel” as the god’s son and representative. As our knowledge of Assyrian and
Babylonian history grows clearer, it becomes plainer that the politics of that
world, the revolutions, usurpations, changes of dynasty, intrigues with foreign
powers, turned largely upon issues between the great wealthy priesthoods and
the growing but still inadequate power of the monarchy. The king relied on his
army, and this was usually a mercenary army of foreigners, speedily mutinous if
there was no pay or plunder, and easily bribed. We have already noted the name
of Sennacherib, the son of Sargon II, among the monarchs of the Assyrian
Empire. Sennacherib was involved in a violent quarrel with the priesthood of
Babylon; he never “took the hand of Bel”; and finally struck at that power by
destroying altogether the holy part of the city of Babylon (691 B.C.) and
removing the statue of Bel-Marduk to Assyria. He was assassinated by one of his
sons, and his successor, Esarhaddon (his son, but not the son who was his
assassin), found it expedient to restore Bel-Marduk and rebuild his temple, and
make his peace with the god.[141]

Assurbanipal (Greek, Sardanapalus), the son of this Esarhaddon, is a
particularly interesting figure from this point of view of the relationship of
priesthood and king. His father’s reconciliation with the priests of Bel-Marduk
went so far that Sardanapalus was given a Babylonian instead of a military
Assyrian education. He became a great collector of the clay documents of the
past, and his library, which has been unearthed, is now the most precious
source of historical material in the world. But for all his learning he kept
his grip on the Assyrian army; he made a temporary conquest of Egypt,
suppressed a rebellion in Babylon, and carried out a number of successful
expeditions. As we have already told in Chapter XVI, he was almost the last of
the Assyrian monarchs. The Aryan tribes, who knew more of war than of
priestcraft, and particularly the Scythians, the Medes and Persians, had long
been pressing upon Assyria from the north and north-east. The Medes and
Persians formed an alliance with the nomadic Semitic Chaldeans of the south for
the joint undoing of Assyria. Nineveh, the Assyrian capital, fell to these
Aryans in 606 B.C.

Sixty-seven years after the taking of Nineveh by the Aryans, which left
Babylonia to the Semitic Chaldeans, the last monarch of the Chaldean Empire
(the Second Babylonian Empire), Nabonidus, the father of Belshazzar, was
overthrown by Cyrus, the Persian. This Nabonidus, again, was a highly educated
monarch, who brought far too much intelligence and imagination and not enough
of the short range wisdom of this world to affairs of state. He conducted
antiquarian researches, and to his researches it is that we owe the date of
3750 B.C., assigned to Sargon I and still accepted by many authorities. He was
proud of this determination, and left inscriptions to record it. It is clear he
was a religious innovator; he built and rearranged temples and attempted to
centralize religion in Babylon by bringing a number of local gods to the temple
of Bel-Marduk. No doubt he realized the weakness and disunion of his empire due
to these conflicting cults, and had some conception of unification in his mind.

Events were marching too rapidly for any such development. His innovation had
manifestly raised the suspicion and hostility of the priesthood of Bel. They
sided with the Persians. “The soldiers of Cyrus entered Babylon without
fighting.” Nabonidus was taken prisoner, and Persian sentinels were set at the
gates of the temple of Bel, “where the services continued without
intermission.”

Cyrus did, in fact, set up the Persian Empire in Babylon with the blessing of
Bel-Marduk. He gratified the conservative instincts of the priests by packing
off the local gods back to their ancestral temples. He also restored the Jews
to Jerusalem.[142] These were merely matters of immediate policy to him. But in
bringing in the irreligious Aryans, the ancient priesthood was paying too
highly for the continuation of its temple services. It would have been wiser to
have dealt with the innovations of Nabonidus, that earnest heretic, to have
listened to his ideas, and to have met the needs of a changing world. Cyrus
entered Babylon 539 B.C.; by 521 B.C. Babylon was in insurrection again, and in
520 B.C. another Persian monarch, Darius, was pulling down her walls. Within
two hundred years the life had altogether gone out of those venerable rituals
of Bel-Marduk, and the temple of Bel-Marduk was being used by builders as a
quarry.

[Illustration: CHEPHREN]


§ 7[143]

The story of priest and king in Egypt is similar to, but by no means parallel
with, that of Babylonia. The kings of Sumeria and Assyria were priests who had
become kings; they were secularized priests. The Pharaoh of Egypt does not
appear to have followed precisely that line. Already in the very oldest records
the Pharaoh has a power and importance exceeding that of any priest. He is, in
fact, a god, and more than either priest or king. We do not know how he got to
that position. No monarch of Sumeria or Babylonia or Assyria could have induced
his people to do for him what the great pyramid-building Pharaohs of the IVth
Dynasty made their people do in those vast erections. The earlier Pharaohs were
not improbably regarded as incarnations of the dominant god. The falcon god
Horus sits behind the head of the great statue of Chephren. So late a monarch
as Rameses III (XIXth Dynasty) is represented upon his sarcophagus (now at
Cambridge) bearing the distinctive symbols of the three great gods of the
Egyptian system.[144] He carries the two sceptres of Osiris, the god of Day and
Resurrection; upon his head are the horns of the cow goddess Hathor, and also
the sun ball and feathers of Ammon Ra. He is not merely wearing the symbols of
these gods as a devout Babylonian might wear the symbols of Bel-Marduk; he is
these three gods in one.

[Illustration: Ramses III as Osiris--between the goddesses Nephthys and
Isis....

Relief on the cover of the sarcophagus (at Cambridge). After Sharpe.

Inscription (round the edges of cover), as far as decipherable.

“Osiris, King of Upper and Lower Egypt, lord of the two countries ... son
of the Sun, beloved of the gods, lord of diadems, Rameses,      prince of
Heliopolis, triumphant! Thou art in the condition of a      god, thou shalt
arise as Usr, there is no enemy to thee, I give to      thee triumph among
them....” BUDGE, _Catalogue, Egyptian      Collection, Fitzwilliam Museum,
Cambridge_. ]

The student will find much more in Sir J. G. Frazer’s _Golden Bough_ about the
ancient use of human beings as well as statues to represent gods. Here we have
merely to point to an apparent difference of idea between the Asiatic and
African monarchies in this respect.

We find also a number of sculptures and paintings to enforce the idea that the
Pharaohs were the actual sons of gods. The divine fathering and birth of
Amenophis III, for instance (of the XVIIIth Dynasty), is displayed in
extraordinary detail in a series of sculptures at Luxor. Moreover, it was held
that the Pharaohs, being of so divine a strain, could not marry common clay,
and consequently they were accustomed to marry blood relations within the
degrees of consanguinity now prohibited, even marrying their sisters.

The struggle between palace and temple came into Egyptian history, therefore,
at a different angle from that at which it came into Babylonia. Nevertheless,
it came in. Professor Maspero (in his _New Light on Ancient Egypt_) gives a
very interesting account of the struggle of Amenophis IV with the priesthoods,
and particularly with priests of the great god, Ammon Ra, Lord of Karnak. The
mother of Amenophis IV was not of the race of Pharaoh; it would seem that his
father, Amenophis III, made a love match with a subject, a beautiful Syrian
named Tii, and Professor Maspero finds in the possible opposition to and
annoyance of this queen by the priests of Ammon Ra the beginnings of the
quarrel. She may, he thinks, have inspired her son with a fanatical hatred of
Ammon Ra. But Amenophis IV may have had a wider view. Like the Babylonian
Nabonidus, who lived a thousand years later, he may have had in mind the
problem of moral unity in his empire. We have already noted that Amenophis III
ruled from Ethiopia to the Euphrates, and that the store of letters to himself
and his son found at Tel Amarna show a very wide range of interest and
influence. At any rate, Amenophis IV set himself to close all the Egyptian and
Syrian temples, to put an end to all sectarian worship throughout his
dominions, and to establish everywhere the worship of one god, Aton, the solar
disk. He left his capital, Thebes, which was even more the city of Ammon Ra
than later Babylon was the city of Bel-Marduk, and set up his capital at Tel
Amarna; he altered his name from “Amenophis,” which consecrated him to Ammon
(Amen) to “Akhnaton,” the Sun’s Glory; and he held his own against all the
priesthoods of his empire for eighteen years and died a Pharaoh.

[Illustration: Akhnaton(Amenophis IV)

[based on the cast at Cairo, & the reliefs in the Berlin Museum.]]

Opinions upon Amenophis IV, or Akhnaton, differ very widely. There are those
who regard him as the creature of his mother’s hatred of Ammon and the uxorious
spouse of a beautiful wife. Certainly he loved his wife very passionately; he
showed her great honour--Egypt honoured women, and was ruled at different times
by several queens--and he was sculptured in one instance with his wife seated
upon his knees, and in another in the act of kissing her in a chariot; but men
who live under the sway of their womenkind do not sustain great empires in the
face of the bitter hostility of the most influential organized bodies in their
realm.[145] Others write of him as a “gloomy fanatic.” Matrimonial bliss is
rare in the cases of gloomy fanatics. It is much more reasonable to regard him
as the Pharaoh who refused to be a god. It is not simply his religious policy
and his frank display of natural affection that seem to mark a strong and very
original personality. His æsthetic ideas were his own. He refused to have his
portrait conventionalized into the customary smooth beauty of the Pharaoh god,
and his face looks out at us across an interval of thirty-four centuries, a man
amidst ranks of divine insipidities.

A reign of eighteen years was not long enough for the revolution he
contemplated, and his son-in-law who succeeded him went back to Thebes and made
his peace with Ammon Ra.

To the very end of the story the divinity of kings haunted the Egyptian mind,
and infected the thoughts of intellectually healthier races. When Alexander the
Great reached Babylon, the prestige of Bel-Marduk was already far gone in
decay, but in Egypt, Ammon Ra was still god enough to make a snob of the
conquering Grecian. The priests of Ammon Ra, about the time of the XVIIIth or
XIXth Dynasty (_circa_ 1400 B.C.), had set up in an oasis of the desert a
temple and oracle. Here was an image of the god which could speak, move its
head, and accept or reject scrolls of inquiry. This oracle was still
flourishing in 332 B.C. The young master of the world, it is related, made a
special journey to visit it; he came into the sanctuary, and the image advanced
out of the darkness at the back to meet him. There was an impressive exchange
of salutations. Some such formula as this must have been used (says Professor
Maspero): “Come, son of my loins, who loves me so that I give thee the royalty
of Ra and the royalty of Horus! I give thee valiance, I give thee to hold all
countries and all religions under thy feet; I give thee to strike all the
peoples united together with thy arm!”

So it was that the priests of Egypt conquered their conqueror, and an Aryan
monarch first became a god....[146]

