# BOOK III - XIX - § 4
[Metadata]: # {04.05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.05.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

GODS AND STARS, PRIESTS AND KINGS

§ 1. _Nomadic and Settled Religion._ § 2. _The Priest Comes into
History._ § 3. _Priests and the Stars._ § 4. _Priests and the Dawn      of
Learning._ § 5. _King against Priest._ § 6. _How Bel-Marduk      Struggled
against the Kings._ § 7. _The God-Kings of Egypt._ § 8.      _Shi Hwang-ti
Destroys the Books._

# § 4
This clear evidence of astronomical inquiry and of a development of
astronomical ideas is the most obvious, but only the most obvious, evidence of
the very considerable intellectual activities that went on within the temple
precincts in ancient times. There is a curious disposition among many modern
writers to deprecate priesthoods and to speak of priests as though they had
always been impostors and tricksters, preying upon the simplicity of mankind.
But, indeed, they were for long the only writing class, the only reading
public, the only learned and the only thinkers; they were all the professional
classes of the time. You could have no intellectual life at all, you could not
get access to literature or any knowledge except through the priesthood. The
temples were not only observatories and libraries and clinics, they were
museums and treasure-houses. The original _Periplus_ of Hanno hung in one
temple in Carthage, skins of his “gorillas” were hung and treasured in another.
Whatever there was of abiding worth in the life of the community sheltered
there. Herodotus, the early Greek historian (485-425 B.C.), collected most of
his material from the priests of the countries in which he travelled, and it is
evident they met him generously and put their very considerable resources
completely at his disposal. Outside the temples the world was still a world of
blankly illiterate and unspeculative human beings, living from day to day
entirely for themselves. Moreover, there is little evidence that the commonalty
felt cheated by the priests, or had anything but trust and affection for the
early priesthoods. Even the great conquerors of later times were anxious to
keep themselves upon the right side of the priests of the nations and cities
whose obedience they desired, because of the immense popular influence of these
priests.

No doubt there were great differences between temple and temple and cult and
cult in the spirit and quality of the priesthood. Some probably were cruel,
some vicious and greedy, many dull and doctrinaire, stupid with tradition, but
it has to be kept in mind that there were distinct limits to the degeneracy or
inefficiency of a priesthood. It had to keep its grip upon the general mind. It
could not go beyond what people would stand--either towards the darkness or
towards the light. Its authority rested, in the end, on the persuasion that its
activities were propitious.


§ 5[139]

It is clear that the earliest civilized governments were essentially priestly
governments. It was not kings and captains who first set men to the plough and
a settled life. It was the ideas of the gods and plenty, working with the
acquiescence of common men. The early rulers of Sumer we know were all priests,
kings only because they were chief priests. And priestly government had its own
weaknesses as well as its peculiar deep-rooted strength. The power of a
priesthood is a power over their own people alone. It is a subjugation through
mysterious fears and hopes. The priesthood can gather its people together for
war, but its traditionalism and all its methods unfit it for military control.
Against the enemy without, a priest-led people is feeble.

Moreover, a priest is a man vowed, trained, and consecrated, a man belonging to
a special corps, and necessarily with an intense _esprit de corps_. He has
given up his life to his temple and his god. This is a very excellent thing for
the internal vigour of his own priesthood, his own temple. He lives or dies for
the honour of his particular god. But in the next town or village is another
temple with another god. It is his constant preoccupation to keep his people
from that god. Religious cults and priesthoods are sectarian by nature; they
will convert, they will overcome, but they will never coalesce. Our first
perceptions of events in Sumer, in the dim uncertain light before history
began, is of priests and gods in conflict; until the Sumerians were conquered
by the Semites they were never united; and the same incurable conflict of
priesthoods scars all the temple ruins of Egypt. It was impossible that it
could have been otherwise, having regard to the elements out of which religion
arose.

[Illustration: An Assyrian King & his Chief Minister]

It was out of those two main weaknesses of all priesthoods, namely, the
incapacity for efficient military leadership and their inevitable jealousy of
all other religious cults, that the power of secular kingship arose. The
foreign enemy either prevailed and set up a king over the people, or the
priesthoods who would not give way to each other set up a common fighting
captain, who retained more or less power in peace time. This secular king
developed a group of officials about him and began, in relation to military
organization, to take a share in the priestly administration of the people’s
affairs. So, growing out of priestcraft and beside the priest, the king, the
protagonist of the priest, appears upon the stage of human history, and a very
large amount of the subsequent experiences of mankind is only to be understood
as an elaboration, complication, and distortion of the struggle, unconscious or
deliberate, between these two systems of human control, the temple and the
palace. And it was in the original centres of civilization that this antagonism
was most completely developed. The Aryan peoples never passed through a phase
of temple rule on their way to civilization; they came to civilization late;
they found that drama already half-played. They took over the ideas of both
temple and kingship, when those ideas were already elaborately developed, from
the more civilized Hamitic or Semitic people they conquered.

The greater importance of the gods and the priests in the earlier history of
the Mesopotamian civilization is very apparent, but gradually the palace won
its way until it was at last in a position to struggle definitely for the
supreme power. At first, in the story, the palace is ignorant and friendless in
the face of the temple; the priests alone read, the priests alone know, the
people are afraid of him. But in the dissensions of the various cults comes the
opportunity of the palace. From other cities, from among captives, from
defeated or suppressed religious cults, the palace gets men who also can read
and who can do magic things.[140] The court also becomes a centre of writing
and record; the king thinks for himself and becomes politic. Traders and
foreigners drift to the court, and if the king has not the full records and the
finished scholarship of the priests, he has a wider and fresher first-hand
knowledge of many things. The priest comes into the temple when he is very
young; he passes many years as a neophyte; the path of learning the clumsy
letters of primitive times is slow and toilsome; he becomes erudite and
prejudiced rather than a man of the world. Some of the more active-minded young
priests may even cast envious eyes at the king’s service. There are many
complications and variations in this ages-long drama of the struggle going on
beneath the outward conflicts of priest and king, between the made man and the
born man, between learning and originality, between established knowledge and
settled usage on the one hand, and creative will and imagination on the other.
It is not always, as we shall find later, the priest who is the conservative
and unimaginative antagonist. Sometimes a king struggles against narrow and
obstructive priesthoods; sometimes priesthoods uphold the standards of
civilization against savage, egotistical, or reactionary kings.

One or two outstanding facts and incidents of the early stages of this
fundamental struggle in political affairs are all that we can note here between
4000 B.C. and the days of Alexander.

