# BOOK I - V - § 3
[Metadata]: # {02.05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK I
V
§ 3
# § 3
A third great group of causes influencing climate are to be found in the forces
within the world itself. Throughout the long history of the earth there has
been a continuous wearing down of the hills and mountains by frost and rain and
a carrying out of their material to become sedimentary rocks under the seas.
There has been a continuous process of wearing down the land and filling up the
seas, by which the seas, as they became shallower, must have spread more and
more over the land. The reverse process, a process of crumpling and upheaval,
has also been in progress, but less regularly. The forces of upheaval have been
spasmodic; the forces of wearing down continuous. For long ages there has been
comparatively little volcanic upheaval, and then have come periods in which
vast mountain chains have been thrust up and the whole outline of land and sea
changed. Such a time was the opening stage of the Cainozoic period, in which
the Alps, the Himalayas, and the Andes were all thrust up from the sea-level to
far beyond their present elevations, and the main outlines of the existing
geography of the world were drawn.

Now, a time of high mountains and deep seas would mean a larger dry land
surface for the world, and a more restricted sea surface, and a time of low
lands would mean a time of wider and shallower seas. High mountains precipitate
moisture from the atmosphere and hold it out of circulation as snow and
glaciers, while smaller oceans mean a lesser area for surface evaporation.
Other things being equal, lowland stages of the world’s history would be ages
of more general atmospheric moisture than periods of relatively greater height
of the mountains and greater depth of the seas. But even small increases in the
amount of moisture in the air have a powerful influence upon the transmission
of radiant heat through that air. The sun’s heat will pass much more freely
through dry air than through moist air, and so a greater amount of heat would
reach the land surfaces of the globe under the conditions of extremes of
elevation and depth, than during the periods of relative lowness and
shallowness. Dry phases in the history of the earth mean, therefore, hot days.
But they also mean cold nights, because for the same reason that the heat comes
abundantly to the earth, it will be abundantly radiated away. Moist phases
mean, on the other hand, cooler days and warmer nights. The same principle
applies to the seasons, and so a phase of great elevations and depressions of
the surface would also be another contributory factor on the side of extreme
climatic conditions.

And a stage of greater elevation and depression would intensify its extreme
conditions by the gradual accumulation of ice caps upon the polar regions and
upon the more elevated mountain masses. This accumulation would be at the
expense of the sea, whose surface would thus be further shrunken in comparison
with the land.

Here, then, is another set of varying influences that will play in with and
help or check the influence of the astronomical variations stated in § 1 and §
2. There are other more localized forces at work into which we cannot go in any
detail here, but which will be familiar to the student of the elements of
physical geography; the influence of great ocean currents in carrying warmth
from equatorial to more temperate latitudes; the interference of mountain
chains with the moisture borne by prevalent winds and the like. As in the slow
processes of nature these currents are deflected or the mountain chains worn
down or displaced by fresh upheavals, the climate over great areas will be
changed and all the conditions of life changed with it. Under the incessant
slow variations of these astronomical, telluric, and geographical influences
life has no rest. As its conditions change it must change or perish.

