# BOOK IV - XXIII - § 3
[Metadata]: # {05.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK IV
XXIII
§ 3
# § 3
The preceding section raised an interesting discussion between Professor
Gilbert Murray and the writer upon the character and quality of the common
Athenian citizen. Professor Murray thought several phrases used by the writer
harsh and unjust. But what he had to say was so interesting and informing, and
the writer was so entirely in agreement with his spirit, that it seemed better,
instead of modifying what had been written in § 1, to leave that as it stood
and to supplement it by quoting Professor Murray. He objected to the
parallelism with a twentieth-century crowd. “What I want you to do,” he wrote,
“is to take them at the level of the people round them and before them and see
how they differ. For example, the first thing that strikes one is that they use
all their powers for a different purpose than most peoples: for intellectual
and artistic things. No more enormous works here to glorify divine kings; no
private splendour, no luxury, but a wonderful output of art, poetry,
philosophy, and--within limits--science. Compare them with Rome.

“In the matter of slavery; all nations had slaves; some treated them very
cruelly, some with moderate cruelty. The Greeks alone argued whether it was
right to have them--and ‘cranks’ occasionally proposed emancipation. You get
strong testimony, sometimes indignant testimony, that the Athenians were too
soft altogether in their treatment of slaves. As soon as you get to
Carthaginian or Roman history you get appalling cruelty (the 6000 crucified by
Crassus, the gladiatorial games, the habitual leg-breaking of slaves, etc.);
such things seem never to have occurred in Greece. As soon as you get to
Alexander you get, of course, the Oriental despotic touch--fantastic vanity and
cruelty; and at length the recurrence of human sacrifice.

“The greatness of Greece comes out only in the art and literature and thought;
not in the political and social history--except in dim flashes. By all means
emphasize clearly to start with that the Greeks of, say, the ninth century,
were practically savages, and those of even the sixth and in places right on to
the fifth and fourth were in many things on the ‘Lower Cultures’ level. Clothes
like Polynesians; tools very poor; religion ... fragments of the Polynesian all
about, when you got outside the educated Attic world. But the _characteristic_
is that, on this very low level, you have extraordinary flashes of very high
inspiration, as the poetry and art and philosophy witness. Also, an actual
achievement in social life--what one calls ‘Hellenism,’ _i.e._, republicanism,
simplicity of life, sobriety of thought, almost complete abolition of torture,
mutilation, etc., and an amazing emancipation of the individual and of the
human intellect. It is impossible to speak, really, of the ‘Greek view’ of
anything. Because all the different views are put forward and represented:
polytheism, monotheism, atheism; pro-slavery, anti-slavery; duty to animals, no
duty to animals; democracy, monarchy, aristocracy. The characteristic is that
_human thought got free_. (Not absolutely, of course; only to an amazing
extent.) This emancipation was paid for by all sorts of instability; awful
political instability, because stability in such things is produced exactly by
the opposite--by long firm tradition and cohesiveness.

“It is not fair to say I idealize the Athenian mob; see, for example, my
_Euripides and his Age_. But I don’t think it was like our music-hall mob. It
was much more artistic, much more intellectual and yet more primitive, more
indecent but less lascivious; more capable of atrocious misconduct; also
probably more capable of idealism. But we don’t really know much about the
crowd. It is only a hostile average-sensual-man background against which the
philosophers and poets stand out. There was no ‘city mob,’ as in Rome. They
were nearly all small farmers or craftsmen. I can’t help thinking that their
badness was more like the faults of a superior South Sea Islander than like the
viler side of the ‘crowd’ to-day.”

