# BOOK II - X - § 4
[Metadata]: # {03.03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE LATER POSTGLACIAL PALÆOLITHIC MEN, THE FIRST TRUE MEN

(Later Palæolithic Age)

§ 1. _The Coming of Men Like Ourselves._ § 2. _Subdivision of the
Later Palæolithic._ § 3. _The Earliest True Men Were Splendid      Savages._ §
4. _Hunters Give Place to Herdsmen._ § 5. _No Sub-men      in America._

# § 4
It was about 12,000 or fewer years ago that, with the spread of forests and a
great change of the fauna, the long prevalence of the hunting life in Europe
drew to its end. Reindeer vanished. Changing conditions frequently bring with
them new diseases. There may have been prehistoric pestilences. For many
centuries there may have been no men in Britain or Central Europe (Wright). For
a time there were in Southern Europe drifting communities of some little known
people who are called the Azilians.[41] They may have been transition
generations; they may have been a different race. We do not know. Some
authorities incline to the view that the Azilians were the first wave of a race
which, as we shall see later, has played a great part in populating Europe, the
dark-white or Mediterranean or Iberian race. These Azilian people have left
behind them a multitude of pebbles, roughly daubed with markings of an unknown
purport (see illus., p. 94). The use or significance of these Azilian pebbles
is still a profound mystery. Was this some sort of token writing? Were they
counters in some game? Did the Azilians play with these pebbles or tell a story
with them, as imaginative children will do with bits of wood and stone
nowadays? At present we are unable to cope with any of these questions.

We will not deal here with the other various peoples who left their scanty
traces in the world during the close of the New Palæolithic period, the spread
of the forests where formerly there had been steppes, and the wane of the
hunters, some 10,000 or 12,000 years ago. We will go on to describe the new
sort of human community that was now spreading over the northern hemisphere,
whose appearance marks what is called the _Neolithic Age_. The map of the world
was assuming something like its present outlines, the landscape and the flora
and fauna were taking on their existing characteristics. The prevailing animals
in the spreading woods of Europe were the royal stag, the great ox, and the
bison; the mammoth and the musk ox had gone. The great ox, or aurochs, is now
extinct, but it survived in the German forests up to the time of the Roman
Empire. It was never domesticated.[42] It stood eleven feet high at the
shoulder, as high as an elephant. There were still lions in the Balkan
peninsula, and they remained there until about 1000 or 1200 B.C. The lions of
Württemberg and South Germany in those days were twice the size of the modern
lion. South Russia and Central Asia were thickly wooded then, and there were
elephants in Mesopotamia and Syria, and a fauna in Algeria that was tropical
African in character.

Hitherto men in Europe had never gone farther north than the Baltic Sea or the
English midlands, but now Ireland, the Scandinavian peninsula, and perhaps
Great Russia were becoming possible regions for human occupation. There are no
Palæolithic remains in Sweden or Norway, nor in Ireland or Scotland. Man, when
he entered these countries, was apparently already at the Neolithic stage of
social development.

