# BOOK VI (_Continued_) - XXXIII - § 2
[Metadata]: # {08.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {08.02.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM (_Continued_)




THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY

CHRISTENDOM AND THE CRUSADES

§ 1. _The Western World at its Lowest Ebb._ § 2. _The Feudal      System._
§ 3. _The Frankish Kingdom of the Merovingians._ § 4. _The
Christianization of the Western Barbarians._ § 5. _Charlemagne      becomes
Emperor of the West._ § 6. _The Personality of      Charlemagne._ § 7. _The
French and the Germans become Distinct._ §      8. _The Normans, the Saracens,
the Hungarians, and the Seljuk      Turks._ § 9. _How Constantinople Appealed
to Rome._ § 10. _The      Crusades._ § 11. _The Crusades a Test of
Christianity._ § 12. _The      Emperor Frederick II._ § 13. _Defects and
Limitations of the      Papacy._ § 14. _A List of Leading Popes._

# § 2
It is necessary that the reader should have a definite idea of the social
condition of western Europe in the eighth century. It was not a barbarism.
Eastern Europe was still barbaric and savage; things had progressed but little
beyond the state of affairs described by Gibbon in his account of the mission
of Priscus to Attila (see vol. i, p. 557). But western Europe was a shattered
civilization, without law, without administration, with roads destroyed and
education disorganized, but still with great numbers of people with civilized
ideas and habits and traditions. It was a time of confusion, of brigandage, of
crimes unpunished and universal insecurity. It is very interesting to trace how
out of the universal mêlée, the beginnings of a new order appeared. In a modern
breakdown there would probably be the formation of local vigilance societies,
which would combine and restore a police administration and a roughly
democratic rule. But in the broken-down western empire of the sixth, seventh,
and eighth centuries, men’s ideas turned rather to leaders than to committees,
and the centres about which affairs crystallized were here barbaric chiefs,
here a vigorous bishop or some surviving claimant to a Roman official position,
here a long-recognized landowner or man of ancient family, and here again some
vigorous usurper of power. No solitary man was safe. So men were forced to link
themselves with others, preferably people stronger than themselves. The lonely
man chose the most powerful and active person in his district and became _his_
man. The freeman or the weak lordling of a petty territory linked himself to
some more powerful lord. The protection of that lord (or the danger of his
hostility) became more considerable with every such accession. So very rapidly
there went on a process of political crystallization in the confused and
lawless sea into which the Western Empire had liquefied. These natural
associations and alliances of protector and subordinates grew very rapidly into
a system, _the feudal system_, traces of which are still to be found in the
social structure of every European community west of Russia.

This process speedily took on technical forms and laws of its own. In such a
country as Gaul it was already well in progress in the days of insecurity
_before_ the barbarian tribes broke into the empire as conquerors. The Franks
when they came into Gaul brought with them an institution, which we have
already noted in the case of the Macedonians, and which was probably of very
wide distribution among the Nordic people, the gathering about the chief or war
king of a body of young men of good family, the companions or _comitatus_, his
counts or captains. It was natural in the case of invading peoples that the
relations of a weak lord to a strong lord should take on the relations of a
count to his king, and that a conquering chief should divide seized and
confiscated estates among his companions. From the side of the decaying empire
there came to feudalism the idea of the grouping for mutual protection of men
and estates; from the Teutonic side came the notions of knightly association,
devotion, and personal service. The former was the economic side of the
institution, the latter the chivalrous.

The analogy of the aggregation of feudal groupings with crystallization is a
very close one. As the historian watches the whirling and eddying confusion of
the fourth and fifth century in Western Europe, he begins to perceive the
appearance of these pyramidal growths of heads and subordinates and
sub-subordinates, which jostle against one another, branch, dissolve again, or
coalesce. “We use the term ‘feudal system’ for convenience’ sake, but with a
degree of impropriety if it conveys the meaning ‘systematic.’ Feudalism in its
most flourishing age was anything but systematic. It was confusion roughly
organized. Great diversity prevailed everywhere, and we should not be surprised
to find some different fact or custom in every lordship. Anglo-Norman feudalism
attained in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a logical completeness and a
uniformity of practice which, in the feudal age proper, can hardly be found
elsewhere through so large a territory....

[Illustration: Map of EUROPE about 500 A.D.]

“The foundation of the feudal relationship proper was the _fief_, which was
usually land, but might be any desirable thing, as an office, a revenue in
money or kind, the right to collect a toll, or operate a mill. In return for
the fief, the man became the _vassal_ of his lord; he knelt before him, and,
with his hands between his lord’s hands, promised him fealty and service....
The faithful performance of all the duties he had assumed in homage constituted
the vassal’s right and title to his fief. So long as they were fulfilled, he,
and his heir after him, held the fief as his property, practically and in
relation to all under-tenants as if he were the owner. In the ceremony of
homage and investiture, which is the creative contract of feudalism, the
obligations assumed by the two parties were, as a rule, not specified in exact
terms. They were determined by local custom.... In many points of detail the
vassal’s services differed widely in different parts of the feudal world. We
may say, however, that they fall into two classes, general and specific. The
general included all that might come under the idea of loyalty, seeking the
lord’s interests, keeping his secrets, betraying the plans of his enemies,
protecting his family, etc. The specific services are capable of more definite
statement, and they usually received exact definition in custom and sometimes
in written documents. The most characteristic of these was the military
service, which included appearance in the field on summons with a certain
force, often armed in a specified way, and remaining a specified length of
time. It often included also the duty of guarding the lord’s castle, and of
holding one’s own castle subject to the plans of the lord for the defence of
his fief....

[Illustration: Area more or less under FRANKISH dominion in the time of CHARLES
MARTEL]

“Theoretically regarded, feudalism covered Europe with a network of these
fiefs, rising in graded ranks one above the other from the smallest, the
knight’s fee, at the bottom, to the king at the top, who was the supreme
landowner, or who held the kingdom from God....”[335]

But this was the theory that was superimposed upon the established facts. The
reality of feudalism was its voluntary co-operation.

“The feudal state was one in which, it has been said, private law had usurped
the place of public law.” But rather is it truer that public law had failed and
vanished and private law had come in to fill the vacuum. Public duty had become
private obligation.

