# BOOK VII - XXXV - § 4
[Metadata]: # {09.02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {09.02.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MONGOL EMPIRES OF THE LAND WAYS AND THE NEW EMPIRES OF THE SEA WAYS

THE RENASCENCE OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION[371]

(LAND WAYS GIVE PLACE TO SEA WAYS)

§ 1. _Christianity and Popular Education._ § 2. _Europe begins to
Think for Itself._ § 3. _The Great Plague and the Dawn of      Communism._ § 4.
_How Paper Liberated the Human Mind._ § 5.      _Protestantism of the Princes
and Protestantism of the Peoples._ §      6. _The Reawakening of Science._ § 7.
_The New Growth of European      Towns._ § 8. _America Comes into History._ §
9. _What Machiavelli      Thought of the World._ § 10. _The Republic of
Switzerland._ § 11A.      _The Life of the Emperor Charles V._ § 11B.
_Protestants if the      Prince Wills it._ § 11C. _The Intellectual Under-tow._

# § 4
The development of free discussion in Europe during this age of fermentation
was enormously stimulated by the appearance of printed books. It was the
introduction of paper from the East that made practicable the long latent
method of printing. It is still difficult to assign the honour of priority in
the use of the simple expedient of printing for multiplying books. It is a
trivial question that has been preposterously debated.[380] Apparently the
glory, such as it is, belongs to Holland. In Haarlem, one Coster was printing
from movable type somewhen before 1446. Gutenberg was printing at Mainz about
the same time. There were printers in Italy by 1465, and Caxton set up his
press in Westminster in 1477. But long before this time there had been a
partial use of printing. Manuscripts as early as the twelfth century display
initial letters that may have been printed from wooden stamps.

Far more important is the question of the manufacture of paper. It is scarcely
too much to say that paper made the revival of Europe possible. Paper
originated in China, where its use probably goes back to the second century
B.C. In 751 the Chinese made an attack upon the Arab Moslems in Samarkand; they
were repulsed, and among the prisoners taken from them were some skilled
paper-makers, from whom the art was learnt. Arabic paper manuscripts from the
ninth century onward still exist. The manufacture entered Christendom either
through Greece or by the capture of Moorish paper-mills during the Christian
reconquest of Spain. But under the Christian Spanish the product deteriorated
sadly. Good paper was not made in Christian Europe until near the end of the
thirteenth century, and then it was Italy which led the world. Only by the
fourteenth century did the manufacture reach Germany, and not until the end of
that century was it abundant and cheap enough for the printing of books to be a
practicable business proposition. Thereupon printing followed naturally and
necessarily, and the intellectual life of the world entered upon a new and far
more vigorous phase. It ceased to be a little trickle from mind to mind; it
became a broad flood, in which thousands and presently scores and hundreds of
thousands of minds participated.

One immediate result of this achievement of printing was the appearance of an
abundance of Bibles in the world. Another was a cheapening of school-books. The
knowledge of reading spread swiftly. There was not only a great increase of
books in the world, but the books that were now made were plainer to read and
so easier to understand. Instead of toiling at a crabbed text and then thinking
over its significance, readers now could think unimpeded as they read. With
this increase in the facility of reading, the reading public grew. The book
ceased to be a highly decorated toy or a scholar’s mystery. People began to
write books to be read as well as looked at by ordinary people. With the
fourteenth century the real history of the European literatures begins. We find
a rapid development of standard Italian, standard English, standard French,
standard Spanish, and standard German.[381] These languages became literary
languages; they were tried over, polished by use, and made exact and vigorous.
They became at last as capable of the burden of philosophical discussion as
Greek or Latin.

