# BOOK I - VII - § 3
[Metadata]: # {02.07.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.07.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK I
VII
§ 3
# § 3
A number of types of mammal already appear in the Eocene. Some are
differentiating in one direction, and some in another, some are perfecting
themselves as herbivorous quadrupeds, some leap and climb among the trees, some
turn back to the water to swim, but all types are unconsciously exploiting and
developing the brain which is the instrument of this new power of acquisition
and educability. In the Eocene rocks are found small early predecessors of the
horse (Eohippus), tiny camels, pigs, early tapirs, early hedgehogs, monkeys and
lemurs, opossums and carnivores. Now, all these were more or less ancestral to
living forms, and all have brains relatively much smaller than their living
representatives. There is, for instance, an early rhinoceros, _Titanotherium_,
with a brain not one tenth the size of that of the existing rhinoceros. The
latter is by no means a perfect type of the attentive and submissive student,
but even so it is ten times more observant and teachable than its predecessor.
This sort of thing is true of all the orders and families that survive until
to-day. All the Cainozoic mammals were doing this one thing in common under the
urgency of a common necessity; they were all growing brain. It was a parallel
advance. In the same order or family to-day, the brain is usually from six to
ten times what it was in the Eocene ancestor.

Grass was now spreading over the world, and with this extension arose some huge
graminivorous brutes of which no representative survives to-day. Such were the
Uintatheres and the Titanotheres. And in pursuit of such beasts came great
swarms of primitive dogs, some as big as bears, and the first cats, one in
particular (_Smilodon_), a small fierce-looking creature with big knife-like
canines, the first sabre-toothed tiger, which was to develop into greater
things. American deposits in the Miocene display a great variety of camels,
giraffe camels with long necks, gazelle camels, llamas, and true camels. North
America, throughout most of the Cainozoic period, appears to have been in open
and easy continuation with Asia, and when at last the glaciers of the Great Ice
Age, and then the Bering Strait, came to separate the two great continental
regions, the last camels were left in the old world and the llamas in the new.

In the Eocene the first ancestors of the elephants appear in northern Africa as
snouted creatures; the elephant’s trunk dawned on the world in the Miocene.

One group of creatures is of peculiar interest in a history that is mainly to
be the story of mankind. We find fossils in the Eocene of monkeys and lemurs,
but of one particular creature we have as yet not a single bone. It was half
ape, half monkey; it clambered about the trees and ran, and probably ran well,
on its hind legs upon the ground. It was small-brained by our present
standards, but it had clever hands with which it handled fruits and beat nuts
upon the rocks and perhaps caught up sticks and stones to smite its fellows. It
was our ancestor.

