# BOOK V - XXIX - § 6
[Metadata]: # {06.03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {06.03.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE RISE AND COLLAPSE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

THE CÆSARS BETWEEN THE SEA AND THE GREAT PLAINS OF THE OLD WORLD[256]

§ 1. _A Short Catalogue of Emperors._ § 2. _Roman Civilization at      its
Zenith._ § 3. _Limitations of the Roman Mind._ § 4. _The Stir      of the Great
Plains._ § 5. _The Western (true Roman) Empire      crumples up._ § 6. _The
Eastern (revived Hellenic) Empire._

# § 6
But though throughout the whole of Western Europe and North Africa the Roman
imperial system had collapsed, though credit had vanished, luxury production
had ceased, and money was hidden, though creditors were going unpaid and slaves
masterless, the tradition of the Cæsars was still being carried on in
Constantinople. We have already had occasion to mention as two outstanding
figures among the late Cæsars, Diocletian (284) and Constantine the Great
(312), and it was to the latter of these that the world owes the setting up of
a fresh imperial centre at Constantinople. Very early during the imperial
period the unsuitability of the position of Rome as a world capital, due to the
Roman failure to use the sea, was felt. The destruction of Carthage and Corinth
had killed the shipping of the main Mediterranean sea-routes. For a people who
did not use the sea properly, having the administrative centre at Rome meant
that every legion, every draft of officials, every order, had to travel
northward for half the length of Italy before it could turn east or west.
Consequently nearly all the more capable emperors set up their headquarters at
some subordinate centre in a more convenient position. Sirmium (on the River
Save), Milan, Lyons, and Nicomedia (in Bithynia) were among such supplementary
capitals. For a time under Diocletian, Durazzo was the imperial capital.
Ravenna, near the head of the Adriatic, was the capital of the last Roman
emperors in the time of Alaric and Stilicho.

[Illustration: The EASTERN ROMAN EMPIRE circa 500 A.D.]

It was Constantine the Great who determined upon the permanent transfer of the
centre of imperial power to the Bosphorus. We have already noted the existence
of the city of Byzantium, which Constantine chose to develop into his new
capital. It played a part in the story of the intricate Histiæus (chap. xxii, §
4); it repulsed Philip of Macedon (chap. xxiv, § 3). If the reader will examine
its position, he will see that in the hands of a line of capable emperors, and
as the centre of a people with some solidarity and spirit and seacraft (neither
of which things were vouchsafed to it), it was extraordinarily well placed. Its
galleys could have penetrated up the rivers to the heart of Russia and
outflanked every barbarian advance. It commanded practicable trade routes to
the east, and it was within a reasonable striking distance of Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Greece, and all the more prosperous and civilized regions of the world
at that period. And even under the rule of a series of inept monarchs and under
demoralized social conditions, the remains of the Roman Empire centring at
Constantinople held out for nearly a thousand years.

It was the manifest intention of Constantine the Great that Constantinople
should be the centre of an undivided empire. But having regard to the methods
of travel and transport available at the time, the geographical conditions of
Europe and Western Asia do not point to any one necessary centre of government.
If Rome faced westward instead of eastward, and so failed to reach out beyond
the Euphrates, Constantinople on the other hand was hopelessly remote from
Gaul. The enfeebled Mediterranean civilization, after a certain struggle for
Italy, did in fact let go of the west altogether and concentrated upon what
were practically the central vestiges, the stump, of the empire of Alexander.
The Greek language resumed its sway, which had never been very seriously
undermined by the official use of Latin. This “Eastern” or Byzantine empire is
generally spoken of as if it were a continuation of the Roman tradition. It is
really far more like a resumption of Alexander’s.

[Illustration: Map to illustrate the geographical advantages of CONSTANTINOPLE]

The Latin language had not the intellectual vigour behind it, it had not the
literature and the science, to make it a necessity to intelligent men and so to
maintain an ascendancy over the Greek. For no language, whatever officialdom
may do, can impose itself in competition with another that can offer the
advantages of a great literature or encyclopædic information. Aggressive
languages must bring gifts, and the gifts of Greek were incomparably greater
than the gifts of Latin. The Eastern empire was from the beginnings of its
separation Greek-speaking, and a continuation, though a degenerate
continuation, of the Hellenic tradition. Its intellectual centre was no longer
in Greece, but Alexandria. Its mentality was no longer the mentality of
free-minded plain-speaking citizens, of the Stagirite Aristotle and the Greek
Plato; its mentality was the mentality of the pedants and of men politically
impotent; its philosophy was a pompous evasion of real things, and its
scientific impulse was dead. Nevertheless, it was Hellenic. The Roman had come,
and he had gone again. Indeed he had gone very extensively from the west also.
By the sixth century A.D. the populations of Europe and North Africa had been
stirred up like sediment. When presently in the seventh and eighth centuries
the sediment begins to settle down again and populations begin to take on a
definite localized character, the Roman is only to be found by name in the
region about Rome. Over large parts of his Western empire we find changed and
changing modifications of his Latin speech; in Gaul, where the Frank is
learning a Gallic form of Latin and evolving French in the process; in Italy,
where, under the influence of Teutonic invaders, the Lombards and Goths, Latin
is being modified into various Italian dialects; in Spain and Portugal, where
it is becoming Spanish and Portuguese. The fundamental Latinity of the
languages in these regions serves to remind us of the numerical unimportance of
the various Frankish, Vandal, Avar, Gothic, and the like German-speaking
invaders, and serves to justify our statement that what happened to the Western
empire was not so much conquest and the replacement of one population by
another as a political and social revolution. The district of Valais in South
Switzerland also retained a fundamentally Latin speech and so did the Canton
Grisons; and, what is more curious and interesting, is that in Dacia and Mœsia
Inferior, large parts of which to the north of the Danube became the modern
Roumania (= Romania), although these regions were added late to the empire and
lost soon, the Latin speech also remained.

In Britain Latin was practically wiped out by the conquering Anglo-Saxons, from
among whose various dialects the root stock of English presently grew.

But while the smashing of the Roman social and political structure was thus
complete, while in the east it was thrown off by the older and stronger
Hellenic tradition, and while in the west it was broken up into fragments that
began to take on a new and separate life of their own, there was one thing that
did not perish, but grew, and that was the tradition of the world empire of
Rome and of the supremacy of the Cæsars. When the reality was destroyed, the
legend had freedom to expand. Removed from the possibility of verification, the
idea of a serene and splendid Roman world-supremacy grew up in the imagination
of mankind, and still holds it to this day.

Ever since the time of Alexander, human thought has been haunted by the
possible political unity of the race. All the sturdy chiefs and leaders and
kings of the barbarians, who raided through the prostrate but vast disorder of
the decayed empire, were capable of conceiving of some mighty king of kings
greater than themselves and giving a real law for all men, and they were ready
to believe that elsewhere in space and time and capable of returning presently
to resume his supremacy, Cæsar had been such a king of kings. Far above their
own titles, therefore, they esteemed and envied the title of Cæsar. The
international history of Europe from this time henceforth is largely the story
of kings and adventurers setting up to be Cæsar and Imperator (Emperor). We
shall tell of some of them in their places. So universal did this “Cæsaring”
become, that the Great War of 1914-18 mowed down no fewer than four Cæsars, the
German Kaiser (= Cæsar), the Austrian Kaiser, the Tsar (= Cæsar) of Russia, and
that fantastic figure, the Tsar of Bulgaria. The French “Imperator” (Napoleon
III) had already fallen in 1871. There is now (1920) no one left in the world
to carry on the Imperial title or the tradition of Divus Cæsar except the
Turkish Sultan and the British monarch. The former commemorates his lordship
over Constantinople as Kaisar-i-Roum[274]; the latter is called the Cæsar of
India (a country no real Cæsar ever looked upon), Kaisar-i-Hind.

