# BOOK VIII - XXXVII - § 6
[Metadata]: # {10.02.05}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VIII
XXXVII
§ 6
# § 6
In an earlier chapter we have described the Roman republic, and its mixture of
modern features with dark superstition and primordial savagery, as the
Neanderthal anticipation of the modern democratic state. A time may come when
people will regard the contrivances and machinery of the American constitution
as the political equivalents of the implements and contrivances of Neolithic
man. They have served their purpose well, and under their protection the people
of the States have grown into one of the greatest, most powerful, and most
civilized communities that the world has yet seen; but there is no reason in
that for regarding the American constitution as a thing more final and
inalterable than the pattern of street railway that overshadows many New York
thoroughfares, or the excellent and homely type of house architecture that
still prevails in Philadelphia. These things also have served a purpose well,
they have their faults, and they can be improved. Our political contrivances,
just as much as our domestic and mechanical contrivances, need to undergo
constant revision as knowledge and understanding grow.

Since the American constitution was planned, our conception of history and our
knowledge of collective psychology has undergone very considerable development.
We are beginning to see many things in the problem of government to which the
men of the eighteenth century were blind; and, courageous as their constructive
disposition was in relation to whatever political creation had gone before, it
fell far short of the boldness which we in these days realize to be needful if
this great human problem of establishing a civilized community of will in the
earth is to be solved. They took many things for granted that now we know need
to be made the subject of the most exacting scientific study and the most
careful adjustment. They thought it was only necessary to set up schools and
colleges, with a grant of land for maintenance, and that they might then be
left to themselves. But education is not a weed that will grow lustily in any
soil, it is a necessary and delicate crop that may easily wilt and degenerate.
We learn nowadays that the under-development of universities and educational
machinery is like some under-development of the brain and nerves, which hampers
the whole growth of the social body. By European standards, by the standard of
any state that has existed hitherto, the level of the common education of
America is high; but by the standard of what it might be, America is an
uneducated country. And those fathers of America thought also that they had but
to leave the press free, and everyone would live in the light. They did not
realize that a free press could develop a sort of constitutional venality due
to its relations with advertisers, and that large newspaper proprietors could
become buccaneers of opinion and insensate wreckers of good beginnings. And,
finally, the makers of America had no knowledge of the complexities of vote
manipulation. The whole science of elections was beyond their ken, they knew
nothing of the need of the transferable vote to prevent the “working” of
elections by specialized organizations, and the crude and rigid methods they
adopted left their political system the certain prey of the great party
machines that have robbed American democracy of half its freedom and most of
its political soul. Politics became a trade, and a very base trade; decent and
able men, after the first great period, drifted out of politics and attended to
“business,” and what I have called elsewhere the “sense of the state”[432]
declined. Private enterprise ruled in many matters of common concern, because
political corruption made collective enterprise impossible.

Yet the defects of the great political system created by the Americans of the
revolutionary period did not appear at once. For several generations the
history of the United States was one of rapid expansion and of an amount of
freedom, homely happiness, and energetic work unparalleled in the world’s
history. And the record of America for the whole last century and a half, in
spite of many reversions towards inequality, in spite of much rawness and much
blundering, is nevertheless as bright and honourable a story as that of any
other contemporary people.

[Illustration: Benjamin Franklin]

In this brief account of the creation of the United States of America we have
been able to do little more than mention the names of some of the group of
great men who made this new departure in human history. We have named casually
or we have not even named such men as Tom Paine, Benjamin Franklin, Patrick
Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Adams brothers, Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and
George Washington. It is hard to measure the men of one period of history with
those in another. Some writers, even American writers, impressed by the
artificial splendours of the European courts and by the tawdry and destructive
exploits of a Frederick the Great or a Great Catherine, display a snobbish
shame of something homespun about these makers of America. They feel that
Benjamin Franklin at the court of Louis XVI, with his long hair, his plain
clothes, and his pawky manner, was sadly lacking in aristocratic distinction.
But stripped to their personalities, Louis XVI was hardly gifted enough or
noble-minded enough to be Franklin’s valet. If human greatness is a matter of
scale and glitter, then no doubt Alexander the Great is at the apex of human
greatness. But is greatness that? Is not a great man rather one who, in a great
position or amidst great opportunities--and great gifts are no more than great
opportunities--serves God and his fellows with a humble heart? And quite a
number of these Americans of the revolutionary time do seem to have displayed
much disinterestedness and devotion. They were limited men, fallible men;
Washington was, for example, a conspicuously indolent man; but on the whole
they seem to have cared more for the commonweal they were creating than for any
personal end or personal vanity.

[Illustration: Washington]

They were all limited men. They were limited in knowledge and outlook; they
were limited by the limitations of the time. And there was no perfect man among
them. They were, like all of us, men of mixed motives; good impulses arose in
their minds, great ideas swept through them, and also they could be jealous,
lazy, obstinate, greedy, vicious. If one were to write a true, full, and
particular history of the making of the United States, it would have to be
written with charity and high spirits as a splendid comedy. And in no other
regard do we find the rich tortuous humanity of the American story so finely
displayed as in regard to slavery. Slavery, having regard to the general
question of labour, is the test of this new soul in the world’s history, the
American soul.

Slavery began very early in the European history of America, and no European
people who went to America can be held altogether innocent in the matter. At a
time when the German is still the moral whipping-boy of Europe, it is well to
note that the German record is in this respect the best of all. Almost the
first outspoken utterances against negro slavery came from German settlers in
Pennsylvania. But the German settler was working with free labour upon a
temperate countryside, well north of the plantation zone; he was not under
serious temptation in this matter. American slavery began with the enslavement
of Indians for gang work in mines and upon plantations, and it is curious to
note that it was a very good and humane man indeed, Las Casas, who urged that
negroes should be brought to America to relieve his tormented Indian protégés.
The need for labour upon the plantations of the West Indies and the south was
imperative. When the supply of Indian captives proved inadequate, the planters
turned not only to the negro, but to the jails and poor-houses of Europe for a
supply of toilers. The reader of Defoe’s _Moll Flanders_ will learn how the
business of Virginian white slavery looked to an intelligent Englishman in the
early eighteenth century. But the negro came very early. The year (1620) that
saw the Pilgrim Fathers landing at Plymouth in New England saw a Dutch sloop
disembarking the first cargo of negroes at Jamestown in Virginia. Negro slavery
was as old as New England; it had been an American institution for over a
century and a half before the War of Independence. It was to struggle on for
the better part of a century more.

But the conscience of thoughtful men in the colonies was never quite easy upon
this score, and it was one of the accusations of Thomas Jefferson against the
crown and lords of Great Britain that every attempt to ameliorate or restrain
the slave trade on the part of the colonists had been checked by the great
proprietary interests in the mother country.[433] With the moral and
intellectual ferment of the revolution, the question of negro slavery came
right into the foreground of the public conscience. The contrast and the
challenge glared upon the mind. “All men are by nature free and equal,” said
the Virginia Bill of Rights, and outside in the sunshine, under the whip of the
overseer, toiled the negro slave.

It witnesses to the great change in human ideas since the Roman Imperial system
dissolved under the barbarian inrush, that there could be this heart-searching.
Conditions of industry, production, and land tenure had long prevented any
recrudescence of gang slavery; but now the cycle had come round again, and
there were enormous immediate advantages to be reaped by the owning and ruling
classes in the revival of that ancient institution in mines, upon plantations,
and upon great public works. It was revived--but against great opposition. From
the beginning of the revival there were protests, and they grew. The revival
was counter to the new conscience of mankind. In some respects the new gang
slavery was worse than anything in the ancient world. Peculiarly horrible was
the provocation by the trade of slave wars and man hunts in Western Africa, and
the cruelties of the long transatlantic voyage. The poor creatures were packed
on the ships often with insufficient provision of food and water, without
proper sanitation, without medicines. Many who could tolerate slavery upon the
plantations found the slave trade too much for their moral digestions. Three
European nations were chiefly concerned in this dark business, Britain, Spain,
and Portugal, because they were the chief owners of the new lands in America.
The comparative innocence of the other European powers is to be ascribed
largely to their lesser temptations. They were similar communities; in parallel
circumstances they would have behaved similarly.

Throughout the middle part of the eighteenth century there was an active
agitation against negro slavery in Great Britain as well as in the States. It
was estimated that in 1770 there were fifteen thousand slaves in Britain,
mostly brought over by their owners from the West Indies and Virginia. In 1771
the issue came to a conclusive test in Britain before Lord Mansfield. A negro
named James Somersett had been brought to England from Virginia by his owner.
He ran away, was captured, and violently taken on a ship to be returned to
Virginia. From the ship he was extracted by a writ of _habeas corpus_. Lord
Mansfield declared that slavery was a condition unknown to English law, an
“odious” condition, and Somersett walked out of the court a free man.

The Massachusetts constitution of 1780 had declared that “all men are born free
and equal.” A certain negro, Quaco, put this to the test in 1783, and in that
year the soil of Massachusetts became like the soil of Britain, intolerant of
slavery; to tread upon it was to become free. At that time no other state in
the Union followed this example. At the census of 1790, Massachusetts, alone of
all the states, returned “no slaves.”

The state of opinion in Virginia is remarkable, because it brings to light the
peculiar difficulties of the southern states. The great Virginian statesmen,
such as Washington and Jefferson, condemned the institution, yet because there
was no other form of domestic service, Washington owned slaves. There was in
Virginia a strong party in favour of emancipating slaves. But they demanded
that the emancipated slaves should leave the state within a year or be
outlawed! They were naturally alarmed at the possibility that a free barbaric
black community, many of its members African-born and reeking with traditions
of cannibalism and secret and dreadful religious rites, should arise beside
them upon Virginian soil. When we consider that point of view, we can
understand why it was that a large number of Virginians should be disposed to
retain the mass of blacks in the country under control as slaves, while at the
same time they were bitterly opposed to the slave trade and the importation of
any fresh blood from Africa. The free blacks, one sees, might easily become a
nuisance; indeed the free state of Massachusetts presently closed its borders
to their entry.... The question of slavery, which in the ancient world was
usually no more than a question of status between individuals racially akin,
merged in America with the different and profounder question of relationship
between two races at opposite extremes of the human species and of the most
contrasted types of tradition and culture. If the black man had been white,
there can be little doubt that negro slavery, like white servitude, would have
vanished from the United States within a generation of the Declaration of
Independence as a natural consequence of the statements in that declaration.


§ 7[434]

We have told of the War of Independence in America as the first great break
away from the system of European monarchies and foreign offices, as the
repudiation by a new community of Machiavellian statescraft as the directive
form of human affairs. Within a decade there came a second and much more
portentous revolt against this strange game of Great Powers, this tangled
interaction of courts and policies which obsessed Europe. But this time it was
no breaking away at the outskirts. In France, the nest and home of Grand
Monarchy, the heart and centre of Europe, came this second upheaval. And,
unlike the American colonists, who simply repudiated a king, the French,
following in the footsteps of the English revolution, beheaded one.

Like the British revolution and like the revolution in the United States, the
French revolution can be traced back to the ambitious absurdities of the French
monarchy. The schemes of aggrandizement, the aims and designs of the Grand
Monarch, necessitated an expenditure upon war equipment throughout Europe out
of all proportion to the taxable capacity of the age. And even the splendours
of monarchy were enormously costly, measured by the productivity of the time.
In France, just as in Britain and in America, the first resistance was made not
to the monarch as such and to his foreign policy as such, nor with any clear
recognition of these things as the roots of the trouble, but merely to the
inconveniences and charges upon the individual life caused by them. The
practical taxable capacity of France must have been relatively much less than
that of England because of the various exemptions of the nobility and clergy.
The burthen resting directly upon the common people was heavier. That made the
upper classes the confederates of the court instead of the antagonists of the
court as they were in England, and so prolonged the period of waste further;
but when at last the bursting-point did come, the explosion was more violent
and shattering.

During the years of the American War of Independence there were few signs of
any impending explosion in France.[435] There was much misery among the lower
classes, much criticism and satire, much outspoken liberal thinking, but there
was little to indicate that the thing as a whole, with all its customs, usages,
and familiar discords, might not go on for an indefinite time. It was consuming
beyond its powers of production, but as yet only the inarticulate classes were
feeling the pinch. Gibbon, the historian, knew France well; Paris was as
familiar to him as London; but there is no suspicion to be detected in the
passage we have quoted that days of political and social dissolution were at
hand. No doubt the world abounded in absurdities and injustices, yet
nevertheless, from the point of view of a scholar and a gentleman, it was
fairly comfortable, and it seemed fairly secure.

There was much liberal thought, speech, and sentiment in France at this time.
Parallel with and a little later than John Locke in England, Montesquieu
(1689-1755) in France, in the earlier half of the eighteenth century, had
subjected social, political, and religious institutions to the same searching
and fundamental analysis, especially in his _Esprit des Lois_. He had stripped
the magical prestige from the absolutist monarchy in France. He shares with
Locke the credit for clearing away many of the false ideas that had hitherto
prevented deliberate and conscious attempts to reconstruct human society. It
was not his fault if at first some extremely unsound and impermanent shanties
were run up on the vacant site. The generation that followed him in the middle
and later decades of the eighteenth century was boldly speculative upon the
moral and intellectual clearings he had made. A group of brilliant writers, the
“Encyclopædists,” mostly rebel spirits from the excellent schools of the
Jesuits, set themselves under the leadership of Diderot to scheme out, in a
group of works, a new world (1766). The glory of the Encyclopædists, says
Mallet, lay “in their hatred of things unjust, in their denunciation of the
trade in slaves, of the inequalities of taxation, of the corruption of justice,
of the wastefulness of wars, in their dreams of social progress, in their
sympathy with the rising empire of industry which was beginning to transform
the world.” Their chief error seems to have been an indiscriminate hostility to
religion. They believed that man was naturally just and politically competent,
whereas his impulse to social service and self-forgetfulness is usually
developed only through an education essentially religious, and sustained only
in an atmosphere of honest co-operation. Unco-ordinated human initiatives lead
to nothing but social chaos.

Side by side with the Encyclopædists were the Economists or Physiocrats, who
were making bold and crude inquiries into the production and distribution of
food and goods. Morally, the author of the _Code de la Nature_, denounced the
institution of private property and proposed a communistic organization of
society. He was the precursor of that large and various school of collectivist
thinkers in the nineteenth century who are lumped together as Socialists.

Both the Encyclopædists and the various Economists and Physiocrats demanded a
considerable amount of hard thinking in their disciples. An easier and more
popular leader to follow was that eloquent sentimentalist, Rousseau (1712-78).
He preached the alluring doctrine that the primitive state of man was one of
virtue and happiness, from which he had declined through the rather
inexplicable activities of priests, kings, lawyers, and the like. (We have
tried to convey to our readers in chap, ix, § 2, primitive man’s state of
virtue and happiness, as the vivid vision of Mr. Worthington Smith has realized
it; and we have done our best to show both the necessity of priests and kings
to early civilization, and the possible inconveniences of their later rô1es in
human affairs.) Rousseau’s work was essentially demoralizing. It struck not
only at the existing social fabric, but at any social organization. When he
wrote of the _Social Contract_, he did so rather to excuse breaches of the
covenant than to emphasize its necessity. Man is so far from perfect, that a
writer who could show that the almost universal disposition, against which we
all have to fortify ourselves, to repudiate debts, misbehave sexually, and
evade the toil and expenses of education for ourselves and others, is not after
all a delinquency, but a fine display of Natural Virtue, was bound to have a
large following in every class that could read him. Rousseau’s tremendous vogue
did much to swamp the harder, clearer thinkers of this time, and to prepare a
sentimental, declamatory, and insincere popular psychology for the great trials
that were now coming upon France.[436]



We have already remarked that hitherto no human community has begun to act upon
theory. There must first be some breakdown and necessity for direction that
lets theory into her own. Up to 1788 the republican and anarchist talk and
writing of French thinkers must have seemed as ineffective and politically
unimportant as the æsthetic socialism of William Morris at the end of the
nineteenth century. There was the social and political system going on with an
effect of an invincible persistence, the king hunting and mending his clocks,
the court and the world of fashion pursuing their pleasures, the financiers
conceiving continually more enterprising extensions of credit, business
blundering clumsily along its ancient routes, much incommoded by taxes and
imposts, the peasants worrying, toiling, and suffering, full of a hopeless
hatred of the nobleman’s château. Men talked--and felt they were merely
talking. Anything might be said, because nothing would ever happen.

