# BOOK III - XVII - § 5
[Metadata]: # {04.03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

SEA PEOPLES AND TRADING PEOPLES

§ 1. _The Earliest Ships and Sailors._ § 2. _The Ægean Cities      before
History._ § 3. _The First Voyages of Exploration._ § 4.      _Early Traders._ §
5. _Early Travellers._

# § 5
When one realizes the absence of small money or of any conveniently portable
means of exchange in the pre-Alexandrian world, one perceives how impossible
was private travel in those days.[130] The first “inns”--no doubt a sort of
caravanserai--are commonly said to have come into existence in Lydia in the
third or fourth century B.C. That, however, is too late a date. They are
certainly older than that. There is good evidence of them at least as early as
the sixth century. Æschylus twice mentions inns. His word is “all-receiver,” or
“all-receiving house.”[131] Private travellers must have been fairly common in
the Greek world, including its colonies, by this time. But such private travel
was a comparatively new thing then. The early historians Hecatæus and Herodotus
travelled widely. “I suspect,” says Professor Gilbert Murray, “that this sort
of travel ‘for Historie’ or ‘for discovery’ was rather a Greek invention. Solon
is supposed to have practiced it; and even Lycurgus.”... The earlier travellers
were traders travelling in a caravan or in a shipload, and carrying their goods
and their minas and shekels of metal or gems or bales of fine stuff with them,
or government officials travelling with letters of introduction and a proper
retinue. Possibly there were a few mendicants, and, in some restricted regions,
religious pilgrims.

That earlier world before 600 B.C. was one in which a lonely “stranger” was a
rare and suspected and endangered being. He might suffer horrible cruelties,
for there was little law to protect such as he. Few individuals strayed
therefore. One lived and died attached and tied to some patriarchal tribe if
one was a nomad, or to some great household if one was civilized, or to one of
the big temple establishments which we will presently discuss. Or one was a
herded slave. One knew nothing, except for a few monstrous legends, of the rest
of the world in which one lived. We know more to-day, indeed, of the world of
600 B.C. than any single living being knew at that time. We map it out, see it
as a whole in relation to past and future. We begin to learn precisely what was
going on at the same time in Egypt and Spain and Media and India and China. We
can share in imagination, not only the wonder of Hanno’s sailors, but of the
men who lit the warning beacons on the shore. We know that those “mountains
flaming to the sky” were only the customary burning of the dry grass at that
season of the year. Year by year, more and more rapidly, our common knowledge
increases. In the years to come men will understand still more of those lives
in the past until perhaps they will understand them altogether.

