# BOOK VI - XXXI - § 1
[Metadata]: # {07.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {07.02.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VI
XXXI
§ 1
# § 1
In the preceding two chapters we have concentrated our attention chiefly on the
collapse in the comparatively short space of four centuries of the political
and social order of the western part of the great Roman Empire of Cæsar and
Trajan. We have dwelt upon the completeness of that collapse. To any
intelligent and public-spirited mind living in the time and under the
circumstances of St. Benedict or Cassiodorus, it must have seemed, indeed, as
if the light of civilization was waning and near extinction. But with the
longer views a study of universal history gives us, we can view those centuries
of shadow as a phase, and probably a necessary phase, in the onward march of
social and political ideas and understandings. And if, during that time, a dark
sense of calamity rested upon Western Europe, we must remember that over large
portions of the world there was no retrogression.

With their Western prepossessions European writers are much too prone to
underrate the tenacity of the Eastern empire that centred upon Constantinople.
This empire embodied a tradition much more ancient than that of Rome. If the
reader will look at the map we have given of its extent in the sixth century,
and if he will reflect that its official language had then become Greek, he
will realize that what we are dealing with here is only nominally a branch of
the Roman Empire; it is really the Hellenic Empire of which Herodotus dreamt
and which Alexander the Great founded. True it called itself Roman and its
people “Romans,” and to this day modern Greek is called “Romaic.” True also
that Constantine the Great knew no Greek and that Justinian’s accent was bad.
These superficialities of name and form cannot alter the fact that the empire
was in reality Hellenic, with a past of six centuries at the time of
Constantine the Great, and that while the real Roman Empire crumpled up
completely in four centuries, this Hellenic “Roman Empire” held out for more
than eleven, from 312, the beginning of the reign of Constantine the Great, to
1453, when Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks.

And while we have had to tell of something like a complete social collapse in
the west, there were no such equivalent breakdowns in the east. Towns and
cities flourished, the countryside was well cultivated, trade went on. For many
centuries Constantinople was the greatest and richest city in the world. We
will not trouble ourselves here with the names and follies, the crimes and
intrigues, of its tale of emperors. As with most monarchs of great states, they
did not guide their empire; they were carried by it. We have already dealt at
some length with Constantine the Great (312-337), we have mentioned Theodosius
the Great (379-395), who for a little while reunited the empire, and Justinian
I (527-565).[304] Presently we shall tell something of Heraclius (610-641).
Justinian, like Constantine, may have had Slav blood in his veins. He was a man
of great ambition and great organizing power, and he had the good fortune to be
married to a woman of equal or greater ability, the Empress Theodora, who had
in her youth been an actress of doubtful reputation. But his ambitious attempts
to restore the ancient greatness of the empire probably overtaxed its
resources. As we have told, he reconquered the African province from the
Vandals and most of Italy from the Goths. He also recovered the South of Spain.
He built the great and beautiful church of Saint Sophia in Constantinople,
founded a university, and codified the law.[305] But against this we must set
his closing of the schools of Athens. Meanwhile a great plague swept the world,
and at his death this renewed and expanded empire of his crumpled up again like
a blown-out bladder. The greater part of his Italian conquests was lost to the
Lombards. Italy was indeed at that time almost a desert; the Lombard historians
assert they came into an empty country. The Avars and Slavs struck down from
the Danube country towards the Adriatic, Slav populations establishing
themselves in what is now Serbia, Croatia, and Dalmatia, to become the
Yugo-Slavs of to-day. Moreover, a great and exhausting struggle began with the
Sassanid Empire in Persia.

But before we say anything of this struggle, in which the Persians thrice came
near to taking Constantinople, and which was decided by a great Persian defeat
at Nineveh (627), it is necessary to sketch very briefly the history of Persia
from the Parthian days.

