# BOOK VI (_Continued_) - XXXIII - § 12
[Metadata]: # {08.02.11}
[Descriptor]: # {08.02.11}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VI (_Continued_)
XXXIII
§ 12
# § 12
The Emperor Frederick II is a very convenient example of the sort of doubter
and rebel the thirteenth century could produce. It may be interesting to tell a
little of this intelligent and cynical man. He was the son of the German
Emperor, Henry VI, and grandson of Frederick Barbarossa, and his mother was the
daughter of Roger I, the Norman King of Sicily. He inherited this kingdom in
1198, when he was four years old; his mother was his guardian for six months,
and when she died, Pope Innocent III (1198 to 1216) became regent and guardian.
He seems to have had an exceptionally good and remarkably mixed education, and
his accomplishments earned him the flattering title of _Stupor mundi_, the
amazement of the world. The result of getting an Arabic view of Christianity,
and a Christian view of Islam, was to make him believe that all religions were
impostures, a view held perhaps by many a stifled observer in the Age of Faith.
But he talked about his views; his blasphemies and heresies are on record.
Growing up under the arrogant rule of Innocent III, who never seems to have
realized that his ward had come of age, he developed a slightly humorous
evasiveness. It was the papal policy to prevent any fresh coalescence of the
power of Germany and Italy, and it was equally Frederick’s determination to get
whatever he could. When presently opportunity offered him the imperial crown of
Germany, he secured the Pope’s support by agreeing, if he were elected, to
relinquish his possessions in Sicily and South Italy, and to put down heresy in
Germany. For Innocent III was one of the great persecuting Popes, an able,
grasping, and aggressive man. (For a Pope, he was exceptionally young. He
became Pope at thirty-seven.) It was Innocent who had preached a cruel crusade
against the heretics in the south of France, a crusade that presently became a
looting expedition beyond his control. So soon as Frederick was elected emperor
(1211),[355] Innocent pressed for the performance of the vows and promises he
had wrung from his dutiful ward. The clergy were to be freed from lay
jurisdiction and from taxation, and exemplary cruelties were to be practised
upon the heretics. None of which things Frederick did. As we have already told,
he would not even relinquish Sicily. He liked Sicily as a place of residence
better than he liked Germany.

Innocent III died baffled in 1216, and his successor, Honorius III, effected
nothing. Honorius was succeeded by Gregory IX (1227), who evidently came to the
papal throne with a nervous resolution to master this perplexing young man. He
excommunicated him at once for failing to start upon his crusade, which was now
twelve years overdue; and he denounced his vices, heresies, and general
offences in a public letter (1227). To this Frederick replied in a far abler
document addressed to all the princes of Europe, a document of extreme
importance in history, because it is the first clear statement of the issue
between the pretensions of the Pope to be absolute ruler of all Christendom,
and the claims of the secular rulers.[356] This conflict had always been
smouldering; it had broken out here in one form, and there in another; but now
Frederick put it in clear general terms upon which men could combine together.

Having delivered this blow, he departed upon the pacific crusade of which we
have already told. In 1239, Gregory IX was excommunicating him for a second
time, and renewing that warfare of public abuse in which the papacy had already
suffered severely. The controversy was revived after Gregory IX was dead, when
Innocent IV was Pope; and again a devastating letter, which men were bound to
remember, was written by Frederick against the church. He denounced the pride
and irreligion of the clergy, and ascribed all the corruptions of the time to
their pride and wealth. He proposed to his fellow princes a general
confiscation of church property--for the good of the church. It was a
suggestion that never afterwards left the imagination of the European princes.

We will not go on to tell of his last years or of the disaster at Parma, due to
his carelessness, which cast a shadow of failure over his end. The particular
events of his life are far less significant than its general atmosphere. It is
possible to piece together something of his court life in Sicily. He is
described towards the end of his life as “red, bald, and short-sighted”; but
his features were good and pleasing. He was luxurious in his way of living, and
fond of beautiful things. He is described as licentious. But it is clear that
his mind was not satisfied by religious scepticism, and that he was a man of
very effectual curiosity and inquiry. He gathered Jewish and Moslem as well as
Christian philosophers at his court, and he did much to irrigate the Italian
mind with Saracenic influences. Through him Arabic numerals and algebra were
introduced to Christian students, and among other philosophers at his court was
Michael Scott, who translated portions of Aristotle and the commentaries
thereon of the great Arab philosopher Averroes (of Cordoba). In 1224 Frederick
founded the University of Naples, and he enlarged and enriched the great
medical school at Salerno University, the most ancient of universities. He also
founded a zoological garden. He left a book on hawking, which shows him to have
been an acute observer of the habits of birds, and he was one of the first
Italians to write Italian verse. Italian poetry was indeed born at his court.
He has been called by an able writer, “the first of the moderns,” and the
phrase expresses aptly the unprejudiced detachment of his intellectual side.
His was an all-round originality. During a gold shortage he introduced and made
a success of a coinage of stamped leather, bearing his promise to pay in gold,
a sort of leather bank-note issue.[357]

In spite of the torrent of abuse and calumny in which Frederick was drenched,
he left a profound impression upon the popular imagination. He is still
remembered in South Italy almost as vividly as is Napoleon I by the peasants of
France; he is the “Gran Federigo.” And German scholars declare[358] that, in
spite of Frederick’s manifest dislike for Germany, it is he, and not Frederick
I, Frederick Barbarossa, to whom that German legend originally attached--that
legend which represents a great monarch slumbering in a deep cavern, his beard
grown round a stone table, against a day of awakening when the world will be
restored by him from an extremity of disorder to peace. Afterwards, it seems,
the story was transferred to the Crusader Barbarossa, the grandfather of
Frederick II.

A difficult child was Frederick II for Mother Church, and he was only the
precursor of many such difficult children. The princes and educated gentlemen
throughout Europe read his letters and discussed them. The more enterprising
university students found, marked, and digested the Arabic Aristotle he had
made accessible to them in Latin. Salerno cast a baleful light upon Rome. All
sorts of men must have been impressed by the futility of the excommunications
and interdicts that were levelled at Frederick.


§ 13[359]

We have said that Innocent III never seemed to realize that his ward, Frederick
II, was growing up. It is equally true that the papacy never seemed to realize
that Europe was growing up. It is impossible for an intelligent modern student
of history not to sympathize with the underlying idea of the papal court, with
the idea of one universal rule of righteousness keeping the peace of the earth,
and not to recognize the many elements of nobility that entered into the
Lateran policy. Sooner or later mankind must come to one universal peace,
unless our race is to be destroyed by the increasing power of its own
destructive inventions; and that universal peace must needs take the form of a
government, that is to say a law-sustaining organization, in the best sense of
the word religious; a government ruling men through the educated co-ordination
of their minds in a common conception of human history and human destiny.

The papacy we must now recognize as the first clearly conscious attempt to
provide such a government in the world. We cannot too earnestly examine its
deficiencies and inadequacies, for every lesson we can draw from them is
necessarily of the greatest value to us in forming our ideas of our own
international relationships. We have tried to suggest the main factors in the
breakdown of the Roman Republic, and it now behoves us to attempt a diagnosis
of the failure of the Roman Church to secure and organize the good will of
mankind.

The first thing that will strike the student is the intermittence of the
efforts of the church to establish the world City of God. The policy of the
church was not whole-heartedly and continuously set upon that end. It was only
now and then that some fine personality or some group of fine personalities
dominated it in that direction. The kingdom of God that Jesus of Nazareth had
preached was overlaid, as we have explained, almost from the beginning by the
doctrines and ceremonial traditions of an earlier age, and of an intellectually
inferior type. Christianity almost from its commencement ceased to be purely
prophetic and creative. It entangled itself with archaic traditions of human
sacrifice, with Mithraic blood-cleansing, with priestcraft as ancient as human
society, and with elaborate doctrines about the structure of the divinity. The
gory forefinger of the Etruscan pontifex maximus emphasized the teachings of
Jesus of Nazareth; the mental complexity of the Alexandrian Greek entangled
them. In the inevitable jangle of these incompatibles the church had become
dogmatic. In despair of other solutions to its intellectual discords it had
resorted to arbitrary authority. Its priests and bishops were more and more men
moulded to creeds and dogmas and set procedures; by the time they became
cardinals or popes they were usually oldish men, habituated to a politic
struggle for immediate ends and no longer capable of world-wide views. They no
longer wanted to see the Kingdom of God established in the hearts of men--they
had forgotten about that; they wanted to see the power of the church, which was
their own power, dominating men. They were prepared to bargain even with the
hates and fears and lusts in men’s hearts to ensure that power. And it was just
because many of them probably doubted secretly of the entire soundness of their
vast and elaborate doctrinal fabric, that they would brook no discussion of it.
They were intolerant of questions or dissent, not because they were sure of
their faith, but because they were not. They wanted conformity for reasons of
policy. By the thirteenth century the church was evidently already morbidly
anxious about the gnawing doubts that might presently lay the whole structure
of its pretensions in ruins. It had no serenity of soul. It was hunting
everywhere for heretics as timid old ladies are said to look under beds and in
cupboards for burglars before retiring for the night.

We have already mentioned (chap, xxxi, § 5) the Persian Mani who was crucified
and flayed in the year 277. His way of representing the struggle between good
and evil was as a struggle between a power of light which was, as it were, in
rebellion against a power of darkness inherent in the universe. All these
profound mysteries are necessarily represented by symbols and poetic
expressions, and the ideas of Mani still find a response in many intellectual
temperaments to-day. One may hear Manichæan doctrines from many Christian
pulpits. But the orthodox Catholic symbol was a different one. These Manichæan
ideas had spread very widely in Europe, and particularly in Bulgaria and the
south of France. In the south of France the people who held them were called
the Cathars or Albigenses. Their ideas jarred so little with the essentials of
Christianity that they believed themselves to be devout Christians. As a body
they lived lives of conspicuous virtue and purity in a violent, undisciplined,
and vicious age. But they questioned the doctrinal soundness of Rome and the
orthodox interpretation of the Bible. They thought Jesus was a rebel against
the cruelty of the God of the Old Testament, and not his harmonious son.
Closely associated with the Albigenses were the Waldenses, the followers of a
man called Waldo, who seems to have been quite soundly Catholic in his
theology, but equally offensive to the church because he denounced the riches
and luxury of the clergy. This was enough for the Lateran, and so we have the
spectacle of Innocent III preaching a crusade against these unfortunate
sectaries, and permitting the enlistment of every wandering scoundrel at loose
ends to carry fire and sword and rape and every conceivable outrage among the
most peaceful subjects of the King of France. The accounts of the cruelties and
abominations of this crusade are far more terrible to read than any account of
Christian martyrdoms by the pagans, and they have the added horror of being
indisputably true.

This black and pitiless intolerance was an evil spirit to be mixed into the
project of a rule of God on earth. This was a spirit entirely counter to that
of Jesus of Nazareth. We do not hear of his smacking the faces or wringing the
wrists of recalcitrant or unresponsive disciples. But the Popes during their
centuries of power were always raging against the slightest reflection upon the
intellectual sufficiency of the church.

And the intolerance of the church was not confined to religious matters. The
shrewd, pompous, irascible, and rather malignant old men who manifestly
constituted a dominant majority in the councils of the church, resented any
knowledge but their own knowledge, and distrusted any thought at all that they
did not correct and control. They set themselves to restrain science, of which
they were evidently jealous. Any mental activity but their own struck them as
being insolent. Later on they were to have a great struggle upon the question
of the earth’s position in space, and whether it moved round the sun or not.
This was really not the business of the church at all. She might very well have
left to reason the things that are reason’s, but she seems to have been
impelled by an inner necessity to estrange the intellectual conscience in men.

Had this intolerance sprung from a real intensity of conviction it would have
been bad enough, but it was accompanied by a scarcely disguised contempt for
the intelligence and mental dignity of the common man that makes it far less
acceptable to our modern judgments, and which no doubt made it far less
acceptable to the free spirits of the time. We have told quite dispassionately
the policy of the Roman church towards her troubled sister in the East. Many of
the tools and expedients she used were abominable. In her treatment of her own
people a streak of real cynicism is visible. She destroyed her prestige by
disregarding her own teaching of righteousness. Of dispensations we have
already spoken (§ 11). Her crowning folly in the sixteenth century was the sale
of _indulgences_, whereby the sufferings of the soul in purgatory could be
commuted for a money payment. But the spirit that led at last to this shameless
and, as it proved, disastrous proceeding, was already very evident in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

Long before the seed of criticism that Frederick II had sown had germinated in
men’s minds and produced its inevitable crop of rebellion, there was apparent a
strong feeling in Christendom that all was not well with the spiritual
atmosphere. There began movements, movements that nowadays we should call
“revivalist,” within the church, that implied rather than uttered a criticism
of the sufficiency of her existing methods and organization. Men sought fresh
forms of righteous living outside the monasteries and priesthood. One notable
figure is that of St. Francis of Assisi (1181-1226). We cannot tell here in any
detail of how this pleasant young gentleman gave up all the amenities and ease
of his life and went forth to seek God; the opening of the story is not unlike
the early experiences of Gautama Buddha. He had a sudden conversion in the
midst of a life of pleasure, and, taking a vow of extreme poverty, he gave
himself up to an imitation of the life of Christ, and to the service of the
sick and wretched, and more particularly to the service of the lepers, who then
abounded in Italy. He was joined by great multitudes of disciples, and so the
first Friars of the Franciscan Order came into existence. An order of women
devotees was set up beside the original confraternity, and in addition great
numbers of men and women were brought into less formal association. He
preached, unmolested by the Moslems, be it noted, in Egypt and Palestine,
though the Fifth Crusade was then in progress. His relations with the church
are still a matter for discussion.[360] His work had been sanctioned by Pope
Innocent III, but while he was in the East there was a reconstitution of his
order, intensifying its discipline and substituting authority for responsive
impulse, and as a consequence of these changes he resigned its headship. To the
end he clung passionately to the ideal of poverty, but he was hardly dead
before the order was holding property through trustees and building a great
church and monastery to his memory at Assisi. The disciplines of the order that
were applied after his death to his immediate associates are scarcely to be
distinguished from a persecution; several of the more conspicuous zealots for
simplicity were scourged, others were imprisoned, one was killed while
attempting to escape, and Brother Bernard, the “first disciple,” passed a year
in the woods and hills, hunted like a wild beast.

This struggle within the Franciscan Order is a very interesting one, because it
foreshadows the great troubles that were coming to Christendom. All through the
thirteenth century a section of the Franciscans were straining at the rule of
the church, and in 1318 four of them were burnt alive at Marseilles as
incorrigible heretics. There seems to have been little difference between the
teaching and spirit of St. Francis and that of Waldo in the twelfth century,
the founder of the murdered sect of Waldenses. Both were passionately
enthusiastic for the spirit of Jesus of Nazareth. But while Waldo rebelled
against the church, St. Francis did his best to be a good child of the church,
and his comment on the spirit of official Christianity was only implicit. But
both were instances of an outbreak of conscience against authority and the
ordinary procedure of the church. And it is plain that in the second instance,
as in the first, the church scented rebellion.

A very different character to St. Francis was the Spaniard St. Dominic
(1170-1221), who was, of all things, orthodox. He had a passion for the
argumentative conversion of heretics, and he was commissioned by Pope Innocent
III to go and preach to the Albigenses. His work went on side by side with the
fighting and massacres of the crusade; whom Dominic could not convert,
Innocent’s crusader slew; yet his very activities and the recognition and
encouragement of his order by the Pope witness to the rising tide of
discussion, and to the persuasion even of the papacy that force was no remedy.
In several respects the development of the Black Friars or Dominicans--the
Franciscans were the Grey Friars--shows the Roman church at the parting of the
ways, committing itself more and more deeply to organized dogma, and so to a
hopeless conflict with the quickening intelligence and courage of mankind. She
whose one duty was to lead, chose to compel. The last discourse of St. Dominic
to the heretics he had sought to convert is preserved to us. It is a signpost
in history. It betrays the fatal exasperation of a man who has lost his faith
in the power of truth because _his_ truth has not prevailed. “For many years,”
he said, “I have exhorted you in vain, with gentleness, preaching, praying, and
weeping. But according to the proverb of my country, ‘where blessing can
accomplish nothing, blows may avail.’ We shall rouse against you princes and
prelates, who, alas! will arm nations and kingdoms against this land ... and
thus blows will avail where blessings and gentleness have been powerless.”[361]

The thirteenth century saw the development of a new institution in the church,
the papal Inquisition. Before this time it had been customary for the Pope to
make occasional inquests or inquiries into heresy in this region or that, but
now Innocent III saw in the new order of the Dominicans a powerful instrument
of suppression. The Inquisition was organized as a standing inquiry under their
direction, and with fire and torment the church set itself, through this
instrument, to assail and weaken the human conscience in which its sole hope of
world dominion resided. Before the thirteenth century the penalty of death had
been inflicted but rarely upon heretics and unbelievers. Now in a hundred
market-places in Europe the dignitaries of the church watched the blackened
bodies of its antagonists, for the most part poor and insignificant people,
burn and sink pitifully, and their own great mission to mankind burn and sink
with them into dust and ashes.

The beginnings of the Franciscans and the Dominicans were but two among many of
the new forces that were arising in Christendom, either to help or shatter the
church, as its own wisdom might decide. Those two orders the church did
assimilate and use, though with a little violence in the case of the former.
But other forces were more frankly disobedient and critical. A century and a
half later came Wycliffe (1320-1384). He was a learned doctor at Oxford; for a
time he was Master of Balliol; and he held various livings in the church. Quite
late in his life he began a series of outspoken criticisms of the corruption of
the clergy and the unwisdom of the church. He organized a number of poor
priests, the Wycliffites, to spread his ideas throughout England; and in order
that people should judge between the church and himself, he translated the
Bible into English. He was a more learned and far abler man than either St.
Francis or St. Dominic. He had supporters in high places and a great following
among the people; and though Rome raged against him, and ordered his
imprisonment, he died a free man, still administering the Sacraments as parish
priest of Lutterworth. But the black and ancient spirit that was leading the
Catholic church to its destruction would not let his bones rest in his grave.
By a decree of the Council of Constance in 1415, his remains were ordered to be
dug up and burnt, an order which was carried out at the command of Pope Martin
V by Bishop Fleming in 1428. This desecration was not the act of some isolated
fanatic; it was the official act of the church.

