# BOOK V - XXVIII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {06.02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {06.02.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE RISE AND COLLAPSE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

FROM TIBERIUS GRACCHUS TO THE GOD EMPEROR IN ROME

§ 1. _The Science of Thwarting the Common Man._ § 2. _Finance in      the
Roman State._ § 3. _The Last Years of Republican Politics._ §      4. _The Era
of the Adventurer Generals._ § 5. _The End of the      Republic._ § 6. _The
Coming of the Princeps._ § 7. _Why the Roman      Republic Failed._

# § 4
Political life in Italy was not so much tranquillized as stunned by the
massacres and confiscations of Marius and Sulla. The scale upon which this
history is planned will not permit us to tell here of the great adventurers
who, relying more and more on the support of the legions, presently began to
scheme and intrigue again for dictatorial power in Rome. In 73 B.C. all Italy
was terrified by a rising of the slaves, and particularly of the gladiators,
led by a gladiator from Thessaly, Spartacus. He and seventy others had fled out
from a gladiatorial “farm” at Capua. Similar risings had already occurred in
Sicily. The forces under Spartacus necessarily became a miscellaneous band
drawn from east and west, without any common idea except the idea of dispersing
and getting home; nevertheless, he held out in southern Italy for two years,
using the then apparently extinct crater of Vesuvius for a time as a natural
fortress. The Italians, for all their love of gladiatorial display, failed to
appreciate this conversion of the whole country into an arena, this bringing of
the gladiatorial sword to the door, and when at last Spartacus was overthrown,
their terror changed to frantic cruelty, six thousand of his captured followers
were crucified--long miles of nailed and drooping victims--along the Appian
Way.

Here we cannot deal at any length with Lucullus, who invaded Pontus and fought
Mithridates, and brought the cultivated cherry-tree to Europe; nor can we tell
how ingeniously Pompey the Great stole the triumph and most of the prestige
Lucullus had won in Armenia beyond Pontus. Lucullus, like Sulla, retired into
an opulent private life, but with more elegance and with a more gracious end.
We cannot relate in any detail how Julius Cæsar accumulated reputation in the
west, by conquering Gaul, defeating the German tribes upon the Rhine, and
pushing a punitive raid across the Straits of Dover into Britain. More and more
important grow the legions; less and less significant are the Senate and the
assemblies of Rome. But there is a certain grim humour about the story of
Crassus that we cannot altogether neglect.

[Illustration: The ROMAN POWER about 50 B.C.]

This Crassus was a great money-lender and forestaller. He was a typical man of
the new Equestrian type, the social equivalent of a modern munition profiteer.
He first grew rich by buying up the property of those proscribed by Sulla. His
earliest exploits in the field were against Spartacus, whom finally he crushed
by great payments and exertions after a prolonged and expensive campaign. He
then, as the outcome of complicated bargains, secured the command in the east
and prepared to emulate the glories of Lucullus, who had pushed east from
Pergamum and Bithynia into Pontus, and of Pompey, who had completed the looting
of Armenia.

His experiences serve to demonstrate the gross ignorance with which the Romans
were conducting their affairs at that time. He crossed the Euphrates, expecting
to find in Persia another Hellenized kingdom like Pontus. But, as we have
already intimated, the great reservoirs of nomadic peoples that stretched round
from the Danube across Russia into Central Asia, had been raining back into the
lands between the Caspian Sea and the Indus that Alexander had conquered for
Hellenism. Crassus found himself against the “Scythian” again; against mobile
tribes of horsemen led by a monarch in Median costume.[251] The particular
variety of “Scythian” he encountered was called the Parthian. It is possible
that in the Parthians a Mongolian (Turanian) element was now mingled with the
Aryan strain; but the campaign of Crassus beyond the Euphrates is curiously
like the campaign of Darius beyond the Danube; there is the same heavy
thrusting of an infantry force against elusive light horsemen. But Crassus was
less quick than Darius to realize the need of withdrawal, and the Parthians
were better bowmen than the Scythians Darius met. They seemed to have had some
sort of noisy projectile of unusual strength and force, something different
from an ordinary arrow.[252] The campaign culminated in that two days’ massacre
of the hot, thirsty, hungry, and weary Roman legions, which is known as the
battle of Carrhæ (53 B.C.). They toiled through the sand, charging an enemy who
always evaded their charge and rode round them and shot them to pieces. Twenty
thousand of them were killed, and ten thousand marched on eastward as prisoners
into slavery in Iran.

What became of Crassus is not clearly known. There is a story, probably
invented for our moral benefit and suggested by his usuries, that he fell alive
into the hands of the Parthians and was killed by having molten gold poured
down his throat.

But this disaster has a very great significance indeed to our general history
of mankind. It serves to remind us that from the Rhine to the Euphrates, all
along to the north of the Alps and Danube and Black Sea, stretched one
continuous cloud of nomadic and semi-nomadic peoples, whom the statescraft of
imperial Rome was never able to pacify and civilize, nor her military science
subdue. We have already called attention to a map showing how the Second
Babylonian Empire, the Chaldean Empire, lay like a lamb in the embrace of the
Median power. In exactly the same way the Roman Empire lay like a lamb in the
embrace of this great crescent of outer barbarians. Not only was Rome never
able to thrust back or assimilate that superincumbent crescent, but she was
never able to organize the Mediterranean Sea into a secure and orderly system
of communication between one part of her empire and another. Quite unknown as
yet to Rome, the Mongolian tribes from northeastern Asia, the Huns and their
kin, walled back and driven out from China by the Tsi and Han dynasties, were
drifting and pressing westward, mixing with the Parthians, the Scythians, the
Teutons and the like, or driving them before them.

Never at any time did the Romans succeed in pushing their empire beyond
Mesopotamia, and upon Mesopotamia their hold was never very secure. Before the
close of the republic that power of assimilation which had been the secret of
their success was giving way to “patriotic” exclusiveness and “patriotic”
greed. Rome plundered and destroyed Asia Minor and Babylonia, which were the
necessary basis for an eastward extension to India, just as she had destroyed
and looted Carthage and so had no foothold for extension into Africa, and just
as she had destroyed Corinth and so cut herself off from an easy way into the
heart of Greece. Western European writers, impressed by the fact that later on
Rome Romanized and civilized Gaul and South Britain and restored the scene of
her earlier devastations in Spain to prosperity, are apt to ignore that over
far greater areas to the south and east her influence was to weaken and so
restore to barbarism the far wider conquests of Hellenic civilization.

