# BOOK VIII - XXXIX - § 7
[Metadata]: # {10.04.06}
[Descriptor]: # {10.04.06}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VIII
XXXIX
§ 7
# § 7
The vast changes we have been recording in the range of human power and
intercourse constitute the fundamental realities of nineteenth-century history.
But the atlas and political history of a time do not show what is being made,
but what has been made, and what is still going on. The formal history of the
latter half of the nineteenth century is not so much concerned with these
permanent changes in human affairs, as with the schemes of Foreign Offices and
the continuing exploits of the Great Powers. The men who were discovering,
inventing, developing inventions and working out ideas were far too busy and
far too few for effective interference in public affairs. The diplomatists,
politicians, and statesmen, on the other hand, were far too occupied with their
established interplay of nations and parties to heed what the contemporary mind
was doing. The Earl of Beaconsfield (1804-81), a leading British statesman,
remarked (of the Darwinian controversy) that it seemed to be a dispute whether
men were descended from apes or angels, and that for his part, he was “on the
side of the angels”--a sprightly saying which added greatly to his reputation.
His rival, Gladstone (1809-98), was of a more serious quality, and in the habit
of plunging during his vacations heavily and conspicuously into intellectual
affairs; among other such exploits he joined in public controversy with Huxley
upon Huxley’s own subject. He revealed ideas derived from Buffon (died 1788)
uncontaminated by any later influence. The whole field of modern discovery,
says Lecky in his _Democracy and Liberty_ was outside his range.

When this Mr. Gladstone was taken by Sir John Lubbock to see Charles
Darwin,[472] he talked all the time of Bulgarian politics, and was evidently
quite unaware of the real importance of the man he was visiting. Darwin, Lord
Morley records, expressed himself as deeply sensible of the honour done him by
the visit of “such a great man,” but he offered no comments on the Bulgarian
discourse. Faraday, the English electrician, whose work lives wherever a dynamo
spins, who is in the aeroplane, the deep-sea cable, the lights that light the
ways of the world, and wherever electricity serves our kind, was also visited
by Gladstone when the latter was Chancellor of the Exchequer. The man of
science tried in vain to explain some simple piece of apparatus to this fine
flower of the parliamentary world. “But,” said Mr. Gladstone, “after all, what
_good_ is it?” “Why, sir,” said Faraday, doing his best to bring things home to
him, “presently you will be able to tax it.”[473]

[Illustration: Mr. Gladstone]

Mr. Gladstone was one of the most central and representative politician
statesmen of the later nineteenth century, and it will be worth while to devote
a paragraph or so to his ideas and intellectual limitations. They will help us
to understand better the astonishing irrelevance of the political life of this
period to the realities that rose about it. He was a person of exceptional
intellectual vigour; he had flashes of real insight; but his circumstances and
temperament conspired against his ever attaining any real vision of the world
in which he lived.

He was the son of Sir John Gladstone, a West Indian slave-holder, the mortality
among whose slaves was a matter of debate in the House of Commons; he was
educated at Eton College, and at Christ Church, Oxford, and his mind never
recovered from the process. We have already told how after the Reformation the
English universities ceased to be the organs of the general intellectual life,
and shrank to be merely the educational preserves of the aristocracy and the
church. Jews, Roman Catholics, dissenters, sceptics, and all forms of
intellectual activity were carefully barred out from those almost extinguished
lamps of learning. Their mathematical work was poor, a series of exercises in
the mere patience-games and formulæ-writing of lower mathematics; science they
despised and excluded, and their staple training was the study, without any
archæology or historical perspective, of the more rhetorical and “poetic” of
the Latin and Greek classics.[474] Such a training prepared men not so much to
tackle and solve the problems of life, as to plaster them over with more or
less apt quotations. It turned the mind away from living contemporary things;
it showed the world reflected in a distorting mirror of bad historical
analogies; all the fated convergences of history were refracted into false
parallels. The British Parliament was thought of as a Senate, statesmen
postured as patricians and equestrians; the new industrial population, now
learning to read and think for itself, was transfigured into the likeness of
the illiterate savage and privileged citizen mob of later republican Rome.[475]
It was natural, therefore, that at the Oxford Union Society young Gladstone
should distinguish himself by an eloquent speech against the threatened reform
of the worst electoral abuses (see chap. xxxiv, § 2), should contest the
immediate emancipation of the parental slaves--slavery, he said, was
“sanctioned by Holy Scripture”--and should oppose on religious grounds the
removal of the disabilities of the Jews. He was returned to Parliament as Tory
member for Newark in 1832, promising to resist “that growing desire for change”
which threatened to produce, “along with partial good, a melancholy
preponderance of mischief.” In his first Parliament he distinguished himself by
his opposition to the admission of religious dissenters to the universities.

Here we have a mind manifestly of a tradition and make-up akin to that of the
framers of the Holy Alliance, a mind set steadfastly against all the vast
creative tendencies of the nineteenth-century world, as though they were no
more than a mere mischievous restlessness of slaves and lower-class persons
that would presently be allayed. But because of the streak of insight in his
composition, Gladstone did not remain set in a course of pure conservatism, he
presently began to realize the strength of the stream upon which things were
being carried forward; his intelligence, in spite of its perversion, set itself
to grasp the real forms of the torrent of change about him. He was a man of
great ambitions and immense energy; his animosity against his brilliant and
flippant Jewish rival Disraeli (afterwards Lord Beaconsfield), who was becoming
a leader amid the shifting of groups and parties, swung this man who had been
the “rising hope of the stern unbending Tories” more and more into a liberal
attitude. He began to express belief in the people, to support extensions of
the franchise, to cultivate the esteem of the dissenters, and, as Chancellor of
the Exchequer, to shift the burthen of taxation from the food and comforts of
the new classes of needy voters, that the franchise extensions were bringing
into the political world. It is clear that for some years he was profoundly
perplexed by the deep forces that evidently lay beneath the stir and thrust of
international politics; then he became a great exponent of a half-true theory,
the theory of Nationalism, that has played and still plays an intensely
mischievous part in the world.

We have already pointed out that there must be a natural political map of the
world which gives the best possible geographical divisions for human
administrations. Any other political division of the world than this natural
political map will necessarily be a misfit, and must produce stresses of
hostility and insurrection tending to shift boundaries in the direction
indicated by the natural political map. These would seem to be self-evident
propositions were it not that the diplomatists at Vienna evidently neither
believed nor understood anything of the sort, and thought themselves as free to
carve up the world as one is free to carve up such a boneless structure as a
cheese. Nor were these propositions evident to Mr. Gladstone. Most of the
upheavals and conflicts that began in Europe as the world recovered from the
exhaustion of the Napoleonic wars were quite obviously attempts of the ordinary
common men to get rid of governments that were such misfits as to be in many
cases intolerable. Generally the existing governments were misfits throughout
Europe because they were not socially representative, and so they were
hampering production and wasting human possibilities; but when there were added
to these universal annoyances differences of religion and racial culture
between rulers and ruled (as in most of Ireland), differences in race and
language (as in Austrian North Italy and throughout most of the Austrian
Empire), or differences in all these respects (as in Poland and the Turkish
Empire in Europe), the exasperation drove towards bloodshed. Europe was a
system of governing machines abominably adjusted. But Mr. Gladstone was no
patient mechanic set upon easing and righting the clumsy injuries of those
stupid adjustments. He was a white-faced, black-haired man of incredible
energy, with eyes like an eagle’s, wrath almost divine, and the “finest
baritone voice in Europe.” He apprehended these things romantically, therefore,
in a manner suitable for passionate treatment in large halls.

He was blind to the pitiful and wonderful reality of mankind, to these millions
and millions of ill-informed, ill-equipped, inexpressive, and divided human
beings, mostly very willing, could they but do it, to live righteously and
well. He fixed his eagle eye on a fantastic vision of “nations rightly
struggling to be free.”[476]

What is a nation? What is nationality? He never paused to ask. No one under the
spell of that fine baritone paused to ask. But historians must stand to the
questions a politician can evade. If our story of the world has demonstrated
anything, it has demonstrated the mingling of races and peoples, the
instability of human divisions, the swirling variety of human groups and human
ideas of association. A nation, it has been said, is an accumulation of human
beings who think they are one people; but we are told that Ireland is a nation,
and Protestant Ulster certainly does not share that idea; and Italy did not
think it was one people until long after its unity was accomplished. When the
writer was in Italy in 1916, people were saying: “This war will make us one
nation.” Again, are the English a nation or have they merged into a “British
nationality”? Scotchmen do not seem to believe very much in this British
nationality. It cannot be a community of race or language that constitutes a
nation, because the Gaels and the Lowlanders make up the Scotch “nation”; it
cannot be a common religion, for England has scores; nor a common literature,
or why is Britain separated from the United States, and the Argentine Republic
from Spain? We may suggest that a nation is in effect any assembly, mixture, or
confusion of people which is either afflicted by or wishes to be afflicted by a
foreign office of its own, in order that it should behave collectively as if it
alone constituted humanity. We have already in Chapter xxxvi, § 6, traced the
development of the Machiavellian monarchies into the rule of their foreign
offices, playing the part of “Powers.” The “nationality” which Mr. Gladstone
made his guiding political principle, is really no more than the romantic and
emotional exaggeration of the stresses produced by the discord of the natural
political map with unsuitable political arrangements. These stresses could be
used for the benefit of this power or the detriment of that.

[Illustration: Tribal Gods--national symbols for which men would die--of the
19th Century

John Bull Britannia Germania France Cathleen ni Houlihan]

Throughout the nineteenth century, and particularly throughout its latter half,
there has been a great working up of this nationalism in the world. All men are
by nature partisans and patriots, but the natural tribalism of men in the
nineteenth century was unnaturally exaggerated, it was fretted and
over-stimulated and inflamed and forced into the nationalist mould. Nationalism
was taught in schools, emphasized by newspapers, preached and mocked and sung
into men. Men were brought to feel that they were as improper without a
nationality as without their clothes in a crowded assembly. Oriental peoples
who had never heard of nationality before, took to it as they took to the
cigarettes and bowler hats of the west. India, a galaxy of contrasted races,
religions, and cultures, Dravidian, Mongolian, and Aryan, became a “nation.”
There were perplexing cases, of course, as when a young Whitechapel Jew had to
decide whether he belonged to the British or the Jewish nation.[477] Caricature
and political cartoons played a large part in this elevation of the cult of
these newer and bigger tribal gods--for such indeed the modern “nations”
are--to their ascendancy over the imagination of the nineteenth century. If one
turns over the pages of _Punch_, that queer contemporary record of the British
soul, which has lasted now since 1841, one finds the figures of Britannia,
Hibernia, France, and Germania embracing, disputing, reproving, rejoicing,
grieving. It greatly helped the diplomatists to carry on their game of Great
Powers to convey politics in this form to the doubting general intelligence. To
the common man, resentful that his son should be sent abroad to be shot, it was
made clear that instead of this being merely the result of the obstinacy and
greed of two foreign offices, it was really a necessary part of a righteous
inevitable gigantic struggle between two of these dim vast divinities. France
had been wronged by Germania, or Italia was showing a proper spirit to Austria.
The boy’s death ceased to appear an outrage on common sense; it assumed a sort
of mythological dignity. And insurrection could clothe itself in the same
romantic habiliments as diplomacy. Ireland became a Cinderella goddess,
Cathleen ni Houlihan, full of heart-rending and unforgivable wrongs, and young
India transcended its realities in the worship of Bande Mataram.

The essential idea of nineteenth-century nationalism was the “legitimate claim”
of every nation to complete sovereignty, the claim of every nation to manage
all its affairs within its own territory, regardless of any other nation. The
flaw in this idea is that the affairs and interests of every modern community
extend to the uttermost parts of the earth. The assassination of Sarajevo in
1914, for example, which caused the great war, produced the utmost distress
among the Indian tribes of Labrador because that war interrupted the marketing
of the furs upon which they relied for such necessities as ammunition, without
which they could not get sufficient food. A world of independent sovereign
nations means, therefore, a world of perpetual injuries, a world of states
constantly preparing for or waging war. But concurrently and discordantly with
the preaching of this nationalism of which Gladstone was the outstanding
exponent,[478] there was, among the stronger nationalities, a vigorous
propagation of another set of ideas, the ideas of imperialism, in which a
powerful and advanced nation was conceded the right to dominate a group of
other less advanced nations or less politically developed nations or peoples
whose nationality was still undeveloped, who were expected by the dominating
nation to be grateful for its protection and dominance. This use of the word
empire was evidently a different one from its former universal significance.
The new empires did not even pretend to be a continuation of the world empire
of Rome. The leading spirit in British imperialism was Lord Beaconsfield,
Gladstone’s antagonist. These two ideas of nationality and, as the crown of
national success, “empire,” ruled European political thought, ruled indeed the
political thought of the world, throughout the latter half of the nineteenth
century, and ruled it to the practical exclusion of any wider conception of a
common human welfare. They were plausible and dangerously unsound working
ideas. They represented nothing fundamental and inalterable in human nature,
and they failed to meet the new needs of world controls and world security that
the mechanical revolution was every day making more imperative. They were
accepted because people in general had neither the sweeping views that a
scientific study of history can give, nor had they any longer the comprehensive
charity of a world religion. Their danger to all the routines of ordinary life
was not realized until it was too late.

