# BOOK VI - XXXI - § 6
[Metadata]: # {07.02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {07.02.06}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VI
XXXI
§ 6
# § 6
It becomes fairly evident that in the fifth and sixth centuries A.D. not merely
Persia, but the regions that are now Turkestan and Afghanistan were far more
advanced in civilization than were the French and English of that time. The
obscurity of the history of these regions has been lifted in the last two
decades, and a very considerable literature written in languages of the Turkish
group has been discovered. These extant manuscripts date from the seventh
century onward. The alphabet is an adaptation of the Syrian, introduced by
Manichæan missionaries, and many of the MSS. discovered--parchments have been
found in windows in the place of glass--are as beautifully written as any
Benedictine production. Mixed up with a very extensive Manichæan literature are
translations of the Christian scriptures and Buddhistic writings. Much of this
early Turkish material still awaits examination.

Everything points to the conclusion that those centuries, which were centuries
of disaster and retrogression in Europe, were comparatively an age of progress
in Middle Asia eastward into China.

A steady westward drift to the north of the Caspian of Hunnish peoples, who
were now called Tartars and Turks, was still going on in the sixth century, but
it must be thought of as an overflow rather than as a migration of whole
peoples. The world from the Danube to the Chinese frontiers was still largely a
nomadic world, with towns and cities growing up upon the chief trade routes. We
need not tell in any detail here of the constant clash of the Turkish peoples
of Western Turkestan with the Persians to the south of them, the age-long
bickering of Turanian and Iranian. We hear nothing of any great northward
marches of the Persians, but there were great and memorable raids to the south
both by the Turanians to the east and the Alans to the west of the Caspian
before the big series of movements of the third and fourth century westward
that carried the Alans and Huns into the heart of Europe. There was a nomadic
drift to the east of Persia and southward through Afghanistan towards India, as
well as this drift to the north-west. These streams of nomads flowed by Persia
on either side. We have already mentioned the Yueh-Chi (chap. xxix., § 4), who
finally descended into India as the Indo-Scythians in the second century. A
backward, still nomadic section of these Yueh-Chi remained in Central Asia, and
became numerous upon the steppes of Turkestan, as the Ephthalites or White
Huns. After being a nuisance and a danger to the Persians for three centuries,
they finally began raiding into India in the footsteps of their kinsmen about
the year 470, about a quarter of a century after the death of Attila. They did
not migrate into India; they went to and fro, looting in India and returning
with their loot to their own country, just as later the Huns established
themselves in the great plain of the Danube and raided all Europe.

The history of India during these seven centuries we are now reviewing is
punctuated by these two invasions of the Yueh-Chi, the Indo-Scythians who, as
we have said, wiped out the last traces of Hellenic rule, and the Ephthalites.
Before the former of these, the Indo-Scythians, a wave of uprooted populations,
the Sakas, had been pushed; so that altogether India experienced three waves of
barbaric invasion, about A.D. 100, about A.D. 120, and about A.D. 470. But only
the second of these invasions was a permanent conquest and settlement. The
Indo-Scythians made their headquarters on the Northwest Frontier and set up a
dynasty, the Kushan dynasty, which ruled most of North India as far east as
Benares.

The chief among these Kushan monarchs was Kanishka (date unknown), who added to
North India Kashgar, Yarkand, and Khotan. Like Asoka, he was a great and
vigorous promoter of Buddhism, and these conquests, this great empire of the
Northwest Frontier, must have brought India into close and frequent relations
with China and Tibet.

We will not trouble to record here the divisions and coalescences of power in
India, nor the dynasties that followed the Kushans, because these things
signify very little to us from our present point of view. Sometimes all India
was a patchwork quilt of states; sometimes such empires as that of the Guptas
prevailed over great areas. These things made little difference in the ideas,
the religion, and the ordinary way of life of the Indian peoples. Brahminism
held its own against Buddhism, and the two religions prospered side by side.
The mass of the population was living then very much as it lives to-day;
dressing, cultivating, and building its houses in much the same fashion.

[Illustration: An Ephthalite Coin....]

The irruption of the Ephthalites is memorable not so much because of its
permanent effects as because of the atrocities perpetrated by the invaders.
These Ephthalites very closely resembled the Huns of Attila in their barbarism;
they merely raided, they produced no such dynasty as the Kushan monarchy; and
their chiefs retained their headquarters in Western Turkestan. Mihiragula,
their most capable leader, has been called the Attila of India. One of his
favourite amusements, we are told, was the expensive one of rolling elephants
down precipitous places in order to watch their sufferings. His abominations
roused his Indian tributary princes to revolt, and he was overthrown (528). But
the final ending of the Ephthalite raids into India was effected not by
Indians, but by the destruction of the central establishment of the Ephthalites
on the Oxus (565) by the growing power of the Turks, working in alliance with
the Persians. After this break-up, the Ephthalites dissolved very rapidly and
completely into the surrounding populations, much as the European Huns did
after the death of Attila a hundred years earlier. Nomads without central
grazing lands must disperse; nothing else is possible. Some of the chief Rajput
clans of to-day in Rajputana in North India are descended, it is said, from
these White Huns.[310]




§ 7[311]

These seven centuries which saw the beginning and the end of the emperors in
Rome and the complete breakdown and recasting of the social, economic,
political, and religious life of Western Europe, saw also very profound changes
in the Chinese world. It is too commonly assumed by both Chinese, Japanese, and
European historians, that the Han dynasty, under which we find China at the
beginning of this period, and the Tang dynasty, with which it closed, were
analogous ascendancies controlling a practically similar empire, and that the
four centuries of division that elapsed between the end of the Han dynasty
(220) and the beginning of the Tang period (619) were centuries of disturbance
rather than essential change. The divisions of China are supposed to be merely
political and territorial; and, deceived by the fact that at the close as at
the commencement of these four centuries, China occupied much the same wide
extent of Asia, and was still recognizably China, still with a common culture,
a common script, and a common body of ideas, they ignore the very fundamental
breaking down and reconstruction that went on, and the many parallelisms to the
European experience that China displayed.

It is true that the social collapse was never so complete in the Chinese as in
the European world. There remained throughout the whole period considerable
areas in which the elaboration of the arts of life could go on. There was no
such complete deterioration in cleanliness, decoration, artistic and literary
production as we have to record in the West, and no such abandonment of any
search for grace and pleasure. We note, for instance, that “tea” appeared in
the world, and its use spread throughout China. China began to drink tea in the
sixth century A.D. And there were Chinese poets to write delightfully about the
effects of the first cup and the second cup and the third cup, and so on. China
continued to produce beautiful paintings long after the fall of the Han rule.
In the second, third, and fourth centuries some of the most lovely landscapes
were painted that have ever been done by men. A considerable production of
beautiful vases and carvings also continued. Fine building and decoration went
on. Printing from wood blocks began about the same time as tea-drinking, and
with the seventh century came a remarkable revival of poetry.

Certain differences between the great empires of the East and West were all in
favour of the stability of the former. China had no general coinage. The cash
and credit system of the Western world, at once efficient and dangerous, had
not strained her economic life. Not that the monetary idea was unknown. For
small transactions the various provinces were using perforated zinc and brass
“cash,” but for larger there was nothing but stamped ingots of silver. This
great empire was still carrying on most of its business on a basis of barter
like that which prevailed in Babylon in the days of the Aramean merchants. And
so it continued to do to the dawn of the twentieth century.

We have seen how under the Roman republic economic and social order was
destroyed by the too great fluidity of property that money brought about. Money
became abstract, and lost touch with the real values it was supposed to
represent. Individuals and communities got preposterously into debt, and the
world was saddled by a class of rich men who were creditors, men who did not
handle and administer any real wealth, but who had the power to call up money.
No such development of “finance” occurred in China. Wealth in China remained
real and visible. And China had no need for any Licinian law, nor for a
Tiberius Gracchus. The idea of property in China did not extend far beyond
tangible things. There was no “labour” slavery, no gang servitude.[312] The
occupier and user of the land was in most instances practically the owner of
it, subject to a land tax. There was a certain amount of small scale
landlordism, but no great estates. Landless men worked for wages paid mostly in
kind--as they were in ancient Babylon.

These things made for stability and the geographical form of China for unity;
nevertheless, the vigour of the Han dynasty declined, and when at last at the
close of the second century A.D. the world catastrophe of the great pestilence
struck the system, the same pestilence that inaugurated a century of confusion
in the Roman empire, the dynasty fell like a rotten tree before a gale. And the
same tendency to break up into a number of warring states, and the same
eruption of barbaric rulers, was displayed in East and West alike. In China, as
in the Western empire, faith had decayed. Mr. Fu ascribes much of the political
nervelessness of China in this period to Epicureanism, arising, he thinks, out
of the sceptical individualism of Lao Tse. This phase of division is known as
the “Three Kingdom Period.” The fourth century saw a dynasty of more or less
civilized Huns established as rulers in the province of Shen-si. This Hunnish
kingdom included not merely the north of China, but great areas of Siberia; its
dynasty absorbed the Chinese civilization, and its influence carried Chinese
trade and knowledge to the Arctic circle. Mr. Fu compares this Siberian
monarchy to the empire of Charlemagne in Europe; it was the barbarian becoming
“Chinized” as Charlemagne was a barbarian becoming Romanized. Out of a fusion
of these Siberian with native north Chinese elements arose the Suy dynasty,
which conquered the south. This Suy dynasty marks the beginning of a renascence
of China. Under a Suy monarch the Lu-chu isles were annexed to China, and there
was a phase of great literary activity. The number of volumes at this time in
the imperial library was increased, we are told, to 54,000. The dawn of the
seventh century saw the beginning of the great Tang dynasty, which was to
endure for three centuries.

The renascence of China that began with Suy and culminated in Tang was, Mr. Fu
insists, a real new birth. “The spirit,” he writes, “was a new one; it marked
the Tang civilization with entirely distinctive features. Four main factors had
been brought together and fused: (1) Chinese liberal culture; (2) Chinese
classicism; (3) Indian Buddhism; and (4) Northern bravery. A new China had come
into being. The provincial system, the central administration and the military
organization of the Tang dynasty, were quite different from those of their
predecessors. The arts had been much influenced and revivified by Indian and
Central Asiatic influences. The literature was no mere continuation of the old;
it was a new production. The religious and philosophical schools of Buddhism
were fresh features. It was a period of substantial change.

[Illustration: The CHINESE EMPIRE under the TANG Dynasty (greatest extent)
[Superimposed--The Roman Empire at its greatest extent, under Trajan.]]

“It may be interesting to compare this making of China with the fate of the
Roman Empire in her later days. As the Roman world was divided into the eastern
and western halves, so was the Chinese world into the southern and the
northern. The barbarians in the case of Rome and in the case of China made
similar invasions. They established dominions of a similar sort. Charlemagne’s
empire corresponded to that of the Siberian dynasty (Later Wei), the temporary
recovery of the Western empire by Justinian corresponded to the temporary
recovery of the north by Liu Yu. The Byzantine line corresponded to the
southern dynasties. But from this point the two worlds diverged. China
recovered her unity; Europe has still to do so.”

The dominions of the emperor Tai-tsung (627), the second Tang monarch, extended
southward into Annam and westward to the Caspian Sea. His southern frontier in
that direction marched with that of Persia. His northern ran along the Altai
from the Kirghis steppe, north of the desert of Gobi. But it did not include
Korea, which was conquered and made tributary by his son. This Tang dynasty
civilized and incorporated into the Chinese race the whole of the southward
population, and just as the Chinese of the north call themselves the “men of
Han,” so the Chinese of the south call themselves the “men of Tang.” The law
was codified, the literary examination system was revised, and a complete and
accurate edition of all the Chinese classics was produced. To the court of
Tai-tsung came an embassy from Byzantium, and, what is more significant, from
Persia came a company of Nestorian missionaries (631). These latter Tai-tsung
received with great respect; he heard them state the chief articles of their
creed, and ordered the Christian scriptures to be translated into Chinese for
his further examination. In 638 he announced that he found the new religion
entirely satisfactory, and that it might be preached within the empire. He also
allowed the building of a church and the foundation of a monastery.

A still more remarkable embassy also came to the court of Tai-tsung in the year
628, three years earlier than the Nestorians. This was a party of Arabs, who
came by sea to Canton in a trading vessel from Yanbu, the port of Medina in
Arabia. (Incidentally it is interesting to know that there were such vessels
engaged in an east and west trade at this time.) These Arabs had been sent by
that Muhammad we have already mentioned, who styled himself “The Prophet of
God,” and the message they brought to Tai-tsung was probably identical with the
summons which was sent in the same year to the Byzantine emperor Heraclius and
to Kavadh in Ctesiphon. But the Chinese monarch neither neglected the message
as Heraclius did, nor insulted the envoys after the fashion of the parricide
Kavadh. He received them well, expressed great interest in their theological
views, and assisted them, it is said, to build a mosque for the Arab traders in
Canton--a mosque which survives to this day. It is one of the oldest mosques in
the world.

