# BOOK III - XV - § 3
[Metadata]: # {04.01.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK III
XV
§ 3
# § 3
The Greek epics reveal the early Greeks with no knowledge of iron, without
writing, and before any Greek-founded cities existed in the land into which
they had evidently come quite recently as conquerors. They were spreading
southward from the Aryan region of origin. They seem to have been a fair
people, newcomers in Greece, newcomers to a land that had been held hitherto by
a darker people, people who are now supposed to have belonged to a dark white
“aboriginal” race, a “Mediterranean” people allied to those Iberians whom the
Kelts pressed westward, and to the Hamitic white people of North Africa.

[Illustration: Combat between Menelaus & Hector (in the Iliad)

From a platter ascribed to the end of the seventh century in the British
Museum. This is probably the earliest known vase bearing a Greek inscription.
Greek writing was just beginning. Note the Swastika.]

Let us, at the risk of a slight repetition, be perfectly clear upon one point.
The _Iliad_ does not give us the primitive neolithic life of that Aryan region
of origin; it gives us that life already well on the move towards a new state
of affairs. The primitive neolithic way of living, with its tame and
domesticated animals, its pottery and cooking, and its patches of rude
cultivation, we have sketched in Chapter XI. We have already discussed in § 4
of Chapter XIII the probability of a widespread _heliolithic_ culture, a sort
of sub-civilization, very like the Polynesian and Indonesian life of a hundred
years ago, an elaboration of the earlier Neolithic stage. Between 15,000 and
6000 B.C. the neolithic way of living had spread with the forests and abundant
vegetation of the Pluvial Period, over the greater part of the old world, from
the Niger to the Hwang-ho and from Ireland to the south of India. Now, as the
climate of great portions of the earth was swinging towards drier and more open
conditions again, the primitive neolithic life was developing along two
divergent directions. One was leading to a more wandering life, towards at last
a constantly migratory life between summer and winter pasture, which is called
NOMADISM; the other, in certain sunlit river valleys, was towards a
water-treasuring life of irrigation, in which men gathered into the first towns
and made the first CIVILIZATION. The nature and development of civilization we
shall consider more fully in the next chapter, but here we have to note that
the Greeks, as the _Iliad_ presents them, are neither simple neolithic nomads,
innocent of civilization, nor are they civilized men. They are primitive nomads
in an excited state, because they have just come upon civilization, and regard
it as an opportunity for war and loot.[96] So far they are exceptional and not
representative. But our interest in them in this chapter is not in their
distinctively Greek and predatory aspect, but in what they reveal of the
ordinary northward life from which they are coming.

These early Greeks of the _Iliad_ are sturdy fighters, but without
discipline--their battles are a confusion of single combats. They have horses,
but no cavalry; they use the horse, which is a comparatively recent addition to
Aryan resources, to drag a rude fighting chariot into battle. The horse is
still novel enough to be something of a terror in itself. For ordinary draught
purposes, as in the quotation from the _Iliad_ we have just made, oxen were
employed.

The only priests of these Aryans are the keepers of shrines and sacred places.
There are chiefs, who are heads of families and who also perform sacrifices,
but there does not seem to be much mystery or sacramental feeling in their
religion. When the Greeks go to war, these heads and elders meet in council and
appoint a king, whose powers are very loosely defined. There are no laws, but
only customs; and no exact standards of conduct.

[Illustration: Horses & chariots--(from an archaic Greek vase)]

The social life of the early Greeks centred about the households of these
leading men. There were no doubt huts for herds and the like, and outlying farm
buildings; but the hall of the chief was a comprehensive centre, to which
everyone went to feast, to hear the bards, to take part in games and exercises.
The primitive craftsmen were gathered there. About it were cowsheds and
stabling and such-like offices. Unimportant people slept about anywhere as
retainers did in the mediæval castles and as people still do in Indian
households. Except for quite personal possessions, there was still an air of
patriarchal communism about the tribe. The tribe, or the chief as the head of
the tribe, owned the grazing lands; forest and rivers were the wild.

The Aryan civilization seems, and indeed all early communities seem, to have
been without the little separate households that make up the mass of the
population in western Europe or America to-day. The tribe was a big family; the
nation a group of tribal families; a household often contained hundreds of
people. Human society began, just as herds and droves begin among animals, by
the family delaying its breaking up. Nowadays the lions in East Africa are
apparently becoming social animals in this way, by the young keeping with the
mother after they are fully grown, and hunting in a group. Hitherto the lion
has been much more of a solitary beast. If men and women do not cling to their
families nowadays as much as they did, it is because the state and the
community now supply safety and help and facilities that were once only
possible in the family group.

In the Hindu community of to-day these great households of the earlier stages
of human society are still to be found. Mr. Bhupendranath Basu has recently
described a typical Hindu household.[97] It is an Aryan household refined and
made gentle by thousands of years of civilization, but its social structure is
the same as that of the households of which the Aryan epics tell.

“The joint family system,” he said, “has descended to us from time immemorial,
the Aryan patriarchal system of old still holding sway in India. The structure,
though ancient, remains full of life. The joint family is a co-operative
corporation, in which men and women have a well-defined place. At the head of
the corporation is the senior member of the family, generally the eldest male
member, but in his absence the senior female member often assumes control.”
(Cp. Penelope in the _Odyssey_.)

“All able-bodied members must contribute their labour and earnings, whether of
personal skill or agriculture and trade, to the common stock; weaker members,
widows, orphans, and destitute relations, all must be maintained and supported;
sons, nephews, brothers, cousins, all must be treated equally, for any undue
preference is apt to break up the family. We have no word for cousins--they are
either brothers or sisters, and we do not know what are cousins two degrees
removed. The children of a first cousin are your nephews and nieces, just the
same as the children of your brothers and sisters. A man can no more marry a
cousin, however removed, than he can marry his own sister, except in certain
parts of Madras, where a man may marry his maternal uncle’s daughter. The
family affections, the family ties, are always very strong, and therefore the
maintenance of an equal standard among so many members is not so difficult as
it may appear at first sight. Moreover, life is very simple. Until recently
shoes were not in general use at home, but sandals without any leather
fastenings. I have known of a well-to-do middle-class family of several
brothers and cousins who had two or three pairs of leather shoes between them,
these shoes being only used when they had occasion to go out, and the same
practice is still followed in the case of the more expensive garments, like
shawls, which last for generations, and with their age are treated with loving
care, as having been used by ancestors of revered memory.

“The joint family remains together sometimes for several generations, until it
becomes too unwieldy, when it breaks up into smaller families, and you thus see
whole villages peopled by members of the same clan. I have said that the family
is a co-operative society, and it may be likened to a small state, and is kept
in its place by strong discipline based on love and obedience. You see nearly
every day the younger members coming to the head of the family and taking the
dust of his feet as a token of benediction; whenever they go on an enterprise,
they take his leave and carry his blessing.... There are many bonds which bind
the family together--the bonds of sympathy, of common pleasures, of common
sorrows; when a death occurs, all the members go into mourning; when there is a
birth or a wedding, the whole family rejoices. Then above all is the family
deity, some image of Vishnu, the preserver; his place is in a separate room,
generally known as the room of God, or in well-to-do families in a temple
attached to the house, where the family performs its daily worship. There is a
sense of personal attachment between this image of the deity and the family,
for the image generally comes down from past generations, often miraculously
acquired by a pious ancestor at some remote time.... With the household gods is
intimately associated the family priest.... The Hindu priest is a part of the
family life of his flock, between whom and himself the tie has existed for many
generations. The priest is not generally a man of much learning; he knows,
however, the traditions of his faith.... He is not a very heavy burden, for he
is satisfied with little--a few handfuls of rice, a few home-grown bananas or
vegetables, a little unrefined sugar made in the village, and sometimes a few
pieces of copper are all that is needed.... A picture of our family life would
be incomplete without the household servants. A female servant is known as the
‘jhi,’ or daughter, in Bengal--she is like the daughter of the house; she calls
the master and the mistress father and mother, and the young men and women of
the family brothers and sisters. She participates in the life of the family;
she goes to the holy places along with her mistress, for she could not go
alone, and generally she spends her life with the family of her adoption; her
children are looked after by the family. The treatment of men servants is very
similar. These servants, men and women, are generally people of the humbler
castes, but a sense of personal attachment grows up between them and the
members of the family, and as they get on in years they are affectionately
called by the younger members elder brothers, uncles, aunts, etc.... In a
well-to-do house there is always a resident teacher, who instructs the children
of the family as well as other boys of the village; there is no expensive
school building, but room is found in some veranda or shed in the courtyard for
the children and their teacher, and into this school low-caste boys are freely
admitted. These indigenous schools were not of a very high order, but they
supplied an agency of instruction for the masses which was probably not
available in many other countries....

“With Hindu life is bound up its traditional duty of hospitality.      It
is the duty of a householder to offer a meal to any stranger who      may come
before midday and ask for one; the mistress of the house      does not sit down
to her meal until every member is fed, and, as      sometimes her food is all
that is left, she does not take her meal      until well after midday lest a
hungry stranger should come and      claim one.” ...

We have been tempted to quote Mr. Basu at some length, because here we do get
to something like a living understanding of the type of household which has
prevailed in human communities since Neolithic days, which still prevails
to-day in India, China, and the Far East, but which in the west is rapidly
giving ground before a state and municipal organization of education and a
large-scale industrialism within which an amount of individual detachment and
freedom is possible, such as these great households never knew....

But let us return now to the history preserved for us in the Aryan epics.

The Sanscrit epics tell a very similar story to that underlying the _Iliad_,
the story of a fair, beef-eating people--only later did they become
vegetarians--coming down from Persia into the plain of North India and
conquering their way slowly towards the Indus. From the Indus they spread over
India, but as they spread they acquired much from the dark Dravidians they
conquered, and they seem to have lost their bardic tradition. The vedas, says
Mr. Basu, were transmitted chiefly in the households by the women....

The oral literature of the Keltic peoples who pressed westward has not been
preserved so completely as that of the Greeks or Indians; it was written down
many centuries later, and so, like the barbaric, primitive English _Beowulf_,
has lost any clear evidence of a period of migration into the lands of an
antecedent people. If the pre-Aryans figure in it at all, it is as the fairy
folk of the Irish stories. Ireland, most cut off of all the Keltic-speaking
communities, retained to the latest date its primitive life; and the _Táin_,
the Irish _Iliad_, describes a cattle-keeping life in which war chariots are
still used, and war dogs also, and the heads of the slain are carried off slung
round the horses’ necks. The _Táin_ is the story of a cattle raid. Here too the
same social order appears as in the _Iliad_; the chiefs sit and feast in great
halls, they build halls for themselves, there is singing and story-telling by
the bards and drinking and intoxication.[98] Priests are not very much in
evidence, but there is a sort of medicine man who deals in spells and prophecy.

