# BOOK III - XX - § 5
[Metadata]: # {04.06.05}
[Descriptor]: # {04.06.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

SERFS, SLAVES, SOCIAL CLASSES, AND FREE INDIVIDUALS

§ 1. _The Common Man in Ancient Times._ § 2. _The Earliest Slaves._      §
3. _The first “Independent” Persons._ § 4. _Social Classes Three      Thousand
Years Ago._ § 5. _Classes Hardening into Castes._ § 6.      _Caste in India._ §
7. _The System of the Mandarins._ § 8. _A      Summary of Five Thousand Years._

# § 5
Let us, before we leave this discussion of the social classes that were
developing in these first civilizations, devote a little attention to their
fixity. How far did they stand aloof from each other, and how far did they
intermingle? So far as the classes we have counted as 9, 10, 11, and 12 go, the
servants, the gang labourers and slaves, the gang soldiers, and, to a lesser
extent, the sailors, or at any rate the galley rowers among the sailors, they
were largely recruited classes, they did not readily and easily form homes,
they were not distinctively breeding classes; they were probably replenished
generation after generation by captives, by the failures of other classes, and
especially from the failures of the class of small retailers, and by persuasion
and impressment from among the cultivators. But so far as the sailors go, we
have to distinguish between the mere rower and the navigating and shipowning
seamen of such ports as Tyre and Sidon. The shipowners pass, no doubt, by
insensible gradations into the mercantile class, but the navigators must have
made a peculiar community in the great seaports, having homes there and handing
on the secrets of seacraft to their sons. The eighth class we have
distinguished was certainly a precarious class, continually increased by the
accession of the heirs and dependents, the widows and retired members of the
wealthy and powerful, and continually diminished by the deaths or speculative
losses of these people and the dispersal of their properties. The priests and
priestesses too, so far as all this world west of India went, were not a very
reproductive class; many priesthoods were celibate, and that class, too, may
also be counted as a recruited class. Nor are servants, as a rule,
reproductive. They live in the households of other people; they do not have
households and rear large families of their own. This leaves us as the really
vital classes of the ancient civilized community:

(_a_) The royal and aristocratic class, officials, military officers, and the
like;

(_b_) The mercantile class;

(_c_) The town artisans;

(_d_) The cultivators of the soil; and

(_e_) The herdsmen.

Each of these classes reared its own children in its own fashion, and so
naturally kept itself more or less continuously distinct from the others.
General education was not organized in those ancient states, education was
mainly a household matter (as it is still in many parts of India to-day), and
so it was natural and necessary for the sons to follow in the footsteps of
their father and to marry women accustomed to their own sort of household.
Except during times of great political disturbance therefore, there would be a
natural and continuous separation of classes; which would not, however, prevent
exceptional individuals from intermarrying or passing from one class to
another. Poor aristocrats would marry rich members of the mercantile class;
ambitious herdsmen, artisans, or sailors would become rich merchants. So far as
one can gather, that was the general state of affairs in both Egypt and
Babylonia. The idea was formerly entertained that in Egypt there was a fixity
of classes, but this appears to be a misconception due to a misreading of
Herodotus. The only exclusive class in Egypt which did not intermarry was, as
in England to-day, the semi-divine royal family.

At various points in the social system there were probably developments of
exclusiveness, an actual barring out of interlopers. Artisans of particular
crafts possessing secrets, for example, have among all races and in all ages
tended to develop guild organizations restricting the practice of their craft
and the marriage of members outside their guild. Conquering people have also,
and especially when there were marked physical differences of race, been
disposed to keep themselves aloof from the conquered peoples, and have
developed an aristocratic exclusiveness. Such organizations of restriction upon
free intercourse have come and gone in great variety in the history of all
long-standing civilizations. The natural boundaries of function were always
there, but sometimes they have been drawn sharply and laid stress upon, and
sometimes they have been made little of. There has been a general tendency
among the Aryan peoples to distinguish noble (patrician) from common (plebeian)
families; the traces of it are evident throughout the literature and life of
Europe to-day, and it has received a picturesque enforcement in the “science”
of heraldry. This tradition is still active even in democratic America.
Germany, the most methodical of European countries, had in the Middle Ages a
very clear conception of the fixity of such distinctions. Below the princes
(who themselves constituted an exclusive class which did not marry beneath
itself) there were the:

(_a_) Knights, the military and official caste, with heraldic coats-of-arms;

(_b_ and _c_) The Bürgerstand, the merchants, shipping people, and artisans;
and

(_d_) The Bauernstand, the cultivating serfs or peasants.

Mediæval Germany went as far as any of the Western heirs of the first great
civilizations towards a fixation of classes. The idea is far less congenial
both to the English-speaking people and to the French and Italians, who, by a
sort of instinct, favour a free movement from class to class. Such exclusive
ideas began at first among, and were promoted chiefly by, the upper classes,
but it is a natural response and a natural Nemesis to such ideas that the mass
of the excluded should presently range themselves in antagonism to their
superiors. It was in Germany, as we shall see in the concluding chapters of
this story, that the conception of a natural and necessary conflict, “the class
war,” between the miscellaneous multitudes of the disinherited (“the
class-conscious proletariat” of the Marxist) and the rulers and merchants first
arose. It was an idea more acceptable to the German mind than to the British or
French.... But before we come to that conflict, we must traverse a long history
of many centuries.

