# BOOK VIII - XXXVII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {10.02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICS OF AMERICA AND FRANCE

§ 1. _Inconveniences of the Great Power System._ § 2. _The Thirteen
Colonies before Their Revolt._ § 3. _Civil War is Forced upon the
Colonies._ § 4. _The War of Independence._ § 5. _The Constitution      of the
United States._ § 6. _Primitive Features of the United      States
Constitution._ § 7. _Revolutionary Ideas in France._ § 8.      _The Revolution
of the Year 1789._ § 9. _The French “Crowned      Republic” of ‘89-91._ § 10.
_The Revolutions of the Jacobins._ §      11. _The Jacobin Republic, 1792-94._
§ 12. _The Directory._ § 13.      _The Pause in Reconstruction and the Dawn of
Modern Socialism._


§ 1[418]

When Gibbon, nearly a century and a half ago, was congratulating the world of
refined and educated people that the age of great political and social
catastrophes was past, he was neglecting many signs which we--in the wisdom of
accomplished facts--could have told him portended far heavier jolts and
dislocations than any he foresaw. We have told how the struggle of the
sixteenth and seventeenth-century princes for ascendancies and advantages
developed into a more cunning and complicated struggle of foreign offices,
masquerading as idealized “Great Powers,” as the eighteenth century wore on.
The intricate and pretentious art of diplomacy developed. The “Prince” ceased
to be a single and secretive Machiavellian schemer, and became merely the
crowned symbol of a Machiavellian scheme. Prussia, Russia, and Austria fell
upon and divided Poland. France was baffled in profound schemes against Spain.
Britain circumvented the “designs of France” in America and acquired Canada,
and got the better of France in India. And then a remarkable thing occurred, a
thing very shocking to European diplomacy. The British colonies in America
flatly refused to have further part or lot in this game of “Great Powers.” They
objected that they had no voice and no great interest in these European schemes
and conflicts, and they refused to bear any portion of the burthen of taxation
these foreign policies entailed.

Of course this decision did not flash out complete and finished from the
American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the eighteenth
century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an entire
willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to leave foreign
affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But there was an equally
strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be neither taxed nor interfered
with in their ordinary pursuits. These are incompatible wishes. Common men
cannot shirk world politics and at the same time enjoy private freedom; but it
has taken them countless generations to learn this. The first impulse in the
American revolt against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against the taxation and interference that followed necessarily from
“foreign policy” without any clear recognition of what was involved in that
objection. It was only when the revolt was consummated that the people of the
American colonies recognized at all clearly that they had repudiated the Great
Power view of life. The sentence in which that repudiation was expressed was
Washington’s injunction to “avoid entangling alliances.” From his time until
the year 1917 the united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated
and independent as the United States of America, stood apart altogether from
the blood-stained intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign offices. Soon
after (1810-1823) they were able to extend their principle of detachment to the
rest of the continent, and to make all the New World “out of bounds” for the
scheming expansionists of the old. When at length, in 1917, they were obliged
to re-enter the arena of world politics, it was to bring the new spirit and new
aims their aloofness had enabled them to develop into the tangle of
international relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof.
Since the treaty of Westphalia (1648), the confederated states of Switzerland,
in their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion from the
schemes of kings and empires.

But since the North American peoples are now to play an increasingly important
part in our history, it will be well to devote a little more attention than we
have hitherto given to their development. We have already glanced at this story
in § 8 of the preceding chapter. We will now tell a little more fully--though
still in the barest outline--what these colonies were, whose recalcitrance was
so disconcerting to the king and ministers of Great Britain in their diplomatic
game against the rest of mankind.[419]

# § 4
So the war began. It was not a war that promised a conclusive end. The
colonists had no one vulnerable capital; they were dispersed over a great
country, with a limitless wilderness behind it, and so they had great powers of
resistance. They had learnt their tactics largely from the Indians; they could
fight well in open order, and harry and destroy troops in movement. But they
had no disciplined army that could meet the British in a pitched battle, and
little military equipment; and their levies grew impatient at a long campaign,
and tended to go home to their farms. The British, on the other hand, had a
well-drilled army, and their command of the sea gave them the power of shifting
their attack up and down the long Atlantic seaboard. They were at peace with
all the world. But the king was stupid and greedy to interfere in the conduct
of affairs; the generals he favoured were stupid “strong men” or flighty men of
birth and fashion; and the heart of England was not in the business. He trusted
rather to being able to blockade, raid, and annoy the colonists into submission
than to a conclusive conquest and occupation of the land. But the methods
employed, and particularly the use of hired German troops, who still retained
the cruel traditions of the Thirty Years’ War, and of Indian auxiliaries, who
raped and scalped the outlying settlers, did not so much weary the Americans of
the war as of the British. The Congress, meeting for the second time in 1775,
endorsed the actions of the New England colonists, and appointed George
Washington the American commander-in-chief. In 1777, General Burgoyne, in an
attempt to get down to New York from Canada, was defeated at Freeman’s Farm on
the Upper Hudson, and surrounded and obliged to capitulate at Saratoga with his
whole army. This disaster encouraged the French and Spanish to come into the
struggle on the side of the colonists. The French sent an army to the States
under General Lafayette, and their fleet did much to minimize the advantage of
the British at sea. General Cornwallis was caught in the Yorktown peninsula in
Virginia in 1781, and capitulated with his army. The British Government, now
heavily engaged with France and Spain in Europe, was at the end of its
resources.

[Illustration: Sketch map to show BOSTON & neighbourhood 1775]

At the outset of the war the colonists in general seem to have been as little
disposed to repudiate monarchy and claim complete independence as were the
Hollanders in the opening phase of Philip II’s persecutions and follies. The
separatists were called radicals; they were mostly extremely democratic, as we
should say in England to-day, and their advanced views frightened many of the
steadier and wealthier colonists, for whom class privileges and distinctions
had considerable charm. But early in 1776 an able and persuasive Englishman,
Tom Paine, published a pamphlet at Philadelphia with the title of _Common
Sense_, which had an enormous effect on public opinion. Its style was
rhetorical by modern standards. “The blood of the slain, the weeping voice of
Nature cries, ‘’Tis time to part,’” and so forth. But its effects were very
great. It converted thousands to the necessity of separation. The turn-over of
opinion, once it had begun, was rapid.

Only in the summer of 1776 did Congress take the irrevocable step of declaring
for separation. “The Declaration of Independence,” another of those exemplary
documents which it has been the peculiar service of the English to produce for
mankind, was drawn up by Thomas Jefferson; and after various amendments and
modifications it was made the fundamental document of the United States of
America. There were two noteworthy amendments to Jefferson’s draft. He had
denounced the slave trade fiercely, and blamed the home government for
interfering with colonial attempts to end it. This was thrown out, and so too
was a sentence about the British: “we must endeavour to forget our former love
for them ... we might have been a free and a great people together.”

(But for the British crown and great proprietors and the mutual ignorance of
the common men in the two countries.)[430]

Towards the end of 1782, the preliminary articles of the treaty in which
Britain recognized the complete independence of the United States were signed
at Paris. The end of the war was proclaimed on April 19th, 1783, exactly eight
years after Paul Revere’s ride, and the retreat of Gage’s men from Concord to
Boston. The Treaty of Peace was finally signed at Paris in September.

