# BOOK VIII - XL - § 1
[Metadata]: # {10.05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 1
For thirty-six years after the Treaty of San Stefano and the Berlin Conference,
Europe maintained an uneasy peace within its borders; there was no war between
any of the leading states during this period. They jostled, browbeat, and
threatened one another, but they did not come to actual hostilities. There was
a general realization after 1871 that modern war was a much more serious thing
than the professional warfare of the eighteenth century, an effort of peoples
as a whole that might strain the social fabric very severely, an adventure not
to be rashly embarked upon. The mechanical revolution was giving constantly
more powerful (and expensive) weapons by land and sea, and more rapid methods
of transport; and making it more and more impossible to carry on warfare
without a complete dislocation of the economic life of the community. Even the
foreign offices felt the fear of war.

But though war was dreaded as it had never been dreaded in the world before,
nothing was done in the way of setting up a federal control to prevent human
affairs drifting towards war. In 1898, it is true, the young Tsar Nicholas II
(1894-1917) issued a rescript inviting the other Great Powers to a conference
of states “seeking to make the great idea of universal peace triumph over the
elements of trouble and discord.” His rescript recalls the declaration of his
predecessor, Alexander I, which gave its tone to the Holy Alliance, and it is
vitiated by the same assumption that peace can be established between sovereign
governments rather than by a broad appeal to the needs and rights of the one
people of mankind. The lesson of the United States of America, which showed
that there could be neither unity of action nor peace until the thought of the
“people of Virginia” and the “people of Massachusetts” had been swept aside by
the thought of the “people of the United States,” went entirely disregarded in
the European attempts at pacification. Two conferences were held at The Hague
in Holland, one in 1899 and another in 1907, and at the second nearly all the
sovereign states of the world were represented. They were represented
diplomatically, there was no direction of the general intelligence of the world
to their deliberations, the ordinary common man did not even know that these
conferences were sitting, and for the most part the assembled representatives
haggled cunningly upon points of international law affecting war, leaving aside
the abolition of war as a chimæra. These Hague Conferences did nothing to
dispel the idea that international life is necessarily competitive. They
accepted that idea. They did nothing to develop the consciousness of a world
commonweal overriding sovereigns and foreign offices. The international lawyers
and statesmen who attended these gatherings were as little disposed to hasten
on a world commonweal on such a basis as were the Prussian statesmen of 1848 to
welcome an all-German parliament overriding the rights and “policy” of the King
of Prussia.

In America a series of three Pan-American conferences in 1889, 1901, and 1906
went some way towards the development of a scheme of international arbitration
for the whole American continent.

The character and good faith of Nicholas II, who initiated these Hague
gatherings, we will not discuss at any length here. He may have thought that
time was on the side of Russia. But of the general unwillingness of the Great
Powers to face the prospect of a merger of sovereign powers, without which
permanent peace projects are absurd, there can be no sort of doubt whatever. It
was no cessation of international competition with its acute phase of war that
they desired, but rather a cheapening of war, which was becoming too costly.
Each wanted to economize the wastage of minor disputes and conflicts, and to
establish international laws that would embarrass its more formidable opponents
in wartime without incommoding itself. These were the practical ends they
sought at the Hague Conference. It was a gathering they attended to please
Nicholas II, just as the monarchs of Europe had subscribed to the evangelical
propositions of the Holy Alliance to please Alexander I; and as they had
attended it, they tried to make what they conceived to be some use of it.

