# BOOK VI - XXXI - § 8
[Metadata]: # {07.02.07}
[Descriptor]: # {07.02.07}
[Author]: # {wells}
CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM

SEVEN CENTURIES IN ASIA (CIRCA 50 B.C. TO A.D. 650)

§ 1. _Justinian the Great._ § 2. _The Sassanid Empire in Persia._ §
3. _The Decay of Syria under the Sassanids._ § 4. _The First      Message from
Islam._ § 5. _Zoroaster and Mani._ § 6. _Hunnish      Peoples in Central Asia
and India._ § 7. _The Great Age of China._      § 8. _Intellectual Fetters of
China._ § 9. _The Travels of Yuan      Chwang._

# § 8
The urbanity, the culture, and the power of China under the early Tang rulers
are in so vivid a contrast with the decay, disorder, and divisions of the
Western world, as at once to raise some of the most interesting questions in
the history of civilization. Why did not China keep this great lead she had won
by her rapid return to unity and order? Why does she not to this day dominate
the world culturally and politically?

For a long time she certainly did keep ahead. It is only a thousand years
later, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with the discovery of
America, the spread of printed books and education in the West, and the dawn of
modern scientific discovery, that we can say with confidence that the Western
world began to pull ahead of China. Under the Tang rule, her greatest period,
and then again under the artistic but rather decadent Sung dynasty (960-1279),
and again during the period of the cultured Mings (1358-1644), China presented
a spectacle of prosperity, happiness, and artistic activity far in front of any
contemporary state. And seeing that she achieved so much, why did she not
achieve more? Chinese shipping was upon the seas, and there was a considerable
overseas trade during that time.[313] Why did the Chinese never discover
America or Australia? There was much isolated observation, ingenuity, and
invention. The Chinese knew of gunpowder in the sixth century,[314] they used
coal and gas heating centuries before these things were used in Europe; their
bridge-building, their hydraulic engineering was admirable; the knowledge of
materials shown in their enamel and lacquer ware is very great. Why did they
never organize the system of record and co-operation in inquiry that has given
the world modern science? And why, in spite of their general training in good
manners and self-restraint, did intellectual education never soak down into the
general mass of the population? Why are the masses of China to-day, and why
have they always been, in spite of an exceptionally high level of natural
intelligence, illiterate?

It is customary to meet such questions with rather platitudinous answers. We
are told that the Chinaman is the most conservative of human beings, that, in
contrast with the European races, his mind is twisted round towards the past,
that he is the willing slave of etiquette and precedent to a degree
inconceivable to Western minds. He is represented as having a mentality so
distinct that one might almost expect to find a difference in brain structure
to explain it. The appeals of Confucius to the wisdom of the ancients are
always quoted to clinch this suggestion.

If, however, we examine this generalization more closely, it dissolves into
thin air. The superior intellectual initiative, the liberal enterprise, the
experimental disposition that is supposed to characterize the Western mind, is
manifest in the history of that mind only during certain phases and under
exceptional circumstances. For the rest, the Western world displays itself as
traditional and conservative as China. And, on the other hand, the Chinese mind
has, under conditions of stimulus, shown itself quite as inventive and
versatile as the European, and the very kindred Japanese mind even more so.
For, take the case of the Greeks, the whole swing of their mental vigour falls
into the period between the sixth century B.C. and the decay of the Alexandrian
Museum under the later Ptolemies in the second century B.C. There were Greeks
before that time and Greeks since, but a history of a thousand years of the
Byzantine empire showed the Hellenic world at least as intellectually stagnant
as China. Then we have already drawn attention to the comparative sterility of
the Italian mind during the Roman period and its abundant fertility since the
Renaissance of learning. The English mind again had a phase of brightness in
the seventh and eighth centuries, and it did not shine again until the
fifteenth. Again, the mind of the Arabs, as we shall presently tell, blazed out
like a star for half a dozen generations after the appearance of Islam, having
never achieved anything of importance before or since. On the other hand, there
was always a great deal of scattered inventiveness in China, and the progress
of Chinese art witnesses to new movements and vigorous innovations. We
exaggerate the reverence of the Chinese for their fathers; parricide was a far
commoner crime among the Chinese emperors than it was even among the rulers of
Persia. Moreover, there have been several liberalizing movements in China,
several recorded struggles against the “ancient ways.”

It has already been suggested that phases of real intellectual progress in any
community seem to be connected with the existence of a detached class of men,
sufficiently free not to be obliged to toil or worry exhaustively about mundane
needs, and not rich and powerful enough to be tempted into extravagances of
lust, display, or cruelty. They must have a sense of security, but not a
conceit of superiority. This class, we have further insinuated, must be able to
talk freely and communicate easily. It must not be watched for heresy or
persecuted for any ideas it may express. Such a happy state of affairs
certainly prevailed in Greece during its best days. A class of intelligent,
free gentlefolk is indeed evident in history whenever there is a record of bold
philosophy or effective scientific advances.

In the days of Tang and Sung and Ming there must have been an abundance of
pleasantly circumstanced people in China of just the class that supplied most
of the young men of the Academy at Athens, or the bright intelligences of
Renaissance Italy, or the members of the London Royal Society, that mother
society of modern science; and yet China did not produce in these periods of
opportunity any such large beginnings of recorded and analyzed fact.

If we reject the idea that there is some profound racial difference between
China and the West which makes the Chinese by nature conservative and the West
by nature progressive, then we are forced to look for the operating cause of
this difference in progressiveness in some other direction. Many people are
disposed to find that operating cause which has, in spite of her original
advantages, retarded China so greatly during the last four or five centuries,
in the imprisonment of the Chinese mind in a script and in an idiom of thought
so elaborate and so difficult that the mental energy of the country has been
largely consumed in acquiring it. This view deserves examination.

We have already given an account in chap. xviii. of the peculiarities of
Chinese writing and of the Chinese language. The Japanese writing is derived
from the Chinese, and consists of a more rapidly written system of forms. A
great number of these forms are ideograms taken over from the Chinese and used
exactly as the Chinese ideograms are used, but also a number of signs are used
to express syllables; there is a Japanese syllabary after the fashion of the
Sumerian syllabary we have described in chap. xviii. The Japanese writing
remains a clumsy system, as clumsy as cuneiform, though not so clumsy as
Chinese; and there has been a movement in Japan to adopt a Western alphabet.
Korea long ago went a step farther and developed a true alphabet from the same
Chinese origins. With these exceptions all the great writing systems now in use
in the world are based on the Mediterranean alphabets, and are beyond
comparison more easily learnt and mastered than the Chinese. This means that
while other peoples learn merely a comparatively simple and straightforward
method of setting down the language with which they are familiar, the Chinaman
has to master a great multitude of complex word signs and word groups. He must
not simply learn the signs, but the established grouping of those signs to
represent various meanings. He must familiarize himself, therefore, with a
number of exemplary classical works. Consequently in China, while you will find
great numbers of people who know the significance of certain frequent and
familiar characters, you discover only a few whose knowledge is sufficiently
extensive to grasp the meaning of a newspaper paragraph, and still fewer who
can read any subtlety of intention or fine shades of meaning. In a lesser
degree this is true also of Japan. No doubt European readers, especially of
such word-rich languages as English or Russian, vary greatly among themselves
in regard to the extent of books they can understand and how far they
understand them; their power varies according to their vocabularies; but the
corresponding levels of understanding among the Chinese represent a far greater
expenditure of time and labour upon their attainment. A mandarin’s education in
China is, mainly, learning to read.

And it may be that the consequent preoccupation of the educated class during
its most susceptible years upon the Chinese classics gave it a bias in favour
of this traditional learning upon which it had spent so much time and energy.
Few men who have toiled to build up any system of knowledge in their minds will
willingly scrap it in favour of something strange and new; this disposition is
as characteristic of the West as of the East; it is shown as markedly by the
scholars of the British and American universities as by any Chinese mandarins,
and the British at the present time, in spite of the great and manifest
advantages in popular education and national propaganda the change would give
them, refuse to make any move from their present barbaric orthography towards a
phonetic alphabet and spelling. The peculiarities of the Chinese script, and
the educational system arising out of that script, must have acted age after
age as an invincible filter that favoured the plastic and scholarly mind as
against the restive and originating type, and kept the latter out of positions
of influence and authority. There is much that is plausible in this
explanation.

There have been several attempts to simplify the Chinese writing and to adopt
an alphabetical system. In the early days of Buddhism in China, when there was
a considerable amount of translation from Sanskrit, Indian influences came near
to achieving this end; two Chinese alphabets were indeed invented, and each had
some little use. But what hindered the general adoption of these, and what
stands in the way of any phonetic system of Chinese writing to-day, is this,
that while the literary script and phraseology is the same from one end of
China to the other, the spoken language of the common people, both in
pronunciation and in its familiar idioms, varies so widely that men from one
province may be incomprehensible to men from another. There is, however, a
“standard Chinese,” a rather bookish spoken idiom, which is generally
understood by educated people; and it is upon the possibility of applying an
alphabetical system of writing to this standard Chinese that the hopes of
modern educational reformers in China are based at the present time. For fresh
attempts are now being made to release the Chinese mind from this ancient
entanglement.

A Chinese alphabet has been formed; it is taught in the common schools, and
newspapers and pamphlets are issued in it. And the rigid examination system
that killed all intellectual initiatives has been destroyed.

The very success and early prosperity and general contentment of China in the
past must have worked to justify in that land all the natural self-complacency
and conservatism of mankind. No animal will change when its conditions are
“good enough” for present survival. And in this matter man is still an animal.
Until the nineteenth century, for more than two thousand years, there was
little in the history of China that could cause any serious doubts in the mind
of a Chinaman of the general superiority of his own civilization to that of the
rest of the world, and there was no reason apparent therefore for any
alteration. China produced a profusion of beautiful art, some delightful
poetry, astonishing cookery, and thousands of millions of glowingly pleasant
lives generation after generation. Her ships followed her marvellous inland
waterways, and put to sea but rarely, and then only to India or Borneo as their
utmost adventure. (Until the sixteenth century we must remember European seamen
never sailed out into the Atlantic Ocean. The Norse discovery of America, the
Phœnician circumnavigation of Africa, were exceptional feats.) And these things
were attained without any such general boredom, servitude, indignity, and
misery as underlay the rule of the rich in the Roman Empire. There was much
poverty, much discontent, but it was not massed poverty, it was not a necessary
popular discontent. For a thousand years the Chinese system, though it creaked
and swayed at times, seemed proof against decay. Dynastic changes there were,
rebellions, phases of disorder, famines, pestilences; two great invasions that
set foreign dynasties upon the throne of the Son of Heaven, but no such shock
as to revolutionize the order of the daily round. The emperors and dynasties
might come and go; the mandarins, the examinations, the classics, and the
traditions and habitual life remained. China’s civilization had already reached
its culmination in the seventh century A.D., its crowning period was the Tang
period; and though it continued to spread slowly and steadily into Annam, into
Cambodia, into Siam, into Tibet, into Nepal, Korea, Mongolia, and Manchuria,
there is henceforth little more than such geographical progress to record of it
in this history for a thousand years.[315]




§ 9[316]

In the year 629, the year after the arrival of Muhammad’s envoys at Canton and
thirty odd years after the landing of Pope Gregory’s missionaries in England, a
certain learned and devout Buddhist named Yuan Chwang started out from Singan,
Tai-tsung’s capital, upon a great journey to India. He was away sixteen years,
he returned in 645, and he wrote an account of his travels which is treasured
as a Chinese classic. One or two points about his experiences are to be noted
here because they contribute to our general review of the state of the world in
the seventh century A.D.

Yuan Chwang was as eager for marvels and as credulous as Herodotus, and without
the latter writer’s fine sense of history; he could never pass a monument or
ruin without learning some fabulous story about it; Chinese ideas of the
dignity of literature perhaps prevented him from telling us much detail of how
he travelled, who were his attendants, how he was lodged, or what he ate and
how he paid his expenses--details precious to the historian; nevertheless, he
gives us a series of illuminating flashes upon China, Central Asia, and India
in the period now under consideration.

[Illustration: YUAN CHWANG’S route from China to India, 629-645 A.D.]

His journey was an enormous one. He went and came back by way of the Pamirs. He
went by the northern route, crossing the desert of Gobi, passing along the
southern slopes of the Thien Shan, skirting the great deep blue lake of Issik
Kul, and so to Tashkend and Samarkand, and then more or less in the footsteps
of Alexander the Great southward to the Khyber Pass and Peshawur. He returned
by the southern route, crossing the Pamirs from Afghanistan to Kashgar, and so
along the line of retreat the Yueh Chi had followed in the reverse direction
seven centuries before, and by Yarkand, along the slopes of the Kuen Lun to
rejoin his former route near the desert end of the Great Wall. Each route
involved some hard mountaineering. His journeyings in India are untraceable; he
was there fourteen years, and he went all over the peninsula from Nepal to
Ceylon.

At that time there was an imperial edict forbidding foreign travel, so that
Yuan Chwang started from Singan like an escaping criminal. There was a pursuit
to prevent him carrying out his project. How he bought a lean red-coloured
horse that knew the desert paths from a strange grey-beard, how he dodged a
frontier guard-house with the help of a “foreign person” who made him a bridge
of brushwood lower down the river, how he crossed the desert guided by the
bones of men and cattle, how he saw a mirage, and how twice he narrowly escaped
being shot by arrows when he was getting water near the watch-towers on the
desert track, the reader will find in the _Life_. He lost his way in the desert
of Gobi, and for four nights and five days he had no water; when he was in the
mountains among the glaciers, twelve of his party were frozen to death. All
this is in the _Life_; he tells little of it in his own account of his travels.

He shows us the Turks, this new development of the Hun tradition, in possession
not only of what is now Turkestan, but all along the northern route. He
mentions many cities and considerable cultivation. He is entertained by various
rulers, allies of or more or less nominally tributaries to China, and among
others by the Khan of the Turks, a magnificent person in green satin, with his
long hair tied with silk.

“The gold embroidery of this grand tent shone with a dazzling splendour; the
ministers of the presence in attendance sat on mats in long rows on either side
all dressed in magnificent brocade robes, while the rest of the retinue on duty
stood behind. You saw that although it was a case of a frontier ruler, yet
there was an air of distinction and elegance. The Khan came out from his tent
about thirty paces to meet Yuan Chwang, who, after a courteous greeting,
entered the tent.... After a short interval envoys from China and Kao-chang
were admitted and presented their despatches and credentials, which the Khan
perused. He was much elated, and caused the envoys to be seated; then he
ordered wine and music for himself and them and grape-syrup for the pilgrim.
Hereupon all pledged each other, and the filling and draining of the winecups
made a din and bustle, while the mingled music of various instruments rose
loud: although the airs were the popular strains of foreigners, yet they
pleased the senses and exhilarated the mental faculties. After a little, piles
of roasted beef and mutton were served for the others, and lawful food, such as
cakes, milk, candy, honey, and grapes, for the pilgrim. After the
entertainment, grape-syrup was again served, and the Khan invited Yuan Chwang
to improve the occasion, whereupon the pilgrim expounded the doctrines of the
‘ten virtues,’ compassion for animal life, and the paramitas and emancipation.
The Khan, raising his hands, bowed, and gladly believed and accepted the
teaching.”

Yuan Chwang’s account of Samarkand[317] is of a large and prosperous city, “a
great commercial entrepôt, the country about it very fertile, abounding in
trees and flowers and yielding many fine horses. Its inhabitants were skilful
craftsmen, smart and energetic.” At that time we must remember there was hardly
such a thing as a town in Anglo-Saxon England.

As his narrative approached his experiences in India, however, the pious and
learned pilgrim in Yuan Chwang got the better of the traveller, and the book
becomes congested with monstrous stories of incredible miracles.[318]
Nevertheless, we get an impression of houses, clothing, and the like, closely
resembling those of the India of to-day. Then, as now, the kaleidoscopic
variety of an Indian crowd contrasted with the blue uniformity of the multitude
in China. In the time of Buddha it is doubtful if there were reading and
writing in India; now reading and writing were quite common accomplishments.
Yuan Chwang gives an interesting account of a great Buddhist university at
Nalanda, where ruins have quite recently been discovered and excavated. Nalanda
and Taxilla seem to have been considerable educational centres as early as the
opening of the schools of Athens. The caste system Yuan Chwang found fully
established in spite of Buddha, and the Brahmins were now altogether in the
ascendant. He names the four main castes we have mentioned in chap. xx., § 4
(_q.v._), but his account of their functions is rather different. The Sudras,
he says, were the tillers of the soil. Indian writers say that their function
was to wait upon the three “twice born” castes above them.

But, as we have already intimated, Yuan Chwang’s account of Indian realities is
swamped by his accumulation of legends and pious inventions. For these he had
come, and in these he rejoiced. The rest, as we shall see, was a task that had
been set him. The faith of Buddha which in the days of Asoka, and even so late
as Kanishka, was still pure enough to be a noble inspiration, we now discover
absolutely lost in a wilderness of preposterous rubbish, a philosophy of
endless Buddhas, tales of manifestations and marvels like a Christmas
pantomime, immaculate conceptions by six-tusked elephants, charitable princes
giving themselves up to be eaten by starving tigresses, temples built over a
sacred nail-paring, and the like. We cannot give such stories here; if the
reader likes that sort of thing, he must go to the publications of the Royal
Asiatic Society or the India Society, where he will find a delirium of such
imaginations. And in competition with this Buddhism, intellectually undermined
as it now was and smothered in gilded decoration, Brahminism was everywhere
gaining ground again, as Yuan Chwang notes with regret.

Side by side with these evidences of a vast intellectual decay in India we may
note the repeated appearance in Yuan Chwang’s narrative of ruined and deserted
cities. Much of the country was still suffering from the ravages of the
Ephthalites and the consequent disorders. Again and again we find such passages
as this: “he went north-east through a great forest, the road being a narrow,
dangerous path, with wild buffalo and wild elephants, and robbers and hunters
always in wait to kill travellers, and emerging from the forest he reached the
country of Kou-shih-na-ka-lo (Kúsinagara). The city walls were in ruins, and
the towns and villages were deserted. The brick foundations of the ‘old city’
(that is, the city which had been the capital) were above ten _li_ in circuit;
there were very few inhabitants, the interior of the city being a wild waste.”
This ruin was, however, by no means universal; there is at least as much
mention of crowded cities and villages and busy cultivations.

The _Life_ tells of many hardships upon the return journey: he fell among
robbers; the great elephant that was carrying the bulk of his possessions was
drowned; he had much difficulty in getting fresh transport. Here we cannot deal
with these adventures.

The return of Yuan Chwang to Singan, the Chinese capital, was, we gather, a
triumph. Advance couriers must have told of his coming. There was a public
holiday; the streets were decorated by gay banners and made glad with music. He
was escorted into the city with great pomp and ceremony. Twenty horses were
needed to carry the spoils of his travels; he had brought with him hundreds of
Buddhist books written in Sanskrit, and made of trimmed leaves of palm and
birch bark strung together in layers; he had many images great and small of
Buddha, in gold, silver, crystal, and sandalwood; he had holy pictures, and no
fewer than one hundred and fifty well authenticated true relics of Buddha. Yuan
Chwang was presented to the emperor, who treated him as a personal friend, took
him into the palace, and questioned him day by day about the wonders of these
strange lands in which he had stayed so long. But while the emperor asked about
India, the pilgrim was disposed only to talk about Buddhism.

Buddhist writers thought very highly of Tai-tsung because of his reception of
Yuan Chwang (645). But so did the Moslem historians, because of that mosque at
Canton, and so did the Christian writers, because of the Nestorian envoys
(631).

The subsequent history of Yuan Chwang contains two incidents that throw light
upon the mental workings of this great monarch, Tai-tsung, who was probably
quite as much a Moslem as he was a Christian or a Buddhist. The trouble about
all religious specialists is that they know too much about their own religion
and how it differs from others; the advantage, or disadvantage, of such
creative statesmen as Tai-tsung and Constantine the Great is that they know
comparatively little of such matters. Evidently the fundamental good of all
these religions seemed to Tai-tsung to be much the same fundamental good. So it
was natural to him to propose that Yuan Chwang should now give up the religious
life and come into his foreign office, a proposal that Yuan Chwang would not
entertain for a moment. The emperor then insisted at least upon a written
account of the travels, and so got this classic we treasure. And finally
Tai-tsung proposed to this highly saturated Buddhist that he should now use his
knowledge of Sanskrit in translating the works of the great Chinese teacher,
Lao Tse, so as to make them available for Indian readers. It seemed, no doubt,
to the emperor a fair return and a useful service to the fundamental good that
lies beneath all religions. On the whole, he thought Lao Tse might very well
rank with or even a little above Buddha, and therefore that if his work was put
before the Brahmins, they would receive it gladly. In much the same spirit
Constantine the Great had done his utmost to make Arius and Athanasius settle
down amicably together. But naturally enough this suggestion was repulsed by
Yuan Chwang. He retired to a monastery and spent the rest of his years
translating as much as he could of the Buddhist literature he had brought with
him into elegant Chinese writing.


*       *       *       *       *


THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY

¶ Mr. WELLS has also written the following novels:

LOVE AND MR. LEWISHAM   KIPPS   MR. POLLY   THE WHEELS OF CHANCE   THE NEW
MACHIAVELLI   ANN VERONICA   TONO BUNGAY   MARRIAGE   BEALBY   THE PASSIONATE
FRIENDS   THE WIFE OF SIR ISAAC HARMAN   THE RESEARCH MAGNIFICENT   MR.
BRITLING SEES IT THROUGH   THE SOUL OF A BISHOP   JOAN AND PETER   THE UNDYING
FIRE

¶ The following fantastic and imaginative romances:

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS   THE TIME MACHINE   THE WONDERFUL VISIT   THE ISLAND
OF DR. MOREAU   THE SEA LADY   THE SLEEPER AWAKES   THE FOOD OF THE GODS   THE
WAR IN THE AIR   THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON   IN THE DAYS OF THE COMET   THE
WORLD SET FREE

And numerous Short Stories now collected in One Volume under the title of THE
COUNTRY OF THE BLIND

¶ A Series of books on Social, Religious, and Political questions:

ANTICIPATIONS (1900)   MANKIND IN THE MAKING   FIRST AND LAST THINGS   NEW
WORLDS FOR OLD   A MODERN UTOPIA   THE FUTURE IN AMERICA   AN ENGLISHMAN LOOKS
AT THE WORLD   WHAT IS COMING?   WAR AND THE FUTURE   IN THE FOURTH YEAR   GOD
THE INVISIBLE KING

¶ And two little books about children’s play, called

FLOOR GAMES and LITTLE WARS

*       *       *       *       *




THE OUTLINE OF
HISTORY

Being a Plain History of Life and Mankind

BY                               H. G. WELLS

WRITTEN WITH THE ADVICE AND EDITORIAL HELP OF

MR. ERNEST BARKER,                SIR H. H. JOHNSTON,
SIR E. RAY LANKESTER                      AND PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY

AND ILLUSTRATED BY

J. F. HORRABIN

VOLUME II

NEW YORK                          THE MACMILLAN
COMPANY                                  1920

_All rights reserved_

COPYRIGHT, 1920,                        BY THE
MACMILLAN COMPANY.

COPYRIGHT, 1920,                             BY H.
G. WELLS.

Set up and electrotyped. Published November, 1920.

Norwood Press                 J. S. Cushing
Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.                         Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




SCHEME OF CONTENTS


BOOK VI (CONTINUED)
PAGE CHAPTER XXXII. MUHAMMAD AND ARAB ISLAM

§ 1. Arabia before Muhammad                                            1

§ 2. Life of Muhammad to the Hegira                                    4

§ 3. Muhammad becomes a fighting prophet                               8

§ 4. The teachings of Islam                                           14

§ 5. The caliphs Abu Bekr and Omar                                    16

§ 6. The great days of the Omayyads                                   22

§ 7. The decay of Islam under the Abbasids                            31

§ 8. The intellectual life of Arab Islam                              34

CHAPTER XXXIII. CHRISTENDOM AND THE CRUSADES

§ 1. The Western world at its lowest ebb                              40

§ 2. The feudal system                                                42

§ 3. The Frankish kingdom of the Merovingians                         46

§ 4. The Christianization of the western barbarians                   48

§ 5. Charlemagne becomes emperor of the West                          54

§ 6. The personality of Charlemagne                                   59

§ 7. The French and the Germans become distinct                       61

§ 8. The Normans, the Saracens, the Hungarians, and the Seljuk Turks  64

§ 9. How Constantinople appealed to Rome                              72

§ 10. The Crusades                                                    76

§ 11. The Crusades a test of Christianity                             84

§ 12. The Emperor Frederick II                                        86

§ 13. Defects and limitations of the papacy                           90

§ 14. A list of leading Popes                                         96


BOOK VII

THE GREAT MONGOL EMPIRES OF THE LAND WAYS AND THE NEW EMPIRES OF THE SEA WAYS

CHAPTER XXXIV. THE GREAT EMPIRE OF JENGIS KHAN AND HIS SUCCESSORS

§ 1. Asia at the end of the twelfth century                          105

§ 2. The rise and victories of the Mongols                           108

§ 3. The travels of Marco Polo                                       114

§ 4. The Ottoman Turks, the Turkish Caliph, and Constantinople       120

§ 5. Why the Mongols were not Christianized                          126

§ 5A. Kublai Khan founds the Yuan Dynasty                            127

§ 5B. The Mongols revert to tribalism                                128

§ 5C. The Kipchak empire and the Tsar of Muscovy                     128

§ 5D. Timurlane                                                      130

§ 5E. The Mongol empire of India                                     133

§ 5F. The Mongols and the Gipsies                                    137

CHAPTER XXXV. THE RENASCENCE OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION

§ 1. Christianity and popular education                              139

§ 2. Europe begins to think for itself                               148

§ 3. The Great Plague and the dawn of communism                      153

§ 4. How paper liberated the human mind                              158

§ 5. Protestantism of the princes and Protestantism of the peoples   160

§ 6. The reawakening of science                                      167

§ 7. The new growth of European towns                                177

§ 8. America comes into history                                      184

§ 9. What Machiavelli thought of the world                           194

§ 10. The republic of Switzerland                                    198

§ 11A. The life of the Emperor Charles V                             199

§ 11B. Protestants if the prince wills it                            210

§ 11C. The intellectual under-tow                                    210


BOOK VIII

THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

CHAPTER XXXVI. PRINCES, PARLIAMENTS, AND POWERS

§ 1. Princes and foreign policy                                      213

§ 2. The English republic                                            218

§ 3. The Dutch republic                                              228

§ 4. The break-up and disorder of Germany                            232

§ 5. The splendours of Grand Monarchy in Europe                      236

§ 6. The growth of the idea of Great Powers                          243

§ 7. The crowned republic of Poland and its fate                     248

§ 8. The first scramble for empire overseas                          251

§ 9. Britain dominates India                                         254

§ 10. Russia’s ride to the Pacific                                   259

§ 11. What Gibbon thought of the world in 1780                       262

§ 12. The social truce draws to an end                               269

CHAPTER XXXVII. THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICS OF AMERICA AND FRANCE

§ 1. Inconveniences of the Great Power system                        278

§ 2. The thirteen colonies before their revolt                       280

§ 3. Civil war is forced upon the colonies                           286

§ 4. The War of Independence                                         291

§ 5. The constitution of the United States                           294

§ 6. Primitive features of the United States constitution            301

§ 7. Revolutionary ideas in France                                   307

§ 8. The Revolution of the year 1789                                 311

§ 9. The French “crowned republic” of ’89-’91                        313

§ 10. The Revolution of the Jacobins                                 321

§ 11. The Jacobin republic, 1792-4                                   331

§ 12. The Directory                                                  337

§ 13. The pause in reconstruction and the dawn of modern Socialism   339

CHAPTER XXXVIII. THE CAREER OF NAPOLEON BONAPARTE

§ 1. The Buonaparte family in Corsica                                348

§ 2. Bonaparte as a republican general                               349

§ 3. Napoleon First Consul, 1799-1804                                354

§ 4. Napoleon I Emperor, 1804-1814                                   360

§ 5. The Hundred Days                                                368

§ 6. The cult of the Napoleonic                                      373

§ 7. The map of Europe in 1815                                       377

CHAPTER XXXIX. THE REALITIES AND IMAGINATION OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. THE
INCREASE OF KNOWLEDGE AND CLEAR THINKING. THE NATIONALIST PHASE

§ 1. The mechanical revolution                                       384

§ 2. Relation of the mechanical to the industrial revolution         393

§ 3. The fermentation of ideas, 1848                                 399

§ 4. The development of the idea of Socialism                        401

§ 5. Shortcomings of Socialism as a scheme of human society          411

§ 6. How Darwinism affected religious and political ideas            416

§ 7. Mr. Gladstone and the idea of Nationalism                       426

§ 8. Europe between 1848 and 1878                                    436

§ 9. The (second) scramble for overseas empires                      449

§ 10. The Indian precedent in Asia                                   461

§ 11. The history of Japan                                           464

§ 12. Close of the period of overseas expansion                      469

§ 13. The British Empire in 1914                                     470

CHAPTER XL. THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914 AND THE CLOSE OF THE GREAT
POWER PERIOD

§ 1. The armed peace before the Great War                            475

§ 2. Imperial Germany                                                477

§ 3. The spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland                486

§ 4. Imperialism in France, Italy, and the Balkans                   499

§ 5. Russia still a Grand Monarchy in 1914                           502

§ 6. The United States and the Imperial idea                         503

§ 7. The immediate causes of the Great War                           508

§ 8. A summary of the Great War up to 1917                           513

§ 9. The Great War from the Russian collapse to the armistice        524

§ 10. The political, economic, and social disorganization caused by the Great
War                                                        532

§ 11. President Wilson and the problems of Versailles                543

§ 12. Summary of the first Covenant of the League of Nations         558

§ 13. A general outline of the treaties of 1919 and 1920             562

§ 14. A forecast of the “next war”                                   567

§ 15. The state of men’s minds in 1920                               572


BOOK IX

THE NEXT STAGE IN HISTORY

CHAPTER XLI. MAN’S COMING OF AGE. THE PROBABLE STRUGGLE FOR THE UNIFICATION OF
THE WORLD INTO ONE COMMUNITY OF KNOWLEDGE AND WILL

§ 1. The possible unification of men’s wills in political matters    579

§ 2. How a Federal World Government may come about                   583

§ 3. Some fundamental characteristics of a modern world state        586

§ 4. What this world might be like, were men united in a common peace and
justice                                                    588

§ 5. The stages beyond?                                              594

FIVE TIME CHARTS OF THE WORLD’S AFFAIRS FROM B.C. 1000 TO A.D. 1920  599

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE FROM 800 B.C. TO A.D. 1920                     605

INDEX                                                                625




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PAGE

Arabia and Adjacent Countries                                          2

The Beginnings of Moslem Power                                        19

The Growth of Moslem Power in 25 Years                                23

The Moslem Empire                                                     25

Europe, 500 A.D.                                                      44

Frankish Dominions in the Time of Charles Martel                      45

England, 640 A.D.                                                     49

England, 878 A.D.                                                     52

Europe at the Death of Charlemagne                                    55

France at the Close of the 10th Century                               65

Empire of Otto the Great                                              68

The Coming of the Seljuks (Map)                                       70

The First Crusade (Map)                                               77

Europe and Asia, 1200                                                107

Empire of Jengis Khan, 1227                                          111

Travels of Marco Polo                                                115

Ottoman Empire before 1453                                           123

Ottoman Empire, 1566                                                 125

Empire of Timurlane                                                  131

Europe at the Fall of Constantinople                                 141

“We have the payne....” John Bull’s Speech                           155

Ignatius of Loyola                                                   164

European Trade Routes in the 14th Century                            183

The Chief Voyages of Exploration up to 1522                          191

Mexico and Peru                                                      192

Switzerland                                                          198

Europe in the Time of Charles V                                      201

Martin Luther                                                        203

Francis I                                                            204

Henry VIII                                                           206

Charles V                                                            207

Central Europe, 1648                                                 233

Louis XIV                                                            237

The Partitions of Poland                                             250

Britain, France, and Spain in America, 1750                          255

Chief Foreign Settlements in India, 17th Century                     256

India in 1750                                                        260

American Colonies, 1760                                              283

Boston in 1775                                                       292

The United States in 1790                                            295

The United States Showing Dates of the Chief Territorial Extensions  299

Benjamin Franklin                                                    303

George Washington                                                    304

The Flight to Varennes (Map)                                         322

North Eastern Frontier of France, 1792                               330

Napoleon’s Egyptian Campaign                                         352

Napoleon as Emperor                                                  360

Tsar Alexander I                                                     362

Napoleon’s Empire, 1810                                              365

The Trail of Napoleon                                                369

Europe after the Congress of Vienna                                  379

The Natural Political Map of Europe                                  383

Mr. Gladstone                                                        427

Tribal Gods of the 19th Century                                      434

Map of Europe, 1848-1871                                             439

Italy, 1861                                                          441

Bismarck                                                             443

The Balkans, 1878                                                    448

Comparative Maps of Asia under Different Projections                 450

The British Empire in 1815                                           452

Africa in the Middle of 19th Century                                 458

Africa, 1914                                                         459

Japan and the East Coast of Asia                                     468

Overseas Empires of European Powers, 1914                            474

Emperor William II                                                   482

Ireland             .                                                491

The Balkan States, 1913                                              501

The Original German Plan, 1914                                       514

The Western Front, 1915-18                                           517

Time Chart of the Great War, 1914-18                              528-29

President Wilson                                                     551

M. Clemenceau                                                        552

Mr. Lloyd George                                                     553

Germany after the Peace Treaty, 1919                                 561

The Turkish Treaty, 1920                                             563

The Break-up of Austria-Hungary                                      565

Time-chart 1000 B.C.-300 B.C.                                        599

Time-chart 400 B.C.-A.D. 300                                         600

Time-chart A.D. 200-A.D. 900                                         601

Time-chart A.D. 800-A.D. 1500                                        602

Time-chart A.D. 1220-A.D. 1920                                       603

