# BOOK II - XII - § 5
[Metadata]: # {03.05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
XII
§ 5
# § 5
The capacity for telling things increased with their vocabulary. The simple
individual fancies, the unsystematic fetish tricks and fundamental tabus of
Palæolithic man began to be handed on and made into a more consistent system.
Men began to tell stories about themselves, about the tribe, about its tabus
and why they had to be, about the world and the why for the world. A tribal
mind came into existence, a tradition. Palæolithic man was certainly more of a
free individualist, more of an artist, as well as more of a savage, than
Neolithic man. Neolithic man was coming under prescription; he could be trained
from his youth and told to do things and not to do things; he was not so free
to form independent ideas of his own about things. He had thoughts given to
him; he was under a new power of suggestion. And to have more words and to
attend more to words is not simply to increase mental power; words themselves
are powerful things and dangerous things. Palæolithic man’s words, perhaps,
were chiefly just names. He used them for what they were. But Neolithic man was
thinking about these words, he was thinking about a number of things with a
great deal of verbal confusion, and getting to some odd conclusions. In speech
he had woven a net to bind his race together, but also it was a net about his
feet. Man was binding himself into new and larger and more efficient
combinations indeed, but at a price. One of the most notable things about the
Neolithic Age is the total absence of that free direct artistic impulse which
was the supreme quality of later Palæolithic man. We find much industry, much
skill, polished implements, pottery with conventional designs, co-operation
upon all sorts of things, but no evidence of personal creativeness.[67]
Self-suppression is beginning for men. Man has entered upon the long and
tortuous and difficult path towards a life for the common good, with all its
sacrifice of personal impulse, which he is still treading to-day.

Certain things appear in the mythology of mankind again and again. Neolithic
man was enormously impressed by serpents--and he no longer took the sun for
granted. Nearly everywhere that Neolithic culture went, there went a
disposition to associate the sun and the serpent in decoration and worship.
This primitive serpent worship spread ultimately far beyond the regions where
the snake is of serious practical importance in human life.

