# BOOK VIII - XXXVIII - § 6
[Metadata]: # {10.03.06}
[Descriptor]: # {10.03.06}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VIII
XXXVIII
§ 6
# § 6
In the long perspectives of history the cult of Napoleon, and his peculiar
effect upon certain types of mind, is of far more interest and far more
importance than his actual adventures. The world has largely recovered from the
mischief he did; perhaps that amount of mischief had to be done by some agency;
perhaps his career, or some such career, was a necessary consequence of the
world’s mental unpreparedness for the crisis of the revolution. But that his
peculiar personality should dominate the imaginations of great numbers of
people, throws a light upon factors of enduring significance in our human
problem.

It would be difficult to find a human being less likely to arouse affection.
One reads in vain through the monstrous accumulations of Napoleonic literature
for a single record of self-forgetfulness. Laughter is one great difference
between man and the lower animals, one method of our brotherhood, and there is
no evidence that Napoleon ever laughed. Nor can we imagine another of the most
beautiful of human expressions upon the face of this saturnine egotist, that
expression of disinterested interest that one sees in the face of an artist or
artisan “lost,” as we say, in his work. Out of his portraits he looks at us
with a thin scorn upon his lips, the scorn of the criminal who believes that he
can certainly cheat such fools as we are, and withal with a certain uneasiness
in his eyes. That uneasiness haunts all his portraits. Are we really convinced
he is quite right? Are his laurels straight? He had a vast contempt for man in
general and men in particular, a contempt that took him at last to St. Helena,
that same contempt that fills our jails with forgers, poisoners, and the like
victims of self-conceit. There is no proof that this unbrotherly, unhumorous
egotist was ever sincerely loved by any human being. The Empress Josephine was
unfaithful to him as he to her. His young Austrian wife would not accompany him
to Elba. A certain Polish countess followed him thither, but not, it would
seem, for love, but on account of the son she had borne him. She wanted
settlements. She stayed only two days with him. He had never even a dog to love
him. He estranged most of his colleagues and fellow generals. He had no
familiar friend. No one who knew him felt safe with him. In his intimacy, his
unflinching self-concentration must have been a terrible bore. His personal
habits were unpleasant; the moodiness of bad health came to him early. True it
is that his soldiers, who, save for a few rare melodramatic encounters, saw
nothing of him, idolized their “Little Corporal.” But it was not him they
idolized, but a carefully fostered legend of an incredibly clever, recklessly
brave little man, a little pet of a man, who was devoted to France and them.

Why, then, is there an enormous cult of Napoleon, an endless writing of books
about him, an insatiable collecting of relics and documents, a kind of worship
of his memory? Marat was a far more noble, persistent, subtle, and pathetic
figure; Talleyrand a greater statesman and a much more amusing personality;
Moreau and Hoche abler leaders of armies; his rival, the Tsar Alexander, as
egotistical, more successful, more emotional, and with a finer imagination. Are
men dazzled simply by the scale of his flounderings, by the mere vastness of
his notoriety?

No doubt scale has something to do with the matter; he was a “record,” the
record plunger; but there is something more in it than that. There is an appeal
in Napoleon to something deeper and more fundamental in human nature than mere
astonishment at bigness. His very deficiencies bring out starkly certain
qualities that lurk suppressed and hidden in us all. He was unhampered. He had
never a gleam of religion or affection or the sense of duty. He was, as few men
are or dare to be, a scoundrel, bright and complete. Most of us are constrained
more or less and now and then to serve God or our fellow men, to do things
disinterestedly, to behave decently when no one is watching us. He was not so
constrained. Most men do a little regret and resent their good deeds, and find
a secret satisfaction in their unpunished bad ones. The early palæolithic
strain is still strong in us; we are being made over, slowly and reluctantly,
into social and fraternal creatures. Few of us thoroughly enjoy being good
citizens. Our moral conflicts, therefore, are intricate and comic; the constant
effort to explain to ourselves and others that there is a fine moral purpose in
this shirking of our duty or in that self-seeking act. We are all regretfully
of the race of Tsar Alexander, who destroyed the freedom of Poland, annexed
Finland, and secured his imperial predominance piously, “in the name of the
most Holy and Indivisible Trinity”--when it would have been far more agreeable
to have done it in the name of the most Holy and Magnificent Alexander. There
was none of this robing of greed and crime about Napoleon. His self-conceit and
his instinctive and fundamental atheism made him at least magnificently direct.
What we all want to do secretly, more or less, he did in the daylight.

Directness was his distinctive and immortalizing quality. He had no brains to
waste in secondary considerations. He flung his armies across Europe straight
at their mark, there never were such marches before; he fought to win; when he
struck he struck with all his might. And what he wanted, he wanted simply and
completely, and got--if he could.

There lies his fascination. Since his time his name has been one of the utmost
reassurance to great multitudes of doubting men; to the business man hesitating
over a more than shady transaction, to the clerk fingering a carelessly written
cheque that could so easily be altered, to the trustee in want of ready money,
to the manufacturer meditating the pros and cons of an adulteration, to
thousands of such people the word “Napoleonic” has come with an effect of
decisive relief. We live in a world full of would-be Napoleons of finance, of
the press, of the turf; half the cells in our jails and many in our mad-houses
are St. Helenas. He was the very embodiment of that sound, clear, self-centred
common sense, without sentiment or scruples or reflection, that struggles with
our feebler better nature, that may ultimately destroy mankind. In all history
there is no figure so completely antithetical to the figure of Jesus of
Nazareth, whose pitiless and difficult doctrine of self-abandonment and
self-forgetfulness we can neither disregard nor yet bring ourselves to obey.
That summons to a new way of life haunts our world to-day, haunts wealth and
comfort and every sort of success. It is a trouble to us all. Our uneasiness
grows. Napoleon was free from it. The cultivation of the Napoleonic legend
seems to offer a kind of refuge. From salvation.

In that antithesis lies the essential historical importance of Napoleon. His
career marks the beginning of a new phase in the elations of strong and able
and energetic and advantageously placed men to the main mass of mankind. They
are robbed of Self-deception; they must either serve or openly defy the idea of
service. They must be humble or Napoleonic; there is no more service with
privilege and pride. Napoleon adorned himself with ancient titles and
antiquated robes, but the more he brought himself into contact with tradition,
the more manifestly he displayed himself as something new. In the Tsar
Alexander I, who was never direct, this direct new imperialism met the old.
Hitherto the kings and potentates of the world had taken themselves in good
faith, had had the support of religion in their consciences, had believed they
were serving God in their kingship, and that they were necessary to mankind and
beneficial to mankind. In many cases they were no doubt swayed by very mixed
motives, his majesty had “weaknesses,” his majesty almost always had a
sensitive personal vanity. Sometimes, indeed, a born rascal like Charles II of
England would have the grace or the gracelessness to laugh at himself, but the
generality of kings and tyrants had the profoundest faith in themselves, and
were sustained by the sincere faith of their loyal supporters. The emperor
Charles V and his son Philip II, Charles I of England, Louis XIV, and the Tsar
Alexander were all inspired by a complete assurance of their own righteousness,
were convinced that opposition to them was sheer wickedness, wickedness to be
overcome in any way and punished with the utmost severity. But Napoleon knew
himself for what he was, an individual man getting the better of his fellow
men. He had small doubt in his struggle with the republicans, where the moral
superiority lay. With Napoleon, we note the beginning of a clearer-headed age.
The self-deceptions of wealth, power, and prominence wear thin. His new
imperialism reflected upon the old.

For a time the Concert of Europe struggled valiantly to carry on upon the old
lines, but the French Revolution had shrivelled the heart of monarchy. In 1830,
and again in 1848, the evaporation of the simple old royalist faith became very
evident. Alexander I and his narrow-minded successor, Nicholas I, could still
sustain the delusion of divine right in Russia--that did not perish until
1917--the idea hung on in Prussia in spite of much muttered criticism,[454] but
for the rest of Europe the days of the unchallenged claim of kingship had gone.
“What good are you?” said the world to monarchs; “and what do you do for us?”

So challenged, many of the monarchs became apologetic and fussily useful. One
or two, as we shall have to tell, became “Napoleonic.” But so far no European
monarch has betrayed any disposition to waive the remnant of his ancient
trappings, to cease his passive and traditional opposition to political
readjustment, and to move of his own accord towards that more broadly conceived
government of human affairs as one world-wide community of will, which the
future welfare of mankind demands.


§ 7[455]

For nearly forty years the idea of the Holy Alliance, the Concert of Europe
which arose out of it, and the series of congresses and conferences that
succeeded the concert, kept an insecure peace in war-exhausted Europe. Two main
things prevented that period from being a complete social and international
peace, and prepared the way for the cycle of wars between 1854 and 1871. The
first of these was the tendency of the royal courts concerned, towards the
restoration of unfair privilege and interference with freedom of thought and
writing and teaching. The second was the impossible system of boundaries drawn
by the diplomatists of Vienna.

The obstinate disposition of monarchy to march back towards past conditions was
first and most particularly manifest in Spain. Here even the Inquisition was
restored. Across the Atlantic the Spanish colonies had followed the example of
the United States and revolted against the European Great Power system, when
Napoleon set up his brother Joseph upon the Spanish throne in 1810. The
Washington of South America was General Bolivar. Spain was unable to suppress
this revolt, it dragged on much as the United States War of Independence had
dragged on, and at last the suggestion was made by Austria in accordance with
the spirit of the Holy Alliance, that the European monarchs should assist Spain
in this struggle. This was opposed by Britain in Europe, but it was the prompt
action of President Monroe of the United States in 1823 which conclusively
warned off this projected monarchist restoration. He announced that the United
States would regard any extension of the European system in the Western
Hemisphere as a hostile act. Thus arose the Monroe Doctrine, which has kept the
Great Power System out of America for nearly a hundred years, and permitted the
new states of Spanish America to work out their destinies along their own
lines. But if Spanish monarchism lost its colonies, it could at least, under
the protection of the Concert of Europe, do what it chose in Europe. A popular
insurrection in Spain was crushed by a French army in 1823, with a mandate from
a European congress, and simultaneously Austria suppressed a revolution in
Naples. The moving spirit in this conspiracy of governments against peoples was
the Austrian statesman, Metternich.

In 1824 Louis XVIII died, and was succeeded by that Count d’Artois whom we have
seen hovering as an émigré on the French frontiers in 1789; he took the title
of Charles X. Charles set himself to destroy the liberty of the press and
universities, and to restore absolute government; the sum of a billion francs
was voted to compensate the nobles for the château burnings and sequestrations
of 1789. In 1830 Paris rose against this embodiment of the ancient régime, and
replaced him by the son of that sinister Philip, Duke of Orleans, whose
execution was one of the brightest achievements of the Terror. The other
continental monarchies, in face of the open approval of the revolution by Great
Britain and a strong liberal ferment in Germany and Austria, did not interfere
in this affair. After all, France was still a monarchy. This young man, Louis
Philippe (1830-48), remained the constitutional king of France for eighteen
years. He went down in 1848, a very eventful year for Europe, of which we shall
tell in the next chapter.

[Illustration: EUROPE after the Congress of Vienna]

Such were the uneasy swayings of the peace of the Congress of Vienna, which
were provoked by the reactionary proceedings to which, sooner or later, all
monarchist courts seem by their very nature to gravitate. The stresses that
arose from the unscientific map-making of the diplomatists gathered force more
deliberately, but they were even more dangerous to the peace of mankind. It is
extraordinarily inconvenient to administer together the affairs of peoples
speaking different languages and so reading different literatures and having
different general ideas, especially if those differences are exacerbated by
religious disputes. Only some strong mutual interest, such as the common
defensive needs of the Swiss mountaineers, can justify a close linking of
peoples of dissimilar languages and faiths; and even in Switzerland there is
the utmost local autonomy. Ultimately, when the Great Power tradition is
certainly dead and buried, those Swiss populations may gravitate towards their
natural affinities in Germany, France, and Italy. When, as in Macedonia,
populations are mixed in a patchwork of villages and districts, the cantonal
system is imperatively needed. But if the reader will look at the map of Europe
as the Congress of Vienna drew it, he will see that this gathering seems almost
as if it had planned the maximum of local exasperation. It destroyed the Dutch
Republic, quite needlessly, it lumped together the Protestant Dutch with the
French-speaking Catholics of the old Spanish (Austrian) Netherlands, and set up
a kingdom of the Netherlands. It handed over not merely the old republic of
Venice, but all of North Italy as far as Milan to the German-speaking
Austrians. French-speaking Savoy it combined with pieces of Italy to restore
the kingdom of Sardinia.[456] Austria and Hungary, already a sufficiently
explosive mixture of discordant nationalities, Germans, Hungarians,
Czecho-Slovaks, Jugo-Slavs, Roumanians, and now Italians, was made still more
impossible by confirming Austria’s Polish acquisitions of 1772 and 1795. The
Polish people, being catholic and republican-spirited, were chiefly given over
to the less civilized rule of the Greek-orthodox Tsar, but important districts
went to Protestant Russia. The Tsar was also confirmed in his acquisition of
the entirely alien Finns. The very dissimilar Norwegian and Swedish peoples
were bound together under one king. Germany, the reader will see, was left in a
particularly dangerous state of muddle. Prussia and Austria were both partly in
and partly out of a German confederation, which included a multitude of minor
states. The King of Denmark came into the German confederation by virtue of
certain German-speaking possessions in Holstein. Luxembourg was included in the
German Confederation, though its ruler was also King of the Netherlands, and
though many of its peoples talked French. Here was a crazy tangle, an outrage
on the common sense of mankind, a preposterous disregard of the fact that the
people who talk German and base their ideas on German literature, the people
who talk Italian and base their ideas on Italian literature, and the people who
talk Polish and base their ideas on Polish literature, will all be far better
off and most helpful and least obnoxious to the rest of mankind if they conduct
their own affairs in their own idiom within the ring-fence of their own speech.
Is it any wonder that one of the most popular songs in Germany during this
period declared that wherever the German tongue was spoken, there was the
German Fatherland?

Even to-day men are still reluctant to recognize that areas of government are
not matters for the bargaining and interplay of tsars and kings and foreign
offices. There is _a natural and necessary political map of the world_ which
transcends these things. There is _a best way possible_ of dividing any part of
the world into administrative areas, and a best possible kind of government for
every area, having regard to the speech and race of its inhabitants, and it is
the common concern of all men of intelligence to secure those divisions and
establish those forms of government quite irrespective of diplomacies and
flags, “claims” and melodramatic “loyalties” and the existing political map of
the world. The natural political map of the world insists upon itself. It
heaves and frets beneath the artificial political map like some misfitted
giant. In 1830 French-speaking Belgium, stirred up by the current revolution in
France, revolted against its Dutch association in the kingdom of the
Netherlands. The Powers, terrified at the possibility of a republic and of
annexation to France, hurried in to pacify this situation, and gave the
Belgians a monarch from that rich breeding-ground of monarchs, Germany, Leopold
I of Saxe-Coburg Gotha. There were also ineffectual revolts in Italy and
Germany in 1830, and a much more serious one in Russian Poland. A republican
government held out in Warsaw for a year against Nicholas I (who succeeded
Alexander in 1825), and was then stamped out of existence with great violence
and cruelty. The Polish language was banned, and the Greek Orthodox church was
substituted for the Roman Catholic as the State religion....

An outbreak of the natural political map of the world, which occurred in 1821,
ultimately secured the support of England, France, and Russia. This was the
insurrection of the Greeks against the Turks. For six years they fought a
desperate war, while the governments of Europe looked on. Liberal opinion
protested against this inactivity; volunteers from every European country
joined the insurgents, and at last Britain, France, and Russia took joint
action. The Turkish fleet was destroyed by the French and English at the Battle
of Navarino (1827), and the Tsar invaded Turkey. By the treaty of Adrianople
(1829) Greece was declared free, but she was not permitted to resume her
ancient republican traditions. There is a sort of historical indecency in a
Greek monarchy. But a Greek republic would have been dangerous to all monarchy
in a Europe that fretted under the ideas of the Holy Alliance. One monarch
makes many. A German king was found for Greece, one Prince Otto of Bavaria,
slightly demented, but quite royal--he gave way to delusions about his divine
right, and was ejected in 1862--and Christian governors were set up in the
Danubian provinces (which are now Roumania) and Serbia (a part of the Jugo-Slav
region). This was a partial concession to the natural political map, but much
blood had still to run before the Turk was altogether expelled from these
lands. A little later the natural political map was to assert itself in Italy
and Germany.

[Illustration: The NATURAL POLITICAL MAP of EUROPE]

