# BOOK II - X - § 3
[Metadata]: # {03.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
X
§ 3
# § 3
There is a disposition on the part of many writers to exaggerate the
intellectual and physical qualities of these later Palæolithic men and make a
wonder of them.[39] Collectively considered, these people had remarkable gifts,
but a little reflection will show they had almost as remarkable deficiencies.
The tremendous advance they display upon their Neanderthalian predecessors and
their special artistic gift must not blind us to their very obvious
limitations. For all the quantity of their brains, the quality was narrow and
special. They had vivid perceptions, an acute sense of animal form, they had
the real artist’s impulse to render; so far they were fully grown human beings.
But that disposition to paint and draw is shown to-day by the Bushmen, by
Californian Indians, and by Australian black fellows; it is not a mark of
all-round high intellectual quality. The cumulative effect of their drawings
and paintings is very great, but we must not make the mistake of crowding all
these achievements together in our minds as though they had suddenly flashed
out upon the world in a brief interval of time, or as though they were all the
achievements of one people. These races of Reindeer Men were in undisturbed
possession of western Europe for a period at least ten times as long as the
interval between ourselves and the beginning of the Christian Era, and through
all that immense time they were free to develop and vary their life to its
utmost possibilities. Their art constitutes their one claim to be accounted
more than common savages.

They were in close contact with animals, but they never seemed to have got to
terms with any animal unless it was the horse. They had no dogs. They had no
properly domesticated animals at all. They watched and drew and killed and ate.
They do not seem to have cooked their food. Perhaps they scorched and grilled
it, but they could not have done much more, because they had no cooking
implements. Although they had clay available, and although there are several
Palæolithic clay figures on record, they had _no pottery_. Although they had a
great variety of flint and bone implements, they never rose to the
possibilities of using timber for permanent shelters or such-like structures.
They never made hafted axes or the like that would enable them to deal with
timber. There is a suggestion in some of the drawings of a fence of stakes in
which a mammoth seems to be entangled. But here we may be dealing with
superimposed scratchings. They had _no buildings_. It is not even certain that
they had tents or huts. They may have had simple skin tents. Some of the
drawings seem to suggest as much. It is doubtful if they knew of the bow. They
left no good arrowheads behind them. Certain of their implements are said to be
“arrow-straighteners” by distinguished authorities, but that is about as much
evidence as we have of arrows. They may have used sharpened sticks as arrows.
They had _no cultivation_ of grain or vegetables of any sort. Their women were
probably squaws, smaller than the men; the earlier statuettes represent them as
grossly fat, almost as the Bushmen women are often fat to-day. (But this may
not be true of the Cro-Magnards.)

They clothed themselves, it would seem, in skins, if they clothed themselves at
all. These skins they prepared with skill and elaboration, and towards the end
of the age they used bone needles, no doubt to sew these pelts. One may guess
pretty safely that they painted these skins, and it has even been supposed,
printed off designs upon them from bone cylinders. But their garments were mere
wraps; there are no clasps or catches to be found. They do not seem to have
used grass or such-like fibre for textiles. Their statuettes are naked. They
were, in fact, except for a fur wrap in cold weather, naked painted savages.

These hunters lived on open steppes for two hundred centuries or so, ten times
the length of the Christian era. They were, perhaps, overtaken by the growth of
the European forests, as the climate became milder and damper. When the wild
horse and the reindeer diminished in Europe, and a newer type of human culture,
with a greater power over food supply, a greater tenacity of settlement, and
probably a larger social organization, arose, the Reindeer Men had to learn
fresh ways of living or disappear. How far they learnt and mingled their strain
with the new European populations, and how far they went under we cannot yet
guess. Opinions differ widely. Wright lays much stress on the “great hiatus”
between the Palæolithic and Neolithic remains, while Osborn traces the likeness
of the former in several living populations. In the region of the Doubs and of
the Dordogne in France, many individuals are to be met with to this day with
skulls of the “Cro-Magnon” type. Apparently the Grimaldi type of men has
disappeared altogether from Europe. Whether the Cro-Magnon type of men mingled
completely with the Neolithic peoples, or whether they remained distinct and
held their own in favourable localities to the north and west, following the
reindeer over Siberia and towards America, which at that time was continuous
with Siberia, or whether they disappeared altogether from the world, is a
matter that can be only speculated about at present. There is not enough
evidence for a judgment. Possibly they mingled to a certain extent. There is
little to prevent our believing that they survived without much intermixture
for a long time in north Asia, that “pockets” of them remained here and there
in Europe, that there is a streak of their blood in most European peoples
to-day, and that there is a much stronger streak, if not a predominant strain,
in the Mongolian and American races.[40]

