# BOOK VIII - XL - § 14
[Metadata]: # {10.05.12}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.12}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 14
The failure to produce a more satisfactory world settlement in 1919-20 was, we
have suggested, a symptom of an almost universal intellectual and moral
lassitude, resulting from the overstrain of the Great War. A lack of fresh
initiative is characteristic of a fatigue phase; everyone, from sheer inability
to change, drifts on for a time along the lines of mental habit and precedent.

Nothing could be more illustrative of this fatigue inertia than the expressed
ideas of military men at this time. It will round off this chapter in an
entirely significant way, and complete our picture of the immense world
interrogation on which our history must end, if we give here the briefest
summary of a lecture that was delivered to a gathering of field-marshals,
generals, major-generals, and the like by Major-General Sir Louis Jackson, at
the Royal United Service Institution in London one day in December, 1919. Lord
Peel, the British Under-Secretary for War, presided, and the reader must
picture to himself the not too large and quite dignified room of assembly in
that building, and all these fine, grave, soldierly figures quietly intent upon
the lecturer’s words. He is describing, with a certain subdued enthusiasm, the
probable technical developments of military method in the “next war.”

Outside, through the evening twilight of Whitehall, flows the London traffic,
not quite so abundant as in 1914, but still fairly abundant; the omnibuses all
overcrowded because there are now not nearly enough of them, and the clothing
of people generally shabbier. Some little way down Whitehall is a temporary
erection, the Cenotaph, with its base smothered with a vast, pathetic heap of
decaying wreaths, bunches of flowers, and the like, a cenotaph to commemorate
the eight hundred thousand young men of the Empire who have been killed in the
recent struggle. A few people are putting fresh flowers and wreaths there. One
or two are crying.

The prospect stretches out beyond this gathering into the grey vastness of
London, where people are now crowded as they have never been crowded before,
whose food is dear and employment more uncertain than it has ever been. But let
not the spectacle be one of unrelieved gloom; Regent Street, Oxford Street, and
Bond Street are bright with shoppers and congested with new automobiles,
because we must remember that everybody does not lose by a war. Beyond London
the country sinks into night, and across the narrow sea are North France and
Belgium devastated, Germany with scores of thousands of her infants dwindling
and dying for want of milk, all Austria starving. Half the population of
Vienna, it is believed, unless American relief comes quickly, is doomed to die
of hardship before the spring. Beyond that bleak twilight stretches the
darkness of Russia. There, at least, no rich people are buying anything, and no
military men are reading essays on the next war. But in icy Petrograd is little
food, little wood, and no coal. All the towns of Russia southward as far as the
snow reaches are in a similar plight, and in the Ukraine and to the south a
ragged and dingy war drags to its end. Europe is bankrupt, and people’s pockets
rustle with paper money whose purchasing power dwindles as they walk about with
it.

But now we will return to Sir Louis in the well-lit room at the United Service
Institution.

He was of opinion--we follow the report in next morning’s _Times_[525]--that we
were merely on the eve of the most extensive modifications of the art of war
known to history. It behoved us, therefore--us being, of course, the British
and not the whole of mankind--to get on with our armaments and to keep ahead; a
fine opening generalization. “It was necessary to develop new arms.... The
nation which best did so would have a great advantage in the next war. There
were people who were crying aloud for a reduction of armaments----”

(But there the Director of Trench Warfare and Supplies was wrong. They were
just crying at the cenotaph, poor, soft, and stupid souls, because a son or a
brother or a father was dead.)

Sir Louis believed that one of the greatest developments in the art of warfare
would be brought about in mechanical transport. The tank he treated with
ingratitude. These military gentlemen are ungrateful to an invention which
shoved and butted them into victory almost in spite of themselves. The tank,
said Sir Louis, was “a freak.... The outstanding feature” of the tank, he said,
was that it made mechanical transport independent of the roads. Hitherto armies
on the march had only been able to spoil the roads; now their transport on
caterpillar wheels would advance in open order on a broad front carrying guns,
munitions, supplies, bridging equipment, rafts, and men--and incidentally
ploughing up and destroying hedges, ditches, fields, and cultivation generally.
Armies would wallow across the country, leaving nothing behind but dust and
mud.

So our imaginations are led up to the actual hostilities.

Sir Louis was in favour of gas. For punitive expeditions particularly, gas was
to be recommended. And here he startled and disconcerted his hearers by a gleam
of something approaching sentimentality. “It might be possible,” he said, “to
come to some agreement that no gas should be used which caused unnecessary
suffering.” But there his heart spoke rather than his head; it should have been
clear to him that if law can so far override warfare as to prohibit any sort of
evil device whatever, it can override warfare to the extent of prohibiting it
altogether. And where would Sir Louis Jackson and his audience be then? War is
war; its only law is the law that the maximum destruction of the forces of the
enemy is necessary. To that law in warfare all considerations of humanity and
justice are subordinate.

From gas Sir Louis passed to the air. Here he predicted “most important
advances.... We need not trouble ourselves yet with flying destroyers or flying
concrete forts, but in twenty years’ time the Air Force Estimates might be the
most important part of our preparations for war.” He discussed the conversion
of commercial flying machines to bombing and reconnaissance uses, and the need
for special types of fighting machine in considerable numbers and always ready.
He gave reasons for supposing that the bombers in the next war would not have
the same targets near the front of the armies, and would secure better results
by going further afield and bombing the centres “where stores are being
manufactured and troops trained.” As everyone who stayed in London or the east
of England in 1917-18 knows, this means the promiscuous bombing of any and
every centre of population. But, of course, the bombing of those ‘prentice days
would be child’s play to the bombing of the “next war.” There would be
countless more aeroplanes, bigger and much nastier bombs....

Sir Louis, proceeding with his sketch, mentioned the “destruction of the
greater part of London” as a possible incident in the coming struggle. And so
on to the culminating moral, that the highest pay, the utmost importance, the
freest expenditure, must be allowed to military gentlemen. “The expense
entailed is in the nature of an absolutely necessary insurance.” With which his
particular audience warmly agreed. And a certain Major-General Stone, a little
forgetful of the source of his phrases,[526] said he hoped that this lecture
“may be the beginning not of trusting in the League of Nations, but in _our
own_ right hand and _our_ stretched-out arm!”

But we will not go on with the details of this dream. For indeed no Utopia was
ever so impossible as this forecast of a world in which scarcely anything but
very carefully sandbagged and camouflaged G. H. Q. would be reasonably safe, in
which countless bombers would bomb the belligerent lands incessantly and great
armies with lines of caterpillar transport roll to and fro, churning the fields
of the earth into blood-streaked mud. There is not energy enough and no will
whatever left in the world for such things. Generals who cannot foresee tanks
cannot be expected to foresee or understand world bankruptcy; still less are
they likely to understand the limits imposed upon military operations by the
fluctuating temper of the common man. Apparently these military authorities of
the United Service Institution did not even know that warfare aims at the
production of states of mind in the enemy, and is sustained by states of mind.
The chief neglected factor in the calculations of Sir Louis is the fact that no
people whatever will stand such warfare as he contemplates, not even the people
on the winning side. For as northern France, south-eastern Britain, and north
Italy now understand, the victor in the “next war” may be bombed and starved
almost as badly as the loser. A phase is possible in which a war-tormented
population may cease to discriminate between military gentlemen on this side or
that, and may be moved to destroy them as the common enemies of the race. The
Great War of 1914-18 was the culmination of the military energy of the western
populations, and they fought and fought well because they believed they were
fighting “the war to end war.” They were. German imperialism, with its
organized grip upon education and its close alliance with an aggressive
commercialism, was beaten and finished. The militarism and imperialism of
Britain and France and Italy are by comparison feeble, disorganized, and
disorganizing survivals. They are things “left over” by the great war. They
have no persuasive power. They go on--for sheer want of wits to leave off. No
European Government will ever get the same proportion of its people into the
ranks and into its munition works again as the governments of 1914-18 did. Our
world is very weak and feeble still (1920), but its war fever is over. Its
temperature is, if anything, sub-normal. It is doubtful if it will take the
fever again for a long time. The alterations in the conditions of warfare are
already much profounder than such authorities as Sir Louis Jackson suspect.[527]

