# BOOK II - XIII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {03.06.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
XIII
§ 4
# § 4
This Mediterranean or Iberian race certainly had a wider range in early times,
and was a less specialized and distinctive race than the Nordic. It is very
hard to define its southward boundaries from the Negro, or to mark off its
early traces in central Asia from those of early Dravidians or Mongolians.
Wilfred Scawen Blunt[74] says that Huxley “had long suspected a common origin
of the Egyptians and the Dravidians of India, perhaps a long belt of
brown-skinned men from India to Spain in very early days.” Across France and
Great Britain these dark-white Iberian or Mediterranean people were ousted by a
round-barrow-making “Alpine” or Alpine-Nordic race, and the dawn of history in
Europe sees them being pressed westward and southward everywhere by the
expansion of the fairer northern peoples.

It is possible that this “belt” of Huxley’s of dark-white and brown-skinned
men, this race of brunet-brown folk, ultimately spread even farther than India;
that they reached to the shores of the Pacific, and that they were everywhere
the original possessors of the Neolithic culture and the beginners of what we
call civilization. The Nordic and the Mongolian peoples may have been but
north-western and north-eastern branches from this more fundamental stem. Or
the Nordic race may have been a branch, while the Mongolian, like the Negro,
may have been another equal and distinct stem with which the brunet-browns met
and mingled in South China. Or the Nordic peoples also may have developed
separately from a palæolithic stage.

[Illustration: The Swastika]

At some period in human history (see Elliot Smith’s _Migrations of Early
Culture_) there seems to have been a special type of Neolithic culture widely
distributed in the world which had a group of features so curious and so
unlikely to have been independently developed in different regions of the
earth, as to compel us to believe that it was in effect one culture. It reached
through all the regions inhabited by the brunet Mediterranean race, and beyond
through India, Further India, up the Pacific coast of China, and it spread at
last across the Pacific and to Mexico and Peru. It was a coastal culture not
reaching deeply inland. (Here again we cover the ground of Huxley’s “belt of
brown-skinned men,” and extend it far to the east across the stepping-stones of
Polynesia. There are, we may note, some very striking resemblances between
early Japanese pottery and so forth and similar Peruvian productions.) This
peculiar development of the Neolithic culture, which, Elliot Smith called the
_heliolithic_[75] culture, included many or all of the following odd practices:
(1) circumcision, (2) the very queer custom of sending the _father_ to bed when
a child is born, known as the _couvade_, (3) the practice of massage, (4) the
making of mummies, (5) megalithic monuments[76] (_e.g._ Stonehenge), (6)
artificial deformation of the heads of the young by bandages, (7) tattooing,
(8) religious association of the sun and the serpent, and (9) the use of the
symbol known as the swastika (see figure) for good luck. This odd little symbol
spins gaily round the world; it seems incredible that men would have invented
and made a pet of it twice over. Elliot Smith traces these practices in a sort
of constellation all over this great Mediterranean-Indian Ocean-Pacific area.
Where one occurs, most of the others occur. They link Brittany with Borneo and
Peru. But this constellation of practices does not crop up in the primitive
homes of Nordic or Mongolian peoples, nor does it extend southward much beyond
equatorial Africa. For thousands of years, from 15,000 to 1000 B.C., such a
heliolithic Neolithic culture and its brownish possessors may have been oozing
round the world through the warmer regions of the world, drifting by canoes
often across wide stretches of sea. And its region of origin may have been, as
Elliot Smith suggests, the Mediterranean and North-African region. It must have
been spreading up the Pacific Coast and across the island stepping-stones to
America, long after it had passed on into other developments in its areas of
origin. Many of the peoples of the East Indies, Melanesia and Polynesia were
still in this heliolithic stage of development when they were discovered by
European navigators in the eighteenth century. The first civilizations in Egypt
and the Euphrates-Tigris valley probably developed directly out of this
widespread culture.[77] We will discuss later whether the Chinese civilization
had a different origin. The Semitic nomads of the Arabian desert seem also to
have had a heliolithic stage.

