# BOOK VIII - XL - § 13
[Metadata]: # {10.05.11}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.11}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 13
The main terms of the Treaties of 1919-20 with which the Conference of Paris
concluded its labours can be stated much more vividly by a few maps than by a
written abstract. We need scarcely point out how much those treaties left
unsettled, but we may perhaps enumerate some of the more salient breaches of
the Twelve that survived out of the Fourteen Points at the opening of the
Conference.

One initial cause of nearly all those breaches lay, we believe, in the complete
unpreparedness and unwillingness of that pre-existing league of nations,
subjected states and exploited areas, the British Empire, to submit to any
dissection and adaptation of its system or to any control of its naval and
aerial armament. A kindred contributory cause was the equal unpreparedness of
the American mind for any interference with the ascendancy of the United States
in the New World (compare Secretary Olney’s declaration in this chapter, § 6).
Neither of those Great Powers, who were necessarily dominant and leading Powers
at Paris, had properly thought out the implications of a League of Nations in
relation to these older arrangements, and so their support of that project had
to most European observers a curiously hypocritical air; it was as if they
wished to retain and ensure their own vast predominance and security while at
the same time restraining any other power from such expansions, annexations,
and alliances as might create a rival and competitive imperialism. Their
failure to set an example of international confidence destroyed all possibility
of international confidence in the other nations represented at Paris.

[Illustration: Map to illustrate the TURKISH TREATY, 1920]



Even more unfortunate was the refusal of the Americans to assent to the
Japanese demand for a recognition of racial equality.

Moreover, the foreign offices of the British, the French, and the Italians were
haunted by traditional schemes of aggression entirely incompatible with the new
ideas. A League of Nations that is to be of any appreciable value to mankind
must supersede imperialisms; it is either a super-imperialism, a liberal
world-empire of united states, participant or in tutelage, or it is nothing;
but few of the people at the Paris Conference had the mental vigour even to
assert this obvious consequence of the League proposal. They wanted to be at
the same time bound and free, to ensure peace for ever, but to keep their
weapons in their hands. Accordingly the old annexation projects of the Great
Power period were hastily and thinly camouflaged as proposed acts of this poor
little birth of April 28th. The newly born and barely animate League was
represented to be distributing, with all the reckless munificence of a captive
pope, “mandates” to the old imperialisms that, had it been the young Hercules
we desired, it would certainly have strangled in its cradle. Britain was to
have extensive “mandates” in Mesopotamia and East Africa; France was to have
the same in Syria; Italy was to have all her holdings to the west and southeast
of Egypt consolidated as mandatory territory. Clearly, if the weak thing that
was being nursed by its Secretary in its cradle at Geneva into some semblance
of life, did presently succumb to the infantile weakness of all institutions
born without passion, all these “mandates” would become frank annexations.
Moreover, all the powers fought tooth and nail at the Conference for
“strategic” frontiers--the ugliest symptom of all. Why should a state want a
strategic frontier unless it contemplates war? If on that plea Italy insisted
upon a subject population of Germans in the southern Tyrol and a subject
population of Yugo-Slavs in Dalmatia, and if little Greece began landing troops
in Asia Minor, neither France nor Britain was in a position to rebuke these
outbreaks of pre-millennial method.

[Illustration: The BREAK-UP of AUSTRIA-HUNGARY]

We will not enter here into any detailed account of how President Wilson gave
way to the Japanese and consented to their replacing the Germans at Kiau Chau,
which is Chinese property, how the almost purely German city of Dantzig was
practically, if not legally, annexed to Poland, and how the powers disputed
over the claims of the Italian imperialists, a claim strengthened by these
instances, to seize the Yugo-Slav part of Fiume and deprive the Yugo-Slavs of a
good Adriatic outlet. Nor will we do more than note the complex arrangements
and justifications that put the French in possession of the Saar valley, which
is German territory, or the entirely iniquitous breach of the right of
“self-determination” which practically forbade German Austria to unite--as it
is natural and proper that she should unite--with the rest of Germany. These
burning questions of 1919-20, which occupied the newspapers and the minds of
statesmen and politicians, and filled all our waste paper baskets with
propaganda literature, may seem presently very incidental things in the larger
movement of these times. All these disputes, like the suspicions and tetchy
injustices of a weary and irritated man, may lose their importance as the tone
of the world improves, and the still inadequately apprehended lessons of the
Great War and the Petty Peace that followed it begin to be digested by the
general intelligence of mankind.

It is worth while for the reader to compare the treaty maps we give with what
we have called the natural political map of Europe. The new arrangements do
approach this latter more closely than any previous system of boundaries. It
may be a necessary preliminary to any satisfactory league of peoples, that each
people should first be in something like complete possession of its own
household.

It is absurd to despair of mankind because of these treaties, or to regard them
as anything more than feeble first sketches of a world settlement. To do so
would be to suppose that there is nothing in France--that land of fine
imaginations--better than M. Clemenceau, nothing in America stronger and wiser
than President Wilson, and nothing in Britain to steady the Keltic traits of
Mr. Lloyd George. The attention we have given to these three personalities in
this _Outline_ is intended less to enhance their importance than to emphasize
their unimportance, and to make it clear to the reader how provisional and
incidental all that they did must be in the world’s affairs. On no statesmen,
on no particular men or groups of men, on no state or organization indeed, and
on no Covenant or Treaty, does the future of our race now depend. The year 1919
was not a year of creation and decision, it was just the first cheerless dawn
of a long day of creative effort. The conferences of the Ten, of the Four, of
the Big Three, had no trace of creative power; there was no light in the men of
Versailles; the dawn was manifest rather as a grey light of critical
disapproval that broke through the shutters and staled the guttering candles of
the old diplomacy as the conference yawned and drawled to its end. Creation was
not there. But a great process of thought spreads throughout the world; many
thousands of men and women, in every country, for the most part undistinguished
and unknown people, are awakening to their responsibility, are studying,
thinking, writing, and teaching, getting together, correcting false
impressions, challenging foolish ideas, trying to find out and tell the truth;
and upon them it is that we must rest our hope, such hope as we can entertain,
of a saner plan to take the place of this first flimsy League and this patched
and discomforting garment of treaties that has been flung for a while over the
naked distresses of our world.

