# BOOK III - XVI - § 3
[Metadata]: # {04.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

THE FIRST CIVILIZATIONS

§ 1. _Early Cities and Early Nomads._ § 2A. _The Riddle of the
Sumerians._ § 2B. _The Empire of Sargon the First._ § 2C. _The      Empire of
Hammurabi._ § 2D. _The Assyrians and their Empire._ § 2E.      _The Chaldean
Empire._ § 3. _The Early History of Egypt._ § 4. _The      Early Civilization
of India._ § 5. _The Early History of China._ §      6. _While the
Civilizations were Growing._

# § 3
The story of the Nile valley from the dawn of its traceable history until the
time of Alexander the Great is not very dissimilar from that of Babylonia; but
while Babylonia lay open on every side to invasion, Egypt was protected by
desert to the west and by desert and sea to the east, while to the south she
had only negro peoples. Consequently her history is less broken by the
invasions of strange races than is the history of Assyria and Babylon, and
until towards the eighth century B.C., when she fell under an Ethiopian
dynasty, whenever a conqueror did come into her story, he came in from Asia by
way of the Isthmus of Suez.

[Illustration: Iron Weapons]



The Stone Age remains in Egypt are of very uncertain date; there are
Palæolithic and then Neolithic remains. It is not certain whether the Neolithic
pastoral people who left those remains were the direct ancestors of the later
Egyptians. In many respects they differed entirely from their successors. They
buried their dead, but before they buried them they cut up the bodies and
apparently ate portions of the flesh. They seem to have done this out of a
feeling of reverence for the departed; the dead were “eaten with honour”
according to the phrase of Mr. Flinders Petrie. It may have been that the
survivors hoped to retain thereby some vestige of the strength and virtue that
had died. Traces of similar savage customs have been found in the long barrows
that were scattered over western Europe before the spreading of the Aryan
peoples, and they have pervaded negro Africa, where they are only dying out at
the present time.

[Illustration: Early figure of the Egyptian hippopotamus goddess.]

About 5000 B.C., or earlier, the traces of these primitive peoples cease, and
the true Egyptians appear on the scene. The former people were hut builders and
at a comparatively low stage of Neolithic culture, the latter were already a
civilized Neolithic people; they used brick and wood buildings instead of their
predecessors’ hovels, and they were working stone. Very soon they passed into
the Bronze Age. They possessed a system of picture writing almost as developed
as the contemporary writing of the Sumerians, but quite different in character.
Possibly there was an irruption from southern Arabia by way of Aden, of a fresh
people, who came into upper Egypt and descended slowly towards the delta of the
Nile. Dr. Wallis Budge writes of them as “conquerors from the East.” But their
gods and their ways, like their picture writing, were very different indeed
from the Sumerian. One of the earliest known figures of a deity is that of a
hippopotamus goddess, and so very distinctively African.[113]

The clay of the Nile is not so fine and plastic as the Sumerian clay, and the
Egyptians made no use of it for writing. But they early resorted to strips of
the papyrus reed fastened together, from whose name comes our word “paper.”

The broad outline of the history of Egypt is simpler than the history of
Mesopotamia. It has long been the custom to divide the rulers of Egypt into a
succession of Dynasties, and in speaking of the periods of Egyptian history it
is usual to speak of the first, fourth, fourteenth, and so on, Dynasty. The
Egyptians were ultimately conquered by the Persians after their establishment
in Babylon, and when finally Egypt fell to Alexander the Great in 332 B.C., it
was Dynasty XXXI that came to an end. In that long history of over 4000 years,
a much longer period than that between the career of Alexander the Great and
the present day, certain broad phases of development may be noted here. There
was a phase known as the “old kingdom,” which culminated in the IVth Dynasty;
this Dynasty marks a period of wealth and splendour, and its monarchs were
obsessed by such a passion for making monuments for themselves as no men have
ever before or since had a chance to display and gratify. It was Cheops[114]
and Chephren and Mycerinus of this IVth Dynasty who raised the vast piles of
the great and the second and the third pyramids at Gizeh. These unmeaning[115]
sepulchral piles, of an almost incredible vastness,[116] erected in an age when
engineering science had scarcely begun, exhausted the resources of Egypt
through three long reigns, and left her wasted as if by a war.

The story of Egypt from the IVth to the XVth Dynasty is a story of conflicts
between alternative capitals and competing religions, of separations into
several kingdoms and reunions. It is, so to speak, an internal history. Here we
can name only one of that long series of Pharaohs, Pepi II, who reigned ninety
years, the longest reign in history, and left a great abundance of inscriptions
and buildings. At last there happened to Egypt what happened so frequently to
the civilizations of Mesopotamia. Egypt was conquered by nomadic Semites, who
founded a “shepherd” dynasty, the Hyksos (XVIth), which was finally expelled by
native Egyptians. This invasion probably happened while that first Babylonian
Empire which Hammurabi founded was flourishing, but the exact correspondences
of dates between early Egypt and Babylonia are still very doubtful. Only after
a long period of servitude did a popular uprising expel these foreigners again.

After the war of liberation (circa 1600 B.C.) there followed a period of great
prosperity in Egypt, _the New Empire_. Egypt became a great and united military
state, and pushed her expeditions at last as far as the Euphrates, and so the
age-long struggle between the Egyptian and Babylonian-Assyrian power began.

For a time Egypt was the ascendant power. Thothmes III[117] and his son
Amenophis III (XVIIIth Dynasty) ruled from Ethiopia to the Euphrates in the
fifteenth century B.C. For various reasons these names stand out with unusual
distinctness in the Egyptian record. They were great builders, and left many
monuments and inscriptions. Amenophis III founded Luxor, and added greatly to
Karnak. At Tel-el-Amarna a mass of letters has been found, the royal
correspondence with Babylonian and Hittite and other monarchs, including that
Tushratta who took Nineveh, throwing a flood of light upon the political and
social affairs of this particular age. Of Amenophis IV we shall have more to
tell later, but of one, the most extraordinary and able of Egyptian monarchs,
Queen Hatasu, the aunt and stepmother of Thotmes III, we have no space to tell.
She is represented upon her monuments in masculine garb, and with a long beard
as a symbol of wisdom.

Thereafter there was a brief Syrian conquest of Egypt, a series, of changing
dynasties, among which we may note the XIXth, which included Rameses II, a
great builder of temples, who reigned seventy-seven years (about 1317 to 1250
B.C.), and who is supposed by some to have been the Pharaoh of Moses, and the
XXIInd, which included Shishak, who plundered Solomon’s temple (circa 930
B.C.). An Ethiopian conqueror from the Upper Nile founded the XXVth Dynasty, a
foreign dynasty, which went down (670 B.C.) before the new Assyrian Empire
created by Tiglath Pileser III, Sargon II, and Sennacherib, of which we have
already made mention.

The days of any Egyptian predominance over foreign nations were drawing to an
end. For a time under Psammetichus I of the XXVIth Dynasty (664-610 B.C.)
native rule was restored, and Necho II recovered for a time the old Egyptian
possessions in Syria up to the Euphrates while the Medes and Chaldeans were
attacking Nineveh. From those gains Necho II was routed out again after the
fall of Nineveh and the Assyrians by Nebuchadnezzar II, the great Chaldean
king, the Nebuchadnezzar of the Bible. The Jews, who had been the allies of
Necho II, were taken into captivity by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon.

When, in the sixth century B.C., Chaldea fell to the Persians, Egypt followed
suit, a rebellion later made Egypt independent once more for sixty years, and
in 332 B.C. she welcomed Alexander the Great as her conqueror, to be ruled
thereafter by foreigners, first by Greeks, then by Romans, then in succession
by Arabs, Turks, and British, until the present day.

Such briefly is the history of Egypt from its beginnings; a history first of
isolation and then of increasing entanglement with the affairs of other
nations, as increasing facilities of communication drew the peoples of the
world into closer and closer interaction.

