# BOOK II - XIII - § 3
[Metadata]: # {03.06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE RACES OF MANKIND

_§1. Is Mankind Still Differentiating? §2. The Main Races of      Mankind.
§3. Was There an Alpine Race? §4. The Brunet Peoples. §5.      How Existing
Races may be Related to Each Other._

# § 3
[Illustration: Negro types]

[Illustration: Mongolian Types]

Whether the “Caucasian” race is to be divided into two or three main
subdivisions depends upon the classificatory value to be attached to certain
differences in the skeleton and particularly to the shape of the skull. The
student in his further reading will meet with constant references to
round-skulled (Brachycephalic) and long-skulled peoples (Dolichocephalic). No
skull looked at from above is completely round, but some skulls (the
dolichocephalic) are much more oblong than others; when the width of a skull is
four-fifths or more of its length from back to front, that skull is called
brachycephalic; when the width is less than four-fifths of the length, the
skull is dolichocephalic. While some ethnologists regard the difference between
brachycephaly and dolichocephaly as a difference of quite primary importance,
another school--which the writer must confess has entirely captured his
convictions--dismisses this as a mere secondary distinction. It seems probable
that the skull shapes of a people may under special circumstances vary in
comparatively few generations.[73]

We do not know what influences alter the shape of the skull, just as we do not
know why people of British descent in the Darling region of Australia
(“Cornstalks”) grow exceptionally tall, or why in New England their jaw-bones
seem to become slighter and their teeth in consequence rather crowded. Even in
Neolithic times dolichocephalic and brachycephalic skulls are found in the same
group of remains and often buried together, and that is true of most peoples
to-day. Some peoples, such as the mountain people of central Europe, have more
brachycephalic individuals per cent. than others; some, as the Scandinavians,
are more prevalently dolichocephalic. In Neolithic Britain and in Scandinavia
the earliest barrows (= tomb mounds) are long grave-shaped barrows and the late
ones round, and the skulls found in the former are usually dolichocephalic and
in the latter most frequently brachycephalic. This points perhaps to a
succession of races in western Europe in the Neolithic Period (see Chapter
XLV), but it may also point to changes of diet, habit, or climate.

[Illustration: Caucasian Types]

But it is this study of skull shapes which has led many ethnologists to divide
the Caucasian race, not, as it was divided by Huxley, into two, the northern
_blonds_ and the Mediterranean and North African _dark whites_ or brunets, but
into three. They split his blonds into two classes. They distinguish a northern
European type, blond and dolichocephalic, the Nordic; a Mediterranean or
Iberian race, Huxley’s dark whites, which is dark-haired and dolichocephalic,
and between these two they descry this third race, their brachycephalic race,
the Alpine race. The opposite school would treat the alleged Alpine race simply
as a number of local brachycephalic varieties of Nordic or Iberian peoples. The
Iberian peoples were the Neolithic people of the long barrows, and seem at
first to have pervaded most of Europe and western Asia.

[Illustration: Map of EUROPE, Western ASIA & Northern AFRICA in the Forest
(Pluvial) Period (about 15,000 or 12,000 years ago)

Showing probable range of the main races before the dawn of history. Mountain
barriers are indicated thus [symbol] Sea barriers [symbol]]

