# BOOK III - XV - § 2
[Metadata]: # {04.01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

THE ARYAN-SPEAKING PEOPLES IN PREHISTORIC TIMES

§ 1. _The Spreading of the Aryan-Speakers._ § 2. _Primitive Aryan
Life._ § 3. _Early Aryan Daily Life._

# § 2
What sort of life did these prehistoric Aryans lead, these Nordic Aryans who
were the chief ancestors of most Europeans and most white Americans and
European colonists of to-day, as well as of the Armenians,[90] Persians, and
high-caste Hindus?

In answering that question we are able to resort to a new source of knowledge
in addition to the dug-up remains and vestiges upon which we have had to rely
in the case of Palæolithic man. We have language. By careful study of the Aryan
languages it has been found possible to deduce a number of conclusions about
the life of these Aryan peoples 5000 or 4000 years ago. All these languages
have a common resemblance, as each, as we have already explained, rings the
changes upon a number of common roots. When we find the same root word running
through all or most of these tongues, it seems reasonable to conclude that the
thing that root word signifies must have been known to the common ancestors. Of
course, if they have _exactly the same word_ in their languages, this may not
be the case; it may be the new name of a new thing or of a new idea that has
spread over the world quite recently. “Gas,” for instance is a word that was
made by Van Helmont, a Dutch chemist, about 1625, and has spread into most
civilized tongues, and “tobacco” again is an American-Indian word which
followed the introduction of smoking almost everywhere. But if the same word
turns up in a number of languages, and _if it follows the characteristic
modifications of each language_, we may feel sure that it has been in that
language, and a part of that language, since the beginning, suffering the same
changes with the rest of it. We know, for example, that the words for waggon
and wheel run in this fashion through the Aryan tongues, and so we are able to
conclude that the primitive Aryans, the more purely Nordic Aryans, had waggons,
though it would seem from the absence of any common roots for spokes, rim, or
axle that their wheels were not wheelwright’s wheels with spokes, but made of
the trunks of trees shaped out with an axe between the ends.

These primitive waggons were drawn by oxen. The early Aryans did not ride or
drive horses; they had very little to do with horses. The Reindeer men were a
horse-people, but the Neolithic Aryans were a cow-people. They ate beef, not
horse; and after many ages they began this use of draught cattle. They reckoned
wealth by cows. They wandered, following pasture, and “trekking” their goods,
as the South African Boers do, in ox-waggons, though of course their waggons
were much clumsier than any to be found in the world to-day. They probably
ranged over very wide areas. They were migratory, but not in the strict sense
of the word “nomadic”; they moved in a slower, clumsier fashion than did the
later, more specialized nomadic peoples. They were forest and parkland people
without horses. They were developing a migratory life out of the more settled
“forest clearing” life of the earlier Neolithic period. Changes of climate
which were replacing forest by pasture, and the accidental burning of forests
by fire may have assisted this development.

When these early “Aryans” came to big rivers or open water, they built boats,
at first hollow tree trunks and then skin-covered frameworks of lighter wood.
Before history began there was already some Aryan canoe-traffic across the
English Channel and in the Baltic, and also among the Greek islands. But the
Aryans, as we shall see later, were probably not the first peoples to take to
the sea.

We have already described the sort of home the primitive Aryan occupied and his
household life, so far as the remains of the Swiss pile-dwellings enable us to
describe these things. Mostly his houses were of too flimsy a sort, probably of
wattle and mud, to have survived, and possibly he left them and trekked on for
very slight reasons. The Aryan peoples burnt their dead, a custom they still
preserve in India, but their predecessors, the long-barrow people, the
Iberians, buried their dead in a sitting position. In some ancient Aryan burial
mounds (round barrows) the urns containing the ashes of the departed are shaped
like houses, and these represent rounded huts with thatched roofs. See Fig. p.
57.

The grazing of the primitive Aryan was far more important to him than his
agriculture. At first he cultivated with a rough wooden hoe; then, after he had
found out the use of cattle for draught purposes, he began real ploughing with
oxen, using at first a suitably bent tree bough as his plough. His first
cultivation before that came about must have been rather in the form of garden
patches near the house buildings than of fields. Most of the land his tribe
occupied was common land on which the cattle grazed together.

He never used stone for building house walls until upon the very verge of
history. He used stone for hearths (_e.g._ at Glastonbury) and sometimes stone
sub-structures. He did, however, make a sort of stone house in the centre of
the great mounds in which he buried his illustrious dead. He may have learnt
this custom from his Iberian neighbours and predecessors. It was these dark
whites of the heliolithic culture, and not the primitive Aryans, who were
responsible for such primitive temples as Stonehenge or Carnac in Brittany.

His social life was growing. Man was now living in clans and tribal
communities. These clans and communities clashed; they took each other’s
grazing land, they sought to rob each other; there began a new thing in human
life, _war_. For war is not a primeval thing; it has not been in this world for
more than 20,000 years. To this day very primitive peoples, such as the
Australian black-fellows, do not understand war. The Palæolithic Age was an age
of fights and murder, no doubt, but not of the organized collective fighting of
numbers of men.[91] But now men could talk together and group themselves under
leaders, and they found a need of centres where they could come together with
their cattle in time of raids and danger. They began to make camps with walls
of earth and palisades, many of which are still to be traced in the
history-worn contours of the European scenery. The leaders under whom men
fought in war were often the same men as the sacrificial purifiers who were
their early priests.

The knowledge of bronze spread late in Europe. Neolithic man had been making
his slow advances age by age for 7000 or 8000 years before the metals came. By
that time his social life had developed so that there were men of various
occupations and men and women of different ranks in the community. There were
men who worked wood and leather, potters and carvers. The women span and wove
and embroidered. There were chiefs and families that were distinguished as
leaderly and noble; and man varied the monotony of his herding and wandering,
he consecrated undertakings and celebrated triumphs, held funeral assemblies,
and distinguished the traditional seasons of the year, by _feasts_. His meats
we have already glanced at; but somewhen between 10,000 B.C. and the broadening
separation of the Aryan peoples towards 2000 or 1000 B.C., mankind discovered
fermentation, and began to brew intoxicating drinks. He made these of honey, of
barley, and, as the Aryan tribes spread southward, of the grape. And he got
merry and drunken. Whether he first used yeast to make his bread light or to
ferment his drink we do not know.

At his feasts there were individuals with a gift for “playing the fool,” who
did so no doubt to win the laughter of their friends,[92] but there was also
another sort of men, of great importance in their time, and still more
important to the historian, certain singers of songs and stories, the bards or
rhapsodists. These _bards_ existed among all the Aryan-speaking peoples; they
were a consequence of and a further factor in that development of spoken
language which was the chief of all the human advances made in Neolithic times.
They chanted or recited stories of the past, or stories of the living chief and
his people; they told other stories that they invented; they memorized jokes
and catches. They found and seized upon and improved the rhythms, rhymes,
alliterations, and such-like possibilities latent in language; they probably
did much to elaborate and fix grammatical forms. They were the first great
artists of the ear, as the later Aurignacian rock painters were the first great
artists of the eye and hand. No doubt they used much gesture; probably they
learnt appropriate gestures when they learnt their songs; but the order and
sweetness and power of language was their primary concern.

And they mark a new step forward in the power and range of the human mind. They
sustained and developed in men’s minds a sense of a greater something than
themselves, the tribe, and of a life that extended back into the past. They not
only recalled old hatreds and battles, they recalled old alliances and a common
inheritance. The feats of dead heroes lived again. A new thought came into
men’s minds, the desire to be remembered. Men began to live in thought before
they were born and after they were dead.

Like most human things, this bardic tradition grew first slowly and then more
rapidly. By the time bronze was coming into Europe there was not an Aryan
people that had not a profession and training of bards. In their hands language
became as beautiful as it is ever likely to be. These bards were living books,
man-histories, guardians and makers of a new and more powerful tradition in
human life. Every Aryan people had its long poetical records thus handed down,
its sagas (Teutonic), its epics (Greek), its vedas (Old Sanscrit). The earliest
Aryan people were essentially a people of the voice. The recitation seems to
have predominated even in those ceremonial and dramatic dances and that
“dressing-up” which among most human races have also served for the
transmission of tradition.[93]

At that time there was no writing, and when first the art of writing crept into
Europe, as we shall tell later, it must have seemed far too slow, clumsy, and
lifeless a method of record for men to trouble very much about writing down
these glowing and beautiful treasures of the memory. Writing was at first kept
for accounts and matters of fact. The bards and rhapsodists flourished for long
after the introduction of writing. They survived, indeed, in Europe as the
minstrels into the Middle Ages.

Unhappily their tradition had not the fixity of a written record. They amended
and reconstructed, they had their fashions and their phases of negligence.
Accordingly we have now only the very much altered and revised vestiges of that
spoken literature of prehistoric times. One of the most interesting and
informing of these prehistoric compositions of the Aryans survives in the Greek
_Iliad_. An early form of _Iliad_ was probably recited by 1000 B.C., but it was
not written down until perhaps 700 or 600 B.C. Many men must have had to do
with it as authors and improvers, but later Greek tradition attributed it to a
blind bard named Homer, to whom also is ascribed the _Odyssey_, a composition
of a very different spirit and outlook. To be a bard was naturally a blind
man’s occupation.[94] The Slavs called all bards _sliepac_, which was also
their word for a blind man. The original recited version of the _Iliad_ was
older than that of the _Odyssey_. “The _Iliad_ as a complete poem is older than
the _Odyssey_, though the material of the _Odyssey_, being largely undatable
folk-lore, is older than any of the historical material in the _Iliad_.”[95]
Both epics were probably written over and rewritten by some poet of a later
date, in much the same manner that Lord Tennyson, the poet laureate of Queen
Victoria, in his _Idylls of the King_, wrote over the _Morte d’Arthur_ (which
was itself a writing over by Sir Thomas Malory, _circ._ 1450, of pre-existing
legends), making the speeches and sentiments and the characters more in
accordance with those of his own time. But the events of the _Iliad_ and the
_Odyssey_, the way of living they describe, the spirit of the acts recorded,
belong to the closing centuries of the prehistoric age. These sagas, epics, and
vedas do supply, in addition to archæology and philology, a third source of
information about those vanished times.

Here, for example, is the concluding passage of the _Iliad_, describing very
exactly the making of a prehistoric barrow. (We have taken here Chapman’s
rhymed translation, correcting certain words with the help of the prose version
of Lang, Leaf, and Myers.)

“ ... Thus oxen, mules, in waggons straight they put,    Went forth, and an
unmeasur’d pile of sylvan matter cut;    Nine days employ’d in carriage, but
when the tenth morn shin’d    On wretched mortals, then they brought the
bravest of his kind    Forth to be burned. Troy swam in tears. Upon the pile’s
most height    They laid the body, and gave fire. All day it burn’d, all night.
But when th’ eleventh morn let on earth her rosy fingers shine,    The
people flock’d about the pile, and first with gleaming wine    Quench’d all the
flames. His brothers then, and friends, the snowy bones,    Gather’d into an
urn of gold, still pouring out their moans.    Then wrapt they in soft purple
veils the rich urn, digg’d a pit,    Grav’d it, built up the grave with stones,
and quickly piled on it    A barrow....    ... The barrow heap’d once, all the
town    In Jove-nurs’d Priam’s Court partook a sumptuous fun’ral feast,    And
so horse-taming Hector’s rites gave up his soul to rest.”

There remains also an old English saga, _Beowulf_, made long before the English
had crossed from Germany into England, which winds up with a similar burial.
The preparation of a pyre is first described. It is hung round with shields and
coats of mail. The body is brought and the pyre fired, and then for ten days
the warriors built a mighty mound to be seen afar by the traveller on sea or
land. _Beowulf_, which is at least a thousand years later than the _Iliad_, is
also interesting because one of the main adventures in it is the looting of the
treasures of a barrow already ancient in those days.

