# BOOK VII - XXXIV - § 5
[Metadata]: # {09.01.05}
[Descriptor]: # {09.01.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VII
XXXIV
§ 5
# § 5
Let us now very briefly run over the subsequent development of the main masses
of the empire of the Great Khan. In no case did Christianity succeed in
capturing the imagination of these Mongol states. Christianity was in a phase
of moral and intellectual insolvency, without any collective faith, energy, or
honour; we have told of the wretched brace of timid Dominicans which was the
Pope’s reply to the appeal of Kublai Khan, and we have noted the general
failure of the overland mission of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
That apostolic passion that could win whole nations to the Kingdom of Heaven
was dead in the church.

In 1305, as we have told, the Pope became the kept pontiff of the French king.
All the craft and policy of the Popes of the thirteenth century to oust the
Emperor from Italy had only served to let in the French to replace him. From
1305 to 1377 the Popes remained at Avignon; and such slight missionary effort
as they made was merely a part of the strategy of Western European
politics.[365] In 1377 the Pope Gregory XI did indeed re-enter Rome and die
there, but the French cardinals split off from the others at the election of
his successor, and two Popes were elected, one at Avignon and one at Rome. This
split, the Great Schism, lasted from 1378 to 1418. Each Pope cursed the other,
and put all his supporters under an interdict. Such was the state of
Christianity, and such were now the custodians of the teachings of Jesus of
Nazareth. All Asia was white unto harvest, but there was no effort to reap it.

When at last the church was reunited and missionary energy returned with the
foundation of the order of the Jesuits, the days of opportunity were over. The
possibility of a world-wide moral unification of East and West through
Christianity had passed away. The Mongols in China and Central Asia turned to
Buddhism; in South Russia, Western Turkestan, and the Ilkhan Empire they
embraced Islam.


§ 5A

In China the Mongols were already saturated with Chinese civilization by the
time of Kublai. After 1280 the Chinese annals treat Kublai as a Chinese
monarch, the founder of the Yuan dynasty (1280-1368). This Mongol dynasty was
finally over-thrown by a Chinese nationalist movement which set up the Ming
dynasty (1368-1644), a cultivated and artistic line of emperors, ruling until a
northern people, the Manchus, who were the same as the Kin whom Jengis had
overthrown, conquered China and established a dynasty which gave way only to a
native republican form of government in 1912.

It was the Manchus who obliged the Chinese to wear pig-tails as a mark of
submission. The pigtailed Chinaman is quite a recent, and now a vanished figure
in history.


§ 5B

In the Pamirs, in much of Eastern and Western Turkestan, and to the north, the
Mongols dropped back towards the tribal conditions from which they had been
lifted by Jengis. It is possible to trace the dwindling succession of many of
the small Kans who became independent during this period, almost down to the
present time. The Kalmuks in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries founded a
considerable empire, but dynastic troubles broke it up before it had extended
its power beyond Central Asia. The Chinese recovered Eastern Turkestan from
them about 1757.

Tibet was more and more closely linked with China, and became the great home of
Buddhism and Buddhist monasticism.

Over most of the area of Western Central Asia and Persia and Mesopotamia, the
ancient distinction of nomad and settled population remains to this day. The
townsmen despise and cheat the nomads, the nomads ill-treat and despise the
townsfolk.


§ 5C

The Mongols of the great realm of Kipchak remained nomadic, and grazed their
stock across the wide plains of South Russia and Western Asia adjacent to
Russia. They became not very devout Moslems, retaining many traces of their
earlier barbaric Shamanism. Their chief Khan was the Khan of the Golden Horde.
To the west, over large tracts of open country, and more particularly in what
is now known as Ukrainia, the old Scythian population, Slavs with a Mongol
admixture, reverted to a similar nomadic life. These Christian nomads, the
Cossacks, formed a sort of frontier screen against the Tartars, and their free
and adventurous life was so attractive to the peasants of Poland and Lithuania
that severe laws had to be passed to prevent a vast migration from the
ploughlands to the steppes. The serf-owning landlords of Poland regarded the
Cossacks with considerable hostility on this account, and war was as frequent
between the Polish chivalry and the Cossacks as it was between the latter and
the Tartars.[366]

In the empire of Kipchak, as in Turkestan almost up to the present time, while
the nomads roamed over wide areas, a number of towns and cultivated regions
sustained a settled population which usually paid tribute to the nomad Khan. In
such towns as Kieff, Moscow, and the like, the pre-Mongol, Christian town life
went on under Russian dukes or Tartar governors, who collected the tribute for
the Khan of the Golden Horde. The Grand Duke of Moscow gained the confidence of
the Khan, and gradually, under his authority, obtained an ascendancy over many
of his fellow tributaries. In the fifteenth century, under its grand duke, Ivan
III, Ivan the Great (1462-1505), Moscow threw off its Mongol allegiance and
refused to pay tribute any longer (1480). The successors of Constantine no
longer reigned in Constantinople, and Ivan took possession of the Byzantine
double-headed eagle for his arms. He claimed to be the heir to Byzantium
because of his marriage (1472) with Zoe Palæologus of the imperial line. This
ambitious grand dukedom of Moscow assailed and subjugated the ancient Northman
trading republic of Novgorod to the north, and so the foundations of the modern
Russian Empire were laid and a link with the mercantile life of the Baltic
established. Ivan III did not, however, carry his claim to be the heir of the
Christian rulers of Constantinople to the extent of assuming the imperial
title. This step was taken by his grandson, Ivan IV (Ivan the Terrible, because
of his insane cruelties; 1533-1584). Although the ruler of Moscow thus came to
be called Tsar (Cæsar), his tradition was in many respects Tartar rather than
European; he was autocratic after the unlimited Asiatic pattern, and the form
of Christianity he affected was the Eastern, court-ruled, “orthodox” form,
which had reached Russia long before the Mongol conquest, by means of Bulgarian
missionaries from Constantinople.

To the west of the domains of Kipchak, outside the range of Mongol rule, a
second centre of Slav consolidation had been set up during the tenth and
eleventh centuries in Poland. The Mongol wave had washed over Poland, but had
never subjugated it. Poland was not “orthodox,” but Roman Catholic in religion;
it used the Latin alphabet instead of the strange Russian letters, and its
monarch never assumed an absolute independence of the Emperor. Poland was in
fact in its origins an outlying part of Christendom and of the Holy Empire;
Russia never was anything of the sort.


§ 5D

The nature and development of the empire of the Ilkhans in Persia, Mesopotamia,
and Syria is perhaps the most interesting of all the stories of these Mongol
powers, because in this region nomadism really did attempt, and really did to a
very considerable degree succeed in its attempt to stamp a settled civilized
system out of existence. When Jengis Khan first invaded China, we are told that
there was a serious discussion among the Mongol chiefs whether all the towns
and settled populations should not be destroyed. To these simple practitioners
of the open-air life the settled populations seemed corrupt, crowded, vicious,
effeminate, dangerous, and incomprehensible; a detestable human efflorescence
upon what would otherwise have been good pasture. They had no use whatever for
the towns. The early Franks and the Anglo-Saxon conquerors of South Britain had
much the same feeling towards townsmen. But it was only under Hulagu in
Mesopotamia that these ideas seem to have been embodied in a deliberate policy.
The Mongols here did not only burn and massacre; they destroyed the irrigation
system that had endured for at least eight thousand years, and with that the
mother civilization of all the Western world came to an end. Since the days of
the priest-kings of Sumeria there had been a continuous cultivation in these
fertile regions, an accumulation of tradition, a great population, a succession
of busy cities, Eridu, Nippur, Babylon, Nineveh, Ctesiphon, Bagdad. Now the
fertility ceased. Mesopotamia became a land of ruins and desolation, through
which great waters ran to waste, or overflowed their banks to make malarious
swamps. Later on Mosul and Bagdad revived feebly as second-rate towns....

[Illustration: The EMPIRE of TIMURLANE]

But for the defeat and death of Hulagu’s general Kitboga in Palestine (1260),
the same fate might have overtaken Egypt. But Egypt was now a Turkish
sultanate; it was dominated by a body of soldiers, the Mamelukes, whose ranks,
like those of their imitators, the Janissaries of the Ottoman Empire, were
recruited and kept vigorous by the purchase and training of boy slaves. A
capable Sultan such men would obey; a weak or evil one they would replace.
Under this ascendancy Egypt remained an independent power until 1517, when it
fell to the Ottoman Turks.

The first destructive vigour of Hulagu’s Mongols soon subsided, but in the
fifteenth century a last tornado of nomadism arose in Western Turkestan under
the leadership of a certain Timur the Lame, or Timurlane. He was descended in
the female line from Jengis Khan. He established himself in Samarkand, and
spread his authority over Kipchak (Turkestan to South Russia), Siberia, and
southward as far as the Indus. He assumed the title of Great Khan in 1369. He
was a nomad of the savage school, and he created an empire of desolation from
North India to Syria. Pyramids of skulls were his particular architectural
fancy; after the storming of Ispahan he made one of 70,000. His ambition was to
restore the empire of Jengis Khan as he conceived it, a project in which he
completely failed. He spread destruction far and wide; the Ottoman Turks--it
was before the taking of Constantinople and their days of greatness--and Egypt
paid him tribute; the Punjab he devastated; and Delhi surrendered to him. After
Delhi had surrendered, however, he made a frightful massacre of its
inhabitants. At the time of his death (1405) very little remained to witness to
his power but a name of horror, ruins, and desolated countries, and a shrunken
and impoverished domain in Persia.

The dynasty founded by Timur in Persia was extinguished by another Turkoman
horde fifty years later.


§ 5E[367]

In 1505 a small Turkoman chieftain, Baber, a descendant of Timur and therefore
of Jengis, was forced after some years of warfare and some temporary
successes--for a time he held Samarkand--to fly with a few followers over the
Hindu Kush to Afghanistan. There his band increased, and he made himself master
of Cabul. He assembled an army, accumulated guns, and then laid claim to the
Punjab, because Timur had conquered it a hundred and seven years before. He
pushed his successes beyond the Punjab. India was in a state of division, and
quite ready to welcome any capable invader who promised peace and order. After
various fluctuations of fortune Baber met the Sultan of Delhi at Panipat
(1525), ten miles north of that town, and though he had but 25,000 men,
provided, however, with guns, against a thousand elephants and four times as
many men--the numbers, by the by, are his own estimate--he gained a complete
victory. He ceased to call himself King of Cabul, and assumed the title of
Emperor of Hindustan. “This,” he wrote, “is quite a different world from our
countries.” It was finer, more fertile, altogether richer. He conquered as far
as Bengal, but his untimely death in 1530 checked the tide of Mongol conquest
for a quarter of a century, and it was only after the accession of his grandson
Akbar that it flowed again. Akbar subjugated all India as far as Berar, and his
great-grandson Aurungzeb (1658-1707) was practically master of the entire
peninsula. This great dynasty of Baber (1526-1530), Humayun (1530-1556), Akbar
(1556-1605), Jehangir (1605-1628), Shah Jehan (1628-1658), and Aurungzeb
(1658-1707), in which son succeeded father for six generations, this “Mogul (=
Mongol) dynasty,”[368] marks the most splendid age that had hitherto dawned
upon India. Akbar next perhaps to Asoka, was one of the greatest of Indian
monarchs, and one of the few royal figures that approach the stature of great
men.

To Akbar it is necessary to give the same distinctive attention that we have
shown to Charlemagne or Constantine the Great. He is one of the hinges of
history. Much of his work of consolidation and organization in India survives
to this day. It was taken over and continued by the British when they became
the successors of the Mogul emperors. The British monarch, indeed, now uses as
his Indian title the title of the Mogul emperors, _Kaisar-i-Hind_. All the
other great administrations of the descendants of Jengis Khan, in Russia,
throughout Western and Central Asia and in China, have long since dissolved
away and given place to other forms of government. Their governments were
indeed little more than taxing governments; a system of revenue-collecting to
feed the central establishment of the ruler, like the Golden Horde in South
Russia or the imperial city at Karakorum or Pekin. The life and ideas of the
people they left alone, careless how they lived--so long as they paid. So it
was that after centuries of subjugation, a Christian Moscow and Kieff, a Shiite
Persia, and a thoroughly Chinese China rose again from their Mongol
submergence. But Akbar made a new India. He gave the princes and ruling classes
of India some inklings at least of a common interest. If India is now anything
more than a sort of rag-bag of incoherent states and races, a prey to every
casual raider from the north, it is very largely due to him.

His distinctive quality was his openness of mind. He set himself to make every
sort of able man in India, whatever his race or religion, available for the
public work of Indian life. His instinct was the true statesman’s instinct for
synthesis. His empire was to be neither a Moslem nor a Mongol one, nor was it
to be Rajput or Aryan, or Dravidian, or Hindu, or high or low caste; it was to
be _Indian_. “During the years of his training he enjoyed many opportunities of
noting the good qualities, the fidelity, the devotion, often the nobility of
soul, of those Hindu princes, whom, because they were followers of Brahma, his
Moslem courtiers devoted mentally to eternal torments. He noted that these men,
and men who thought like them, constituted the vast majority of his subjects.
He noted, further, of many of them, and those the most trustworthy, that though
they had apparently much to gain from a worldly point of view by embracing the
religion of the court, they held fast to their own. His reflective mind,
therefore, was unwilling from the outset to accept the theory that because he,
the conqueror, the ruler, happened to be born a Muhammadan, therefore
Muhammadanism was true for all mankind. Gradually his thoughts found words in
the utterance: ‘Why should I claim to guide men before I myself am guided?’
and, as he listened to other doctrines and other creeds, his honest doubts
became confirmed, and, noting daily the bitter narrowness of sectarianism, no
matter of what form of religion, he became more and more wedded to the
principle of toleration for all.”

“The son of a fugitive emperor,” says Dr. Emil Schmit, “born in the desert,
brought up in nominal confinement, he had known the bitter side of life from
his youth up. Fortune had given him a powerful frame, which he trained to
support the extremities of exertion. Physical exercise was with him a passion;
he was devoted to the chase and especially to the fierce excitement of catching
the wild horse or elephant or slaying the dangerous tiger. On one occasion,
when it was necessary to dissuade the Raja of Jodhpore to abandon his intention
of forcing the widow of his deceased son to mount the funeral pyre, Akbar rode
two hundred and twenty miles in two days. In battle he displayed the utmost
bravery. He led his troops in person during the dangerous part of a campaign,
leaving to his generals the lighter task of finishing the war. In every victory
he displayed humanity to the conquered, and decisively opposed any exhibition
of cruelty. Free from all these prejudices which separate society and create
dissension, tolerant to men of other beliefs, impartial to men of other races,
whether Hindu or Dravidian, he was a man obviously marked out to weld the
conflicting elements of his kingdom into a strong and prosperous whole.

“In all seriousness he devoted himself to the work of peace. Moderate in all
pleasures, needing but little sleep and accustomed to divide his tune with the
utmost accuracy, he found leisure to devote himself to science and art after
the completion of his State duties. The famous personages and scholars who
adorned the capital he had built for himself at Fatehpur-Sikri were at the same
time his friends; every Thursday evening a circle of these was collected for
intellectual conversation and philosophical discussion. His closest friends
were two highly talented brothers, Faizi and Abul Fazl, the sons of a learned
free-thinker. The elder of these was a famous scholar in Hindu literature; with
his help, and under his direction, Akbar had the most important of the Sanskrit
works translated into Persian. Fazl, on the other hand, who was an especially
close friend of Akbar, was a general, a statesman, and an organizer, and to his
activity Akbar’s kingdom chiefly owed the solidarity of its internal
organization.”[369]

(Such was the quality of the circle that used to meet in the palaces of
Fatehpur-Sikri, buildings which still stand in the Indian sunlight--but empty
now and desolate. Fatehpur-Sikri, like the city of Ambar, is now a dead city. A
few years ago the child of a British official was killed by a panther in one of
its silent streets.)

All this that we have quoted reveals a pre-eminent monarch. But Akbar, like all
men, great or petty, lived within the limitations of his period and its circles
of ideas. And a Turkoman, ruling in India, was necessarily ignorant of much
that Europe had been painfully learning for a thousand years. He knew nothing
of the growth of a popular consciousness in Europe, and little or nothing of
the wide educational possibilities that the church had been working out in the
West. His upbringing in Islam and his native genius made it plain to him that a
great nation in India could only be cemented by common ideas upon a religious
basis, but the knowledge of how such a solidarity could be created and
sustained by universal schools, cheap books, and a university system at once
organized and free to think, to which the modern state is still feeling its
way, was as impossible to him as a knowledge of steamboats or aeroplanes. The
form of Islam he knew best was the narrow and fiercely intolerant form of the
Turkish Sunnites. The Moslems were only a minority of the population. The
problem he faced was indeed very parallel to the problem of Constantine the
Great. But it had peculiar difficulties of its own. He never got beyond an
attempt to adapt Islam to a wider appeal by substituting for “There is one God,
and Muhammad is his prophet,” the declaration, “There is one God, and the
Emperor is his vice-regent.” This he thought might form a common platform for
every variety of faith in India, that kaleidoscope of religions. With this
faith he associated a simple ritual borrowed from the Persian Zoroastrians (the
Parsees) who still survived, and survive to-day, in India. This new state
religion, however, died with him, because it had no roots in the minds of the
people about him.

The essential factor in the organization of a living state, the world is coming
to realize, is the organization of an education. This Akbar never understood.
And he had no class of men available who would suggest such an idea to him or
help him to carry it out. The Moslem teachers in India were not so much
teachers as conservators of an intense bigotry; they did not want a common mind
in India, but only a common intolerance in Islam. The Brahmins, who had the
monopoly of teaching among the Hindus, had all the conceit and slackness of
hereditary privilege. Yet though Akbar made no general educational scheme for
India, he set up a number of Moslem and Hindu schools. He knew less and he did
more for India in these matters than the British who succeeded him. Some of the
British viceroys have aped his magnificence, his costly tents and awnings, his
palatial buildings and his elephants of state, but none have gone far enough
beyond the political outlook of this mediæval Turkoman to attempt that popular
education which is an absolute necessity to India before she can play her
fitting part in the commonweal of mankind.[370]


§ 5F

A curious side result of these later Mongol perturbations, those of the
fourteenth century of which Timurlane was the head and centre, was the
appearance of drifting batches of a strange refugee Eastern people in Europe,
the Gipsies. They appeared somewhen about the end of the fourteenth and early
fifteenth centuries in Greece, where they were believed to be Egyptians (hence
Gipsy), a very general persuasion which they themselves accepted and
disseminated. Their leaders, however, styled themselves “Counts of Asia Minor.”
They had probably been drifting about Western Asia for some centuries before
the massacres of Timurlane drove them over the Hellespont. They may have been
dislodged from their original homeland--as the Ottoman Turks were--by the great
cataclysm of Jengis or even earlier. They had drifted about as the Ottoman
Turks had drifted about, but with less good fortune. They spread slowly
westward across Europe, strange fragments of nomadism in a world of plough and
city, driven off their ancient habitat of the Bactrian steppes to harbour upon
European commons and by hedgerows and in wild woodlands and neglected patches.
The Germans called them “Hungarians” and “Tartars,” the French, “Bohemians.”
They do not seem to have kept the true tradition of their origin, but they have
a distinctive language which indicates their lost history; it contains many
North Indian words, and is probably in its origin North India. There are also
considerable Armenian and Persian elements in their speech. They are found in
all European countries to-day; they are tinkers, pedlars, horse-dealers,
showmen, fortune-tellers, and beggars. To many imaginative minds their wayside
encampments, with their smoking fires, their rounded tents, their hobbled
horses, and their brawl of sunburnt children, have a very strong appeal.
Civilization is so new a thing in history, and has been for most of the time so
very local a thing, that it has still to conquer and assimilate most of our
instincts to its needs. In most of us, irked by its conventions and
complexities, there stirs the nomad strain. We are but half-hearted
home-keepers. The blood in our veins was brewed on the steppes as well as on
the ploughlands.

