# BOOK III - XVII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {04.03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

SEA PEOPLES AND TRADING PEOPLES

§ 1. _The Earliest Ships and Sailors._ § 2. _The Ægean Cities      before
History._ § 3. _The First Voyages of Exploration._ § 4.      _Early Traders._ §
5. _Early Travellers._

# § 4
The great trading cities of the Phœnicians are the most striking of the early
manifestations of the peculiar and characteristic gift of the Semitic peoples
to mankind, trade and exchange.[127] While the Semitic Phœnician peoples were
spreading themselves upon the seas, another kindred Semitic people, the
Arameans, whose occupation of Damascus we have already noted, were developing
the caravan routes of the Arabian and Persian deserts, and becoming the chief
trading people of Western Asia. The Semitic peoples, earlier civilized than the
Aryan, have always shown, and still show to-day, a far greater sense of quality
and quantity in marketable goods than the latter; it is to their need of
account-keeping that the development of alphabetical writing is to be ascribed,
and it is to them that most of the great advances in computation are due. Our
modern numerals are Arabic; our arithmetic and algebra are essentially Semitic
sciences.

The Semitic peoples, we may point out here, are to this day _counting peoples_
strong in their sense of equivalents and reparation. The moral teaching of the
Hebrews was saturated by such ideas. “With what measure ye mete, the same shall
be meted unto you.” Other races and peoples have imagined diverse and fitful
and marvellous gods, but it was the trading Semites who first began to think of
God as a Righteous Dealer, whose promises were kept, who failed not the
humblest creditor, and called to account every spurious act.

The trade that was going on in the ancient world before the sixth or seventh
century B.C. was almost entirely a barter trade. There was little or no credit
or coined money. The ordinary standard of value with the early Aryans was
cattle, as it still is with the Zulus and Kaffirs to-day. In the _Iliad_, the
respective values of two shields are stated in head of cattle, and the Roman
word for moneys, _pecunia_, is derived from _pecus_, cattle. Cattle as money
had this advantage; it did not need to be carried from one owner to another,
and if it needed attention and food, at any rate it bred. But it was
inconvenient for ship or caravan transit. Many other substances have at various
times been found convenient as a standard; tobacco was once legal tender in the
colonial days in North America, and in West Africa fines are paid and bargains
made in bottles of trade gin. The early Asiatic trade included metals; and
weighed lumps of metal, since they were in general demand and were convenient
for hoarding and storage, costing nothing for fodder and needing small
house-room, soon asserted their superiority over cattle and sheep. Iron, which
seems to have been first reduced from its ores by the Hittites, was, to begin
with, a rare and much-desired substance.[128] It is stated by Aristotle to have
supplied the first currency. In the collection of letters found at
Tel-el-Amarna, addressed to and from Amenophis III (already mentioned) and his
successor Amenophis IV, one from a Hittite king promises iron as an extremely
valuable gift. Gold, then as now, was the most precious and therefore most
portable, security. In early Egypt silver was almost as rare as gold until
after the XVIIIth Dynasty. Later the general standard of value in the Eastern
world became silver, measured by weight.

To begin with, metals were handed about in ingots and weighed at each
transaction. Then they were stamped to indicate their fineness and guarantee
their purity. The first recorded coins were minted about 600 B.C. in Lydia, a
gold-producing country in the west of Asia Minor. The first-known gold coins
were minted in Lydia by Crœsus, whose name has become a proverb for wealth; he
was conquered, as we shall tell later, by that same Cyrus the Persian who took
Babylon in 539 B.C. But very probably coined money had been used in Babylonia
before that time. The “sealed shekel,” a stamped piece of silver, came very
near to being a coin. The promise to pay so much silver or gold on “leather” (=
parchment) with the seal of some established firm is probably as old or older
than coinage. The Carthaginians used such “leather money.” We know very little
of the way in which small traffic was conducted. Common people, who in those
ancient times were in dependent positions, seem to have had no money at all;
they did their business by barter. Early Egyptian paintings show this going
on.[129]

