# BOOK II - XIV - § 8
[Metadata]: # {03.07.08}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.08}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE LANGUAGES OF MANKIND

§ 1. _No one Primitive Language._ § 2. _The Aryan Languages._ § 3.
_The Semitic Languages._ § 4. _The Hamitic Languages._ § 5. _The      Ural
Altaic Languages._ § 6. _The Chinese Languages._ § 7. _Other      Language
Groups._ § 8. _Submerged and Lost Languages._ § 9. _How      Languages may be
Related._

# § 8
The fundamental tongues of these nine main language groups we have noted were
not by any means all the human speech beginnings of the Neolithic Age. There
may have been other, and possibly many other, ineffective centres of speech
which were afterwards overrun by the speakers of still surviving tongues, and
of elementary languages which faded out. We find strange little patches of
speech still in the world which do not seem to be connected with any other
language about them. Sometimes, however, an exhaustive inquiry seems to
affiliate these disconnected patches, seems to open out to us tantalizing
glimpses of some simpler, wider, and more fundamental and universal form of
human speech. One language group that has been keenly discussed is the Basque
group of dialects. The Basques live now on the north and south slopes of the
Pyrenees; they number perhaps 600,000 altogether in Europe, and to this day
they are a very sturdy and independent-spirited people. Their language, as it
exists to-day, is a fully developed one. But it is developed upon lines
absolutely different from those of the Aryan languages about it. Basque
newspapers have been published in the Argentine and in the United States to
supply groups of prosperous emigrants. The earliest “French” settlers in Canada
were Basque, and Basque names are frequent among the French Canadians to this
day. Ancient remains point to a much wider distribution of the Basque speech
and people over Spain. For a long time this Basque language was a profound
perplexity to scholars, and its structural character led to the suggestion that
it might be related to some Amer-Indian tongue. A. H. Keane, in _Man Past and
Present_, assembles reasons for linking it--though remotely--with the Berber
language of North Africa, and through the Berber with the general body of
Hamitic languages, but this relationship is questioned by other philologists.
They find Basque more akin to certain similarly stranded vestiges of speech
found in the Caucasian Mountains, and they are disposed to regard it as a last
surviving member, much changed and specialized, of a once very widely extended
group of pre-Hamitic languages, otherwise extinct, spoken chiefly by peoples of
that brunet Mediterranean race (round-barrow men) which once occupied most of
western and southern Europe and western Asia, and which may have been very
closely related to the Dravidians of India and the peoples with a heliolithic
culture who spread eastward thence through the East Indies to Polynesia and
beyond.

It is quite possible that over western and southern Europe language groups
extended 10,000 years ago that have completely vanished before Aryan tongues.
Later on we shall note, in passing, the possibility of three lost language
groups represented by (1) Ancient Cretan, Lydian, and the like (though these
may have belonged, says Sir H. H. Johnston, to the “Basque-Caucasian-Dravidian
(!) group”), (2) Sumerian, and (3) Elamite. The suggestion has been made--it is
a mere guess--that ancient Sumerian may have been a linking language between
the early Basque-Caucasian and early Mongolian groups. If this is true, then we
have in this “Basque-Caucasian-Dravidian-Sumerian-proto-Mongolian” group a
still more ancient and more ancestral system of speech than the fundamental
Hamitic.

The Hottentot language is said to have affinities with the Hamitic tongues,
from which it is separated by the whole breadth of Bantu-speaking central
Africa. A Hottentot-like language with Bushman affinities is still spoken in
equatorial east Africa, and this strengthens the idea that the whole of east
Africa was once Hamitic-speaking. The Bantu languages and peoples spread, in
comparatively recent times, from some center of origin in west central Africa
and cut off the Hottentots from the other Hamitic peoples. But it is at least
equally probable that the Hottentot is a separate language group.

Among other remote and isolated little patches of language are the Papuan
speech of New Guinea and the native Australian. The now extinct Tasmanian
language is little known. What we know of it is in support of what we have
guessed about the comparative speechlessness of Palæolithic man.

We may quote a passage from Hutchinson’s _Living Races of Mankind_ upon this
matter:--

“The language of the natives is irretrievably lost, only imperfect indication
of its structure and a small proportion of its words having been preserved. In
the absence of sibilants and some other features, their dialects resembled the
Australian, but were of ruder, of less developed structure, and so imperfect
that, according to Joseph Milligan, our best authority on the subject, they
observed no settled order or arrangement of words in the construction of their
sentences, but conveyed in a supplementary fashion by tone, manner, and gesture
those modifications of meaning which we express by mood, tense, number, etc.
Abstract terms were rare; for every variety of gum-tree or wattle-tree there
was a name, but no word for ‘tree’ in general, nor for qualities such as hard,
soft, warm, cold, long, short, round, etc. Anything hard was ‘like a stone,’
anything round ‘like the moon,’ and so on, usually suiting the action to the
word and confirming by some sign the meaning to be understood.”

[Illustration: Racial Types ... From Egyptian tomb-paintings. (After
Champollion.)]

