# BOOK VIII - XXXIX - § 13
[Metadata]: # {10.04.12}
[Descriptor]: # {10.04.12}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE REALITIES AND IMAGINATIONS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY[457]

§ 1. _The Mechanical Revolution._ § 2. _Relation of the Mechanical      to
the Industrial Revolution._ § 3. _The Fermentation of Ideas,      1848._ § 4.
_The Development of the Idea of Socialism._ § 5.      _Shortcomings of
Socialism as a Scheme of Human Society._ § 6. _How      Darwinism Affected
Religious and Political Ideas._ § 7. _Mr.      Gladstone and the Idea of
Nationalism._ § 8. _Europe between 1848      and 1878._ § 9. _The (Second)
Scramble for Overseas Empires._ § 10.      _The Indian Precedent in Asia._ §
11. _The History of Japan._ § 12.      _Close of the Period of Overseas
Expansion._ § 13. _The British      Empire in 1914._

# § 13
We may note here briefly the very various nature of the constituents of the
British Empire in 1914. It was and is a quite unique political combination;
nothing of the sort has ever existed before.

First and central to the whole system was the “crowned republic” of the United
British Kingdoms, including (against the will of a considerable part of the
Irish people) Ireland. The majority of the British Parliament, made up of the
three united parliaments of England, Scotland, and Ireland, determines the
headship, the quality, and policy of the ministry, and determines it largely on
considerations arising out of British domestic politics. It is this ministry
which is the effective supreme government, with powers of peace and war, over
all the rest of the empire;

Next in order of political importance to the British States were the “crowned
republics” of Australia, Canada, Newfoundland (the oldest British possession,
1583), New Zealand, and South Africa, all practically independent and
self-governing states in alliance with Great Britain, but each with a
representative of the Crown appointed by the Government in office;

Next the Indian Empire, an extension of the empire of the Great Mogul, with its
dependent and “protected” states reaching now from Baluchistan to Burmah, and
including Aden, in all of which empire the British Crown and the Indian Office
(under Parliamentary control) played the rôle of the original Turkoman dynasty;

Then the ambiguous possession of Egypt, still nominally a part of the Turkish
Empire and still retaining its own monarch, the Khedive, but under almost
despotic British official rule;

Then the still more ambiguous “Anglo-Egyptian” Sudan province, occupied and
administered jointly by the British and by the (British controlled) Egyptian
Government;

Then a number of partially self-governing communities, some British in origin
and some not, with elected legislatures and an appointed executive, such as
Malta,[487] Jamaica, the Bahamas, and Bermuda;

Then the Crown colonies, in which the rule of the British Home Government
(through the Colonial Office), verged on autocracy, as in Ceylon, Trinidad, and
Fiji (where there was an appointed council), and Gibraltar and St. Helena
(where there was a governor);

Then great areas of (chiefly) tropical lands, raw-product areas, with
politically weak and under-civilized native communities, which were nominally
protectorates, and administered either by a High Commissioner set over native
chiefs (as in Basutoland) or over a chartered company (as in Rhodesia). In some
cases the Foreign Office, in some cases the Colonial Office, and in some cases
the India Office had been concerned in acquiring the possessions that fell into
this last and least definite class of all, but for the most part the Colonial
Office was now responsible for them.

It will be manifest, therefore, that no single office and no single brain had
ever comprehended the British Empire as a whole. It was a mixture of growths
and accumulations entirely different from anything that has ever been called an
empire before. It guaranteed a wide peace and security; that is why it was
endured and sustained by many men of the “subject” races--in spite of official
tyrannies and insufficiencies, and of much negligence on the part of the “home”
public. Like the “Athenian empire,” it was an overseas empire; its ways were
sea ways, and its common link was the British Navy. Like all empires, its
cohesion was dependent physically upon a method of communication; the
development of seamanship, ship-building, and steamships between the sixteenth
and nineteenth centuries had made it a possible and convenient Pax--the “Pax
Britannica,” and fresh developments of air or swift land transport might at any
time make it inconvenient.

Air transport may indeed be already opening the way to a still more extensive
and universal “Pax,” in which the British system may of its own accord merge.
It is impossible to say whether this unprecedented imperialism will obstruct or
help forward that final unification of the world’s affairs towards which all
history is pointing. A system so various in its structure has many
contradictory aspects, some very attractive, and some very repellent to a
liberal intelligence. The conversion of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and
South Africa from mere administered dependencies into quasi-independent allies,
has been a very fine feat of statescraft. But in these cases the British
Government had to deal with largely kindred and sympathetic populations, very
ready to renew the methods of the old country upon a distant soil. In the case
of mainly alien peoples the record is not so good, and, for reasons we have
already partly analyzed (§ 6), it has been worse during the last few decades
than it was before. There has been a deterioration in the quality of British
imperialism in relation to “subject peoples.” Whether that is a temporary
deterioration or whether it is a fated drift towards disruption is a question
of the profoundest moment to an English writer, but it is one that it is
impossible to discuss properly within the limits of this Outline. But even at
its worst it is open to question whether the British rule in India does not
compare favourably with any other domination of one entirely remote and alien
civilization by another. What is wrong is not so much that Britain rules India
and Egypt, but that any civilized country should be ruled by the legislature of
another, and that there should be no impartial court of appeal in the world yet
to readjust this arrangement.[488]



[Illustration: OVERSEAS EMPIRES of EUROPEAN POWERS, January 1914.]

