# BOOK I - II - § 2
[Metadata]: # {02.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF OUR WORLD




THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY

THE RECORD OF THE ROCKS


§ 1. _The First Living Things._ § 2. _How Old Is the World?_

# § 2
[Illustration: graph of eras]

Speculations about geological time vary enormously.[7] Estimates of the age of
the oldest rocks by geologists and astronomers starting from different
standpoints have varied between 1,600,000,000, and 25,000,000. The lowest
estimate was made by Lord Kelvin in 1867. Professor Huxley guessed at
400,000,000 years. There is a summary of views and the grounds upon which the
estimates have been made in Osborn’s _Origin and Evolution of Life_; he
inclines to the moderate total of 100,000,000. It must be clearly understood by
the reader how sketchy and provisional all these time estimates are. They rest
nearly always upon theoretical assumptions of the slenderest kind. That the
period of time has been vast, that it is to be counted by scores and possibly
by hundreds of millions of years, is the utmost that can be said with certainty
in the matter. It is quite open to the reader to divide every number in the
appended time diagram by ten or multiply it by two; no one can gainsay him. Of
the relative amount of time as between one age and another we have, however,
stronger evidence; if the reader cuts down the 800,000,000 we have given here
to 400,000,000, then he must reduce the 40,000,000 of the Cainozoic to
20,000,000. And be it noted that whatever the total sum may be, most geologists
are in agreement that _half or more than half of the whole of geological time
had passed before life had developed to the Later Palæozoic level_. The reader
reading quickly through these opening chapters may be apt to think of them as a
mere swift prelude of preparation to the apparently much longer history that
follows, but in reality that subsequent history is longer only because it is
more detailed and more interesting to us. It looms larger in perspective. For
ages that stagger the imagination this earth spun hot and lifeless, and again
for ages of equal vastness it held no life above the level of the animalculæ in
a drop of ditch-water.

Not only is Space from the point of view of life and humanity empty, but Time
is empty also. Life is like a little glow, scarcely kindled yet, in these void
immensities.

