# BOOK I - VI - § 1
[Metadata]: # {02.06.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF OUR WORLD




THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY

THE AGE OF REPTILES

§ 1. _The Age of Lowland Life._ § 2. _Flying Dragons._ § 3. _The
First Birds._ § 4. _An Age of Hardship and Death._ § 5. _The First
Appearance of Fur and Feathers._

# § 1
We know that for hundreds of thousands of years the wetness and warmth, the
shallow lagoon conditions that made possible the vast accumulations of
vegetable matter which, compressed and mummified,[14] are now coal, prevailed
over most of the world. There were some cold intervals, it is true; but they
did not last long enough to destroy the growths. Then that long age of
luxuriant low-grade vegetation drew to its end, and for a time life on the
earth seems to have undergone a period of world-wide bleakness.

When the story resumes again, we find life entering upon a fresh phase of
richness and expansion. Vegetation has made great advances in the art of living
out of water. While the Palæozoic plants of the coal-measures probably grew
with swamp water flowing over their roots, the Mesozoic flora from its very
outset included palm-like cycads and low-ground conifers that were distinctly
land plants growing on soil above the water level. The lower levels of the
Mesozoic land were no doubt covered by great fern brakes and shrubby bush and a
kind of jungle growth of trees. But there existed as yet no grass, no small
flowering plants, no turf nor greensward. Probably the Mesozoic was not an age
of very brightly coloured vegetation. It must have had a flora green in the wet
season and brown and purple in the dry. There were no gay flowers, no bright
autumn tints before the fall of the leaf, because there was as yet no fall of
the leaf. And beyond the lower levels the world was still barren, still
unclothed, still exposed without any mitigation to the wear and tear of the
wind and rain.

When one speaks of conifers in the Mesozoic the reader must not think of the
pines and firs that clothe the high mountain slopes of our time. He must think
of low-growing evergreens. The mountains were still as bare and lifeless as
ever. The only colour effects among the mountains were the colour effects of
naked rock, such colours as make the landscape of Colorado so marvellous
to-day.

Amidst this spreading vegetation of the lower plains the reptiles were
increasing mightily in multitude and variety. They were now in many cases
absolutely land animals. There are numerous anatomical points of distinction
between a reptile and an amphibian; they held good between such reptiles and
amphibians as prevailed in the carboniferous time of the Upper Palæozoic; but
the fundamental difference between reptiles and amphibia which matters in this
history is that the amphibian must go back to the water to lay its eggs, and
that in the early stages of its life it must live in and under water. The
reptile, on the other hand, has cut out all the tadpole stages from its life
cycle, or, to be more exact, its tadpole stages are got through before the
young leave the egg case. The reptile has come out of the water altogether.
Some had gone back to it again, just as the hippopotamus and the otter among
mammals have gone back, but that is a further extension of the story to which
we cannot give much attention in this _Outline_.

[Illustration: Some Mesozoic Reptiles]

In the Palæozoic period, as we have said, life had not spread beyond the swampy
river valleys and the borders of sea lagoons and the like; but in the Mesozoic,
life was growing ever more accustomed to the thinner medium of the air, was
sweeping boldly up over the plains and towards the hillsides. It is well for
the student of human history and the human future to note that. If a
disembodied intelligence with no knowledge of the future had come to earth and
studied life during the early Palæozoic age, he might very reasonably have
concluded that life was absolutely confined to the water, and that it could
never spread over the land. It found a way. In the Later Palæozoic Period that
visitant might have been equally sure that life could not go beyond the edge of
a swamp. The Mesozoic Period would still have found him setting bounds to life
far more limited than the bounds that are set to-day. And so to-day, though we
mark how life and man are still limited to five miles of air and a depth of
perhaps a mile or so of sea, we must not conclude from that present limitation
that life, through man, may not presently spread out and up and down to a range
of living as yet inconceivable.

[Illustration: Some

Late Mesozoic

Reptiles]

The earliest known reptiles were beasts with great bellies and not very
powerful legs, very like their kindred amphibia, wallowing as the crocodile
wallows to this day; but in the Mesozoic they soon began to stand up and go
stoutly on all fours, and several great sections of them began to balance
themselves on tail and hind legs, rather as the kangaroos do now, in order to
release the fore limbs for grasping food. The bones of one notable division of
reptiles which retained a quadrupedal habit, a division of which many remains
have been found in South African and Russian Early Mesozoic deposits, display a
number of characters which approach those of the mammalian skeleton, and
because of this resemblance to the mammals (beasts) this division is called the
_Theriomorpha_ (beastlike). Another division was the crocodile branch, and
another developed towards the tortoises and turtles. The _Plesiosaurs_ and
_Ichthyosaurs_ were two groups which have left no living representatives; they
were huge reptiles returning to a whale-like life in the sea. _Pliosaurus_, one
of the largest plesiosaurs, measured thirty feet from snout to tail tip--of
which half was neck. The _Mosasaurs_ were a third group of great porpoise-like
marine lizards. But the largest and most diversified group of these Mesozoic
reptiles was the group we have spoken of as kangaroo-like, the _Dinosaurs_,
many of which attained enormous proportions. In bigness these greater
_Dinosaurs_ have never been exceeded, although the sea can still show in the
whales creatures as great. Some of these, and the largest among them, were
herbivorous animals; they browsed on the rushy vegetation and among the ferns
and bushes, or they stood up and grasped trees with their fore legs while they
devoured the foliage. Among the browsers, for example, were the _Diplodocus
carnegii_, which measured eighty=four feet in length, and the _Atlantosaurus_.
The _Gigantosaurus_, disinterred by a German expedition in 1912 from rocks in
East Africa, was still more colossal. It measured well over a hundred feet!
These greater monsters had legs, and they are usually figured as standing up on
them; but it is very doubtful if they could have supported their weight in this
way, out of water. Buoyed up by water or mud, they may have got along. Another
noteworthy type we have figured is the _Triceratops_. There were also a number
of great flesh-eaters who preyed upon these herbivores. Of these,
_Tyrannosaurus_ seems almost the last word in “frightfulness” among living
things. Some species of this genus measured forty feet from snout to tail.
Apparently it carried this vast body kangaroo fashion on its tail and hind
legs. Probably it reared itself up. Some authorities even suppose that it leapt
through the air. If so, it possessed muscles of a quite miraculous quality. A
leaping elephant would be a far less astounding idea. Much more probably it
waded half submerged in pursuit of the herbivorous river saurians.

