# BOOK II - X - § 1
[Metadata]: # {03.03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK II
X
§ 1
# § 1
The Neanderthal type of man prevailed in Europe at least for tens of thousands
of years. For ages that make all history seem a thing of yesterday, these
nearly human creatures prevailed. If the Heidelberg jaw was that of a
Neanderthaler, and if there is no error in the estimate of the age of that jaw,
then the Neanderthal Race lasted out for more than 200,000 years! Finally,
between 40,000 and 25,000 years ago, as the Fourth Glacial Age softened towards
more temperate conditions (see Map on p. 89), a different human type came upon
the scene, and, it would seem, exterminated _Homo Neanderthalensis_.[36] This
new type was probably developed in South Asia or North Africa, or in lands now
submerged in the Mediterranean basin, and, as more remains are collected and
evidence accumulates, men will learn more of their early stages. At present we
can only guess where and how, through the slow ages, parallel with the
Neanderthal cousin, these first _true men_ arose out of some more ape-like
progenitor. For hundreds of centuries they were acquiring skill of hand and
limb, and power and bulk of brain, in that still unknown environment. They were
already far above the Neanderthal level of achievement and intelligence, when
first they come into our ken, and they had already split into two or more very
distinctive races.

[Illustration: Cromagnon

Man]

These new-comers did not migrate into Europe in the strict sense of the word,
but rather, as century by century the climate ameliorated, they followed the
food and plants to which they were accustomed, as those spread into the new
realms that opened to them. The ice was receding, vegetation was increasing,
big game of all sorts was becoming more abundant. Steppe-like conditions,
conditions of pasture and shrub, were bringing with them vast herds of wild
horse. Ethnologists (students of race) class these new human races in one same
species as ourselves, and with all human races subsequent to them, under one
common specific name of _Homo sapiens_. They had quite human brain-cases and
hands. Their teeth and their necks were anatomically as ours are.

Now here again, with every desire to be plain and explicit with the reader, we
have still to trouble him with qualified statements and notes of interrogation.
There is now an enormous literature about these earliest true men, the men of
the Later Palæolithic Age, and it is still for the general reader a very
confusing literature indeed. It is confusing because it is still confused at
the source. We know of two distinct sorts of skeletal remains in this period,
the first of these known as the Cro-Magnon race, and the second the Grimaldi
race; but the great bulk of the human traces and appliances we find are either
without human bones or with insufficient bones for us to define their
associated physical type. There may have been many more distinct races than
these two. There may have been intermediate types. In the grotto of Cro-Magnon
it was that complete skeletons of one main type of these Newer Palæolithic men,
these true men, were first found, and so it is that they are spoken of as
Cro-Magnards.

[Illustration: MAP SHOWING EUROPE AND WESTERN ASIA ABOUT THE TIME THE TRUE MEN
WERE REPLACING THE NEANDERTHALERS IN WESTERN EUROPE]

[Illustration: Reindeer Age Articles

(_drawn to differing scales_)

_Bone points_

(_Azillian--pierced for thong_)

_Pebble cup mortar_

_Harpoons of reindeer horn_

_Bone needles_

_Arrow straighteners_

(_reindeer horn_)

_Australian natives’ method of using throwing-stick or spear-thrower_

_Throwing-stick_ (_reindeer horn_)]

These Cro-Magnards were a tall people with very broad faces, prominent noses,
and, all things considered, astonishingly big brains. The brain capacity of the
woman in the Cro-Magnon cave exceeded that of the average male to-day. Her head
had been smashed by a heavy blow. There were also in the same cave with her the
complete skeleton of an older man, nearly six feet high, the fragments of a
child’s skeleton, and the skeletons of two young men. There were also flint
implements and perforated sea-shells, used no doubt as ornaments. Such is one
sample of the earliest true men. But at the Grimaldi cave, near Mentone, were
discovered two skeletons also of the Later Palæolithic period, but of a widely
contrasted type, with negroid characteristics that point rather to the negroid
type. There can be no doubt that we have to deal in this period with at least
two, and probably more, highly divergent races of true men. They may have
overlapped in time, or Cro-Magnards may have followed the Grimaldi race, and
either or both may have been contemporary with the late Neanderthal men.
Various authorities have very strong opinions upon these points, but they are,
at most, opinions. The whole story is further fogged at present by our
inability to distinguish, in the absence of skeletons, which race has been at
work in any particular case. In what follows the reader will ask of this or
that particular statement, “Yes, but is this the Cro-Magnard or the Grimaldi
man or some other that you are writing about?” To which in most cases the
honest answer is, “As yet we do not know.” Confessedly our account of the newer
Palæolithic is a jumbled account. There are probably two or three concurrent
and only roughly similar histories of these newer Palæolithic men as yet,
inextricably mixed up together. Some authorities appear to favour the
Cro-Magnards unduly and to dismiss the Grimaldi people with as little as
possible of the record.

The appearance of these truly human postglacial Palæolithic peoples was
certainly an enormous leap forward in the history of mankind. Both of these
main races had a human fore-brain, a human hand, an intelligence very like our
own. They dispossessed _Homo Neanderthalensis_ from his caverns and his stone
quarries. And they agreed with modern ethnologists, it would seem, in regarding
him as a different species. Unlike most savage conquerors, who take the women
of the defeated side for their own and interbreed with them, it would seem that
the true men would have nothing to do with the Neanderthal race, women or men.
There is no trace of any intermixture between the races, in spite of the fact
that the newcomers, being also flint users, were establishing themselves in the
very same spots that their predecessors had occupied. We know nothing of the
appearance of the Neanderthal man, but this absence of intermixture seems to
suggest an extreme hairiness, an ugliness, or a repulsive strangeness in his
appearance over and above his low forehead, his beetle brows, his ape neck, and
his inferior stature. Or he--and she--may have been too fierce to tame. Says
Sir Harry Johnston, in a survey of the rise of modern man in his _Views and
Reviews_: “The dim racial remembrance of such gorilla-like monsters, with
cunning brains, shambling gait, hairy bodies, strong teeth, and possibly
cannibalistic tendencies, may be the germ of the ogre in folklore....”

These true men of the Palæolithic Age, who replaced the Neanderthalers, were
coming into a milder climate, and although they used the caves and shelters of
their predecessors, they lived largely in the open. They were hunting peoples,
and some or all of them appear to have hunted the mammoth and the wild horse as
well as the reindeer, bison, and aurochs. They ate much horse. At a great
open-air camp at Solutré, where they seem to have had animal gatherings for
many centuries, it is estimated that there are the bones of 100,000 horses,
besides reindeer, mammoth, and bison bones. They probably followed herds of
horses, the little bearded ponies of that age, as these moved after pasture.
They hung about on the flanks of the herd, and became very wise about its
habits and dispositions. A large part of these men’s lives must have been spent
in watching animals.

Whether they tamed and domesticated the horse is still an open question.
Perhaps they learnt to do so by degrees as the centuries passed. At any rate,
we find late Palæolithic drawings of horses with marks about the heads that are
strongly suggestive of bridles, and there exists a carving of a horse’s head
showing what is perhaps a rope of twisted skin or tendon. But even if they
tamed the horse, it is still more doubtful whether they rode it or had much use
for it when it was tamed. The horse they knew was a wild pony with a beard
under its chin, not up to carrying a man for any distance. It is improbable
that these men had yet learnt the rather unnatural use of animal’s milk as
food. If they tamed the horse at last, it was the only animal they seem to have
tamed. They had no dogs, and they had little to do with any sort of
domesticated sheep or cattle.

It greatly aids us to realize their common humanity that these earliest true
men could draw. Both races, it would seem, drew astonishingly well. They were
by all standards savages, but they were artistic savages. They drew better than
any of their successors down to the beginnings of history. They drew and
painted on the cliffs and cave walls that they had wrested from the Neanderthal
men. And the surviving drawings come to the ethnologist, puzzling over bones
and scraps, with the effect of a plain message shining through guesswork and
darkness. They drew on bones and antlers; they carved little figures.

These late Palæolithic people not only drew remarkably well for our
information, and with an increasing skill as the centuries passed, but they
have also left us other information about their lives in their graves. They
buried. They buried their dead, often with ornaments, weapons, and food; they
used a lot of colour in the burial, and evidently painted the body. From that
one may infer that they painted their bodies during life. Paint was a big fact
in their lives. They were inveterate painters; they used black, brown, red,
yellow, and white pigments, and the pigments they used endure to this day in
the caves of France and Spain. Of all modern races, none have shown so
pictorial a disposition; the nearest approach to it has been among the American
Indians.

[Illustration: A Reindeer Age Masterpiece]

[Illustration:

Reindeer Age (_Aurignacian_)

Engravings & Carvings]

These drawings and paintings of the later Palæolithic people went on through a
long period of time, and present wide fluctuations in artistic merit. We give
here some early sketches, from which we learn of the interest taken by these
early men in the bison, horse, ibex, cave bear, and reindeer. In its early
stages the drawing is often primitive like the drawing of clever children;
quadrupeds are usually drawn with one hindleg and one foreleg, as children draw
them to this day. The legs on the other side were too much for the artist’s
technique. Possibly the first drawings began as children’s drawings begin, out
of idle scratchings. The savage scratched with a flint on a smooth rock
surface, and was reminded of some line or gesture. But their solid carvings are
at least as old as their first pictures. The earlier drawings betray a complete
incapacity to group animals. As the centuries progressed, more skilful artists
appeared. The representation of beasts became at last astonishingly vivid and
like. But even at the crest of their artistic time they still drew in profile
as children do; perspective and the fore-shortening needed for back and front
views were too much for them.[37] They rarely drew themselves. The vast
majority of their drawings represent animals. The mammoth and the horse are
among the commonest themes. Some of the people, whether Grimaldi people or
Cro-Magnon people, also made little ivory and soapstone statuettes, and among
these are some very fat female figures. These latter suggest the physique of
Grimaldi rather than of Cro-Magnon artists. They are like Bushmen women. The
human sculpture of the earlier times inclined to caricature, and generally such
human figures as they represent are far below the animal studies in vigour and
veracity.

Later on there was more grace and less coarseness in the human representations.
One little ivory head discovered is that of a girl with an elaborate coiffure.
These people at a later stage also scratched and engraved designs on ivory and
bone. Some of the most interesting groups of figures are carved very curiously
round bone, and especially round rods of deer bone, so that it is impossible to
see the entire design all together. Figures have also been found modelled in
clay, although no Palæolithic people made any use of pottery.

Many of the paintings are found in the depths of unlit caves. They are often
difficult of access. The artists must have employed lamps to do their work, and
shallow soapstone lamps in which fat could have been burnt have been found.
Whether the seeing of these cavern paintings was in some way ceremonial or
under what circumstances they were seen, we are now altogether at a loss to
imagine.

