# BOOK II - IX - § 1
[Metadata]: # {03.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

THE NEANDERTHAL MEN, AN EXTINCT RACE

(The Early Palæolithic Age[29])

§ 1. _The World 50,000 Years Ago._ § 2. _The Daily Life of the      First
Men._ § 3. _The Last Palæolithic Men._

# § 1
In the time of the Third Interglacial period the outline of Europe and western
Asia was very different from what it is to-day. Vast areas to the west and
northwest which are now under the Atlantic waters were then dry land; the Irish
Sea and the North Sea were river valleys. Over these northern areas there
spread and receded and spread again a great ice cap such as covers central
Greenland to-day (see Map, on page 77). This vast ice cap, which covered both
polar regions of the earth, withdrew huge masses of water from the ocean, and
the sea-level consequently fell, exposing great areas of land that are now
submerged again. The Mediterranean area was probably a great valley below the
general sea-level, containing two inland seas cut off from the general ocean.
The climate of this Mediterranean basin was perhaps cold temperate, and the
region of the Sahara to the south was not then a desert of baked rock and blown
sand, but a well-watered and fertile country. Between the ice sheets to the
north and the Alps and Mediterranean valley to the south stretched a bleak
wilderness whose climate changed from harshness to a mild kindliness and then
hardened again for the Fourth Glacial Age.

Across this wilderness, which is now the great plain of Europe, wandered a
various fauna. At first there were hippopotami, rhinoceroses, mammoths, and
elephants. The sabre-toothed tiger was diminishing towards extinction. Then, as
the air chilled, the hippopotamus, and then other warmth-loving creatures,
ceased to come so far north, and the sabre-toothed tiger disappeared
altogether. The woolly mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, the musk ox, the bison,
the aurochs, and the reindeer became prevalent, and the temperate vegetation
gave place to plants of a more arctic type. The glaciers spread southward to
the maximum of the Fourth Glacial Age (about 50,000 years ago), and then
receded again. In the earlier phase, the Third Interglacial period, a certain
number of small family groups of men (_Homo Neanderthalensis_) and probably of
sub-men (_Eoanthropus_) wandered over the land, leaving nothing but their flint
implements to witness to their presence. They probably used a multitude and
variety of wooden implements also; they had probably learnt much about the
shapes of objects and the use of different shapes from wood, knowledge which
they afterwards applied to stone; but none of this wooden material has
survived; we can only speculate about its forms and uses. As the weather
hardened to its maximum of severity, the Neanderthal men, already it would seem
acquainted with the use of fire, began to seek shelter under rock ledges and in
caves--and so leave remains behind them. Hitherto they had been accustomed to
squat in the open about the fire, and near their water supply. But they were
sufficiently intelligent to adapt themselves to the new and harder conditions.
(As for the sub-men, they seem to have succumbed to the stresses of this Fourth
Glacial Age altogether. At any rate, the rudest type of Palæolithic implements
presently disappears.)

[Illustration: THIS MAP REPRESENTS THE PRESENT STATE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE
GEOGRAPHY OF EUROPE AND WESTERN ASIA AT A PERIOD WHICH WE GUESS TO BE ABOUT
50,000 YEARS AGO, THE NEANDERTHALER AGE.

Much of this map is of course speculative, but its broad outlines must be
fairly like those of the world in which men first became men.]

Not merely man was taking to the caves. This period also had a cave lion, a
cave bear, and a cave hyæna. These creatures had to be driven out of the caves
and kept out of the caves in which these early men wanted to squat and hide;
and no doubt fire was an effective method of eviction and protection. Probably
early men did not go deeply into the caves, because they had no means of
lighting their recesses. They got in far enough to be out of the weather, and
stored wood and food in odd corners. Perhaps they barricaded the cave mouths.
Their only available light for going deeply into the caverns would be torches.

[Illustration: Neanderthal Man]

What did these Neanderthal men hunt? Their only possible weapons for killing
such giant creatures as the mammoth or the cave bear, or even the reindeer,
were spears of wood, wooden clubs, and those big pieces of flint they left
behind them, the “Chellean” and “Mousterian” implements;[30] and probably their
usual quarry was smaller game. But they did certainly eat the flesh of the big
beasts when they had a chance, and perhaps they followed them when sick or when
wounded by combats, or took advantage of them when they were bogged or in
trouble with ice or water. (The Labrador Indians still kill the caribou with
spears at awkward river crossings.) At Dewlish in Dorset, an artificial trench
has been found which is supposed to have been a Palæolithic trap for
elephants.[31] We know that the Neanderthalers partly ate their kill where it
fell; but they brought back the big marrow bones to the cave to crack and eat
at leisure, because few ribs and vertebræ are found in the caves, but great
quantities of cracked and split long bones. They used skins to wrap about them,
and the women probably dressed the skins.

We know also that they were right-handed like modern men, because the left side
of the brain (which serves the right side of the body) is bigger than the
right. But while the back parts of the brain which deal with sight and touch
and the energy of the body are well developed, the front parts, which are
connected with thought and speech, are comparatively small. It was as big a
brain as ours, but different. This species of _Homo_ had certainly a very
different mentality from ours; its individuals were not merely simpler and
lower than we are, they were on another line. It may be they did not speak at
all, or very sparingly. They had nothing that we should call a language.

