# BOOK VIII - XXXVI - § 11
[Metadata]: # {10.01.11}
[Descriptor]: # {10.01.11}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VIII
XXXVI
§ 11
# § 11
In these preceding ten sections we have been dealing with an age of division,
of separated nationalities. We have already described this period of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as an interregnum in the progress of
mankind towards a worldwide unity. Throughout this period there was no ruling
unifying idea in men’s minds. The impulse of the empire had failed until the
Emperor was no more than one of a number of competing princes, and the dream of
Christendom also was a fading dream. The developing “powers” jostled one
another throughout the world; but for a time it seemed that they might jostle
one another indefinitely without any great catastrophe to mankind. The great
geographical discoveries of the sixteenth century had so enlarged human
resources that, for all their divisions, for all the waste of their wars and
policies, the people of Europe enjoyed a considerable and increasing
prosperity. Central Europe recovered steadily from the devastation of the
Thirty Years War.

Looking back upon this period, which came to its climax in the eighteenth
century, looking back, as we can begin to do nowadays, and seeing its events in
relation to the centuries that came before it and to the great movements of the
present time, we are able to realize how transitory and provisional were its
political forms and how unstable its securities. Provisional it was as no other
age has been provisional, an age of assimilation and recuperation, a political
pause, a gathering up of the ideas of men and the resources of science for a
wider human effort. But the contemporary mind did not see it in that light. The
failure of the great creative ideas as they had been formulated in the Middle
Ages, had left human thought for a time destitute of the guidance of creative
ideas; even educated and imaginative men saw the world undramatically; no
longer as an interplay of effort and destiny, but as the scene in which a trite
happiness was sought and the milder virtues were rewarded. It was not simply
the contented and conservative-minded who, in a world of rapid changes, were
under the sway of this assurance of an achieved fixity of human conditions.
Even highly critical and insurgent intelligences, in default of any sustaining
movements in the soul of the community, betrayed the same disposition.
Political life, they felt, had ceased to be the urgent and tragic thing it had
once been; it had become a polite comedy. The eighteenth was a century of
comedy--which at the end grew grim. It is inconceivable that that world of the
middle eighteenth century could have produced a Jesus of Nazareth, a Gautama, a
Francis of Assisi, an Ignatius of Loyola. If one may imagine an
eighteenth-century John Huss, it is impossible to imagine anyone with
sufficient passion to burn him. Until the stirrings of conscience in Britain
that developed into the Methodist revival began, we can detect scarcely a
suspicion that there still remained great tasks in hand for our race to do,
that enormous disturbances were close at hand, or that the path of man through
space and time was dark with countless dangers, and must to the end remain a
high and terrible enterprise.

We have quoted again and again in this history from Gibbon’s _Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire_. Now we shall quote from it for the last time and bid it
farewell, for we have come to the age in which it was written. Gibbon was born
in 1737,[410]

and the last volume of his history was published in 1787, but the passage we
shall quote was probably written in the year 1780. Gibbon was a young man of
delicate health and fairly good fortune; he had a partial and interrupted
education at Oxford, and then he completed his studies in Geneva; on the whole
his outlook was French and cosmopolitan rather than British, and he was much
under the intellectual influence of that great Frenchman who is best known
under the name of Voltaire (François Marie Arouet de Voltaire, 1694-1778).
Voltaire was an author of enormous industry; seventy volumes of him adorn the
present writer’s shelves, and another edition of Voltaire’s works runs to
ninety-four; he dealt largely with history and public affairs, and he
corresponded with Catherine the Great of Russia, Frederick the Great of
Prussia, Louis XV, and most of the prominent people of the time. Both Voltaire
and Gibbon had the sense of history strong in them; both have set out very
plainly and fully their visions of human life; and it is clear that to both of
them the system in which they lived, the system of monarchy, of leisurely and
privileged gentlefolks, of rather despised industrial and trading people and of
down-trodden and negligible labourers and poor and common people, seemed the
most stably established way of living that the world has ever seen. They
postured a little as republicans, and sneered at the divine pretensions of
monarchy; but the republicanism that appealed to Voltaire was the crowned
republicanism of the Britain of those days, in which the king was simply the
official head, the first and greatest of the gentlemen.

The ideal they sustained was the ideal of a polite and polished world in which
men--men of quality that is, for no others counted--would be ashamed to be
cruel or gross or enthusiastic, in which the appointments of life would be
spacious and elegant, and the fear of ridicule the potent auxiliary of the law
in maintaining the decorum and harmonies of life. Voltaire had in him the
possibility of a passionate hatred of injustice, and his interventions on
behalf of persecuted or ill-used men are the high lights of his long and
complicated life-story. And this being the mental disposition of Gibbon and
Voltaire, and of the age in which they lived, it is natural that they should
find the existence of religion in the world, and in particular the existence of
Christianity, a perplexing and rather unaccountable phenomenon. The whole of
that side of life seemed to them a kind of craziness in the human make-up.
Gibbon’s great history is essentially an attack upon Christianity as the
operating cause of the decline and fall. He idealized the crude and gross
plutocracy of Rome into a world of fine gentlemen upon the eighteenth-century
model, and told how it fell before the Barbarian from without because of the
decay through Christianity within. In our history here we have tried to set
that story in a better light. To Voltaire official Christianity was
“_l’infâme_”; something that limited people’s lives, interfered with their
thoughts, persecuted harmless dissentients. And indeed in that period of the
interregnum there was very little life or light in either the orthodox
Christianity of Rome or in the orthodox tame churches of Russia and of the
Protestant princes. In an interregnum incommoded with an abundance of sleek
parsons and sly priests it was hard to realize what fires had once blazed in
the heart of Christianity, and what fires of political and religious passion
might still blaze in the hearts of men.

At the end of his third volume Gibbon completed his account of the breaking up
of the Western Empire. He then raised the question whether civilization might
ever undergo again a similar collapse. This led him to review the existing
state of affairs (1780) and to compare it with the state of affairs during the
decline of imperial Rome. It will be very convenient to our general design to
quote some passages from that comparison here, for nothing could better
illustrate the state of mind of the liberal thinkers of Europe at the crest of
the political interregnum of the age of the Great Powers, before the first
intimations of those profound political and social forces of disintegration
that have produced at length the dramatic interrogations of our own times.

“This awful revolution,” wrote Gibbon of the Western collapse, “may be usefully
applied to the useful instruction of the present age. It is the duty of a
patriot to prefer and promote the exclusive interest and glory of his native
country; but a philosopher may be permitted to enlarge his views, and to
consider Europe as one great republic, whose various inhabitants have attained
almost the same level of politeness and cultivation. The balance of power will
continue to fluctuate, and the prosperity of our own or the neighbouring
kingdoms may be alternately exalted or depressed; but these partial events
cannot essentially injure our general state of happiness, the system of arts,
and laws, and manners, which so advantageously distinguish, above the rest of
mankind, the Europeans and their colonies. The savage nations of the globe are
the common enemies of civilized society; and we may enquire with anxious
curiosity whether Europe is still threatened with a repetition of those
calamities which formerly oppressed the arms and institutions of Rome. Perhaps
the same reflections will illustrate the fall of that mighty empire and explain
the probable causes of our actual security.

“The Romans were ignorant of the extent of their danger, and the number of
their enemies. Beyond the Rhine and Danube, the northern countries of Europe
and Asia were filled with innumerable tribes of hunters and shepherds, poor,
voracious, and turbulent; bold in arms, and impatient to ravish the fruits of
industry. The Barbarian world was agitated by the rapid impulse of war; and the
peace of Gaul or Italy was shaken by the distant revolutions of China. The
Huns, who fled before a victorious enemy, directed their march towards the
west; and the torrent was swelled by the gradual accession of captives and
allies. The flying tribes who yielded to the Huns assumed in their turn the
spirit of conquest; the endless column of barbarians pressed on the Roman
Empire with accumulated weight and, if the foremost were destroyed, the vacant
space was instantly replenished by new assailants. Such formidable emigrations
can no longer issue from the North; and the long repose, which has been imputed
to the decrease of population, is the happy consequence of the progress of arts
and agriculture. Instead of some rude villages, thinly scattered among its
woods and morasses, Germany now produces a list of two thousand three hundred
walled towns; the Christian kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden, and Poland have been
successively established; and the Hanse merchants, with the Teutonic knights,
have extended their colonies along the coast of the Baltic, as far as the Gulf
of Finland. From the Gulf of Finland to the Eastern Ocean, Russia now assumes
the form of a powerful and civilized empire. The plough, the loom, and the
forge are introduced on the banks of the Volga, the Oby, and the Lena; and the
fiercest of the Tartar hordes have been taught to tremble and obey....

“The Empire of Rome was firmly established by the singular and perfect
coalition of its members.... But this union was purchased by the loss of
national freedom and military spirit; and the servile provinces, destitute of
life and motion, expected their safety from the mercenary troops and governors,
who were directed by the orders of a distant court. The happiness of a hundred
millions depended on the personal merit of one or two men, perhaps children,
whose minds were corrupted by education, luxury, and despotic power. Europe is
now divided into twelve powerful, though unequal kingdoms, three respectable
commonwealths, and a variety of smaller, though independent, states; the
chances of royal and ministerial talents are multiplied, at least with the
number of its rulers; and a Julian[411] or Semiramis[412] may reign in the
north, while Arcadius and Honorius[413] again slumber on the thrones of the
House of Bourbon. The abuses of tyranny are restrained by the mutual influence
of fear and shame; republics have acquired order and stability; monarchies have
imbibed the principles of freedom, or, at least, of moderation; and some sense
of honour and justice is introduced into the most defective constitutions by
the general manners of the times. In peace, the progress of knowledge and
industry is accelerated by the emulation of so many active rivals: in war, the
European forces are exercised by temperate and undecisive contests. If a savage
conqueror should issue from the deserts of Tartary, he must repeatedly vanquish
the robust peasants of Russia, the numerous armies of Germany, the gallant
nobles of France, and the intrepid freemen of Britain; who, perhaps, might
confederate for their common defence. Should the victorious Barbarians carry
slavery and desolation as far as the Atlantic Ocean, ten thousand vessels would
transport beyond their pursuit the remains of civilized society; and Europe
would revive and flourish in the American world which is already filled with
her colonies and institutions.

“Cold, poverty, and a life of danger and fatigue fortify the strength and
courage of Barbarians. In every age they have oppressed the polite and peaceful
nations of China, India, and Persia, who neglected, and still neglect, to
counterbalance these natural powers by the resources of military art. The
warlike states of antiquity, Greece, Macedonia, and Rome, educated a race of
soldiers; exercised their bodies, disciplined their courage, multiplied their
forces by regular evolutions, and converted the iron which they possessed into
strong and serviceable weapons. But this superiority insensibly declined with
their laws and manners; and the feeble policy of Constantine and his successors
armed and instructed, for the ruin of the empire, the rude valour of the
Barbarian mercenaries. The military art has been changed by the invention of
gunpowder; which enables man to command the two most powerful agents of nature,
air and fire. Mathematics, chemistry, mechanics, architecture, have been
applied to the service of war; and the adverse parties oppose to each other the
most elaborate modes of attack and of defence. Historians may indignantly
observe that the preparations of a siege would found and maintain a flourishing
colony; yet we cannot be displeased that the subversion of a city should be a
work of cost and difficulty, or that an industrious people should be protected
by those arts, which survive and supply the decay of military virtue. Cannon
and fortifications now form an impregnable barrier against the Tartar
horse;[414] and Europe is secure from any future irruption of Barbarians;
since, before they can conquer, they must cease to be barbarous....

“Should these speculations be found doubtful or fallacious, there still remains
a more humble source of comfort and hope. The discoveries of ancient and modern
navigators, and the domestic history, or tradition, of the most enlightened
nations, represent the _human savage_, naked both in mind and body, and
destitute of laws, of arts, of ideas, and almost of language. From this abject
condition, perhaps the primitive and universal state of man, he has gradually
arisen to command the animals, to fertilize the earth, to traverse the ocean,
and to measure the heavens. His progress in the improvement and exercise of his
mental and corporeal faculties has been irregular and various, infinitely slow
in the beginning, and increasing by degrees with redoubled velocity; ages of
laborious ascent have been followed by a moment of rapid downfall; and the
several climates of the globe have felt the vicissitudes of light and darkness.
Yet the experience of four thousand years should enlarge our hopes, and
diminish our apprehensions; we cannot determine to what height the human
species may aspire in their advances towards perfection; but it may safely be
presumed that no people, unless the face of nature is changed, will relapse
into their original barbarism.

“Since the first discovery of the arts, war, commerce, and religious zeal have
diffused, among the savages of the Old and New World, those inestimable gifts,
they have been successively propagated; they can never be lost. We may
therefore acquiesce in the pleasing conclusion that every age of the world has
increased, and still increases, the real wealth, the happiness, the knowledge,
and perhaps the virtue, of the human race.”


§ 12[415]

One of the most interesting aspects of this story of Europe in the seventeenth
and earlier eighteenth century during the phase of the Grand and Parliamentary
Monarchies, is the comparative quiescence of the peasants and workers. The
insurrectionary fires of the fourteenth and fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
seem to have died down. The acute economic clashes of the earlier period had
been mitigated by rough adjustments. The discovery of America had
revolutionized and changed the scale of business and industry, had brought a
vast volume of precious metal for money into Europe, had increased and varied
employment. For a time life and work ceased to be intolerable to the masses of
the poor. This did not, of course, prevent much individual misery and
discontent; the poor we have always had with us, but this misery and discontent
was divided and scattered. It became inaudible.

In the earlier period the common people had had an idea to crystallize upon,
the idea of Christian communism. They had found an educated leadership in the
dissentient priests and doctors of the Wycliffe type. As the movement for a
revival in Christianity spent its force, as Lutheranism fell back for
leadership from Jesus upon the Protestant Princes, this contact and reaction of
the fresher minds of the educated class upon the illiterate mass was
interrupted. However numerous a downtrodden class may be, and however extreme
its miseries, it will never be able to make an effective protest until it
achieves solidarity by the development of some common general idea. Educated
men and men of ideas are more necessary to a popular political movement than to
any other political process. A monarchy learns by ruling, and an oligarchy of
any type has the education of affairs; but the common man, the peasant or
toiler, has no experience in large matters, and can exist politically only
through the services, devotion, and guidance of educated men. The Reformation,
the Reformation that succeeded, the Reformation that is of the Princes, by
breaking up educational facilities, largely destroyed the poor scholar and
priest class whose persuasion of the crowd had rendered the Reformation
possible.

The Princes of the Protestant countries when they seized upon the national
churches early apprehended the necessity of gripping the universities also.
Their idea of education was the idea of capturing young clever people for the
service of their betters. Beyond that they were disposed to regard education as
a mischievous thing. The only way to an education, therefore, for a poor man
was through patronage. Of course there was a parade of encouragement towards
learning in all the Grand Monarchies, a setting up of Academies and Royal
Societies, but these benefited only a small class of subservient scholars. The
church also had learnt to distrust the educated poor man. In the great
aristocratic “crowned republic” of Britain there was the same shrinkage of
educational opportunity. “Both the ancient universities,” says Hammond, in his
account of the eighteenth century, “were the universities of the rich. There is
a passage in Macaulay describing the state and pomp of Oxford at the end of the
seventeenth century, ‘when her Chancellor, the Venerable Duke of Ormonde, sat
in his embroidered mantle on his throne under the painted ceiling of the
Sheldonian theatre, surrounded by hundreds of graduates robed according to
their rank, while the noblest youths of England were solemnly presented to him
as candidates for academical honours.’ The university was a power, not in the
sense in which that could be said of a university like the old university of
Paris, whose learning could make Popes tremble, but in the sense that the
university was part of the recognized machinery of aristocracy. What was true
of the universities was true of the public schools. Education in England was
the nursery not of a society, but of an order; not of a state, but of a race of
owner-rulers.” The missionary spirit had departed from education throughout
Europe. To that quite as much as to the amelioration of things by a diffused
prosperity, this phase of quiescence among the lower classes is to be ascribed.
They had lost brains and speech, and they were fed. The community was like a
pithed animal in the hands of the governing class.[416]

Moreover, there had been considerable changes in the proportions of class to
class. One of the most difficult things for the historian to trace is the
relative amount of the total property of the community held at any time by any
particular class in that community. These things fluctuate very rapidly. The
peasant wars of Europe indicate a phase of comparatively concentrated property
when large masses of people could feel themselves expropriated and at a common
disadvantage, and so take mass action. This was the time of the rise and
prosperity of the Fuggers and their like, a time of international finance. Then
with the vast importation of silver and gold and commodities into Europe from
America, there seems to have been a restoration of a more diffused state of
wealth. The poor were just as miserable as ever, but there were perhaps not so
many poor relatively, and they were broken up into a variety of types without
any ideas in common. In Great Britain the agricultural life which had been
dislocated by the confiscations of the Reformation had settled down again into
a system of tenant fanning under great landowners. Side by side with the large
estates there was still, however, much common land for pasturing the beasts of
the poorer villagers, and much land cultivated in strips upon communal lines.
The middling sort of man, and even the poorer sort of man upon the land, were
leading an endurable existence in 1700. The standard of life, the idea, that
is, of what is an endurable existence, was, however, rising during the opening
phase of Grand Monarchy; after a time the process of the upward concentration
of wealth seems to have been resumed, the larger landowners began to acquire
and crowd out the poorer free cultivators, and the proportion of poor people
and of people who felt they were leading impoverished lives increased again.
The bigger men were unchallenged rulers of Great Britain, and they set
themselves to enact laws, the Enclosure Acts, that practically confiscated the
unenclosed and common lands, mainly for the benefit of the larger landowners.
The smaller men sank to the level of wage workers upon the land over which they
had once possessed rights of cultivation and pasture.

The peasant in France and upon the Continent generally was not so expropriated;
his enemy was not the landlord, but the tax-gatherer; he was squeezed on his
land instead of being squeezed off it.

As the eighteenth century progressed, it is apparent in the literature of the
time that what to do with “the poor” was again exercising men’s thoughts. We
find such active-minded English writers as Defoe (1659-1731) and Fielding
(1707-54) deeply exercised by this problem. But as yet there is no such revival
of the communistic and equalitarian ideas of primitive Christianity as
distinguished the time of Wycliffe and John Huss. Protestantism in breaking up
the universal church had for a time broken up the idea of a universal human
solidarity. Even if the universal church of the Middle Ages had failed
altogether to realize that idea, it had at any rate been the symbol of that
idea.

Defoe and Fielding were men of a livelier practical imagination than Gibbon,
and they realized something of the economic processes that were afoot in their
time. So did Oliver Goldsmith (1728-74); his _Deserted Village_ (1770) is a
pamphlet on enclosures disguised as a poem.[417] But Gibbon’s circumstances had
never brought economic facts very vividly before his eyes; he saw the world as
a struggle between barbarism and civilization, but he perceived nothing of that
other struggle over which he floated, the mute, unconscious struggle of the
commonalty against able, powerful, rich, and selfish men. He did not perceive
the accumulation of stresses that were presently to strain and break up all the
balance of his “twelve powerful, though unequal, kingdoms,” his “three
respectable commonwealths,” and their rag, tag, and bobtail of independent
minor princes, reigning dukes, and so forth. Even the civil war that had begun
in the British colonies in America did not rouse him to the nearness of what we
now call “Democracy.”

From what we have been saying hitherto, the reader may suppose that the
squeezing of the small farmer and the peasant off the land by the great
landowners, the mere grabbing of commons and the concentration of property in
the hands of a powerful privileged and greedy class, was all that was happening
to the English land in the eighteenth century. So we do but state the worse
side of the change. Concurrently with this change of ownership there was going
on a great improvement in agriculture. There can be little doubt that the
methods of cultivation pursued by the peasants, squatters, and small farmers
were antiquated, wasteful, and comparatively unproductive, and that the larger
private holdings and estates created by the Enclosure Acts were much more
productive (one authority says twenty times more productive) than the old ways.
The change was perhaps a necessary one and the evil of it was not that it was
brought about, but that it was brought about so as to increase both wealth and
the numbers of the poor. Its benefits were intercepted by the bigger private
owners. The community was injured to the great profit of this class.

And here we come upon one of the chief problems of our lives at the present
time, the problem of the deflection of the profits of progress. For two hundred
years there has been, mainly under the influence of the spirit of science and
enquiry, a steady improvement in the methods of production of almost everything
that humanity requires. If our sense of community and our social science were
equal to the tasks required of them, there can be little question that this
great increment in production would have benefited the whole community, would
have given everyone an amount of education, leisure and freedom such as mankind
had never dreamt of before. But though the common standard of living has risen,
the rise has been on a scale disproportionately small. The rich have developed
a freedom and luxury unknown in the world hitherto, and there has been an
increase in the proportion of rich people and stagnantly prosperous and
unproductive people in the community; but that also fails to account for the
full benefit. There has been much sheer waste. Vast accumulations of material
and energy have gone into warlike preparations and warfare. Much has been
devoted to the futile efforts of unsuccessful business competition. Huge
possibilities have remained undeveloped because of the opposition of owners,
forestallers, and speculators to their economical exploitation. The good things
that science and organization have been bringing within the reach of mankind
have not been taken methodically and used to their utmost, but they have been
scrambled for, snatched at, seized upon by gambling adventurers and employed
upon selfish and vain ends. The eighteenth century in Europe, and more
particularly in Great Britain and Poland, was the age of private ownership.
“Private enterprise,” which meant in practice that everyone was entitled to get
everything he could out of the business of the community, reigned supreme. No
sense of obligation to the state in business matters is to be found in the
ordinary novels, plays, and such like representative literature of the time.
Everyone is out “to make his fortune,” there is no recognition that it is wrong
to be an unproductive parasite on the community, and still less that a
financier or merchant or manufacturer can ever be overpaid for his services to
mankind. This was the moral atmosphere of the time, and those lords and
gentlemen who grabbed the people’s commons, assumed possession of the mines
under their lands, and crushed down the yeoman farmers and peasants to the
status of pauper labourers, had no idea that they were living anything but
highly meritorious lives.

Concurrently with this change in Great Britain from traditional patch
agriculture and common pasture to large and more scientific agriculture, very
great changes were going on in the manufacture of commodities. In these changes
Great Britain was, in the eighteenth century, leading the world. Hitherto,
throughout the whole course of history from the beginnings of civilization,
manufactures, building, and industries generally had been in the hands of
craftsmen and small masters who worked in their own houses. They had been
organized in guilds, and were mostly their own employers. They formed an
essential and permanent middle class. There were capitalists among them, who
let out looms and the like, supplied material, and took the finished product,
but they were not big capitalists. There had been no rich manufacturers. The
rich men of the world before this time had been great landowners or
money-lenders and money manipulators or merchants. But in the eighteenth
century, workers in certain industries began to be collected together into
factories in order to produce things in larger quantities through a systematic
division of labour, and the employer, as distinguished from the master worker,
began to be a person of importance. Moreover, mechanical invention was
producing machines that simplified the manual work of production, and were
capable of being driven by water power and presently by steam. In 1765 Watt’s
steam engine was constructed, a very important date in the history of
industrialism.

The cotton industry was one of the first to pass into factory production
(originally with water-driven machinery). The woollen industry followed. At the
same time iron smelting, which had been restrained hitherto to small methods by
the use of charcoal, resorted to coke made from coal, and the coal and iron
industries also began to expand. The iron industry shifted from the wooded
country of Sussex and Surrey to the coal districts. By 1800 this change-over of
industry from a small scale business with small employers to a large scale
production under big employers was well in progress. Everywhere there sprang up
factories using first water then steam power. It was a change of fundamental
importance in human economy. From the dawn of history the manufacturer and
craftsman had been, as we have said, a sort of middle-class townsman. The
machine and the employer now superseded his skill, and he either became an
employer of his fellows, and grew towards wealth and equality with the other
rich classes, or he remained a worker and sank very rapidly to the level of a
mere labourer. This great change in human affairs is known as the Industrial
Revolution. Beginning in Great Britain, it spread during the nineteenth century
throughout the world.

As the Industrial Revolution went on, a great gulf opened between employer and
employed. In the past every manufacturing worker had the hope of becoming an
independent master. Even the slave craftsmen of Babylon and Rome were protected
by laws that enabled them to save and buy their freedom and to set up for
themselves. But now a factory and its engines and machines became a vast and
costly thing, measured by the scale of the worker’s pocket. Wealthy men had to
come together to create an enterprise; credit and plant, that is to say,
“Capital,” were required. “Setting up for oneself” ceased to be a normal hope
for an artisan. The worker was henceforth a worker from the cradle to the
grave. Besides the landlords and merchants and the money-dealers who financed
trading companies and lent their money to the merchants and the state, there
arose now this new wealth of industrial capital--a new sort of power in the
state.

Of the working out of these beginnings we shall tell later. The immediate
effect of the industrial revolution upon the countries to which it came was to
cause a vast, distressful shifting and stirring of the mute, uneducated,
leaderless, and now more and more propertyless common population. The small
cultivators and peasants, ruined and dislodged by the Enclosure Acts, drifted
towards the new manufacturing regions, and there they joined the families of
the impoverished and degraded craftsmen in the factories. Great towns of
squalid houses came into existence. Nobody seems to have noted clearly what was
going on at the time. It is the keynote of “private enterprise” to mind one’s
own business, secure the utmost profit, and disregard any other consequences.
Ugly great factories grew up, built as cheaply as possible, to hold as many
machines and workers as possible. Around them gathered the streets of workers’
homes, built at the cheapest rate, without space, without privacy, barely
decent, and let at the utmost rent that could be exacted. These new industrial
centres were at first without schools, without churches.... The English
gentleman of the closing decades of the eighteenth century read Gibbon’s third
volume and congratulated himself that there was henceforth no serious fear of
the Barbarians, with this new barbarism growing up, with this metamorphosis of
his countrymen into something dark and desperate, in full progress, within an
easy walk perhaps of his door.

