# BOOK II - XI - § 1
[Metadata]: # {03.04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.01}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

NEOLITHIC MAN IN EUROPE[45]

§ 1. _The Age of Cultivation Begins._ § 2. _Where Did the Neolithic
Culture Arise?_ § 3. _Everyday Neolithic Life._ § 4. _How Did      Sowing
Begin?_ § 5. _Primitive Trade._ § 6. _The Flooding of the      Mediterranean
Valley._

# § 1
THE Neolithic phase of human affairs began in Europe about 10,000 or 12,000
years ago. But probably men had reached the Neolithic stage elsewhere some
thousands of years earlier.[46] Neolithic men came slowly into Europe from the
south or south-east as the reindeer and the open steppes gave way to forest and
modern European conditions.

The Neolithic stage in culture is characterized by: (1) the presence of
polished stone implements, and in particular the stone _axe_, which was
perforated so as to be the more effectually fastened to a wooden handle, and
which was probably used rather for working wood than in conflict. There are
also abundant arrow heads. The fact that some implements are polished does not
preclude the presence of great quantities of implements of unpolished stone.
But there are differences in the make between even the unpolished tools of the
Neolithic and of the Palæolithic Period. (2) The beginning of a sort of
agriculture, and the use of plants and seeds. But at first there are abundant
evidences that hunting was still of great importance in the Neolithic Age.
Neolithic man did not at first sit down to his agriculture. He took snatch
crops. He settled later. (3) Pottery and proper cooking. The horse is no longer
eaten. (4) Domesticated animals. The dog appears very early. The Neolithic man
had domesticated cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs. He was a huntsman turned
herdsman of the herds he once hunted.[47] (5) Plaiting and weaving.

These Neolithic people probably “migrated” into Europe, in the same way that
the Reindeer Men had migrated before them; that is to say, generation by
generation and century by century, as the climate changed, they spread after
their accustomed food. They were not “nomads.” Nomadism, like civilization, had
still to be developed. At present we are quite unable to estimate how far the
Neolithic peoples were new-comers and how far their arts were developed or
acquired by the descendants of some of the hunters and fishers of the Later
Palæolithic Age.

Whatever our conclusions in that matter, this much we may say with certainty;
there is no great break, no further sweeping away of one kind of man and
replacement by another kind between the appearance of the Neolithic way of
living and our own time. There are invasions, conquests, extensive emigrations
and intermixtures, but the races as a whole carry on and continue to adapt
themselves to the areas into which they began to settle in the opening of the
Neolithic Age. The Neolithic men of Europe were white men ancestral to the
modern Europeans. They may have been of a darker complexion than many of their
descendants; of that we cannot speak with certainty. But there is no real break
in culture from their time onward until we reach the age of coal, steam, and
power-driven machinery that began in the eighteenth century.

After a long time gold, the first known of the metals, appears among the bone
ornaments with jet and amber. Irish Neolithic remains are particularly rich in
gold. Then, perhaps 6000 or 7000 years ago in Europe, Neolithic people began to
use copper in certain centres, making out of it implements of much the same
pattern as their stone ones. They cast the copper in moulds made to the shape
of the stone implements. Possibly they first found native copper and hammered
it into shape.[48] Later--we will not venture upon figures--men had found out
how to get copper from its ore. Perhaps, as Lord Avebury suggested, they
discovered the secret of smelting by the chance putting of lumps of copper ore
among the ordinary stones with which they built the fire pits they used for
cooking. In China, Hungary, Cornwall, and elsewhere copper ore and tinstone
occur in the same veins; it is a very common association, and so, rather
through dirtiness than skill, the ancient smelters, it may be, hit upon the
harder and better bronze, which is an alloy of copper and tin.[49] Bronze is
not only harder than copper, but the mixture of tin and copper is more fusible
and easier to reduce. The so-called “pure-copper” implements usually contain a
small proportion of tin, and there are no tin implements known, nor very much
evidence to show that early men knew of tin as a separate metal.[50][51] The
plant of a prehistoric copper smelter has been found in Spain, and the material
of bronze foundries in various localities. The method of smelting revealed by
these finds carries out Lord Avebury’s suggestion. In India, where zinc and
copper ore occur together, brass (which is an alloy of the two metals) was
similarly hit upon.

So slight was the change in fashions and methods produced by the appearance of
bronze, that for a long time such bronze axes and so forth as were made were
cast in moulds to the shape of the stone implements they were superseding.

[Illustration: Neolithic Implements]

Finally, perhaps as early as 3000 years ago in Europe, and even earlier in Asia
Minor, men began to smelt iron. Once smelting was known to men, there is no
great marvel in the finding of iron. They smelted iron by blowing up a charcoal
fire, and wrought it by heating and hammering. They produced it at first in
comparatively small pieces;[52] its appearance worked a gradual revolution in
weapons and implements; but it did not suffice to change the general character
of men’s surroundings. Much the same daily life that was being led by the more
settled Neolithic men 10,000 years ago was being led by peasants in
out-of-the-way places all over Europe at the beginning of the eighteenth
century.[53]

People talk of the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age in Europe, but
it is misleading to put these ages as if they were of equal importance in
history. Much truer is it to say that there was:

(1) An _Early Palæolithic Age_, of vast duration; (2) a _Later Palæolithic
Age_, that lasted not a tithe of the time; and (3) the Age of Cultivation, the
age of the white men in Europe, which began 10,000 or at most 12,000 years ago,
of which the Neolithic Period was the beginning, and which is still going on.

