# BOOK I - VII - § 2
[Metadata]: # {02.07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.07.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF OUR WORLD




THE OUTLINE OF HISTORY

THE AGE OF MAMMALS

§ 1. _A New Age of Light._ § 2. _Tradition Comes into the World._ §
3. _An Age of Brain Growth._ § 4. _The World Grows Hard Again._ §      5.
_Chronology of the Ice Age._

# § 2
In the forests and following the grass over the Eocene plains there appeared
for the first time a variety and abundance of mammals. Before we proceed to any
description of these mammals, it may be well to note in general terms what a
mammal is.

[Illustration: Some Oligocene Mammals]

From the appearance of the vertebrated animals in the Lower Palæozoic Age, when
the fish first swarmed out into the sea, there has been a steady progressive
development of vertebrated creatures. A fish is a vertebrated animal that
breathes by gills and can live only in water. An amphibian may be described as
a fish that has added to its gill-breathing the power of breathing air with its
swimming-bladder in adult life, and that has also developed limbs with five
toes to them in place of the fins of a fish. A tadpole is for a time a fish; it
becomes a land creature as it develops. A reptile is a further stage in this
detachment from water; it is an amphibian that is no longer amphibious; it
passes through its tadpole stage--its fish stage, that is--in an egg. From the
beginning it must breathe in air; it can never breathe under water as a tadpole
can do. Now, a modern mammal is really a sort of reptile that has developed a
peculiarly effective protective covering, hair; and that also retains its eggs
in the body until they hatch so that it brings forth living young (viviparous),
and even after birth it cares for them and feeds them by its mammæ for a longer
or shorter period. Some reptiles, some vipers for example, are viviparous, but
none stand by their young as the real mammals do. Both the birds and the
mammals, which escaped whatever destructive forces made an end to the Mesozoic
reptiles, and which survived to dominate the Cainozoic world, have these two
things in common: first, a far more effective protection against changes of
temperature than any other variation of the reptile type ever produced; and,
secondly, a peculiar care for their eggs, the bird by incubation and the mammal
by retention, and a disposition to look after the young for a certain period
after hatching or birth. There is by comparison the greatest carelessness about
offspring in the reptile.

Hair was evidently the earliest distinction of the mammals from the rest of the
reptiles. It is doubtful if the particular Theriodont reptiles who were
developing hair in the early Mesozoic were viviparous. Two mammals survive to
this day which not only do not suckle their young,[17] but which lay eggs, the
_Ornithorhynchus_ and the _Echidna_, and in the Eocene there were a number of
allied forms. They are the survivors of what was probably a much larger number
and variety of small egg-laying hairy creatures, hairy reptiles, hoppers,
climbers, and runners, which included the Mesozoic ancestors of all existing
mammals up to and including man.

Now we may put the essential facts about mammalian reproduction in another way.
_The mammal is a family animal._ And the family habit involved the possibility
of a new sort of continuity of experience in the world. Compare the completely
closed-in life of an individual lizard with the life of even a quite lowly
mammal of almost any kind. The former has no mental continuity with anything
beyond itself; it is a little self-contained globe of experience that serves
its purpose and ends; but the latter “picks up” from its mother, and “hands on”
to its offspring. All the mammals, except for the two genera we have named, had
already before the lower Eocene age arrived at this stage of pre-adult
dependence and imitation. They were all more or less imitative in youth and
capable of a certain modicum of education; they all, as a part of their
development, received a certain amount of care and example and even direction
from their mother. This is as true of the hyæna and rhinoceros as it is of the
dog or man; the difference of educability is enormous, but the fact of
protection and educability in the young stage is undeniable. So far as the
vertebrated animals go, these new mammals, with their viviparous,
young-protecting disposition, and these new birds, with their incubating,
young-protecting disposition, introduce at the opening of the Cainozoic period
a fresh thing into the expanding story of life, namely, social association, the
addition to hard and inflexible instinct of _tradition_, and the nervous
organization necessary to receive tradition.

All the innovations that come into the history of life begin very humbly. The
supply of blood-vessels in the swimming-bladder of the mudfish in the lower
Palæozoic torrent-river, that enabled it to pull through a season of drought,
would have seemed at that time to that bodiless visitant to our planet we have
already imagined, a very unimportant side fact in that ancient world of great
sharks and plated fishes, sea-scorpions, and coral reefs and seaweed; but it
opened the narrow way by which the land vertebrates arose to predominance. The
mudfish would have seemed then a poor refugee from the too crowded and
aggressive life of the sea. But once lungs were launched into the world, every
line of descent that had lungs went on improving them. So, too, in the upper
Palæozoic, the fact that some of the Amphibia were losing their
“amphibiousness” by a retardation of hatching of their eggs, would have
appeared a mere response to the distressful dangers that threatened the young
tadpole. Yet that prepared the conquest of the dry land for the triumphant
multitude of the Mesozoic reptiles. It opened a new direction towards a free
and vigorous land-life along which all the reptilian animals moved. And this
viviparous, young-tending training that the ancestral mammalia underwent during
that age of inferiority and hardship for them, set going in the world a new
continuity of perception, of which even man to-day only begins to appreciate
the significance.

