# BOOK VIII - XL - § 12
[Metadata]: # {10.05.10}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.10}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 12
This homunculus in a bottle which it was hoped might become at last Man ruling
the Earth, this League of Nations as it was embodied in the Covenant of April
28th, 1919, was not a league of peoples at all; it was a league of “states,
dominions, or colonies.” It was stipulated that these should be “fully
self-governing,” but there was no definition whatever of this phrase. There was
no bar to a limited franchise and no provision for any direct control by the
people of any state. India figured--presumably as a “fully self-governing
state!” An autocracy would no doubt have been admissible as a “fully
self-governing” democracy with a franchise limited to one person. The League of
the Covenant of 1919 was, in fact, a league of “representatives” of foreign
offices, and it did not even abolish the nonsense of embassies at every
capital. The British Empire appeared once as a whole, and then India (!) and
the four dominions of Canada, Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand appeared
as separate sovereign states. The Indian representative was, of course, sure to
be merely a British nominee; the other four would be colonial politicians. But
if the British Empire was to be thus dissected, a representative of Great
Britain should have been substituted for the Imperial representative, and
Ireland and Egypt should also have been given representation. Moreover, either
New York State or Virginia was historically and legally almost as much a
sovereign state as New Zealand or Canada. The inclusion of India raised logical
claims for French Africa and French Asia. One French representative did propose
a separate vote for the little principality of Monaco.

There was to be an assembly of the League in which every member state was to be
represented and to have an equal voice, but the working directorate of the
league was to vest in a Council, which was to consist of the representatives of
the United States, Britain, France, Italy, and Japan, with four other members
elected by the Assembly. The Council was to meet once a year; the gatherings of
the Assembly were to be at “stated intervals,” not stated.

Except in certain specified instances the league of this Covenant could make
only unanimous decisions. One dissentient on the council could bar any
proposal--on the lines of the old Polish _liberum veto_ (chapter xxxvi, § 7).
This was a quite disastrous provision. To many minds it made the Covenant
League rather less desirable than no league at all. It was a complete
recognition of the unalienable sovereignty of states, and a repudiation of the
idea of an over-riding commonweal of mankind. This provision practically barred
the way to all amendments to the league constitution in future except by the
clumsy expedient of a simultaneous withdrawal of the majority of member states
desiring a change, to form the league again on new lines. The covenant made
inevitable such a final winding-up of the league it created, and that was
perhaps the best thing about it.

The following powers, it was proposed, should be excluded from the original
league: Germany, Austria, Russia, and whatever remains there were of the
Turkish Empire. But any of these might subsequently be included with the assent
of two thirds of the Assembly. The original membership of the league as
specified in the projected Covenant was: the United States of America, Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, the British Empire (Canada, Australia, South Africa, New
Zealand, and India), China, Cuba, Ecuador, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
the Hedjas, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Rumania, the Serb-Croat-Slovene State, Siam, Czecho-Slovakia, and
Uruguay. To which were to be added by invitation the following powers which had
been neutral in the war: the Argentine Republic, Chile, Colombia, Denmark,
Holland, Norway, Paraguay, Persia, Salvador, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and
Venezuela.

Such being the constitution of the league, it is scarcely to be wondered at
that its powers were special and limited. It was given a seat at Geneva and a
secretariat. It had no powers even to inspect the military preparations of its
constituent states, or to instruct a military and naval staff to plan out the
armed co-operation needed to keep the peace of the world. The French
representative in the League of Nations Commission, M. Leon Bourgeois, insisted
lucidly and repeatedly on the logical necessity of such powers. As a speaker he
was rather copious and lacking in “spice” of the Clemenceau quality. The final
scene in the plenary session of April 28th, before the adoption of the
Covenant, is described compactly by Mr. Wilson Harris, the crowded Banqueting
Hall at the Quai d’Orsay, with its “E” of tables for the delegates, with
secretaries and officials lining the walls and a solid mass of journalists at
the lower end of the room. “At the head of the room the ‘Big Three’ _diverted
themselves in undertones_ at the expense of the worthy M. Bourgeois, now
launched, with the help of what must have been an entirely superfluous sheaf of
notes, on the fifth rendering of his speech in support of his famous
amendments.”

They were so often “diverting themselves in undertones,” those three men whom
God had mocked with the most tremendous opportunity in history. Keynes (_op.
cit._) gives other instances of the levities, vulgarities, disregards,
inattentions, and inadequacies of these meetings.

This poor Covenant arrived at in this fashion returned with President Wilson to
America, and there it was subjected to an amount of opposition, criticism, and
revision which showed, among other things, how relatively unimpaired was the
mental energy of the United States. It was manifest that the people of America
had no mind to a compact that was virtually little more than a league of allied
imperialisms for mutual insurance. The Senate refused to ratify the covenant,
and the first meeting of the League Council was held therefore without American
representatives. The close of 1919 and the opening months of 1920 saw a very
curious change come over American feeling after the pro-French and pro-British
enthusiasms of the war period. The peace negotiations reminded the Americans,
in a confused and very irritating way, of their profound differences in
international outlook from any European power that the war had for a time
helped them to forget. They felt they had been “rushed” into many things
without due consideration. They experienced a violent revulsion towards that
policy of isolation that had broken down in 1917. The close of 1919 saw a
phase, a very understandable phase, of passionate and even violent
“Americanism,” in which European imperialism and European socialism were
equally anathema. There may have been a sordid element in the American
disposition to “cut” the moral responsibilities the United States had incurred
in the affairs of the Old World, and to realize the enormous financial and
political advantages the war had given the new world; but the broad instinct of
the American people seems to have been sound in its distrust of the proposed
settlement.

[Illustration: GERMANY after the PEACE TREATY of 1919]

