# BOOK VIII - XXXVII - § 3
[Metadata]: # {10.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {10.02.02}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICS OF AMERICA AND FRANCE

§ 1. _Inconveniences of the Great Power System._ § 2. _The Thirteen
Colonies before Their Revolt._ § 3. _Civil War is Forced upon the
Colonies._ § 4. _The War of Independence._ § 5. _The Constitution      of the
United States._ § 6. _Primitive Features of the United      States
Constitution._ § 7. _Revolutionary Ideas in France._ § 8.      _The Revolution
of the Year 1789._ § 9. _The French “Crowned      Republic” of ‘89-91._ § 10.
_The Revolutions of the Jacobins._ §      11. _The Jacobin Republic, 1792-94._
§ 12. _The Directory._ § 13.      _The Pause in Reconstruction and the Dawn of
Modern Socialism._


§ 1[418]

When Gibbon, nearly a century and a half ago, was congratulating the world of
refined and educated people that the age of great political and social
catastrophes was past, he was neglecting many signs which we--in the wisdom of
accomplished facts--could have told him portended far heavier jolts and
dislocations than any he foresaw. We have told how the struggle of the
sixteenth and seventeenth-century princes for ascendancies and advantages
developed into a more cunning and complicated struggle of foreign offices,
masquerading as idealized “Great Powers,” as the eighteenth century wore on.
The intricate and pretentious art of diplomacy developed. The “Prince” ceased
to be a single and secretive Machiavellian schemer, and became merely the
crowned symbol of a Machiavellian scheme. Prussia, Russia, and Austria fell
upon and divided Poland. France was baffled in profound schemes against Spain.
Britain circumvented the “designs of France” in America and acquired Canada,
and got the better of France in India. And then a remarkable thing occurred, a
thing very shocking to European diplomacy. The British colonies in America
flatly refused to have further part or lot in this game of “Great Powers.” They
objected that they had no voice and no great interest in these European schemes
and conflicts, and they refused to bear any portion of the burthen of taxation
these foreign policies entailed.

Of course this decision did not flash out complete and finished from the
American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the eighteenth
century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an entire
willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to leave foreign
affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But there was an equally
strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be neither taxed nor interfered
with in their ordinary pursuits. These are incompatible wishes. Common men
cannot shirk world politics and at the same time enjoy private freedom; but it
has taken them countless generations to learn this. The first impulse in the
American revolt against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against the taxation and interference that followed necessarily from
“foreign policy” without any clear recognition of what was involved in that
objection. It was only when the revolt was consummated that the people of the
American colonies recognized at all clearly that they had repudiated the Great
Power view of life. The sentence in which that repudiation was expressed was
Washington’s injunction to “avoid entangling alliances.” From his time until
the year 1917 the united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated
and independent as the United States of America, stood apart altogether from
the blood-stained intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign offices. Soon
after (1810-1823) they were able to extend their principle of detachment to the
rest of the continent, and to make all the New World “out of bounds” for the
scheming expansionists of the old. When at length, in 1917, they were obliged
to re-enter the arena of world politics, it was to bring the new spirit and new
aims their aloofness had enabled them to develop into the tangle of
international relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof.
Since the treaty of Westphalia (1648), the confederated states of Switzerland,
in their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion from the
schemes of kings and empires.

But since the North American peoples are now to play an increasingly important
part in our history, it will be well to devote a little more attention than we
have hitherto given to their development. We have already glanced at this story
in § 8 of the preceding chapter. We will now tell a little more fully--though
still in the barest outline--what these colonies were, whose recalcitrance was
so disconcerting to the king and ministers of Great Britain in their diplomatic
game against the rest of mankind.[419]

# § 3
We have noted in the previous chapter how the governing class of Great Britain
steadily acquired the land and destroyed the liberty of the common people
throughout the eighteenth century, and how greedily and blindly the new
industrial revolution was brought about. We have noted also how the British
Parliament, through the decay of the representative methods of the House of
Commons, had become both in its upper and lower houses merely the instrument of
government through the big landowners. Both these big property-holders and the
crown were deeply interested in America; the former as private adventurers, the
latter partly as representing the speculative exploitations of the Stuart
kings, and partly as representing the state in search of funds for the expenses
of foreign policy, and neither lords nor crown were disposed to regard the
traders, planters, and common people of the colonies with any more
consideration than they did the yeomen and small cultivators at home. At bottom
the interests of the common man in Great Britain, Ireland, and America were the
same. Each was being squeezed by the same system. But while in Britain
oppressor and oppressed were closely tangled up in one intimate social system,
in America the crown and the exploiter were far away, and men could get
together and develop a sense of community against their common enemy.

Moreover, the American colonist had the important advantage of possessing a
separate and legal organ of resistance to the British government in the
assembly or legislature of his colony that was necessary for the management of
local affairs. The common man in Britain, cheated out of his proper
representation in the Commons, had no organ, no centre of expression and action
for his discontents.

It will be evident to the reader, bearing in mind the variety of the colonies,
that here was the possibility of an endless series of disputes, aggressions,
and counter-aggressions. The story of the development of irritations between
the colonies and Britain is a story far too intricate, subtle, and lengthy for
the scheme of this _Outline_. Suffice it that the grievances fell under three
main heads: attempts to secure for British adventurers or the British
government the profits of the exploitation of new lands; systematic
restrictions upon trade designed to keep the foreign trade of the colonies
entirely in British hands, so that the colonial exports all went through
Britain and only British-made goods were used in America;[426] and finally
attempts at taxation through the British Parliament as the supreme taxing
authority of the empire. Under the pressure of this triple system of
annoyances, the American colonists were forced to do a very considerable amount
of hard political thinking. Such men as Patrick Henry and James Otis began to
discuss the fundamental ideas of government and political association very much
as they had been discussed in England in the great days of Cromwell’s
Commonweal. They began to deny both the divine origin of kingship and the
supremacy of the British Parliament, and (James Otis, 1762[427]) to say such
things as:--

“God made all men naturally equal.

“Ideas of earthly superiority are educational, not innate.

“Kings were made for the good of the people, and not the people for them.

“No government has a right to make slaves of its subjects.

“Though most governments are _de facto_ arbitrary, and consequently the curse
and scandal of human nature, yet none are _de jure_ arbitrary.”

Some of which propositions reach far.

This ferment in the political ideas of the Americans was started by English
leaven. One very influential English writer was John Locke (1632-1704), whose
_Two Treatises on Civil Government_ may be taken, as much as any one single
book can be taken in such cases, as the point of departure for modern
democratic ideas. He was the son of a Cromwellian soldier, he was educated at
Christ Church, Oxford, during the republican ascendancy, he spent some years in
Holland in exile, and his writings form a bridge between the bold political
thinking of those earlier republican days and the revolutionary movement both
in America and France.

But men do not begin to act upon theories. It is always some real danger, some
practical necessity, that produces action; and it is only after action has
destroyed old relationships and produced a new and perplexing state of affairs
that theory comes to its own. Then it is that theory is put to the test. The
discord in interests and ideas between the colonists was brought to a fighting
issue by the obstinate resolve of the British Parliament after the peace of
1763 to impose taxation upon the American colonies. Britain was at peace and
flushed with successes; it seemed an admirable opportunity for settling
accounts with these recalcitrant settlers. But the great British
property-owners found a power beside their own, of much the same mind with
them, but a little divergent in its ends--the reviving crown. King George III,
who had begun his reign in 1760, was resolved to be much more of a king than
his two German predecessors. He could speak English; he claimed to “glory in
the name of Briton”--and indeed it is not a bad name for a man without a
perceptible drop of English, Welsh, or Scotch blood in his veins. In the
American colonies and the overseas possessions generally, with their indefinite
charters or no charters at all, it seemed to him that the crown might claim
authority and obtain resources and powers absolutely denied to it by the strong
and jealous aristocracy in Britain. This inclined many of the Whig noblemen to
a sympathy with the colonists that they might not otherwise have shown. They
had no objection to the exploitation of the colonies in the interests of
British “private enterprise,” but they had very strong objections to the
strengthening of the crown by that exploitation so as to make it presently
independent of themselves.[428]

The war that broke out was therefore in reality not a war between Britain and
the colonists, it was a war between the British government and the colonists,
with a body of Whig noblemen and a considerable amount of public feeling in
England on the side of the latter. An early move after 1763 was an attempt to
raise revenue for Britain in the colonies by requiring that newspapers and
documents of various sorts should be stamped. This was stiffly resisted, the
British crown was intimidated, and the Stamp Acts were repealed (1766). Their
repeal was greeted by riotous rejoicings in London, more hearty even than those
in the colonies.

But the Stamp Act affair was only one eddy in a turbulent stream flowing
towards civil war. Upon a score of pretexts, and up and down the coast, the
representatives of the British government were busy asserting their authority
and making British government intolerable. The quartering of soldiers upon the
colonists was a great nuisance. Rhode Island was particularly active in defying
the trade restrictions; the Rhode Islanders were “free traders,”--that is to
say, smugglers; a government schooner, the _Gaspee_, ran aground off
Providence; she was surprised, boarded, and captured by armed men in boats, and
burnt. In 1773, with a total disregard of the existing colonial tea trade,
special advantages for the importation of tea into America[429] were given by
the British Parliament to the East India Company. It was resolved by the
colonists to refuse and boycott this tea. When the tea importers at Boston
showed themselves resolute to land their cargoes, a band of men disguised as
Indians, in the presence of a great crowd of people, boarded the three tea
ships and threw the tea overboard (December 16th, 1773).

All 1774 was occupied in the gathering up of resources on either side for the
coming conflict. It was decided by the British Parliament in the spring of 1774
to punish Boston by closing her port. Her trade was to be destroyed unless she
accepted that tea. It was a quite typical instance of that silly “firmness”
which shatters empires. In order to enforce this measure, British troops were
concentrated at Boston under General Gage. The colonists took counter-measures.
The first colonial Congress met at Philadelphia in September, at which twelve
colonies were represented: Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, and
North and South Carolina. Georgia was not present. True to the best English
traditions, the Congress documented its attitude by a “Declaration of Rights.”
Practically this Congress was an insurrectionary government, but no blow was
struck until the spring of 1775. Then came the first shedding of blood.

Two of the American leaders, Hancock and Samuel Adams, had been marked down by
the British Government for arrest and trial for treason; they were known to be
at Lexington, about eleven miles from Boston; and in the night of April 18th,
1775, Gage set his forces in motion for their arrest.

That night was a momentous one in history. The movement of Gage’s troops had
been observed, signal lanterns were shown from a church tower in Boston, and
two men, Dawes and Paul Revere, stole away in boats across the Back Bay to take
horse and warn the countryside. The British were also ferried over the water,
and as they marched through the night towards Lexington, the firing of signal
cannon and the ringing of church bells went before them. As they entered
Lexington at dawn, they saw a little company of men drawn up in military
fashion. It seems that the British fired first. There was a single shot and
then a volley, and the little handful decamped, apparently without any
answering shots, leaving eight dead and nine wounded upon the village green.

The British then marched on to Concord, ten miles further, occupied the
village, and stationed a party on the bridge at that place. The expedition had
failed in its purpose of arresting Hancock and Adams, and the British commander
seems to have been at a loss what to do next. Meanwhile the colonial levies
were coming up from all directions, and presently the picket upon the bridge
found itself subjected to an increasing fire from a gathering number of
assailants firing from behind trees and fences. A retreat to Boston was decided
upon. It was a disastrous retreat. The country had risen behind the British;
all the morning the colonials had been gathering. Both sides of the road were
now swarming with sharpshooters firing from behind rock and fence and building;
the soldiers were in conspicuous scarlet uniforms, with yellow facings and
white gaiters and cravats; this must have stood out very vividly against the
cold sharp colours of the late New England spring; the day was bright, hot, and
dusty, and they were already exhausted by a night march. Every few yards a man
fell, wounded or killed. The rest tramped on, or halted to fire an ineffectual
volley. No counter-attack was possible. Their assailants lurked everywhere. At
Lexington there were British reinforcements and two guns, and after a brief
rest the retreat was resumed in better order. But the sharpshooting and pursuit
was pressed to the river, and after the British had crossed back into Boston,
the colonial levies took up their quarters in Cambridge and prepared to
blockade the city.

