# BOOK IV - XXII - § 5
[Metadata]: # {05.02.05}
[Descriptor]: # {05.02.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK IV
XXII
§ 5
# § 5
Now while one series of Aryan-speaking invaders had developed along the lines
we have described in Greece, Magna Græcia, and around the shores of the Black
Sea, another series of Aryan-speaking peoples, whose originally Nordic blood
was perhaps already mixed with a Mongolian element, were settling and spreading
to the north and east of the Assyrian and Babylonian empires. We have already
spoken of the arc-like dispersion of the Nordic Aryan peoples to the north of
the Black and Caspian Seas; it was probably by this route that the
Aryan-speaking races gradually came down into what is now the Persian country,
and spread, on the one hand, eastward to India (? 2000 to 1000 B.C.), and on
the other, increased and multiplied in the Persian uplands until they were
strong enough to assail first Assyria (650 B.C.) and then Babylon (538 B.C.).

There is much that is not yet clear about the changes of climate that have been
going on in Europe and Asia during the last 10,000 years. The ice of the last
glacial age receded gradually, and gave way to a long period of steppe or
prairie-like conditions over the great plain of Europe. About 12,000 or 10,000
years ago, as it is reckoned now, this state of affairs was giving place to
forest conditions. We have already noted how, as a consequence of these
changes, the Solutrian horse hunters gave place to Magdalenian fishers and
forest deer hunters; and these, again, to the Neolithic herdsmen and
agriculturists. For some thousands of years the European climate seems to have
been warmer than it is to-day. A great sea spread from the coast of the Balkan
peninsula far into Central Asia and extended northward into Central Russia, and
the shrinkage of that sea and the consequent hardening of the climate of south
Russia and Central Asia was going on contemporaneously with the development of
the first civilizations in the river valleys. Many facts seem to point to a
more genial climate in Europe and western Asia, and still more strongly to a
greater luxuriance of plant and vegetable life, 4000 to 3000 years ago, than we
find to-day. There were forests then in south Russia and in the country which
is now Western Turkestan, where now steppes and deserts prevail. On the other
hand, between 1500 and 2000 years ago, the Aral-Caspian region was probably
drier and those seas smaller than they are at the present time.

We may note in this connection that Thotmes III (say, the fifteenth century
B.C.), in his expedition beyond the Euphrates, hunted a herd of 120 elephants
in that region. Again, an Ægean dagger from Mycenæ, dating about 2000 B.C.,
shows a lion-hunt in progress. The hunters carry big shields and spears, and
stand in rows one behind the other. The first man spears the lion, and when the
wounded beast leaps at him, drops flat under the protection of his big shield,
leaving the next man to repeat his stroke, and so on, until the lion is speared
to death. This method of hunting is practised by the Masai to-day, and could
only have been worked out by a people in a land where lions were abundant. But
abundant lions imply abundant game, and that again means abundant vegetation.
About 2000 B.C. the hardening of the climate in the central parts of the Old
World, to which we have already referred, which put an end to elephants and
lions in Asia Minor and Greece,[178] was turning the faces of the nomadic Aryan
peoples southward towards the fields and forests of the more settled and
civilized nations.

These Aryan peoples come down from the East Caspian regions into history about
the time that Mycenæ and Troy and Cnossos are falling to the Greeks. It is
difficult to disentangle the different tribes and races that appear under a
multitude of names in the records and inscriptions that record their first
appearance, but, fortunately, these distinctions are not needed in an
elementary outline such as this present history. A people called the Cimmerians
appear in the districts of Lake Urumiya and Van, and shortly after Aryans have
spread from Armenia to Elam. In the ninth century B.C. a people called the
Medes, very closely related to the Persians to the east of them, appear in the
Assyrian inscriptions. Tiglath Pileser III and Sargon II, names already
familiar in this story, profess to have made them pay tribute. They are spoken
of in the inscriptions as the “dangerous Medes.” They are as yet a tribal
people, not united under one king.

About the ninth century B.C. Elam and the Elamites, whose capital was Susa, a
people which possessed a tradition and civilization at least as old as the
Sumerian, suddenly vanish from history. We do not know what happened. They seem
to have been overrun and the population absorbed by the conquerors. Susa is in
the hands of the Persians.

[Illustration: Scythians ... as portrayed by a Greek artist....

ONE OF THE FEW EXISTING REPRESENTATIONS OF THE ANCIENT SCYTHIANS. FROM A GREEK
ELECTRUM VASE.]

A fourth people, related to these Aryan tribes, who appear at this time in the
narrative of Herodotus, are the “Scythians.” For a while the monarchs of
Assyria play off these various kindred peoples, the Cimmerians, the Medes, the
Persians, and the Scythians, against each other. Assyrian princesses (a
daughter of Esarhaddon, _e.g._) are married to Scythian chiefs. Nebuchadnezzar
the Great, on the other hand, marries a daughter of Cyaxares, who has become
king of all the Medes. The Aryan Scythians are for the Semitic Assyrians; the
Aryan Medes for the Semitic Babylonians. It was this Cyaxares who took Nineveh,
the Assyrian capital, in 606 B.C., and so released Babylon from the Assyrian
yoke to establish, under Chaldean rule, the Second Babylonian Empire. The
Scythian allies of Assyria drop out of the story after this. They go on living
their own life away to the north without much interference with the peoples to
the south. A glance at the map of this period shows how, for two-thirds of a
century, the Second Babylonian Empire lay like a lamb within the embrace of the
Median lion.

Into the internal struggles of the Medes and Persians, that ended at last in
the accession of Cyrus “the Persian” to the throne of Cyaxares in 550 B.C., we
will not enter. In that year Cyrus was ruling over an empire that reached from
the boundaries of Lydia to Persia and perhaps to India. Nabonidus, the last of
the Babylonian rulers, was, as we have already told, digging up old records and
building temples in Babylonia.

