# BOOK VIII - XL - § 4
[Metadata]: # {10.05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 4
Our studies of modern imperialism in Germany and Britain bring out certain
forces common to the two countries, and we shall find these same forces at work
in variable degrees and with various modifications in the case of the other
great modern communities at which we shall now glance. This modern imperialism
is not a synthetic uniting movement like the older imperialism; it is
essentially a _megalomaniac nationalism_, a nationalism made aggressive by
prosperity; and always it finds its strongest support in the military and
official castes, and in the enterprising and acquisitive strata of society, in
new money, that is, and big business; its chief critics in the educated poor,
and its chief opponents in the peasantry and the labour masses. It accepts
monarchy where it finds it, but it is not necessarily a monarchist movement. It
does, however, need a foreign office of the traditional type for its full
development. Its origin, which we have traced very carefully in this book of
our history, makes this clear. Modern imperialism is the natural development of
the Great Power system which arose, with the foreign office method of policy,
out of the Machiavellian monarchies after the break-up of Christendom. It will
only come to an end when the intercourse of nations and peoples through
embassies and foreign offices is replaced by an assembly of elected
representatives in direct touch with their peoples.

[Illustration: The BALKAN STATES after the Wars of 1912-13]

French imperialism during the period of the Armed Peace in Europe was naturally
of a less confident type than the German. It called itself “nationalism” rather
than imperialism, and it set itself, by appeals to patriotic pride, to thwart
the efforts of those socialists and rationalists who sought to get into touch
with liberal elements in German life. It brooded upon the _Revanche_, the
return match with Prussia. But in spite of that pre-occupation, it set itself
to the adventure of annexation and exploitation in the Far East and in Africa,
narrowly escaping a war with Britain upon the Fashoda clash (1898), and it
never relinquished a dream of acquisitions in Syria.[494] Italy too caught the
imperialist fever; the blood letting of Adowa cooled her for a time, and then
she resumed in 1911 with a war upon Turkey and the annexation of Tripoli.[495]



The Italian imperialists exhorted their countrymen to forget Mazzini and
remember Julius Cæsar; for were they not the heirs of the Roman Empire?
Imperialism touched the Balkans; little countries not a hundred years from
slavery began to betray exalted intentions; King Ferdinand of Bulgaria assumed
the title of Tsar, the latest of the pseudo-Cæsars, and in the shop-windows of
Athens the curious student could study maps showing the dream of a vast Greek
empire in Europe and Asia.

In 1913 the three states of Serbia, Bulgaria, and Greece fell upon Turkey,
already weakened by her war with Italy, and swept her out of all her European
possessions except the country between Adrianople and Constantinople; later in
that year they quarrelled among themselves over the division of the spoils.
Roumania joined in the game and helped to crush Bulgaria. Turkey recovered
Adrianople. The greater imperialisms of Austria, Russia, and Italy watched that
conflict and one another....

