# BOOK V - XXVII - § 9
[Metadata]: # {06.01.08}
[Descriptor]: # {06.01.08}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK V
XXVII
§ 9
# § 9
The history of the Roman Republic thus far, is in many respects much more
modern in flavour, especially to the American or Western European reader, than
anything that has preceded it. For the first time we have something like a
self-governing “nation,” something larger than a mere city state, seeking to
control its own destinies. For the first time we have a wide countryside under
one conception of law. We get in the Senate and the popular assembly a conflict
of groups and personalities, an argumentative process of control, far more
stable and enduring than any autocracy can be, and far more flexible and
adaptable than any priesthood. For the first time also we encounter social
conflicts comparable to our own. Money has superseded barter, and financial
capital has become fluid and free; not perhaps so fluid and free as it is
to-day, but much more so than it had ever been before. The Punic Wars were wars
of peoples, such as were no other wars we have yet recorded. Indubitably the
broad lines of our present world, the main ideas, the chief oppositions, were
appearing in those days.

But, as we have already pointed out, certain of the elementary facilities and
some of the current political ideas of our time were still wanting in the Rome
of the Punic Wars. There were no newspapers,[242] and there was practically no
use of elected representatives in the popular assemblies. And another
deficiency, very understandable to us nowadays, but quite beyond the scope of
anyone then, was the absence of any general elementary political education at
all. The plebeians of Rome had shown some glimmering of the idea that without
knowledge votes cannot make men free, when they had insisted upon the
publication of the law of the Twelve Tables; but they had never been able, it
was beyond the possibilities of the time, to imagine any further extension of
knowledge to the bulk of the people. It is only nowadays that men are beginning
to understand fully the political significance of the maxim that “knowledge is
power.” Two British Trade Unions, for example, have recently set up a Labour
College to meet the special needs of able working-men in history, political and
social science, and the like. But education in republican Rome was the freak of
the individual parent, and the privilege of wealth and leisure. It was mainly
in the hands of Greeks, who were in many cases slaves. There was a thin small
stream of very fine learning and very fine thinking up to the first century of
the monarchy, let Lucretius and Cicero witness, but it did not spread into the
mass of the people. The ordinary Roman was not only blankly ignorant of the
history of mankind, but also of the conditions of foreign peoples; he had no
knowledge of economic laws nor of social possibilities. Even his own interests
he did not clearly understand.

Of course, in the little city states of Greece and in that early Roman state of
four hundred square miles, men acquired by talk and observation a sufficient
knowledge for the ordinary duties of citizenship, but by the beginning of the
Punic Wars the business was already too big and complicated for illiterate men.
Yet nobody seems to have observed the gap that was opening between the citizen
and his state, and so there is no record at all of any attempt to enlarge the
citizen by instruction to meet his enlarged duties. From the second century
B.C. and onward everyone is remarking upon the ignorance of the common citizen
and his lack of political wisdom, everything is suffering from the lack of
political solidarity due to this ignorance, but no one goes on to what we
should now consider the inevitable corollary, no one proposes to destroy the
ignorance complained of. There existed no means whatever for the instruction of
the masses of the people in a common political and social ideal. It was only
with the development of the great propagandist religions in the Roman world, of
which Christianity was the chief and the survivor, that the possibility of such
a systematic instruction of great masses of people became apparent in the
world. That very great political genius, the Emperor Constantine the Great, six
centuries later, was the first to apprehend and to attempt to use this
possibility for the preservation and the mental and moral knitting-together of
the world community over which he ruled.

[Illustration: Gladiators (from a wall-painting at Pompeii)]

But it is not only in these deficiencies of news and of education and of the
expedient of representative government that this political system of Rome
differed from our own. True, it was far more like a modern civilized state than
any other state we have considered hitherto, but in some matters it was
strangely primordial and “sub-civilized.” Every now and then the reader of
Roman history, reading it in terms of debates and measures, policies and
campaigns, capital and labour, comes upon something that gives him much the
same shock he would feel if he went down to an unknown caller in his house and
extended his hand to meet the misshapen hairy paw of _Homo Neanderthalensis_
and looked up to see a chinless, bestial face. We have noted the occurrence of
human sacrifice in the third century B.C., and much that we learn of the
religion of republican Rome carries us far back beyond the days of decent gods,
to the age of shamanism and magic. We talk of a legislative gathering, and the
mind flies to Westminster; but how should we feel if we went to see the
beginning of a session of the House of Lords, and discovered the Lord
Chancellor, with bloody fingers, portentously fiddling about among the entrails
of a newly killed sheep? The mind would recoil from Westminster to the customs
of Benin. And the slavery of Rome was a savage slavery, altogether viler than
the slavery of Babylon. We have had a glimpse of the virtuous Cato among his
slaves in the second century B.C. Moreover, in the third century B.C., when
King Asoka was ruling India in light and gentleness, the Romans were reviving
an Etruscan sport, the setting on of slaves to fight for their lives. One is
reminded of West Africa again in the origin of this amusement; it grew out of
the prehistoric custom of a massacre of captives at the burial of a chief.
There was a religious touch about this sport, the slaves with hooks, who
dragged the dead bodies out of the arena, wore masks to represent the infernal
ferry-man-god, Charon. In 264 B.C., the very year in which Asoka began to reign
and the First Punic War began, the first recorded gladiatorial combat took
place in the forum at Rome, to celebrate the funeral of a member of the old
Roman family of Brutus. This was a modest display of three couples, but soon
gladiators were fighting by the hundred. The taste for these combats grew
rapidly, and the wars supplied an abundance of captives. The old Roman
moralists, who were so severe upon kissing and women’s ornaments and Greek
philosophy, had nothing but good to say for this new development. So long as
pain was inflicted, Roman morality, it would seem, was satisfied.

If republican Rome was the first of modern self-governing national communities,
she was certainly the “Neanderthal” form of them.

In the course of the next two or three centuries the gladiatorial shows of Rome
grew to immense proportions. To begin with, while wars were frequent, the
gladiators were prisoners of war. They came with their characteristic national
weapons, tattooed Britons, Moors, Scythians, negroes, and the like, and there
was perhaps some military value in these exhibitions. Then criminals of the
lower classes[243] condemned to death were also used. The ancient world did not
understand that a criminal condemned to death still has rights, and at any rate
the use of a criminal as a gladiator was not so bad as his use as “material”
for the vivisectors of the Museum at Alexandria. But as the profits of this
sort of show business grew and the demand for victims increased, ordinary
slaves were sold to the trainers of gladiators, and any slave who had aroused
his owner’s spite might find himself in an establishment for letting out
gladiators. And dissipated young men who had squandered their property, and
lads of spirit, would go voluntarily into the trade for a stated time, trusting
to their prowess to survive. As the business developed, a new use was found for
gladiators as armed retainers; rich men would buy a band, and employ it as a
bodyguard or hire it out for profit at the shows. The festivities of a show
began with a ceremonial procession (_pompa_) and a sham fight (_prælusio_). The
real fighting was heralded by trumpets. Gladiators who objected to fight for
any reason were driven on by whips and hot irons. A wounded man would sometimes
call for pity by holding up his forefinger. The spectators would then either
wave their handkerchiefs in token of mercy, or condemn him to death by holding
out their clenched fists with the thumbs down.[244] The slain and nearly dead
were dragged out to a particular place, the _spoliarium_, where they were
stripped of their arms and possessions, and those who had not already expired
were killed.

This organization of murder as a sport and show serves to measure the great gap
in moral standards between the Roman community and our own. No doubt cruelties
and outrages upon human dignity as monstrous as this still go on in the world,
but they do not go on in the name of the law and without a single dissentient
voice. For it is true that until the time of Seneca (first century A.D.) there
is no record of any plain protest against this business. The conscience of
mankind was weaker and less intelligent then than now. Presently a new power
was to come into the human conscience through the spread of Christianity. The
spirit of Jesus in Christianity became the great antagonist in the later Roman
state of these cruel shows and of slavery, and, as Christianity spread, these
two evil things dwindled and disappeared.[245]

