# BOOK II - XI - § 3
[Metadata]: # {03.04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

NEOLITHIC MAN IN EUROPE[45]

§ 1. _The Age of Cultivation Begins._ § 2. _Where Did the Neolithic
Culture Arise?_ § 3. _Everyday Neolithic Life._ § 4. _How Did      Sowing
Begin?_ § 5. _Primitive Trade._ § 6. _The Flooding of the      Mediterranean
Valley._

# § 3
It will be of interest here to give a brief account of the life of the European
Neolithic people before the appearance of metals. We get our light upon that
life from various sources. They scattered their refuse about, and in some
places (_e.g._ on the Danish coast) it accumulated in great heaps, known as the
kitchen middens. They buried some of their people, but not the common herd,
with great care and distinction, and made huge heaps of earth over their
sepulchres; these heaps are the barrows or dolmens which contribute a feature
to the European, Indian, and American scenery in many districts to this day. In
connection with these mounds, or independently of them, they set up great
stones (megaliths), either singly or in groups, of which Stonehenge in
Wiltshire and Carnac in Brittany are among the best-known examples. In various
places their villages are still traceable.

One fruitful source of knowledge about Neolithic life comes from Switzerland,
and was first revealed by the very dry winter of 1854, when the water level of
one of the lakes, sinking to an unheard-of lowness, revealed the foundations of
prehistoric pile dwellings of the Neolithic and early Bronze Ages, built out
over the water after the fashion of similar homes that exist to-day in Celebes
and elsewhere. Not only were the timbers of those ancient platforms preserved,
but a great multitude of wooden, bone, stone, and earthenware utensils and
ornaments, remains of food and the like, were found in the peaty accumulations
below them. Even pieces of net and garments have been recovered. Similar lake
dwellings existed in Scotland, Ireland, and elsewhere--there are well-known
remains at Glastonbury in Somersetshire; in Ireland lake dwellings were
inhabited from prehistoric times up to the days when O’Neil of Tyrone was
fighting against the English before the plantation of Scotch colonists to
replace the Irish in Ulster in the reign of James I of England. These lake
villages had considerable defensive value, and there was a sanitary advantage
in living over flowing water.

Probably these Neolithic Swiss pile dwellings did not shelter the largest
communities that existed in those days. They were the homes of small
patriarchal groups. Elsewhere upon fertile plains and in more open country
there were probably already much larger assemblies of homes than in those
mountain valleys. There are traces of such a large community of families in
Wiltshire in England, for example; the remains of the stone circle of Avebury
near Silbury mound were once the “finest megalithic ruin in Europe.”[54] It
consisted of two circles of stones surrounded by a larger circle and a ditch,
and covering all together twenty-eight and a half acres. From it two avenues of
stones, each a mile and a half long, ran west and south on either side of
Silbury Hill. Silbury Hill is the largest prehistoric artificial mound in
England. The dimensions of this centre of a faith and a social life now
forgotten altogether by men indicate the concerted efforts and interests of a
very large number of people, widely scattered though they may have been over
the west and south and centre of England. Possibly they assembled at some
particular season of the year in a primitive sort of fair. The whole community
“lent a hand” in building the mounds and hauling the stones. The Swiss
pile-dwellers, on the contrary, seem to have lived in practically
self-contained villages.

[Illustration: Pottery from Lake Dwellings

J.F.H.

(after a drawing in Déchelette’s “Manuel d’Archéologie”)]

[Illustration: Restoration of a Lake dwelling]

These lake-village people were considerably more advanced in methods and
knowledge, and probably much later in time than the early Neolithic people who
accumulated the shell mounds, known as kitchen middens, on the Danish and
Scotch coasts. These kitchen midden folk may have been as early as 10,000 B.C.
or earlier; the lake dwellings were probably occupied continuously from 5000 or
4000 B.C. down almost to historic times. Those early kitchen-midden people were
among the most barbaric of Neolithic peoples, their stone axes were rough, and
they had no domesticated animal except the dog. The lake-dwellers, on the other
hand, had, in addition to the dog, which was of a medium-sized breed, oxen,
goats, and sheep. Later on, as they were approaching the Bronze Age, they got
swine. The remains of cattle and goats prevail in their débris, and, having
regard to the climate and country about them, it seems probable that these
beasts were sheltered in the buildings upon the piles in winter, and that
fodder was stored for them. Probably the beasts lived in the same houses with
the people, as the men and beasts do now in Swiss chalets. The people in the
houses possibly milked the cows and goats, and milk perhaps played as important
a part in their economy as it does in that of the mountain Swiss of to-day. But
of that we are not sure at present. Milk is not a natural food for adults; it
must have seemed queer stuff to take at first; and it may have been only after
much breeding that a continuous supply of milk was secured from cows and goats.
Some people think that the use of milk, cheese, butter, and other milk products
came later into human life when men became nomadic. The writer is, however,
disposed to give the Neolithic men credit for having discovered milking. The
milk, if they did use it (and, no doubt, in that case sour curdled milk also,
but not well-made cheese and butter), they must have kept in earthenware pots,
for they had pottery, though it was roughly hand-made pottery and not the
shapely product of the potter’s wheel. They eked out this food supply by
hunting. They killed and ate red deer and roe deer, bison and wild boar. And
they ate the fox, a rather high-flavoured meat, and not what any one would eat
in a world of plenty. Oddly enough, they do not seem to have eaten the hare,
although it was available as food. They are supposed to have avoided eating it,
as some savages are said to avoid eating it to this day, because they feared
that the flesh of so timid a creature might make them, by a sort of infection,
cowardly.[55]

Of their agricultural methods we know very little. No ploughs and no hoes have
been found. They were of wood and have perished. Neolithic men cultivated and
ate wheat, barley, and millet, but they knew nothing of oats or rye. Their
grain they roasted, ground between stones and stored in pots, to be eaten when
needed. And they made exceedingly solid and heavy bread, because round flat
slabs of it have been got out of these deposits. Apparently they had no yeast.
If they had no yeast, then they had no fermented drink. One sort of barley that
they had is the sort that was cultivated by the ancient Greeks, Romans, and
Egyptians, and they also had an Egyptian variety of wheat, showing that their
ancestors had brought or derived this cultivation from the south-east. The
centre of diffusion of wheat was somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean region.
A wild form is still found in the neighbourhood of Mt. Hermon (see footnote to
Ch. XVI, § 1). When the lake dwellers sowed their little patches of wheat in
Switzerland, they were already following the immemorial practice of mankind.
The seed must have been brought age by age from that distant centre of
diffusion. In the ancestral lands of the south-east men had already been sowing
wheat perhaps for thousands of years.[56] Those lake dwellers also ate peas,
and crab-apples--the only apples that then existed in the world. Cultivation
and selection had not yet produced the apple of to-day.

They dressed chiefly in skins, but they also made a rough cloth of flax.
Fragments of that flaxen cloth have been discovered. Their nets were made of
flax; they had as yet no knowledge of hemp and hempen rope. With the coming of
bronze, their pins and ornaments increased in number. There is reason to
believe they set great store upon their hair, wearing it in large shocks with
pins of bone and afterwards of metal. To judge from the absence of realistic
carvings or engravings or paintings, they either did not decorate their
garments or decorated them with plaids, spots, interlacing designs, or similar
conventional ornament. Before the coming of bronze there is no evidence of
stools or tables; the Neolithic people probably squatted on their clay floors.
There were no cats in these lake dwellings; no mice or rats had yet adapted
themselves to human dwellings; the cluck of the hen was not as yet added to the
sounds of human life, nor the domestic egg to its diet.[57]

The chief tool and weapon of Neolithic man was his axe; his next the bow and
arrow. His arrow heads were of flint, beautifully made, and he lashed them
tightly to their shafts. Probably he prepared the ground for his sowing with a
pole, or a pole upon which he had stuck a stag’s horn. Fish he hooked or
harpooned. These implements no doubt stood about in the interior of the house,
from the walls of which hung his fowling-nets. On the floor, which was of clay
or trodden cow-dung (after the fashion of hut floors in India to-day), stood
pots and jars and woven baskets containing grain, milk, and such-like food.
Some of the pots and pans hung by rope loops to the walls. At one end of the
room, and helping to keep it warm in winter by their animal heat, stabled the
beasts. The children took the cows and goats out to graze, and brought them in
at night before the wolves and bears came prowling.

[Illustration: _Hut urns, the first probably representing a lake-dwelling....
After Lubbock._]

Since Neolithic man had the bow, he probably also had stringed instruments, for
the rhythmic twanging of a bow-string seems almost inevitably to lead to that.
He also had earthenware drums across which skins were stretched; perhaps also
he made drums by stretching skins over hollow tree stems.[58] We do not know
when man began to sing, but evidently he was making music, and since he had
words, songs were no doubt being made. To begin with, perhaps, he just let his
voice loose as one may hear Italian peasants now behind their ploughs singing
songs without words. After dark in the winter he sat in his house and talked
and sang and made implements by touch rather than sight. His lighting must have
been poor, and chiefly firelight, but there was probably always some fire in
the village, summer or winter. Fire was too troublesome to make for men to be
willing to let it out readily. Sometimes a great disaster happened to those
pile villages, the fire got free, and they were burnt out. The Swiss deposits
contain clear evidence of such catastrophes.

All this we gather from the remains of the Swiss pile dwellings, and such was
the character of the human life that spread over Europe, coming from the south
and from the east with the forests as, 10,000 or 12,000 years ago, the reindeer
and the Reindeer Men passed away. It is evident that we have here a way of life
already separated by a great gap of thousands of years of invention from its
original Palæolithic stage. The steps by which it rose from that condition we
can only guess at. From being a hunter hovering upon the outskirts of flocks
and herds of wild cattle and sheep, and from being a co-hunter with the dog,
man by insensible degrees may have developed a sense of proprietorship in the
beasts and struck up a friendship with his canine competitor. He learnt to turn
the cattle when they wandered too far; he brought his better brain to bear to
guide them to fresh pasture. He hemmed the beasts into valleys and enclosures
where he could be sure to find them again. He fed them when they starved, and
so slowly he tamed them. Perhaps his agriculture began with the storage of
fodder. He reaped, no doubt, before he sowed. The Palæolithic ancestor away in
that unknown land of origin to the south-east first supplemented the precarious
meat supply of the hunter by eating roots and fruits and wild grains. Man
storing graminiferous grasses for his cattle might easily come to beat out the
grain for himself.

