# BOOK III - XVII - § 3
[Metadata]: # {04.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03.03}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE DAWN OF HISTORY

SEA PEOPLES AND TRADING PEOPLES

§ 1. _The Earliest Ships and Sailors._ § 2. _The Ægean Cities      before
History._ § 3. _The First Voyages of Exploration._ § 4.      _Early Traders._ §
5. _Early Travellers._

# § 3
At her zenith Carthage probably had the hitherto unheard-of population of a
million. This population was largely industrial, and her woven goods were
universally famous. As well as a coasting trade, she had a considerable land
trade with Central Africa,[126] and she sold negro slaves, ivory, metals,
precious stones and the like, to all the Mediterranean people; she worked
Spanish copper mines, and her ships went out into the Atlantic and coasted
along Portugal and France northward as far as the Cassiterides (the Scilly
Isles, or Cornwall, in England) to get tin. About 520 B.C. a certain Hanno made
a voyage that is still one of the most notable in the world. This Hanno, if we
may trust the _Periplus of Hanno_, the Greek translation of his account which
still survives, followed the African coast southward from the Straits of
Gibraltar as far as the confines of Liberia. He had sixty big ships, and his
main task was to found or reinforce certain Carthaginian stations upon the
Morocco coast. Then he pushed southward. He founded a settlement in the Rio de
Oro (on Kerne or Herne Island), and sailed on past the Senegal river. The
voyagers passed on for seven days beyond the Gambia, and landed at last upon
some island. This they left in a panic, because, although the day was silent
with the silence of the tropical forest, at night they heard the sound of
flutes, drums, and gongs, and the sky was red with the blaze of the bush fires.
The coast country for the rest of the voyage was one blaze of fire, from the
burning of the bush. Streams of fire ran down the hills into the sea, and at
length a blaze arose so loftily that it touched the skies. Three days further
brought them to an island containing a lake (? Sherbro Island). In this lake
was another island (? Macaulay Island), and on this were wild, hairy men and
women, “whom the interpreters called gorilla.” The Carthaginians, having caught
some of the females of these “gorillas”--they were probably chimpanzees--turned
back and eventually deposited the skins of their captives--who had proved
impossibly violent guests to entertain on board ship--in the Temple of Juno.

A still more wonderful Phœnician sea voyage, long doubted, but now supported by
some archæological evidence, is related by Herodotus, who declares that the
Pharaoh Necho of the XXVIth Dynasty commissioned some Phœnicians to attempt the
circumnavigation of Africa, and that starting from the Gulf of Suez southward,
they did finally come back through the Mediterranean to the Nile delta. They
took nearly three years to complete their voyage. Each year they landed, and
sowed and harvested a crop of wheat before going on.

