# BOOK VIII - XL - § 7
[Metadata]: # {10.05.07}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.07}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE AGE OF THE GREAT POWERS

THE INTERNATIONAL CATASTROPHE OF 1914[489]

§ 1. _The Armed Peace before the Great War._ § 2. _Imperial      Germany._
§ 3. _The Spirit of Imperialism in Britain and Ireland._      § 4. _Imperialism
in France, Italy, and the Balkans._ § 5. _Russia      a Grand Monarchy._ § 6.
_The United States and the Imperial Idea._      § 7. _The Immediate Causes of
the Great War._ § 8. _A Summary of      the Great War up to 1917._ § 9. _The
Great War from the Russian      Collapse to the Armistice._ § 10. _The
Political, Economical, and      Social Disorganization Caused by the War._ §
11. _President Wilson      and the Problems of Versailles._ § 12. _Summary of
the First      Covenant of the League of Nations._ § 13. _A General Outline of
the      Treaties of 1919 and 1920._ § 14. _A Forecast of the “Next War.”_ §
15. _The State of Men’s Minds in 1920._

# § 7
We have been at some pains to examine the state of mind of Europe and of
America in regard to international relations in the years that led up to the
world tragedy of 1914 because, as more and more people are coming to recognize,
that great war or some such war was a necessary consequence of the mentality of
the period. All the things that men and nations do are the outcome of
instinctive motives reacting upon the ideas which talk and books and newspapers
and schoolmasters and so forth have put into people’s heads. Physical
necessities, pestilences, changes of climate, and the like outer things may
deflect and distort the growth of human history, but its living root is
thought.

All human history is fundamentally a history of ideas. Between the man of
to-day and the Cro-Magnard the physical and mental differences are very slight;
their essential difference lies in the extent and content of the mental
background which we have acquired in the five or six hundred generations that
intervene.

We are too close to the events of the Great War to pretend that this _Outline_
can record the verdict of history thereupon, but we may hazard the guess that
when the passions of the conflict have faded, it will be Germany that will be
most blamed for bringing it about, and she will be blamed not because she was
morally and intellectually very different from her neighbours, but because she
had the common disease of imperialism in its most complete and energetic form.
No self-respecting historian, however superficial and popular his aims may be,
can countenance the legend, produced by the stresses of the war, that the
German is a sort of human being more cruel and abominable than any other
variety of men. All the great states of Europe before 1914 were in a condition
of aggressive nationalism and drifting towards war; the government of Germany
did but lead the general movement. She fell into the pit first, and she
floundered deepest. She became the dreadful example at which all her fellow
sinners could cry out.

For long, Germany and Austria had been plotting an extension of German
influence eastward through Asia Minor to the East. The German idea was
crystallized in the phrase “Berlin to Bagdad.” Antagonized to the German dreams
were those of Russia, which was scheming for an extension of the Slav
ascendancy to Constantinople and through Serbia to the Adriatic. These lines of
ambition lay across one another and were mutually incompatible. The feverish
state of affairs in the Balkans was largely the outcome of the intrigues and
propagandas sustained by the German and Slav schemes. Turkey turned for support
to Germany, Serbia to Russia. Roumania and Italy, both Latin in tradition, both
nominally allies of Germany, pursued remoter and deeper schemes in common.
Ferdinand, the Tsar of Bulgaria, was following still darker ends; and the
squalid mysteries of the Greek court, whose king was the German Kaiser’s
brother-in-law, are beyond our present powers of inquiry.

But the tangle did not end with Germany on the one hand and Russia on the
other. The greed of Germany in 1871 had made France her inveterate enemy. The
French people, aware of their inability to recover their lost provinces by
their own strength, had conceived exaggerated ideas of the power and
helpfulness of Russia. The French people had subscribed enormously to Russian
loans. France was the ally of Russia. If the German powers made war upon
Russia, France would certainly attack them.

Now the short eastern French frontier was very strongly defended. There was
little prospect of Germany repeating the successes of 1870-71 against that
barrier. But the Belgian frontier of France was longer and less strongly
defended. An attack in overwhelming force on France through Belgium might
repeat 1870 on a larger scale. The French left might be swung back
south-eastwardly on Verdun, as a pivot, and crowded back upon its right, as one
shuts an open razor. This scheme the German strategists had worked out with
great care and elaboration. Its execution involved an outrage upon the law of
nations, because Prussia had undertaken to guarantee the neutrality of Belgium
and had no quarrel with her, and it involved the risk of bringing in Great
Britain (which power was also pledged to protect Belgium) against Germany. Yet
the Germans believed that their fleet had grown strong enough to make Great
Britain hesitate to interfere, and with a view to possibilities they had
constructed a great system of strategic railways to the Belgian frontier, and
made every preparation for the execution of this scheme. So they might hope to
strike down France at one blow, and deal at their leisure with Russia.

In 1914 all things seemed moving together in favour of the two Central Powers.
Russia, it is true, had been recovering since 1906, but only very slowly;
France was distracted by financial scandals. The astounding murder of M.
Calmette, the editor of the _Figaro_, by the wife of M. Caillaux, the minister
of finance, brought these to a climax in March; Britain, all Germany was
assured, was on the verge of a civil war in Ireland. Repeated efforts were made
both by foreign and English people to get some definite statement of what
Britain would do if Germany and Austria assailed France and Russia; but the
British Foreign Secretary maintained a front of heavy ambiguity up to the very
day of the British entry into the war.[499] As a consequence, there was a
feeling on the continent that Britain would either not fight or delay fighting,
and this may have encouraged Germany to go on threatening France. Events were
precipitated on June 28th by the assassination of the Archduke Francis
Ferdinand, the heir to the Austrian Empire, when on a state visit to Sarajevo,
the capital of Bosnia. Here was a timely excuse to set the armies marching. “It
is now or never,” said the German Emperor.[500] Serbia was accused of
instigating the murderers, and notwithstanding the fact that Austrian
commissioners reported that there was no evidence to implicate the Serbian
government, the Austro-Hungarian government contrived to press this grievance
towards war. On July 23rd Austria discharged an ultimatum at Serbia, and, in
spite of a practical submission on the part of Serbia, and of the efforts of
Sir Edward Grey, the British Foreign Secretary, to call a conference of the
powers, declared war against Serbia on July 28th.

Russia mobilized her army on July 30th, and on August 1st Germany declared war
upon her. German troops crossed into French territory next day, and,
simultaneously with the delivery of an ultimatum to the unfortunate Belgians,
the big flanking movement through Luxembourg and Belgium began. Westward rode
the scouts and advanced guards. Westward rushed a multitude of automobiles
packed with soldiers. Enormous columns of grey-clad infantry followed;
round-eyed, fair young Germans they were for the most part--law-abiding,
educated youngsters who had never yet seen a shot fired in anger. “This was
war,” they were told. They had to be bold and ruthless. Some of them did their
best to carry out these militarist instructions at the expense of the ill-fated
Belgians.

A disproportionate fuss has been made over the detailed atrocities in Belgium,
disproportionate, that is, in relation to the fundamental atrocity of August,
1914, which was the invasion of Belgium. Given that, the casual shootings and
lootings, the wanton destruction of property, the plundering of inns and of
food and drink shops by hungry and weary men, and the consequent rapes and
incendiarism, follow naturally enough. Only very simple people believe that an
army in the field can maintain as high a level of honesty, decency, and justice
as a settled community at home. And the tradition of the Thirty Years War still
influenced the Prussian army. It has been customary in the countries allied
against Germany to treat all this vileness and bloodshed of the Belgian months
as though nothing of the sort had ever happened before, and as if it were due
to some distinctively evil strain in the German character. They were nicknamed
“Huns.” But nothing could be less like the systematic destructions of the
nomads (who once proposed to exterminate the entire Chinese population in order
to restore China to pasture) than the German crimes in Belgium. Much of that
crime was the drunken brutality of men who for the first time in their lives
were free to use lethal weapons, much of it was the hysterical violence of men
shocked at their own proceedings and in deadly fear of the revenge of the
people whose country they had outraged, and much of it was done under duress
because of the theory that men should be terrible in warfare and that
populations are best subdued by fear. The German common people were bundled
from an orderly obedience into this war in such a manner that atrocities were
bound to ensue. They certainly did horrible and disgusting things. But any
people who had been worked up for war and led into war as the Germans were,
would have behaved in a similar manner.

On the night of August 2nd, while most of Europe, still under the tranquil
inertias of half a century of peace, still in the habitual enjoyment of such a
widely diffused plenty and cheapness and freedom as no man living will ever see
again, was thinking about its summer holidays, the little Belgian village of
Visé was ablaze, and stupefied rustics were being led out and shot because it
was alleged someone had fired on the invaders. The officers who ordered these
acts, the men who obeyed, must surely have felt scared at the strangeness of
the things they did. Most of them had never yet seen a violent death. And they
had set light not to a village, but a world. It was the beginning of the end of
an age of comfort, confidence, and gentle and seemly behaviour in Europe.

So soon as it was clear that Belgium was to be invaded, Great Britain ceased to
hesitate, and (at eleven at night on August 4th) declared war upon Germany. The
following day a German mine-laying vessel was caught off the Thames mouth by
the cruiser _Amphion_ and sunk,--the first time that the British and Germans
had ever met in conflict under their own national flags upon land or water....

All Europe still remembers the strange atmosphere of those eventful sunny
August days, the end of the Armed Peace. For nearly half a century the Western
world had been tranquil and had seemed safe. Only a few middle-aged and ageing
people in France had had any practical experience of warfare. The newspapers
spoke of a world catastrophe, but that conveyed very little meaning to those
for whom the world had always seemed secure, who were indeed almost incapable
of thinking of it as otherwise than secure. In Britain particularly for some
weeks the peace-time routine continued in a slightly dazed fashion. It was like
a man still walking about the world unaware that he has contracted a fatal
disease which will alter every routine and habit in his life. People went on
with their summer holidays; shops reassured their customers with the
announcement, “business as usual.” There was much talk and excitement when the
newspapers came, but it was the talk and excitement of spectators who have no
vivid sense of participation in the catastrophe that was presently to involve
them all.


§ 8[501]

[Illustration: Map to illustrate the Original GERMAN Plan, 1914]

We will now review very briefly the main phases of the world struggle which had
thus commenced. Planned by Germany, it began with a swift attack designed to
“knock out” France while Russia was still getting her forces together in the
East. For a time all went well. Military science is never up to date under
modern conditions, because military men are as a class unimaginative, there are
always at any date undeveloped inventions capable of disturbing current
tactical and strategic practice which the military intelligence has declined.
The German plan had been made for some years; it was a stale plan; it could
probably have been foiled at the outset by a proper use of entrenchments and
barbed wire and machine guns, but the French were by no means as advanced in
their military science as the Germans, and they trusted to methods of open
warfare that were at least fourteen years behind the times. They had a proper
equipment neither of barbed wire nor machine guns, and there was a ridiculous
tradition that the Frenchman did not fight well behind earthworks. The Belgian
frontier was defended by the fortress of Liège, ten or twelve years out of
date, with forts whose armament had been furnished and fitted in many cases by
German contractors; and the French north-eastern frontier was very badly
equipped. Naturally the German armament firm of Krupp had provided nutcrackers
for these nuts in the form of exceptionally heavy guns firing high explosive
shells. These defences proved therefore to be mere traps for their garrisons.
The French attacked and failed in the southern Ardennes. The German hosts swung
round the French left with an effect of being irresistible; Liège fell on
August 9th, Brussels was reached on August 20th, and the small British army of
about 70,000, which had arrived in Belgium, was struck at Mons (August 22nd) in
overwhelming force, and driven backward in spite of the very deadly rifle
tactics it had learnt during the South African War. (The German troops could
not believe that the British were using rifles and not machine guns against
them.) The little British force was pushed aside westward, and the German right
swept down so as to leave Paris to the west and crumple the entire French army
back upon itself.

So confident was the German higher command at this stage of having won the war,
that by the end of August German troops were already being withdrawn for the
Eastern front, where the Russians were playing havoc in East and West Prussia.
And then came the French counter-attack, strategically a very swift and
brilliant counter-attack. The French struck back on their centre, they produced
an unexpected army on their left, and the small British army, shaken but
reinforced, was still fit to play a worthy part in the counter-stroke. The
German right overran itself, lost its cohesion, and was driven back from the
Marne to the Aisne (Battle of the Marne, September 6th to 10th). It would have
been driven back farther had it not had the art of entrenchment in reserve.
Upon the Aisne it stood and dug itself in. The heavy guns, the high explosive
shell, the tanks, needed by the allies to smash up these entrenchments, did not
yet exist.

The Battle of the Marne shattered the original German plan. For a time France
was saved. But the German was not defeated; he had still a great offensive
superiority in men and equipment. His fear of the Russian in the east had been
relieved by a tremendous victory at Tannenberg. His next phase was a headlong,
less elaborately planned campaign to outflank the left of the allied armies and
to seize the Channel ports and cut off supplies coming from Britain to France.
Both armies extended to the west in a sort of race to the coast. Then the
Germans, with a great superiority of guns and equipment, struck at the British
round and about Ypres. They came very near to a break through, but the British
held them.

The war on the Western front settled down to trench warfare. Neither side had
the science and equipment needed to solve the problem of breaking through
modern entrenchments and entanglements, and both sides were now compelled to
resort to scientific men, inventors, and such-like unmilitary persons for
counsel and help in their difficulty. At that time the essential problem of
trench warfare had already been solved; there existed in England, for instance,
the model of a tank, which would have given the allies a swift and easy victory
before 1916; but the professional military mind is by necessity an inferior and
unimaginative mind; no man of high intellectual quality would willingly
imprison his gifts in such a calling; nearly all supremely great soldiers have
been either inexperienced fresh-minded young men like Alexander, Napoleon, and
Hoche, politicians turned soldiers like Julius Cæsar, nomads like the Hun and
Mongol captains, or amateurs like Cromwell and Washington; whereas this war
after fifty years of militarism was a hopelessly professional war; from first
to last it was impossible to get it out of the hands of the regular generals,
and neither the German nor allied headquarters was disposed to regard an
invention with toleration that would destroy their traditional methods.[502]
The tank was not only disagreeably strange to these military gentlemen, but it
gave an unprofessional protection to the common soldiers within it. The
Germans, however, did make some innovations. In February (28th) they produced a
rather futile novelty, the flame projector, the user of which was in constant
danger of being burnt alive, and in April, in the midst of a second grave
offensive upon the British (second Battle of Ypres, April 17th to May 17th),
they employed a cloud of poison gas. This horrible device was used against
Algerian and Canadian troops; it shook them by the physical torture it
inflicted, and by the anguish of those who died, but it failed to break through
them. For some weeks chemists were of more importance than soldiers on the
allied front, and within six weeks the defensive troops were already in
possession of protective methods and devices.

[Illustration: The WESTERN FRONT 1915-18]

For a year and a half, until July, 1916, the Western front remained in a state
of indecisive tension. There were heavy attacks on either side that ended in
bloody repulses. The French made costly but glorious thrusts at Arras and in
Champagne in 1915, the British at Loos. From Switzerland to the North Sea there
ran two continuous lines of entrenchment, sometimes at a distance of a mile or
more, sometimes at a distance of a few feet (at Arras, _e.g._), and in and
behind these lines of trenches millions of men toiled, raided their enemies,
and prepared for sanguinary and foredoomed offensives. In any preceding age
these stagnant masses of men would have engendered a pestilence inevitably, but
here again modern science had altered the conditions of warfare. Certain novel
diseases appeared, trench feet for instance, caused by prolonged standing in
cold water, new forms of dysentery, and the like, but none developed to an
extent to disable either combatant force. Behind this front the whole life of
the belligerent nations was being turned more and more to the task of
maintaining supplies of food, munitions, and, above all, men to supply the
places of those who day by day were killed or mangled.[503] The Germans had had
the luck to possess a considerable number of big siege guns intended for the
frontier fortresses; these were now available for trench smashing with high
explosive, a use no one had foreseen for them. The Allies throughout the first
years were markedly inferior in their supply of big guns and ammunition, and
their losses were steadily greater than the German. Mr. Asquith, the British
Prime Minister, though a very fine practitioner in all the arts of Parliament,
was wanting in creative ability; and it is probably due to the push and hustle
of Mr. Lloyd George (who presently ousted him in December, 1916) and the
clamour of the British press that this inferiority of supplies was eventually
rectified.[504]

There was a tremendous German onslaught upon the French throughout the first
half of 1916 round and about Verdun. The Germans suffered enormous losses and
were held, after pushing in the French lines for some miles. The French losses
were as great or greater. “_Ils ne passeront pas_,” said and sang the French
infantry--and kept their word.

The Eastern German front was more extended and less systematically entrenched
than the Western. For a time the Russian armies continued to press westward in
spite of the Tannenberg disaster. They conquered nearly the whole of Galicia
from the Austrians, took Lemberg on September 2nd, 1914, and the great fortress
of Przemysl on March 22nd, 1915. But after the Germans had failed to break the
Western front of the Allies, and after an ineffective allied offensive made
without proper material,[505] they turned to Russia, and a series of heavy
blows, with a novel use of massed artillery, were struck first in the south and
then at the north of the Russian front. On June 22nd, Przemysl was retaken, and
the whole Russian line was driven back until Vilna (September 2nd) was in
German hands.

In May, 1915 (23rd), Italy joined the allies, and declared war upon Austria.
(Not until a year later did she declare war on Germany.) She pushed over her
eastern boundary towards Goritzia (which fell in the summer of 1916), but her
intervention was of little use at that time to either Russia or the two Western
powers. She merely established another line of trench warfare among the high
mountains of her picturesque north-eastern frontier.

While the main fronts of the chief combatants were in this state of exhaustive
deadlock, both sides were attempting to strike round behind the front of their
adversaries. The Germans made a series of Zeppelin, and later of aeroplane,
raids upon Paris and the east of England. Ostensibly these aimed at depôts,
munition works, and the like targets of military importance, but practically
they bombed promiscuously at inhabited places. At first these raiders dropped
not very effective bombs, but later the size and quality of these missiles
increased, considerable numbers of people were killed and injured, and very
much damage was done. The English people were roused to a pitch of extreme
indignation by these outrages.[506] Although the Germans had possessed
Zeppelins for some years, no one in authority in Great Britain had thought out
the proper methods of dealing with them, and it was not until late in 1916 that
an adequate supply of anti-aircraft guns was brought into play and that these
raiders were systematically attacked by aeroplanes. Then came a series of
Zeppelin disasters, and after the spring of 1917 they ceased to be used for any
purpose but sea scouting, and their place as raiders was taken by large
aeroplanes (the Gothas). The visits of these latter machines to London and the
east of England became systematic after the summer of 1917. All through the
winter of 1917-18, London on every moonlight night became familiar with the
banging of warning maroons, the shrill whistles of the police alarm, the hasty
clearance of the streets, the distant rumbling of scores and hundreds of
anti-aircraft guns growing steadily to a wild uproar of thuds and crashes, the
swish of flying shrapnel, and at last, if any of the raiders got through the
barrage, with the dull heavy bang of the bursting bombs. Then presently, amidst
the diminuendo of the gun fire, would come the inimitable rushing sound of the
fire brigade engines and the hurry of the ambulances.... War was brought home
to every Londoner by these experiences.

While the Germans were thus assailing the nerve of their enemy home population
through the air, they were also attacking the overseas trade of the British by
every means in their power. At the outset of the war they had various trade
destroyers scattered over the world, and a squadron of powerful modern cruisers
in the Pacific, namely, the _Scharnhorst_, the _Gneisenau_, the _Leipzig_, the
_Nürnberg_, and the _Dresden_. Some of the detached cruisers, and particularly
the _Emden_, did a considerable amount of commerce destroying before they were
hunted down, and the main squadron caught an inferior British force off the
coast of Chile and sank the _Good Hope_ and the _Monmouth_ on November 1st,
1914. A month later these German ships were themselves pounced upon by a
British force, and all (except the _Dresden_) sunk by Admiral Sturdee in the
Battle of the Falkland Isles. After this conflict the allies remained in
undisputed possession of the surface of the sea, a supremacy which the great
naval Battle of Jutland (May 1st, 1916) did nothing to shake. The Germans
concentrated their attention more and more upon submarine warfare. From the
beginning of the war they had had considerable submarine successes. On one day,
September 22nd, 1914, they sank three powerful cruisers, the _Aboukir_, the
_Hogue_, and the _Cressy_, with 1473 men. They continued to levy a toll upon
British shipping throughout the war; at first they hailed and examined
passenger and mercantile shipping, but this practice they discontinued for fear
of traps, and in the spring of 1915 they began to sink ships without notice. In
May, 1915, they sank the great passenger liner, the _Lusitania_, without any
warning, drowning a number of American citizens. This embittered American
feeling against them, but the possibility of injuring and perhaps reducing
Britain by a submarine blockade was so great, that they persisted in a more and
more intensified submarine campaign, regardless of the danger of dragging the
United States into the circle of their enemies.

Meanwhile, Turkish forces, very ill equipped, were making threatening gestures
at Egypt across the desert of Sinai.

And while the Germans were thus striking at Britain, their least accessible and
most formidable antagonist, through the air and under the sea, the French and
British were also embarking upon a disastrous flank attack in the east upon the
Central Powers through Turkey. The Gallipoli campaign was finely imagined, but
disgracefully executed. Had it succeeded, the Allies would have captured
Constantinople in 1915. But the Turks were given two months’ notice of the
project by a premature bombardment of the Dardanelles in February, the scheme
was also probably betrayed through the Greek Court, and when at last British
and French forces were landed upon the Gallipoli peninsula in April, they found
the Turks well entrenched and better equipped for trench warfare[507] than
themselves. The Allies trusted for heavy artillery to the great guns of the
ships, which were comparatively useless for battering down entrenchments, and
among every other sort of thing that they had failed to foresee, they had not
foreseen hostile submarines. Several great battleships were lost; they went
down in the same clear waters over which the ships of Xerxes had once sailed to
their fate at Salamis. The story of the Gallipoli campaign from the side of the
Allies is at once heroic and pitiful, a story of courage and incompetence, and
of life, material, and prestige wasted, culminating in a withdrawal in January,
1916.[508]

This failure was due in part to the refusal of the Greeks to co-operate in the
adventure. For a year and a half the Greek king, the brother-in-law of the
Kaiser, being protected by friends in high quarters on the Allied side, tricked
and misled the Allies, and wasted the lives of great numbers of common British
and French soldiers. In June, 1917, he was forced to abdicate, but instead of
permitting the Greeks, under their proper leader Venizelos, to follow their
natural and traditional republican disposition, his son, Alexander, the
Kaiser’s nephew, was made king in his place--_by the Allies!_ This Greek
chapter in the story of the great war still awaits the investigations of the
historian. It is at present a quite inexplicable story, and we give these
preposterous facts with no attempt to rationalize them.

Linked up closely with this Greek vacillation was the entry of Bulgaria into
the war (October 12th, 1915). The king of Bulgaria had hesitated for more than
a year to make any decision between the two sides. Now the manifest failure of
the British at Gallipoli, coupled with a strong Austro-German attack in Serbia,
swung him over to the Central Powers. While the Serbs were hotly engaged with
the Austro-German invaders upon the Danube he attacked Serbia in the rear, and
in a few weeks the country had been completely overrun. The Serbian army made a
terrible retreat through the mountains of Albania to the coast, where its
remains were rescued by an Allied fleet.

An Allied force landed at Salonika in Greece, and pushed inland towards
Monastir, but was unable to render any effectual assistance to the Serbians. It
was the Salonika plan which sealed the fate of the Gallipoli expedition.

To the east, in Mesopotamia, the British, using Indian troops chiefly, made a
still remoter flank attack upon the Central Powers. An army, very ill provided
for the campaign, was landed at Basra in the November of 1914, and pushed up
towards Bagdad in the following year. It gained a victory at Ctesiphon, the
ancient Arsacid and Sassanid capital within twenty-five miles of Bagdad, but
the Turks were heavily reinforced, there was a retreat to Kut, and there the
British army, under General Townshend, was surrounded and starved into
surrender on April 29th, 1916.

All these campaigns in the air, under the seas, in Russia, Turkey, and Asia,
were subsidiary to the main front, the front of decision, between Switzerland
and the sea; and there the main millions lay entrenched, slowly learning the
necessary methods of modern scientific warfare. There was a rapid progress in
the use of the aeroplane. At the outset of the war this had been used chiefly
for scouting, and by the Germans for the dropping of marks for the artillery.
Such a thing as aerial fighting was unheard of. In 1916 the aeroplanes carried
machine guns and fought in the air; their bombing work was increasingly
important, they had developed a wonderful art of aerial photography, and all
the aerial side of artillery work, both with aeroplanes and observation
balloons, had been enormously developed. But the military mind was still
resisting the use of the tank, the obvious weapon for decision in trench
warfare.

Many intelligent people outside military circles understood this quite clearly.
The use of the tank against trenches was an altogether obvious expedient.
Leonardo da Vinci invented an early tank, but what military “expert” has ever
had the wits to study Leonardo? Soon after the South African War, in 1903,
there were stories in magazines describing imaginary battles in which tanks
figured, and a complete working model of a tank was shown to the British
military authorities--who of course rejected it--in 1912. Tanks had been
invented and re-invented before the war began. But had the matter rested
entirely in the hands of the military, there would never have been any use of
tanks. It was Mr. Winston Churchill, at that time at the British Admiralty, who
insisted upon the manufacture of the first tanks, and it was in the teeth of
the grimmest opposition that they were sent to France.[509] To the British
navy, and not to the army, military science owes the use of these devices. The
German military authorities were equally set against them. In July, 1916, Sir
Douglas Haig, the British commander-in-chief, began a great offensive which
failed to break through the German line. In some places he advanced a few
miles; in others he was completely repulsed. There was a huge slaughter of the
new British armies. And he did not use tanks.

In September, when the season was growing too late for a sustained offensive,
tanks first appeared in warfare. A few were put into action by the British in a
not very intelligent fashion. Their effect upon the German was profound, they
produced something like a panic, and there can be little doubt that had they
been used in July in sufficient numbers and handled by a general of imagination
and energy, they would have ended the war there and then. At that time the
Allies were in greater strength than the Germans upon the Western front.
Russia, though fast approaching exhaustion, was still fighting, Italy was
pressing the Austrians hard, and Roumania was just entering the war on the side
of the allies. But the waste of men in this disastrous July offensive, coupled
with the obstinate neglect of the possibilities of the tanks by the military
authorities, brought the Allied cause to the very brink of disaster.

Directly the British failure of July had reassured the Germans, they turned on
the Roumanians, and the winter of 1916 saw the same fate overtake Roumania that
had fallen upon Serbia in 1915. The year that had begun with the retreat from
Gallipoli and the surrender of Kut, ended with the crushing of Roumania and
with volleys fired at a landing party of French and British marines by a
royalist crowd in the port of Athens. It looked as though King Constantine of
Greece, that protégé of the Allied foreign offices, meant to lead his people in
the footsteps of King Ferdinand of Bulgaria. But the coast line of Greece is
one much exposed to naval action. Greece was blockaded, and a French force from
Salonika joined hands with an Italian force from Valona to cut the king of
Greece off from his Central European friends.

On the whole, things looked much less dangerous for the Hohenzollern
imperialism at the end of 1916 than they had done after the failure of the
first great rush at the Marne. The Allies had wasted two years of opportunity.
Belgium, Serbia, and Roumania, and large areas of France and Russia, were
occupied by Austro-German troops. Counterstroke after counterstroke had failed,
and Russia was now tottering towards a collapse. Had Germany been ruled with
any wisdom, she might have made a reasonable peace at this time. But the touch
of success had intoxicated her imperialists. They wanted not safety, but
triumph, not world welfare, but world empire. “World power or downfall” was
their formula; it gave their antagonists no alternative but a fight to a
conclusive end.

