# BOOK III - XVI - § 6
[Metadata]: # {04.02.05}
[Descriptor]: # {04.02.05}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK III
XVI
§ 6
# § 6
And in these thousands of years during which man was making his way step by
step from the barbarism of the heliolithic culture to civilization at these
old-world centres, what was happening in the rest of the world? To the north of
these centres, from the Rhine to the Pacific, the Nordic and Mongolian peoples,
as we have told, were also learning the use of metals; but while the
civilizations were settling down these men of the great plains were becoming
migratory and developing from a slow wandering life towards a complete seasonal
nomadism. To the south of the civilized zone, in central and southern Africa,
the negro was making a slower progress, and that, it would seem, under the
stimulus of invasion by whiter tribes from the Mediterranean regions, bringing
with them in succession cultivation and the use of metals. These white men came
to the black by two routes: across the Sahara to the west as Berbers and
Tuaregs and the like, to mix with the negro and create such quasi-white races
as the Fulas; and also by way of the Nile, where the Baganda (= Gandafolk) of
Uganda, for example, may possibly be of remote white origin. The African
forests were denser then, and spread eastward and northward from the Upper
Nile.

The islands of the East Indies, three thousand years ago, were probably still
only inhabited here and there by stranded patches of Palæolithic Australoids,
who had wandered thither in those immemorial ages when there was a nearly
complete land bridge by way of the East Indies to Australia. The islands of
Oceania were uninhabited. The spreading of the heliolithic peoples by sea-going
canoes into the islands of the Pacific came much later in the history of man,
at earliest a thousand years B.C. Still later did they reach Madagascar. The
beauty of New Zealand also was as yet wasted upon mankind; its highest living
creatures were a great ostrich-like bird, the moa, now extinct, and the little
kiwi which has feathers like coarse hair and the merest rudiment of wings.

In North America a group of Mongoloid tribes were now cut off altogether from
the old world. They were spreading slowly southward, hunting the innumerable
bison of the plains. They had still to learn for themselves the secrets of a
separate agriculture based on maize, and in South America to tame the lama to
their service and so build up in Mexico and Peru two civilizations roughly
parallel in their nature to that of Sumer, but different in many respects, and
later by six or seven thousand years....

When men reached the southern extremity of America, the _Megatherium_, the
giant sloth, and the _Glyptodon_, the giant armadillo, were still living....

There is a considerable imaginative appeal in the obscure story of the early
American civilizations. It was largely a separate development.[119] Somewhen at
last the southward drift of the Amerindians must have met and mingled with the
eastward, canoe-borne drift of the heliolithic culture. But it was the
heliolithic culture still at a very lowly stage and probably before the use of
metals. It has to be noted as evidence of this canoe-borne origin of American
culture, that elephant-headed figures are found in Central American drawings.
American metallurgy may have arisen independently of the old-world use of
metal, or it may have been brought by these elephant carvers. These American
peoples got to the use of bronze and copper, but not to the use of iron; they
had gold and silver; and their stonework, their pottery, weaving, and dyeing
were carried to a very high level. In all these things the American product
resembles the old-world product generally, but always it has characteristics
that are distinctive. The American civilizations had picture-writing of a
primitive sort, but it never developed even to the pitch of the earliest
Egyptian hieroglyphics. In Yucatan only was there a kind of script, the Maya
writing, but it was used simply for keeping a calendar. In Peru the beginnings
of writing were superseded by a curious and complicated method of keeping
records by means of knots tied upon strings of various colours and shapes. It
is said that even laws and orders could be conveyed by this code. These string
bundles were called _quipus_, but though quipus are still to be found in
collections, the art of reading them is altogether lost. The Chinese histories,
Mr. L. Y. Chen informs us, state that a similar method of record by knots was
used in China before the invention of writing there. The Peruvians also got to
making maps and the use of counting-frames. “But with all this there was no
means of handing on knowledge and experience from one generation to another,
nor was anything done to fix and summarize these intellectual possessions,
which are the basis of literature and science.”[120]

When the Spaniards came to America, the Mexicans knew nothing of the Peruvians
nor the Peruvians of the Mexicans. Intercourse there was none. Whatever links
had ever existed were lost and forgotten. The Mexicans had never heard of the
potato, which was a principal article of Peruvian diet. In 5000 B.C. the
Sumerians and Egyptians probably knew as little of one another. America was
6000 years behind the Old World.

