# BOOK II - XI - § 4
[Metadata]: # {03.04.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
THE MAKING OF MEN

NEOLITHIC MAN IN EUROPE[45]

§ 1. _The Age of Cultivation Begins._ § 2. _Where Did the Neolithic
Culture Arise?_ § 3. _Everyday Neolithic Life._ § 4. _How Did      Sowing
Begin?_ § 5. _Primitive Trade._ § 6. _The Flooding of the      Mediterranean
Valley._

# § 4
How did man learn to sow in order that he might reap?

We may hesitate here to guess at the answer to that question. But a very great
deal has been made of the fact that wherever sowing occurs among primitive
people in any part of the world, it is accompanied by a human sacrifice or by
some ceremony which may be interpreted as the mitigation and vestige of an
ancient sacrificial custom. This is the theme of Sir J. G. Frazer’s _Golden
Bough_. From this it has been supposed that the first sowings were in
connection with the burial of a human being, either through wild grain being
put with the dead body as food or through the scattering of grain over the
body. It may be argued that there is only one reason why man should have
disturbed the surface of the earth before he took to agriculture, and that was
to bury his dead; and in order to bury a dead body and make a mound over it, it
was probably necessary for him to disturb the surface over a considerable area.
Neolithic man’s chief apparatus for mound-making consisted of picks of deer’s
horn and shovels of their shoulder-blades, and with this he would have found
great difficulty in making a deep excavation. Nor do we find such excavations
beside the barrows. Instead of going down into tough sub-soil, the mound-makers
probably scraped up some of the surface soil and carried it to the mound. All
this seems probable, and it gives just that wide area of bared and turned-over
earth upon which an eared grass, such as barley, millet, or primitive wheat,
might have seeded and grown. Moreover, the mound-makers, being busy with the
mound, would not have time to hunt meat, and if they were accustomed to store
and eat wild grain, they would be likely to scatter grain, and the grain would
be blown by the wind out of their rude vessels over the area they were
disturbing. And if they were bringing up seed in any quantity in baskets and
pots to bury with the corpse, some of it might easily blow and be scattered
over the fresh earth. Returning later to the region of the mound, they would
discover an exceptionally vigorous growth of food grain, and it would be a
natural thing to associate it with the buried person, and regard it as a
consequence of his death and burial. He had given them back the grain they gave
him increased a hundredfold.

At any rate, there is apparently all over the world a traceable association in
ancient ceremonial and in the minds of barbaric people between the death and
burial of a person and the ploughing and sowing of grain. From this it is
assumed that there was once a world-wide persuasion that it was necessary that
some one should be buried before a crop could be sown, and that out of this
persuasion arose a practice and tradition of human sacrifice at seedtime, which
has produced profound effects in the religious development of the race. There
may have been some idea of refreshing the earth by a blood draught or
revivifying it with the life of the sacrificed person. We state these
considerations here merely as suggestions that have been made of the way in
which the association of seedtime and sacrifice arose. They are, at the best,
speculations; they have a considerable vogue at the present time, and we have
to note them, but we have neither the space nor the time here to examine them
at length. The valuable accumulations of suggestions due to the industry and
ingenuity of Sir J. G. Frazer still await a thorough critical examination, and
to his works the reader must go for the indefatigable expansion of this idea.

