# BOOK VIII - XL - § 10
[Metadata]: # {10.05.09}
[Descriptor]: # {10.05.09}
[Author]: # {wells}
BOOK VIII
XL
§ 10
# § 10
The world in the year after the great war was like a man who has had some vital
surgical operation very roughly performed, and who is not yet sure whether he
can now go on living or whether he has not been so profoundly shocked and
injured that he will presently fall down and die. It was a world dazed and
stunned. German militarist imperialism had been defeated, but at an
overwhelming cost. It had come very near to victory. Everything went on, now
that the strain of the conflict had ceased, rather laxly, rather weakly, and
with a gusty and uncertain temper. There was a universal hunger for peace, a
universal desire for the lost safety and liberty and prosperity of pre-war
times, without any power of will to achieve and secure these things.

Just as with the Roman Republic under the long strain of the Punic War, so now
there had been a great release of violence and cruelty, and a profound
deterioration in financial and economic morality. Generous spirits had
sacrificed themselves freely to the urgent demands of the war, but the sly and
base of the worlds of business and money had watched the convulsive
opportunities of the time and secured a firm grip upon the resources and
political power of their countries. Everywhere men who would have been regarded
as shady adventurers before 1914 had acquired power and influence while better
men toiled unprofitably. Such men as Lord Rhondda, the British food controller,
killed themselves with hard work, while the war profiteer waxed rich and
secured his grip upon press and party organization.

In the course of the war there had been extraordinary experiments in collective
management in nearly all the belligerent countries. It was realized that the
common expedients of peacetime commerce, the higgling of the market, the
holding out for a favourable bargain, were incompatible with the swift needs of
warfare. Transport, fuel, food supply, and the distribution of the raw
materials not only of clothing, housing, and the like, but of everything needed
for war munitions, had been brought under public control. No longer had farmers
been allowed to under-farm; cattle had been put upon deer-parks and grass-lands
ploughed up, with or without the owner’s approval. Luxury building and
speculative company promotion had been restrained. In effect, a sort of
emergency socialist state had been established throughout belligerent Europe.
It was rough-and-ready and wasteful, but it was more effective than the tangled
incessant profit-seeking, the cornering and forestalling and incoherent
productiveness of “private enterprise.”

In the earlier years of the war there was a very widespread feeling of
brotherhood and the common interest in all the belligerent states. The common
men were everywhere sacrificing life and health for what they believed to be
the common good of the state. In return, it was promised, there would be less
social injustice after the war, a more universal devotion to the common
welfare. In Great Britain, for instance, Mr. Lloyd George was particularly
insistent upon his intention to make the after-war Britain “a land fit for
heroes.” He foreshadowed the continuation of this new war communism into the
peace period in discourses of great fire and beauty. In Great Britain there was
created a Ministry of Reconstruction, which was understood to be planning a new
and more generous social order, better labour conditions, better housing,
extended education, a complete and scientific revision of the economic system.
Similar hopes of a better world sustained the common soldiers of France and
Germany and Italy. It was premature disillusionment that caused the Russian
collapse. So that two mutually dangerous streams of anticipation were running
through the minds of men in Western Europe towards the end of the war. The rich
and adventurous men, and particularly the new war profiteers, were making their
plans to prevent such developments as that air transport should become a state
property, and to snatch back manufactures, shipping, land transport, the public
services generally, and the trade in staples from the hands of the commonweal
into the grip of private profit; they were securing possession of newspapers
and busying themselves with party caucuses and the like to that end; while the
masses of common men were looking forward naïvely to a new state of society
planned almost entirely in their interest and according to generous general
ideas. The history of 1919 is largely the clash of these two streams of
anticipation. There was a hasty selling off, by the “business” government in
control, of every remunerative public enterprise to private speculators.... By
the middle of 1919 the labour masses throughout the world were manifestly
disappointed and in a thoroughly bad temper. The British “Ministry of
Reconstruction” and its foreign equivalents were exposed as a soothing sham.
The common man felt he had been cheated. There was to be no reconstruction, but
only a restoration of the old order--in the harsher form necessitated by the
poverty of the new time.

For four years the drama of the war had obscured the social question which had
been developing in the Western civilizations throughout the nineteenth century.
Now that the war was over, this question reappeared gaunt and bare, as it had
never been seen before.

And the irritations and hardships and the general insecurity of the new time
were exacerbated by a profound disturbance of currency and credit. Money, a
complicated growth of conventions rather than a system of values, had been
deprived within the belligerent countries of the support of a gold standard.
Gold had been retained only for international trade, and every government had
produced excessive quantities of paper money for domestic use. With the
breaking down of the war-time barriers the international exchange became a
wildly fluctuating confusion, a source of distress to everyone except a few
gamblers and wily speculators. Prices rose and rose--with an infuriating effect
upon the wage-earner. On the one hand was the employer resisting his demands
for more pay; on the other hand, food, house-room, and clothing were being
steadily cornered against him. And, which was the essential danger of the
situation, _he had lost any confidence he had ever possessed that any patience
or industrial willingness he displayed would really alleviate the shortages and
inconveniences by which he suffered_.

In the speeches of politicians towards the close of 1919 and the spring of
1920, there was manifest an increasing recognition of the fact that what is
called the capitalist system--the private ownership system that is, in which
private profit is the working incentive--was on its trial. It had to produce
general prosperity, they admitted, or it had to be revised. It is interesting
to note such a speech as that of Mr. Lloyd George, the British premier,
delivered on Saturday, December 6th, 1919. Mr. Lloyd George had had the
education and training of a Welsh solicitor; he entered politics early, and in
the course of a brilliant parliamentary career he had had few later
opportunities for reading and thought. But being a man of great natural
shrewdness, he was expressing here very accurately the ideas of the more
intelligent of the business men and wealthy men and ordinary citizens who
supported him.

“There is a new challenge to civilization,” he said. “What is it? It is
fundamental. It affects the whole fabric of society as we know it; its
commerce, its trade, its industry, its finance, its social order--all are
involved in it. There are those who maintain that the prosperity and strength
of the country have been built up by the stimulating and invigorating appeal to
individual impulse, to individual action. That is one view. The State must
educate; the State must assist where necessary; the State must control where
necessary; the State must shield the weak against the arrogance of the strong;
but the life springs from individual impulse and energy. (Cheers.) That is one
view. What is the other? That private enterprise is a failure, tried, and found
wanting--a complete failure, a cruel failure. It must be rooted out, and the
community must take charge as a community, to produce, to distribute, as well
as to control.

“Those are great challenges for us to decide. _We_ say that the ills of private
enterprise can be averted. _They_ say, ‘No, they cannot. No ameliorative, no
palliative, no restrictive, no remedial measure will avail. These evils are
inherent in the system. They are the fruit of the tree, and you must cut it
down.’ That is the challenge we hear ringing through the civilized world
to-day, from ocean to ocean, through valley and plain. You hear it in the
whining and maniacal shrieking of the Bolshevists. You hear it in the loud,
clear, but more restrained tones of Congresses and Conferences. The Bolshevists
would blow up the fabric with high explosive, with horror. Others would pull
down with the crowbars and with cranks--especially cranks. (Laughter.)

“Unemployment, with its injustice for the man who seeks and thirsts for
employment, who begs for labour and cannot get it, and who is punished for
failure he is not responsible for by the starvation of his children--that
torture is _something that private enterprise ought to remedy for its own
sake_. (Cheers.) Sweating, slums, the sense of semi-slavery in labour, must go.
We must cultivate a sense of manhood by treating men as men. If I--and I say
this deliberately--if I had to choose between this fabric I believe in, and
allowing millions of men and women and children to rot in its cellars, I would
not hesitate one hour. That is not the choice. Thank God it is not the choice.
Private enterprise can produce more, so that all men get a fair share of
it....”[512]

Here, put into quasi-eloquent phrasing, and with a jest adapted to the mental
habits of the audience, we have the common-sense view of the ordinary
prosperous man not only of Great Britain, but of America or France or Italy or
Germany. In quality and tone it is a fair sample of British political thought
in 1919. The prevailing economic system has made us what we are, is the
underlying idea; and we do not want any process of social destruction to
precede a renascence of society, we do not want to experiment with the
fundamentals of our social order. Let us accept that. Adaptation, Mr. Lloyd
George admitted, there had to be. Now this occasion of his speaking was a year
and a month after the Armistice, and for all that period private enterprise had
been failing to do all that Mr. Lloyd George was so cheerfully promising it
would do. The community was in urgent need of houses. Throughout the war there
had been a cessation not only of building, but of repairs. The shortage of
houses in the last months of 1919 amounted to scores of thousands in Britain
alone.[513] Multitudes of people were living in a state of exasperating
congestion, and the most shameless profiteering in apartments and houses was
going on. It was a difficult, but not an impossible situation. Given the same
enthusiasm and energy and self-sacrifice that had tided over the monstrous
crisis of 1916, the far easier task of providing a million houses could have
been performed in a year or so. But there had been corners in building
materials, transport was in a disordered state, and it did not _pay_ private
enterprise to build houses at any rents within the means of the people who
needed them. Private enterprise, therefore, so far from bothering about the
public need of housing, did nothing but corner and speculate in rents and
sub-letting. It now demanded grants in aid from the State--in order to build at
a profit. And there was a great crowding and dislocation of goods at the dépôts
because there was insufficient road transport. There was an urgent want of
cheap automobiles to move about goods and workers. But private enterprise in
the automobile industry found it far more profitable to produce splendid and
costly cars for those whom the war had made rich. The munition factories built
with public money could have been converted very readily into factories for the
mass production of cheap automobiles, but private enterprise had insisted upon
these factories being sold by the State, and would neither meet the public need
itself nor let the State do so. So, too, with the world, in the direst
discomfort for need of shipping, private enterprise insisted upon the shutting
down of the newly constructed State shipyards. Currency was dislocated
everywhere, but private enterprise was busy buying and selling francs or marks
and intensifying the trouble. While Mr. George was making the very
characteristic speech we have quoted, the discontent of the common man was
gathering everywhere, and little or nothing was being done to satisfy his
needs. It was becoming very evident that unless there was to be some profound
change in the spirit of business, under an unrestrained private enterprise
system there was little or no hope, in Europe at any rate, of decent housing,
clothing, or education for the workers for two or three generations.

These are facts that the historian of mankind is obliged to note with as little
comment as possible. Private enterprise in Europe in 1919 displayed neither
will nor capacity for meeting the crying needs of the time. So soon as it was
released from control, it ran naturally into speculation, cornering, and luxury
production. It followed the line of maximum profit. It displayed no sense of
its own dangers; and it resisted any attempt to restrain and moderate its
profits and make itself serviceable, even in its own interest. And this went on
in the face of the most striking manifestations of the extreme recalcitrance on
the part of the European masses to the prolonged continuance of the privations
and inconveniences they suffered. In 1913 these masses were living as they had
lived since birth; they were habituated to the life they led. The masses of
1919, on the other hand, had been uprooted everywhere, to go into the armies,
to go into munition factories, and so on. They had lost their habits of
acquiescence, and they were hardier and more capable of desperate action. Great
multitudes of men had gone through such brutalizing training as, for instance,
bayonet drill; they had learnt to be ferocious, and to think less either of
killing or being killed. Social unrest had become, therefore, much more
dangerous. Everything seemed to point to a refusal to tolerate the current
state of affairs for many years. Unless the educated and prosperous and
comfortable people of Europe could speedily get their private enterprise under
sufficient restraint to make it work well and rapidly for the common good,
unless they could develop the idea of business as primarily a form of public
service and not primarily a method of profit-making, unless they could in their
own interest achieve a security of peace that would admit of a cessation not
only of war preparation, but of international commercial warfare, strike and
insurrection promised to follow strike and insurrection up to a complete social
and political collapse. It was not that the masses had or imagined that they
had the plan of a new social, political, and economic system. They had not, and
they did not believe they had. The defects we have pointed out in the socialist
scheme (chapter xxxix, § 5) were no secret from them. It was a much more
dangerous state of affairs than that. It was that they were becoming so
disgusted with the current system, with its silly luxury, its universal waste,
and its general misery, that they did not care what happened afterwards so long
as they could destroy it. It was a return to a state of mind comparable to that
which had rendered possible the debacle of the Roman Empire.

Already in 1919 the world had seen one great community go that way, the Russian
people. The Russians overturned the old order and submitted to the autocratic
rule of a small group of doctrinaire Bolshevik socialists, because these men
seemed to have something new to try. They wrecked the old system, and at any
cost they would not have it back. The information available from Russia at the
time of writing this summary is still too conflicting and too obviously tainted
by propagandist aims for us to form any judgment upon the proceedings and
methods of the Soviet Government, but it is very plain that from November,
1917, Russia has not only endured that government and its mainly socialistic
methods, but has fought for it successfully against anything that seemed to
threaten a return to the old régime.

We have already (§ 5) pointed out the very broad differences between the
Russian and the Western communities, and the strong reasons there are for
doubting that they will move upon parallel lines and act in similar ways. The
Russian masses were cut off by want of education and sympathy from the small
civilized community of prosperous and educated people which lived upon them.
These latter were a little separate nation. The masses below have thrown that
separate nation off and destroyed it and begun again, so to speak, upon a new
sort of society which, whether it succeed or collapse, cannot fail to be of
intense interest to all mankind. But there is much more unity of thought and
feeling between class and class in the West than in Russia, and particularly in
the Atlantic communities. Even if they wrangle, classes can talk together and
understand each other. There is no unbroken stratum of illiterates. The groups
of rich and speculative men, the “bad men” in business and affairs, whose
freedoms are making the very name of “private enterprise” stink in the nostrils
of the ordinary man, are only the more active section of very much larger
classes, guilty perhaps of indolence and self-indulgence, but capable of being
roused to a sense not merely of the wickedness but of the danger of systematic
self-seeking in a strained, impoverished, and sorely tried world. Many of these
more reasonable and moral people have shown themselves clearly aware of the
nature of the present situation, and some of them have made speeches and
delivered sermons and written books--often addressed to the working
classes--expressing very generous and unselfish views. Speeches and sermons and
books will in themselves do little to allay the gathering wrath of classes ill
housed, ill fed, and unhealthy, and angry because they believe things are so
through the reckless greed of others; but such utterances are valuable as
admissions, and if these good intentions, encouraged perhaps and aided by a
certain pressure from below, presently develop into a resolute combining and
direction of the energies of private enterprise--for a time at least--towards
socially necessary work and a restriction of speculation and luxury, and if
there begin a rapid provision, even at some cost to the hoards and
satisfactions of the successful classes, of the decent homes and gardens, of
the pleasant public surroundings, the health services and the education and
leisure needed to tranquillize the fiercer discontents, it is still possible
that readjustment rather than revolution will be the method of the Atlantic
communities. But that readjustment cannot be indefinitely delayed; it must come
soon.

In one way or another it seems inevitable now that the new standard of
well-being which the mechanical revolution of the last century has rendered
possible, should become the general standard of life. Revolution is conditional
upon public discomfort. Social peace is impossible without a rapid amelioration
of the needless discomforts of the present time. A rapid resort to willing
service and social reconstruction on the part of those who own and rule, or
else a worldwide social revolution leading towards an equalization of
conditions and an attempt to secure comfort on new and untried lines, seem now
to be the only alternatives before mankind. The choice which route shall be
taken lies, we believe, in western Europe, and still more so in America, with
the educated, possessing, and influential classes. The former route demands
much sacrifice, for prosperous people in particular, a voluntary assumption of
public duties and a voluntary acceptance of class discipline and self-denial;
the latter may take an indefinite time to traverse, it will certainly be a very
destructive and bloody process, and whether it will lead to a new and better
state of affairs at last is questionable. A social revolution, if ultimately
the western European States blunder into it, may prove to be a process
extending over centuries; it may involve a social breakdown as complete as that
of the Roman Empire, and it may necessitate as slow a recuperation.

Let us add to what has been written above a short passage from an abler and far
more authoritative pen.[514] It approaches this question of economic
disorganization from a different angle, but the drift of its implications is
the same. It says as plainly to the private capitalist system: “Mend, show more
understanding, and a better and a stronger will for the common welfare, or go.”

“In the latter stages of the war all the belligerent governments practised,
from necessity or incompetence, what a Bolshevist might have done from
design.[515] Even now, when the war is over, most of them continue out of
weakness the same malpractices. But further, the Governments of Europe, being
many of them at this moment reckless in their methods as well as weak, seek to
direct on to a class known as ‘profiteers’ the popular indignation against the
more obvious consequences of their vicious methods. These profiteers are,
broadly speaking, the entrepreneur class of capitalists, that is to say, the
active and constructive element in the whole capitalist society, who in a
period of rapidly rising prices cannot but get rich quick whether they wish it
or desire it or not.[516] If prices are continually rising, every trader who
has purchased for stock or owns property and plant inevitably makes profits. By
directing hatred against this class, therefore, the European Governments are
carrying a step further the fatal process which the subtle mind of Lenin had
consciously conceived. The profiteers are a consequence and not a cause of
rising prices. By combining a popular hatred of the class of _entrepreneurs_
with the blow already given to social security by the violent and arbitrary
disturbance of contract and of the established equilibrium of wealth which is
the inevitable result of inflation, these governments are fast rendering
impossible a continuance of the social and economic order of the nineteenth
century. But they have no plan for replacing it.

“We are thus faced in Europe with the spectacle of an extraordinary weakness,
on the part of the great capitalist class, which has emerged from the
industrial triumphs of the nineteenth century and seemed a very few years ago
our all-powerful master. The terror and personal timidity of the individuals of
this class is now so great, their confidence in their place in society and in
their necessity to the social organism so diminished, that they are the easy
victims of intimidation. This was not so in England twenty-five years ago, any
more than it is now in the United States. Then the capitalists believed in
themselves, in their value to society, in the propriety of their continued
existence in the full enjoyment of their riches and the unlimited exercise of
their power. Now they tremble before every insult. Call them pro-Germans,
international financiers, or profiteers, and they will give you any ransom you
choose to ask not to speak of them so harshly. They allow themselves to be
ruined and altogether undone by their own instruments, governments of their own
making, and a press of which they are the proprietors. Perhaps it is
historically true that no order of society ever perished save by its own hand.”


§ 11[517]

We have dealt with the social and economic disorder of the European
communities, and the rapid return of the “class-war” to the foreground of
attention, before giving any account of the work of world settlement that
centred on the Peace Conference at Paris, because the worried and preoccupied
state of everyone concerned with private problems of income, prices,
employment, and the like goes far to explain the jaded atmosphere in which that
Conference addressed itself to the vast task before it.

The story of the Conference turns very largely upon the adventure of one
particular man, one of those men whom accident or personal quality picks out as
a type to lighten the task of the historian. We have in the course of this
history found it very helpful at times to focus our attention upon some
individual, Buddha, Alexander the Great, Yuan Chwang, the Emperor Frederick II
and Charles V and Napoleon I for example, and to let him by reflection
illuminate the period in which he lived. The conclusion of the Great War can be
seen most easily as the rise of the American President, President Wilson, to
predominant importance in the world’s hopes and attention, and his failure to
justify that predominance.

President Wilson (born 1856) had previously been a prominent student and
teacher of history, constitutional law, and the political sciences generally.
He had held various professorial chairs, and had been President of Princeton
University (New Jersey). There is a long list of books to his credit, and they
show a mind rather exclusively directed to American history and American
politics. There is no evidence that he had at any time in his life made a
general study of the world problem outside the very peculiar and exceptional
American case. He was mentally the new thing in history, negligent of and
rather ignorant of the older things out of which his new world had arisen. He
retired from academic life, and was elected Democratic Governor of New Jersey
in 1910. In 1913 he became the Democratic presidential candidate, and as a
consequence of a violent quarrel between ex-President Roosevelt and President
Taft, which split the dominant Republican party, he became President of the
United States.

The events of August 1914 seem to have taken President Wilson, like the rest of
his fellow-countrymen, by surprise. We find him cabling an offer of his
services as a mediator on August 3rd. Then, for a time, he and America watched
the conflict. At first neither the American people nor their President seem to
have had a very clear or profound understanding of that long-gathered
catastrophe. Their tradition for a century had been to disregard the problems
of the Old World, and it was not to be lightly changed. The imperialistic
arrogance of the German Court and the stupid inclination of the German military
authorities towards melodramatic “frightfulness,” their invasion of Belgium,
their cruelties there, their use of poison gas, and the nuisance of their
submarine campaign created a deepening hostility to Germany in the States as
the war proceeded; but the tradition of political abstinence and the
deep-rooted persuasion that America possessed a political morality altogether
superior to European conflicts restrained the President from active
intervention. He adopted a lofty tone. He professed to be unable to judge the
causes and justice of the Great War. It was largely his high pacific attitude
that secured his re-election as President for a second term. But the world is
not to be mended by merely regarding evil-doers with an expression of rather
undiscriminating disapproval. By the end of 1916 the Germans had been
encouraged to believe that under no circumstances whatever would the United
States fight, and in 1917 they began their unrestricted submarine warfare and
the sinking of American ships without notice. President Wilson and the American
people were dragged into the war by this supreme folly. And also they were
dragged into a reluctant attempt to define their relations to Old-World
politics in some other terms than those of mere aloofness. Their thoughts and
temper changed very rapidly. They came into the war side by side with the
Allies, but not in any pact with the Allies. They came into the war, in the
name of their own modern civilization, to punish and end an intolerable
political and military situation.

Slow and belated judgments are sometimes the best judgments. In a series of
“notes,” too long and various for detailed treatment in this _Outline_,
thinking aloud, as it were, in the hearing of all mankind, President Wilson
sought to state the essential differences of the American State from the Great
Powers of the Old World. We have been at some pains in this history to make
plain the development of these differences. He unfolded a conception of
international relationships that came like a gospel, like the hope of a better
world, to the whole eastern hemisphere. Secret agreements were to cease,
“nations” were to determine their own destinies, militarist aggression was to
cease, the sea-ways were to be free to all mankind. These commonplaces of
American thought, these secret desires of every sane man, came like a great
light upon the darkness of anger and conflict in Europe. At last, men felt, the
ranks of diplomacy were broken, the veils of Great Power “policy” were rent in
twain. Here with authority, with the strength of a powerful new nation behind
it, was the desire of the common man throughout the world, plainly said.

Manifestly there was needed some over-riding instrument of government to
establish world law and maintain these broad and liberal generalizations upon
human intercourse. A number of schemes had floated in men’s minds for the
attainment of that end. In particular there was a movement for some sort of
world league, a “League of Nations.” The American President adopted this phrase
and sought to realize it. An essential condition of the peace he sought through
the overthrow of German imperialism was, he declared, to be this federal organ.
This League of Nations was to be the final court of appeal in international
affairs. It was to be the substantial realization of the peace. Here again he
awakened a tremendous echo.

President Wilson was the spokesman of a new age. Throughout the war, and for
some little time after it had ended, he held, so far as the Old World was
concerned, that exalted position. But in America, where they knew him better,
there were doubts. And writing as we do now with the wisdom of subsequent
events, we can understand these doubts. America, throughout a century and more
of detachment and security, had developed new ideals and formulæ of political
thought, without realizing with any intensity that, under conditions of stress
and danger, these ideals and formulæ might have to be passionately sustained.
To her community many things were platitudes that had to the Old World
communities, entangled still in ancient political complications, the quality of
a saving gospel. President Wilson was responding to the thought and conditions
of his own people and his own country, based on a liberal tradition that had
first found its full expression in English speech; but to Europe and Asia he
seemed to be thinking and saying, for the first time in history, things
hitherto undeveloped and altogether secret. And that misconception he may have
shared.

We are dealing here with an able and successful professor of political science,
who did not fully realize what he owed to his contemporaries and the literary
and political atmosphere he had breathed throughout his life; and who passed
very rapidly, after his re-election as President, from the mental attitudes of
a political leader to those of a Messiah. His “notes” are a series of
explorations of the elements of the world situation. When at last, in his
address to Congress of January 8th, 1918, he produced his Fourteen Points as a
definite statement of the American peace intentions, they were, as a statement,
far better in their spirit than in their arrangement and matter.

Yet, since the Fourteen Points certainly mark a new epoch in human affairs, and
since it was in the belief that they would determine and limit the pains and
penalties of the peace treaty that Germany capitulated,[518] it may be well to
summarize them here, with a word or so of explanation.

(I) The First Point was the most vital of all. It summarizes and dismisses the
essential evils of the Great Power system. It demands: “Open covenants of peace
openly arrived at, after which there shall be no private international
understandings of any kind, but diplomacy shall proceed always frankly and in
the public view.”

(II) “Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas outside territorial waters
alike in peace and in war, except as the seas may be closed in whole or in part
by international action for the enforcement of international covenants.”

(III) “The removal, so far as possible, of all economic barriers and the
establishment of an equality of trade conditions among all the nations
consenting to the peace and associating themselves for its maintenance.”

(IV) “Adequate guarantees given and taken that national armaments will be
reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety.”

There are four points of universal importance, admirably stated. But II is
insufficient. Why should the sea-ways alone be free? What of the air-ways above
three thousand feet? What of the great international land routes? Why, if
Switzerland is at war with Germany and Italy, should those powers be able to
stop air and land transit and the passage of peaceful people between France and
Constantinople?

After IV, the Fourteen Points embark upon the consideration of particular
cases, for which one general statement should have sufficed.

(V) provides for “A free, open-minded and absolutely impartial adjustment of
all colonial claims based upon a strict observance of the principle that in
determining all such questions of sovereignty the interests of the populations
concerned must have equal weight with the equitable claims of the government
whose title is to be determined.”... This is hopelessly vague. What, for
instance, is this about claims and title? There is no definition, no standard
here.

The drop towards particular current issues continues in the next eight points,
which betray clearly how limited and accidental was the President’s vision of
European affairs.

(VI) is a vague demand for the evacuation of Russian territory (then occupied
by Germany), and the “assistance” (undefined) of the Russian people.

(VII) Evacuation and restoration of Belgium.

(VIII) Evacuation and restoration of all French territory, and the “righting”
of the wrong done to France by Prussia in the matter of Alsace-Lorraine.

(IX) The readjustment of the Italian frontier “on the lines of nationality.”

(X) “Autonomy” of the Austrian “subject nations.”

(XI) The Balkans to be evacuated, Serbia to be granted an outlet to the sea,
and the independence of the Balkan States to be guaranteed.

(XII) Turkish subject nations to be assured of “undoubted security of life and
unmolested opportunity of autonomous development.” The Dardanelles to be
internationalized, and Ottoman sovereignty to be recognized only in Turkish
districts.

(XIII) Poland to be independent.

Finally the Fourteenth Point arises again to the Great Charter level out of
this peddling with special cases.

(XIV) “A general association of nations must be formed under specific covenants
for the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political and territorial
independence for great and small States alike.”

So far the Fourteen Points. But some of the utterances of President Wilson
after this epoch-making address went much further and much higher than this
first statement. On September 27th, 1918, at New York, he said some very
important things:

“As I see it, the constitution of that League of Nations and the clear
definition of its objects must be a part, in a sense the most essential part,
of the peace settlement itself. It cannot be formed now. If formed now, it
would be merely a new alliance confined to the nations associated against a
common enemy....

“But these general terms do not disclose the whole matter. Some details are
needed to make them sound less like a thesis and more like a practical
programme. These, then, are some of the particulars, and I state them with the
greater confidence because I can state them authoritatively as representing
this Government’s interpretation of its own duty with regard to peace.

“First, the impartial justice meted out must involve no discrimination between
those to whom we wish to be just and those to whom we do not wish to be just.
It must be a justice that has no favourites and knows no standards but the
equal rights of the several peoples concerned.

“Second, no special or separate interest of any single nation or any group of
nations can be made the basis of any part of the settlement which is not
consistent with the common interest of all.

“Third, there can be no leagues or alliances or special covenants and
understandings within the general and common family of the League of Nations.

“Fourth, and more specifically, there can be no special selfish economic
combinations within the League, and no employment of any form of economic
boycott or exclusion, except as the power of economic penalty, by exclusion
from the markets of the world, may be vested in the League of Nations itself as
a means of discipline and control.

“Fifth, all international agreements and treaties of every kind must be made
known in their entirety to the rest of the world....

“In the same sentence in which I say that the United States will enter into no
special arrangements or understandings with particular nations, let me say also
that the United States is prepared to assume its full share of responsibility
for the maintenance of the common covenants and understandings upon which peace
must henceforth rest.

“We still read Washington’s immortal warning against entangling alliances with
full comprehension and an answering purpose. But only special and limited
alliances entangle; and we recognize and accept the duty of a new day in which
we are permitted to hope for a general alliance, which will avoid entanglements
and clear the air of the world for common understandings and the maintenance of
common rights.”

These Fourteen Points and their significant later addenda had an immense
reception throughout the world. Here at last seemed a peace for reasonable men
everywhere, as good and acceptable to honest and decent Germans and Russians,
as to honest and decent Frenchmen and Englishmen and Belgians; and for some
months the whole world was lit by faith in Wilson. Could they have been made
the basis of a world settlement in 1919, they would forthwith have opened a new
and more hopeful era in human affairs.

But, as we must tell, they did not do that. There was about President Wilson a
certain narrowness of mind, a certain suspicion of egotism; there was in the
generation of people in the United States to whom this great occasion came, a
generation born in security, reared in plenty and, so far as history goes, in
ignorance, a generation remote from the tragic issues that had made Europe
grave, a certain superficiality and lightness of mind. It was not that the
American people were superficial by nature and necessity, but that they had
never been deeply stirred by the idea of a human community larger than their
own. It was an intellectual but not a moral conviction, with them. One had on
the one hand these new people of the new world, with their new ideas, their
finer and better ideas, of peace and world righteousness, and on the other the
old, bitter, deeply entangled peoples of the Great Power system and the former
were crude and rather childish in their immense inexperience, and the latter
were seasoned and bitter and intricate. The theme of this clash of the raw
idealist youthfulness of a new age with the experienced ripeness of the old,
was treated years ago by that great novelist, Henry James, in a very typical
story called _Daisy Miller_. It is the pathetic story of a frank, trustful,
high-minded, but rather simple-minded American girl, with a real disposition
towards righteousness and a great desire for a “good time” and how she came to
Europe and was swiftly entangled and put in the wrong, and at last driven to
welcome death by the complex tortuousness and obstinate limitations of the
older world. There have been a thousand variants of that theme in real life, a
thousand such trans-Atlantic tragedies, and the story of President Wilson is
one of them. But it is not to be supposed, because the new thing succumbs to
the old infections, that is the final condemnation of the new thing.

Probably no fallible human being manifestly trying to do his best amidst
overwhelming circumstances has been subjected to such minute, searching, and
pitiless criticism as President Wilson. He is blamed, and it would seem that he
is rightly blamed, for conducting the war and the ensuing peace negotiations on
strictly party lines. He remained the President representing the American
Democratic Party, when circumstances conspired to make him the representative
of the general interests of mankind. He made no attempt to forget party issues
for a time, and to incorporate with himself such great American leaders as
ex-President Roosevelt, ex-President Taft, and the like. He did not draw fully
upon the moral and intellectual resources of the States; he made the whole
issue too personal, and he surrounded himself with merely personal adherents.
And a still graver error was his decision to come to the Peace Conference
himself. Nearly every experienced critic seems to be of opinion that he should
have remained in America, in the rôle of America, speaking occasionally as if a
nation spoke. Throughout the concluding years of the war he had achieved an
unexampled position in the world.

[Illustration: President Wilson]

Says Doctor Dillon:[519] “Europe, when the President touched its shores, was as
clay ready for the creative potter. Never before were the nations so eager to
follow a Moses who would take them to the long-promised land where wars are
prohibited and blockades unknown. And to their thinking he was that great
leader. In France men bowed down before him with awe and affection. Labour
leaders in Paris told me that they shed tears of joy in his presence, and that
their comrades would go through fire and water to help him to realize his noble
schemes. To the working classes in Italy his name was a heavenly clarion at the
sound of which the earth would be renewed. The Germans regarded him and his
humane doctrine as their sheet-anchor of safety. The fearless Herr Muehlon
said: ‘If President Wilson were to address the Germans, and pronounce a severe
sentence upon them, they would accept it with resignation and without a murmur
and set to work at once.’ In German-Austria his fame was that of a saviour, and
the mere mention of his name brought balm to the suffering and surcease of
sorrow to the afflicted....”

Such was the overpowering expectation of the audience to which President Wilson
prepared to show himself. He reached France on board the _George Washington_ in
December, 1918.

He brought his wife with him. That seemed no doubt a perfectly natural and
proper thing to an American mind. Quite a number of the American
representatives brought their wives. Unhappily a social quality, nay, almost a
tourist quality, was introduced into the world settlement by these ladies.
Transport facilities were limited, and most of them arrived in Europe with a
radiant air of privilege. They came as if they came to a treat. They were, it
was intimated, seeing Europe under exceptionally interesting circumstances.
They would visit Chester, or Warwick, or Windsor _en route_--for they might not
have a chance of seeing these celebrated places again. Important interviews
would be broken off to get in a visit to some “old historical mansion.” This
may seem a trivial matter to note in a History of Mankind, but it was such
small human things as this that threw a miasma of futility over the Peace
Conference of 1919. In a little while one discovered that Wilson, the Hope of
Mankind, had vanished, and that all the illustrated fashion papers contained
pictures of a delighted tourist and his wife, grouped smilingly with crowned
heads and such-like enviable company.... It is so easy to be wise after the
event, and to perceive that he should not have come over.

[Illustration: M. Clemenceau]

The men he had chiefly to deal with, for example M. Clemenceau (France), Mr.
Lloyd George and Mr. Balfour (Britain), Baron Sonnino and Signor Orlando
(Italy), were men of widely dissimilar historical traditions. But in one
respect they resembled him and appealed to his sympathies. They, too, were
party politicians, who had led their country through the war. Like himself they
had failed to grasp the necessity of entrusting the work of settlement to more
specially qualified men. “They were the merest novices in international
affairs. Geography, ethnology, psychology, and political history were sealed
books to them. Like the Rector of Louvain University, who told Oliver Goldsmith
that, as he had become the head of that institution without knowing Greek, he
failed to see why it should be taught there, the chiefs of State, having
obtained the highest position in their respective countries without more than
an inkling of international affairs, were unable to realize the importance of
mastering them or the impossibility of repairing the omission as they went
along....”[520]

“What they lacked, however, might in some perceptible degree have been supplied
by enlisting as their helpers men more happily endowed than themselves. But
they deliberately chose mediocrities. It is a mark of genial spirits that they
are well served, but the plenipotentiaries of the Conference were not
characterized by it. Away in the background some of them had familiars or
casual prompters to whose counsels they were wont to listen, but many of the
adjoints who moved in the limelight of the world-stage were gritless and
pithless.

[Illustration: Mr. Lloyd George]

“As the heads of the principal Governments implicitly claimed to be the
authorized spokesmen of the human race, and endowed with unlimited powers, it
is worth noting that this claim was boldly challenged by the people’s organs in
the Press. Nearly all the journals read by the masses objected from the first
to the dictatorship of the group of Premiers, Mr. Wilson being
excepted....”[521]

The restriction upon our space in this _Outline_ will not allow us to tell here
how the Peace Conference shrank from a Council of Ten to a Council of Four
(Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Orlando), and how it became a conference
less and less like a frank and open discussion of the future of mankind, and
more and more like some old-fashioned diplomatic conspiracy. Great and
wonderful had been the hopes that had gathered to Paris. “The Paris of the
Conference,” says Dr. Dillon, “ceased to be the capital of France. It became a
vast cosmopolitan caravanserai teeming with unwonted aspects of life and
turmoil, filled with curious samples of the races, tribes, and tongues of four
continents who came to watch and wait for the mysterious to-morrow.

“An Arabian Nights’ touch was imparted to the dissolving panorama by strange
visitants from Tartary and Kurdistan, Corea and Aderbeijan, Armenia, Persia,
and the Hedjaz--men with patriarchal beards and scimitar-shaped noses, and
others from desert and oasis, from Samarkand and Bokhara. Turbans and fezzes,
sugar-loaf hats and head-gear resembling episcopal mitres, old military
uniforms devised for the embryonic armies of new states on the eve of perpetual
peace, snowy-white burnouses, flowing mantles, and graceful garments like the
Roman toga, contributed to create an atmosphere of dreamy unreality in the city
where the grimmest of realities were being faced and coped with.

“Then came the men of wealth, of intellect, of industrial enterprise, and the
seed-bearers of the ethical new ordering, members of economic committees from
the United States, Britain, Italy, Poland, Russia, India, and Japan,
representatives of naphtha industries and far-off coal mines, pilgrims,
fanatics and charlatans from all climes, priests of all religions, preachers of
every doctrine, who mingled with princes, field-marshals, statesmen,
anarchists, builders-up and pullers-down. All of them burned with desire to be
near to the crucible in which the political and social systems of the world
were to be melted and recast. Every day, in my walks in my apartment, or at
restaurants, I met emissaries from lands and peoples whose very names had
seldom been heard of before in the West. A delegation from the Pont-Euxine
Greeks called on me, and discoursed of their ancient cities of Trebizond,
Samsoun, Tripoli, Kerassund, in which I resided many years ago, and informed me
that they, too, desired to become welded into an independent Greek Republic,
and had come to have their claims allowed. The Albanians were represented by my
old friend Turkhan Pasha, on the one hand, and by my friend Essad Pasha on the
other--the former desirous of Italy’s protection, the latter demanding complete
independence. Chinamen, Japanese, Coreans, Hindus, Kirghizes, Lesghiens,
Circassians, Mingrelians, Buryats, Malays, and Negroes and Negroids from Africa
and America were among the tribes and tongues foregathered in Paris to watch
the rebuilding of the political world system and to see where they ‘came in.’
...”

To this thronging, amazing Paris, agape for a new world, came President Wilson,
and found its gathering forces dominated by a personality narrower, in every
way more limited and beyond comparison more forcible than himself: the French
Premier, M. Clemenceau. At the instance of President Wilson, M. Clemenceau was
elected President of the Conference. “It was,” said President Wilson, “a
special tribute to the sufferings and sacrifices of France.” And that,
unhappily, sounded the keynote of the Conference, whose sole business should
have been with the future of mankind.

Georges Benjamin Clemenceau[522] was an old journalist politician, a great
denouncer of abuses, a great upsetter of governments, a doctor who had, while a
municipal councillor, kept a free clinic, and a fierce, experienced duellist.
None of his duels ended fatally, but he faced them with great intrepidity. He
had passed from the medical school to republican journalism in the days of the
Empire. In those days he was an extremist of the left. He was for a time a
teacher in America, and he married and divorced an American wife. He was thirty
in the eventful year 1871. He returned to France after Sedan, and flung himself
into the stormy politics of the defeated nation with great fire and vigour.
Thereafter France was his world, the France of vigorous journalism,
high-spirited personal quarrels, challenges, confrontations, scenes, dramatic
effects, and witticisms at any cost. He was what people call “fierce stuff,” he
was nicknamed the “Tiger,” and he seems to have been rather proud of his
nickname. Professional patriot rather than statesman and thinker, this was the
man whom the war had flung up to misrepresent the fine mind and the generous
spirit of France.[523] His limitations had a profound effect upon the
conference, which was further coloured by the dramatic resort for the purpose
of signature to the very Hall of Mirrors at Versailles in which Germany had
triumphed and proclaimed her unity. There the Germans were to sign. To M.
Clemenceau and to France, in that atmosphere, the war ceased to seem a world
war; it was merely the sequel of the previous conflict of the Terrible Year,
the downfall and punishment of offending Germany. “The world had to be made
safe for democracy,” said President Wilson. That from M. Clemenceau’s expressed
point of view was “talking like Jesus Christ.” The world had to be made safe
for Paris. “Talking like Jesus Christ” seemed a very ridiculous thing to many
of those brilliant rather than sound diplomatists and politicians who made the
year 1919 supreme in the history of human insufficiency.

(Another flash of the “Tiger’s” wit, it may be noted, was that President Wilson
with his fourteen points was “worse” than God Almighty. “Le bon Dieu” only had
ten....)

M. Clemenceau sat with Signor Orlando in the more central chairs of a
semicircle of four in front of the fire, says Keynes. He wore a black
frock-coat and grey suede gloves, which he never removed during these sessions.
He was, it is to be noted, the only one of these four reconstructors of the
world who could understand and speak both French and English.

The aims of M. Clemenceau were simple and in a manner attainable. He wanted all
the settlement of 1871 undone. He wanted Germany punished as though she was a
uniquely sinful nation and France a sinless martyr land. He wanted Germany so
crippled and devastated as never more to be able to stand up to France. He
wanted to hurt and humiliate Germany more than France had been hurt and
humiliated in 1871. He did not care if in breaking Germany Europe was broken;
his mind did not go far enough beyond the Rhine to understand that possibility.
He accepted President Wilson’s League of Nations as an excellent proposal if it
would guarantee the security of France whatever she did, but he preferred a
binding alliance of the United States and England to maintain, uphold, and
glorify France under practically any circumstances. He wanted wider
opportunities for the exploitation of Syria, north Africa, and so forth by
Parisian financial groups. He wanted indemnities to recuperate France, loans,
gifts, and tributes to France, glory and homage to France. France had suffered,
and France had to be rewarded. Belgium, Russia, Serbia, Poland, Armenia,
Britain, Germany, and Austria had all suffered too, all mankind had suffered,
but what would you? that was not his affair. These were the supers of a drama
in which France was for him the star.... In much the same spirit Signor Orlando
seems to have sought the welfare of Italy.

Mr. Lloyd George brought to the Council of Four the subtlety of a Welshman, the
intricacy of a European, and an urgent necessity for respecting the nationalist
egotism of the British imperialists and capitalists who had returned him to
power. Into the secrecy of that council went President Wilson (leaving Point I
at the door) with the very noblest aims for his newly discovered American world
policy, his rather hastily compiled Fourteen (now reduced to Thirteen) Points,
and a project rather than a scheme for a League of Nations.

The Second Point was presently observed to be missing. It may have fallen into
the Atlantic on the way over. It may have been thrown into the sea as an
offering to the British Admiralty.

“There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent than
the President in the agilities of the Council Chamber.”[524] From the
whispering darknesses and fireside disputes of that council, and after various
comings and goings we cannot here describe, he emerged at last with his
Fourteen Points pitifully torn and dishevelled, but with a little puling infant
of a League of Nations, which might die or which might live and grow--no one
could tell. This history cannot tell. We are at the end of our term. But that
much, at least, he had saved....

Let us now consider briefly this Covenant of the League of Nations, and
recapitulate the terms of the quasi-settlement of the world’s affairs of
1919-20; and let us indicate here and there where the latter departs from the
promised standard of the Fourteen Points, and where it is most dangerous to the
future peace and most manifestly contrary to the welfare of mankind. Because
just as the history of Europe in the nineteenth century was largely the undoing
of the Treaty of Vienna, and as the Great War was the necessary outcome of the
Treaty of Frankfort and the Treaty of Berlin, so the general history of the
twentieth century henceforth will be largely the amendment or reversal of the
more ungenerous and unscientific arrangements of the Treaty of 1919, and a
struggle to establish those necessary impartial world controls of which the
League of Nations is the first insufficient and unsatisfactory sketch.

