# BOOK IV - XXIII - § 4
[Metadata]: # {05.03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {05.03.04}
[Author]: # {wells}
JUDEA, GREECE, AND INDIA

GREEK THOUGHT AND LITERATURE[182]

§ 1. _The Athens of Pericles._ § 2. _Socrates._ § 3. _What was the
Quality of the Common Athenians?_ § 4. _Greek Tragedy and Comedy._      § 5.
_Plato and the Academy._ § 6. _Aristotle and the Lyceum._ § 7.      _Philosophy
becomes Unworldly._ § 8. _The Quality and Limitations      of Greek Thought._

# § 4
The most characteristic feature of the opening years of this brilliant century
and a half (475 to 325 B.C.) of Greek intellectual life was the appearance of
the great tragedies.

Before the age of Pericles the main literature of the Greek peoples had been
their epic poetry, of which we have already said something in our account of
the earlier nomadic Aryan life. It was made up of songs of free adventure,
aristocratic and valiant in spirit. The main Greek epics were reduced to
writing, and the text of the chief ones put in its present order in the time of
the tyrant Peisistratus (_i.e._, immediately before the first Persian wars).
Chanted originally to the chiefs and leading men in hall, they were now recited
at the public festivals. In addition, there were also poems of more homely
character, love songs, war lyrics, and the like.

A third stream of poetry also ran into the Greek tradition, perhaps not of
Aryan origin at all, but preserving the religious ideas of the dark whites whom
the Greeks had conquered. There were religious chants and hymns associated with
the secret religious practices of the worship of Demeter, the earth goddess,
and of Orpheus and Dionysus. They are mixed up with ideas of self-abasement,
self-mutilation, and the like, that were altogether foreign to the healthy
directness of the hardy barbarians from the north. These ideas were creeping
out from their hiding-places, and expressing themselves in Greek in Athens
during this period in the Orphic religious poetry. It seems probable that in
the Athenian population among all the Greek cities the pre-Aryan strain was
unusually strong. This dark strain was subtle, artistic, creative--Cnossos
witnesses to that; but it had no great courage of the mind; it was afraid of
the stars and of life. Whenever that strain is found in any race, there are to
be found also thoughts and legends of sacrificial murders.

And perhaps also indigenous to the Greek soil, rooted deeply there in the time
of the world-wide ancient heliolithic culture, were religious dances. Such
dances we can trace from the Atlantic to Peru. There is a drawing in a Spanish
cave at Cogul, near the Ebro, which is supposed to represent a later
palæolithic ritual dance. There is little evidence of the primitive Aryans
engaging in religious dances. But running through the rural life of Greece was
the tradition of a dressing-up and a dancing and chanting associated with the
worship of another god, who is killed and lives again as a part of the
ceremonies, the god Dionysus. After the coming of the Aryans into Greece, the
vocal element became stronger in these proceedings, and thrust into the dance
came a recitation. There was first one reciter, then two, and then three, and
the rest of the company became the chorus to the declamations of these
principal actors. Out of the public performance at festivals and anniversaries
of these choir songs or dithyrambs with one actor grew the great art of tragedy
with three and more. Side by side with tragedy, comedy developed from another
and merrier series of dressings-up and singing. Here we can but name those who
were supreme in these arts who flourished in the days of Pericles, Æschylus,
Sophocles, and Euripides, the masters of tragedy, and Aristophanes, the writer
of comedies. We can say nothing of the splendour and beauty of the former, nor
of the fantastic invention and wit of the latter. Æschylus won his first prize
for tragedy in the year that Herodotus was born (484 B.C.); Sophocles came some
eighteen years later; Euripides was four years old when Æschylus was beginning
his career. The mockery of Aristophanes broke out (427 B.C.) only when the days
of great tragedy and sculpture and building were drawing to a close.[187]

