AKALLABÊTH

The Downfall of Númenor

It is said by the Eldar that Men came into the world in the time of the Shadow
of Morgoth, and they fell swiftly under his dominion; for he sent his emissaries
among them, and they listened to his evil and cunning words, and they worshipped
the Darkness and yet feared it. But there were some that turned from evil and
left the lands of their kindred, and wandered ever westward; for they had heard
a rumour that in the West there was a light which the Shadow could not dim. The
servants of Morgoth pursued them with hatred, and their ways were long and hard;
yet they came at last to the lands that look upon the Sea, and they entered
Beleriand in the days of the War of the Jewels. The Edain these were named in
the Sindarin tongue; and they became friends and allies of the Eldar, and did
deeds of great valour in the war against Morgoth.

Of them was sprung, upon the side of his fathers, Bright Eärendil; and in the
Lay of Eärendil it is told how at the last, when the victory of Morgoth was
almost complete, he built his ship Vingilot, that Men called Rothinzil, and
voyaged upon the unsailed seas, seeking ever for Valinor; for he desired to
speak before the Powers on behalf of the Two Kindreds, that the Valar might have
pity on them and send them help in their uttermost need. Therefore by Elves and
Men he is called Eärendil the Blessed, for he achieved his quest after long
labours and many perils, and from Valinor there came the host of the Lords of
the West. But Eärendil came never back to the lands that he had loved.

In the Great Battle when at last Morgoth was overthrown and Thangorodrim was
broken, the Edain alone of the kindreds of Men fought for the Valar, whereas
many others fought for Morgoth. And after the victory of the Lords of the West
those of the evil Men who were not destroyed fled back into the east, where many
of their race were still wandering in the unharvested lands, wild and lawless,
refusing alike the summons of the Valar and of Morgoth. And the evil Men came
among them, and cast over them a shadow of fear, and they took them for kings.
Then the Valar forsook for a time the Men of Middle-earth who had refused their
summons and had taken the friends of Morgoth to be their masters; and Men dwelt
in darkness and were troubled by many evil things that Morgoth had devised in
the days of his dominion: demons, and dragons, and misshapen beasts, and the
unclean Orcs that are mockeries of the Children of Ilúvatar. And the lot of Men
was unhappy.

But Manwë put forth Morgoth and shut him beyond the World in the Void that is
without; and he cannot himself return again into the World, present and visible,
while the Lords of the West are still enthroned. Yet the seeds that he had
planted still grew and sprouted, bearing evil fruit, if any would tend them. For
his will remained and guided his servants, moving them ever to thwart the will
of the Valar and to destroy those that obeyed them. This the Lords of the West
knew full well. When therefore Morgoth had been thrust forth, they held council
concerning the ages that should come after. The Eldar they summoned to return
into the West, and those that hearkened to the summons dwelt in the Isle of
Eressëa; and there is in that land a haven that is named Avallónë, for it is of
all cities the nearest to Valinor, and the tower of Avallónë is the first sight
that the mariner beholds when at last he draws nigh to the Undying Lands over
the leagues of the Sea. To the Fathers of Men of the three faithful houses rich
reward also was given. Eönwë came among them and taught them; and they were
given wisdom and power and life more enduring than any others of mortal race
have possessed. A land was made for the Edain to dwell in, neither part of
Middle-earth nor of Valinor, for it was sundered from either by a wide sea; yet
it was nearer to Valinor. It was raised by Ossë out of the depths of the Great
Water, and it was established by Aulë and enriched by Yavanna; and the Eldar
brought thither flowers and fountains out of Tol Eressëa. That land the Valar
called Andor, the Land of Gift; and the Star of Eärendil shone bright in the
West as a token that all was made ready, and as a guide over the sea; and Men
marvelled to see that silver flame in the paths of the Sun.

Then the Edain set sail upon the deep waters, following the Star; and the Valar
laid a peace upon the sea for many days, and sent sunlight and a sailing wind,
so that the waters glittered before the eyes of the Edain like rippling glass,
and the foam flew like snow before the stems of their ships. But so bright was
Rothinzil that even at morning Men could see it glimmering in the West, and in
the cloudless night it shone alone, for no other star could stand beside it. And
setting their course towards it the Edain came at last over leagues of sea and
saw afar the land that was prepared for them, Andor, the Land of Gift,
shimmering in a golden haze. Then they went up out of the sea and found a
country fair and fruitful, and they were glad. And they called that land Elenna,
which is Starwards; but also Anadûnë, which is Westernesse, Númenórë in the High
Eldarin tongue.

This was the beginning of that people that in the Grey-elven speech are called
the Dúnedain: the Númenóreans, Kings among Men. But they did not thus escape
from the doom of death that Ilúvatar had set upon all Mankind, and they were
mortal still, though their years were long, and they knew no sickness, ere the
shadow fell upon them. Therefore they grew wise and glorious, and in all things
more like to the Firstborn than any other of the kindreds of Men; and they were
tall, taller than the tallest of the sons of Middle-earth; and the light of
their eyes was like the bright stars. But their numbers increased only slowly in
the land, for though daughters and sons were born to them, fairer than their
fathers, yet their children were few.

Of old the chief city and haven of Númenor was in the midst of its western
coasts, and it was called Andúnië because it faced the sunset. But in the midst
of the land was a mountain tall and steep, and it was named the Meneltarma, the
Pillar of Heaven, and upon it was a high place that was hallowed to Eru
Ilúvatar, and it was open and unroofed, and no other temple or fane was there in
the land of the Númenóreans. At the feet of the mountain were built the tombs of
the Kings, and hard by upon a hill was Armenelos, fairest of cities, and there
stood the tower and the citadel that was raised by Elros son of Eärendil, whom
the Valar appointed to be the first King of the Dúnedain.

Now Elros and Elrond his brother were descended from the Three Houses of the
Edain, but in part also both from the Eldar and the Maiar; for Idril of Gondolin
and Lúthien daughter of Melian were their fore-mothers. The Valar indeed may not
withdraw the gift of death, which comes to Men from Ilúvatar, but in the matter
of the Half-elven Ilúvatar gave to them the judgement; and they judged that to
the sons of Eärendil should be given choice of their own destiny. And Elrond
chose to remain with the Firstborn, and to him the life of the Firstborn was
granted. But to Elros, who chose to be a king of Men, still a great span of
years was allotted, many times that of the Men of Middle-earth; and all his
line, the kings and lords of the royal house, had long life even according to
the measure of the Númenóreans. But Elros lived five hundred years, and ruled
the Númenóreans four hundred years and ten.

Thus the years passed, and while Middle-earth went backward and light and
wisdom faded, the Dúnedain dwelt under the protection of the Valar and in the
friendship of the Eldar, and they increased in stature both of mind and body.
For though this people used still their own speech, their kings and lords knew
and spoke also the Elven tongue, which they had learned in the days of their
alliance, and thus they held converse still with the Eldar, whether of Eressëa
or of the west-lands of Middle-earth. And the loremasters among them learned
also the High Eldarin tongue of the Blessed Realm, in which much story and song
was preserved from the beginning of the world; and they made letters and scrolls
and books, and wrote in them many things of wisdom and wonder in the high tide
of their realm, of which all is now forgot. So it came to pass that, beside
their own names, all the lords of the Númenóreans had also Eldarin names; and
the like with the cities and fair places that they founded in Númenor and on the
shores of the Hither Lands.

For the Dúnedain became mighty in crafts, so that if they had had the mind they
could easily have surpassed the evil kings of Middle-earth in the making of war
and the forging of weapons; but they were become men of peace. Above all arts
they nourished shipbuilding and sea-craft, and they became mariners whose like
shall never be again since the world was diminished; and voyaging upon the wide
seas was the chief feat and adventure of their hardy men in the gallant days of
their youth.

But the Lords of Valinor forbade them to sail so far westward that the coasts
of Númenor could no longer be seen; and for long the Dúnedain were content,
though they did not fully understand the purpose of this ban. But the design of
Manwë was that the Númenóreans should not be tempted to seek for the Blessed
Realm, nor desire to overpass the limits set to their bliss, becoming enamoured
of the immortality of the Valar and the Eldar and the lands where all things
endure.

For in those days Valinor still remained in the world visible, and there
Ilúvatar permitted the Valar to maintain upon Earth an abiding place, a memorial
of that which might have been if Morgoth had not cast his shadow on the world.
This the Númenóreans knew full well; and at times, when all the air was clear
and the sun was in the east, they would look out and descry far off in the west
a city white-shining on a distant shore, and a great harbour and a tower. For in
those days the Númenóreans were far-sighted; yet even so it was only the keenest
eyes among them that could see this vision, from the Meneltarma, maybe, or from
some tall ship that lay off their western coast as far as it was lawful for them
to go. For they did not dare to break the Ban of the Lords of the West. But the
wise among them knew that this distant land was not indeed the Blessed Realm of
Valinor, but was Avallónë, the haven of the Eldar upon Eressëa, easternmost of
the Undying Lands. And thence at times the Firstborn still would come sailing to
Númenor in oarless boats, as white birds flying from the sunset. And they
brought to Númenor many gifts: birds of song, and fragrant flowers, and herbs of
great virtue. And a seedling they brought of Celeborn, the White Tree that grew
in the midst of Eressëa; and that was in its turn a seedling of Galathilion the
Tree of Túna, the image of Telperion that Yavanna gave to the Eldar in the
Blessed Realm. And the tree grew and blossomed in the courts of the King in
Armenelos; Nimloth it was named, and flowered in the evening, and the shadows of
night it filled with its fragrance.

Thus it was that because of the Ban of the Valar the voyages of the Dúnedain in
those days went ever eastward and not westward, from the darkness of the North
to the heats of the South, and beyond the South to the Nether Darkness; and they
came even into the inner seas, and sailed about Middle-earth and glimpsed from
their high prows the Gates of Morning in the East. And the Dúnedain came at
times to the shores of the Great Lands, and they took pity on the forsaken world
of Middle-earth; and the Lords of Númenor set foot again upon the western shores
in the Dark Years of Men, and none yet dared to withstand them. For most of the
Men of that age that sat under the Shadow were now grown weak and fearful. And
coming among them the Númenóreans taught them many things. Corn and wine they
brought, and they instructed Men in the sowing of seed and the grinding of
grain, in the hewing of wood and the shaping of stone, and in the ordering of
their life, such as it might be in the lands of swift death and little bliss.

Then the Men of Middle-earth were comforted, and here and there upon the
western shores the houseless woods drew back, and Men shook off the yoke of the
offspring of Morgoth, and unlearned their terror of the dark. And they revered
the memory of the tall Sea-kings, and when they had departed they called them
gods, hoping for their return; for at that time the Númenóreans dwelt never long
in Middle-earth, nor made there as yet any habitation of their own. Eastward
they must sail, but ever west their hearts returned.

Now this yearning grew ever greater with the years; and the Númenóreans began
to hunger for the undying city that they saw from afar, and the desire of
everlasting life, to escape from death and the ending of delight, grew strong
upon them; and ever as their power and glory grew greater their unquiet
increased. For though the Valar had rewarded the Dúnedain with long life, they
could not take from them the weariness of the world that comes at last, and they
died, even their kings of the seed of Eärendil; and the span of their lives was
brief in the eyes of the Eldar. Thus it was that a shadow fell upon them: in
which maybe the will of Morgoth was at work that still moved in the world. And
the Númenóreans began to murmur, at first in their hearts, and then in open
words, against the doom of Men, and most of all against the Ban which forbade
them to sail into the West.

And they said among themselves: 'Why do the Lords of the West sit there in
peace unending, while we must die and go we know not whither, leaving our home
and all that we have made? And the Eldar die not, even those that rebelled
against the Lords. And since we have mastered all seas, and no water is so wild
or so wide that our ships cannot overcome it, why should we not go to Avallónë
and greet there our friends?'

And some there were who said: 'Why should we not go even to Aman, and taste
there, were it but for a day, the bliss of the Powers? Have we not become mighty
among the people of Arda?'

The Eldar reported these words to the Valar, and Manwë was grieved, seeing a
cloud gather on the noontide of Númenor. And he sent messengers to the Dúnedain,
who spoke earnestly to the King, and to all who would listen, concerning the
fate and fashion of the world.

'The Doom of the World,' they said, 'One alone can change who made it. And were
you so to voyage that escaping all deceits and snares you came indeed to Aman,
the Blessed Realm, little would it profit you. For it is not the land of Manwë
that makes its people deathless, but the Deathless that dwell therein have
hallowed the land; and there you would but wither and grow weary the sooner, as
moths in a light too strong and steadfast.'

But the King said: 'And does not Eärendil, my forefather, live? Or is he not in
the land of Aman?'

To which they answered: 'You know that he has a fate apart, and was adjudged to
the Firstborn who die not; yet this also is his doom that he can never return
again to mortal lands. Whereas you and your people are not of the Firstborn, but
are mortal Men as Ilúvatar made you. Yet it seems that you desire now to have
the good of both kindreds, to sail to Valinor when you will, and to return when
you please to your homes. That cannot be. Nor can the Valar take away the gifts
of Ilúvatar. The Eldar, you say, are unpunished, and even those who rebelled do
not die. Yet that is to them neither reward nor punishment, but the fulfilment
of their being. They cannot escape, and are bound to this world, never to leave
it so long as it lasts, for its life is theirs. And you are punished for the
rebellion of Men, you say, in which you had small part, and so it is that you
die. But that was not at first appointed for a punishment. Thus you escape, and
leave the world, and are not bound to it, in hope or in weariness. Which of us
therefore should envy the others?"

And the Númenóreans answered: 'Why should we not envy the Valar, or even the
least of the Deathless? For of us is required a blind trust, and a hope without
assurance, knowing not what lies before us in a little while. And yet we also
love the Earth and would not lose it.'

Then the Messengers said: 'Indeed the mind of Ilúvatar concerning you is not
known to the Valar, and he has not revealed all things that are to come. But
this we hold to be true, that your home is not here, neither in the Land of Aman
nor anywhere within the Circles of the World. And the Doom of Men, that they
should depart, was at first a gift of Ilúvatar. It became a grief to them only
because coming under the shadow of Morgoth it seemed to them that they were
surrounded by a great darkness, of which they were afraid; and some grew wilful
and proud and would not yield, until life was reft from them. We who bear the
ever-mounting burden of the years do not clearly understand this; but if that
grief has returned to trouble you, as you say, then we fear that the Shadow
arises once more and grows again in your hearts. Therefore, though you be the
Dúnedain, fairest of Men, who escaped from the Shadow of old and fought
valiantly against it, we say to you: Beware! The will of Eru may not be
gainsaid; and the Valar bid you earnestly not to withhold the trust to which you
are called, lest soon it become again a bond by which you are constrained. Hope
rather that in the end even the least of your desires shall have fruit. The love
of Arda was set in your hearts by Ilúvatar, and he does not plant to no purpose.
Nonetheless, many ages of Men unborn may pass ere that purpose is made known;
and to you it will be revealed and not to the Valar.'

These things took place in the days of Tar-Ciryatan the Shipbuilder, and of
Tar-Atanamir his son; and they were proud men, eager for wealth, and they laid
the men of Middle-earth under tribute, taking now rather than giving. It was to
Tar-Atanamir that the Messengers came; and he was the thirteenth King, and in
his day the Realm of Númenor had endured for more than two thousand years, and
was come to the zenith of its bliss, if not yet of its power. But Atanamir was
ill pleased with the counsel of the Messengers and gave little heed to it, and
the greater part of his people followed him; for they wished still to escape
death in their own day, not waiting upon hope. And Atanamir lived to a great
age, clinging to his life beyond the end of all joy; and he was the first of the
Númenóreans to do this, refusing to depart until he was witless and unmanned,
and denying to his son the kingship at the height of his days. For the Lords of
Númenor had been wont to wed late in their long lives and to depart and leave
the mastery to their sons when these were come to full stature of body and mind.

Then Tar-Ancalimon, son of Atanamir, became King, and he was of like mind; and
in his day the people of Númenor became divided. On the one hand was the greater
party, and they were called the King's Men, and they grew proud and were
estranged from the Eldar and the Valar. And on the other hand was the lesser
party, and they were called the Elendili, the Elf-friends; for though they
remained loyal indeed to the King and the House of Elros, they wished to keep
the friendship of the Eldar, and they hearkened to the counsel of the Lords of
the West. Nonetheless even they, who named themselves the Faithful, did not
wholly escape from the affliction of their people, and they were troubled by the
thought of death.

Thus the bliss of Westernesse became diminished; but still its might and
splendour increased. For the kings and their people had not yet abandoned
wisdom, and if they loved the Valar no longer at least they still feared them.
They did not dare openly to break the Ban or to sail beyond the limits that had
been appointed. Eastwards still they steered their tall ships. But the fear of
death grew ever darker upon them, and they delayed it by all means that they
could; and they began to build great houses for their dead, while their wise men
laboured unceasingly to discover if they might the secret of recalling life, or
at the least of the prolonging of Men's days. Yet they achieved only the art of
preserving incorrupt the dead flesh of Men, and they filled all the land with
silent tombs in which the thought of death was enshrined in the darkness. But
those that lived turned the more eagerly to pleasure and revelry, desiring ever
more goods and more riches; and after the days of Tar-Ancalimon the offering of
the first fruits to Eru was neglected, and men went seldom any more to the
Hallow upon the heights of Meneltarma in the midst of the land.

Thus it came to pass in that time that the Númenóreans first made great
settlements upon the west shores of the ancient lands; for their own land seemed
to them shrunken, and they had no rest or content therein, and they desired now
wealth and dominion in Middle-earth, since the West was denied. Great harbours
and strong towers they made, and there many of them took up their abode; but
they appeared now rather as lords and masters and gatherers of tribute than as
helpers and teachers. And the great ships of the Númenóreans were borne east on
the winds and returned ever laden, and the power and majesty of their kings were
increased; and they drank and they feasted and they clad themselves in silver
and gold.

In all this the Elf-friends had small part They alone came now ever to the
north and the land of Gil-galad, keeping their friendship with the Elves and
lending them aid against Sauron; and their haven was Pelargir above the mouths
of Anduin the Great. But the King's Men sailed far away to the south; and the
lordships and strongholds that they made have left many rumours in the legends
of Men.

In this Age, as is elsewhere told, Sauron arose again in Middle-earth, and
grew, and turned back to the evil in which he was nurtured by Morgoth, becoming
mighty in his service. Already in the days of Tar-Minastir, the eleventh King of
Númenor, he had fortified the land of Mordor and had built there the Tower of
Barad-dûr, and thereafter he strove ever for the dominion of Middle-earth, to
become a king over all kings and as a god unto Men. And Sauron hated the
Númenóreans, because of the deeds of their fathers and their ancient alliance
with the Elves and allegiance to the Valar; nor did he forget the aid that
Tar-Minastir had rendered to Gil-galad of old, in that time when the One Ring
was forged and there was war between Sauron and the Elves in Eriador. Now he
learned that the kings of Númenor had increased in power and splendour, and he
hated them the more; and he feared them, lest they should invade his lands and
wrest from him the dominion of the East. But for a long time he did not dare to
challenge the Lords of the Sea, and he withdrew from the coasts.

Yet Sauron was ever guileful, and it is said that among those whom he ensnared
with the Nine Rings three were great lords of Númenórean race. And when the
Úlairi arose that were the Ring-wraiths, his servants, and the strength of his
terror and mastery over Men had grown exceedingly great, he began to assail the
strong places of the Númenóreans upon the shores of the sea.

In those days the Shadow grew deeper upon Númenor; and the lives of the Kings
of the House of Elros waned because of their rebellion, but they hardened their
hearts the more against the Valar. And the nineteenth king took the sceptre of
his fathers, and he ascended the throne in the name of Adûnakhôr, Lord of the
West, forsaking the Elven-tongues and forbidding their use in his hearing. Yet
hi the Scroll of Kings the name Herunúmen was inscribed in the High-elven
speech, because of ancient custom, which the kings feared to break utterly, lest
evil befall Now this title seemed to the Faithful over-proud, being the title of
the Valar; and their hearts were sorely tried between their loyalty to the House
of Elros and their reverence of the appointed Powers. But worse was yet to come.
For Ar-Gimilzôr the twenty-second king was the greatest enemy of the Faithful.
In his day the White Tree was untended and began to decline; and he forbade
utterly the use of the Elven-tongues, and punished those that welcomed the ships
of Eressëa, that still came secretly to the west-shores of the land.

Now the Elendili dwelt mostly in the western regions of Númenor; but
Ar-Gimilzôr commanded all that he could discover to be of this party to remove
from the west and dwell in the east of the land; and there they were watched.
And the chief dwelling of the Faithful in the later days was thus nigh to the
harbour of Rómenna; thence many set sail to Middle-earth, seeking the northern
coasts where they might speak still with the Eldar in the kingdom of Gil-galad.
This was known to the kings, but they hindered it not, so long as the Elendili
departed from their land and did not return; for they desired to end all
friendship between then: people and the Eldar of Eressëa, whom they named the
Spies of the Valar, hoping to keep their deeds and their counsels hidden from
the Lords of the West. But all that they did was known to Manwë, and the Valar
were wroth with the Kings of Númenor, and gave them counsel and protection no
more; and the ships of Eressëa came never again out of the sunset, and the
havens of Andúnië were forlorn.

Highest in honour after the house of the kings were the Lords of Andúnië; for
they were of the line of Elros, being descended from Silmarien, daughter of
Tar-Elendil the fourth king of Númenor. And these lords were loyal to the kings,
and revered them; and the Lord of Andúnië was ever among the chief councillors
of the Sceptre. Yet also from the beginning they bore especial love to the Eldar
and reverence for the Valar; and as the Shadow grew they aided the Faithful as
they could. But for long they did not declare themselves openly, and sought
rather to amend the hearts of the lords of the Sceptre with wiser counsels.

There was a lady Inzilbêth, renowned for her beauty, and her mother was
Lindórië, sister of Eärendur, the Lord of Andúnië in the days of Ar-Sakalthôr
father of Ar-Gimilzôr. Gimilzôr took her to wife, though this was little to her
liking, for she was in heart one of the Faithful, being taught by her mother;
but the kings and their sons were grown proud and not to be gainsaid in their
wishes. No love was there between Ar-Gimilzôr and his queen, or between their
sons. Inziladûn, the elder, was like his mother in mind as in body; but
Gimilkhâd, the younger, went with his father, unless he were yet prouder and
more wilful. To him Ar-Gimilzôr would have yielded the sceptre rather than to
the elder son, if the laws had allowed.

But when Inziladûn acceded to the sceptre, he took again a title in the
Elven-tongue as of old, calling himself Tar-Palantir, for he was far-sighted
both in eye and in mind, and even those that hated him feared his words as those
of a true-seer. He gave peace for a while to the Faithful; and he went once more
at due seasons to the Hallow of Eru upon the Meneltarma, which Ar-Gimilzôr had
forsaken. The White Tree he tended again with honour; and he prophesied, saying
that when the Tree perished, then also would the line of the Kings come to its
end. But his repentance was too late to appease the anger of the Valar with the
insolence of his fathers, of which the greater part of his people did not
repent. And Gimilkhâd was strong and ungentle, and he took the leadership of
those that had been called the King's Men and opposed the will of his brother as
openly as he dared, and yet more in secret. Thus the days of Tar-Palantir became
darkened with grief; and he would spend much of his time in the west, and there
ascended often the ancient tower of King Minastir upon the hill of Oromet nigh
to Andúnië, whence he gazed westward in yearning, hoping to see, maybe, some
sail upon the sea. But no ship came ever again from the West to Númenor, and
Avallónë was veiled in cloud.

Now Gimilkhâd died two years before his two hundredth year (which was accounted
an early death for one of Elros' line even in its waning), but this brought no
peace to the King. For Pharazôn son of Gimilkhâd had become a man yet more
restless and eager for wealth and power than his father. He had fared often
abroad, as a leader in the wars that the Númenóreans made then in the coastlands
of Middle-earth, seeking to extend their dominion over Men; and thus he had won
great renown as a captain both by land and by sea. Therefore when he came back
to Númenor, hearing of his father's death, the hearts of the people were turned
to him; for he brought with him great wealth, and was for the time free in his
giving.

And it came to pass that Tar-Palantir grew weary of grief and died. He had no
son, but a daughter only, whom he named Míriel in the Elven-tongue; and to her
now by right and the laws of the Númenóreans came the sceptre. But Pharazôn took
her to wife against her will, doing evil in this and evil also in that the laws
of Númenor did not permit the marriage, even in the royal house, of those more
nearly akin than cousins in the second degree. And when they were wedded, he
seized the sceptre into his own hand, taking the title of Ar-Pharazôn
(Tar-Calion in the Elven-tongue); and the name of his queen he changed to
Ar-Zimraphel.

The mightiest and proudest was Ar-Pharazôn the Golden of all those that had
wielded the Sceptre of the Sea-Kings since the foundation of Númenor; and three
and twenty Kings and Queens had ruled the Númenóreans before, and slept now in
their deep tombs under the mount of Meneltarma, lying upon beds of gold.

And sitting upon his carven throne in the city of Armenelos in the glory of his
power, he brooded darkly, thinking of war. For he had learned in Middle-earth of
the strength of the realm of Sauron, and of his hatred of Westernesse. And now
there came to him the masters of ships and captains returning out of the East,
and they reported that Sauron was putting forth his might, since Ar-Pharazôn had
gone back from Middle-earth, and he was pressing down upon the cities by the
coasts; and he had taken now the title of King of Men, and declared his purpose
to drive the Númenóreans into the sea, and destroy even Númenor, if that might
be.

Great was the anger of Ar-Pharazôn at these tidings, and as he pondered long in
secret, his heart was filled with the desire of power unbounded and the sole
dominion of his will. And he determined without counsel of the Valar, or the aid
of any wisdom but his own, that the title of King of Men he would himself claim,
and would compel Sauron to become his vassal and his servant; for in his pride
he deemed that no king should ever arise so mighty as to vie with the Heir of
Eärendil. Therefore he began in that time to smithy great hoard of weapons, and
many ships of war he built and stored them with his arms; and when all was made
ready he himself set sail with his host into the East.

And men saw his sails coming up out of the sunset, dyed as with scarlet and
gleaming with red and gold, and fear fell upon the dwellers by the coasts, and
they fled far away. But the fleet came at last to that place that was called
Umbar, where was the mighty haven of the Númenóreans that no hand had wrought.
Empty and silent were all the lands about when the King of the Sea marched upon
Middle-earth. For seven days he journeyed with banner and trumpet, and he came
to a hill, and he went up, and he set there his pavilion and his throne; and he
sat him down in the midst of the land, and the tents of his host were ranged all
about him, blue, golden, and white, as a field of tall flowers. Then he sent
forth heralds, and he commanded Sauron to come before him and swear to him
fealty.

And Sauron came. Even from his mighty tower of Barad-dûr he came, and made no
offer of battle. For he perceived that the power and majesty of the Kings of the
Sea surpassed all rumour of them, so that he could not trust even the greatest
of his servants to withstand them; and he saw not his time yet to work his will
with the Dúnedain. And he was crafty, well skilled to gain what he would by
subtlety when force might not avail. Therefore he humbled himself before
Ar-Pharazôn and smoothed his tongue; and men wondered, for all that he said
seemed fair and wise.

But Ar-Pharazôn was not yet deceived, and it came into his mind that, for the
better keeping of Sauron and of his oaths of fealty, he should be brought to
Númenor, there to dwell as a hostage for himself and all his servants in
Middle-earth. To this Sauron assented as one constrained, yet in his secret
thought he received it gladly, for it chimed indeed with his desire. And Sauron
passed over the sea and looked upon the land of Númenor, and on the city of
Armenelos in the days of its glory, and he was astounded; but his heart within
was filled the more with envy and hate.

Yet such was the cunning of his mind and mouth, and the strength of his hidden
will, that ere three years had passed he had become closest to the secret
counsels of the King; for flattery sweet as honey was ever on his tongue, and
knowledge he had of many things yet unrevealed to Men. And seeing the favour
that he had of their lord all the councillors began to fawn upon him, save one
alone, Amandil lord of Andúnië. Then slowly a change came over the land, and the
hearts of the Elf-friends were sorely troubled, and many fell away out of fear;
and although those that remained still called themselves the Faithful, their
enemies named them rebels. For now, having the ears of men, Sauron with many
arguments gainsaid all that the Valar had taught; and he bade men think that in
the world, in the east and even hi the west, there lay yet many seas and many
lands for their winning, wherein was wealth uncounted. And still, if they should
at the last come to the end of those lands and seas, beyond all lay the Ancient
Darkness. 'And out of it the world was made. For Darkness alone is worshipful,
and the Lord thereof may yet make other worlds to be gifts to those that serve
him, so that the increase of their power shall find no end.'

And Ar-Pharazôn said: 'Who is the Lord of the Darkness?'

Then behind locked doors Sauron spoke to the King, and he lied, saying: 'It is
he whose name is not now spoken; for the Valar have deceived you concerning him,
putting forward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of their hearts,
seeking to enchain Men in servitude to themselves. For they are the oracle of
this Eru, which speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall
yet prevail, and he will deliver you from this phantom; and his name is Melkor,
Lord of All, Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.'

Then Ar-Pharazôn the King turned back to the worship of the Dark, and of Melkor
the Lord thereof, at first in secret, but ere long openly and in the face of his
people; and they for the most part followed him. Yet there dwelt still a remnant
of the Faithful, as has been told, at Rómenna and in the country near, and other
few there were here and there in the land. The chief among them, to whom they
looked for leading and courage in evil days, was Amandil, councillor of the
King, and his son Elendil, whose sons were Isildur and Anárion, then young men
by the reckoning of Númenor. Amandil and Elendil were great ship-captains; and
they were of the line of Elros Tar-Minyatur, though not of the ruling house to
whom belonged the crown and the throne in the city of Armenelos. In the days of
their youth together Amandil had been dear to Pharazôn, and though he was of the
Elf-friends he remained in his council until the coming of Sauron. Now he was
dismissed, for Sauron hated him above all others in Númenor. But he was so
noble, and had been so mighty a captain of the sea, that he was still held in
honour by many of the people, and neither the King nor Sauron dared to lay hands
on him as yet.

Therefore Amandil withdrew to Rómenna, and all that he trusted still to be
faithful he summoned to come thither in secret; for he feared that evil would
now grow apace, and all the Elf-friends were in peril. And so it soon came to
pass. For the Meneltarma was utterly deserted in those days; and though not even
Sauron dared to defile the high place, yet the King would let no man, upon pain
of death, ascend to it, not even those of the Faithful who kept Ilúvatar in
their hearts. And Sauron urged the King to cut down the White Tree, Nimloth the
Fair, that grew in his courts, for it was a memorial of the Eldar and of the
light of Valinor.

At the first the King would not assent to this, since be believed that the
fortunes of his house were bound up with the Tree, as was forespoken by
Tar-Palantir. Thus in his folly he who now hated the Eldar and the Valar vainly
clung to the shadow of the old allegiance of Númenor. But when Amandil heard
rumour of the evil purpose of Sauron he was grieved to the heart, knowing that
in the end Sauron would surely have his will. Then he spoke to Elendil and the
sons of Elendil, recalling the tale of the Trees of Valinor; and Isildur said no
word, but went out by night and did a deed for which he was afterwards renowned.
For he passed alone in disguise to Armenelos and to the courts of the King,
which were now forbidden to the Faithful; and he came to the place of the Tree,
which was forbidden to all by the orders of Sauron, and the Tree was watched day
and night by guards in his service. At that time Nimloth was dark and bore no
bloom, for it was late in the autumn, and its winter was nigh; and Isildur
passed through the guards and took from the Tree a fruit that hung upon it, and
turned to go. But the guard was aroused, and he was assailed, and fought his way
out, receiving many wounds; and he escaped, and because he was disguised it was
not discovered who had laid hands on the Tree. But Isildur came at last hardly
back to Rómenna and delivered the fruit to the hands of Amandil, ere his
strength failed him. Then the fruit was planted in secret, and it was blessed by
Amandil; and a shoot arose from it and sprouted in the spring. But when its
first leaf opened then Isildur, who had lain long and come near to death, arose
and was troubled no more by his wounds.

None too soon was this done; for after the assault the King yielded to Sauron
and felled the White Tree, and turned then wholly away from the allegiance of
his fathers. But Sauron caused to be built upon the hill in the midst of the
city of the Númenóreans, Armenelos the Golden, a mighty temple; and it was in
the form of a circle at the base, and there the walls were fifty feet in
thickness, and the width of the base was five hundred feet across the centre,
and the walls rose from the ground five hundred feet, and they were crowned with
a mighty dome. And that dome was roofed all with silver, and rose glittering in
the sun, so that the light of it could be seen afar off; but soon the light was
darkened, and the silver became black. For there was an altar of fire in the
midst of the temple, and in the topmost of the dome there was a louver, whence
there issued a great smoke. And the first fire upon the altar Sauron kindled
with the hewn wood of Nimloth, and it crackled and was consumed; but men
marvelled at the reek that went up from it, so that the land lay under a cloud
for seven days, until slowly it passed into the west.

Thereafter the fire and smoke went up without ceasing; for the power of Sauron
daily increased, and in that temple, with spilling of blood and torment and
great wickedness, men made sacrifice to Melkor that he should release them from
Death. And most often from among the Faithful they chose their victims; yet
never openly on the charge that they would not worship Melkor, the Giver of
Freedom, rather was cause sought against them that they hated the King and were
his rebels, or that they plotted against their kin, devising lies and poisons.
These charges were for the most part false; yet those were bitter days, and hate
brings forth hate.

But for all this Death did not depart from the land, rather it came sooner and
more often, and in many dreadful guises. For whereas aforetime men had grown
slowly old, and had laid them down in the end to sleep, when they were weary at
last of the world, now madness and sickness assailed them; and yet they were
afraid to die and go out into the dark, the realm of the lord that they had
taken; and they cursed themselves in their agony. And men took weapons in those
days and slew one another for little cause; for they were become quick to anger,
and Sauron, or those whom he had bound to himself, went about the land setting
man against man, so that the people murmured against the King and the lords, or
against any that had aught that they had not; and the men of power took cruel
revenge.

Nonetheless for long it seemed to the Númenóreans that they prospered, and if
they were not increased in happiness, yet they grew more strong, and their rich
men ever richer. For with the aid and counsel of Sauron they multiplied then:
possessions, and they devised engines, and they built ever greater ships. And
they sailed now with power and armoury to Middle-earth, and they came no longer
as bringers of gifts, nor even as rulers, but as fierce men of war. And they
hunted the men of Middle-earth and took their goods and enslaved them, and many
they slew cruelly upon their altars. For they built in their fortresses temples
and great tombs in those days; and men feared them, and the memory of the kindly
kings of the ancient days faded from the world and was darkened by many a tale
of dread.

Thus Ar-Pharazôn, King of the Land of the Star, grew to the mightiest tyrant
that had yet been in the world since the reign of Morgoth, though in truth
Sauron ruled all from behind the throne. But the years passed, and the King felt
the shadow of death approach, as his days lengthened; and he was filled with
fear and wrath. Now came the hour that Sauron had prepared and long had awaited.
And Sauron spoke to the King, saying that his strength was now so great that he
might think to have his will in all things, and be subject to no command or ban.

And he said: 'The Valar have possessed themselves of the land where there is no
death; and they lie to you concerning it, hiding it as best they may, because of
their avarice, and their fear lest the Kings of Men should wrest from them the
deathless realm and rule the world in their stead. And though, doubtless, the
gift of life unending is not for all, but only for such as are worthy, being men
of might and pride and great lineage, yet against all Justice is it done that
this gift, which is his due, should be withheld from the King of Bangs,
Ar-Pharazôn, mightiest of the sons of Earth, to whom Manwë alone can be
compared, if even he. But great kings do not brook denials, and take what is
their due.'

Then Ar-Pharazôn, being besotted, and walking under the shadow of death, for
his span was drawing towards its end, hearkened to Sauron; and he began to
ponder in his heart how he might make war upon the Valar. He was long preparing
this design, and he spoke not openly of it, yet it could not be hidden from all.
And Amandil, becoming aware of the purposes of the King, was dismayed and filled
with a great dread, for he knew that Men could not vanquish the Valar in war,
and that ruin must come upon the world, if this war were not stayed. Therefore
he called his son, Elendil, and he said to him:

'The days are dark, and there is no hope for Men, for the Faithful are few.
Therefore I am minded to try that counsel which our forefather Eärendil took of
old, to sail into the West, be there ban or no, and to speak to the Valar, even
to Manwë himself, if may be, and beseech his aid ere all is lost.'

'Would you then betray the King?' said Elendil. 'For you know well the charge
that they make against us, that we are traitors and spies, and that until this
day it has been false.'

'If I thought that Manwë needed such a messenger,' said Amandil, I would betray
the King. For there is but one loyalty from which no man can be absolved in
heart for any cause. But it is for mercy upon Men and their deliverance from
Sauron the Deceiver that I would plead, since some at least have remained
faithful. And as for the Ban, I will suffer in myself the penalty, lest all my
people should become guilty.'

'But what think you, my father, is like to befall those of your house whom you
leave behind, when your deed becomes known?'

'It must not become known,' said Amandil. 'I will prepare my going in secret,
and I will set sail into the east, whither daily the ships depart from our
havens; and thereafter, as wind and chance may allow, I will go about, through
south or north, back into the west, and seek what I may find. But for you and
your folk, my son, I counsel that you should prepare yourselves other ships, and
put aboard all such things as your hearts cannot bear to part with; and when the
ships are ready, you should lie in the haven of Rómenna, and give out among men
that you purpose, when you see your time, to follow me into the east. Amandil is
no longer so dear to our kinsman upon the throne that he will grieve over much,
if we seek to depart, for a season or for good. But let it not be seen that you
intend to take many men, or he will be troubled, because of the war that he now
plots, for which he will need all the force that he may gather. Seek out the
Faithful that are known still to be true, and let them join you in secret, if
they are willing to go with you, and share in your design.'

'And what shall that design be?' said Elendil.

'To meddle not in the war, and to watch,' answered Amandil. 'Until I return I
can say no more. But it is most like that you shall fly from the Land of the
Star with no star to guide you; for that land is defiled. Then you shall lose
all that you have loved, foretasting death in life, seeking a land of exile
elsewhere. But east or west the Valar alone can say.'

Then Amandil said farewell to all his household, as one that is about to die.
'For,' said he, 'it may well prove that you will see me never again; and that I
shall show you no such sign as Eärendil showed long ago. But hold you ever in
readiness, for the end of the world that we have known is now at hand.'

It is said that Amandil set sail in a small ship at night, and steered first
eastward, and then went about and passed into the west. And he took with him
three servants, dear to his heart, and never again were they heard of by word or
sign in this world, nor is there any tale or guess of their fate. Men could not
a second time be saved by any such embassy, and for the treason of Númenor there
was no easy absolving.

But Elendil did all that his father had bidden, and his ships lay off the east
coast of the land; and the Faithful put aboard their wives and their children,
and their heirlooms, and great store of goods. Many things there were of beauty
and power, such as the Númenóreans had contrived in the days of their wisdom,
vessels and jewels, and scrolls of lore written in scarlet and black. And Seven
Stones they had, the gift of the Eldar; but in the ship of Isildur was guarded
the young tree, the scion of Nimloth the Fair. Thus Elendil held himself in
readiness, and did not meddle in the evil deeds of those days; and ever he
looked for a sign that did not come. Then he journeyed in secret to the western
shores and gazed out over the sea, for sorrow and yearning were upon him, and he
greatly loved his father. But naught could he descry save the fleets of
Ar-Pharazôn gathering in the havens of the west.

Now aforetime in the isle of Númenor the weather was ever apt to the needs and
liking of Men: rain in due season and ever in measure; and sunshine, now warmer,
now cooler, and winds from the sea. And when the wind was in the west, it seemed
to many that it was filled with a fragrance, fleeting but sweet, heart-stirring,
as of flowers that bloom for ever in undying meads and have no names on mortal
shores. But all this was now changed; for the sky itself was darkened, and there
were storms of rain and hail in those days, and violent winds; and ever and anon
a great ship of the Númenóreans would founder and return not to haven, though
such a grief had not till then befallen them since the rising of the Star. And
out of the west there would come at times a great cloud in the evening, shaped
as it were an eagle, with pinions spread to the north and the south; and slowly
it would loom up, blotting out the sunset, and then uttermost night would fall
upon Númenor. And some of the eagles bore lightning beneath their wings, and
thunder echoed between sea and cloud.

Then men grew afraid. 'Behold the Eagles of the Lords of the West!' they cried.
'The Eagles of Manwë are come upon Númenor!' And they fell upon their faces.

Then some few would repent for a season, but others hardened their hearts, and
they shook their fists at heaven, saying: 'The Lords of the West have plotted
against us. They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!' These words the
King himself spoke, but they were devised by Sauron.

Now the lightnings increased and slew men upon the hills, and in the fields,
and in the streets of the city; and a fiery bolt smote the dome of the Temple
and shore it asunder, and it was wreathed in flame. But the Temple itself was
unshaken, and Sauron stood there upon the pinnacle and defied the lightning and
was unharmed; and in that hour men called him a god and did all that he would.
When therefore the last portent came they heeded it little. For the land shook
under them, and a groaning as of thunder underground was mingled with the
roaring of the sea, and smoke issued from the peak of the Meneltarma. But all
the more did Ar-Pharazôn press on with his armament.

In that time the fleets of the Númenóreans darkened the sea upon the west of
the land, and they were like an archipelago of a thousand isles; their masts
were as a forest upon the mountains, and their sails like a brooding cloud; and
their banners were golden and black. And all things waited upon the word of
Ar-Pharazôn; and Sauron withdrew into the inmost circle of the Temple, and men
brought him victims to be burned.

Then the Eagles of the Lords of the West came up out of the dayfall, and they
were arrayed as for battle, advancing in a line the end of which diminished
beyond sight; and as they came their wings spread ever wider, grasping the sky.
But the West burned red behind them, and they glowed beneath, as though they
were lit with a flame of great anger, so that all Númenor was illumined as with
a smouldering fire; and men looked upon the faces of their fellows, and it
seemed to them that they were red with wrath.

Then Ar-Pharazôn hardened his heart, and he went aboard his mighty ship,
Alcarondas, Castle of the Sea. Many-oared it was and many-masted, golden and
sable; and upon it the throne of Ar-Pharazôn was set. Then he did on his panoply
and his crown, and let raise his standard, and he gave the signal for the
raising of the anchors; and in that hour the trumpets of Númenor outrang the
thunder.

Thus the fleets of the Númenóreans moved against the menace of the West; and
there was little wind, but they had many oars and many strong slaves to row
beneath the lash. The sun went down, and there came a great silence. Darkness
fell upon the land, and the sea was still, while the world waited for what
should betide. Slowly the fleets passed out of the sight of the watchers in the
havens, and their lights faded, and night took them; and in the morning they
were gone. For a wind arose in the east and it wafted them away; and they broke
the Ban of the Valar, and sailed into forbidden seas, going up with war against
the Deathless, to wrest from them everlasting life within the Circles of the
World.

But the fleets of Ar-Pharazôn came up out of the deeps of the sea and
encompassed Avallónë and all the isle of Eressëa, and the Eldar mourned, for the
light of the setting sun was cut off by the cloud of the Númenóreans. And at
last Ar-Pharazôn came even to Aman, the Blessed Realm, and the coasts of
Valinor; and still all was silent, and doom hung by a thread. For Ar-Pharazôn
wavered at the end, and almost he turned back. His heart misgave him when he
looked upon the soundless shores and saw Taniquetil shining, whiter than snow,
colder than death, silent, immutable, terrible as the shadow of the light of
Ilúvatar. But pride was now his master, and at last he left his ship and strode
upon the shore, claiming the land for his own, if none should do battle for it.
And a host of the Númenóreans encamped in might about Túna, whence all the Eldar
had fled.

Then Manwë upon the Mountain called upon Ilúvatar, and for that time the Valar
laid down their government of Arda. But Ilúvatar showed forth his power, and he
changed the fashion of the world; and a great chasm opened in the sea between
Númenor and the Deathless Lands, and the waters flowed down into it, and the
noise and smoke of the cataracts went up to heaven, and the world was shaken.
And all the fleets of the Númenóreans were drawn down into the abyss, and they
were drowned and swallowed up for ever. But Ar-Pharazôn the King and the mortal
warriors that had set foot upon the land of Aman were buried under falling
hills: there it is said that they lie imprisoned in the Caves of the Forgotten,
until the Last Battle and the Day of Doom.

But the land of Aman and Eressëa of the Eldar were taken away and removed
beyond the reach of Men for ever. And Andor, the Land of Gift, Númenor of the
Kings, Elenna of the Star of Eärendil, was utterly destroyed. For it was nigh to
the east of the great rift, and its foundations were overturned, and it fell and
went down into darkness, and is no more. And there is not now upon Earth any
place abiding where the memory of a time without evil is preserved. For Ilúvatar
cast back the Great Seas west of Middle-earth, and the Empty Lands east of it,
and new lands and new seas were made; and the world was diminished, for Valinor
and Eressëa were taken from it into the realm of hidden things.

In an hour unlocked for by Men this doom befell, on the nine and thirtieth day
since the passing of the fleets. Then suddenly fire burst from the Meneltarma,
and there came a mighty wind and a tumult of the earth, and the sky reeled, and
the hills slid, and Númenor went down into the sea, with all its children and
its wives and its maidens and its ladies proud; and all its gardens and its
halls and its towers, its tombs and its riches, and its jewels and its webs and
its things painted and carven, and its lore: they vanished for ever. And last of
all the mounting wave, green and cold and plumed with foam, climbing over the
land, took to its bosom Tar-Míriel the Queen, fairer than silver or ivory or
pearls. Too late she strove to ascend the steep ways of the Meneltarma to the
holy place; for the waters overtook her, and her cry was lost in the roaring of
the wind.

But whether or no it were that Amandil came indeed to Valinor and Manwë
hearkened to his prayer, by grace of the Valar Elendil and his sons and their
people were spared from the ruin of that day. For Elendil had remained in
Romenna, refusing the summons of the King when he set forth to war; and avoiding
the soldiers of Sauron that came to seize him and drag him to the fires of the
Temple, he went aboard his ship and stood off from the shore, waiting on the
time. There he was protected by the land from the great draught of the sea that
drew all towards the abyss, and afterwards he was sheltered from the first fury
of the storm. But when the devouring wave rolled over the land and Númenor
toppled to its fall, then he would have been overwhelmed and would have deemed
it the lesser grief to perish, for no wrench of death could be more bitter than
the loss and agony of that day; but the great wind took him, wilder than any
wind that Men had known, roaring from the west, and it swept his ships far away;
and it rent their sails and snapped their masts, hunting the unhappy men like
straws upon the water.

Nine ships there were: four for Elendil, and for Isildur three, and for Anárion
two; and they fled before the black gale out of the twilight of doom into the
darkness of the world. And the deeps rose beneath them in towering anger, and
waves like unto mountains moving with great caps of writhen snow bore them up
amid the wreckage of the clouds, and after many days cast them away upon the
shores of Middle-earth. And all the coasts and seaward regions of the western
world suffered great change and ruin in that time; for the seas invaded the
lands, and shores foundered, and ancient isles were drowned, and new isles were
uplifted; and hills crumbled and rivers were turned into strange courses.

Elendil and his sons after founded kingdoms in Middle-earth; and though their
lore and craft was but an echo of that which had been ere Sauron came to
Númenor, yet very great it seemed to the wild men of the world. And much is said
in other lore of the deeds of the heirs of Elendil in the age that came after,
and of their strife with Sauron that not yet was ended.

For Sauron himself was filled with great fear at the wrath of the Valar, and
the doom that Eru laid upon sea and land. It was greater far than aught he had
looked for, hoping only for the death of the Númenóreans and the defeat of their
proud king. And Sauron, sitting in his black seat in the midst of the Temple,
had laughed when he heard the trumpets of Ar-Pharazôn sounding for battle; and
again he had laughed when he heard the thunder of the storm; and a third time,
even as he laughed at his own thought, thinking what he would do now in the
world, being rid of the Edain for ever, he was taken in the midst of his mirth,
and his seat and his temple fell into the abyss. But Sauron was not of mortal
flesh, and though he was robbed now of that shape in which he had wrought so
great an evil, so that he could never again appear fair to the eyes of Men, yet
his spirit arose out of the deep and passed as a shadow and a black wind over
the sea, and came back to Middle-earth and to Mordor that was his home. There he
took up again his great Ring in Barad-dûr, and dwelt there, dark and silent,
until he wrought himself a new guise, an image of malice and hatred made
visible; and the Eye of Sauron the Terrible few could endure.

But these things come not into the tale of the Drowning of Númenor, of which
now all is told. And even the name of that land perished, and Men spoke
thereafter not of Elenna, nor of Andor the Gift that was taken away, nor of
Númenórë on the confines of the world; but the exiles on the shores of the sea,
if they turned towards the West in the desire of their hearts, spoke of
Mar-nu-Falmar that was whelmed in the waves, Akallabêth the Downfallen, Atalantë
in the Eldarin tongue.

* * *

Among the Exiles many believed that the summit of the Meneltarma, the Pillar of
Heaven, was not drowned for ever, but rose again above the waves, a lonely
island lost in the great waters; for it had been a hallowed place, and even in
the days of Sauron none had defiled it And some there were of the seed of
Eärendil that afterwards sought for it, because it was said among loremasters
that the far-sighted men of old could see from the Meneltarma a glimmer of the
Deathless Land. For even after the ruin the hearts of the Dúnedain were still
set westwards; and though they knew indeed that the world was changed, they
said: 'Avallónë is vanished from the Earth and the Land of Aman is taken away,
and in the world of this present darkness they cannot be found. Yet once they
were, and therefore they still are, in true being and in the whole shape of the
world as at first it was devised.'

For the Dúnedain held that even mortal Men, if so blessed, might look upon
other times than those of their bodies' life; and they longed ever to escape
from the shadows of their exile and to see in some fashion fee light that dies
not; for the sorrow of the thought of death had pursued them over the deeps of
the sea. Thus it was that great mariners among them would still search the empty
seas, hoping to come upon the Isle of Meneltarma, and there to see a vision of
things that were. But they found it not. And those that sailed far came only to
the new lands, and found them like to the old lands, and subject to death. And
those that sailed furthest set but a girdle about the Earth and returned weary
at last to the place of their beginning; and they said:

'All roads are now bent.'

Thus in after days, what by the voyages of ships, what by lore and star-craft,
the kings of Men knew that the world was indeed made round, and yet the Eldar
were permitted still to depart and to come to the Ancient West and to Avallónë,
if they would. Therefore the loremasters of Men said that a Straight Road must
still be, for those that were permitted to find it. And they taught that, while
the new world fell away, the old road and the path of the memory of the West
still went on, as it were a mighty bridge invisible that passed through the air
of breath and of flight (which were bent now as the world was bent), and
traversed Ilmen which flesh unaided cannot endure, until it came to Tol Eressëa,
the Lonely Isle, and maybe even beyond, to Valinor, where the Valar still dwell
and watch the unfolding of the story of the world. And tales and rumours arose
along the shores of the sea concerning mariners and men forlorn upon the water
who, by some fate or grace or favour of the Valar, had entered in upon the
Straight Way and seen the face of the world sink below them, and so had come to
the lamplit quays of Avallónë, or verily to the last beaches on the margin of
Aman, and there had looked upon the White Mountain, dreadful and beautiful,
before they died.


