# PART 1: CHIBA CITY BLUES

ONE
_We are introduced to our main character Case, who, learning from Ratz the
bartender that his ex-girlfriend Linda Lee wishes to see Case, learns from
Linda that a man named Wage has a mark on Case's head. Case asks his
coorespondant Julius Deane about Wage, but Jules doesn't have a word on the
street. After feeling a tail, Case arms himself, loses his tail, and confronts
Wage at Ratz's bar. Wage and Case square themselves.

After all this busy day, Case returns to his coffin to find his RAM stolen
curtousy of his Ex, and opens his room to find a woman who reveals herself as
Molly, the tail Case had the whole time. The chapter ends at Molly's reveal.

Intermixed throughout, we also have descriptions of the Matrix as a consensual
halucination, and brief backstory on Case, how he was what they call a "Console
Cowboy", and how he tried to steal from his employer but got caught, resulting
in neurotoxic surgery altering him unable to jack into the matrix he loves so
much._

## Case and Ratz chat at the Chatsubo
### Opening line
THE SKY ABOVE the port was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel.

### Case and bartender Ratz kabitz at the Chatsubo
“It’s not like I’m using,” Case heard someone say, as he shouldered his way
through the crowd around the door of the Chat. “It’s like my body’s developed
this massive drug deficiency.” It was a Sprawl voice and a Sprawl joke. The
Chatsubo was a bar for professional expatriates; you could drink there for a
week and never hear two words in Japanese.

Ratz was tending bar, his prosthetic arm jerking monotonously as he filled a
tray of glasses with draft Kirin. He saw Case and smiled, his teeth a webwork
of East European steel and brown decay. Case found a place at the bar, between
the unlikely tan on one of Lonny Zone’s whores and the crisp naval uniform of a
tall African whose cheekbones were ridged with precise rows of tribal scars.
“Wage was in here early, with two joeboys,” Ratz said, shoving a draft across
the bar with his good hand. “Maybe some business with you, Case?”

Case shrugged. The girl to his right giggled and nudged him.

The bartender’s smile widened. His ugliness was the stuff of legend. In an age
of affordable beauty, there was something heraldic about his lack of it. The
antique arm whined as he reached for another mug. It was a Russian military
prosthesis, a seven-function force-feedback manipulator, cased in grubby pink
plastic. “You are too much the artiste, Herr Case.” Ratz grunted; the sound
served him as laughter. He scratched his overhang of white-shirted belly with
the pink claw. “You are the artiste of the slightly funny deal.”

“Sure,” Case said, and sipped his beer. “Somebody’s gotta be funny around here.
Sure the fuck isn’t you.”

The whore’s giggle went up an octave.

“Isn’t you either, sister. So you vanish, okay? Zone, he’s a close personal
friend of mine.”

She looked Case in the eye and made the softest possible spitting sound, her
lips barely moving. But she left.

“Jesus,” Case said, “what kinda creepjoint you running here? Man can’t have a
drink.”

“Ha,” Ratz said, swabbing the scarred wood with a rag. “Zone shows a
percentage. You I let work here for entertainment value.”

As Case was picking up his beer, one of those strange instants of silence
descended, as though a hundred unrelated conversations had simultaneously
arrived at the same pause. Then the whore’s giggle rang out, tinged with a
certain hysteria.

Ratz grunted. “An angel passed.”

“The Chinese,” bellowed a drunken Australian, “Chinese bloody invented
nerve-splicing. Give me the mainland for a nerve job any day. Fix you right,
mate. . . .”

“Now that,” Case said to his glass, all his bitterness suddenly rising in him
like bile, “that is so much bullshit.”

### Jump to exposition: The reader is told that Case is an addict that dreams of cyberspace
THE JAPANESE HAD already forgotten more neurosurgery than the Chinese had ever
known. The black clinics of Chiba were the cutting edge, whole bodies of
technique supplanted monthly, and still they couldn’t repair the damage he’d
suffered in that Memphis hotel.

A year here and he still dreamed of cyberspace, hope fading nightly. All the
speed he took, all the turns he’d taken and the corners he’d cut in Night City,
and still he’d see the matrix in his sleep, bright lattices of logic unfolding
across that colorless void. . . . The Sprawl was a long strange way home over
the Pacific now, and he was no console man, no cyberspace cowboy. Just another
hustler, trying to make it through. But the dreams came on in the Japanese
night like livewire voodoo, and he’d cry for it, cry in his sleep, and wake
alone in the dark, curled in his capsule in some coffin hotel, his hands clawed
into the bedslab, temperfoam bunched between his fingers, trying to reach the
console that wasn’t there.

### Back at the bar, Ratz mentions Linda Lee to Case before Case pays and leaves
“I SAW YOUR girl last night,” Ratz said, passing Case his second Kirin.

“I don’t have one,” he said, and drank.

“Miss Linda Lee.”

Case shook his head.

“No girl? Nothing? Only biz, friend artiste? Dedication to commerce?” The
bartender’s small brown eyes were nested deep in wrinkled flesh. “I think I
liked you better, with her. You laughed more. Now, some night, you get maybe
too artistic; you wind up in the clinic tanks, spare parts.”

“You’re breaking my heart, Ratz.” He finished his beer, paid and left, high
narrow shoulders hunched beneath the rain-stained khaki nylon of his
windbreaker. Threading his way through the Ninsei crowds, he could smell his
own stale sweat.

## Backstory for Case
### Case fucked up in the past as a cowboy and his employer damaged his nervous system
CASE WAS TWENTY-FOUR. At twenty-two, he’d been a cowboy, a rustler, one of the
best in the Sprawl. He’d been trained by the best, by McCoy Pauley and Bobby
Quine, legends in the biz. He’d operated on an almost permanent adrenaline
high, a byproduct of youth and proficiency, jacked into a custom cyberspace
deck that projected his disembodied consciousness into the consensual
hallucination that was the matrix. A thief, he’d worked for other, wealthier
thieves, employers who provided the exotic software required to penetrate the
bright walls of corporate systems, opening windows into rich fields of data.

He’d made the classic mistake, the one he’d sworn he’d never make. He stole
from his employers. He kept something for himself and tried to move it through
a fence in Amsterdam. He still wasn’t sure how he’d been discovered, not that
it mattered now. He’d expected to die, then, but they only smiled. Of course he
was welcome, they told him, welcome to the money. And he was going to need it.
Because—still smiling—they were going to make sure he never worked again.

They damaged his nervous system with a wartime Russian mycotoxin.

Strapped to a bed in a Memphis hotel, his talent burning out micron by micron,
he hallucinated for thirty hours.

The damage was minute, subtle, and utterly effective.

For Case, who’d lived for the bodiless exultation of cyberspace, it was the
Fall. In the bars he’d frequented as a cowboy hotshot, the elite stance
involved a certain relaxed contempt for the flesh. The body was meat. Case fell
into the prison of his own flesh.

### How Case quickly zipped through his money trying to find a cure.
HIS TOTAL ASSETS were quickly converted to new Yen, a fat sheaf of the old
paper currency that circulated endlessly through the closed circuit of the
world’s black markets like the seashells of the Trobriand islanders. It was
difficult to transact legitimate business with cash in the Sprawl; in Japan, it
was already illegal.

In Japan, he’d known with a clenched and absolute certainty, he’d find his
cure. In Chiba. Either in a registered clinic or in the shadowland of black
medicine. Synonymous with implants, nerve-splicing, and microbionics, Chiba was
a magnet for the Sprawl’s techno-criminal subcultures.

In Chiba, he’d watched his New Yen vanish in a two-month round of examinations
and consultations. The men in the black clinics, his last hope, had admired the
expertise with which he’d been maimed, and then slowly shaken their heads.

Now he slept in the cheapest coffins, the ones nearest the port, beneath the
quartz-halogen floods that lit the docks all night like vast stages; where you
couldn’t see the lights of Tokyo for the glare of the television sky, not even
the towering hologram logo of the Fuji Electric Company, and Tokyo Bay was a
black expanse where gulls wheeled above drifting shoals of white styrofoam.
Behind the port lay the city, factory domes dominated by the vast cubes of
corporate arcologies. Port and city were divided by a narrow borderland of
older streets, an area with no official name. Night City, with Ninsei its
heart. By day, the bars down Ninsei were shuttered and featureless, the neon
dead, the holograms inert, waiting, under the poisoned silver sky.

## Linda tells Case about Wage
### Case reminisces about Linda at a teashop called the Jarre de Thé
TWO BLOCKS WEST of the Chat, in a teashop called the Jarre de Thé, Case washed
down the night’s first pill with a double espresso. It was a flat pink octagon,
a potent species of Brazilian dex he bought from one of Zone’s girls.

The Jarre was walled with mirrors, each panel framed in red neon.

At first, finding himself alone in Chiba, with little money and less hope of
finding a cure, he’d gone into a kind of terminal overdrive, hustling fresh
capital with a cold intensity that had seemed to belong to someone else. In the
first month, he’d killed two men and a woman over sums that a year before would
have seemed ludicrous. Ninsei wore him down until the street itself came to
seem the externalization of some death wish, some secret poison he hadn’t known
he carried.

Night City was like a deranged experiment in social Darwinism, designed by a
bored researcher who kept one thumb permanently on the fast-forward button.
Stop hustling and you sank without a trace, but move a little too swiftly and
you’d break the fragile surface tension of the black market; either way, you
were gone, with nothing left of you but some vague memory in the mind of a
fixture like Ratz, though heart or lungs or kidneys might survive in the
service of some stranger with New Yen for the clinic tanks.

Biz here was a constant subliminal hum, and death the accepted punishment for
laziness, carelessness, lack of grace, the failure to heed the demands of an
intricate protocol.

Alone at a table in the Jarre de Thé, with the octagon coming on, pinheads of
sweat starting from his palms, suddenly aware of each tingling hair on his arms
and chest, Case knew that at some point he’d started to play a game with
himself, a very ancient one that has no name, a final solitaire. He no longer
carried a weapon, no longer took the basic precautions. He ran the fastest,
loosest deals on the street, and he had a reputation for being able to get
whatever you wanted. A part of him knew that the arc of his self-destruction
was glaringly obvious to his customers, who grew steadily fewer, but that same
part of him basked in the knowledge that it was only a matter of time. And that
was the part of him, smug in its expectation of death, that most hated the
thought of Linda Lee.

He’d found her, one rainy night, in an arcade.

Under bright ghosts burning through a blue haze of cigarette smoke, holograms
of Wizard’s Castle, Tank War Europa, the New York skyline. . . . And now he
remembered her that way, her face bathed in restless laser light, features
reduced to a code: her cheekbones flaring scarlet as Wizard’s Castle burned,
forehead drenched with azure when Munich fell to the Tank War, mouth touched
with hot gold as a gliding cursor struck sparks from the wall of a skyscraper
canyon. He was riding high that night, with a brick of Wage’s ketamine on its
way to Yokohama and the money already in his pocket. He’d come in out of the
warm rain that sizzled across the Ninsei pavement and somehow she’d been
singled out for him, one face out of the dozens who stood at the consoles, lost
in the game she played. The expression on her face, then, had been the one he’d
seen, hours later, on her sleeping face in a portside coffin, her upper lip
like the line children draw to represent a bird in flight.

Crossing the arcade to stand beside her, high on the deal he’d made, he saw her
glance up. Gray eyes rimmed with smudged black paintstick. Eyes of some animal
pinned in the headlights of an oncoming vehicle.

Their night together stretching into a morning, into tickets at the hoverport
and his first trip across the Bay. The rain kept up, falling along Harajuku,
beading on her plastic jacket, the children of Tokyo trooping past the famous
boutiques in white loafers and clingwrap capes, until she’d stood with him in
the midnight clatter of a pachinko parlor and held his hand like a child.

It took a month for the gestalt of drugs and tension he moved through to turn
those perpetually startled eyes into wells of reflexive need. He’d watched her
personality fragment, calving like an iceberg, splinters drifting away, and
finally he’d seen the raw need, the hungry armature of addiction. He’d watched
her track the next hit with a concentration that reminded him of the mantises
they sold in stalls along Shiga, beside tanks of blue mutant carp and crickets
caged in bamboo.

He stared at the black ring of grounds in his empty cup. It was vibrating with
the speed he’d taken. The brown laminate of the tabletop was dull with a patina
of tiny scratches. With the dex mounting through his spine he saw the countless
random impacts required to create a surface like that. The Jarre was decorated
in a dated, nameless style from the previous century, an uneasy blend of
Japanese traditional and pale Milanese plastics, but everything seemed to wear
a subtle film, as though the bad nerves of a million customers had somehow
attacked the mirrors and the once glossy plastics, leaving each surface fogged
with something that could never be wiped away.

### Linda arrives at the tea shop and informs Case that Mona Wage will come looking for Case for the money he owes
“Hey. Case, good buddy. . . .”

He looked up, met gray eyes ringed with paintstick. She was wearing faded
French orbital fatigues and new white sneakers.

“I been lookin’ for you, man.” She took a seat opposite him, her elbows on the
table. The sleeves of the blue zipsuit had been ripped out at the shoulders; he
automatically checked her arms for signs of derms or the needle. “Want a
cigarette?”

She dug a crumpled pack of Yeheyuan filters from an ankle pocket and offered
him one. He took it, let her light it with a red plastic tube. “You sleepin’
okay, Case? You look tired.” Her accent put her south along the Sprawl, toward
Atlanta. The skin below her eyes was pale and unhealthy-looking, but the flesh
was still smooth and firm. She was twenty. New lines of pain were starting to
etch themselves permanently at the corners of her mouth. Her dark hair was
drawn back, held by a band of printed silk. The pattern might have represented
microcircuits, or a city map.

“Not if I remember to take my pills,” he said, as a tangible wave of longing
hit him, lust and loneliness riding in on the wavelength of amphetamine. He
remembered the smell of her skin in the overheated darkness of a coffin near
the port, her fingers locked across the small of his back.

All the meat, he thought, and all it wants.

“Wage,” she said, narrowing her eyes. “He wants to see you with a hole in your
face.” She lit her own cigarette.

“Who says? Ratz? You been talking to Ratz?”

“No. Mona. Her new squeeze is one of Wage’s boys.”

“I don’t owe him enough. He does me, he’s out the money anyway.” He shrugged.

“Too many people owe him now, Case. Maybe you get to be the example. You
seriously better watch it.”

“Sure. How about you, Linda? You got anywhere to sleep?”

“Sleep.” She shook her head. “Sure, Case.” She shivered, hunched forward over
the table. Her face was filmed with sweat.

“Here,” he said, and dug in the pocket of his windbreaker, coming up with a
crumpled fifty. He smoothed it automatically, under the table, folded it in
quarters, and passed it to her.

“You need that, honey. You better give it to Wage.” There was something in the
gray eyes now that he couldn’t read, something he’d never seen there before.

“I owe Wage a lot more than that. Take it. I got more coming,” he lied, as he
watched his New Yen vanish into a zippered pocket.

“You get your money, Case, you find Wage quick.”

“I’ll see you, Linda,” he said, getting up.

“Sure.” A millimeter of white showed beneath each of her pupils. Sanpaku. “You
watch your back, man.”

He nodded, anxious to be gone.

He looked back as the plastic door swung shut behind him, saw her eyes
reflected in a cage of red neon.

### Case contemplates many things, such as the backdrop of Chiba City, before he gets the idea to talk to Julius about the hit on his head
FRIDAY NIGHT ON Ninsei.

He passed yakitori stands and massage parlors, a franchised coffee shop called
Beautiful Girl, the electronic thunder of an arcade. He stepped out of the way
to let a dark-suited sarariman by, spotting the Mitsubishi-Genentech logo
tattooed across the back of the man’s right hand.

Was it authentic? If that’s for real, he thought, he’s in for trouble. If it
wasn’t, served him right. M-G employees above a certain level were implanted
with advanced microprocessors that monitored mutagen levels in the bloodstream.
Gear like that would get you rolled in Night City, rolled straight into a black
clinic.

The sarariman had been Japanese, but the Ninsei crowd was a gaijin crowd.
Groups of sailors up from the port, tense solitary tourists hunting pleasures
no guidebook listed, Sprawl heavies showing off grafts and implants, and a
dozen distinct species of hustler, all swarming the street in an intricate
dance of desire and commerce.

There were countless theories explaining why Chiba City tolerated the Ninsei
enclave, but Case tended toward the idea that the Yakuza might be preserving
the place as a kind of historical park, a reminder of humble origins. But he
also saw a certain sense in the notion that burgeoning technologies require
outlaw zones, that Night City wasn’t there for its inhabitants, but as a
deliberately unsupervised playground for technology itself.

Was Linda right, he wondered, staring up at the lights? Would Wage have him
killed to make an example? It didn’t make much sense, but then Wage dealt
primarily in proscribed biologicals, and they said you had to be crazy to do
that.

But Linda said Wage wanted him dead. Case’s primary insight into the dynamics
of street dealing was that neither the buyer nor the seller really needed him.
A middleman’s business is to make himself a necessary evil. The dubious niche
Case had carved for himself in the criminal ecology of Night City had been cut
out with lies, scooped out a night at a time with betrayal. Now, sensing that
its walls were starting to crumble, he felt the edge of a strange euphoria.

The week before, he’d delayed transfer of a synthetic glandular extract,
retailing it for a wider margin than usual. He knew Wage hadn’t liked that.
Wage was his primary supplier, nine years in Chiba and one of the few gaijin
dealers who’d managed to forge links with the rigidly stratified criminal
establishment beyond Night City’s borders. Genetic materials and hormones
trickled down to Ninsei along an intricate ladder of fronts and blinds. Somehow
Wage had managed to trace something back, once, and now he enjoyed steady
connections in a dozen cities.

Case found himself staring through a shop window. The place sold small bright
objects to the sailors. Watches, flicknives, lighters, pocket VTRs, simstim
decks, weighted manriki chains, and shuriken. The shuriken had always
fascinated him, steel stars with knife-sharp points. Some were chromed, others
black, others treated with a rainbow surface like oil on water. But the chrome
stars held his gaze. They were mounted against scarlet ultrasuede with nearly
invisible loops of nylon fishline, their centers stamped with dragons or
yinyang symbols. They caught the street’s neon and twisted it, and it came to
Case that these were the stars under which he voyaged, his destiny spelled out
in a constellation of cheap chrome.

“Julie,” he said to his stars. “Time to see old Julie. He’ll know.”

## Case talks to Julius
### Julius has no info about whether Wage wants to kill Case or not
JULIUS DEANE WAS one hundred and thirty-five years old, his metabolism
assiduously warped by a weekly fortune in serums and hormones. His primary
hedge against aging was a yearly pilgrimage to Tokyo, where genetic surgeons
reset the code of his DNA, a procedure unavailable in Chiba. Then he’d fly to
Hongkong and order the year’s suits and shirts. Sexless and inhumanly patient,
his primary gratification seemed to lie in his devotion to esoteric forms of
tailor-worship. Case had never seen him wear the same suit twice, although his
wardrobe seemed to consist entirely of meticulous reconstructions of garments
of the previous century. He affected prescription lenses, framed in spidery
gold, ground from thin slabs of pink synthetic quartz and beveled like the
mirrors in a Victorian dollhouse.

His offices were located in a warehouse behind Ninsei, part of which seemed to
have been sparsely decorated, years before, with a random collection of
European furniture, as though Deane had once intended to use the place as his
home. Neo-Aztec bookcases gathered dust against one wall of the room where Case
waited. A pair of bulbous Disney-styled table lamps perched awkwardly on a low
Kandinsky-look coffee table in scarlet-lacquered steel. A Dali clock hung on
the wall between the bookcases, its distorted face sagging to the bare concrete
floor. Its hands were holograms that altered to match the convolutions of the
face as they rotated, but it never told the correct time. The room was stacked
with white fiberglass shipping modules that gave off the tang of preserved
ginger.

“You seem to be clean, old son,” said Deane’s disembodied voice. “Do come in.”

Magnetic bolts thudded out of position around the massive imitation-rosewood
door to the left of the bookcases. JULIUS DEANE IMPORT EXPORT was lettered
across the plastic in peeling self-adhesive capitals. If the furniture
scattered in Deane’s makeshift foyer suggested the end of the past century, the
office itself seemed to belong to its start.

Deane’s seamless pink face regarded Case from a pool of light cast by an
ancient brass lamp with a rectangular shade of dark green glass. The importer
was securely fenced behind a vast desk of painted steel, flanked on either side
by tall, drawered cabinets made of some sort of pale wood. The sort of thing,
Case supposed, that had once been used to store written records of some kind.
The desktop was littered with cassettes, scrolls of yellowed printout, and
various parts of some sort of clockwork typewriter, a machine Deane never
seemed to get around to reassembling.

“What brings you around, boyo?” Deane asked, offering Case a narrow bonbon
wrapped in blue-and-white checked paper. “Try one. Ting Ting Djahe, the very
best.” Case refused the ginger, took a seat in a yawing wooden swivel chair,
and ran a thumb down the faded seam of one black jeans-leg. “Julie, I hear Wage
wants to kill me.”

“Ah. Well then. And where did you hear this, if I may?”

“People.”

“People,” Deane said, around a ginger bonbon. “What sort of people? Friends?”

Case nodded.

“Not always that easy to know who your friends are, is it?”

“I do owe him a little money, Deane. He say anything to you?”

“Haven’t been in touch, of late.” Then he sighed. “If I did know, of course, I
might not be in a position to tell you. Things being what they are, you
understand.”

“Things?”

“He’s an important connection, Case.”

“Yeah. He want to kill me, Julie?”

“Not that I know of.” Deane shrugged. They might have been discussing the price
of ginger. “If it proves to be an unfounded rumor, old son, you come back in a
week or so and I’ll let you in on a little something out of Singapore.”

“Out of the Nan Hai Hotel, Bencoolen Street?”

“Loose lips, old son!” Deane grinned. The steel desk was jammed with a fortune
in debugging gear.

“Be seeing you, Julie. I’ll say hello to Wage.”

Deane’s fingers came up to brush the perfect knot in his pale silk tie.

## Case hunts for a weapon
### Case feels a tail, and after losing him sets off running
HE WAS LESS than a block from Deane’s office when it hit, the sudden cellular
awareness that someone was on his ass, and very close.

The cultivation of a certain tame paranoia was something Case took for granted.
The trick lay in not letting it get out of control. But that could be quite a
trick, behind a stack of octagons. He fought the adrenaline surge and composed
his narrow features in a mask of bored vacancy, pretending to let the crowd
carry him along. When he saw a darkened display window, he managed to pause by
it. The place was a surgical boutique, closed for renovations. With his hands
in the pockets of his jacket, he stared through the glass at a flat lozenge of
vatgrown flesh that lay on a carved pedestal of imitation jade. The color of
its skin reminded him of Zone’s whores; it was tattooed with a luminous digital
display wired to a subcutaneous chip. Why bother with the surgery, he found
himself thinking, while sweat coursed down his ribs, when you could just carry
the thing around in your pocket?

Without moving his head, he raised his eyes and studied the reflection of the
passing crowd.

There.

Behind sailors in short-sleeved khaki. Dark hair, mirrored glasses, dark
clothing, slender . . .

And gone.

Then Case was running, bent low, dodging between bodies.

### Case unsuccussfully asks Shin for a gun
“RENT ME A gun, Shin?”

The boy smiled. “Two hour.” They stood together in the smell of fresh raw
seafood at the rear of a Shiga sushi stall. “You come back, two hour.”

“I need one now, man. Got anything right now?”

Shin rummaged behind empty two-liter cans that had once been filled with
powdered horseradish. He produced a slender package wrapped in gray plastic.
“Taser. One hour, twenty New Yen. Thirty deposit.”

“Shit. I don’t need that. I need a gun. Like I maybe wanna shoot somebody,
understand?”

The waiter shrugged, replacing the taser behind the horseradish cans. “Two
hour.”

### Case buys a Cobra from a shop
HE WENT INTO the shop without bothering to glance at the display of shuriken.
He’d never thrown one in his life.

He bought two packs of Yeheyuans with a Mitsubishi Bank chip that gave his name
as Charles Derek May. It beat Truman Starr, the best he’d been able to do for a
passport.

The Japanese woman behind the terminal looked like she had a few years on old
Deane, none of them with the benefit of science. He took his slender roll of
New Yen out of his pocket and showed it to her. “I want to buy a weapon.”

She gestured in the direction of a case filled with knives.

“No,” he said, “I don’t like knives.”

She brought an oblong box from beneath the counter. The lid was yellow
cardboard, stamped with a crude image of a coiled cobra with a swollen hood.
Inside were eight identical tissue-wrapped cylinders. He watched while mottled
brown fingers stripped the paper from one. She held the thing up for him to
examine, a dull steel tube with a leather thong at one end and a small bronze
pyramid at the other. She gripped the tube with one hand, the pyramid between
her other thumb and forefinger, and pulled. Three oiled, telescoping segments
of tightly wound coilspring slid out and locked. “Cobra,” she said.

## Case learns about Wage's whereabouts through Lonny
### Case returns to the Chat, but not finding Ratz but instead Lonny Zone the pimp, Zone points Case to the whereabouts of Wage in Namban
BEYOND THE NEON shudder of Ninsei, the sky was that mean shade of gray. The air
had gotten worse; it seemed to have teeth tonight, and half the crowd wore
filtration masks. Case had spent ten minutes in a urinal, trying to discover a
convenient way to conceal his cobra; finally he’d settled for tucking the
handle into the waistband of his jeans, with the tube slanting across his
stomach. The pyramidal striking tip rode between his ribcage and the lining of
his windbreaker. The thing felt like it might clatter to the pavement with his
next step, but it made him feel better.

The Chat wasn’t really a dealing bar, but on weeknights it attracted a related
clientele. Fridays and Saturdays were different. The regulars were still there,
most of them, but they faded behind an influx of sailors and the specialists
who preyed on them. As Case pushed through the doors, he looked for Ratz, but
the bartender wasn’t in sight. Lonny Zone, the bar’s resident pimp, was
observing with glazed fatherly interest as one of his girls went to work on a
young sailor. Zone was addicted to a brand of hypnotic the Japanese called
Cloud Dancers. Catching the pimp’s eye, Case beckoned him to the bar. Zone came
drifting through the crowd in slow motion, his long face slack and placid.

“You seen Wage tonight, Lonny?”

Zone regarded him with his usual calm. He shook his head.

“You sure, man?”

“Maybe in the Namban. Maybe two hours ago.”

“Got some joeboys with him? One of ’em thin, dark hair, maybe a black jacket?”

“No,” Zone said at last, his smooth forehead creased to indicate the effort it
cost him to recall so much pointless detail. “Big boys. Graftees.” Zone’s eyes
showed very little white and less iris; under the drooping lids, his pupils
were dilated and enormous. He stared into Case’s face for a long time, then
lowered his gaze. He saw the bulge of the steel whip. “Cobra,” he said, and
raised an eyebrow. “You wanna fuck somebody up?”

“See you, Lonny.” Case left the bar.

## Case loses his tail by intentionally raising attention to himself in an arcade
### Case feels his tail again and loses him in a short action scene
HIS TAIL WAS back. He was sure of it. He felt a stab of elation, the octagons
and adrenaline mingling with something else. You’re enjoying this, he thought;
you’re crazy.

Because, in some weird and very approximate way, it was like a run in the
matrix. Get just wasted enough, find yourself in some desperate but strangely
arbitrary kind of trouble, and it was possible to see Ninsei as a field of
data, the way the matrix had once reminded him of proteins linking to
distinguish cell specialties. Then you could throw yourself into a highspeed
drift and skid, totally engaged but set apart from it all, and all around you
the dance of biz, information interacting, data made flesh in the mazes of the
black market. . . .

Go it, Case, he told himself. Suck ’em in. Last thing they’ll expect. He was
half a block from the games arcade where he’d first met Linda Lee.

He bolted across Ninsei, scattering a pack of strolling sailors. One of them
screamed after him in Spanish. Then he was through the entrance, the sound
crashing over him like surf, subsonics throbbing in the pit of his stomach.
Someone scored a ten-megaton hit on Tank War Europa, a simulated airburst
drowning the arcade in white sound as a lurid hologram fireball mushroomed
overhead. He cut to the right and loped up a flight of unpainted chipboard
stairs. He’d come here once with Wage, to discuss a deal in proscribed hormonal
triggers with a man called Matsuga. He remembered the hallway, its stained
matting, the row of identical doors leading to tiny office cubicles. One door
was open now. A Japanese girl in a sleeveless black t-shirt glanced up from a
white terminal, behind her head a travel poster of Greece, Aegean blue splashed
with streamlined ideograms.

“Get your security up here,” Case told her.

Then he sprinted down the corridor, out of her sight. The last two doors were
closed and, he assumed, locked. He spun and slammed the sole of his nylon
running shoe into the blue-lacquered composition door at the far end. It
popped, cheap hardware falling from the splintered frame. Darkness there, the
white curve of a terminal housing. Then he was on the door to its right, both
hands around the transparent plastic knob, leaning in with everything he had.
Something snapped, and he was inside. This was where he and Wage had met with
Matsuga, but whatever front company Matsuga had operated was long gone. No
terminal, nothing. Light from the alley behind the arcade, filtering in through
sootblown plastic. He made out a snakelike loop of fiberoptics protruding from
a wall socket, a pile of discarded food containers, and the bladeless nacelle
of an electric fan.

The window was a single pane of cheap plastic. He shrugged out of his jacket,
bundled it around his right hand, and punched. It split, requiring two more
blows to free it from the frame. Over the muted chaos of the games, an alarm
began to cycle, triggered either by the broken window or by the girl at the
head of the corridor.

Case turned, pulled his jacket on, and flicked the cobra to full extension.

With the door closed, he was counting on his tail to assume he’d gone through
the one he’d kicked half off its hinges. The cobra’s bronze pyramid began to
bob gently, the spring-steel shaft amplifying his pulse.

Nothing happened. There was only the surging of the alarm, the crashing of the
games, his heart hammering. When the fear came, it was like some half-forgotten
friend. Not the cold, rapid mechanism of the dex-paranoia, but simple animal
fear. He’d lived for so long on a constant edge of anxiety that he’d almost
forgotten what real fear was.

This cubicle was the sort of place where people died. He might die here. They
might have guns. . . .

A crash, from the far end of the corridor. A man’s voice, shouting something in
Japanese. A scream, shrill terror. Another crash.

And footsteps, unhurried, coming closer.

Passing his closed door. Pausing for the space of three rapid beats of his
heart. And returning. One, two, three. A bootheel scraped the matting.

The last of his octagon-induced bravado collapsed. He snapped the cobra into
its handle and scrambled for the window, blind with fear, his nerves screaming.
He was up, out, and falling, all before he was conscious of what he’d done. The
impact with pavement drove dull rods of pain through his shins.

A narrow wedge of light from a half-open service hatch framed a heap of
discarded fiberoptics and the chassis of a junked console. He’d fallen face
forward on a slab of soggy chipboard; he rolled over, into the shadow of the
console. The cubicle’s window was a square of faint light. The alarm still
oscillated, louder here, the rear wall dulling the roar of the games.

A head appeared, framed in the window, backlit by the fluorescents in the
corridor, then vanished. It returned, but he still couldn’t read the features.
Glint of silver across the eyes. “Shit,” someone said, a woman, in the accent
of the northern Sprawl.

The head was gone. Case lay under the console for a long count of twenty, then
stood up. The steel cobra was still in his hand, and it took him a few seconds
to remember what it was. He limped away down the alley, nursing his left ankle.

## Case and Wage square up
### Case returns to the coffin where he tries to short a deal to no avail
SHIN’S PISTOL WAS a fifty-year-old Vietnamese imitation of a South American
copy of a Walther PPK, double-action on the first shot, with a very rough pull.
It was chambered for .22 long rifle, and Case would’ve preferred lead azide
explosives to the simple Chinese hollowpoints Shin had sold him. Still, it was
a handgun and nine rounds of ammunition, and as he made his way down Shiga from
the sushi stall he cradled it in his jacket pocket. The grips were bright red
plastic molded in a raised dragon motif, something to run your thumb across in
the dark. He’d consigned the cobra to a dump canister on Ninsei and
dry-swallowed another octagon.

The pill lit his circuits and he rode the rush down Shiga to Ninsei, then over
to Baiitsu. His tail, he’d decided, was gone, and that was fine. He had calls
to make, biz to transact, and it wouldn’t wait. A block down Baiitsu, toward
the port, stood a featureless ten-story office building in ugly yellow brick.
Its windows were dark now, but a faint glow from the roof was visible if you
craned your neck. An unlit neon sign near the main entrance offered CHEAP HOTEL
under a cluster of ideograms. If the place had another name, Case didn’t know
it; it was always referred to as Cheap Hotel. You reached it through an alley
off Baiitsu, where an elevator waited at the foot of a transparent shaft. The
elevator, like Cheap Hotel, was an afterthought, lashed to the building with
bamboo and epoxy. Case climbed into the plastic cage and used his key, an
unmarked length of rigid magnetic tape.

Case had rented a coffin here, on a weekly basis, since he’d arrived in Chiba,
but he’d never slept in Cheap Hotel. He slept in cheaper places.

The elevator smelled of perfume and cigarettes; the sides of the cage were
scratched and thumb-smudged. As it passed the fifth floor, he saw the lights of
Ninsei. He drummed his fingers against the pistolgrip as the cage slowed with a
gradual hiss. As always, it came to a full stop with a violent jolt, but he was
ready for it. He stepped out into the courtyard that served the place as some
combination of lobby and lawn.

Centered in the square carpet of green plastic turf, a Japanese teenager sat
behind a C-shaped console, reading a textbook. The white fiberglass coffins
were racked in a framework of industrial scaffolding. Six tiers of coffins, ten
coffins on a side. Case nodded in the boy’s direction and limped across the
plastic grass to the nearest ladder. The compound was roofed with cheap
laminated matting that rattled in a strong wind and leaked when it rained, but
the coffins were reasonably difficult to open without a key.

The expansion-grate catwalk vibrated with his weight as he edged his way along
the third tier to Number 92. The coffins were three meters long, the oval
hatches a meter wide and just under a meter and a half tall. He fed his key
into the slot and waited for verification from the house computer. Magnetic
bolts thudded reassuringly and the hatch rose vertically with a creak of
springs. Fluorescents flickered on as he crawled in, pulling the hatch shut
behind him and slapping the panel that activated the manual latch.

There was nothing in Number 92 but a standard Hitachi pocket computer and a
small white styrofoam cooler chest. The cooler contained the remains of three
ten-kilo slabs of dry ice, carefully wrapped in paper to delay evaporation, and
a spun aluminum lab flask. Crouching on the brown temperfoam slab that was both
floor and bed, Case took Shin’s .22 from his pocket and put it on top of the
cooler. Then he took off his jacket. The coffin’s terminal was molded into one
concave wall, opposite a panel listing house rules in seven languages. Case
took the pink handset from its cradle and punched a Hongkong number from
memory. He let it ring five times, then hung up. His buyer for the three
megabytes of hot RAM in the Hitachi wasn’t taking calls.

He punched a Tokyo number in Shinjuku.

A woman answered, something in Japanese.

“Snake Man there?”

“Very good to hear from you,” said Snake Man, coming in on an extension. “I’ve
been expecting your call.”

“I got the music you wanted.” Glancing at the cooler.

“I’m very glad to hear that. We have a cash flow problem. Can you front?”

“Oh, man, I really need the money bad. . . .”

Snake Man hung up.

“You shit,” Case said to the humming receiver. He stared at the cheap little
pistol.

“Iffy,” he said, “it’s all looking very iffy tonight.”

### Case goes to the Chat where Wage finds him and they square up
CASE WALKED INTO the Chat an hour before dawn, both hands in the pockets of his
jacket; one held the rented pistol, the other the aluminum flask.

Ratz was at a rear table, drinking Apollonaris water from a beer pitcher, his
hundred and twenty kilos of doughy flesh tilted against the wall on a creaking
chair. A Brazilian kid called Kurt was on the bar, tending a thin crowd of
mostly silent drunks. Ratz’s plastic arm buzzed as he raised the pitcher and
drank. His shaven head was filmed with sweat. “You look bad, friend artiste,”
he said, flashing the wet ruin of his teeth.

“I’m doing just fine,” said Case, and grinned like a skull. “Super fine.” He
sagged into the chair opposite Ratz, hands still in his pockets.

“And you wander back and forth in this portable bombshelter built of booze and
ups, sure. Proof against the grosser emotions, yes?”

“Why don’t you get off my case, Ratz? You seen Wage?”

“Proof against fear and being alone,” the bartender continued. “Listen to the
fear. Maybe it’s your friend.”

“You hear anything about a fight in the arcade tonight, Ratz? Somebody hurt?”

“Crazy cut a security man.” He shrugged. “A girl, they say.”

“I gotta talk to Wage, Ratz, I . . .”

“Ah.” Ratz’s mouth narrowed, compressed into a single line. He was looking past
Case, toward the entrance. “I think you are about to.”

Case had a sudden flash of the shuriken in their window. The speed sang in his
head. The pistol in his hand was slippery with sweat.

“Herr Wage,” Ratz said, slowly extending his pink manipulator as if he expected
it to be shaken. “How great a pleasure. Too seldom do you honor us.”

Case turned his head and looked up into Wage’s face. It was a tanned and
forgettable mask. The eyes were vatgrown sea-green Nikon transplants. Wage wore
a suit of gunmetal silk and a simple bracelet of platinum on either wrist. He
was flanked by his joeboys, nearly identical young men, their arms and
shoulders bulging with grafted muscle.

“How you doing, Case?”

“Gentlemen,” said Ratz, picking up the table’s heaped ashtray in his pink
plastic claw, “I want no trouble here.” The ashtray was made of thick,
shatterproof plastic, and advertised Tsingtao beer. Ratz crushed it smoothly,
butts and shards of green plastic cascading onto the tabletop. “You
understand?”

“Hey, sweetheart,” said one of the joeboys, “you wanna try that thing on me?”

“Don’t bother aiming for the legs, Kurt,” Ratz said, his tone conversational.
Case glanced across the room and saw the Brazilian standing on the bar, aiming
a Smith & Wesson riot gun at the trio. The thing’s barrel, made of paper-thin
alloy wrapped with a kilometer of glass filament, was wide enough to swallow a
fist. The skeletal magazine revealed five fat orange cartridges, subsonic
sandbag jellies.

“Technically nonlethal,” said Ratz.

“Hey, Ratz,” Case said, “I owe you one.”

The bartender shrugged. “Nothing, you owe me. These,” and he glowered at Wage
and the joeboys, “should know better. You don’t take anybody off in the
Chatsubo.”

Wage coughed. “So who’s talking about taking anybody off? We just wanna talk
business. Case and me, we work together.”

Case pulled the .22 out of his pocket and levelled it at Wage’s crotch. “I hear
you wanna do me.” Ratz’s pink claw closed around the pistol and Case let his
hand go limp.

“Look, Case, you tell me what the fuck is going on with you, you wig or
something? What’s this shit I’m trying to kill you?” Wage turned to the boy on
his left. “You two go back to the Namban. Wait for me.”

Case watched as they crossed the bar, which was now entirely deserted except
for Kurt and a drunken sailor in khakis, who was curled at the foot of a
barstool. The barrel of the Smith & Wesson tracked the two to the door, then
swung back to cover Wage. The magazine of Case’s pistol clattered on the table.
Ratz held the gun in his claw and pumped the round out of the chamber.

“Who told you I was going to hit you, Case?” Wage asked.

Linda.

“Who told you, man? Somebody trying to set you up?”

The sailor moaned and vomited explosively.

“Get him out of here,” Ratz called to Kurt, who was sitting on the edge of the
bar now, the Smith & Wesson across his lap, lighting a cigarette.

Case felt the weight of the night come down on him like a bag of wet sand
settling behind his eyes. He took the flask out of his pocket and handed it to
Wage. “All I got. Pituitaries. Get you five hundred if you move it fast. Had
the rest of my roll in some RAM, but that’s gone by now.”

“You okay, Case?” The flask had already vanished behind a gunmetal lapel. “I
mean, fine, this’ll square us, but you look bad. Like hammered shit. You better
go somewhere and sleep.”

“Yeah.” He stood up and felt the Chat sway around him. “Well, I had this fifty,
but I gave it to somebody.” He giggled. He picked up the .22’s magazine and the
one loose cartridge and dropped them into one pocket, then put the pistol in
the other. “I gotta see Shin, get my deposit back.”

“Go home,” said Ratz, shifting on the creaking chair with something like
embarrassment. “Artiste. Go home.”

He felt them watching as he crossed the room and shouldered his way past the
plastic doors.

### Case returns to the Cheap Hotel, where he realizes Linda has stolen his RAM
“BITCH,” HE SAID to the rose tint over Shiga. Down on Ninsei the holograms were
vanishing like ghosts, and most of the neon was already cold and dead. He
sipped thick black coffee from a street vendor’s foam thimble and watched the
sun come up. “You fly away, honey. Towns like this are for people who like the
way down.” But that wasn’t it, really, and he was finding it increasingly hard
to maintain the sense of betrayal. She just wanted a ticket home, and the RAM
in his Hitachi would buy it for her, if she could find the right fence. And
that business with the fifty; she’d almost turned it down, knowing she was
about to rip him for the rest of what he had.

When he climbed out of the elevator, the same boy was on the desk. Different
textbook. “Good buddy,” Case called across the plastic turf, “you don’t need to
tell me. I know already. Pretty lady came to visit, said she had my key. Nice
little tip for you, say fifty New ones?” The boy put down his book. “Woman,”
Case said, and drew a line across his forehead with his thumb. “Silk.” He
smiled broadly. The boy smiled back, nodded. “Thanks, asshole,” Case said.

On the catwalk, he had trouble with the lock. She’d messed it up somehow when
she’d fiddled it, he thought. Beginner. He knew where to rent a blackbox that
would open anything in Cheap Hotel. Fluorescents came on as he crawled in.

## We meet Molly, the girl that has been tailing Case
### We learn his tail from earlier was a girl named Molly
“Close the hatch real slow, friend. You still got that Saturday night special
you rented from the waiter?”

She sat with her back to the wall, at the far end of the coffin. She had her
knees up, resting her wrists on them; the pepperbox muzzle of a flechette
pistol emerged from her hands.

“That you in the arcade?” He pulled the hatch down. “Where’s Linda?”

“Hit that latch switch.”

He did.

“That your girl? Linda?”

He nodded.

“She’s gone. Took your Hitachi. Real nervous kid. What about the gun, man?” She
wore mirrored glasses. Her clothes were black, the heels of black boots deep in
the temperfoam.

“I took it back to Shin, got my deposit. Sold his bullets back to him for half
what I paid. You want the money?”

“No.”

“Want some dry ice? All I got, right now.”

“What got into you tonight? Why’d you pull that scene at the arcade? I had to
mess up this rentacop came after me with nunchucks.”

“Linda said you were gonna kill me.”

“Linda said? I never saw her before I came up here.”

“You aren’t with Wage?”

She shook her head. He realized that the glasses were surgically inset, sealing
her sockets. The silver lenses seemed to grow from smooth pale skin above her
cheekbones, framed by dark hair cut in a rough shag. The fingers curled around
the fletcher were slender, white, tipped with polished burgundy. The nails
looked artificial. “I think you screwed up, Case. I showed up and you just fit
me right into your reality picture.”

“So what do you want, lady?” He sagged back against the hatch.

“You. One live body, brains still somewhat intact. Molly, Case. My name’s
Molly. I’m collecting you for the man I work for. Just wants to talk, is all.
Nobody wants to hurt you.”

“That’s good.”

“ ’Cept I do hurt people sometimes, Case. I guess it’s just the way I’m wired.”
She wore tight black gloveleather jeans and a bulky black jacket cut from some
matte fabric that seemed to absorb light. “If I put this dartgun away, will you
be easy, Case? You look like you like to take stupid chances.”

“Hey, I’m very easy. I’m a pushover, no problem.”

“That’s fine, man.” The fletcher vanished into the black jacket. “Because you
try to fuck around with me, you’ll be taking one of the stupidest chances of
your whole life.”

She held out her hands, palms up, the white fingers slightly spread, and with a
barely audible click, ten double-edged, four centimeter scalpel blades slid
from their housings beneath the burgundy nails.

She smiled. The blades slowly withdrew.

