# NINE


## 
THE TUG MARCUS GARVEY, a steel drum nine meters long and two in diameter,
creaked and shuddered as Maelcum punched for a navigational burn. Splayed in
his elastic g-web, Case watched the Zionite’s muscular back through a haze of
scopolamine. He’d taken the drug to blunt SAS nausea, but the stimulants the
manufacturer included to counter the scop had no effect on his doctored system.

“How long’s it gonna take us to make Freeside?” Molly asked from her web beside
Maelcum’s pilot module.

“Don’ be long now, m’seh dat.”

“You guys ever think in hours?”

“Sister, time, it be time, ya know wha mean? Dread,” and he shook his locks,
“at control, mon, an’ I an’ I come a Freeside when I an’ I come. . . .”

“Case,” she said, “have you maybe done anything toward getting in touch with
our pal from Berne? Like all that time you spent in Zion, plugged in with your
lips moving?”

“Pal,” Case said, “sure. No. I haven’t. But I got a funny story along those
lines, left over from Istanbul.” He told her about the phones in the Hilton.

“Christ,” she said, “there goes a chance. How come you hung up?”

“Coulda been anybody,” he lied. “Just a chip . . . I dunno. . . .” He shrugged.

“Not just ’cause you were scared, huh?”

He shrugged again.

“Do it now.”

“What?”

“Now. Anyway, talk to the Flatline about it.”

“I’m all doped,” he protested, but reached for the trodes. His deck and the
Hosaka had been mounted behind Maelcum’s module along with a very
high-resolution Cray monitor.

He adjusted the trodes. Marcus Garvey had been thrown together around an
enormous old Russian air scrubber, a rectangular thing daubed with Rastafarian
symbols, Lions of Zion and Black Star Liners, the reds and greens and yellows
overlaying wordy decals in Cyrillic script. Someone had sprayed Maelcum’s pilot
gear a hot tropical pink, scraping most of the overspray off the screens and
readouts with a razor blade. The gaskets around the airlock in the bow were
festooned with semirigid globs and streamers of translucent caulk, like clumsy
strands of imitation seaweed. He glanced past Maelcum’s shoulder to the central
screen and saw a docking display: the tug’s path was a line of red dots,
Freeside a segmented green circle. He watched the line extend itself,
generating a new dot.

He jacked in.

“Dixie?”

“Yeah.”

“You ever try to crack an AI?”

“Sure. I flatlined. First time. I was larkin’, jacked up real high, out by Rio
heavy commerce sector. Big biz, multinationals, Government of Brazil lit up
like a Christmas tree. Just larkin’ around, you know? And then I started
picking up on this one cube, maybe three levels higher up. Jacked up there and
made a pass.”

“What did it look like, the visual?”

“White cube.”

“How’d you know it was an AI?”

“How’d I know? Jesus. It was the densest ice I’d ever seen. So what else was
it? The military down there don’t have anything like that. Anyway, I jacked out
and told my computer to look it up.”

“Yeah?”

“It was on the Turing Registry. AI. Frog company owned its Rio mainframe.”

Case chewed his lower lip and gazed out across the plateaus of the Eastern
Seaboard Fission Authority, into the infinite neuroelectronic void of the
matrix. “Tessier-Ashpool, Dixie?”

“Tessier, yeah.”

“And you went back?”

“Sure. I was crazy. Figured I’d try to cut it. Hit the first strata and that’s
all she wrote. My joeboy smelled the skin frying and pulled the trodes off me.
Mean shit, that ice.”

“And your EEG was flat.”

“Well, that’s the stuff of legend, ain’t it?”

Case jacked out. “Shit,” he said, “how do you think Dixie got himself
flatlined, huh? Trying to buzz an AI. Great. . . .”

“Go on,” she said, “the two of you are supposed to be dynamite, right?”

## 
“DIX,” CASE SAID, “I wanna have a look at an AI in Berne. Can you think of any
reason not to?”

“Not unless you got a morbid fear of death, no.”

Case punched for the Swiss banking sector, feeling a wave of exhilaration as
cyberspace shivered, blurred, gelled. The Eastern Seaboard Fission Authority
was gone, replaced by the cool geometric intricacy of Zurich commercial
banking. He punched again, for Berne.

“Up,” the construct said. “It’ll be high.”

They ascended lattices of light, levels strobing, a blue flicker.

That’ll be it, Case thought.

Wintermute was a simple cube of white light, that very simplicity suggesting
extreme complexity.

“Don’t look much, does it?” the Flatline said. “But just you try and touch it.”

“I’m going in for a pass, Dixie.”

“Be my guest.”

Case punched to within four grid points of the cube. Its blank face, towering
above him now, began to seethe with faint internal shadows, as though a
thousand dancers whirled behind a vast sheet of frosted glass.

“Knows we’re here,” the Flatline observed.

Case punched again, once; they jumped forward by a single grid point.

A stippled gray circle formed on the face of the cube.

“Dixie. . . .”

“Back off, fast.”

The gray area bulged smoothly, became a sphere, and detached itself from the
cube.

Case felt the edge of the deck sting his palm as he slapped MAX REVERSE. The
matrix blurred backward; they plunged down a twilit shaft of Swiss banks. He
looked up. The sphere was darker now, gaining on him. Falling.

“Jack out,” the Flatline said.

The dark came down like a hammer.

## 
COLD STEEL ODOR and ice caressed his spine.

And faces peering in from a neon forest, sailors and hustlers and whores, under
a poisoned silver sky. . . .

“Look, Case, you tell me what the fuck is going on with you, you wig or
something?”

A steady pulse of pain, midway down his spine—

## 
RAIN WOKE HIM, a slow drizzle, his feet tangled in coils of discarded
fiberoptics. The arcade’s sea of sound washed over him, receded, returned.
Rolling over, he sat up and held his head.

Light from a service hatch at the rear of the arcade showed him broken lengths
of damp chipboard and the dripping chassis of a gutted game console.
Streamlined Japanese was stenciled across the side of the console in faded
pinks and yellows.

He glanced up and saw a sooty plastic window, a faint glow of fluorescents.

His back hurt, his spine.

He got to his feet, brushed wet hair out of his eyes.

Something had happened. . . .

He searched his pockets for money, found nothing, and shivered. Where was his
jacket? He tried to find it, looked behind the console, but gave up.

On Ninsei, he took the measure of the crowd. Friday. It had to be a Friday.
Linda was probably in the arcade. Might have money, or at least cigarettes. . .
. Coughing, wringing rain from the front of his shirt, he edged through the
crowd to the arcade’s entrance.

Holograms twisted and shuddered to the roaring of the games, ghosts overlapping
in the crowded haze of the place, a smell of sweat and bored tension. A sailor
in a white t-shirt nuked Bonn on a Tank War console, an azure flash.

She was playing Wizard’s Castle, lost in it, her gray eyes rimmed with smudged
black paintstick.

She looked up as he put his arm around her, smiled. “Hey. How you doin’? Look
wet.”

He kissed her.

“You made me blow my game,” she said. “Look there, asshole. Seventh level
dungeon and the goddam vampires got me.” She passed him a cigarette. “You look
pretty strung, man. Where you been?”

“I don’t know.”

“You high, Case? Drinkin’ again? Eatin’ Zone’s dex?”

“Maybe . . . how long since you seen me?”

“Hey, it’s a put-on, right?” She peered at him. “Right?”

“No. Some kind of blackout. I . . . I woke up in the alley.”

“Maybe somebody decked you, baby. Got your roll intact?”

He shook his head.

“There you go. You need a place to sleep, Case?”

“I guess so.”

“Come on, then.” She took his hand. “We’ll get you a coffee and something to
eat. Take you home. It’s good to see you, man.” She squeezed his hand.

He smiled.

Something cracked.

Something shifted at the core of things. The arcade froze, vibrated—

She was gone. The weight of memory came down, an entire body of knowledge
driven into his head like a microsoft into a socket. Gone. He smelled burning
meat.

The sailor in the white t-shirt was gone. The arcade was empty, silent. Case
turned slowly, his shoulders hunched, teeth bared, his hands bunched into
involuntary fists. Empty. A crumpled yellow candy wrapper, balanced on the edge
of a console, dropped to the floor and lay amid flattened butts and styrofoam
cups.

“I had a cigarette,” Case said, looking down at his white-knuckled fist. “I had
a cigarette and a girl and a place to sleep. Do you hear me, you son of a
bitch? You hear me?”

Echoes moved through the hollow of the arcade, fading down corridors of
consoles.

He stepped out into the street. The rain had stopped.

Ninsei was deserted.

Holograms flickered, neon danced. He smelled boiled vegetables from a vendor’s
pushcart across the street. An unopened pack of Yeheyuans lay at his feet,
beside a book of matches. JULIUS DEANE IMPORT EXPORT. Case stared at the
printed logo and its Japanese translation.

“Okay,” he said, picking up the matches and opening the pack of cigarettes. “I
hear you.”

## Case talks with Wintermute as Julius
HE TOOK HIS time climbing the stairs of Deane’s office. No rush, he told
himself, no hurry. The sagging face of the Dali clock still told the wrong
time. There was dust on the Kandinsky table and the Neo-Aztec bookcases. A wall
of white fiberglass shipping modules filled the room with a smell of ginger.

“Is the door locked?” Case waited for an answer, but none came. He crossed to
the office door and tried it. “Julie?”

The green-shaded brass lamp cast a circle of light on Deane’s desk. Case stared
at the guts of an ancient typewriter, at cassettes, crumpled printouts, at
sticky plastic bags filled with ginger samples.

There was no one there.

Case stepped around the broad steel desk and pushed Deane’s chair out of the
way. He found the gun in a cracked leather holster fastened beneath the desk
with silver tape. It was an antique, a .357 Magnum with the barrel and
trigger-guard sawn off. The grip had been built up with layers of masking tape.
The tape was old, brown, shiny with a patina of dirt. He flipped the cylinder
out and examined each of the six cartridges. They were handloads. The soft lead
was still bright and untarnished.

With the revolver in his right hand, Case edged past the cabinet to the left of
the desk and stepped into the center of the cluttered office, away from the
pool of light.

“I guess I’m not in any hurry. I guess it’s your show. But all this shit, you
know, it’s getting kind of . . . old.” He raised the gun with both hands,
aiming for the center of the desk, and pulled the trigger.

The recoil nearly broke his wrist. The muzzle-flash lit the office like a
flashbulb. With his ears ringing, he stared at the jagged hole in the front of
the desk. Explosive bullet. Azide. He raised the gun again.

“You needn’t do that, old son,” Julie said, stepping out of the shadows. He
wore a three-piece drape suit in silk herringbone, a striped shirt, and a bow
tie. His glasses winked in the light.

Case brought the gun around and looked down the line of sight at Deane’s pink,
ageless face.

“Don’t,” Deane said. “You’re right. About what this all is. What I am. But
there are certain internal logics to be honored. If you use that, you’ll see a
lot of brains and blood, and it would take me several hours—your subjective
time—to effect another spokesperson. This set isn’t easy for me to maintain.
Oh, and I’m sorry about Linda, in the arcade. I was hoping to speak through
her, but I’m generating all this out of your memories, and the emotional
charge. . . . Well, it’s very tricky. I slipped. Sorry.”

Case lowered the gun. “This is the matrix. You’re Wintermute.”

“Yes. This is all coming to you courtesy of the simstim unit wired into your
deck, of course. I’m glad I was able to cut you off before you’d managed to
jack out.” Deane walked around the desk, straightened his chair, and sat down.
“Sit, old son. We have a lot to talk about.”

“Do we?”

“Of course we do. We have had for some time. I was ready when I reached you by
phone in Istanbul. Time’s very short now. You’ll be making your run in a matter
of days, Case.” Deane picked up a bonbon and stripped off its checkered
wrapper, popped it into his mouth. “Sit,” he said around the candy.

Case lowered himself into the swivel chair in front of the desk without taking
his eyes off Deane. He sat with the gun in his hand, resting it on his thigh.

“Now,” Deane said briskly, “order of the day. ‘What,’ you’re asking yourself,
‘is Wintermute?’ Am I right?”

“More or less.”

“An artificial intelligence, but you know that. Your mistake, and it’s quite a
logical one, is in confusing the Wintermute mainframe, Berne, with the
Wintermute entity.” Deane sucked his bonbon noisily. “You’re already aware of
the other AI in Tessier-Ashpool’s link-up, aren’t you? Rio. I, insofar as I
have an ‘I’—this gets rather metaphysical, you see—I am the one who arranges
things for Armitage. Or Corto, who, by the way, is quite unstable. Stable
enough,” said Deane and withdrew an ornate gold watch from a vest pocket and
flicked it open, “for the next day or so.”

“You make about as much sense as anything in this deal ever has,” Case said,
massaging his temples with his free hand. “If you’re so goddam smart . . .”

“Why ain’t I rich?” Deane laughed, and nearly choked on his bonbon. “Well,
Case, all I can say to that, and I really don’t have nearly as many answers as
you imagine I do, is that what you think of as Wintermute is only a part of
another, a, shall we say, potential entity. I, let us say, am merely one aspect
of that entity’s brain. It’s rather like dealing, from your point of view, with
a man whose lobes have been severed. Let’s say you’re dealing with a small part
of the man’s left brain. Difficult to say if you’re dealing with the man at
all, in a case like that.” Deane smiled.

“Is the Corto story true? You got to him through a micro in that French
hospital?”

“Yes. And I assembled the file you accessed in London. I try to plan, in your
sense of the word, but that isn’t my basic mode, really. I improvise. It’s my
greatest talent. I prefer situations to plans, you see. . . . Really, I’ve had
to deal with givens. I can sort a great deal of information, and sort it very
quickly. It’s taken a very long time to assemble the team you’re a part of.
Corto was the first, and he very nearly didn’t make it. Very far gone, in
Toulon. Eating, excreting, and masturbating were the best he could manage. But
the underlying structure of obsessions was there: Screaming Fist, his betrayal,
the Congressional hearings.”

“Is he still crazy?”

“He’s not quite a personality.” Deane smiled. “But I’m sure you’re aware of
that. But Corto is in there, somewhere, and I can no longer maintain that
delicate balance. He’s going to come apart on you, Case. So I’ll be counting on
you. . . .”

“That’s good, motherfucker,” Case said, and shot him in the mouth with the
.357.

He’d been right about the brains. And the blood.

## Back in the real world, it's revealed that Case flatlined for 40 seconds

### Molly and Maelcum exchange words about Case flatlining
“MON,” MAELCUM WAS saying, “I don’t like this. . . .”

“It’s cool,” Molly said. “It’s just okay. It’s something these guys do, is all.
Like, he wasn’t dead, and it was only a few seconds. . . .”

“I saw th’ screen, EEG readin’ dead. Nothin’ movin’, forty second.”

“Well, he’s okay now.”

“EEG flat as a strap,” Maelcum protested.





