# SEVEN


IT WAS RAINING in Beyoglu, and the rented Mercedes slid past the grilled and
unlit windows of cautious Greek and Armenian jewelers. The street was almost
empty, only a few dark-coated figures on the sidewalks turning to stare after
the car.

“This was formerly the prosperous European section of Ottoman Istanbul,” purred
the Mercedes.

“So it’s gone downhill,” Case said.

“The Hilton’s in Cumhuriyet Caddesi,” Molly said. She settled back against the
car’s gray ultrasuede.

“How come Armitage flies alone?” Case asked. He had a headache.

“ ’Cause you get up his nose. You’re sure getting up mine.”

He wanted to tell her the Corto story, but decided against it. He’d used a
sleep derm, on the plane.

The road in from the airport had been dead straight, like a neat incision,
laying the city open. He’d watched the crazy walls of patchwork wooden
tenements slide by, condos, arcologies, grim housing projects, more walls of
plyboard and corrugated iron.

The Finn, in a new Shinjuku suit, sarariman black, was waiting sourly in the
Hilton lobby, marooned on a velour armchair in a sea of pale blue carpeting.

“Christ,” Molly said. “Rat in a business suit.”

They crossed the lobby.

“How much you get paid to come over here, Finn?” She lowered her bag beside the
armchair. “Bet not as much as you get for wearing that suit, huh?”

The Finn’s upper lips drew back. “Not enough, sweetmeat.” He handed her a
magnetic key with a round yellow tag. “You’re registered already. Honcho’s
upstairs.” He looked around. “This town sucks.”

“You get agoraphobic, they take you out from under a dome. Just pretend it’s
Brooklyn or something.” She twirled the key around a finger. “You here as valet
or what?”

“I gotta check out some guy’s implants,” the Finn said.

“How about my deck?” Case asked.

The Finn winced. “Observe the protocol. Ask the boss.”

Molly’s fingers moved in the shadow of her jacket, a flicker of jive. The Finn
watched, then nodded.

“Yeah,” she said, “I know who that is.” She jerked her head in the direction of
the elevators. “Come on, cowboy.” Case followed her with both bags.

THEIR ROOM MIGHT have been the one in Chiba where he’d first seen Armitage. He
went to the window, in the morning, almost expecting to see Tokyo Bay. There
was another hotel across the street. It was still raining. A few letter-writers
had taken refuge in doorways, their old voiceprinters wrapped in sheets of
clear plastic, evidence that the written word still enjoyed a certain prestige
here. It was a sluggish country. He watched a dull black Citroen sedan, a
primitive hydrogen-cell conversion, as it disgorged five sullen-looking Turkish
officers in rumpled green uniforms. They entered the hotel across the street.

He glanced back at the bed, at Molly, and her paleness struck him. She’d left
the micropore cast on the bedslab in their loft, beside the transdermal
inducer. Her glasses reflected part of the room’s light fixture.

He had the phone in his hand before it had a chance to ring twice. “Glad you’re
up,” Armitage said.

“I’m just. Lady’s still under. Listen, boss, I think it’s maybe time we have a
little talk. I think I work better if I know a little more about what I’m
doing.”

Silence on the line. Case bit his lip.

“You know as much as you need to. Maybe more.”

“You think so?”

“Get dressed, Case. Get her up. You’ll have a caller in about fifteen minutes.
His name is Terzibashjian.” The phone bleated softly. Armitage was gone.

“Wake up, baby,” Case said. “Biz.”

“I’ve been awake an hour already.” The mirrors turned.

“We got a Jersey Bastion coming up.”

“You got an ear for language, Case. Bet you’re part Armenian. That’s the eye
Armitage has had on Riviera. Help me up.”

Terzibashjian proved to be a young man in a gray suit and gold-framed, mirrored
glasses. His white shirt was open at the collar, revealing a mat of dark hair
so dense that Case at first mistook it for some kind of t-shirt. He arrived
with a black Hilton tray arranged with three tiny, fragrant cups of thick black
coffee and three sticky, straw-colored Oriental sweets.

“We must, as you say in Ingiliz, take this one very easy.” He seemed to stare
pointedly at Molly, but at last he removed the silver glasses. His eyes were a
dark brown that matched the shade of his very short military-cut hair. He
smiled. “It is better, this way, yes? Else we make the tunel infinity, mirror
into mirror. . . . You particularly,” he said to her, “must take care. In
Turkey there is disapproval of women who sport such modifications.”

Molly bit one of the pastries in half. “It’s my show, Jack,” she said, her
mouth full. She chewed, swallowed, and licked her lips. “I know about you.
Stool for the military, right?” Her hand slid lazily into the front of her
jacket and came out with the fletcher. Case hadn’t known she had it.

“Very easy, please,” Terzibashjian said, his white china thimble frozen
centimeters from his lips.

She extended the gun. “Maybe you get the explosives, lots of them, or maybe you
get a cancer. One dart, shitface. You won’t feel it for months.”

“Please. You call this in Ingiliz making me very tight. . . .”

“I call it a bad morning. Now tell us about your man and get your ass out of
here.” She put the gun away.

“He is living in Fener, at Küchük Gülhane Djaddesi 14. I have his tunel route,
nightly to the bazaar. He performs most recently at the Yenishehir Palas Oteli,
a modern place in the style turistik, but it has been arranged that the police
have shown a certain interest in these shows. The Yenishehir management has
grown nervous.” He smiled. He smelled of some metallic aftershave.

“I want to know about the implants,” she said, massaging her thigh, “I want to
know exactly what he can do.”

Terzibashjian nodded. “Worst is how you say in Ingiliz, the subliminals.” He
made the word four careful syllables.

“ON OUR LEFT,” said the Mercedes, as it steered through a maze of rainy
streets, “is Kapali Carsi, the grand bazaar.”

Beside Case, the Finn made an appreciative noise, but he was looking in the
wrong direction. The right side of the street was lined with miniature
scrapyards. Case saw a gutted locomotive atop rust-stained, broken lengths of
fluted marble. Headless marble statues were stacked like firewood.

“Homesick?” Case asked.

“Place sucks,” the Finn said. His black silk tie was starting to resemble a
worn carbon ribbon. There were medallions of kebab gravy and fried egg on the
lapels of the new suit.

“Hey, Jersey,” Case said to the Armenian, who sat behind them, “where’d this
guy get his stuff installed?”

“In Chiba City. He has no left lung. The other is boosted, is how you say it?
Anyone might buy these implants, but this one is most talented.” The Mercedes
swerved, avoiding a balloon-tired dray stacked with hides. “I have followed him
in the street and seen a dozen cycles fall, near him, in a day. Find the
cyclist in a hospital, the story is always the same. A scorpion poised beside a
brake lever. . . .”

“ ‘What you see is what you get,’ yeah,” the Finn said. “I seen the schematics
on the guy’s silicon. Very flash. What he imagines, you see. I figure he could
narrow it to a pulse and fry a retina over easy.”

“You have told this to your woman friend?” Terzibashjian leaned forward between
the ultrasuede buckets. “In Turkey, women are still women. This one . . .”

The Finn snorted. “She’d have you wearing your balls for a bow tie if you
looked at her cross-eyed.”

“I do not understand this idiom.”

“That’s okay,” Case said. “Means shut up.”

The Armenian sat back, leaving a metallic edge of aftershave. He began to
whisper to a Sanyo transceiver in a strange salad of Greek, French, Turkish,
isolated fragments of English. The transceiver answered in French. The Mercedes
swung smoothly around a corner. “The spice bazaar, sometimes called the
Egyptian bazaar,” the car said, “was erected on the site of an earlier bazaar
erected by Sultan Hatice in 1660. This is the city’s central market for spices,
software, perfumes, drugs. . . .”

“Drugs,” Case said, watching the car’s wipers cross and recross the bulletproof
Lexan. “What’s that you said before, Jersey, about this Riviera being wired?”

“A mixture of cocaine and meperidine, yes.” The Armenian went back to the
conversation he was having with the Sanyo.

“Demerol, they used to call that,” said the Finn. “He’s a speedball artist.
Funny class of people you’re mixing with, Case.”

“Never mind,” Case said, turning up the collar of his jacket, “we’ll get the
poor fucker a new pancreas or something.”

ONCE THEY ENTERED the bazaar, the Finn brightened noticeably, as though he were
comforted by the crowd density and the sense of enclosure. They walked with the
Armenian along a broad concourse, beneath soot-stained sheets of plastic and
green-painted ironwork out of the age of steam. A thousand suspended ads
writhed and flickered.

“Hey, Christ,” the Finn said, taking Case’s arm, “looka that.” He pointed.
“It’s a horse, man. You ever see a horse?”

Case glanced at the embalmed animal and shook his head. It was displayed on a
sort of pedestal, near the entrance to a place that sold birds and monkeys. The
thing’s legs had been worn black and hairless by decades of passing hands. “Saw
one in Maryland once,” the Finn said, “and that was a good three years after
the pandemic. There’s Arabs still trying to code ’em up from the DNA, but they
always croak.”

The animal’s brown glass eyes seemed to follow them as they passed.
Terzibashjian led them into a cafe near the core of the market, a low-ceilinged
room that looked as though it had been in continuous operation for centuries.
Skinny boys in soiled white coats dodged between the crowded tables, balancing
steel trays with bottles of Turk-Tuborg and tiny glasses of tea.

Case bought a pack of Yeheyuans from a vendor by the door. The Armenian was
muttering to his Sanyo. “Come,” he said, “he is moving. Each night he rides the
tunel to the bazaar, to purchase his mixture from Ali. Your woman is close.
Come.”

THE ALLEY WAS an old place, too old, the walls cut from blocks of dark stone.
The pavement was uneven and smelled of a century’s dripping gasoline, absorbed
by ancient limestone. “Can’t see shit,” he whispered to the Finn. “That’s okay
for sweetmeat,” the Finn said. “Quiet,” said Terzibashjian, too loudly.

Wood grated on stone or concrete. Ten meters down the alley, a wedge of yellow
light fell across wet cobbles, widened. A figure stepped out and the door
grated shut again, leaving the narrow place in darkness. Case shivered.

“Now,” Terzibashjian said, and a brilliant beam of white light, directed from
the rooftop of the building opposite the market, pinned the slender figure
beside the ancient wooden door in a perfect circle. Bright eyes darted left,
right, and the man crumpled. Case thought someone had shot him; he lay face
down, blond hair pale against the old stone, his limp hands white and pathetic.

The floodlight never wavered.

The back of the fallen man’s jacket heaved and burst, blood splashing the wall
and doorway. A pair of impossibly long, rope-tendoned arms flexed grayish-pink
in the glare. The thing seemed to pull itself up out of the pavement, through
the inert, bloody ruin that had been Riviera. It was two meters tall, stood on
two legs, and seemed to be headless. Then it swung slowly to face them, and
Case saw that it had a head, but no neck. It was eyeless, the skin gleaming a
wet intestinal pink. The mouth, if it was a mouth, was circular, conical,
shallow, and lined with a seething growth of hairs or bristles, glittering like
black chrome. It kicked the rags of clothing and flesh aside and took a step,
the mouth seeming to scan for them as it moved.

Terzibashjian said something in Greek or Turkish and rushed the thing, his arms
spread like a man attempting to dive through a window. He went through it. Into
the muzzle-flash of a pistol from the dark beyond the circle of light.
Fragments of rock whizzed past Case’s head; the Finn jerked him down into a
crouch.

The light from the rooftop vanished, leaving him with mismatched afterimages of
muzzle-flash, monster, and white beam. His ears rang.

Then the light returned, bobbing now, searching the shadows. Terzibashjian was
leaning against a steel door, his face very white in the glare. He held his
left wrist and watched blood drip from a wound in his left hand. The blond man,
whole again, unbloodied, lay at his feet.

Molly stepped out of the shadows, all in black, with her fletcher in her hand.

“Use the radio,” the Armenian said, through gritted teeth. “Call in Mahmut. We
must get him out of here. This is not a good place.”

“Little prick nearly made it,” the Finn said, his knees cracking loudly as he
stood up, brushing ineffectually at the legs of his trousers. “You were
watching the horror-show, right? Not the hamburger that got tossed out of
sight. Real cute. Well, help ’em get his ass outa here. I gotta scan all that
gear before he wakes up, make sure Armitage is getting his money’s worth.”

Molly bent and picked something up. A pistol. “A Nambu,” she said. “Nice gun.”

Terzibashjian made a whining sound. Case saw that most of his middle finger was
missing.

WITH THE CITY drenched in predawn blue, she told the Mercedes to take them to
Topkapi. The Finn and an enormous Turk named Mahmut had taken Riviera, still
unconscious, from the alley. Minutes later, a dusty Citroen had arrived for the
Armenian, who seemed on the verge of fainting.

“You’re an asshole,” Molly told the man, opening the car door for him. “You
shoulda hung back. I had him in my sights as soon as he stepped out.”
Terzibashjian glared at her: “So we’re through with you anyway.” She shoved him
in and slammed the door. “Run into you again and I’ll kill you,” she said to
the white face behind the tinted window. The Citroen ground away down the alley
and swung clumsily into the street.

Now the Mercedes whispered through Istanbul as the city woke. They passed the
Beyoglu tunel terminal and sped past mazes of deserted back streets, run-down
apartment houses that reminded Case vaguely of Paris.

“What is this thing?” he asked Molly, as the Mercedes parked itself on the
fringes of the gardens that surround the Seraglio. He stared dully at the
baroque conglomeration of styles that was Topkapi.

“It was sort of a private whorehouse for the King,” she said, getting out
stretching. “Kept a lotta women there. Now it’s a museum. Kinda like Finn’s
shop, all this stuff just jumbled in there, big diamonds, swords, the left hand
of John the Baptist. . . .”

“Like in a support vat?”

“Nah. Dead. Got it inside this brass hand thing, little hatch on the side so
the Christians could kiss it for luck. Got it off the Christians about a
million years ago, and they never dust the goddam thing, ’cause it’s an infidel
relic.”

Black iron deer rusted in the gardens of the Seraglio. Case walked beside her,
watching the toes of her boots crunch unkept grass made stiff by an early
frost. They walked beside a path of cold octagonal flagstones. Winter was
waiting, somewhere in the Balkans.

“That Terzi, he’s grade-A scum,” she said. “He’s the secret police. Torturer.
Real easy to buy out, too, with the kind of money Armitage was offering.” In
the wet trees around them, birds began to sing.

“I did that job for you,” Case said, “the one in London. I got something, but I
don’t know what it means.” He told her the Corto story.

“Well, I knew there wasn’t anybody name of Armitage in that Screaming Fist.
Looked it up.” She stroked the rusted flank of an iron doe. “You figure the
little computer pulled him out of it? In that French hospital?”

“I figure Wintermute,” Case said.

She nodded.

“Thing is,” he said, “do you think he knows he was Corto, before? I mean, he
wasn’t anybody in particular, by the time he hit the ward, so maybe Wintermute
just . . .”

“Yeah. Built him up from go. Yeah . . .” She turned and they walked on. “It
figures. You know, the guy doesn’t have any life going, in private. Not as far
as I can tell. You see a guy like that, you figure there’s something he does
when he’s alone. But not Armitage. Sits and stares at the wall, man. Then
something clicks and he goes into high gear and wheels for Wintermute.”

“So why’s he got that stash in London? Nostalgia?”

“Maybe he doesn’t know about it,” she said. “Maybe it’s just in his name,
right?”

“I don’t get it,” Case said.

“Just thinking out loud. . . . How smart’s an AI, Case?”

“Depends. Some aren’t much smarter than dogs. Pets. Cost a fortune anyway. The
real smart ones are as smart as the Turing heat is willing to let ’em get.”

“Look, you’re a cowboy. How come you aren’t just flat-out fascinated with those
things?”

“Well,” he said, “for starts, they’re rare. Most of them are military, the
bright ones, and we can’t crack the ice. That’s where ice all comes from, you
know? And then there’s the Turing cops, and that’s bad heat.” He looked at her.
“I dunno, it just isn’t part of the trip.”

“Jockeys all the same,” she said. “No imagination.”

They came to a broad rectangular pond where carp nuzzled the stems of some
white aquatic flower. She kicked a loose pebble in and watched the ripples
spread.

“That’s Wintermute,” she said. “This deal’s real big, looks to me. We’re out
where the little waves are too broad, we can’t see the rock that hit the
center. We know something’s there, but not why. I wanna know why. I want you to
go and talk to Wintermute.”

“I couldn’t get near it,” he said. “You’re dreaming.”

“Try.”

“Can’t be done.”

“Ask the Flatline.”

“What do we want out of that Riviera?” he asked, hoping to change the subject.

She spat into the pond. “God knows. I’d as soon kill him as look at him. I saw
his profile. He’s a kind of compulsive Judas. Can’t get off sexually unless he
knows he’s betraying the object of desire. That’s what the file says. And they
have to love him first. Maybe he loves them, too. That’s why it was easy for
Terzi to set him up for us, because he’s been here three years, shopping
politicals to the secret police. Probably Terzi let him watch, when the cattle
prods came out. He’s done eighteen in three years. All women age twenty to
twenty-five. It kept Terzi in dissidents.” She thrust her hands into her jacket
pockets. “Because if he found one he really wanted, he’d make sure she turned
political. He’s got a personality like a Modern’s suit. The profile said it was
a very rare type, estimated one in a couple of million. Which anyway says
something good about human nature, I guess.” She stared at the white flowers
and the sluggish fish, her face sour. “I think I’m going to have to buy myself
some special insurance on that Peter.” Then she turned and smiled, and it was
very cold.

“What’s that mean?”

“Never mind. Let’s go back to Beyoglu and find something like breakfast. I
gotta busy night again, tonight. Gotta collect his stuff from that apartment in
Fener, gotta go back to the bazaar and buy him some drugs. . . .”

“Buy him some drugs? How’s he rate?”

She laughed. “He’s not dying on the wire, sweetheart. And it looks like he
can’t work without that special taste. I like you better now, anyway, you
aren’t so goddam skinny.” She smiled. “So I’ll go to Ali the dealer and stock
up. You betcha.”

ARMITAGE WAS waiting in their room at the Hilton.

“Time to pack,” he said, and Case tried to find the man called Corto behind the
pale blue eyes and the tanned mask. He thought of Wage, back in Chiba.
Operators above a certain level tended to submerge their personalities, he
knew. But Wage had had vices, lovers. Even, it had been rumored, children. The
blankness he found in Armitage was something else.

“Where to now?” he asked, walking past the man to stare down into the street.
“What kind of climate?”

“They don’t have climate, just weather,” Armitage said. “Here. Read the
brochure.” He put something on the coffee table and stood.

“Did Riviera check out okay? Where’s the Finn?”

“Riviera’s fine. The Finn is on his way home.” Armitage smiled, a smile that
meant as much as the twitch of some insect’s antenna. His gold bracelet clinked
as he reached out to prod Case in the chest. “Don’t get too smart. Those little
sacs are starting to show wear, but you don’t know how much.”

Case kept his face very still and forced himself to nod.

When Armitage was gone, he picked up one of the brochures. It was expensively
printed, in French, English, and Turkish.

FREESIDE—WHY WAIT?

THE FOUR OF them were booked on a THY flight out of Yesilköy airport. Transfer
at Paris to the JAL shuttle. Case sat in the lobby of the Istanbul Hilton and
watched Riviera browse bogus Byzantine fragments in the glass-walled gift shop.
Armitage, his trenchcoat draped over his shoulders like a cape, stood in the
shop’s entrance.

Riviera was slender, blond, soft-voiced, his English accentless and fluid.
Molly said he was thirty, but it would have been difficult to guess his age.
She also said he was legally stateless and traveled under a forged Dutch
passport. He was a product of the rubble rings that fringe the radioactive core
of old Bonn.

Three smiling Japanese tourists bustled into the shop, nodding politely to
Armitage. Armitage crossed the floor of the shop too quickly, too obviously, to
stand beside Riviera. Riviera turned and smiled. He was very beautiful; Case
assumed the features were the work of a Chiba surgeon. A subtle job, nothing
like Armitage’s blandly handsome blend of pop faces. The man’s forehead was
high and smooth, gray eyes calm and distant. His nose, which might have been
too nicely sculpted, seemed to have been broken and clumsily reset. The
suggestion of brutality offset the delicacy of his jaw and the quickness of his
smile. His teeth were small, even, and very white. Case watched the white hands
play over the imitation fragments of sculpture.

Riviera didn’t act like a man who’d been attacked the night before, drugged
with a toxin-flechette, abducted, subjected to the Finn’s examination, and
pressured by Armitage into joining their team.

Case checked his watch. Molly was due back from her drug run. He looked up at
Riviera again. “I bet you’re stoned right now, asshole,” he said to the Hilton
lobby. A graying Italian matron in a white leather tuxedo jacket lowered her
Porsche glasses to stare at him. He smiled broadly, stood, and shouldered his
bag. He needed cigarettes for the flight. He wondered if there was a smoking
section on the JAL shuttle. “See ya, lady,” he said to the woman, who promptly
slid the sunglasses back up her nose and turned away.

There were cigarettes in the gift shop, but he didn’t relish talking with
Armitage or Riviera. He left the lobby and located a vending console in a
narrow alcove, at the end of a rank of pay phones.

He fumbled through a pocketful of lirasi, slotting the small dull alloy coins
one after another, vaguely amused by the anachronism of the process. The phone
nearest him rang.

Automatically, he picked it up.

“Yeah?”

Faint harmonics, tiny inaudible voices rattling across some orbital link, and
then a sound like wind.

“Hello, Case.”

A fifty-lirasi coin fell from his hand, bounced, and rolled out of sight across
Hilton carpeting.

“Wintermute, Case. It’s time we talk.”

It was a chip voice.

“Don’t you want to talk, Case?”

He hung up.

On his way back to the lobby, his cigarettes forgotten, he had to walk the
length of the ranked phones. Each rang in turn, but only once, as he passed.





