The land was no greener than any other land, nor was it any loss; the land was
exactly as green as any other land.

The king was not exceptional in any way. He was a good king, but truely many
kings can be good, giving the word good a possible negative connotation. No,
this king was not "more than good" any more than he was "less than goo"; the
king was neither of these things.

The king wore a crown made with gold, and ruby, and saphirre, and a touch of
diamond. The crown matched the marble and granite floors, the prue mahogany
table, fitted to seat hundretds, aond the fine leather furniture made from
cowhide. Worldly things, the king was givqn in abundence, and in a much
insignificant comparison, he gave back those things to the people.

Of all the corturies earning, the King was given 51%, and the towns folk were
give 49% to be split amongst themselves. And of course, the king hosted many a
feast for the townsfolk and gave them many hollidays. The townsfolk adid not
complain about their situation, not because they feared their king. No, the
king was good, se he lived in the exact same manner as the good kings before
him, establishing a precedent that hadn't been broken. No, instead, they kept
to themselves because the towns folk pitied their king.

The king was woefully unhappy. However, that could not possibly be. The king
had a house to live at, massive feasts for every meal, a choice of mistress to
sleep with, and any amenity required was immedietly broutght forth with a
simple usage of the underground telegraph. Of course, the king would busy
himself in the affairs of bouth the inner and outer workings of his nations,
speaking on behalf aof the people to the people. That was about the extent of
the kings job, and he found it amusit at best and tiresome at worst. Still, it
was not cause to be unhappy.

The king fell into his own misery for many night. The townspeople began to
notice the kings speechings becoming more nihilistic. His concern in the
affairs of his people became a mere afterthought to his long and pointless
ramblings of "purpose" and "meaning". The townspeople were growing concerned
for the king, both for the kings sake and their own.

The towns people grew uneasy as athey watched their leadership collapse on
itself in depression. Concerned for their own well being, they set out to
restore the king to his original vigor.

Firstly, the town tried reason with the nighlistic king directly. "Pelase come
back to your senses." A townsperson spoke. "We need you to resrtore your
original leadership."

"Oh, fuck that," The king would reply, "What the hell dos any of your ramblings
about leadership and youth concern me?"

"But sir, your highness --"

"Pah! Don't use such honorifics. I care not for them." the king adjusted his
crown, tossing it aside for the time being.

"Fine!" The towns person replied, "Look bro, our farms are yeilding fractions
of their predicted output, our education has plummetted, and to top it off, the
military is growing undisciplined. With all of your negativity, morale is down,
and invasion from other nations would prove fatal. Please snap out of your
girlish hissy fit and return to your original self."

At this the king let silence ring in the hall for a solid dozen beats of a
heart, as he stared lifelessly into the unkonwn distance, giving a look of
disconcern and apathy on his face. "Ah, we still have plenty to eat," he said,
breaking the long silence, "And I believe we can probably assume that we aren't
going to be attacked any time soon. Honce, I say.. Dare you tire my ears
longer?" The king's eyes continued to stare off at nothing, with a look of
apathetic nihilism overwhelming his appearance.

The townfolk replied, "Do you not care for the well being of your people?"

The king quickly replied, an in a pre-programmed reaction, "Eh, everyone dies
in the end anyway." and resumed his new past time of staring blankly at
nothing.

At this the townsfolk knew that the king would not listen to their pleas, and
that they needed to take a more cunning route. The townspeople resumed their
every day lives.

A few weeks had gone by without proper leadership at this point, and now the
townsfolk were growing desperate. They knew a dragon that lived up on the
mountain to the east, and slept peacefully for many generation. Waking the
dragon was always risky, and involved a complex ritual of dance and music
coreagraphed specifically for the purpose. The townsfolk had decided that
extreme measures had to be taken. They climbed up the moutian at sunrise, and
performed the waking ritual.

The dragon woke. The waking of the dragon was neither monumentous, nor was it
without tension. The dragons long neck extended from the ground up to the sky.
Right himself to a standing positions, the dragon reached to the sky and
exhaled a tempestuous burst of flame from his nose, before looking down on the
townsfolk which woke him. "Who dares to inturrupt my slumber?" His voice was
deep, but not overwhelming.

The townsfolk finished their ritual, and one of them surfaced himself to speak,
"Dragon, we seek your advice."

Long pause... "Go on" muttered the dragen.

"You see, our king takes 51% of our labors, and still he is unhappy and
nihilistic about his own life so as to create disorder and inefficiency amongst
our town. We have no leader and act as an unguided wswarm of fish. Please tell
us you have a means to resolve our most unusual conflict."

The dragon, upon hearing, observed the townsfolk, making eye contact with each
individual. After this, he replied. "Was this king born into his position."
Reply, "Aye, it is so..." "I see" replied the dragon. "Here is what you must
do.

"The king has never experienced the world apart from his rulership. As a result
the king has a perverted sense of what reality is and what reality means. Your
ancensotrs of the dawn of your species did not sit in a palce and gorge on food
and wealth as they sat back and did comparitively little work. Instead your
kind would hunt and scavenge for food, using physical labor to forcefully
aquire their food.

"Thus, what you as the townsfolke should do is enlighten the king of his warped
and mashappen view of the world and convince him to live as one of teh people
for some time." The dragon thus concluded his suggestion.

The town folk thought and asked in reply, "A mighty suggestion that is, but
among us who would become king in his place during that time?"

"You amuse me with your concern. Can not one among you take the crown while the
king embarks on his reality shifiting journey? Or are you yourselves, lowly
towwnsfolk, incapable of performing the smiple duties of the king?" The towns
people hung in silince. The dragon coninued. "Very well, I shall be your king
for 40 days. I have served nations much greater than yours in the past, and it
gives much pleasure to rule a nation."

At this, the towns folk agreed, and appointed the dragon as the acting king for
40 days.

The king, upon hearing of this, was not upset, as one might expect, but
surprisingly happy. "I've always wanted to explore the forest," he replied upon
hearing of the dragons idea, "Well, have fun for 40 days without me. I'll be
back." And the king was off.

The dragon immedietly took appointment in the kings office, preparing himself
as head of the nation. He assumed the jewelry of the king and adorned his many
features with gold and silver. The dragon became a harsh ruler, punishing
simple misgivings with fire, sometimes scorthching his victims to the point of
oiling flesh, burning some victims alive. The economy prospered in that time,
and the people accepted the dragons harsh rule because the knew this was a
temporary establishment set forth to end in 40 days.

However, 40 days went by, and teh king did not return. Upon discovering this
the townsfolk got worried. Unsure if the king had gotten killed in the forest,
or if he simply laost trakc of time, and every possibility in between was
rumuored amongst the folk. After two fortnights of searcing the forset, it was
concluded that the king was nowhere to be found.

Upset, the towspeople revolted at the dragon, and gathered together to confront
him. "To what am I to owe this disapperance?" The dragon replied, "I am quite
frankly just as shocked as you are. I suppose the only reasonable explanation
is to assume the king has abandoned your town and has gone off to live
elsewhere in peace." Pause. The towns people grumbled amongst themselves,
unsure of what to make of the dragons hyposthesis. After some time, the dragon
continued. "Do you not agree that I should be king? Your profits increased by
absurd margins, and teh welfare of all has increased substansially, can aI not
rule you from now on?"

The humans thus began to converse amongst themselves. From the dragons point of
view, it sounded like a rumble of hushed voices swarming oupon a singular idea,
teste ideas with neighbors until a general consensus was made amongst the
people. One among them stood out. "Dragon, give us our king back, the proper
king, and go back to your eternal slumber."

To this th edragon replied. "Eternal slumber? PAH! You speak of suhch a thing
as though I loathe wakefullness. Alas, it is the waking world which makes the
dream of the eternal slumber so magnificent." With that, he paused, and
coninued. "Will you not have me as you knig?"

"No!" the townsfolk were vigilent. "You are a slave owner at best and a tyrant
at worst, and we as the towsfolk feel you should leave us in peace before we
decide to rebel against you."

"HA!" The dragon snorted a massive flame in teh air illiminating the sun even
brighter then it already was. Y"You think you can rebel against me? Need I
remind you the completeness of my destruction? Have I not demonstrated the
thorouhness ofg my wrath and vengence? Who are you to rebel against me?" The
dragon maintaned eye contact, never once swerving to blink.

The townsfolk answered with action, hoisting spears and pitchforks towards the
dragon, bravely stumbling over eachother to get a chance at harming the dragon.
Their rebellion was short lived, however.

The dragon, upon realizing the civilian revolt, having premeditated their
risting tension, immediately swung his wings out wide, releansing the jewelry
he had inherited falsely and let it fall to the ground, and began to soar above
the revolting people. "Must you act in this manner?" The people continued to
throw things up at the dragno, cursing his name. "Very well. " ANd with on
emight breath, the dragon released a fereball which swept all of th epeople
with the forest and the town into flames engulfing everything into an agonizing
death by fire.

The dragon looked at the ashes that remained ofg teh town, no longer requireing
a king because pillars of ash genereally don't require leadership. The dragn
idly wondered what happened to the king. Did he survive in some other town or
did he die in the forest? The dragon shrugged off the question. The knig would
certainly be dead the next time he woke from his slumber anyway. With tha, the
dragon resumed his perch on the mountain and returned to his eternal rest.
