# Part 1 - CHAPTER 11
[Metadata]: # {02.11}
[Descriptor]: # {02.11}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 11
_People(From chapter 2)_
_Princess Sarene of Teod_
_Ashe: The Seon of Sarene_
_King Iaoden of Arelon_
_Queen Eshen of Arelon_

_Kiin: Uncle to Sarene(husband to Daora)_
_Lukel(Male): Older step-cousin to Sarene (son of Daora)_
_Kaise(Female): Cousin to Sarene_
_Daorn(Male): Cousin to Sarene_

_Places_
_Kae: Capital of Arelon_
_Fjorden: Center of Derethi_

##
Only five men responded to Kiin’s request. Lukel scowled at the meager turnout.
“Raoden had as many as thirty men at his meetings before he died,” the handsome
merchant explained. “I didn’t expect them all to come running, but five? That’s
barely even worth our time.”

“It’s enough, son,” Kiin said thoughtfully, peeking through the kitchen door.
“They may be few in number, but we got the best of the lot. Those are five of
the most powerful men in the nation, not to mention five of the most
intelligent. Raoden had a way of attracting clever men to his side.”

“Kiin, you old bear,” one of the men called from the dining room. He was a
stately man with graying lines of silver hair who wore a sharp martial uniform.
“Are you going to feed us or not? Domi knows I only came because I heard you
were going to fix some of your roast ketathum.”

“The pig is turning as we speak, Eondel,” Kiin called back. “And I made sure to
prepare a double portion for you. Keep your stomach in check for a little while
longer.”

The man laughed heartily, patting his belly—which, as far as Sarene could tell,
was as flat and hard as that of a man many years younger. “Who is he?” she
asked.

“The Count of Eon Plantation,” Kiin said. “Lukel, go check on the pork while
your cousin and I gossip about our guests.”

“Yes, Father,” Lukel said, accepting the poker and moving to the firepit room
at the back of the kitchen.

“Eondel is the only man besides Raoden that I’ve ever seen openly oppose the
king and get away with it,” Kiin explained. “He’s a military genius, and owns a
small personal army. There are only a couple hundred men in it, but they’re
extremely well trained.”

Next Kiin pointed through the slightly open door toward a man with dark brown
skin and delicate features. “That man beside Eondel is Baron Shuden.”

“Jindoeese?” Sarene asked.

Her uncle nodded. “His family took up residence in Arelon about a century ago,
and they’ve amassed a fortune directing the Jindoeese trade routes through the
country. When Iadon came to power, he offered them a barony to keep their
caravans running. Shuden’s father passed away about five years ago, and the son
is much more traditional than the father ever was. He thinks Iadon’s method of
rule contradicts the heart of Shu-Keseg, which is why he’s willing to meet with
us.”

Sarene tapped her cheek in thought, studying Shuden. “If his heart is as
Jindoeese as his skin, Uncle, then he could be a powerful ally indeed.”

“That’s what your husband thought,” Kiin said.

Sarene pursed her lips. “Why do you keep referring to Raoden as ‘your husband’?
I know I’m married. No need to keep pointing it out.”

“You know it,” Kiin said in his deep-throated rasp, “but you don’t believe it
yet.”

Either Kiin didn’t see the question in her face, or he simply ignored it, for
he continued with his explanations as if he hadn’t just made an infuriatingly
unfair judgment.

“Beside Shuden is the Duke Roial of Ial Plantation,” Kiin said, nodding to the
oldest man in the room. “His holdings include the port of Iald—a city that is
second only to Kae in wealth. He’s the most powerful man in the room, and
probably the wisest as well. He’s been loath to take action against the king,
however. Roial and Iadon have been friends since before the Reod.”

Sarene raised an eyebrow. “Why does he come, then?”

“Roial is a good man,” Kiin explained. “Friendship or not, he knows that
Iadon’s rule has been horrible for this nation. That, and I suspect he also
comes because of boredom.”

“He engages in traitorous conferences simply because he’s bored?” Sarene asked
incredulously.

Her uncle shrugged. “When you’ve been around as long as Roial, you have trouble
finding things to keep you interested. Politics is so ingrained in the duke
that he probably can’t sleep at night unless he’s involved in at least five
different wild schemes—he was governor of Iald before the Reod, and was the
only Elantris-appointed official to remain in power after the uprising. He’s
fabulously wealthy—the only way Iadon keeps ahead is by including national tax
revenues in his own earnings.”

Sarene studied the duke as the group of men laughed at one of Roial’s comments.
He seemed different from other elderly statesmen she had met: Roial was
boisterous instead of reserved, almost more mischievous than distinguished.
Despite the duke’s diminutive frame, he dominated the conversation, his thin
locks of powder-white hair bouncing as he laughed. One man, however, didn’t
seem captivated by the duke’s company.

“Who is that sitting next to Duke Roial?”

“The portly man?”

“Portly?” Sarene said with a raised eyebrow. The man was so overweight his
stomach bulged over the sides of his chair.

“That’s how we fat men describe one another,” Kiin said with a smile.

“But Uncle,” Sarene said with a sweet grin. “You’re not fat. You’re … robust.”

Kiin laughed a scratchy-throated chuckle. “All right, then. The ‘robust’
gentleman next to Roial is Count Ahan. You wouldn’t know it by watching them,
but he and the duke are very good friends. Either that or they’re very old
enemies. I can never remember which it is.”

“There’s a bit of a distinction there, Uncle,” Sarene pointed out.

“Not really. The two of them have been squabbling and sparring for so long that
neither one would know what to do without the other. You should have seen their
faces when they realized they were both on the same side of this particular
argument—Raoden laughed for days after that first meeting. Apparently, he’d
gone to them each separately and gained their support, and they both came to
that first meeting with the belief they were outdoing the other.”

“So why do they keep coming?”

“Well, they both seem to agree with our point of view—not to mention the fact
that they really do enjoy one another’s company. That or they just want to keep
an eye on each other.” Kiin shrugged. “Either way they help us, so we don’t
complain.”

“And the last man?” Sarene asked, studying the table’s final occupant. He was
lean, with a balding head and a pair of very fidgety eyes. The others didn’t
let nervousness show; they laughed and spoke together as if they were meeting
to discuss bird-watching rather than treason. This last man, however, wiggled
in his seat uncomfortably, his eyes in constant motion—as if he were trying to
determine the easiest way to escape.

“Edan,” Kiin said, his lips turning downward. “Baron of Tii Plantation to the
south. I’ve never liked him, but he’s probably one of our strongest
supporters.”

“Why is he so nervous?”

“Iadon’s system of government lends itself well to greed—the better a noble
does financially, the more likely he is to be granted a better title. So, the
minor nobles squabble like children, each one trying to find new ways to milk
their subjects and increase their holdings.

“The system also encourages financial gambling. Edan’s fortune was never very
impressive—his holdings border the Chasm, and the lands nearby just aren’t very
fertile. In an attempt to gain a bit more status, Edan made some risky
investments—but lost them. Now he doesn’t have the wealth to back his
nobility.”

“He might lose his title?”

“Not ‘might’—he’s going to lose it as soon as the next tax period comes around
and Iadon realizes just how poor the baron’s become. Edan has about three
months to either discover a gold mine in his backyard or overthrow Iadon’s
system of allocating noble titles.” Kiin scratched his face, as if looking for
whiskers to pull in thought. Sarene smiled—ten years might have passed since
the burly man’s face had held a beard, but old habits were more difficult to
shave away.

“Edan is desperate,” Kiin continued, “and desperate people do things completely
out of character. I don’t trust him, but of all the men in that room, he’s
probably the most anxious for us to succeed.”

“Which would mean?” Sarene asked. “What exactly do these men expect to
accomplish?”

Kiin shrugged. “They’ll do about anything to get rid of this silly system that
requires them to prove their wealth. Noblemen will be nobleman, ’Ene—they’re
worried about maintaining their place in society.”

Further discussion was halted as a voice called from the dining room. “Kiin,”
Duke Roial noted pointedly, “we could have raised our own hogs and had them
slaughtered in the time this is taking you.”

“Good meals take time, Roial,” Kiin huffed, sticking his head out the kitchen
door. “If you think you can do better, you’re welcome to come cook your own.”

The duke assured him that wouldn’t be necessary. Fortunately, he didn’t have to
wait much longer. Kiin soon proclaimed the pig cooked to perfection, and
ordered Lukel to begin cutting it. The rest of the meal quickly followed—a
feast so large it would even have satisfied Kaise, if her father hadn’t ordered
her and the other children to visit their aunt’s house for the evening.

“You’re still determined to join us?” Kiin asked Sarene as he reentered the
kitchen to grab the final dish.

“Yes,” Sarene said firmly.

“This isn’t Teod, Sarene,” Kiin said. “The men here are a lot more …
traditional. They don’t feel it’s proper for a woman to be involved in
politics.”

“This from a man who’s doing the evening’s cooking?” Sarene asked.

Kiin smiled. “Good point,” he noted in his scratchy voice. Someday, she would
have to find out what had happened to his throat.

“I can handle myself, Uncle,” Sarene said. “Roial isn’t the only one who likes
a good challenge.”

“All right, then,” Kiin said, picking up a large steaming bean dish. “Let’s
go.” Kiin led the way through the kitchen doors and then, after setting down
the plate, gestured to Sarene. “Everyone, I’m sure you’ve all met my niece,
Sarene, princess of our realm.”

Sarene curtsied to Duke Roial, then nodded to the others, before taking her
seat.

“I was wondering who that extra seat was for,” mumbled the aged Roial. “Niece,
Kiin? You have connections to the Teoish throne?”

“Oh come now!” The overweight Ahan laughed merrily. “Don’t tell me you don’t
know Kiin is old Eventeo’s brother? My spies told me that years ago.”

“I was being polite, Ahan,” Roial said. “It’s bad form to spoil a man’s
surprise just because your spies are efficient.”

“Well, it’s also bad form to bring an outsider to a meeting of this nature,”
Ahan pointed out. His voice was still happy, but his eyes were quite serious.

All faces turned toward Kiin, but it was Sarene who answered. “One would think
that after such a drastic reduction in your numbers, my lord, you would
appreciate additional support—no matter how unfamiliar, or how feminine, it may
be.”

The table went silent at her words, ten eyes studying her through the steam
rising from Kiin’s several masterpieces. Sarene felt herself grow tense beneath
their unaccepting gaze. These men knew just how quickly a single error could
bring destruction upon their houses. One did not dabble lightly with treason in
a country where civil upheaval was a fresh memory.

Finally, Duke Roial laughed, the chuckle echoing lightly from his slight frame.
“I knew it!” he proclaimed. “My dear, no person could possibly be as stupid as
you made yourself out to be—not even the queen herself is that empty-headed.”

Sarene pasted a smile over her nervousness. “I believe you’re wrong about Queen
Eshen, Your Grace. She’s simply … energetic.”

Ahan snorted. “If that’s what you want to call it.” Then, as it appeared no one
else was going to begin, he shrugged and began helping himself to the food.
Roial, however, did not follow his rival’s lead; mirth had not erased his
concerns. He folded his hands in front of himself and regarded Sarene with a
very practiced gaze.

“You may be a fine actress, my dear,” the duke said as Ahan reached in front of
him to grab a basket of rolls, “but I see no reason why you should attend this
dinner. Through no fault of your own, you are young and inexperienced. The
things we say tonight will be very dangerous to hear and even more dangerous to
remember. An unnecessary set of ears—no matter how pretty the head to which
they are attached—will not help.”

Sarene narrowed her eyes, trying to decide whether the duke was attempting to
provoke her or not. Roial was as hard a man to read as any she had ever met.
“You’ll find that I am hardly inexperienced, my lord. In Teod we don’t shelter
our women behind a curtain of weaving and embroidering. I have spent years
serving as a diplomat.”

“True,” Roial said, “but you are hardly familiar with the delicate political
situations here in Arelon.”

Sarene raised an eyebrow. “I have often found, my lord, that a fresh, unbiased
opinion is an invaluable tool in any discussion.”

“Don’t be silly, girl,” spat the still nervous Edan as he filled his plate.
“I’m not going to risk my safety simply because you want to assert your
liberated nature.”

A dozen snide retorts snapped to Sarene’s lips. However, even as she was
deciding which was the most witty, a new voice entered the debate.

“I beseech you, my lords,” said the young Jindo, Shuden. His words were very
soft, but still distinct. “Answer me a question. Is ‘girl’ the proper title for
one who, had things turned out a bit differently, might have been our queen?”

Forks stopped on the way to mouths, and once again Sarene found herself the
focus of the room’s attention. This time, however, the looks were slightly more
appreciative. Kiin nodded, and Lukel shot her an encouraging smile.

“I warn you, my lords,” Shuden continued, “forbid her or accept her as you
will, but do not treat her with disrespect. Her Arelish title is no stronger
and no more flimsy than our own. Where we ignore one, we must ignore all
others.”

Sarene blushed furiously on the inside, chastising herself. She had overlooked
her most valuable asset—her marriage to Raoden. She had been a Teoish princess
all her life; the position formed the cornerstone of who she was.
Unfortunately, that self-concept was outdated. She was no longer just Sarene,
daughter of Teod; she was also Sarene, wife to the crown prince of Arelon.

“I applaud your caution, my lords,” she said. “You have good reason to be
careful—you have lost your patron, the only man who could have given you a
measure of protection. Remember, however, that I am his wife. I am no
substitute for the prince, but I am still a connection to the throne. Not just
this throne, but others as well.”

“That’s well and good, Sarene,” Roial said, “but ‘connections’ and promises
will do us little good in the face of the king’s wrath.”

“Little good is not the same as no good, my lord,” Sarene replied. Then, in a
softer, less argumentative tone, she continued. “My lord duke, I will never
know the man that I now call my husband. You all respected and, if I am to
believe my uncle, loved Raoden—but I, who should have come to love him best,
can never even meet him. This work in which you are involved was his passion. I
want to be a part of it. If I cannot know Raoden, at least let me share his
dreams.”

Roial watched her for a second, and she knew that he was measuring her
sincerity. The duke was not a man to be fooled by mock sentimentality.
Eventually, he nodded and began cutting himself a piece of pork. “I have no
problem with her staying.”

“Neither do I,” Shuden said.

Sarene looked at the others. Lukel was smiling openly at her speech, and the
stately mercenary Lord Eondel was nearly in tears. “I give my assent to the
lady.”

“Well, if Roial wants her here, then I have to object out of principle,” Ahan
said with a laugh. “But, happily, it looks as if I’m outvoted.” He winked at
her with a broad smile. “I get tired of looking at the same crusty old faces
anyway.”

“Then she stays?” Edan asked with surprise.

“She stays,” Kiin said. Her uncle still hadn’t touched his meal. He wasn’t the
only one—neither Shuden nor Eondel had begun to eat either. As soon as the
debate ended, Shuden bowed his head in a short prayer, then turned to eating.
Eondel, however, waited until Kiin had taken his first bite—a fact Sarene
noticed with interest. Despite Roial’s higher rank, the meeting was at Kiin’s
home. According to the older traditions, it should have been his privilege to
eat first. Only Eondel, however, had waited. The others were probably so
accustomed to being the most important person at their respective tables that
they gave no thought to when they should eat.

After the intensity of the debate surrounding Sarene’s place, or lack thereof,
the lords were quick to turn their minds to a topic less controversial.

“Kiin,” Roial declared, “this is by far the best meal I have eaten in decades.”

“You humble me, Roial,” Kiin said. He apparently avoided calling the others by
their titles—but, oddly, none of them seemed to mind.

“I agree with Lord Roial, Kiin,” Eondel said. “No chef in this country can
outdo you.”

“Arelon is a large place, Eondel,” Kiin said. “Be careful not to encourage me
too much, lest you find someone better and disappoint me.”

“Nonsense,” Eondel said.

“I can’t believe that you make all of it by yourself,” Ahan said with a shake
of his large round head. “I’m absolutely certain that you have a fleet of
Jaadorian chefs hiding underneath one of those counters back there.”

Roial snorted. “Just because it keeps an army of men to keep you fed, Ahan,
doesn’t mean that a single cook isn’t satisfactory for the rest of us.” Then,
to Kiin, he continued. “Still, Kiin, it is very odd of you to insist on doing
this all yourself. Couldn’t you at least hire an assistant?”

“I enjoy it, Roial. Why would I let someone else steal my pleasure?”

“Besides, my lord,” Lukel added, “it gives the king chest pains every time he
hears that a man as wealthy as my father does something as mundane as cook.”

“Quite clever,” Ahan agreed. “Dissidence through subservience.”

Kiin held up his hands innocently. “All I know, my lords, is that a man can
take care of himself and his family quite easily without any assistance, no
matter how wealthy he supposedly is.”

“Supposedly, my friend?” Eondel laughed. “The little bit you let us see is
enough to earn you a barony at least. Who knows, maybe if you told everyone how
much you’re really worth we wouldn’t have to worry about Iadon—you’d be king.”

“Your assumptions are a bit inflated, Eondel,” Kiin said. “I’m just a simple
man who likes to cook.”

Roial smiled. “A simple man who likes to cook—and whose brother is king of
Teod, whose niece is now the daughter of two kings, and whose wife is a ranked
noblewoman in our own court.”

“I can’t help that I’m related to important people,” Kiin said. “Merciful Domi
gives us each different trials.”

“Speaking of trials,” Eondel said, turning eyes on Sarene. “Has Your Ladyship
decided what to do for her Trial yet?”

Sarene furled her brow in confusion. “Trial, my lord?”

“Yes, uh, your …” The dignified man looked to the side, a bit embarrassed.

“He’s talking about your Widow’s Trial,” Roial explained.

Kiin shook his head. “Don’t tell me you expect her to perform one of those,
Roial? She never even met Raoden—it’s preposterous to expect her to go through
mourning, let alone a Trial.”

Sarene felt herself grow annoyed. No matter how much she claimed she enjoyed
surprises, she didn’t like the way this conversation was going. “Would one of
you please explain exactly what this Trial is?” she requested in a firm voice.

“When an Arelish noblewoman is widowed, my lady,” Shuden explained, “she is
expected to perform a Trial.”

“So what am I supposed to do?” Sarene asked, frowning. She did not like
unfulfilled duties hanging over her.

“Oh, hand out some food or blankets to the poor,” Ahan said with a dismissive
wave of his hand. “No one expects you to take any real interest in the process,
it’s just one of the traditions that Iadon decided to hold over from the old
days—the Elantrians used to do something similar whenever one of their kind
died. I never liked the custom myself. It seems to me we shouldn’t encourage
the people to look forward to our deaths; it doesn’t bode well for an
aristocrat’s popularity to be at its greatest just after he dies.”

“I think it’s a fine tradition, Lord Ahan,” Eondel said.

Ahan chuckled. “You would, Eondel. You’re so conservative that even your socks
are more traditional than the rest of us.”

“I can’t believe no one’s told me about it,” Sarene said, still annoyed.

“Well,” Ahan said, “perhaps somebody would have mentioned it to you if you
didn’t spend all of your time holed up in the palace or in Kiin’s house.”

“What else am I supposed to do?”

“Arelon has a fine court, Princess,” Eondel said. “I believe there have been
two balls since you arrived, and there is another happening as we speak.”

“Well, why didn’t anyone invite me?” she asked.

“Because you’re in mourning,” Roial explained. “Besides, the invitations only
go out to men, who in turn bring their sisters and wives.”

Sarene frowned. “You people are so backward.”

“Not backward, Your Highness,” Ahan said. “Just traditional. If you like, we
could arrange to have some men invite you.”

“Wouldn’t that look bad?” Sarene asked. “Me, not even a week widowed,
accompanying some young bachelor to a party?”

“She has a point,” Kiin noted.

“Why don’t you all take me?” Sarene asked.

“Us?” Roial asked.

“Yes, you,” Sarene said. “Your Lordships are old enough that people won’t talk
too much—you’ll just be introducing a young friend to the joys of court life.”

“Many of these men are married, Your Highness,” Shuden said.

Sarene smiled. “What a coincidence. So am I.”

“Don’t worry about our honor, Shuden,” Roial said. “I’ll make the princess’s
intentions known, and as long as she doesn’t go with any one of us too often,
no one will infer much from it.”

“Then it’s settled,” Sarene decided with a smile. “I’ll be expecting to hear
from each of you, my lords. It’s essential that I get to these parties—if I am
ever going to fit into Arelon, then I’ll need to get to know the aristocracy.”

There was general agreement, and the conversation turned to other topics, such
as the upcoming lunar eclipse. As they spoke, Sarene realized that her question
about the mysterious “Trial” hadn’t yielded much information. She would have to
corner Kiin later.

Only one man wasn’t enjoying the conversation or, apparently, the meal. Lord
Edan had filled his plate, but had barely taken a few bites. Instead, he poked
at his food with dissatisfaction, mixing the different dishes into an
adulterated mush only vaguely resembling the delicacies Kiin had prepared.

“I thought we had decided not to meet anymore,” Edan finally blurted out, the
comment forcing its way into the conversation like an elk wandering into the
middle of a pack of wolves. The others paused, turning toward Edan.

“We had decided not to meet for a while, Lord Edan,” Eondel said. “We never
intended to stop meeting completely.”

“You should be happy, Edan,” Ahan said, waving a fork topped with a chunk of
pork. “You, of all people, should be eager to keep these meetings going. How
long is it before the next taxing period arrives?”

“I believe it is on the first day of Eostek, Lord Ahan,” Eondel said helpfully.
“Which would put it just under three months away.”

Ahan smiled. “Thank you, Eondel—you’re such a useful man to have around. Always
knowing things that are proper and such. Anyway … three months, Edan. How are
the coffers doing? You know how picky the king’s auditors are….”

Edan squirmed even more beneath the count’s brutal mockery. It appeared that he
was quite aware of his time constraints—yet, at the same time, he seemed to be
trying to forget his troubles in the hope that they would disappear. The
conflict was visible in his face, and Ahan seemed to take great pleasure in
watching.

“Gentlemen,” Kiin said, “we are not here to squabble. Remember that we all have
much to gain from reform—including stability for our country and freedom for
our people.”

“The good baron does bring up a valid concern, however,” Duke Roial said,
sitting back in his chair. “Despite this young lady’s promise of aid, we are
completely exposed without Raoden. The people loved the prince—even if Iadon
had discovered our meetings, he could never have taken action against Raoden.”

Ahan nodded. “We don’t have the power to oppose the king anymore. We were
gaining strength before—it probably wouldn’t have been long before we had
enough of the nobility to go public. Now, however, we have nothing.”

“You still have a dream, my lord,” Sarene said quietly. “That is hardly
nothing.”

“A dream?” Ahan said with a laugh. “The dream was Raoden’s, my lady. We were
just along to see where he took us.”

“I can’t believe that, Lord Ahan,” Sarene said with a frown.

“Perhaps Her Highness would tell us what that dream is?” Shuden requested, his
voice inquisitive but not argumentative.

“You are intelligent men, dear lords,” Sarene replied. “You have the brains and
the experience to know that a country cannot withstand the stress that Iadon is
placing on it. Arelon is not a business to be run with a grip of steel—it is
much more than its production minus its costs. The dream, my lords, is an
Arelon whose people work with her king, instead of against him.”

“A fine observation, Princess,” Roial said. His tone, however, was dismissive.
He turned to the others, and they continued talking—every one of them politely
ignoring Sarene. They had allowed her into the meeting, but they obviously
didn’t intend to let her join the discussion. She sat back with annoyance.

“… having a goal is not the same thing as having the means to accomplish it,”
Roial was saying. “I believe that we should wait—to let my old friend run
himself into a corner before we move in to help.”

“But Iadon will destroy Arelon in the process, Your Grace,” Lukel objected.
“The more time we give him, the harder it will be to recover.”

“I do not see another option,” Roial said with raised hands. “We cannot
continue to move against the king in the way we were.”

Edan jumped slightly at the proclamation, sweat forming on his brow. He was
finally beginning to realize that, dangerous or not, continuing to meet was a
much better choice than waiting for Iadon to strip him of rank.

“You have a point, Roial,” Ahan grudgingly admitted. “The prince’s original
plan will never work now. We won’t be able to pressure the king unless we have
at least half of the nobility—and their fortunes—on our side.”

“There is another way, my lords,” Eondel said with a hesitant voice.

“What is that, Eondel?” the duke asked.

“It would take me less than two weeks to gather the legion from their
watch-points along the nation’s highways. Monetary might isn’t the only kind of
power.”

“Your mercenaries could never stand against Arelon’s armies,” Ahan scoffed.
“Iadon’s military might be small compared to those of some kingdoms, but it’s
far larger than your few hundred men—especially if the king calls in the
Elantris City Guard.”

“Yes, Lord Ahan, you are correct,” Eondel agreed. “However, if we strike
quickly—while Iadon is still ignorant of our intentions—we could get my legion
into the palace and take the king hostage.”

“Your men would have to fight their way into the king’s quarters,” Shuden said.
“Your new government would be born out of the blood of the old, as Iadon’s rule
was birthed from the death of Elantris. You would set the cycle again for
another fall, Lord Eondel. As soon as one revolution achieves its goal, another
will begin to scheme. Blood, death, and coups will only lead to further chaos.
There must be a way to persuade Iadon without resorting to anarchy.”

“There is,” Sarene said. Annoyed eyes turned her direction. They still assumed
she was simply there to listen. They should have known better.

“I agree,” Roial said, turning away from Sarene, “and that way is to wait.”

“No, my lord,” Sarene countered. “I am sorry, but that is not the answer. I
have seen the people of Arelon, and while there is still hope in their eyes, it
is growing weak. Give Iadon time, and he will create the despondent peasants he
desires.”

Roial’s mouth turned downward. He had probably intended to be in control, now
that Raoden was gone. Sarene hid her smile of satisfaction: Roial had been the
first to allow her in, and therefore he would have to let her speak. Refusing
to listen now would show that he had been wrong to grant her his support.

“Speak, Princess,” the old man said with reservation.

“My lords,” Sarene said in a frank voice, “you have been trying to find a way
to overthrow Iadon’s system of rule, a system that equates wealth with ability
to lead. You claim it is unwieldy and unfair—that its foolishness is a torture
to the Arelish people.”

“Yes,” Roial said curtly. “And?”

“Well, if Iadon’s system is so bad, why worry about overthrowing it? Why not
let the system overthrow itself?”

“What do you mean, Lady Sarene?” Eondel asked with interest.

“Turn Iadon’s own creation against him, and force him to acknowledge its
faults. Then, hopefully, you can work out one that is more stable and
satisfactory.”

“Interesting, but impossible,” Ahan said with a shake of his many-jowled face.
“Perhaps Raoden could have done it, but we are too few.”

“No, you’re perfect,” Sarene said, rising from her chair and strolling around
the table. “What we want to do, my lords, is make the other aristocrats
jealous. That won’t work if we have too many on our side.”

“Speak on,” Eondel said.

“What is the biggest problem with Iadon’s system?” Sarene asked.

“It encourages the lords to treat their people brutally,” Eondel said. “King
Iadon threatens the noblemen, taking away the titles of those who do not
produce. So, in turn, the lords grow desperate, and they beat extra effort out
of their people.”

“It is an unconscionable arrangement,” Shuden agreed, “one based on greed and
fear rather than loyalty.”

Sarene continued to stroll around the table. “Have any of you looked at
Arelon’s production charts over the last ten years?”

“Is there such a thing?” Ahan asked.

Sarene nodded. “We keep them in Teod. Would you be surprised to find, my lords,
that Arelon’s level of production has plummeted since Iadon took control?”

“Not at all,” Ahan said. “We’ve had quite the decade of misfortune.”

“Kings make their own misfortune, Lord Ahan,” Sarene said with a cutting motion
of her hand. “The saddest thing about Iadon’s system is not what it does to the
people, nor is it the fact that it destroys the morality of the country. No,
most pitiful is the fact that it does both of these things without making the
noblemen any richer.

“We have no slaves in Teod, my lords, and we get along just fine. In fact, not
even Fjorden uses a serf-based system anymore. They found something better—they
discovered that a man will work much more productively when he works for
himself.”

Sarene let the words hang in the air for a moment. The lords sat thoughtfully.
“Continue,” Roial finally said.

“The planting season is upon us, my lords,” Sarene sad. “I want you to divide
your land amongst your peasants. Give them each a section of field, and tell
them they can keep ten percent of whatever that land produces. Tell them that
you will even let them buy their homes and the land they occupy.”

“That would be a very difficult thing to do, young princess,” Roial said.

“I’m not done yet,” Sarene said. “I want you to feed your people well, my
lords. Give them clothing and supplies.”

“We are not beasts, Sarene,” Ahan warned. “Some lords treat their peasants
poorly, but we would never accept such into our fellowship. The people on our
lands have food to eat and clothing to keep them warm.”

“That may be true, my lord,” Sarene continued, “but the people must feel that
you love them. Do not trade them to other nobles or squabble over them. Let the
peasants know that you care, and they will give you their hearts and their
sweat. Prosperity need not be limited to a small percentage of the population.”

Sarene reached her seat and stood behind it. The lords were thinking—that was
good—but they were scared as well.

“It will be risky,” Shuden ventured.

“As risky as attacking Iadon with Lord Eondel’s army?” Sarene asked. “If this
doesn’t work, you lose a bit of money and some pride. If the honorable
general’s plan doesn’t work, you lose your heads.”

“She has a point,” Ahan agreed.

“A good one,” Eondel said. There was relief in his eyes: soldier or not, he
didn’t want to attack his countrymen. “I will do it.”

“That’s easy for you to say, Eondel,” Edan said, wiggling in his seat. “You can
always just order your legion to work on the farms when the peasants turn
lazy.”

“My men are policing our country’s highways, Lord Edan,” Eondel huffed. “Their
service there is invaluable.”

“And you are handsomely rewarded for it,” Edan spat. “I have no income but that
of my farms—and while my lands look big, I’ve got that blasted crack running
right through the center of them. I don’t have any room for laziness. If my
potatoes don’t get planted, weeded, and harvested, then I will lose my title.”

“You’ll probably lose it anyway,” Ahan said with a helpful smile.

“Enough, Ahan,” Roial ordered. “Edan has a point. How can we be certain the
peasants will produce more if we give them so much liberty?”

Edan nodded. “I have found the Arelish peasantry to be a lazy, unproductive
lot. The only way I can get enough work out of them is by force.”

“They aren’t lazy, my lord,” Sarene said. “They are angry. Ten years is not so
long a time, and these people can remember what it is to be their own masters.
Give them the promise of autonomy, and they will work hard to achieve it. You
will be surprised how much more profitable an independent man is than a slave
who thinks of nothing more than his next meal. After all, which situation would
make you more likely to be productive?”

The nobles mused over her words.

“Much of what you say makes sense,” Shuden noted.

“But, Lady Sarene’s evidence is vague,” Roial said. “Times were different
before the Reod. The Elantrians provided food, and the land could survive
without a peasant class. We no longer have that luxury.”

“Then help me find evidence, my lord,” Sarene said. “Give me a few months and
we will create our own proof.”

“We will … consider your words,” Roial said.

“No, Lord Roial, you will make a decision,” Sarene said. “Beneath everything
else, I believe that you are a patriot. You know what is right, and this is it.
Don’t tell me you’ve never felt any guilt for what you have done to this
country.”

Sarene regarded Roial anxiously. The elderly duke had impressed her, but there
was no way for her to be sure he felt ashamed for Arelon. She had to depend on
her impression that his heart was good, and that in his long life he had seen
and understood how far his country had fallen. The collapse of Elantris had
been a catalyst, but the greed of the nobility had been the true destroyer of
this once grand nation.

“We have all been blinded at one time or another by Iadon’s promises of
wealth,” Shuden said with his soft, wise voice. “I will do as Her Highness
asks.” Then the brown-skinned man turned his eyes on Roial and nodded. His
acceptance had given the duke an opportunity to agree without losing too much
face.

“All right,” the elderly duke said with a sigh. “You are a wise man, Lord
Shuden. If you find merit in this plan, then I will follow it as well.”

“I suppose we have no choice,” Edan said.

“It’s better than waiting, Lord Edan,” Eondel noted.

“True. I agree as well.”

“That leaves me,” Ahan said with a sudden realization. “Oh, my. What shall I
do?”

“Lord Roial agreed only grudgingly, my lord,” Sarene said. “Don’t tell me you
are going to do the same?”

Ahan bellowed a laugh, his entire frame shaking. “What a delightful girl you
are! Well, then, I guess I have to accept wholeheartedly, with the admonition
that I knew she was right all along. Now, Kiin, please tell me you haven’t
forgotten dessert. I’ve heard such lovely things about your confections.”

“Forget dessert?” her uncle rasped. “Ahan, you wound me.” He smiled as he rose
from his chair and moved toward the kitchen.


“She is good at this, Kiin—perhaps better than I am.” It was Duke Roial’s
voice. Sarene froze; she had gone looking for the washroom after bidding
everyone farewell, and had expected them to be gone by now.

“She is a very special young woman,” Kiin agreed. Their voices were coming from
the kitchen. Silently, Sarene slipped forward and listened outside the door.

“She neatly slipped control away from me, and I still don’t know where I went
wrong. You should have warned me.”

“And let you escape, Roial?” Kiin said with a laugh. “It’s been a long time
since anyone, including Ahan, got the better of you. It does a man good to
realize he can still be taken by surprise once in a while.”

“She nearly lost it near the end there, though,” Roial said. “I don’t like
being backed into corners, Kiin.”

“It was a calculated risk, my lord,” Sarene said, pushing open the door and
strolling in.

Her appearance didn’t give the duke even a moment’s pause. “You all but
threatened me, Sarene. That is no way to make an ally—especially of a crotchety
old man such as myself.” The duke and Kiin were sharing a bottle of Fjordell
wine at the kitchen table, and their manner was even more relaxed than the
dinner had been. “A few days wouldn’t have hurt our position, and I certainly
would have given you my support. I’ve found that thoughtful, well-considered
commitment is much more productive than spurious professions.”

Sarene nodded, slipping a glass from one of Kiin’s shelves and pouring herself
some wine before sitting. “I understand, Roial.” If he could drop formalities,
then so could she. “But the others look to you. They trust your judgment. I
needed more than your support—which, by the way, I know you would have given—I
needed your open support. The others had to see you accept the plan before they
would agree. It wouldn’t have had the same impact a few days later.”

“Perhaps,” Roial said. “One thing is certain, Sarene—you give us hope again.
Raoden was our unity before; now you will take his place. Kiin or I couldn’t do
it. Kiin has refused nobility for too long—no matter what they say, the people
still want a leader with a title. And me … they all know that I helped Iadon
start this monstrosity that has slowly killed our country.”

“That was long ago, Roial,” Kiin said clasping the elderly duke on the
shoulder.

“No,” Roial said with a shake of his head. “As the fair princess said, ten
years isn’t long in the life span of nations. I am guilty of a grave mistake.”

“We will make it right, Roial,” Kiin said. “This plan is a good one—perhaps
even better than Raoden’s.”

Roial smiled. “She would have made him a fine wife, Kiin.”

Kiin nodded. “Fine indeed—and an even better queen. Domi moves in ways that are
sometimes strange to our mortal minds.”

“I’m not convinced it was Domi’s will that took him from us, Uncle,” Sarene
said over her wine. “Have either of you ever wondered if, perhaps, someone
might have been behind the prince’s death?”

“The answer to that question borders on treason, Sarene,” Kiin warned.

“Any more than the other things we have said tonight?”

“We were only accusing the king of greed, Sarene,” Roial said. “The murder of
his own son is another matter entirely.”

“Think about it, though,” Sarene said, waving her hand in a wide gesture, and
nearly spilling her wine. “The prince took a contrary stance on everything his
father did—he ridiculed Iadon in court, he planned behind the king’s back, and
he had the love of the people. Most importantly, everything he said about Iadon
was true. Is that the kind of person a monarch can afford to have running
free?”

“Yes, but his own son?” Roial said with a disbelieving shake of his head.

“It wouldn’t be the first time such a thing has happened,” Kiin said.

“True,” Roial said. “But, I don’t know if the prince was as much of a problem
to Iadon as you assume. Raoden wasn’t so much rebellious as he was critical. He
never said that Iadon shouldn’t be king, he simply claimed that Arelon’s
government was in trouble—which it is.”

“Weren’t either of you even a little suspicious when you heard the prince was
dead?” Sarene asked, contemplatively sipping her wine. “It came at such a
convenient time. Iadon has the benefit of an alliance with Teod, but now he
doesn’t have to worry about Raoden producing any heirs.”

Roial looked at Kiin, who shrugged. “I think we have to at least consider the
possibility, Roial.”

Roial nodded regretfully. “So what do we do? Try and find proof that Iadon
executed his son?”

“Knowledge will bring strength,” Sarene said simply.

“Agreed,” Kiin said. “You, however, are the only one of us with free access to
the palace.”

“I’ll poke around and see what I can uncover.”

“Is it possible he isn’t dead?” Roial asked. “It would have been easy enough to
find a look-alike for the casket—the coughing shivers is a very disfiguring
disease.”

“It’s possible,” Sarene said doubtfully.

“But you don’t believe it.”

Sarene shook her head. “When a monarch decides to destroy a rival, he usually
makes sure to do so in a permanent way. There are too many stories about lost
heirs that reappear after twenty years in the wilderness to claim their
rightful throne.”

“Still, perhaps Iadon isn’t as brutal as you assume,” Roial said. “He was a
better man, once—never what I would call a good man, but not a bad one either.
Just greedy. Something’s happened to him over the last few years, something
that has … changed him. Still, I think there remains enough compassion in Iadon
to keep him from murdering his own son.”

“All right,” Sarene said. “I’ll send Ashe to search through the royal dungeons.
He’s so meticulous he’ll know the name of every rat in the place before he’s
satisfied.”

“Your Seon?” Roial realized. “Where is he?”

“I sent him to Elantris.”

“Elantris?” Kiin asked.

“That Fjordell gyorn is interested in Elantris for some reason,” Sarene
explained. “And I make it my business never to ignore what a gyorn finds
interesting.”

“You seem to be rather preoccupied with a single priest, ’Ene,” Kiin said.

“Not a priest, Uncle,” Sarene corrected. “A full gyorn.”

“Still only one man. How much damage can he do?”

“Ask the Duladen Republic,” Sarene said. “I think this is the same gyorn who
was involved in that disaster.”

“There’s no sure evidence that Fjorden was behind the collapse,” Roial noted.

“There is in Teod, but no one else would believe it. Just believe me when I
tell you that this single gyorn could be more dangerous than Iadon.”

The comment struck a lull in the conversation. Time passed silently, the three
nobles drinking their wine in thought until Lukel entered, having traveled to
retrieve his mother and siblings. He nodded to Sarene and bowed to the duke
before pouring himself a cup of wine.

“Look at you,” Lukel said to Sarene as he took a seat. “A confident member of
the boys’ club.”

“Leader of it, more truthfully,” Roial noted.

“Your mother?” Kiin asked.

“Is on her way,” Lukel said. “They weren’t finished, and you know how Mother
is. Everything must be done in its proper order; no rushing allowed.”

Kiin nodded, downing the last of his wine. “Then you and I should get to
cleaning before she returns. We wouldn’t want her to see what a mess our
collected noble friends have made of the dining room.”

Lukel sighed, giving Sarene a look that suggested he sometimes wished he lived
in a traditional household—one with servants, or at least women, to do such
things. Kiin was already moving, however, and his son had no choice but to
follow.

“Interesting family,” Roial said, watching them go.

“Yes. A little odd even by Teoish standards.”

“Kiin had a long life on his own,” the duke observed. “It accustomed him to
doing things by himself. He once hired a cook, I hear, but grew frustrated with
the woman’s methods. I seem to recall that she quit before he had the heart to
fire her—she claimed she couldn’t work in such a demanding environment.”

Sarene laughed. “That sounds appropriate.”

Roial smiled, but continued in a more serious tone. “Sarene, we are indeed
fortunate. You might very well be our last chance for saving Arelon.”

“Thank you, Your Grace,” Sarene said, flushing despite herself.

“This country will not last much longer. A few months, maybe, a half a year if
we are lucky.”

Sarene’s brow furled. “But, I thought you wanted to wait. At least, that’s what
you told the others.”

Roial made a dismissive gesture. “I’d convinced myself that little could be
gained by their aid—Edan and Ahan are too contrary, and Shuden and Eondel are
both too inexperienced. I wanted to mollify them while Kiin and I decided what
to do. I fear our plans may have centered around more … dangerous methods.

“Now, however, there is another chance. If your plan works—though I’m still not
convinced that it will—we might be able to forestall collapse for a little
longer. I’m not sure; ten years of Iadon’s rule has built momentum. It will be
difficult to change it in only a few months’ time.”

“I think we can do it, Roial,” Sarene said.

“Just make sure you don’t get ahead of yourself, young lady,” Roial said,
eyeing her. “Do not dash if you only have the strength to walk, and do not
waste your time pushing on walls that will not give. More importantly, don’t
shove where a pat would be sufficient. You backed me into a corner today. I’m
still a prideful old man. If Shuden hadn’t saved me, I honestly can’t say if I
would have been humble enough to acknowledge fault in front of all those men.”

“I’m sorry,” Sarene said, now blushing for another reason. There was something
about this powerful, yet grandfatherly, old duke that made her suddenly
desperate to have his respect.

“Just be careful,” Roial said. “If this gyorn is as dangerous as you claim,
then there are some very powerful forces moving through Kae. Do not let Arelon
get crushed between them.”

Sarene nodded, and the duke leaned back, pouring the last of the wine into his
cup.

