# Part 2 - CHAPTER 28
[Metadata]: # {03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 28
The most difficult part was deciding where to begin reading. The bookshelves
extended out of sight, their information stretching as if to eternity. Raoden
was certain that the clues he needed were contained somewhere within the vast
sea of pages, but finding them seemed a daunting task indeed.

Karata was the one who made the discovery. She located a low bookshelf near the
side of the room opposite the entrance. A set of about thirty volumes squatted
on the shelf, waiting in their dust. They dictated a cataloguing system, with
numbers relating to the various columns and rows of the library. From it,
Raoden easily located the books on AonDor. He selected the least complicated
volume he could find, and set to work.

Raoden restricted knowledge of the library to himself, Galladon, and Karata.
Not only did he fear a repeat of Aanden’s book boiling, but he sensed a
sacredness to the structure. It was not a place to be invaded by visitors,
misunderstanding fingers that would disorganize books and shatter the calm.

They kept the pool a secret as well, giving Mareshe and Saolin a simplified
explanation. Raoden’s own longings warned him how dangerous the pool was. There
was a part of him that wanted to seek out its deadly embrace, the refreshment
of destruction. If the people knew that there was an easy, painless way to
escape the suffering, many would take it without deliberation. The city would
be depopulated in a matter of months.

Letting them do so was an option, of course. What right had he to keep the
others from their peace? Still, Raoden felt that it was too soon to give up on
Elantris. In the weeks before Sarene began giving out food, he had seen that
Elantris could forget its pains and its hungers. The Elantrians could move
beyond their urges—there was an escape for them besides destruction.

But not for him. The pain swelled with each passing day. It drew strength from
the Dor, bringing him a little closer to submission with its every assault.
Fortunately, he had the books to distract him. He studied them with hypnotic
fascination, finally discovering the simple explanations he had sought for so
long.

He read how the complex Aon equations worked together. Drawing a line slightly
longer in proportion to the rest of an Aon could have drastic effects. Two Aon
equations could start the same, but—like two rocks rolled down a mountain on
slightly different paths—they could end up doing completely different things.
All by changing the length of a few lines.

He began to grasp the theory of AonDor. The Dor was as Galladon had described
it: a powerful reservoir just beyond the normal senses. Its only desire was to
escape. The books explained that the Dor existed in a place that was full of
pressure, and so the energy pushed its way through any viable exit, moving from
an area of high concentration to one of low.

However, because of the Dor’s nature, it could enter the physical world only
through gates of the proper size and shape. Elantrians could create rifts with
their drawings, providing a means for the Dor to escape, and those drawings
would determine what form the energy took when it appeared. However, if even
one line was of the wrong proportion, the Dor would be unable to enter—like a
square trying to force its way through a round hole. Some theorists described
the process using unfamiliar words like “frequency” and “pulse length.” Raoden
was only beginning to understand how much scientific genius was held in the
library’s musty pages.

Still, for all of his studies, he was disappointingly unable to find out what
had made AonDor stop working. He could only guess that the Dor had changed
somehow. Perhaps now, instead of a square, the Dor was a triangle—and, no
matter how many square-shaped Aons Raoden drew, the energy couldn’t get
through. What could have led to the Dor’s sudden shift was beyond him.

“How did that get in here?” Galladon asked, interrupting Raoden’s thoughts. The
Dula pointed toward the Seon Ien, who floated along the top of a bookshelf, his
light casting shadows on the books.

“I don’t know,” Raoden said, watching Ien loop a few times.

“I have to admit, sule. Your Seon is creepy.”

Raoden shrugged. “All of the mad Seons are that way.”

“Yes, but the others generally stay away from people.” Galladon eyed Ien,
shivering slightly. The Seon, as usual, didn’t pay any apparent attention to
Galladon—though Ien did seem to like staying near Raoden.

“Well, anyway,” Galladon said, “Saolin’s asking for you.”

Raoden nodded, closing his book and rising from the small desk—one of many at
the back of the library. He joined Galladon at the doorway. The Dula shot one
last, uncomfortable look at Ien before closing the door, locking the Seon in
darkness.


“I don’t know, Saolin,” Raoden said hesitantly.

“My lord, we have little choice,” the soldier said. “My men have too many
injuries. It would be pointless to stand against Shaor today—the wildmen would
barely pause to laugh as they pushed us out of the way.”

Raoden nodded with a sigh. The soldier was right: They couldn’t keep holding
Shaor’s men away from Sarene. Though Saolin had grown quite proficient at
fighting with his left hand, there just weren’t enough warriors left to protect
the courtyard. In addition, it seemed that Shaor’s men were growing more and
more dangerous in their ferocity. They could obviously sense that there was
food in the courtyard, and the inability to reach it had driven them to an even
deeper level of insanity.

Raoden had tried leaving food out for them, but the distraction only worked for
a short time. They stuffed their faces, then rushed on, even more furious than
before. They were driven by a single-minded, obsessive goal: to reach the carts
of food in the courtyard.

If only we had more soldiers! Raoden thought with frustration. He’d lost many
of his people to Sarene’s handouts, while Shaor’s numbers were apparently
remaining strong. Raoden and Galladon had both offered to join Saolin’s
fighters, but the grizzled captain would hear nothing of it.

“Leaders don’t fight,” the broken-nosed man had said simply. “You’re too
valuable.”

Raoden knew the man was right. Raoden and Galladon were not soldiers; they
wouldn’t do much besides disorder Saolin’s carefully trained troops. They had
few choices left, and it appeared Saolin’s plan was the best of several bad
options.

“All right,” Raoden said. “Do it.”

“Very good, my lord,” Saolin said with a slight bow. “I will begin the
preparations—we only have a few minutes until the princess arrives.”

Raoden dismissed Saolin with a nod. The soldier’s plan was a desperate
last-ditch attempt at a trap. Shaor’s men tended to take that same path each
day before splitting up to try and work their way into the courtyard, and
Saolin planned to ambush them as they approached. It was risky, but it was
probably their only chance. The soldiers could not continue fighting as they
were.

“I suppose we should go, then,” Raoden said.

Galladon nodded. As they turned to walk toward the courtyard, Raoden couldn’t
help feeling uncomfortable with the decision he’d made. If Saolin lost, then
the wildmen would break through. If Saolin won, it would mean the death or
incapacitation of dozens of Elantrians—men, on both sides, that Raoden should
have been able to protect.

Either way, I’m a failure, Raoden thought.


Sarene could tell something was wrong, but she wasn’t sure what it could be.
Spirit was nervous, his friendly banter subdued. It wasn’t her—it was something
else. Perhaps some burden of leadership.

She wanted to ask him what it was. She moved through the now familiar routine
of food distribution, Spirit’s worry making her nervous. Each time he
approached to accept an item from the cart, she looked into his eyes and saw
his tension. She couldn’t force herself to ask about the problem. She had gone
too long feigning coldness, too long rebuffing his attempts at friendship. Just
as in Teod, she had locked herself into a role. And, just as before, she cursed
herself, not quite knowing how to escape her self-imposed indifference.

Fortunately, Spirit didn’t share her same inhibitions. As the noblemen gathered
to begin the handouts, Spirit pulled Sarene aside, walking just a short
distance from the main group.

She eyed him curiously. “What?”

Spirit glanced back at the collection of noblemen, and even a few noblewomen,
who were waiting for the Elantrians to approach and receive their food.
Finally, he turned to Sarene. “Something might happen today,” he said.

“What?” she asked, frowning.

“Do you remember how I told you that not all Elantrians were as docile as the
ones here?”

“Yes,” Sarene said slowly. What’s your trick, Spirit? What game are you
playing? He seemed so honest, so earnest. Yet, she couldn’t help worrying that
he was just toying with her.

“Well, just …” Spirit said. “Just be ready. Keep your guards close.”

Sarene frowned. She sensed a new emotion in his eyes—something she hadn’t seen
in him before. Guilt.

As he turned back toward the food line, leaving his foreboding words ringing in
her mind, a part of Sarene was suddenly grateful that she had remained aloof.
He was hiding something from her—something big. Her political senses warned her
to be wary.

Whatever he had been expecting, however, it didn’t come. By the time they had
begun handing out food, Spirit had relaxed somewhat, speaking cheerfully.
Sarene began to think that he had made a big show out of nothing.

Then the yelling began.


Raoden cursed, dropping his bag of food as he heard the howl. It was close—far
too close. A moment later he saw Saolin’s beleaguered form appear at the mouth
of an alley. The soldier was swinging his sword wildly at four separate
opponents. One of the wildmen smashed a cudgel against Saolin’s legs, and the
soldier fell.

Then Shaor’s men were upon them.

They spilled out of every alleyway—nearly two dozen howling madmen. The
Elantris City Guards jumped up in surprise, startled from their leisurely
idling near the gate, but they were too slow. Shaor’s men leapt toward the
group of aristocrats and Elantrians, their mouths open savagely.

Then Eondel appeared. By some fortune of chance, he had chosen to accompany
Sarene on the day’s trip and, as always, he had worn his sword—defying
convention in favor of safety. In this instance, his caution was well placed.

Shaor’s men weren’t expecting resistance, and they stumbled over themselves
before the general’s swinging blade. Despite his accumulating years, Eondel
fought with spry dexterity, beheading two wildmen in one breath. Eondel’s
weapon, powered by healthy muscles, easily cut through the Elantrian flesh. His
attack slowed the wildmen long enough for the Guards to join the battle, and
they formed a line beside him.

Finally realizing that they were in danger, the nobles began to scream.
Fortunately, they were only a few steps away from the gate, and they easily
fled the chaos. Soon only Raoden and Sarene remained, looking at each other
through the battle.

One of Shaor’s followers fell at their feet, knocking over a carton of grain
mush. The creature’s belly was sliced waist to neck, and his arms flailed
awkwardly, mixing the white mush paste with the slime of the cobblestones. His
lips trembled as he stared upward.

“Food. We only wanted a little food. Food …” the madman said, beginning the
mantra of a Hoed.

Sarene looked down at the creature, then took a step back. When she looked back
up at Raoden, her eyes shone with the icy rage of betrayal.

“You held food back from them, didn’t you?” she demanded.

Raoden nodded slowly, making no excuse. “I did.”

“You tyrant!” she hissed. “You heartless despot!”

Raoden turned to look at Shaor’s desperate men. In a way, she was right. “Yes.
I am.”

Sarene took another step backward. However, she stumbled against something.
Raoden reached out to steady her, but then stopped as he realized what had
tripped her. It was a sack of food, one of the overstuffed bags Raoden had
prepared for the Hoed. Sarene looked down as well, realization dawning.

“I almost started trusting you,” Sarene said bitterly. Then she was gone,
dashing toward the gate as the soldiers fell back. Shaor’s men did not follow,
instead falling on the bounty that the nobles had abandoned.

Raoden stepped back from the food. Shaor’s men didn’t even seem to notice him
as they tore into the scattered supplies, stuffing their faces with dirty
hands. Raoden watched them with tired eyes. It was over. The nobles would not
enter Elantris again. At least none of them had been killed.

Then he remembered Saolin. Raoden dashed across the courtyard to kneel beside
his friend. The old soldier stared sightlessly into the sky, his head rocking
back and forth as he mumbled, “Failed my lord. Failed my lord Spirit. Failed,
failed, failed….”

Raoden moaned, bowing his head in despair. What have I done? he wondered,
helplessly cradling the newly made Hoed.

Raoden stayed there, lost in sorrow until long after Shaor’s men had taken the
last of the food and run off. Eventually, an incongruous sound brought him out
of his grief.

The gates of Elantris were opening again.

