# Part 2 - CHAPTER 32
[Metadata]: # {03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 32
“So, you’ve returned to wearing black, have you, my dear?” Duke Roial asked as
he helped her into the carriage.

Sarene looked down at her dress. It wasn’t one that Eshen had sent her, but
something she’d asked Shuden to bring up on one of his caravans through
Duladel. Less full than most current trends in Arelish fashion, it hugged
tightly to her form. The soft velvet was embroidered with tiny silver patterns,
and rather than a cape it had a short mantle that covered her shoulders and
upper arms.

“It’s actually blue, Your Grace,” she said. “I never wear black.”

“Ah.” The older man was dressed in a white suit with a deep maroon undercoat.
The outfit worked well with his carefully styled head of white hair.

The coachman closed the door and climbed into his place. A short moment later
they were on their way to the ball.

Sarene stared out at the dark streets of Kae, her mood tolerant, but unhappy.
She couldn’t, of course, refuse to attend the ball—Roial had agreed to throw it
at her suggestion. However, she had made those plans a week ago, before events
in Elantris. The last three days had been devoted to reflection; she has spent
them trying to work through her feelings and reorganize her plans. She didn’t
want to bother with a night of frivolities, even if there was a point behind
it.

“You look at ill-ease, Your Highness,” Roial said.

“I haven’t quite recovered from what happened the other day, Your Grace,” she
said, leaning back in her seat.

“The day was rather overwhelming,” he agreed. Then, leaning his head out the
carriage’s window, he checked the sky. “It is a beautiful night for our
purposes.”

Sarene nodded absently. It no longer mattered to her whether the eclipse would
be visible or not. Ever since her tirade before Iadon, the entire court had
begun to step lightly around her. Instead of growing angry as Kiin had
predicted, Iadon simply avoided her. Whenever Sarene entered a room, heads
turned away and eyes looked down. It was as if she were a monster—a vengeful
Svrakiss sent to torment them.

The servants were no better. Where they had once been subservient, now they
cringed. Her dinner had come late, and though the cook insisted it was because
one of her serving women had suddenly run off, Sarene was certain it was simply
because no one wanted to face the fearful princess’s wrath. The entire
situation was putting Sarene on edge. Why, in the blessed name of Domi, she
wondered, does everyone in this country feel so threatened by an assertive
woman?

Of course, this time she had to admit that woman or not, what she had done to
the king had been too forward. Sarene was just paying the price for her loss of
temper.

“All right, Sarene,” Roial declared. “That is enough.”

Sarene started, looking up at the elderly duke’s stern face. “Excuse me, Your
Grace?”

“I said it’s enough. By all reports, you’ve spent the last three days moping in
your room. I don’t care how emotionally disturbing that attack in Elantris was,
you need to get over it—and quickly. We’re almost to my mansion.”

“Excuse me?” she said again, taken aback.

“Sarene,” Roial continued, his voice softening, “we didn’t ask for your
leadership. You wiggled your way in and seized control. Now that you’ve done
so, you can’t just leave us because of injured feelings. When you accept
authority, you must be willing to take responsibility for it at all times—even
when you don’t particularly feel like it.”

Suddenly abashed by the duke’s wisdom, Sarene lowered her eyes in shame. “I’m
sorry.”

“Ah, Princess,” Roial said, “we’ve come to rely on you so much in these last
few weeks. You crept into our hearts and did what no one else, even myself,
could have done—you unified us. Shuden and Eondel all but worship you, Lukel
and Kiin stand by your side like two unmoving stones, I can barely unravel your
delicate schemes, and even Ahan describes you as the most delightful young
woman he’s ever met. Don’t leave us now—we need you.”

Flushing slightly, Sarene shook her head as the carriage pulled up Roial’s
drive. “But what is left, Your Grace? Through no cleverness of my own, the
Derethi gyorn has been neutralized, and it appears that Iadon has been quelled.
It seems to me that the time of danger has passed.”

Roial raised a bushy white eyebrow. “Perhaps. But Iadon is more clever than we
usually credit. The king has some overwhelming blind spots, but he was capable
enough to seize control ten years ago, and he has kept the aristocracy at one
another’s throats all this time. And as for the gyorn …”

Roial looked out the carriage window, toward a vehicle pulling up next to them.
Inside was a short man dressed completely in red; Sarene recognized the young
Aonic priest who had served as Hrathen’s assistant.

Roial frowned. “I think we may have traded Hrathen for a foe of equal danger.”

“Him?” Sarene asked with surprise. She’d seen the young man with Hrathen, of
course—even remarked on his apparent fervor. However, he could hardly be as
dangerous as the calculating gyorn, could he?

“I’ve been watching that one,” the duke said. “His name is Dilaf—he’s Arelish,
which means he was probably raised Korathi. I’ve noticed that those who turn
away from a faith are often more hateful toward it than any outsider could be.”

“You might be right, Your Grace,” Sarene admitted. “We’ll have to change our
plans. We can’t deal with this one the same way we did Hrathen.”

Roial smiled, a slight twinkle in his eyes. “That’s the girl I remember. Come;
it wouldn’t do for me to be late to my own party.”

Roial had decided to have the eclipse-observation party on the grounds behind
his house—an action necessitated by the relative modesty of his home. For the
third-richest man in Arelon, the duke was remarkably frugal.

“I’ve only been a duke for ten years, Sarene,” Roial had explained when she
first visited his home, “but I’ve been a businessman all my life. You don’t
make money by being wasteful. The house suits me—I fear I’d get lost in
anything larger.”

The grounds surrounding the home, however, were extensive—a luxury Roial
admitted was a bit extravagant. The duke was a lover of gardens, and he spent
more time outside wandering his grounds than he did in his house.

Fortunately, the weather had decided to comply with the duke’s plans, providing
a warm breeze from the south and a completely cloudless sky. Stars splattered
the sky like specks of paint on a black canvas, and Sarene found her eyes
tracing the constellations of the major Aons. Rao shone directly overhead, a
large square with four circles at its sides and a dot in the center. Her own
Aon, Ene, crouched barely visible on the horizon. The full moon rose
ponderously toward its zenith. In just a few hours it would vanish
completely—or, at least, that was what the astronomers claimed.

“So,” Roial said, walking at her side, their arms linked, “are you going to
tell me what this is all about?”

“What what’s all about?”

“The ball,” Roial said. “You can’t claim that you had me organize it on a whim.
You were much too specific about the date and location. What are you planning?”

Sarene smiled, rekindling the night’s schemes. She had nearly forgotten about
the party, but the more she considered it, the more excited she became. Before
this night was over, she hoped to find the answer to a problem that had been
bothering her almost since she’d arrived in Arelon.

“Let’s just say I wanted to view the eclipse with company,” she said with a sly
smile.

“Ah, Sarene, ever dramatic. You’ve missed your calling in life, my dear—you
should have been an actress.”

“As a matter of fact, I considered it once,” Sarene said reminiscently. “Of
course, I was eleven years old at the time. A troop of players came through
Teoin. After watching them, I informed my parents that I had decided not to
grow up to be a princess, but an actress instead.”

Roial laughed. “I would like to have seen old Eventeo’s face when his prize
daughter told him she wanted to become a traveling performer.”

“You know my father?”

“Really, Sarene,” Roial said with indignation, “I haven’t been old and senile
all my life. There was a time when I traveled, and every good merchant has a
few contacts in Teod. I’ve had two audiences with your father, and both times
he mocked my wardrobe.”

Sarene chuckled. “He’s merciless with visiting merchants.”

Roial’s grounds centered around a large courtyardlike patch of grass overlaid
by a wooden dancing pavilion. Hedge-walled pathways led away from the pavilion,
toward newly blooming flower beds, bridge-covered ponds, and sculpture
displays. Torches lined the pavilion, providing full illumination. These would,
of course, be doused prior to the eclipse. However, if things went as Sarene
planned, she wouldn’t be there to see it.

“The king!” Sarene exclaimed. “Is he here?”

“Of course,” Roial said, pointing toward an enclosed sculpture garden to one
side of the pavilion. Sarene could barely make out the form of Iadon inside,
Eshen at his side.

Sarene relaxed. Iadon was the whole point of the night’s activities. Of course,
the king’s pride wouldn’t let him miss a ball thrown by one of his dukes. If he
had attended Telrii’s party, he would certainly make it to Roial’s.

“What could the king have to do with little Sarene’s schemes?” Roial mused to
himself. “Maybe she sent someone to peruse his chambers while he’s away. Her
Seon, perhaps?”

However, at that moment Ashe floated into view a short distance away. Sarene
shot Roial a sly look.

“All right, perhaps it wasn’t the Seon,” Roial said. “That would be too obvious
anyway.”

“My lady,” Ashe said, bobbing in greeting as he approached.

“What did you find out?” Sarene asked.

“The cook did indeed lose a serving woman this afternoon, my lady. They claim
she ran off to be with her brother, who was recently moved to one of the king’s
provincial mansions. The man, however, swears he hasn’t seen anything of her.”

Sarene frowned. Perhaps she had been too quick in judging the cook and her
minions. “All right. Good work.”

“What was that about?” Roial asked suspiciously.

“Nothing,” Sarene said, this time completely honest.

Roial, however, nodded knowingly.

The problem with being clever, Sarene thought with a sigh, is that everyone
assumes you’re always planning something.

“Ashe, I want you to keep an eye on the king,” Sarene said, aware of Roial’s
curious smile. “He’ll probably spend most of his time in his exclusive portion
of the party. If he decides to move, tell me immediately.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said, hovering away to take an unobtrusive place next to
one of the torches, where the flame’s light masked his own.

Roial nodded again. He was obviously having a delightful time trying to
decipher Sarene’s plans.

“So, do you feel like joining the king’s private gathering?” Sarene asked,
trying to divert the duke’s attention.

Roial shook his head. “No. As much good as it would do me to watch Iadon squirm
in your presence, I’ve never approved of the way he holds himself aloof. I’m
the host, thanks to you, and a host should mingle. Besides, being around Iadon
tonight will be intolerable—he’s looking for someone to replace Baron Edan, and
every minor noble at the party will make a play for the title.”

“As you wish,” Sarene said, allowing Roial to lead her toward the open-walled
pavilion where a group of musicians was playing and some couples were dancing,
though most stood talking at the perimeter.

Roial chuckled, and Sarene followed his gaze. Shuden and Torena spun near the
center of the dance floor, completely captivated by one another.

“What are you laughing about?” Sarene asked, watching the fire-haired girl and
the young Jindo.

“It is one of the great joys of my old age to see young men proven hypocrites,”
Roial said with an evil smile. “After all those years swearing that he would
never let himself be caught—after endless balls spent complaining when women
fawned over him—his heart, and his mind, have turned to mush as surely as any
other man’s.”

“You’re a mean old man, Your Grace.”

“And that is the way it should be,” Roial informed. “Mean young men are
trivial, and kindly old men boring. Here, let me get us something to drink.”

The duke wandered away, and Sarene was left watching the young couple dance.
The look in Shuden’s eyes was so sickeningly dreamy that she had to turn away.
Perhaps Daora’s words had been more accurate than Sarene had been willing to
admit. Sarene was jealous, though not because she had assumed any romantic
possibilities with Shuden. However, ever since her arrival in Arelon, Shuden
had been one of her most fervent supporters. It was hard to watch him giving
his attention to another woman, even for a completely different purpose.

There was another reason as well—a deeper, more honest reason. She was jealous
of that look in Shuden’s eyes. She was envious of his opportunity to court, to
fall in love, and to be swept up in the stupefying joy of romance.

They were ideals Sarene had dreamed about since early adolescence. As she grew
older, Sarene realized such things would never be hers. She had rebelled at
first, cursing her offensive personality. She knew she intimidated the court’s
men, and so, for a short while, she had forced herself to adopt a more
subservient, docile temperament. Her engagement, and near marriage, to a young
count named Graeo had been the result.

She still remembered the man—more a boy—with pity. Only Graeo had been willing
to take a chance on the new, even-tempered Sarene—risking the mockery of his
peers. The union had not been one of love, but she had liked Graeo despite his
weak will. There had been a kind of childish hesitancy about him; an overdone
compulsion to do what was right, to succeed in a world where most people
understood things much better than he.

In the end, she had broken off the engagement—not because she knew living with
the dull-minded Graeo would have driven her mad, but because she had realized
that she was being unfair. She had taken advantage of Graeo’s simple
ingenuousness, knowing full well he was getting himself into something far over
his head. It was better he bear the scorn of being refused at the last moment
than live the rest of his life with a woman who would stifle him.

The decision had sealed her fate as an unmarried spinster. Rumors spread that
she had led Graeo on simply to make a fool out of him, and the embarrassed
young man had left the court, living the next three years holed up on his lands
like a hermit. After that, no man had dared court the king’s daughter.

She’d fled Teod at that point, immersing herself in her father’s diplomatic
corps. She served as an envoy in all the major cities of Opelon, from Fjorden
itself to the Svordish capital of Seraven. The prospect of going to Arelon had
intrigued her, of course, but her father had remained adamant about his
prohibition. He barely allowed spies into the country, let alone his only
daughter.

Still, Sarene thought with a sigh, she had made it eventually. It was worth it,
she decided; her engagement to Raoden had been a good idea, no matter how
horribly it had turned out. For a while, when they had been exchanging letters,
she had allowed herself to hope again. The promise had eventually been crushed,
but she still had the memory of that hope. It was more than she had ever
expected to obtain.

“You look as if your best friend just died,” Roial noted, returning to hand her
a cup of blue Jaadorian wine.

“No, just my husband,” Sarene said with a sigh.

“Ah,” Roial said with an understanding nod. “Perhaps we should move somewhere
else—a place where we won’t have such a clear view of our young baron’s
rapture.”

“A wonderful suggestion, Your Grace,” Sarene said.

They moved along the pavilion’s outer border, Roial nodding to those who
complimented him on the fine party. Sarene strolled along at the elderly man’s
side, growing increasingly confused at the dark looks she occasionally got from
noblewomen they passed. It was a few minutes before she realized the reason
behind the hostility; she had completely forgotten Roial’s status as the most
marriageable man in Arelon. Many of the women had come this night expecting the
duke to be unaccompanied. They had probably planned long and hard on how to
corner the old man, intent on currying his favor. Sarene had ruined any chance
of that.

Roial chuckled, studying her face. “You’ve figured it out then, haven’t you?”

“This is why you never throw parties, isn’t it?”

The duke nodded. “As difficult as it is to deal with them at another man’s
ball, it is nearly impossible to be a good host with those vixens nipping at my
hide.”

“Be careful, Your Grace,” Sarene said. “Shuden complained about exactly the
same sort of thing the first time he took me to a ball, and look where he ended
up.”

“Shuden went about it the wrong way,” Roial said. “He just ran away—and
everyone knows that no matter how hard you run, there’s always going to be
someone faster. I, on the other hand, don’t run. I find far too much enjoyment
in playing with their greedy little minds.”

Sarene’s chastising reply was cut off by the approach of a familiar couple.
Lukel wore his customarily fashionable outfit, a blue, gold-embroidered vest
and tan trousers, while Jalla, his dark-haired wife, was in a simple lavender
dress—Jindoeese, by the look of its high-necked cut.

“Now, there’s a mismatched couple if I’ve ever seen one,” Lukel said with an
open smile as he bowed to the duke.

“What?” Roial asked. “A crusty old duke and his lovely young companion?”

“I was referring more to the height difference, Your Grace,” Lukel said with a
laugh.

Roial glanced up with a raised eyebrow; Sarene stood a full head taller than
him. “At my age, you take what you can get.”

“I think that’s true no matter what your age, Your Grace,” Lukel said, looking
down at his pretty, black-eyed wife. “We just have to accept whatever the women
decide to allot us, and count ourselves blessed for the offering.”

Sarene felt sick—first Shuden, now Lukel. She was definitely not in the mood to
deal with happy couples this night.

Sensing her disposition, the duke bid Lukel farewell, pleading the need to
check on the food in other parts of the garden. Lukel and Jalla turned back to
their dancing as Roial led Sarene out of the lighted pavilion and back under
the darkened sky and flickering torchlight.

“You’re going to need to get over that, Sarene,” the duke said. “You can’t go
running every time you meet someone with a stable relationship.”

Sarene decided not to point out that young love was hardly stable. “I don’t
always get this way, Your Grace. I’ve just had a difficult week. Give me a few
more days, and I’ll be back to my regular, stone-hearted self.”

Sensing her bitterness, Roial wisely decided not to respond to that particular
remark. Instead, he glanced to the side, following the sound of a familiar
voice’s laughter.

Duke Telrii had apparently decided not to join the king’s private section of
the party. Quite the opposite, in fact. He stood entertaining a large group of
noblemen in a small hedged courtyard opposite the pavilion of Iadon’s private
gathering. It was almost as if he were starting his own exclusive subparty.

“Not a good sign,” Roial said quietly, voicing Sarene’s own thoughts.

“Agreed,” Sarene said. She did a quick count of Telrii’s fawners, trying to
distinguish rank, then glanced back toward Iadon’s section of the party. Their
numbers were about equal, but Iadon seemed to command more important
nobility—for the moment.

“That’s another unforeseen effect of your tirade before the king,” Roial said.
“The more unstable Iadon becomes, the more tempting other options appear.”

Sarene frowned as Telrii laughed again, his voice melodious and unconcerned. He
did not at all sound like a man whose most important supporter—Gyorn
Hrathen—had just fallen.

“What is he planning?” Sarene wondered. “How could he take the throne now?”

Roial just shook his head. After a moment more of contemplation, he looked up
and addressed open air. “Yes?”

Sarene turned as Ashe approached. Then, with astonishment, she realized it
wasn’t Ashe. It was a different Seon.

“The gardeners report that one of your guests has fallen into the pond, my
lord,” the Seon said, bobbing almost to the ground as he approached. His voice
was crisp and unemotional.

“Who?” Roial asked with a chuckle.

“Lord Redeem, Your Grace,” the Seon explained. “It appears the wine proved too
much for him.”

Sarene squinted, searching deep into the ball of light and trying to make out
the glowing Aon. She thought it was Opa.

Roial sighed. “He probably scared the fish right out of the pond. Thank you,
Opa. Make sure that Redeem is given some towels and a ride home, if he needs
it. Next time maybe he won’t mix ponds with alcohol.”

The Seon bobbed formally once more, then floated away to do his master’s
bidding.

“You never told me you had a Seon, my lord,” Sarene said.

“Many of the nobles do, Princess,” Roial said, “but it is no longer fashionable
to bring them along with us wherever we go. Seons are reminders of Elantris.”

“So he just stays here at your house?”

Roial nodded. “Opa oversees the gardeners of my estate. I think it
fitting—after all, his name does mean ‘flower.’”

Sarene tapped her cheek, wondering about the stern formality in Opa’s voice.
The Seons she knew back in Teod were much warmer with their masters, no matter
what their personality. Perhaps it was because here, in the presumed land of
their creation, Seons were now regarded with suspicion and dislike.

“Come,” Roial said, taking her arm. “I was serious when I said I wanted to
check on the serving tables.”

Sarene allowed herself to be led away.

“Roial, you old prune,” a blustery voice called out as they approached the
serving tables, “I’m astounded. You actually know how to throw a party! I was
afraid you’d try and cram us all into that box you call a house.”

“Ahan,” Roial said, “I should have realized I would find you next to the food.”

The large count was draped in a yellow robe and clutched a plateful of crackers
and shellfish. His wife’s plate, however, held only a few slices of fruit.
During the weeks Seaden had been attending Sarene’s fencing lessons she had
lost considerable weight.

“Of course—best part of a party!” the count said with a laugh. Then, nodding to
Sarene, he continued, “Your Highness. I’d warn you not to let this old
scoundrel corrupt you, but I’m just as worried about you doing the same to
him.”

“Me?” Sarene said with mock indignation. “What danger could I be?”

Ahan snorted. “Ask the king,” he said, shoving a wafer into his mouth.
“Actually, you can ask me—just look what you’re doing to my poor wife. She
refuses to eat!”

“I’m enjoying my fruit, Ahan,” Seaden said. “I think you should try some of
it.”

“Maybe I’ll try a plate of it after I’m done here,” Ahan huffed. “You see what
you’re doing, Sarene? I would never have agreed to this ‘fencing’ thing if I
had known how it would ruin my wife’s figure.”

“Ruin?” Sarene asked with surprise.

“I’m from southern Arelon, Princess,” Ahan said, reaching for some more clams.
“To us, round is beautiful. Not everyone wants their women to look like
starving schoolboys.” Then, realizing that he might have said too much, Ahan
paused. “No offense intended, of course.”

Sarene frowned. Ahan really was a delightful man, but he often spoke—and
acted—without thought. Unsure how to properly respond, Sarene hesitated.

The wonderful Duke Roial came to her rescue. “Well, Ahan, we have to keep
moving—I have a lot of guests to greet. Oh, by the way—you might want to tell
your caravan to hurry.”

Ahan looked up as Roial began to lead Sarene off. “Caravan?” he asked, suddenly
very serious. “What caravan?”

“Why, the one you have carrying sourmelons from Duladel to Svorden, of course,”
the duke said offhandedly. “I sent a shipment of them myself a week ago. It
should be arriving tomorrow morning. I’m afraid, my friend, that your caravan
will arrive to a saturated market—not to mention the fact that your melons will
be slightly overripe.”

Ahan cursed, the plate going limp in his hand, shellfish tumbling unnoticed to
the grass below. “How in the name of Domi did you manage that?”

“Oh, didn’t you know?” Roial asked. “I was half partner in young Lukel’s
venture. I got all the unripened fruits from his shipment last week—they should
be ready by the time they hit Svorden.”

Ahan shook his head, laughing in a low voice. “You got me again, Roial. But
just you watch—one of these days I’m finally going to get the better of you,
and you’ll be so surprised that you won’t be able to look at yourself for a
week!”

“I look forward to it,” Roial said as they left the serving tables behind.

Sarene chuckled, the sound of Seaden scolding her husband rising behind. “You
really are as good a businessman as they say, aren’t you?”

Roial spread his hands in humility. Then he said, “Yes. Every bit as good.”

Sarene laughed.

“However,” Roial continued, “that young cousin of yours puts me to shame. I
have no idea how he kept that sourmelon shipment a secret—my Duladen agents are
supposed to inform me of such things. I only got in on the deal because Lukel
came to me for capital.”

“Then it’s a good thing he didn’t go to Ahan instead.”

“A good thing indeed,” Roial agreed. “I would never hear the end of it if he
had. Ahan’s been trying to best me for two decades now—one of these days he’s
going to realize I only act brilliant to keep him off-balance, and then life
isn’t going to be half as entertaining.”

They continued to walk, speaking with guests and enjoying Roial’s excellent
gardens. The early-blooming flower beds were cleverly lit with torchlight,
lanterns, and even candles. Most impressive were the crosswood trees, whose
branches—leafed with pink and white blossoms—were lit from behind by lanterns
running up the trunks. Sarene was enjoying herself so much that she almost lost
track of time. Only Ashe’s sudden appearance reminded her of the night’s true
purpose.

“My lady!” Ashe exclaimed. “The king is leaving the party!”

“Are you certain?” she asked, her attention snapping away from the crosswood
flowers.

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said. “He left furtively, claiming he needed to use the
privy, but he called his carriage instead.”

“Excuse me, Your Grace,” Sarene curtly told Roial. “I must be going.”

“Sarene?” Roial asked with surprise as Sarene walked back toward the house.
Then, more urgently, he called again. “Sarene! You can’t go.”

“I apologize, Your Grace, but this is important!”

He tried to follow her, but her legs were longer. In addition, the duke had a
party to attend. He couldn’t just disappear in the middle of it.

Sarene rounded the side of Roial’s house in time to see the king climbing into
his carriage. She cursed—why hadn’t she thought to arrange transportation of
her own? She looked around frantically, searching for a vehicle to requisition.
She picked a likely candidate as the king’s carriage pulled away, hooves
clopping against the cobblestones.

“My lady!” Ashe warned. “The king is not in that carriage.”

Sarene froze. “What?”

“He slipped out the other side and disappeared into the shadows on the far side
of the driveway. The carriage is a ruse.”

Sarene didn’t bother to question the Seon—his senses were much more acute than
those of a human. “Let’s go,” she said, heading in the proper direction. “I’m
not dressed for sneaking; you’ll have to keep watch on him and tell me where he
goes.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said, dimming his light to a nearly imperceptible level
and flying after the king. Sarene followed at a slower pace.

They continued in that manner, Ashe staying close to the king and Sarene
following at a less conspicuous distance. They covered the ground surrounding
Roial’s mansion quickly, then moved into the city of Kae. Iadon moved strictly
through alleys, and Sarene realized for the first time that she might be
putting herself in danger. Women didn’t travel alone after dark—even in Kae,
which was one of the safest cities in Opelon. She considered turning back a
half-dozen times, once nearly dashing away in a panic as a drunk man moved in
the darkness next to her. However, she kept going. She was only going to get
one chance to find out what Iadon was up to, and her curiosity was stronger
than her fear … for the moment at least.

Ashe, sensing the danger, advised that she let him follow the king alone, but
she pressed on with determination. The Seon, accustomed to Sarene’s ways, gave
no further argument. He flitted back and forth between her and the king, doing
his best to keep watch over Sarene while at the same time following Iadon.

Eventually, the Seon slowed, returning to Sarene with an apprehensive bob. “He
just entered the sewers, my lady.”

“The sewers?” Sarene asked incredulously.

“Yes, my lady. And he is not alone—he met two cloaked men just after he left
the party, and was joined by a half-dozen more at the mouth of the sewers.”

“And you didn’t follow them in?” she asked with disappointment. “We’ll never be
able to tail them.”

“That is unfortunate, my lady.”

Sarene ground her teeth in frustration. “They’ll leave tracks in the muck,” she
decided, stalking forward. “You should be able to follow them.”

Ashe hesitated. “My lady, I must insist that you return to the duke’s party.”

“Not a chance, Ashe.”

“I have the solemn duty of your protection, my lady,” Ashe said. “I can’t allow
you to go climbing through refuse in the middle of the night—I was wrong to let
you go this far. It is my responsibility to stop this before it goes any
further.”

“And how will you do that?” Sarene asked impatiently.

“I could call your father.”

“Father lives in Teod, Ashe,” Sarene pointed out. “What is he going to do?”

“I could go get Lord Eondel or one of the others.”

“And leave me to get lost in the sewers on my own?”

“You would never do something that foolish, my lady,” Ashe declared. Then he
paused, hovering uncertainly in the air, his Aon so dim it was translucent.
“All right,” he finally admitted. “You are indeed that foolish.”

Sarene smiled. “Come on—the fresher those tracks are, the easier it will be for
you to follow them.”

The Seon sullenly led the way down the street, which soon ended in a dirty,
fungus-lined arch. Sarene strode forward with determination, paying no heed to
the damage the sludge would do to her dress.

The moonlight lasted only as far as the first turnoff. Sarene stood for a
moment in the suffocating, dank blackness, realizing that even she would never
have been foolish enough to enter the directionless maze without guidance.
Fortunately, her bluff had convinced Ashe—though she wasn’t sure whether or not
to be offended by the level of arrogant idiocy of which he thought her capable.

Ashe increased his light slightly. The sewer was a hollow tube, a remnant of
the days when Elantris’s magic provided running water for every house in Kae.
Now the sewers were used as a receptacle for trash and excrement. They were
flushed out by a periodic diversion of the Aredel—something which obviously
hadn’t been done in a while, for the wet muck at the bottom of the corridor
came up to her ankles. She didn’t want to consider what that sludge must be
composed of, but the pungent stink was an overpowering clue.

All of the tunnels looked the same to Sarene. One thing reassured her: the Seon
sense of direction. It was impossible to get lost when accompanied by Ashe. The
creatures always knew where they were, and could point the exact direction to
any place they had ever been.

Ashe led the way, floating close to the muck’s surface. “My lady, may I be
allowed to know just how you knew the king would sneak away from Roial’s
party?”

“Surely you can figure it out, Ashe,” she chided.

“Let me assure you, my lady, I have tried.”

“Well, what day of the week is it?”

“MaeDal?” the Seon replied, leading her around a corner.

“Right. And what happens every week on MaeDal?”

Ashe didn’t answer immediately. “Your father plays ShinDa with Lord Eoden?” he
asked, his voice laced with uncharacteristic frustration. The night’s
activities—especially her belligerence—were wearing away even Ashe’s formidable
patience.

“No,” Sarene said. “Every week on MaeDal at eleven o’clock I hear scrapings in
the passage that runs through my wall—the one that leads to the king’s rooms.”

The Seon made a slight “ah” of understanding.

“I heard noises in the passage some other nights as well,” Sarene explained.
“But MaeDal was the only consistent day.”

“So you had Roial throw a party tonight, expecting that the king would keep to
his schedule,” the Seon said.

“Right,” Sarene said, trying not to slip in the muck. “And I had to make it a
late party so that people would stay at least until midnight—the eclipse
provided a convenient excuse. The king had to come to the party; his pride
wouldn’t let him stay away. However, his weekly appointment must be important,
for he risked leaving early to attend it.”

“My lady, I don’t like this,” Ashe said. “What good could the king be doing in
the sewers at midnight?”

“That is exactly what I intend to find out,” Sarene said, brushing away a
spiderweb. One thought drove her through muck and darkness—a possibility she
was barely willing to acknowledge. Perhaps Prince Raoden lived. Maybe Iadon
hadn’t confined him to the dungeons, but in the sewers. Sarene might not be a
widow after all.

A noise came from ahead. “Turn down your light, Ashe,” she said. “I think I
hear voices.”

He did so, becoming nearly invisible. There was an intersection just ahead, and
torchlight flickered from the rightmost tunnel. Sarene approached the corner
slowly, intending to peek around it. Unfortunately, she hadn’t noticed that the
floor declined slightly just before the intersection, and her feet slipped. She
waved desperate arms, barely stabilizing herself as she slid a few feet down
the incline and came to a halt at the bottom.

The motion placed her directly in the middle of the intersection. Sarene looked
up slowly.

King Iadon stared back, looking as stunned as she felt.

“Merciful Domi,” Sarene whispered. The king stood facing her behind an altar, a
red-streaked knife raised in his hand. He was completely naked except for the
blood smearing his chest. The remains of an eviscerated young woman lay tied to
the altar, her torso sliced open from neck to crotch.

The knife dropped from Iadon’s hand, hitting the muck below with a muffled
plop. Only then did Sarene notice the dozen black-robed forms standing behind
him, Duladen runes sewn into their clothing. Each one carried a long dagger.
Several approached her with quick steps.

Sarene wavered between her body’s urge to retch and her mind’s insistence that
she scream.

The scream came out on top.

She stumbled backward, slipping and splashing down into the slime. The figures
rushed for her, their cowled eyes intent. Sarene kicked and struggled in the
slime, still screaming as she tried to regain her feet. She almost missed the
sounds of footsteps from her right.

Then Eondel was there.

The aged general’s sword flashed in the dim light, cleanly slicing off an arm
that was reaching for Sarene’s ankle. Other figures moved through the corridor
as well, men in the livery of Eondel’s legion. There was also a man in a red
robe—Dilaf, the Derethi priest. He didn’t join the fighting, but stood to the
side with a fascinated look on his face.

Dumbfounded, Sarene tried to stand again, but only ended up slipping in the
sewage once more. A hand grabbed her arm, helping her up. Roial’s wrinkled face
smiled in relief as he pulled Sarene to her feet.

“Maybe next time you’ll tell me what you are planning, Princess,” he suggested.


“You told him,” Sarene realized, shooting Ashe an accusatory look.

“Of course I told him, my lady,” the Seon responded, pulsing slightly to
punctuate the remark. She sat in Roial’s study with Ashe and Lukel. Sarene wore
a robe that the duke had borrowed from one of his maids. It was too short, of
course, but it was better than a sewage-covered velvet dress.

“When?” Sarene demanded, leaning back in Roial’s deep plush couch and wrapping
herself in a blanket. The duke had ordered a bath drawn for her, and her hair
was still wet, chilled in the night air.

“He called Opa as soon as you left my drive,” Roial explained, walking into the
room, carrying three steaming cups. He handed one to her and another to Lukel
before taking a seat.

“That soon?” Sarene asked with surprise.

“I knew you would never turn back, no matter what I said,” Ashe said.

“You know me too well,” she muttered, taking a sip of her drink. It was
Fjordell garha—which was good; she couldn’t afford to fall asleep just yet.

“I will admit to that failing without argument, my lady,” Ashe said.

“Then why did you try and stop me before leading me into the sewer?” she asked.

“I was stalling, my lady,” Ashe explained. “The duke insisted on coming
himself, and his group moved slowly.”

“I might be slow, but I was not going to miss whatever you had planned,
Sarene,” Roial said. “They say age brings wisdom, but it only gave me a
torturous case of curiosity.”

“Eondel’s soldiers?” Sarene asked.

“Were already at the party,” Lukel said. He had insisted on knowing what had
happened as soon as he saw Sarene sneaking into Roial’s house, covered in
slime. “I saw some of them mingling with the guests.”

“I invited Eondel’s officers,” Roial explained. “Or, at least, the half-dozen
of them that were in town.”

“All right,” Sarene said. “So after I ran off, Ashe called your Seon and told
you I was pursuing the king.”

“‘The foolish girl is going off to get herself killed’ were his exact words, I
believe,” Roial said with a chuckle.

“Ashe!”

“I apologize, my lady,” the Seon said, pulsing in embarrassment. “I was rather
out of sorts.”

“Anyway,” Sarene continued, “Ashe called Roial and he gathered Eondel and his
men from the party. You all followed me to the sewers, where you had your Seon
guide you.”

“Until Eondel heard you screaming,” Roial finished. “You are a very lucky lady
to have that man’s loyalty, Sarene.”

“I know,” Sarene said. “That’s the second time this week his sword has proved
useful. Next time I see Iadon, remind me to kick him for convincing the
nobility that military training is beneath them.”

Roial chuckled. “You might have to stand in line to do that kicking, Princess.
I doubt the city’s priests—Derethi or Korathi—will let the king get away with
taking part in the Jeskeri Mysteries.”

“And sacrificing that poor woman,” Ashe said quietly.

The tone of the conversation grew subdued as they remembered just what they
were discussing. Sarene shuddered at the image of the blood-covered altar and
its occupant. Ashe’s right, she thought somberly. This is no time for joking.

“That’s what it was, then?” Lukel asked.

Sarene nodded. “The Mysteries sometimes involve sacrifices. Iadon must have
wanted something very badly.”

“Our Derethi friend claimed to have some knowledge on the subject,” Roial said.
“He seemed to think the king was petitioning the Jesker spirits to destroy
someone for him.”

“Me?” Sarene asked, growing cold despite her blanket.

Roial nodded. “Arteth Dilaf said the instructions were written on the altar in
that woman’s blood.”

Sarene shivered. “Well, at least now we know what happened to the maids and
cooks who disappeared from the palace.”

Roial nodded. “I’d guess he’s been involved with the Mysteries for a long
time—perhaps even since the Reod. He was obviously the leader of that
particular band.”

“The others?” Sarene asked.

“Minor nobles,” Roial said. “Iadon wouldn’t have involved anyone who could
challenge him.”

“Wait a moment,” Sarene said, her brows furled. “Where did that Derethi priest
come from, anyway?”

Roial looked down at his cup uncomfortably. “That’s my fault. He saw me
gathering Eondel’s men—I was kind of in a hurry—and followed us. We didn’t have
time to deal with him.”

Sarene sipped at her drink petulantly. The night’s events definitely hadn’t
turned out as she had planned.

Suddenly Ahan waddled through the door. “Rag Domi, Sarene!” he declared. “First
you oppose the king, then you rescue him, and now you dethrone him. Would you
please make up your mind?”

Sarene pulled her knees up against her chest and dropped her head between them
with a groan. “There’s no chance of keeping it under cover, then?”

“No,” Roial said. “The Derethi priest saw to that—he’s already announced it to
half of the city.”

“Telrii will almost certainly seize power now,” Ahan said with a shake of his
head.

“Where is Eondel?” Sarene asked, her voice muffled by the blankets.

“Locking the king in the jailhouse,” Ahan said.

“And Shuden?”

“Still seeing that the women got home safely, I assume,” Lukel said.

“All right,” Sarene said, raising her head and brushing her hair out of her
eyes. “We’ll have to proceed without them. Gentlemen, I’m afraid I just
destroyed our brief respite of peace. We have some heavy planning to do—and
most of it is going to be in the way of damage control.”

