# Part 1 - CHAPTER 7
[Metadata]: # {02.07}
[Descriptor]: # {02.07}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 7
Raoden stabbed the air with his finger. The air bled light. His fingertip left
a glowing white trail behind it as he moved his arm, as if he were writing with
paint on a wall—except without the paint, and without the wall.

He moved cautiously, careful not to let his finger waver. He drew a line about
a handspan long from left to right, then pulled his finger down at a slight
slant, drawing a curved line downward at the corner. Next he lifted his finger
from the unseen canvas and replaced it to draw a dot in the center. Those three
marks—two lines and a dot—were the starting point of every Aon.

He continued, drawing the same three-line pattern at different angles, then
added several diagonal lines. The finished drawing looked something like an
hourglass, or perhaps two boxes placed on top of each other, pulling in just
slightly near the middles. This was Aon Ashe, the ancient symbol for light. The
character brightened momentarily, seeming to pulse with life; then it flashed
weakly like a man heaving his last breath. The Aon disappeared, its light
fading from brightness, to dimness, to nothing.

“You’re much better at that than I am, sule,” Galladon said. “I usually make
one line a little too big, or slant it a bit too much, and the whole thing
fades away before I’m done.”

“It’s not supposed to be like this,” Raoden complained. It had been a day since
Galladon had shown him how to draw Aons, and he had spent nearly every moment
since then practicing. Every Aon he had finished properly had acted the same
way, disappearing without producing any visible effect. His first acquaintance
with the legendary magic of the Elantrians had been decidedly anticlimactic.

The most surprising thing was how easy it was. In ignorance he had assumed that
AonDor, the magic of the Aons, would require some sort of incantation or
ritual. A decade without AonDor had spawned hordes of rumors; some people,
mostly Derethi priests, claimed the magic had been a hoax, while others, also
mostly Derethi priests, had denounced the art as blasphemous rites involving
the power of evil. The truth was that no one, not even the Derethi priests,
knew just what AonDor had been. Every one of its practitioners had fallen to
the Reod.

Yet Galladon claimed AonDor required nothing more than a steady hand and an
intimate knowledge of the Aons. Since only Elantrians could draw the characters
in light, only they could practice AonDor, and no one outside Elantris had been
allowed to know just how simple it was. No incantations, no sacrifices, no
special potions or ingredients; anyone who was taken by the Shaod could perform
AonDor, assuming, of course, they knew the characters.

Except, it didn’t work. The Aons were supposed to do something—at least,
something more than flash weakly and disappear. Raoden could remember images of
Elantris as a child—visions of men flying through the air, incredible feats of
power, and merciful healings. He had broken his leg once, and although his
father had objected, his mother had taken him to Elantris for healing. A
bright-haired figure had reknit Raoden’s bones with barely a wave of her hand.
She had drawn an Aon, just as he was doing, but the rune had released a
powerful burst of arcane magic.

“They’re supposed to do something,” Raoden said again, this time out loud.

“They did once, sule, but not since the Reod. Whatever took the life from
Elantris also stole AonDor’s power. Now all we can do is paint pretty
characters in the air.”

Raoden nodded, drawing his own Aon, Aon Rao. Four circles with one large square
in the center, all five connected by lines. The Aon reacted as all of the
others had, building as if for some release of power, then dying with a
whimper.

“Disappointing. Kolo?”

“Very,” Raoden admitted, pulling over a chair and sitting down. They were still
in Galladon’s small underground study. “I’ll be honest with you, Galladon. When
I saw that first Aon hovering in the air in front of you, I forgot about
everything—the filth, the depression, even my toe.”

Galladon smiled. “If AonDor worked, the Elantrians would still rule in
Arelon—Reod or no Reod.”

“I know. I just wonder what happened. What changed?”

“The world wonders with you, sule,” Galladon said with a shrug.

“They must be related,” Raoden mused. “The change in Elantris, the way the
Shaod started making people demons rather than gods, the ineffectiveness of
AonDor….”

“You aren’t the first person to notice that. Not by far. However, no one is
likely to find the answer—the powerful in Arelon are much too comfortable with
Elantris the way it is.”

“Trust me, I know,” Raoden said. “If the secret is to be found, it will have to
come from us.” Raoden looked over the small laboratory. Remarkably clean and
free from the grime that coated the rest of Elantris, the room had an almost
homey feeling—like the den or study in a large mansion.

“Maybe the answer is in here, Galladon,” Raoden said. “In those books,
somewhere.”

“Perhaps,” Galladon said noncommittally.

“Why were you so reluctant to bring me here?”

“Because it’s special, sule—surely you can see that? Let the secret out, and I
won’t be able to leave for fear it will be pillaged while I am gone.”

Raoden stood, nodding as he walked around the room. “Then why bring me?”

Galladon shrugged, as if not completely sure himself. Eventually he answered,
“You aren’t the first to think the answer might be in those books. Two men can
read more quickly than one.”

“Twice as quickly, I’d guess,” Raoden agreed with a smile. “Why do you keep it
so dark in here?”

“We are in Elantris, sule. We can’t just go to the lamplighter’s store every
time we run out of oil.”

“I know, but surely there’s enough. Elantris must have had stores of oil before
the Reod.”

“Ah, sule,” Galladon said with a shake of his head. “You still don’t
understand, do you? This is Elantris, city of the gods. What need have gods of
such mundane things as lamps and oil? Look at the wall beside you.”

Raoden turned. There was a metal plate hanging on the wall beside him. Though
it was tarnished with time, Raoden could still make out the shape etched into
its surface—Aon Ashe, the character he had drawn just a few moments ago.

“Those plates used to glow more brightly and steadily than any lamp, sule,”
Galladon explained. “The Elantrians could shut them off with a bare brush of
their fingers. Elantris didn’t need oil—it had a far more reliable source of
light. For the same reason, you won’t find coal—or even furnaces—in Elantris,
nor are there many wells, for water flowed from pipes like rivers trapped
within the walls. Without AonDor, this city is barely fit to be inhabited.”

Raoden rubbed his finger against the plate, feeling the lines of Aon Ashe.
Something catastrophic must have happened—an event lost in just ten brief
years’ time. Something so terrible it caused the land to shatter and gods to
stumble. However, without an understanding of how AonDor had worked, he
couldn’t even begin to imagine what had caused it to fail. He turned from the
plate and considered the two squat bookcases. It was unlikely that any of the
books contained direct explanations of AonDor. However, if they had been
written by Elantrians, then maybe they would have references to the magic.
References that could lead the careful reader to an understanding of how AonDor
worked. Maybe.

His thoughts were interrupted by a pain from his stomach. It wasn’t like hunger
he had experienced on the outside. His stomach didn’t rumble. Yet, the pain was
there—somehow even more demanding. He had gone three days now without food, and
the hunger was beginning to grow insistent. He was only just beginning to see
why it, and the other pains, were enough to reduce men to the beasts that had
attacked him on his first day.

“Come,” he said to Galladon. “There is something we need to do.”


The square was much as it had been the day before: grime, moaning unfortunates,
tall unforgiving gates. The sun was almost three-quarters finished with its
trek through the sky. It was time for new inductees to be cast into Elantris.

Raoden studied the square, watching from atop a building beside Galladon. As he
looked, he realized that something was different. There was a small crowd
gathered on top of the wall.

“Who’s that?” Raoden asked with interest, pointing to a tall figure standing
high on the wall above Elantris’s gates. The man’s arms were outstretched, and
his bloodred cloak was flapping in the wind. His words were hardly audible from
such a distance, but it was obvious that he was yelling.

Galladon grunted in surprise. “A Derethi gyorn. I didn’t know there was one
here in Arelon.”

“A gyorn? As in high priest?” Raoden squinted, trying to make out the details
of the figure far above them.

“I’m surprised one would come this far east,” Galladon said. “They hated Arelon
even before the Reod.”

“Because of the Elantrians?”

Galladon nodded. “Though not so much because of Elantrian worship, no matter
what they claim. The Derethi have a particular loathing for your country
because their armies never figured a way to get through those mountains to
attack you.”

“What do you suppose he’s doing up there?” Raoden asked.

“Preaching. What else would a priest do? He’s probably decided to denounce
Elantris as some sort of judgment from his god. I’m surprised it took them so
long.”

“People have been whispering it for years,” Raoden said, “but no one had the
courage to actually teach such things. They’re secretly afraid that the
Elantrians are just testing them—that they will return to their former glory
someday and punish all the unbelievers.”

“Still?” Galladon asked. “I would have thought such beliefs would be gone after
ten years.”

Raoden shook his head. “Even yet there are many who pray for, or fear, the
Elantrians’ return. The city was strong, Galladon. You can’t know how beautiful
it once was.”

“I know, sule,” Galladon said. “I didn’t spend all of my life in Duladel.”

The priest’s voice rose to a crescendo, and he delivered one final wave of
screams before spinning around and disappearing from view. Even from a
distance, Raoden could hear the hate and anger in the gyorn’s voice. Galladon
was right: This man’s words had been no blessing.

Raoden shook his head, looking from the wall to the gates. “Galladon,” he
asked, “what are the chances of someone being thrown in here today?”

Galladon shrugged. “Hard to say, sule. Sometimes weeks go without a new
Elantrian, but I have seen as many as five cast in at once. You came two days
ago, that woman yesterday—who knows, maybe Elantris will have new flesh for the
third day in a row. Kolo?”

Raoden nodded, watching the gate expectantly.

“Sule, what do you intend to do?” Galladon asked uncomfortably.

“I intend to wait.”


The newcomer was an older man, perhaps in his late forties, with a gaunt face
and nervous eyes. As the gate slammed shut, Raoden climbed down from the
rooftop, pausing just inside the courtyard. Galladon followed, a worried look
on his face. He obviously thought Raoden might do something foolish.

He was right.

The unfortunate newcomer just stared morosely at the gate. Raoden waited for
him to take a step, to make the unwitting decision that would determine who got
the privilege of robbing him. The man stood where he was, watching the
courtyard with nervous eyes, his thin frame pulled up inside his robes like he
was trying to hide within them. After a few minutes of waiting, he finally took
his first hesitant step—to the right, the same way Raoden had chosen.

“Come on,” Raoden declared, striding out of the alleyway. Galladon groaned,
mumbling something in Duladen.

“Teoren?” Raoden called, choosing a common Aonic name.

The spindly newcomer looked up with surprise, then glanced over his shoulder
with confusion.

“Teoren, it is you!” Raoden said, wrapping his hand around the man’s shoulder.
Then, in a lower voice, he continued. “Right now you have two choices, friend.
Either you do what I tell you, or you let those men in the shadows over there
chase you down and beat you senseless.”

The man turned around to search the shadows with apprehensive eyes.
Fortunately, at that moment, Shaor’s men decided to move, their shadowed forms
emerging into the light, their carnal eyes staring at the new man with hunger.
It was all the encouragement the newcomer needed.

“What do I do?” the man asked with a quavering voice.

“Run!” Raoden ordered, then took off toward one of the alleys at a dash.

The man didn’t need to be told twice; he bolted so quickly that Raoden was
afraid he would go careering down a side alley and get lost. There was a
muffled yell of surprise from behind as Galladon realized what Raoden was
doing. The large Duladen man obviously wouldn’t have any problems keeping up;
even considering his time in Elantris, Galladon was in much better shape than
Raoden.

“What in the name of Doloken do you think you are doing, you idiot?” Galladon
swore.

“I’ll tell you in a moment,” Raoden said, conserving strength as he ran. Again,
he noticed that he didn’t get out of breath, though his body did begin to grow
tired. A dull feeling of fatigue began to grow within him, and of the three of
them, Raoden was soon proven the slowest runner. However, he was the only one
who knew where they were going.

“Right!” he yelled to Galladon and the new man, then took off down a side
alley. The two men followed, as did the group of thugs, who were gaining
quickly. Fortunately, Raoden’s destination wasn’t far away.

“Rulo,” Galladon cursed, realizing where they were going. It was one of the
houses he had shown Raoden the day before, the one with the unstable staircase.
Raoden sprinted through the door and up the stairs, nearly falling twice as
steps gave out beneath him. Once on the roof, he used the last of his strength
to push over a stack of bricks—the remnants of what had once been a
planter—toppling the entire pile of crumbling clay into the stairwell just as
Galladon and the newcomer reached the top. The weakened steps didn’t even begin
to hold the weight, collapsing to the ground with a furious crash.

Galladon walked over and looked through the hole with a critical eye. Shaor’s
men gathered around the fallen steps below, their feral intensity dulled a bit
by realization.

Galladon raised an eyebrow. “Now what, genius?”

Raoden walked over to the newcomer, who had collapsed after stumbling up the
stairs. Raoden carefully removed each of the man’s food offerings and, after
tucking a certain one into his belt, he dumped the rest to the houndlike men
waiting below. The sounds of battle came from below as they fought over the
food.

Raoden stepped back from the hole. “Let’s just hope they realize that they’re
not going to get anything more out of us, and decide to leave.”

“And if they don’t?” Galladon asked pointedly.

Raoden shrugged. “We can live forever without food or water, right?”

“Yes, but I’d rather not spend the rest of eternity on the top of this
building.” Then, shooting a look at the new man, Galladon pulled Raoden to the
side and demanded in a low voice, “Sule, what was the point of that? You could
have just thrown them the food back in the courtyard. In fact, why ‘save’ him?
For all we know, Shaor’s men might not have even hurt him.”

“We don’t know that. Besides, this way he thinks he owes me his life.”

Galladon snorted. “So now you have another follower—at the cheap price of the
hatred of an entire third of Elantris’s criminal element.”

“And this is only the beginning,” Raoden said with a smile. However, despite
the brave words, he wasn’t quite so certain of himself. He was still amazed at
how much his toe hurt, and he had scraped his hands while pushing the bricks.
While not as painful as the toe, the scrapes also continued to hurt,
threatening to draw his attention away from his plans.

I have to keep moving, Raoden repeated to himself. Keep working. Don’t let the
pain take control.


“I’m a jeweler,” the man explained. “Mareshe is my name.”

“A jeweler,” Raoden said with dissatisfaction, his arms folded as he regarded
Mareshe. “That won’t be of much use. What else can you do?”

Mareshe looked at him indignantly, as if having forgotten that he had, just a
few moments ago, been cowering in fear. “Jewelry making is an extremely useful
skill, sir.”

“Not in Elantris, sule,” Galladon said, peeking through the hole to see if the
thugs had decided to leave. Apparently they hadn’t, for he gave Raoden a
withering look.

Pointedly ignoring the Dula, Raoden turned back to Mareshe. “What else can you
do?”

“Anything.”

“That’s quite broad, friend,” Raoden said. “Could you be a bit more specific?”

Mareshe brought his hand up beside his head with a dramatic gesture. “I … am a
craftsman. An artisan. I can make anything, for Domi himself has granted me the
soul of an artist.”

Galladon snorted from his seat beside the stairwell.

“How about shoes?” Raoden asked.

“Shoes?” Mareshe replied with a slightly offended tone.

“Yes, shoes.”

“I suppose I could,” Mareshe said, “though such hardly demands the skill of a
man who is a full artisan.”

“And a full id—” Galladon began before Raoden hushed him.

“Artisan Mareshe,” Raoden continued in his most diplomatic of tones.
“Elantrians are cast into the city wearing only an Arelish burial shroud. A man
who could make shoes would be very valuable indeed.”

“What kind of shoes?” Mareshe asked.

“Leather ones,” Raoden said. “It won’t be an easy calling, Mareshe. You see,
Elantrians don’t have the luxury of trial and error—if the first pair of shoes
do not fit, then they will cause blisters. Blisters that will never leave.”

“What do you mean, never leave?” Mareshe asked uncomfortably.

“We are Elantrians now, Mareshe,” Raoden explained. “Our wounds no longer
heal.”

“No longer heal …?”

“Would you care for an example, artisan?” Galladon asked helpfully. “I can
arrange one quite easily. Kolo?”

Mareshe’s face turned pale, and he looked back at Raoden. “He doesn’t seem to
like me very much,” he said quietly.

“Nonsense,” Raoden said, putting his arm around Mareshe’s shoulder and turning
him away from Galladon’s grinning face. “That’s how he shows affection.”

“If you say so, Master …”

Raoden paused. “Just call me Spirit,” he decided, using the translation of Aon
Rao.

“Master Spirit.” Then Mareshe’s eyes narrowed. “You look familiar for some
reason.”

“You’ve never seen me before in your life. Now, about those shoes …”

“They have to fit perfectly, without a bit of scraping or rubbing?” Mareshe
asked.

“I know it sounds difficult. If it’s beyond your ability …”

“Nothing is beyond my ability,” Mareshe said. “I’ll do it, Master Spirit.”

“Excellent.”

“They’re not leaving,” Galladon said from behind them.

Raoden turned to regard the large Dula. “What does it matter? It’s not like we
have anything pressing to do. It’s actually quite pleasant up here—you should
just sit back and enjoy it.”

An ominous crash came from the clouds above them, and Raoden felt a wet drop
splat against his head.

“Fantastic,” Galladon grumbled. “I’m enjoying myself already.”

