# Part 1 - CHAPTER 20
[Metadata]: # {02.20}
[Descriptor]: # {02.20}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 20
“Let me see if I understand you, Princess dear,” Ahan said, holding aloft a
chubby finger. “You want us to help Iadon? How foolish I am—I thought we didn’t
like the fellow.”

“We don’t,” Sarene agreed. “Helping the king financially doesn’t have anything
to do with our personal feelings.”

“I’m afraid I have to agree with Ahan, Princess,” Roial said with outspread
hands. “Why the sudden change? What good will it do to aid the king now?”

Sarene gritted her teeth in annoyance. Then, however, she caught a twinkle in
the elderly duke’s eye. He knew. The duke reportedly had a spy network as
extensive as most kings’—he had figured out what Hrathen was trying to do. He
had asked the question not to provoke her, but to give her an opportunity to
explain. Sarene exhaled slowly, grateful for the duke’s tact.

“Someone is sinking the king’s ships,” Sarene said. “Common sense confirms what
my father’s spies say. Dreok Crushthroat’s fleets couldn’t be sinking the
boats—most of Dreok’s ships were destroyed fifteen years ago when he tried to
take the throne of Teod, and any remnants have long since disappeared. Wyrn
must be behind the sinkings.”

“All right, we accept that much,” Ahan said.

“Fjorden is also giving financial support to Duke Telrii,” Sarene continued.

“You don’t have any proof of that, Your Highness,” Eondel pointed out.

“No, I don’t,” Sarene admitted, pacing between the men’s chairs, the ground
soft with new spring grass. They had eventually decided to hold this meeting in
the gardens of Kae’s Korathi chapel, and so there was no table for her to
circle. Sarene had managed to remain seated during the first part of the
meeting, but had eventually stood. She found it easier to address others when
she was on her feet—something of a nervous habit, she realized, but she also
knew that her height lent her an air of authority.

“I do, however, have logical conjecture,” she said. Eondel would respond well
to anything following the word “logical.” “We all attended Telrii’s party a
week ago. He must have spent more on that ball than most men make in a year.”

“Extravagance isn’t always a sign of wealth,” Shuden pointed out. “I’ve seen
men poor as a peasant put on dazzling shows to maintain an illusion of security
in the face of collapse.” Shuden’s words rang true—a man at their own meeting,
Baron Edan, was doing just what Shuden described.

Sarene frowned. “I’ve done some checking around—I had a lot of free time this
last week, since none of you managed to get this meeting together, despite its
urgency.” None of the noblemen would meet her eyes after that comment. She’d
finally gotten them together. But, unfortunately, Kiin and Lukel hadn’t been
able to attend because of a prior engagement. “Anyway, rumors say that Telrii’s
accounts have swelled drastically during the last two weeks, and his shipments
to Fjorden turn fantastic profits no matter what he chooses to send, whether it
be fine spices or cow dung.”

“The fact remains that the duke has not aligned himself with Shu-Dereth,”
Eondel pointed out. “He still attends his Korathi meetings piously.”

Sarene folded her arms, tapping her cheek in thought. “If Telrii openly aligned
himself with Fjorden, his earnings would be suspicious. Hrathen is far too
crafty to be so transparent. It would be much smarter for Fjorden to remain
separate from the duke, allowing Telrii to appear a pious conservative. Despite
Hrathen’s recent advances, it would be much easier for a traditional Korathi to
usurp the throne than it would be for a Derethi.”

“He’ll take the throne, then make good on his pact with Wyrn,” Roial agreed.

“Which is why we have to make sure Iadon starts earning money again very soon,”
Sarene said. “The nation is running dry—it is very possible that Telrii will
earn more in this next accounting period than Iadon, even including taxes. I
doubt the king would abdicate. However, if Telrii were to stage a coup, the
other nobles might go along with him.”

“How do you like that, Edan?” Ahan asked, directing a hearty laugh at the
anxious baron. “You might not be the only one who loses his title in a few
months—old Iadon himself might join you.”

“If you please, Count Ahan,” Sarene said. “It’s our duty to make sure that
doesn’t happen.”

“What do you want us to do?” Edan asked nervously. “Send gifts to the king? I
don’t have any money to spare.”

“None of us do, Edan,” Ahan responded, hands resting on his ample belly. “If it
were ‘spare’ it wouldn’t be valuable now, would it?”

“You know what he means, Ahan,” Roial chided. “And I doubt gifts are what the
princess had in mind.”

“Actually, I’m open for suggestions, gentlemen,” Sarene said, spreading out her
hands. “I’m a politician, not a merchant. I’m a confessed amateur at making
money.”

“Gifts wouldn’t work,” Shuden said, hands laced before his chin
contemplatively. “The king is a proud man who has earned his fortune through
sweat, work, and scheming. He would never take handouts, even to save his
throne. Besides, merchants are notoriously suspicious of gifts.”

“We could go to him with the truth,” Sarene suggested. “Maybe then he’d accept
our help.”

“He wouldn’t believe us,” Roial said with a shake of his aged head. “The king
is a very literal man, Sarene—even more so than our dear Lord Eondel. Generals
have to think abstractly to outguess their opponents, but Iadon—I seriously
doubt he’s had an abstract thought in his life. The king accepts things as they
appear to be, especially if they are the way he thinks they should be.”

“Which is why Lady Sarene fooled His Majesty with her apparent lack of wits,”
Shuden agreed. “He expected her to be foolish, and when she appeared to fit his
expectations he dismissed her—even if her act was terribly overdone.”

Sarene chose not to rebut that remark.

“Pirates are something Iadon understands,” Roial said. “They make sense in the
world of shipping—in a way, every merchant considers himself a pirate. However,
governments are different. In the king’s eyes, it wouldn’t make sense for a
kingdom to sink ships filled with valuable merchandise. The king would never
attack merchants, no matter how tense the war. And as far as he knows, Arelon
and Fjorden are good friends. He was the first one to let Derethi priests into
Kae, and he has given that gyorn Hrathen every liberty of a visiting nobleman.
I seriously doubt we could convince him that Wyrn is trying to depose him.”

“We could try framing Fjorden,” Eondel suggested. “Making it obvious that the
sinkings are Wyrn’s work.”

“It would take too long, Eondel,” Ahan said, shaking his jowls. “Besides, Iadon
doesn’t have many ships left—I doubt he’ll risk them in those same waters
again.”

Sarene nodded. “It would also be very difficult for us to establish a
connection to Wyrn. He’s probably using Svordish warships for the task—Fjorden
itself doesn’t have much of a navy.”

“Was Dreok Crushthroat Svordish?” Eondel asked with a frown.

“I heard he was Fjordell,” Ahan said.

“No,” Roial said. “I think he was supposed to be Aonic, wasn’t he?”

“Anyway,” Sarene said impatiently, trying to keep the meeting on track as she
paced across the loamy garden floor. “Lord Ahan said he wouldn’t risk his ships
in those waters again, but the king obviously has to keep them shipping
somewhere.”

Ahan nodded in agreement. “He can’t afford to stop now—spring is one of the
best buying seasons. People have been cooped up all winter with drab colors and
drabber relatives. As soon as the snows melt, they’re ready to splurge a
little. This is the time when expensive colored silks go for a premium, and
that is one of Iadon’s best products.

“These sinkings are a disaster. Not only did Iadon lose the ships themselves,
he lost the profit he would have made off all those silks, not to mention the
other cargo. Many merchants nearly bankrupt themselves this time of year by
stockpiling goods that they know they can eventually sell.”

“His Majesty got greedy,” Shuden said. “He bought more and more ships, and
filled them with as much silk as he could afford.”

“We’re all greedy, Shuden,” Ahan said. “Don’t forget, your family earned its
fortune by organizing the spice route from Jindo. You didn’t even ship
anything—you just built the roads and charged the merchants to use them.”

“Let me rephrase, Lord Ahan,” Shuden said. “The king let his greed make him
foolish. Disasters are something every good merchant should plan for. Never
ship what you can’t afford to lose.”

“Well put,” Ahan agreed.

“Anyway,” Sarene said, “if the king only has a couple of ships left, then they
have to deliver a solid profit.”

“‘Solid’ isn’t the right word, my dear,” Ahan said. “Try ‘extraordinary.’ It is
going to take a miracle for Iadon to recoup from this little
catastrophe—especially before Telrii humiliates him irreparably.”

“What if he had an agreement with Teod?” Sarene asked. “An extremely lucrative
contract for silks?”

“Maybe,” Ahan said with a shrug. “It’s clever.”

“But impossible,” Duke Roial said.

“Why?” Sarene demanded. “Teod can afford it.”

“Because,” the duke explained, “Iadon would never accept such a contract. He’s
too experienced a merchant to make a deal that appears too fabulous to be
realistic.”

“Agreed,” Shuden said with a nod. “The king wouldn’t be against making a
horrible profit off of Teod, but only if he thought he was cheating you.”

The others nodded at Shuden’s statement. Although the Jindoeese man was the
youngest in the group, Shuden was quickly proving himself to be as shrewd as
Roial—perhaps more so. That capability, mixed with his deserved reputation for
honesty, earned him respect beyond his years. It was a powerful man indeed who
could mix integrity with savvy.

“We’ll have to think on this some more,” Roial said. “But not too long. We must
solve the problem by the accounting day, otherwise we’ll be dealing with Telrii
instead of Iadon. As bad as my old friend is, I know we’d have less luck with
Telrii—especially if Fjorden is backing him.”

“Is everyone doing as I asked with their planting?” Sarene asked as the nobles
prepared to leave.

“It wasn’t easy,” Ahan admitted. “My overseers and minor nobles all objected to
the idea.”

“But you did it.”

“I did,” Ahan said.

“As did I,” Roial said.

“I had no choice,” Edan muttered.

Shuden and Eondel each gave her quiet nods.

“We started planting last week,” Edan said. “How long before we see results?”

“Hopefully within the next three months, for your sake, my lord,” Sarene said.

“That is usually long enough to get an estimate of how good a crop will do,”
Shuden said.

“I still don’t see how it matters whether the people think they’re free or
not,” Ahan said. “The same seeds get planted, and so the same crop should come
up.”

“You’ll be surprised, my lord,” Sarene promised.

“May we go now?” Edan asked pointedly. He still chafed at the idea of Sarene
running these meetings.

“One more question, my lords. I’ve been considering my Widow’s Trial, and would
like to hear what you think.”

The men began to shift uncomfortably at the statement, looking at each other
uneasily.

“Oh, come now,” Sarene said with a displeased frown, “you’re grown men. Get
over your childish fear of Elantris.”

“It is a very delicate topic in Arelon, Sarene,” Shuden said.

“Well, it appears that Hrathen isn’t worried about that,” she said. “You all
know what he’s begun to do.”

“He’s drawing a parallel between Shu-Korath and Elantris,” Roial said with a
nod. “He’s trying to turn the people against the Korathi priests.”

“And he’s going to be successful if we don’t stop him,” Sarene said, “which
requires you all to get over your squeamishness and stop pretending that
Elantris doesn’t exist. The city is a major part of the gyorn’s plans.”

The men shot each other knowing looks in the dense Korathi garden. The men
thought she paid undue attention to the gyorn; they saw Iadon’s government as a
major problem, but religion didn’t seem a tangible threat. They didn’t
understand that in Fjorden, at least, religion and war were almost the same
thing.

“You’re just going to have to trust me, my lords,” Sarene said. “Hrathen’s
schemes are important. You said the king sees things concretely—well, this
Hrathen is the opposite. He views everything by its potential, and his goal is
to make Arelon another Fjordell protectorate. If he is using Elantris against
us, we must respond.”

“Just have that short Korathi priest agree with him,” Ahan suggested. “Put them
on the same side, then no one can use the city against anyone else.”

“Omin won’t do that, my lord,” Sarene said with a shake of her head. “He bears
the Elantrians no ill will, and he would never consent to labeling them
devils.”

“Couldn’t he just …” Ahan said.

“Merciful Domi, Ahan,” Roial said. “Don’t you ever attend his sermons? The man
would never do that.”

“I go,” Ahan said indignantly. “I just thought he might be willing to serve his
kingdom. We could compensate him.”

“No, my lord,” Sarene said insistently. “Omin is a man of the Church—a good and
sincere one, at that. To him, truth is not subject to debate—or sale. I’m
afraid we have no choice. We have to side with Elantris.”

Several faces, including Eondel and Edan’s, blanched at that statement.

“That might not be an easy proposition to carry out, Sarene,” Roial warned.
“You may think us childish, but these four are among the most intelligent and
open-minded men in Arelon. If you find them nervous about Elantris, then you
will find the rest of Arelon more so.”

“We have to change that sentiment, my lord,” Sarene said. “And my Widow’s Trial
is our opportunity. I am going to take food to the Elantrians.”

This time she succeeded in getting a reaction even from Shuden and Roial.

“Did I hear your correctly, my dear?” Ahan asked with a shaky voice. “You’re
going to go into Elantris?”

“Yes,” Sarene said.

“I need something to drink,” Ahan decided, unstoppering his wine flask.

“The king will never allow it,” Edan said. “He doesn’t even let the Elantris
City Guards go inside.”

“He’s right,” Shuden agreed. “You will never get through those gates, Your
Highness.”

“Let me deal with the king,” Sarene said.

“Your subterfuge won’t work this time, Sarene,” Roial warned. “No amount of
stupidity will convince the king to let you into the city.”

“I’ll think of something,” Sarene said, trying to sound more certain than she
was. “It’s not your concern, my lord. I just want your word that you will help
me.”

“Help you?” Ahan asked hesitantly.

“Help me distribute food in Elantris,” Sarene said.

Ahan’s eyes bugged out. “Help you?” he repeated. “In there?”

“My goal is to demystify the city,” Sarene explained. “To do that, I’ll need to
convince the nobility to go inside and see for themselves that there’s nothing
horrifying about the Elantrians.”

“I’m sorry to sound objectionable,” Eondel began. “But, Lady Sarene, what if
there is? What if everything they say about Elantris is true?”

Sarene paused. “I don’t think they’re dangerous, Lord Eondel. I’ve looked in on
the city and its people. There is nothing frightening about Elantris—well,
nothing besides the way its people are treated. I don’t believe the tales about
monsters or Elantrian cannibalism. I just see a collection of men and women who
have been mistreated and misjudged.”

Eondel didn’t look convinced, and neither did the others.

“Look, I’ll go in first and test it,” Sarene said. “I want you lords to join me
after the first few days.”

“Why us?” Edan said with a groan.

“Because I need to start somewhere,” Sarene explained. “If you lords brave the
city, then others will feel foolish if they object. Aristocrats have a group
mentality; if I can build some momentum, then I can probably get most of them
to come in with me at least once. Then they’ll see that there is nothing
horrible about Elantris—that its people are just poor wretches who want to eat.
We can defeat Hrathen with simple truth. It is hard to demonize a man after you
have seen tears in his eyes as he thanks you for feeding him.”

“This is all pointless anyway,” Edan said, his hand twitching at the thought of
entering Elantris. “The king will never let her in.”

“And if he does?” Sarene asked quickly. “Then will you go, Edan?”

The baron blinked in surprise, realizing he had been caught. She waited for him
to respond, but he stubbornly refused to answer the question.

“I will,” Shuden declared.

Sarene smiled at the Jindo. This was the second time he had been the first to
offer her support.

“If Shuden’s going to do it, then I doubt the rest of us will have the humility
to say no,” Roial said. “Get your permission, Sarene, then we will discuss this
further.”


“Maybe I was a little too optimistic,” Sarene admitted, standing outside the
doors to Iadon’s study. A pair of guards stood a short distance away, watching
her suspiciously.

“Do you know what you are going to do, my lady?” Ashe asked. The Seon had spent
the meeting floating just outside the chapel walls—well within his range of
hearing—making certain that no one else was eavesdropping on their meeting.

Sarene shook her head. She had displayed bravado when confronted by Ahan and
the others, but now she realized how misplaced that sentiment had been. She had
no idea how she was going to get Iadon to let her into Elantris—let alone get
him to accept their help.

“Did you speak with Father?” she asked.

“I did, my lady,” Ashe replied. “He said he would give you whatever financial
help you required.”

“All right,” Sarene said. “Let’s go.” She took a deep breath and strode toward
the soldiers. “I would speak with my father,” she announced.

The guards glanced at each other. “Um, we were told not to …”

“That doesn’t apply to family, soldier,” Sarene said insistently. “If the queen
came to speak with her husband would you turn her away?”

The guards frowned in confusion; Eshen probably didn’t come to visit. Sarene
had noticed that the bubbly queen tended to keep her distance from Iadon. Even
silly women resent being described that way to their faces.

“Just open the door, soldier,” Sarene said. “If the king doesn’t want to talk
to me, he’ll throw me out, and next time you will know not to let me in.”

The guards hesitated, and Sarene simply pushed her way between them and opened
the door herself. The guards, obviously unused to dealing with forceful
women—especially in the royal family—simply let her pass.

Iadon looked up from his desk, a pair of spectacles she had never seen him wear
before balanced on the end of his nose. He quickly pulled them off and stood,
slamming his hands against the desktop in annoyance, disturbing several invoice
stacks in the process.

“You aren’t content to annoy me in public, so you have to follow me to my study
as well?” he demanded. “If I’d known what a foolish, spindly girl you were, I
would never have signed that treaty. Be gone, woman, and leave me to work!”

“I tell you what, Father,” Sarene said with frankness. “I’ll pretend to be an
intelligent human being capable of a semilucid conversation, and you pretend
the same thing.”

Iadon’s eyes grew wide at the comment, and his face turned a bright red. “Rag
Domi!” he swore, using a curse so vile Sarene had only heard it twice. “You
tricked me, woman. I could have you beheaded for making me look the fool.”

“Start decapitating your children, Father, and people will begin to ask
questions.” She watched his reaction carefully, hoping to glean something about
Raoden’s disappearance, but she was disappointed. Iadon brushed off the comment
with only passing attention.

“I should ship you back to Eventeo right now,” he said.

“Fine, I’d be happy to go,” she lied. “However, realize that if I go, you lose
your trade treaty with Teod. That could be a problem, considering the luck
you’ve had peddling your silks in Fjorden lately.”

Iadon gritted his teeth at the comment.

“Careful, my lady,” Ashe whispered. “Do not unsettle him too much. Men often
place pride before reason.”

Sarene nodded. “I can give you a way out, Father. I have come to offer you a
deal.”

“What reason do I have to accept any offers from you, woman?” he snapped. “You
have been here nearly a month, and now I find that you have been deceiving me
the whole time.”

“You will trust me, Father, because you have lost seventy-five percent of your
fleet to pirates. In a few short months you could lose your throne unless you
listen to me.”

Iadon betrayed surprise at her knowledge. “How do you know these things?”

“Everyone knows, Father,” Sarene said lightly. “It’s all over the court—they
expect you to fall at the next taxing period.”

“I knew it!” Iadon said, his eyes widening with rage. He began to sweat and
curse at the courtiers, railing at their determination to see him off the
throne.

Sarene blinked in surprise. She had made the comment passingly to keep Iadon
off balance, but hadn’t expected such a strong reaction. He’s paranoid! she
realized. Why hasn’t anyone noticed this before? However, the speed with which
Iadon recovered gave her a clue—he was paranoid, but he kept it well hidden.
The way she was jerking his emotions must have weakened his control.

“You propose a deal?” the king demanded.

“I do,” Sarene said. “Silk is going for a premium in Teod right now, Father.
One could make quite a profit selling it to the king. And, considering certain
familial relationships, you might be able to talk Eventeo into giving you sole
mercantile rights in his country.”

Iadon grew suspicious, his rage cooling as he sensed a bargain. However, the
merchant in him immediately began to sniff for problems. Sarene gritted her
teeth in frustration: It was as the others had told her. Iadon would never
accept her offer; it stank too much of deceit.

“An interesting proposal,” he admitted. “But I’m afraid that I—”

“I would, of course, require something in return,” Sarene interrupted, thinking
quickly. “Call it a fee for setting up the deal between Eventeo and yourself.”

Iadon paused. “What kind of fee are we talking about?” he asked warily. An
exchange was different from a gift—it could be weighed, measured, and, to an
extent, trusted.

“I want to go inside Elantris,” Sarene declared. “What?”

“I have to perform a Widow’s Trial,” Sarene said. “So, I am going to bring food
to the Elantrians.”

“What possible motivation could you have for doing that, woman?”

“Religious reasons, Father,” Sarene explained. “Shu-Korath teaches us to help
those most lowly, and I challenge you to find anyone more lowly than the
Elantrians.”

“It’s out of the question,” Iadon said. “Entry into Elantris is forbidden by
law.”

“A law you made, Father,” Sarene said pointedly. “And, therefore, you can make
exceptions. Think carefully—your fortune, and your throne, could balance on
your answer.”

Iadon ground his teeth audibly as he considered the trade. “You want to enter
Elantris with food? For how long?”

“Until I am convinced my duty as Prince Raoden’s wife has been fulfilled,”
Sarene said.

“You would go alone?”

“I would take any who were willing to accompany me.”

Iadon snorted. “You’ll have trouble finding anyone to fill that requirement.”

“My problem, not yours.”

“First that Fjordell devil starts whipping my people into mobs, now you would
do the same,” the king mumbled.

“No, Father,” Sarene corrected. “I want quite the opposite—chaos would only
benefit Wyrn. Believe as you wish, but it is my sole concern to see stability
in Arelon.”

Iadon continued to think for a moment. “No more than ten at a time, excluding
guards,” he finally said. “I don’t want mass pilgrimages going into Elantris.
You will enter an hour before noon and you will be gone by an hour after noon.
No exceptions.”

“Done,” Sarene agreed. “You may use my Seon to call King Eventeo to work out
the details of the deal.”


“I must admit, my lady, that was rather clever.” Ashe bobbed along beside her
in the hallway on the way to her room.

Sarene had stayed as Iadon spoke with Eventeo, mediating as the two worked out
the deal. Her father’s voice had contained a hearty measure of “I hope you know
what you’re doing, ’Ene” in it. Eventeo was a kind and good king, but he was an
absolutely horrible businessman; he kept a fleet of accountants to manage the
royal finances. Once Iadon had sensed her father’s inability, he struck with
the enthusiasm of a raging predator, and only Sarene’s presence had kept Iadon
from leaking away Teod’s entire tax revenue in a rampage of trading fervor. As
it was, Iadon had managed to talk them into buying his silks for four times as
much as they were worth. The king had been beaming so widely as Sarene left
that he almost appeared to have forgiven her for her charade.

“Clever?” Sarene asked innocently in response to Ashe’s comment. “Me?”

The Seon bobbed, chuckling softly. “Is there anyone you can’t manipulate, my
lady?”

“Father,” Sarene said. “You know he gets the better of me three times out of
five.”

“He says the same thing about you, my lady,” Ashe noted.

Sarene smiled, pushing open the door to her room to prepare for bed. “It really
wasn’t that clever, Ashe. We should have realized that our problems were really
solutions to one another—one an offer with no catch, the other a request with
no sweetener.”

Ashe made noises of displeasure as he floated around the room, “tisking,”
offended at its messy state.

“What?” Sarene asked, unwrapping the black ribbon tied around her upper arm—the
only remaining sign of her mourning.

“The room has not been cleaned again, my lady,” Ashe explained.

“Well, it’s not like I left it that messy in the first place,” Sarene said with
a huff.

“No, Your Highness is a very tidy woman,” Ashe agreed. “However, the palace
maids have been lax in their duties. A princess deserves proper esteem—if you
allow them to neglect their work, it won’t be long before they stop respecting
you.”

“I think you’re reading too much into it, Ashe,” Sarene said with a shake of
her head, pulling off her dress and preparing her nightgown. “I’m supposed to
be the suspicious one, remember?”

“This is a matter of servants, not lords, my lady,” Ashe said. “You are a
brilliant woman and a fine politician, but you betray a common weakness of your
class—you ignore the opinions of servants.”

“Ashe!” Sarene objected. “I always treated my father’s servants with respect
and kindness.”

“Perhaps I should rephrase, my lady,” Ashe said. “Yes, you lack unkind
prejudices. However, you don’t pay attention to what the servants think of
you—not in the same way you are always aware of what the aristocracy thinks.”

Sarene pulled her nightgown over her head, refusing to show even a hint of
petulance. “I’ve always tried to be fair.”

“Yes, my lady, but you are a child of nobility, raised to ignore those who work
around you. I only suggest you remember that if the maids disrespect you, it
could be as detrimental as if the lords did so.”

“All right,” Sarene said with a sigh. “Point taken. Fetch Meala for me; I’ll
ask her if she knows what happened.”

“Yes, my lady.”

Ashe floated toward the window. However, before he left, Sarene made one last
comment.

“Ashe?” she asked. “The people loved Raoden, didn’t they?”

“By all accounts, my lady. He was known for paying very personal heed to their
opinions and needs.”

“He was a better prince than I am a princess, wasn’t he?” she asked, her voice
falling.

“I wouldn’t say that, my lady,” Ashe said. “You are a very kindhearted woman,
and you always treat your maids well. Do not compare yourself to Raoden—it is
important to remember that you weren’t preparing to run a country, and your
popularity with the people wasn’t an issue. Prince Raoden was the heir to the
throne, and it was vital that he understand his subjects’ feelings.”

“They say he gave the people hope,” Sarene said musingly. “That the peasants
endured Iadon’s outrageous burdens because they knew Raoden would eventually
take the throne. The country would have collapsed years ago if the prince
hadn’t gone amongst them, encouraging them and reviving their spirits.”

“And now he’s gone,” Ashe said quietly.

“Yes, he’s gone,” Sarene agreed, her voice detached. “We have to hurry, Ashe. I
keep feeling that I’m not doing any good—that the country is heading for
disaster no matter what I do. It’s like I’m at the bottom of a hill watching an
enormous boulder crash down toward me, and I’m throwing pebbles up to try and
deflect it.”

“Be strong, my lady,” Ashe said in his deep, stately voice. “Your God will not
sit and watch as Arelon and Teod crumble beneath Wyrn’s heel.”

“I hope the prince is watching as well,” Sarene said. “Would he be proud of me,
Ashe?”

“Very proud my lady.”

“I just want them to accept me,” she explained, realizing how silly she must
sound. She had spent nearly three decades loving a country without ever feeling
it loved her back. Teod had respected her, but she was tired of respect. She
wanted something different from Arelon.

“They will, Sarene,” Ashe promised. “Give them time. They will.”

“Thank you Ashe,” Sarene said with a quiet sigh. “Thank you for enduring the
lamentations of a silly girl.”

“We can be strong in the face of kings and priests, my lady,” Ashe replied,
“but to live is to have worries and uncertainties. Keep them inside, and they
will destroy you for certain—leaving behind a person so callused that emotion
can find no root in his heart.”

With that the Seon passed out the window, in search of the maid Meala.

_______


By the time Meala arrived, Sarene had composed herself. There had been no
tears, just time spent in thought. Sometimes it was too much for her, and her
insecurity simply had to boil out. Ashe and her father had always been there to
support her during those times.

“Oh dear,” Meala said, regarding the state of the room. She was thin and rather
young—definitely not what Sarene expected when she had first moved into the
palace. Meala more resembled one of her father’s accountants than she did a
head maid.

“I’m sorry, my lady,” Meala apologized, offering Sarene a wan smile. “I didn’t
even think of this. We lost another girl this afternoon, and it didn’t occur to
me that your room was on her list of duties.”

“‘Lost,’ Meala?” Sarene asked with concern.

“A runaway, my lady,” Meala explained. “They aren’t supposed to leave—we’re
indentured like the rest of the peasants. For some reason we have trouble
keeping maids in the palace, however. Domi knows why it is—no servant in the
country is treated better than those here.”

“How many have you lost?” Sarene asked with curiosity.

“She was the fourth this year,” Meala said. “I’ll send someone up immediately.”

“No, don’t bother tonight. Just make sure it doesn’t happen again.”

“Of course, my lady,” Meala said with a curtsy.

“Thank you.”


“There it is again!” Sarene said with excitement, jumping out of her bed.

Ashe instantly burst back to full illumination, hovering uncertainly by the
wall. “My lady?”

“Quiet,” Sarene ordered, pressing her ear against the stone wall beneath her
window, listening to the scraping sound. “What do you think?”

“I am thinking that whatever my lady had for supper, it isn’t agreeing with
her,” Ashe informed curtly.

“There was definitely a noise there,” Sarene said, ignoring the gibe. Though
Ashe was always awake in the mornings when she got up, he didn’t like being
disturbed after he had fallen asleep.

She reached over to her nightstand and picked up a scrap of parchment. On it
she made a mark with a thin piece of charcoal, not wanting to bother with pen
and ink.

“Look,” she declared, holding up the paper for Ashe to see. “The sounds always
come on the same days of the week: MaeDal and OpeDal.”

Ashe floated over and looked at the paper, his glowing Aon the room’s only
illumination besides starlight. “You’ve heard it twice on MaeDal and twice on
OpeDal, four times in total,” he said skeptically. “That is hardly grounds for
a decision that they ‘always come on the same days,’ my lady.”

“Oh, you think I’m hearing things anyway,” Sarene said, dropping the parchment
back onto her table. “I thought Seons were supposed to have excellent auditory
senses.”

“Not when we’re sleeping, my lady,” Ashe said, implying that that was exactly
what he should have been doing at the moment.

“There must be a passage here,” Sarene decided, ineffectually tapping the stone
wall.

“If you say so, my lady.”

“I do,” she said, rising and studying her window. “Look how thick the stone is
around this window, Ashe.” She leaned against the wall and stuck her arm out
the window. The tips of her fingers could barely curl around the outside ledge.
“Does the wall really need to be so wide?”

“It offers much protection, my lady.”

“It also offers room for a passage.”

“A very thin one,” Ashe replied.

“True,” Sarene mused, kneeling down to view the bottom edge of the window at
eye level. “It slopes upwards. The passage was constructed to angle up, passing
between the bottoms of the windows on this level and the first story.”

“But the only thing in that direction is …”

“The king’s rooms,” Sarene finished. “Where else would a passage lead?”

“Are you suggesting that the king takes secret excursions twice a week in the
middle of the night, my lady?”

“At precisely eleven o’clock,” Sarene said, eyeing the large grandfather clock
in the corner of her room. “It’s always at the same time.”

“What possible reason could he have for such a thing?”

“I don’t know,” Sarene said, tapping her cheek in contemplation.

“Oh dear,” Ashe mumbled. “My lady is concocting something, isn’t she?”

“Always,” Sarene said sweetly, climbing back into bed. “Turn down your
light—some of us want to get some sleep.”

