# Part 1 - CHAPTER 4
[Metadata]: # {02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 4
_Proper People(From Chapter 1)_
_Prince Raoden of Arelon: Shaod and new resident of Elantris_
_Galloden of Duladel: Shaod and Arelon by blood_
_King Ioden of Arelon_

_Gang Leaders of Elantris_
_Shaor(He): Ruler of the market section_
_Karata(She): Ruler of the palace section_
_Aanden(He): Ruler of university section_

_Other Names Mentioned_
_Derethi: The opposing religion of Elantris_
_Shu-Keseg: Another religion_
_AonDor Magic_
_Seon_
_Aon: The mystical ancient characters behind the Aonic language_

## Galladon tells Raoden about the sections of Elantris, and the things hunger drives men to do
The woman screamed until she grew too tired, calling for help, for mercy, for
Domi. She clawed at the broad gate, her fingernails leaving marks in the film
of slime. Eventually, she slumped to the ground in a quiet heap, shaking from
occasional sobs. Seeing her agony reminded Raoden of his own pain—the sharp
twinge of his toe, the loss of his life outside.

“They won’t wait much longer,” Galladon whispered, his hand firmly on Raoden’s
arm, holding the prince back.

The woman finally stumbled to her feet, looking dazed, as if she had forgotten
where she was. She took a single, uncertain step to her left, her palm resting
on the wall, as if it were a comfort—a connection to the outside world, rather
than the barrier separating her from it.

“It’s done,” Galladon said.

“Just like that?” Raoden asked.

Galladon nodded. “She picked well—or, as well as one could. Watch.”

Shadows stirred in an alleyway directly across the courtyard; Raoden and
Galladon watched from inside a ramshackle stone building, one of many that
lined Elantris’s entry courtyard. The shadows resolved into a group of men, and
they approached the woman with determined, controlled steps, surrounding her.
One reached out and took her basket of offerings. The woman didn’t have the
strength left to resist; she simply collapsed again. Raoden felt Galladon’s
fingers dig into his shoulder as he involuntarily pulled forward, wanting to
dash out to confront the thieves.

“Not a good idea. Kolo?” Galladon whispered. “Save your courage for yourself.
If stubbing your toe nearly knocked you out, think how it would feel to have
one of those cudgels cracking across your brave little head.”

Raoden nodded, relaxing. The woman had been robbed, but it didn’t look like she
was in further danger. It hurt, however, to watch her. She wasn’t a young
maiden; she bore the stout figure of a woman accustomed to childbirth and the
running of a household. A mother, not a damsel. The strong lines of the woman’s
face bespoke hard-won wisdom and courage, and somehow that made watching her
more difficult. If such a woman could be defeated by Elantris, what hope was
there for Raoden?

“I told you she chose well,” Galladon continued. “She might be a few pounds of
food lighter, but she doesn’t have any wounds. Now, if she had turned
right—like you did, sule—she would have been at the dubious mercy of Shaor’s
men. If she had gone forward, then Aanden would have had the right to her
offerings. The left turn is definitely best—Karata’s men take your food, but
they rarely hurt you. Better to be hungry than spend the next few years with a
broken arm.”

“Next few years?” Raoden asked, turning away from the courtyard to regard his
tall, dark-skinned companion. “I thought you said our wounds would last us an
eternity.”

“We only assume they will, sule. Show me an Elantrian who has managed to keep
his wits until eternity ends, and maybe he’ll be able to prove the theory.”

“How long do people usually last in here?”

“A year, maybe two,” Galladon said.

“What?”

“Thought we were immortal, did you? Just because we don’t age, we’ll last
forever?”

“I don’t know,” Raoden said. “I though you said we couldn’t die.”

“We can’t,” Galladon said. “But the cuts, the bruises, the stubbed toes … they
pile up. One can only take so much.”

“They kill themselves?” Raoden asked quietly.

“That’s not an option. No, most of them lie around mumbling or screaming. Poor
rulos.”

“How long have you been here, then?”

“A few months.”

The realization was another shock to pile on the already teetering stack.
Raoden had assumed that Galladon had been an Elantrian for at least a few
years. The Dula spoke of life in Elantris as if it had been his home for
decades, and he was impressively adept at navigating the enormous city.

Raoden looked back at the courtyard, but the woman had already gone. She could
have been a maid in his father’s palace, a wealthy merchant’s lady, or a simple
housewife. The Shaod respected no classes; it took from all equally. She was
gone now, having entered the gaping pit that was Elantris. He should have been
able to help her.

“All that for a single loaf of bread and a few flaccid vegetables,” Raoden
muttered.

“It may not seem like much now, but just wait a few days. The only food that
enters this place comes clutched in the arms of its new arrivals. You wait,
sule. You will feel the desire as well. It takes a strong man to resist when
the hunger calls.”

“You do it,” Raoden said.

“Not very well—and I’ve only been here a few months. There’s no telling what
the hunger will drive me to do a year from now.”

Raoden snorted. “Just wait until my thirty days are done before you become a
primordial beast, if you please. I’d hate to feel that I hadn’t got my beef’s
worth out of you.”

Galladon paused for a moment, then laughed. “Does nothing frighten you, sule?”

“Actually, pretty much everything here does—I’m just good at ignoring the fact
that I’m terrified. If I ever realize how scared I am, you’ll probably find me
trying to hide under those cobblestones over there. Now, tell me more about
these gangs.”

Galladon shrugged, walking away from the broken door and pulling a chair away
from the wall. He turned a critical eye on its legs, then carefully settled
down. He moved just quickly enough to stand again as the legs cracked. He
tossed the chair away with disgust, and settled on the floor.

“There are three sections of Elantris, sule, and three gangs. The market
section is ruled by Shaor; you met a few members of his court yesterday, though
they were too busy licking the slime off your offerings to introduce
themselves. In the palace section you’ll find Karata—she’s the one who so very
politely relieved that woman of her food today. Last is Aanden. He spends most
of his time in the university section.”

“A learned man?”

“No, an opportunist. He was the first one who realized that many of the
library’s older texts were written on vellum. Yesterday’s classics have become
tomorrow’s lunch. Kolo?”

“Idos Domi!” Raoden swore. “That’s atrocious! The old scrolls of Elantris are
supposed to hold countless original works. They’re priceless!”

Galladon turned him a suffering eye. “Sule, do I need to repeat my speech about
hunger? What good is literature when your stomach hurts so much your eyes
water?”

“That’s a terrible argument. Two-century-old lambskin scrolls can’t possibly
taste very good.”

Galladon shrugged. “Better than slime. Anyway, Aanden supposedly ran out of
scrolls a few months back. They tried boiling books, but that didn’t work very
well.”

“I’m surprised they haven’t tried boiling one another.”

“Oh, it’s been tried,” Galladon said. “Fortunately, something happens to us
during the Shaod—apparently the flesh of a dead man doesn’t taste too good.
Kolo? In fact, it’s so violently bitter that no one can keep it down.”

“It’s nice to see that cannibalism has been so logically ruled out as an
option,” Raoden said dryly.

“I told you, sule. The hunger makes men do strange things.”

“And that makes it all right?”

Wisely, Galladon didn’t answer.

Raoden continued. “You talk about hunger and pain as if they are forces which
can’t be resisted. Anything is acceptable, as long as the hunger made you do
it—remove our comforts, and we become animals.”

Galladon shook his head. “I’m sorry, sule, but that’s just the way things
work.”

“It doesn’t have to be.”

## Raoden lets his mind wander
Ten years wasn’t long enough. Even in Arelon’s thick humidity, it should have
taken longer for the city to deteriorate so much. Elantris looked as if it had
been abandoned for centuries. Its wood was decaying, its plaster and bricks
were disintegrating—even stone buildings were beginning to crumble. And coating
everything was the omnipresent film of brown sludge.

Raoden was finally getting used to walking on the slippery, uneven
cobblestones. He tried to keep himself clean of the slime, but the task proved
impossible. Every wall he brushed and every ledge he grasped left its mark on
him.

The two men walked slowly down a broad street; the thoroughfare was far larger
than any of its kind back in Kae. Elantris had been built on a massive scale,
and while the size had seemed daunting from without, Raoden was only now
beginning to grasp just how enormous the city was. He and Galladon had been
walking for hours, and Galladon said they were still a moderate distance from
their destination.

The two did not rush, however. That was one of the first things Galladon had
taught: In Elantris, one took one’s time. Everything the Dula did was performed
with an air of utter precision, his movements relaxed and careful. The
slightest scratch, no matter how negligible, added to an Elantrian’s pain. The
more careful one was, the longer one would stay sane. So, Raoden followed,
trying to mimic Galladon’s attentive gait. Every time Raoden began to feel that
the caution was excessive, all he had to do was look at one of the numerous
forms that lay huddled in gutters and on street corners, and his determination
would return.

The Hoed, Galladon called them: those Elantrians who had succumbed to the pain.
Their minds lost, their lives were filled with continual, unrelenting torture.
They rarely moved, though some had enough feral instinct to remain crouched in
the shadows. Most of them were quiet, though few were completely silent. As he
passed, Raoden could hear their mumbles, sobs, and whines. Most seemed to be
repeating words and phrases to themselves, a mantra to accompany their
suffering.

“Domi, Domi, Domi …”

“So beautiful, once so very beautiful …”

“Stop, stop, stop. Make it stop….”

Raoden forced himself to close his ears to the words. His chest was beginning
to constrict, as if he were suffering with the poor, faceless wretches. If he
paid too much attention, he would go mad long before the pain took him.

However, if he let his mind wander, it invariably turned to his outside life.
Would his friends continue their clandestine meetings? Would Kiin and Roial be
able to hold the group together? And what of his best friend, Lukel? Raoden had
barely gotten to know Lukel’s new wife; now he would never get to see their
first child.

Even worse were the thoughts of his own marriage. He had never met the woman he
was to have married, though he had spoken to her via Seon on many occasions.
Was she really as witty and interesting as she had seemed? He would never know.
Iadon had probably covered up Raoden’s transformation, pretending that his son
was dead. Sarene would never come to Arelon now; once she heard the news, she
would stay in Teod and seek another husband.

If only I had been able to meet her, if just once. But, such thoughts were
useless. He was an Elantrian now.

Instead, he focused on the city itself. It was difficult to believe that
Elantris had once been the most beautiful city in Opelon, probably in the
world. The slime was what he saw—the rot and the erosion. However, beneath the
filth were the remnants of Elantris’s former greatness. A spire, the remains of
a delicately carved wall relief, grand chapels and vast mansions, pillars and
arches. Ten years ago this city had shone with its own mystical brightness, a
city of pure white and gold.

No one knew what had caused the Reod. There were those who theorized—most of
them Derethi priests—that the fall of Elantris had been caused by God. The
pre-Reod Elantrians had lived as gods, allowing other religions in Arelon, but
suffering them the same way a master lets his dog lick fallen food off the
floor. The beauty of Elantris, the powers its inhabitants wielded, had kept the
general population from converting to Shu-Keseg. Why seek an unseen deity when
you had gods living before you?

It had come with a tempest—that much even Raoden remembered. The earth itself
had shattered, an enormous chasm appearing in the south, all of Arelon quaking.
With the destruction, Elantris had lost its glory. The Elantrians had changed
from brilliant white-haired beings to creatures with splotchy skin and bald
scalps—like sufferers of some horrible disease in the advanced stages of decay.
Elantris had stopped glowing, instead growing dark.

And it had happened only ten years ago. Ten years was not enough. Stone should
not crumble after just a decade of neglect. The filth should not have piled up
so quickly—not with so few inhabitants, most of whom were incapacitated. It was
as if Elantris were intent on dying, a city committing suicide.



## Galladon reveals some facts of gang life in the market region
“The market section of Elantris,” Galladon said. “This place used to be one of
the most magnificent marketplaces in the world—merchants came from across
Opelon to sell their exotic goods to the Elantrians. A man could also come here
to buy the more luxurious Elantrian magics. They didn’t give everything away
for free. Kolo?”

They stood atop a flat-roofed building; apparently, some Elantrians had
preferred flat roofs as opposed to peaks or domes, for the flat sections
allowed for rooftop gardens. Before them lay a section of city that looked
pretty much the same as the rest of Elantris—dark and falling apart. Raoden
could imagine that its streets had once been decorated with the colorful canvas
awnings of street vendors, but the only remains of such was the occasional
filth-covered rag.

“Can we get any closer?” Raoden asked, leaning over the ledge to look down on
the market section.

“You can if you want, sule,” Galladon said speculatively. “But I’m staying
here. Shaor’s men are fond of chasing people; it’s probably one of the few
pleasures they have left.”

“Tell me about Shaor himself, then.”

Galladon shrugged. “In a place like this, many look for leaders—someone to ward
off a bit of the chaos. Like any society, those who are strongest often end up
in command. Shaor is one who finds pleasure in controlling others, and for some
reason the most wild and morally corrupt Elantrians find their way to him.”

“And he gets to take the offerings of one-third of the newcomers?” Raoden
asked.

“Well, Shaor himself rarely bothers with such things—but yes, his followers get
first call on one-third of the offerings.”

“Why the compromise?” Raoden asked. “If Shaor’s men are as uncontrollable you
imply, then what convinced them to hold to such an arbitrary agreement?”

“The other gangs are just as big as Shaor’s, sule,” Galladon explained. “On the
outside, people tend to be convinced of their own immortality. We are more
realistic. One rarely wins a battle without at least a few wounds, and here
even a couple of slight cuts can be more devastating, and more agonizing, than
a swift decapitation. Shaor’s men are wild, but they are not complete idiots.
They won’t fight unless they have incredible odds or a promising reward. You
think it was your physique that kept that man from attacking you yesterday?”

“I wasn’t sure,” Raoden admitted.

“Even the slightest hint that you might fight back is enough to scare these men
off, sule,” Galladon said. “The pleasure of torturing you just isn’t worth the
gamble that you might get in a lucky blow.”

Raoden shivered at the thought. “Show me where the other gangs live.”


## Galladon goes over the palace and university gang sections
The university and the palace bordered one another. According to Galladon,
Karata and Aanden had a very uneasy truce, and guards were usually posted on
both sides to keep watch. Once again, Raoden’s companion led him to a
flat-roofed building, an untrustworthy set of stairs leading to the top.

However, after climbing the stairs—and nearly falling when one of the steps
cracked beneath him—Raoden had to admit that the view was worth the effort.
Elantris’s palace was large enough to be magnificent despite the inevitable
decay. Five domes topped five wings, each with a majestic spire. Only one of
the spires—the one in the middle—was still intact, but it rose high into the
air, by far the tallest structure Raoden had ever seen.

“That’s said to be the exact center of Elantris,” Galladon said, nodding to the
spire. “Once you could climb the steps winding around it and look out over the
entire city. Nowadays, I wouldn’t trust it. Kolo?”

The university was large, but less magnificent. It consisted of five or six
long, flat buildings and a lot of open space—ground that had probably once held
grass or gardens, both things that would have been eaten to their roots long
ago by Elantris’s starving inhabitants.

“Karata is both the harshest and most lenient of the gang leaders,” Galladon
said, gazing down on the university. There was something odd in his eyes, as if
he were seeing things Raoden couldn’t. His description continued in its
characteristic rambling tone, as if his mouth wasn’t aware that his mind was
focused elsewhere.

“She doesn’t often let new members into her gang, and she is extremely
territorial. Shaor’s men might chase you for a while if you wander onto his
turf, but only if they feel like it. Karata suffers no intruders. However, if
you leave Karata alone, she leaves you alone, and she rarely harms newcomers
when she takes their food. You saw her earlier today—she always takes the food
personally. Maybe she doesn’t trust her underlings enough to handle it.”

“Perhaps,” Raoden said. “What else do you know about her?”

“Not much—leaders of violent thieving gangs don’t tend to be the type to spend
their afternoons chatting.”

“Now who’s taking things lightly?” Raoden said with a smile.

“You’re a bad influence, sule. Dead people aren’t supposed to be cheerful.
Anyway, the only thing I can tell you about Karata is that she doesn’t like
being in Elantris very much.”

Raoden frowned. “Who does?”

“We all hate it, sule, but few of us have the courage to try and escape. Karata
has been caught in Kae three times now—always in the vicinity of the king’s
palace. One more time and the priests will have her burned.”

“What does she want at the palace?”

“She hasn’t been kind enough to explain it to me,” Galladon replied. “Most
people think she intends to assassinate King Iadon.”

“The king?” Raoden said. “What would that accomplish?”

“Revenge, discord, bloodlust. All very good reasons when you’re already damned.
Kolo?”

Raoden frowned. Perhaps living with his father—who was absolutely paranoid
about the prospect of getting killed by an assassin—had desensitized him, but
murdering the king just didn’t seem like a likely goal to him. “What about the
other gang leader?”

“Aanden?” Galladon asked, looking back over the city. “He claims he was some
kind of noble before he was thrown in here—a baron, I think. He’s tried to
establish himself as monarch of Elantris, and he is incredibly annoyed that
Karata has control of the palace. He holds court, claims he will feed those who
join him—though all they’ve gotten so far are a few boiled books—and makes
plans for attacking Kae.”

“What?” Raoden asked with surprise. “Attacking?”

“He isn’t serious,” Galladon said. “But he is good at propaganda. He claims to
have a plan to free Elantris, and it’s gained him a large following. However,
he’s also brutal. Karata only harms people who try to sneak into the
palace—Aanden is notorious for dispensing judgments at a whim. Personally,
sule, I don’t think he’s completely sane.”

Raoden frowned. If this Aanden really had been a baron, then Raoden would have
known him. However, he didn’t recognize the name. Either Aanden had lied about
his background, or he had chosen a new name after entering Elantris.

Raoden studied the area in between the university and the palace. A certain
object had caught his attention. Something so mundane he wouldn’t have given it
a second look, had it not been the first of its kind he had seen in all of
Elantris.

“Is that a well?” he asked uncertainly.

Galladon nodded. “The only one in the city.”

“How is that possible?”

“Indoor plumbing, sule, courtesy of AonDor magic. Wells weren’t necessary.”

“Then why build that one?”

“I think it was used in religious ceremonies. Several Elantrian worship
services required water that had been freshly gathered from a moving river.”

“Then the Aredel river does run under the city,” Raoden said.

“Of course. Where else would it go. Kolo?”

Raoden narrowed his eyes thoughtfully, but he didn’t volunteer any information.
As he stood, watching the city, he noticed a small ball of light floating
through one of the streets below. The Seon meandered with an aimless air,
occasionally floating in circles. It was far too distant for him to make out
the Aon at its center.

Galladon noticed Raoden’s scrutiny. “A Seon,” the Dula noted. “Not uncommon in
the city.”

“It’s true, then?” Raoden asked.

Galladon nodded. “When a Seon’s master gets taken by the Shaod, the Seon itself
is driven mad. There’s a number of them floating through the city. They don’t
talk, they just hover about, mindless.”

Raoden glanced away. Since being thrown into Elantris, he’d avoided thinking
about his own Seon, Ien. Raoden had heard what happened to Seons when their
masters became Elantrians.

Galladon glanced up at the sky. “It will rain soon.”

Raoden raised an eyebrow at the cloudless sky. “If you say so.”

“Trust me. We should get inside, unless you want to spend the next few days in
damp clothing. Fires are hard to make in Elantris; the wood is all too wet or
too rotten to burn.”

“Where should we go?”

Galladon shrugged. “Pick a house, sule. Chances are it won’t be inhabited.”

They had spent the previous night sleeping in an abandoned house—but now,
something occurred to Raoden. “Where do you live, Galladon?”

“In Duladel,” Galladon immediately answered.

“I mean nowadays.”

Galladon thought for a moment, eyeing Raoden uncertainly. Then, with a shrug,
he waved Raoden to follow him down the unstable stairs. “Come.”

## Galladon reveals his ability as an Aon to Raoden
“Books!” Raoden said with excitement.

“Should never have brought you here,” Galladon muttered. “Now I’ll never get
rid of you.”

Galladon had led Raoden into what had seemed to be a deserted wine cellar, but
had turned out to be something quite different indeed. The air was drier
here—even though it was below ground—and much cooler as well. As if to revoke
his earlier cautions about fire, Galladon had pulled a lantern from a hidden
alcove and lit it with a bit of flint and steel. What the light had revealed
was surprising indeed.

It looked like a learned man’s study. There were Aons—the mystical ancient
characters behind the Aonic language—painted all over the walls, and there were
several shelves of books.

“How did you ever find this place?” Raoden asked eagerly.

“I stumbled upon it,” Galladon said with a shrug.

“All these books,” Raoden said, picking one up off its shelf. It was a bit
moldy, but still legible. “Maybe these could teach us the secret behind the
Aons, Galladon! Did you ever think of that?”

“The Aons?”

“The magic of Elantris,” Raoden said. “They say that before the Reod,
Elantrians could create powerful magics just by drawing Aons.”

“Oh, you mean like this?” the large dark-skinned man asked, raising his hand.
He traced a symbol in the air, Aon Deo, and his finger left a glowing white
line behind it.

Raoden’s eyes opened wide, and the book dropped from his stunned fingers. The
Aons. Historically, only the Elantrians had been able to call upon the power
locked within them. That power was supposed to be gone; it was said to have
failed when Elantris fell.

Galladon smiled at him through the glowing symbol that hovered in the air
between them.

