# PART 3 - CHAPTER 61
[Metadata]: # {04.07}
[Descriptor]: # {04.07}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 61
Dilaf reached around the princess to press his dagger against her neck.
Eventeo’s eyes opened wide with horror.

Hrathen watched the dagger begin to slice Sarene’s skin. He thought of Fjorden.
He thought of the work he had done, the people he had saved. He thought of a
young boy, eager to prove his faith by entering the priesthood. Unity.

“No!” Spinning, Hrathen drove his fist into Dilaf’s face.

Dilaf stumbled for a moment, lowering his weapon in surprise. Then the monk
looked up with rage and plunged the dagger at Hrathen’s breast.

The knife slid off Hrathen’s armor, scraping ineffectually along the painted
steel. Dilaf regarded the breastplate with stunned eyes. “But, that armor is
just for show….”

“You should know by now, Dilaf,” Hrathen said, bringing his armored forearm up
and smashing it into the monk’s face. Though the unnatural bone had resisted
Hrathen’s fist, it crunched with a satisfying sound beneath steel. “Nothing I
do is just for show.”

Dilaf fell, and Hrathen pulled the monk’s sword free from its scabbard. “Launch
your ships, Eventeo!” he yelled. “Fjorden’s armies come not to dominate, but to
massacre. Move now if you want to save your people!”

“Rag Domi!” Eventeo cursed, yelling for his generals. Then he paused. “My
daughter—”

“I will help the girl!” Hrathen snapped. “Save your kingdom, you fool!”

Though Dakhor bodies were unnaturally quick, their minds recovered from shock
no more quickly than those of regular men. Their surprise bought Hrathen a few
vital seconds. He brought his sword up, shoving Sarene toward an alleyway and
backing up to block the entrance.


The water held Raoden in a cool embrace. It was a thing alive; he could hear it
calling in his mind. Come, it said, I give you release. It was a comforting
parent. It wanted to take away his pain and sorrows, just as his mother had
once done.

Come, it pled. You can finally give up.

No, Raoden thought. Not yet.


The Fjordells finished dousing the Elantrians with oil, then prepared their
torches. During the entire process, Shuden moved his arms in restrained
circular patterns, not increasing their speed as he had the time at the fencing
class. Lukel began to wonder if Shuden wasn’t planning an assault at all, but
simply preparing himself for the inevitable.

Then Shuden burst into motion. The young baron snapped forward, spinning like a
dancer as he brought his fist around, driving it into the chest of a chanting
warrior monk. There was an audible crack, and Shuden spun again, slapping the
monk across the face. The demon’s head spun completely around, his eyes bulging
as his reinforced neck snapped.

And Shuden did it all with his eyes closed. Lukel couldn’t be certain, but he
thought he saw something else—a slight glow following Shuden’s movements in the
dawn shadows.

Yelling a battle cry—more to motivate himself than frighten his foes—Lukel
grabbed the table leg and swung it at a soldier. The wood bounced off the man’s
helmet, but the blow was powerful enough to daze him, so Lukel followed it with
a solid blow to the face. The soldier dropped and Lukel grabbed his weapon.

Now he had a sword. He only wished he knew how to use it.


The Dakhor were faster, stronger, and tougher, but Hrathen was more determined.
For the first time in years, his heart and his mind agreed. He felt power—the
same strength he had felt that first day when he had arrived in Arelon,
confident in his ability to save its people.

He held them off, though just barely. Hrathen might not have been a Dakhor
monk, but he was a master swordsman. What he lacked in comparative strength and
speed he could compensate for in skill. He swung, thrusting his sword at a
Dakhor chest, slamming it directly in between two bone ridges. The blade slid
past enlarged ribs, piercing the heart. The Dakhor gasped, dropping as Hrathen
whipped his sword free. The monk’s companions, however, forced Hrathen to
retreat defensively into the alleyway.

He felt Sarene stumbling behind him, pulling off her gag. “There are too many!”
she said. “You can’t fight them all.”

She was right. Fortunately, a wave moved through the crowd of warriors, and
Hrathen heard the sounds of battle coming from the other side. Eventeo’s honor
guard had joined the affray.

“Come on,” Sarene said, tugging his shoulder. Hrathen risked a glance behind
him. The princess was pointing at a slightly ajar door in the building next to
them. Hrathen nodded, battering away another attack, then turned to run.


Raoden burst from the water, gasping reflexively for breath. Galladon and
Karata jumped back in surprise. Raoden felt the cool blue liquid streaming from
his face. It wasn’t water, but something else. Something thicker. He paid it
little heed as he crawled from the pool.

“Sule!” Galladon whispered in surprise.

Raoden shook his head, unable to respond. They had expected him to
dissolve—they didn’t understand that the pool couldn’t take him unless he
wanted it to.

“Come,” he finally rasped, stumbling to his feet.


Despite Lukel’s energetic assault and Shuden’s powerful attack, the other
townspeople simply stood and watched in dumb stupefaction. Lukel found himself
desperately fighting three soldiers; the only reason he stayed alive was
because he did more dodging and running than actual attacking. When aid finally
did come, it was given by an odd source: the women.

Several of Sarene’s fencers snatched up pieces of wood or fallen swords and
fell in behind Lukel, thrusting with more control and ability than he could
even feign to know. The brunt of their onslaught was pushed forward by
surprise, and for a moment Lukel thought they might actually break free.

Then Shuden fell, crying out as a sword bit into his arm. As soon as the
Jindo’s concentration broke, so did his war dance, and a simple club to the
head knocked him from the battle. The old queen, Eshen, fell next, a sword
rammed through her chest. Her horrible scream, and the sight of the blood
streaming down her dress, unnerved the other women. They broke, dropping their
weapons. Lukel took a long gash on the thigh as one of his foes realized he had
no clue how to use his weapon.

Lukel yelled in pain and fell to the cobblestones, holding his leg. The soldier
didn’t even bother to finish him off.


Raoden dashed down the side of the mountain at a horrifying pace. The prince
leapt and scrambled, as if he hadn’t been practically comatose just a few
minutes earlier. One slip at this pace, one wrong step, and he wouldn’t stop
rolling until he hit the foot of the mountain.

“Doloken!” Galladon said, trying his best to keep up. At this rate they would
reach Kae in a matter of minutes.


Sarene hid beside her unlikely rescuer, holding perfectly still in the
darkness.

Hrathen looked up through the floorboards. He had been the one to spot the
cellar door, pulling it open and shoving her though. Underneath they had found
a terrified family huddled in the blackness. They had all waited quietly,
tense, as the Dakhor moved through the house then left out the front door.

Eventually, Hrathen nodded. “Let’s go,” he said, reaching over to lift the
trapdoor.

“Stay down here,” Sarene told the family. “Don’t come up until you absolutely
have to.”

The gyorn’s armor clinked as he climbed the steps, then peeked cautiously into
the room. He motioned for Sarene to follow, then moved into the small kitchen
at the back of the house. He began pulling off his armor, dropping its pieces
to the floor. Though he gave no explanation, Sarene understood the action. The
bloodred gyorn’s armor was far too distinctive to be worth its protective
value.

As he worked, Sarene was surprised at the apparent weight of the metal. “You’ve
been walking around all these months in real armor? Wasn’t that difficult?”

“The burden of my calling,” Hrathen said, pulling off his final greave. Its
bloodred paint was now scratched and dented. “A calling I no longer deserve.”
He dropped it with a clank.

He looked at the greave, then shook his head, pulling off his bulky cotton
underclothing, meant to cushion the armor. He stood bare-chested, wearing only
a pair of thin, knee-length trousers and a long, sleevelike band of cloth
around his right arm.

Why the covered arm? Sarene wondered. Some piece of Derethi priest’s garb?
Other questions were more pressing, however.

“Why did you do it, Hrathen?” she asked. “Why turn against your people?”

Hrathen paused. Then he looked away. “Dilaf’s actions are evil.”

“But your faith …”

“My faith is in Jaddeth, a God who wants the devotion of men. A massacre does
not serve Him.”

“Wyrn seems to think differently.”

Hrathen did not respond, instead selecting a cloak from a nearby chest. He
handed it to her, then took another for himself. “Let us go.”


Raoden’s feet were so covered with bumps, lacerations, and scrapes that he no
longer related to them as pieces of flesh. They were simply lumps of pain
burning at the end of his legs.

But still he ran on. He knew that if he stopped, the pain would claim him once
again. He wasn’t truly free—his mind was on loan, returned from the void to
perform a single task. When he was finished, the white nothingness would suck
him down into its oblivion again.

He stumbled toward the city of Kae, feeling as much as seeing his way.


Lukel lay dazed as Jalla pulled him back toward the mass of terrified
townspeople. His leg throbbed, and he could feel his body weakening as blood
spilled from the long gash. His wife bound it as best she could, but Lukel knew
that the action was pointless. Even if she did manage to stop the bleeding, the
soldiers were only going to kill them in a few moments anyway.

He watched in despair as one of the bare-chested warriors tossed a torch onto
the pile of Elantrians. The oil-soaked bodies burst into flames.

The demon-man nodded to several soldiers, who pulled out their weapons and
grimly advanced on the huddled townspeople.

_______

“What is he doing?” Karata demanded as they reached the bottom of the slope.
Raoden was still ahead of them, running in an unsteady gait toward Kae’s short
border wall.

“I don’t know,” Galladon said. Ahead, Raoden grabbed a long stick from the
ground, then he started to run, dragging the length of wood behind him.

What are you up to, sule? Galladon wondered. Yet he could feel stubborn hope
rising again. “Whatever it is, Karata, it is important. We must see that he
finishes.” He ran after Raoden, following the prince along his path.

After a few minutes, Karata pointed ahead of them. “There!” A squad of six
Fjordell guards, probably searching the city for stragglers, walked along the
inside of Kae’s border wall. The lead soldier noticed Raoden and raised a hand.

“Come on,” Galladon said, dashing after Raoden with sudden strength. “No matter
what else happens, Karata, don’t let them stop him!”


Raoden barely heard the men approaching, and he only briefly recognized
Galladon and Karata running up behind him, desperately throwing themselves at
the soldiers. His friends were unarmed; a voice in the back of his head warned
that they would not be able to win him much time.

Raoden continued to run, the stick held in rigid fingers. He wasn’t sure how he
knew he was in the right place, but he did. He felt it.

Only a little farther. Only a little farther.

A hand grabbed him; a voice yelled at him in Fjordell. Raoden tripped, falling
to the ground—but he kept the stick steady, not letting it slip even an inch. A
moment later there was a grunt, and the hand released him.

Only a little farther!

Men battled around him, Galladon and Karata keeping the soldiers’ attention.
Raoden let out a primal sob of frustration, crawling like a child as he dug his
line in the ground. Boots slammed into the earth next to Raoden’s hand, coming
within inches of crushing his fingers. Still he kept moving.

He looked up as he neared the end. A soldier finished the swing that separated
Karata’s beleaguered head from her body. Galladon fell with a pair of swords in
his stomach. A soldier pointed at Raoden.

Raoden gritted his teeth, and finished his line in the dirt.

Galladon’s large bulk crashed to the ground. Karata’s head knocked against the
short stone wall. The soldier took a step.

Light exploded from the ground.

It burst from the dirt like a silver river, spraying into the air along the
line Raoden had drawn. The light enveloped him—but it was more than just light.
It was essential purity. Power refined. The Dor. It washed over him, covering
him like a warm liquid.

And for the first time in two months, the pain went away.


The light continued along Raoden’s line, which connected to Kae’s short border
wall. It followed the wall, spurting from the ground, continuing in a circle
until it completely surrounded Kae. It didn’t stop. The power shot up the short
road between Kae and Elantris, spreading to coat the great city’s wall as well.
From Elantris it moved to the other three outer cities, their rubble all but
forgotten in the ten years since the Reod. Soon all five cities were outlined
with light—five resplendent pillars of energy.

The city complex was an enormous Aon—a focus for Elantrian power. All it had
needed was the Chasm line to make it begin working again.

One square, four circles. Aon Rao. The Spirit of Elantris.


Raoden stood in the torrent of light, his clothing fluttering in its unique
power. He felt his strength return, his pains evaporate like unimportant
memories, and his wounds heal. He didn’t need to look to know that soft white
hair had grown from his scalp, that his skin had discarded its sickly taint in
favor of a delicate silver sheen.

Then he experienced the most joyful event of all. Like a thundering drum, his
heart began to beat in his chest. The Shaod, the Transformation, had finally
completed its work.

With a sigh of regret, Raoden stepped from the light, emerging into the world
as a metamorphosed creature. Galladon, stunned, rose from the ground a few feet
away, his skin a dark metallic silver.

The terrified soldiers stumbled away. Several made wards against evil, calling
upon their god.

“You have one hour,” Raoden said, raising a glowing finger toward the docks.
“Go.”


Lukel clutched his wife, watching the fire consume its living fuel. He
whispered his love to her as the soldiers advanced to do their grisly work.
Father Omin whispered behind Lukel, offering a quiet prayer to Domi for their
souls, and for those of their executioners.

Then, like a lantern suddenly set aflame, Elantris erupted with light. The
entire city shook, its walls seeming to stretch, distorted by some awesome
power. The people inside were trapped in a vortex of energy, sudden winds
ripping through the town.

All fell still. They stood as if at the eye of an enormous white storm, power
raging in a wall of luster that surrounded the city. Townspeople cried out in
fear, and soldiers cursed, looking up at the shining walls with confusion.
Lukel wasn’t watching the walls. His mouth opened slightly in amazement as he
stared at the pyre of corpses—and the shadows moving within it.

Slowly, their bodies glistening with a light both more luminous and more
powerful than the flames around them, the Elantrians began to step from the
blaze, unharmed by its heat.

The townspeople sat stunned. Only the two demon priests seemed capable of
motion. One of them screamed in denial, dashing at the emerging Elantrians with
his sword upraised.

A flash of power shot across the courtyard and struck the monk in the chest,
immolating the creature in a puff of energy. The sword dropped to the
cobblestones with a clang, followed by a scattering of smoking bones and burnt
flesh.

Lukel turned bewildered eyes toward the source of the attack. Raoden stood in
the still open gate of Elantris, his hand upraised. The king glowed like a
specter returned from the grave, his skin silver, his hair a brilliant white,
his face effulgent with triumph.

The remaining demon priest screamed at Raoden in Fjorden, cursing him as a
Svrakiss. Raoden raised a hand, quietly sketching in the air, his fingers
leaving gleaming white trails—trails that shone with the same raging power that
surrounded Elantris’s wall.

Raoden stopped, his hand poised next to the gleaming character—Aon Daa, the Aon
for power. The king looked through the glowing symbol, his eyes raised in a
challenge to the lone Derethi warrior.

The monk cursed again, then slowly lowered his weapon.

“Take your men, monk,” Raoden said. “Board those ships and go. Anything
Derethi, man or vessel, that remains in my country after the next hour’s chime
will suffer the force of my rage. I dare you to leave me with a suitable
target.”

The soldiers were already running, dashing past Raoden into the city. Their
leader slunk behind them. Before Raoden’s glory, the monk’s horrible body
seemed more pitiful than it did terrifying.

Raoden watched them go, then he turned toward Lukel and the others. “People of
Arelon. Elantris is restored!”

Lukel blinked dizzily. Briefly, he wondered if the entire experience had been a
vision concocted by his overtaxed mind. When the shouts of joy began to ring in
his ears, however, he knew that it was all real. They had been saved.

“How totally unexpected,” he declared, then proceeded to faint from blood loss.

_______


Dilaf tenderly prodded at his shattered nose, resisting the urge to bellow in
pain. His men, the Dakhor, waited beside him. They had easily slain the king’s
guards, but in the combat they had somehow lost not only Eventeo and the
princess, but the traitor Hrathen as well.

“Find them!” Dilaf demanded, rising to his feet. Passion. Anger. The voice of
his dead wife called in his ears, begging for revenge. She would have it.
Eventeo would never launch his ships in time. Besides, fifty Dakhor already
roamed his capital. The monks themselves were like an army, each one as
powerful as a hundred normal men.

They would take Teod yet.

