# Part 2 - CHAPTER 41
[Metadata]: # {03.14}
[Descriptor]: # {03.14}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 41
The sudden change was nothing less than stupefying. It was as if Sarene had
stepped from darkness into sunlight, burst from brackish water into warm air.
The dirt and grime of Elantris stopped in a crisp line, beyond which the
cobblestones were pure and white. Anywhere else the street’s simple cleanliness
would have been noticeable, but not remarkable. Here, with the rot of Elantris
behind her, it seemed as if Sarene had stumbled into Domi’s Paradise.

She stopped before the stone gate, staring at the city-within-a-city, her eyes
wide and disbelieving. People talked and worked within, each bearing the cursed
skin of an Elantrian, but each wearing a pleasant smile as well. None wore the
rags she had assumed were the only available clothing in Elantris; their
outfits were simple skirts or trousers and a shirt. The cloth was strikingly
colorful. With amazement Sarene realized that these were the colors she had
chosen. What she had seen as offensive, however, the people wore with joy—the
bright yellows, greens, and reds highlighting their cheerfulness.

These were not the people she had seen just a few weeks before, pathetic and
begging for food. They looked as if they belonged to some pastoral village of
lore—people who expressed a good-natured joviality Sarene had thought
unrealistic in the real world. Yet, they lived in the one place everyone knew
was even more horrible than the real world.

“What …?”

Spirit smiled broadly, still holding her hand as he pulled her through the
gateway into the village. “Welcome to New Elantris, Sarene. Everything you
assumed is no longer valid.”

“I can see that.”

A squat Elantrian woman approached, her dress a mixture of vibrant greens and
yellows. She eyed Sarene critically. “I doubt we’ve got anything in her size,
Lord Spirit.”

Spirit laughed, taking in Sarene’s height. “Do your best, Maare,” he said,
walking toward a low-ceilinged building at the side of the gate. The door was
open, and Sarene could see rows of clothing hanging on pegs inside.
Embarrassed, she was suddenly aware of her own clothing. She had already
stained the white garment with slime and muck.

“Come, dearie,” Maare said, leading her to a second building. “Let’s see what
we can do.”

The motherly woman eventually found a dress that fit Sarene reasonably well—or,
at least, a blue skirt that showed her legs only up to midcalf, along with a
bright red blouse. There were even undergarments, though they too were
constructed of bright materials. Sarene didn’t complain—anything was better
than her filth-soiled robe.

After pulling on the clothing, Sarene regarded herself in the room’s
full-length mirror. Half of her skin was still flesh-toned, but that only made
the dark splotches more striking. She assumed that her flesh tones would dim
with time, becoming gray like those of the other Elantrians.

“Wait,” she asked hesitantly, “where did the mirror come from?”

“It isn’t a mirror, dearie,” Maare informed as she sifted through socks and
shoes. “It’s a flat piece of stone—part of a table, I think—with thin sheets of
steel wrapped around it.”

Looking closely, Sarene could see the folds where sheets of steel overlapped
one another. All things considered, it made a remarkable mirror. The stone must
have been extremely smooth.

“But where—” Sarene stopped. She knew exactly where they had gotten sheets of
steel that thin. Sarene herself had sent them, again thinking to get the better
of Spirit, who had demanded several sheets of metal as part of his bribe.

Maare disappeared for a moment, then returned with socks and shoes for Sarene.
Both were different colors from either her shirt or her skirt. “Here we are,”
the woman said. “I had to go over and pilfer these from the men.”

Sarene felt herself blush as she accepted the items.

“Don’t mind, dearie,” Maare said with a laugh. “It makes sense you’d have big
feet—Domi knows you need more on the bottom to support all that height! Oh, and
here’s the last thing.”

The woman held up a long scarflike piece of orange cloth. “For your head,”
Maare said, pointing at the similar cloth wrapped around her own head. “It
helps us forget about the hair.”

Sarene nodded thankfully, accepting the scarf and tying it around her scalp.
Spirit waited for her outside, wearing a pair of red trousers and a yellow
shirt. He smiled as she approached.

“I feel like an insane rainbow,” Sarene confessed, looking down at the
menagerie of colors.

Spirit laughed, holding out his hand and leading her deeper into the city.
Unconsciously, she found herself judging his height. He’s tall enough for me,
she thought almost offhandedly, if only barely. Then, realizing what she was
doing, she rolled her eyes. The entire world was toppling around her, and all
she could do was size up the man walking next to her.

“… get used to the idea that we all look like secabirds in the spring,” he was
saying. “The colors don’t bother you all that much once you wear them for a
while. Actually, after the dull monotones of old Elantris, I find them quite
refreshing.”

As they walked, Spirit explained New Elantris to her. It wasn’t very large,
perhaps fifty buildings in all, but its compact nature made it feel more
unified. Though there couldn’t have been many people in the town—five or six
hundred at most—there always seemed to be motion around her. Men worked on
walls or roofs, women sewed or cleaned—even children ran in the streets. It had
never occurred to her that the Shaod would take children as well as adults.

Everyone greeted Spirit as he passed, calling out with welcoming smiles. There
was true acceptance in their voices, displaying a level of loving respect
Sarene had rarely seen given to a leader; even her father, who was generally
well liked, had his dissenters. Of course, it was easier with such a small
population, but she was still impressed.

At one point they walked by a man of indecipherable age—it was hard to put
years with faces in Elantris—sitting on a stone block. He was short with a
large belly, and he didn’t greet them. His inattention, however, was not a sign
of incivility—he was just focused on the small object in his hand. Several
children stood around the man, watching his bent-over work with eager eyes. As
Sarene and Spirit passed, the man held the object out to one of the children;
it was a beautifully carved stone horse. The girl clapped ecstatically,
accepting the piece with exuberant fingers. The children ran off as the
sculptor reached down to select another rock from the ground. He began to
scrape at the stone with a short tool; as Sarene peered closely at his fingers,
she realized what it was.

“One of my nails!” she said. “He’s using one of the bent nails I sent you.”

“Hmm?” Spirit asked. “Oh, yes. I have to tell you, Sarene, we had quite a time
figuring out what to do with that particular box. It would have taken far too
much fuel to melt them all down, even assuming we had the tools for smelting.
Those nails were one of your more clever adaptations.”

Sarene flushed. These people were fighting to survive in a city deprived of
resources, and she had been so petty as to send them bent nails. “I’m sorry. I
was afraid you would make weapons out of the steel.”

“You were right to be wary,” Spirit said. “I did, after all, betray you in the
end.”

“I’m sure you had a good reason,” she said quickly.

“I did,” he said with a nod. “But that didn’t matter much at the time, did it?
You were right about me. I was—am—a tyrant. I kept food back from a part of the
population, I broke our agreement, and I caused the deaths of some fine men.”

Sarene shook her head, her voice growing firm. “You are not a tyrant. This
community proves that—the people love you, and there cannot be tyranny where
there is love.”

He half smiled, his eyes unconvinced. Then, however, he regarded her with an
unreadable expression. “Well, I suppose the time during your Trial wasn’t a
complete loss. I gained something very important during those weeks.”

“The supplies?” Sarene asked.

“That too.”

Sarene paused, holding his eyes. Then she looked back at the sculptor. “Who is
he?”

“His name is Taan,” Spirit said. “Though you might know of him by the name
Aanden.”

“The gang leader?” Sarene asked with surprise.

Spirit nodded. “Taan was one of the most accomplished sculptors in Arelon
before the Shaod took him. After coming to Elantris, he lost track of himself
for a while. He came around eventually.”

They left the sculptor to his work, Spirit showing her through the last few
sections of the city. They passed a large building that he referred to as “the
Hall of the Fallen,” and the sorrow in his voice kept her from asking about it,
though she did see several mindless Shaod Seons floating around above its roof.

Sarene felt a sudden stab of grief. Ashe must be like that now, she thought,
remembering the mad Seons she had occasionally seen floating around Elantris.
Despite what she’d seen, she’d continued to hope through the night that Ashe
would find her. The Korathi priests had locked her in some sort of holding cell
to wait—apparently, new Elantrians were only thrown into the city once a
day—and she’d stood by the window, wishing he would arrive.

She’d waited in vain. With the confusion at the wedding, she couldn’t even
remember the last time she’d seen him. Not wanting to enter the chapel, he’d
gone ahead to wait for her in the throne room. When she’d arrived, had she seen
him floating inside the room? Had she heard his voice, calling out amid the
other shocked members of the wedding party? Or, was she simply letting hope
cloud her memories?

Sarene shook her head, sighing as she let Spirit lead her away from the Hall of
the Fallen. She kept looking over her shoulder, glancing upward, expecting Ashe
to be there. He always had been before.

At least he isn’t dead, she thought, forcing aside her grief. He’s probably in
the city somewhere. I can find him … maybe help him, somehow.

They continued to walk, and Sarene intentionally let herself be distracted by
the scenery—she couldn’t bear to think of Ashe anymore. Soon, Spirit led her
past several open areas that—looking closely—Sarene realized must be fields.
Tiny sprouts were appearing in careful rows piled in the dirt, and several men
walked among them, searching for weeds. There was a distinct smell in the air.

Sarene paused. “Fish?”

“Fertilizer,” Spirit said with a chuckle. “That’s one time we managed to get
the better of you. We asked for trike knowing full well you would find the
nearest barrel of rotten fish to include in the shipment.”

“It seems like you got the better of me more times than not,” Sarene said,
remembering with shame the time she had spent gloating over her sly
interpretations of the demands. It seemed no matter how twisted her attempt,
the New Elantrians had found uses for all of her useless gifts.

“We don’t have much choice, Princess. Everything from pre-Reod Elantris is
rotten or befouled; even the stones are starting to crumble. No matter how
defective you may have thought those supplies, they were still far more useful
than anything left in the city.”

“I was wrong,” Sarene said morosely.

“Don’t start that again,” Spirit said. “If you begin feeling sorry for
yourself, I’ll lock you in a room with Galladon for an hour so that you can
learn what true pessimism is.”

“Galladon?”

“He was the large fellow you met briefly back at the gates,” Spirit explained.

“The Dula?” Sarene asked with surprise, recalling the large, broad-faced
Elantrian with the thick Duladen accent.

“That’s him.”

“A pessimistic Dula?” she repeated. “I’ve never heard of such a thing.”

Spirit laughed again, leading her into a large, stately building. Sarene gasped
in wonder at its beauty. It was lined with delicate, spiraled arches, and the
floor was crafted of pale white marble. The wall reliefs were even more
intricate than those on the Korathi temple in Teoras.

“It’s a chapel,” she said, running her fingers over the intricate marble
patterns.

“Yes, it is. How did you know that?”

“These scenes are straight out of the Do-Korath,” she said, looking up with
chiding eyes. “Someone didn’t pay much attention in chapel school.”

Spirit coughed to himself. “Well …”

“Don’t even try and convince me you didn’t go,” Sarene said, turning back to
the carvings. “You’re obviously a nobleman. You would have gone to church to
keep up appearances, even if you weren’t devout.”

“My lady is very astute. I am, of course, Domi’s humble servant—but I’ll admit
that my mind sometimes wandered during the sermons.”

“So, who were you?” Sarene asked conversationally, finally asking the question
that had bothered her ever since she first met Spirit weeks before.

He paused. “The second son of the Lord of Ien Plantation. A very minor holding
in the south of Arelon.”

It could be the truth. She hadn’t bothered memorizing the names of minor lords;
it had been difficult enough to keep track of the dukes, counts, and barons. It
could also be a lie. Spirit appeared to be at least a passable statesman, and
he would know how to tell a convincing falsehood. Whatever he was, he had
certainly learned some excellent leadership skills—attributes she had found,
for the most part, lacking in the Arelish aristocracy.

“How long—” she began, turning away from the wall. Then she froze, her breath
catching in her throat.

Spirit was glowing.

A spectral light grew from somewhere within; she could see the lines of his
bones silhouetted before some awesome power that burned within his chest. His
mouth opened in a voiceless scream; then he collapsed, quivering as the light
flared.

Sarene rushed to his side, then paused, unsure what to do. Gritting her teeth,
she grabbed him, lifting his head up to keep the spasms from pounding it
repeatedly against the cold marble floor. And she felt something.

It brought bumps to her arms and sent a frigid shiver through her body.
Something large, something impossibly immense, pressed against her. The air
itself seemed to warp away from Spirit’s body. She could no longer see his
bones; there was too much light. It was as if he were dissolving into pure
whiteness; she would have thought him gone if she hadn’t felt his weight in her
arms. His struggles jerked to a stop, and he fell limp.

Then he screamed.

A single note, cold and uniform, flew from his mouth in a defiant yell. The
light vanished almost immediately, and Sarene was left with her heart pounding
a rhythm in her breast, her arms bathed in anxious sweat, her breathing coming
deeply and rapidly.

Spirit’s eyes fluttered open a few moments later. As comprehension slowly
returned, he smiled wanly and rested his head back against her arm. “When I
opened my eyes, I though that time I had died for certain.”

“What happened?” she asked anxiously. “Should I go for help?”

“No, this is becoming a common occurrence.”

“Common?” Sarene asked slowly. “For … all of us?”

Spirit laughed weakly. “No, just me. I’m the one the Dor is intent on
destroying.”

“The Dor?” she asked. “What does Jesker have to do with this?”

He smiled. “So, the fair princess is a religious scholar as well?”

“The fair princess knows a lot of things,” Sarene said dismissively. “I want to
know why a ‘humble servant of Domi’ thinks the Jesker overspirit is trying to
destroy him.”

Spirit moved to sit, and she helped. “It has to do with AonDor,” he explained
with a tired voice.

“AonDor? That’s a heathen legend.” There wasn’t much conviction to her
words—not after what she had just seen.

Spirit raised an eyebrow. “So, it’s all right for us to be cursed with bodies
that won’t die, but it’s not possible for our ancient magic to work? Didn’t I
see you with a Seon?”

“That’s different….” Sarene trailed off weakly, her mind turning back to Ashe.

Spirit, however, immediately drew her attention again. He raised his hand and
began drawing. Lines appeared in the air, following his finger’s movement.

Korathi teaching of the last ten years had done its best to downplay Elantris’s
magic, despite the Seons. Seons were familiar, almost like benevolent spirits
sent by Domi for protection and comfort. Sarene had been taught, and had
believed, that Elantris’s magics had mostly been a sham.

Now, however, she was faced with a possibility. Perhaps the stories were true.

“Teach me,” she whispered. “I want to know.”


It wasn’t until later, after night had fallen, that Sarene finally allowed
herself to cry. Spirit had spent the better part of the day explaining all he
knew of AonDor. Apparently, he had done some extensive research on the subject.
Sarene had listened with enjoyment, because of both the company and the
distraction he provided. Before they had known it, dusk was falling outside the
chapel windows, and Spirit had found her lodgings.

Now she lay curled up, shivering in the cold. The room’s two other women slept
soundly, neither one bothering with a blanket despite the frigid air. The other
Elantrians didn’t seem to notice temperature variation as much as Sarene did.
Spirit claimed that their bodies were in a kind of stasis, that they had
stopped working as they waited for the Dor to finish transforming them. Still,
it seemed unpleasantly cold to Sarene.

The dismal atmosphere didn’t do much for her mood. As she bunched up against
the hard stone wall, she remembered the looks. Those awful looks. Most other
Elantrians had been taken at night, and they would have been discovered
quietly. Sarene, however, had been exhibited before the entire aristocracy. And
at her own wedding, no less.

It was a mortifying embarrassment. Her only consolation was that she would
probably never see any of them again. It was a small comfort, for by the same
reasoning she would probably never see her father, mother, or brother again.
Kiin and his family were lost to her. So, where homesickness had never hit her
before, now it attacked with a lifetime’s worth of repression.

Coupled with it was the knowledge of her failure. Spirit had asked her for news
from the outside, but the topic had proven too painful for her. She knew that
Telrii was probably already king, and that meant Hrathen would easily convert
the rest of Arelon.

Her tears came silently. She cried for the wedding, for Arelon, for Ashe’s
madness, and for the shame dear Roial must have felt. Thoughts of her father
were worst of all. The idea of never again feeling the love of his gentle
banter—never again sensing his overwhelming, unconditional approval—brought to
her heart an overpowering sense of dread.

“My lady?” whispered a deep, hesitant voice. “Is that you?”

Shocked, she looked up through her tears. Was she hearing things? She had to
be. She couldn’t have heard …

“Lady Sarene?”

It was Ashe’s voice.

Then she saw him, hovering just inside the window, his Aon so dim it was nearly
invisible. “Ashe?” she asked with hesitant wonder.

“Oh, blessed Domi!” the Aon exclaimed, approaching quickly.

“Ashe!” she said, wiping her eyes with a quivering hand, numbed by shock. “You
never use the Lord’s name!”

“If He has brought me to you, then He has His first Seon convert,” Ashe said,
pulsing excitedly.

She could barely keep herself from reaching out and trying to hug the ball of
light. “Ashe, you’re talking! You shouldn’t be able to speak, you should be …”

“Mad,” Ashe said. “Yes, my lady, I know. Yet, I feel no differently from
before.”

“A miracle,” Sarene said.

“A wonder, if nothing else,” the Seon said. “Perhaps I should look into
converting to Shu-Korath.”

Sarene laughed. “Seinalan would never hear of it. Of course, his disapproval
has never stopped us before, has it?”

“Not once, my lady.”

Sarene rested back against the wall, content to simply enjoy the familiarity of
his voice.

“You have no idea how relieved I am to find you, my lady. I have been searching
for two days. I had begun to fear that something awful had happened to you.”

“It did, Ashe,” Sarene said, though she smiled when she said the words.

“I mean something more horrible, my lady,” the Seon said. “I have seen the kind
of atrocities this place can breed.”

“It has changed, Ashe,” Sarene said. “I don’t quite understand how he did it,
but Spirit brought order to Elantris.”

“Whatever he did, if it kept you safe, I bless him for it.”

Suddenly, something occurred to her. If Ashe lived … Sarene had a link to the
outside world. She wasn’t completely separated from Kiin and the others.

“Do you know how everyone is doing?” she asked.

“No, my lady. After the wedding dismissed, I spent an hour demanding that the
patriarch let you free. I don’t think he was disappointed by your fall. After
that, I realized that I had lost you. I went to Elantris’s gates, but I was
apparently too late to see you get thrown into the city. However, when I asked
the guards where you had gone, they refused to tell me anything. They said it
was taboo to speak of those who had become Elantrians, and when I told them
that I was your Seon, they grew very uncomfortable and stopped speaking to me.
I had to venture into the city without information, and I’ve been searching for
you ever since.”

Sarene smiled, picturing the solemn Seon—essentially, a pagan creation—arguing
with the head of the Korathi religion. “You didn’t arrive too late to see me
get thrown into the city, Ashe. You arrived too early. Apparently, they only
throw people in before a certain time of day, and the marriage happened quite
late. I spent the night in the chapel, and they brought me to Elantris this
afternoon.”

“Ah,” the Seon said, bobbing with comprehension.

“In the future you can probably find me here, in the clean section of the
city.”

“This is an interesting place,” Ashe said. “I had never been here before—it is
well masked from the outside. Why is this area different from the others?”

“You’ll see,” she said. “Come back tomorrow.”

“Come back, my lady?” Ashe asked indignantly. “I don’t intend to leave you.”

“Just briefly, my friend,” Sarene said. “I need news from Kae, and you need to
let the others know I am all right.”

“Yes, my lady.”

Sarene paused for a moment. Spirit had gone through great efforts to make sure
no one on the outside knew of New Elantris; she couldn’t betray his secret so
offhandedly, even if she did trust the people Ashe would tell. “Tell them you
found me, but don’t tell them any of what you see in here.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said, his voice confused. “Just a moment, my lady. Your
father wishes to speak with you.” The Seon began to pulse, then his light
melted, dripping and reforming into Eventeo’s large oval head.

“’Ene?” Eventeo asked with frantic concern.

“I’m here, Father.”

“Oh, thank Domi!” he said. “Sarene, are you unharmed?”

“I’m fine, Father,” she assured him, strength returning. She suddenly knew that
she could do anything and go anywhere as long as she had the promise of
Eventeo’s voice.

“Curse that Seinalan! He didn’t even try to let you free. If I weren’t so
devout, I’d behead him without a second thought.”

“We must be fair, Father,” Sarene said. “If a peasant’s daughter can be cast
into Elantris, then a king’s daughter shouldn’t be exempt.”

“If my reports are true, then no one should be thrown into that pit.”

“It’s not as bad as you think, Father,” Sarene said. “I can’t explain, but
things are more hopeful than anticipated.”

“Hopeful or not, I’m getting you out of there.”

“Father, no!” Sarene said. “If you bring soldiers to Arelon you’ll not only
leave Teod undefended, but you’ll alienate our only ally!”

“It won’t be our ally for long, if my spy’s predictions are accurate,” Eventeo
said. “Duke Telrii is waiting a few days to consolidate power, but everyone
knows he’ll soon take the throne—and he is on very friendly terms with that
Gyorn Hrathen. You tried, ’Ene, but Arelon is lost. I’m going to come get you—I
won’t really need all that many men—and then I’m going to fall back and prepare
for an invasion. No matter how many men Wyrn raises, he’ll never get them past
our armada. Teod has the finest ships on the sea.”

“Father, you might have given up on Arelon, but I can’t.”

“Sarene,” Eventeo said warningly, “do not start that again. You are no more
Arelish than I—”

“I mean it, Father,” Sarene said firmly. “I will not leave Arelon.”

“Idos Domi, Sarene, this is lunacy! I am your father and your king. I am going
to bring you back, whether you want to come or not.”

Sarene calmed herself; force would never work with Eventeo. “Father,” she said,
letting love and respect sound in her voice, “you taught me to be bold. You
made me into something stronger than the ordinary. At times I cursed you, but
mostly I blessed your encouragement. You gave me the liberty to become myself.
Would you deny that now by taking away my right to choose?”

Her father’s white head hung silently in the dark room.

“Your lessons won’t be complete until you let go, Father,” Sarene said quietly.
“If you truly believe the ideals that you gave me, then you will allow me to
make this decision.”

Finally he spoke. “You love them that much, ’Ene?”

“They have become my people, Father.”

“It has been less than two months.”

“Love is independent of time, Father. I need to stay with Arelon. If it is to
fall, I must fall with it—but I don’t think it will. There has to be a way to
stop Telrii.”

“But you’re trapped in that city, Sarene,” her father said. “What can you do
from there?”

“Ashe can act as messenger. I can no longer lead them, but I might be able to
help. Even if I cannot, I still must stay.”

“I see,” her father finally said, sighing deeply. “Your life is yours, Sarene.
I have always believed that—even if I forget it once in a while.”

“You love me, Father. We protect what we love.”

“And I do,” Eventeo said. “Never forget that, my daughter.”

Sarene smiled. “I never have.”

“Ashe,” Eventeo ordered, calling the Seon’s consciousness into the
conversation.

“Yes, my king,” Ashe’s voice said, its deep tone deferential and reverent.

“You will watch and protect her. If she is injured, you will call me.”

“As I ever have, and ever will, my king,” Ashe responded.

“Sarene, I’m still going to set the armada in a defensive pattern. Let your
friends know that any ship approaching Teoish waters will be sunk without
question. The entire world has turned against us, and I cannot risk the safety
of my people.”

“I’ll warn them, Father,” Sarene promised.

“Goodnight then, ’Ene, and may Domi bless you.”

