# PART 3 - CHAPTER 63
[Metadata]: # {04.09}
[Descriptor]: # {04.09}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 63
Sarene straightened Raoden’s jacket, then stood back, tapping her cheek as she
studied him. She would have preferred a white suit rather than a gold one, but
for some reason white seemed pale and lifeless when placed next to his silvery
skin.

“Well?” Raoden asked, holding his arms out to the sides. “You’ll have to do,”
she decided airily.

He laughed, approaching and kissing her with a smile. “Shouldn’t you be alone
in the chapel, praying and preparing? What ever happened to tradition?”

“I tried that once already,” Sarene said, turning to make sure he hadn’t mussed
up her makeup. “This time I intend to keep a close eye on you. For some reason,
my potential husbands have a way of disappearing.”

“That might say something about you, Leky Stick,” Raoden teased. He had laughed
long when her father explained the nickname to him, and since then he had been
careful to use it at every possible occasion.

She swatted at him absently, straightening her veil.

“My lord, my lady,” said a stoic voice. Raoden’s Seon, Ien, floated in through
the doorway. “It is time.”

Sarene grabbed Raoden’s arm in a firm grip. “Walk,” she ordered, nodding toward
the doorway. This time, she wasn’t letting go until someone married them.


Raoden tried to pay attention to the ceremony, but Korathi wedding services
were lengthy and often dry. Father Omin, well aware of the precedent set by an
Elantrian asking a Korathi priest to officiate at his wedding, had prepared an
extensive speech for the occasion. As usual, the short man’s eyes took on a
semiglazed look as he rambled, as if he had forgotten that there was anyone
else present.

So Raoden let his mind wander too. He couldn’t stop thinking of a conversation
he had held with Galladon earlier in the day, a conversation initiated because
of a piece of bone. The bone, retrieved from the body of a dead Fjordell monk,
was deformed and twisted—yet it was more beautiful than disgusting. It was like
a carved piece of ivory, or a bundle of engraved wooden rods all twisted
together. Most disturbingly, Raoden swore he could make out slightly familiar
symbols in the carving. Symbols he recognized from his schooling—ancient
Fjordell characters.

The Derethi monks had devised their own version of AonDor.

The worry pressed on his mind with such vigor that it drew his attention even
in the middle of his own wedding. Over the centuries, only one thing had kept
Fjorden from conquering the West: Elantris. If Wyrn had learned to access the
Dor … Raoden kept remembering Dilaf and his strange ability to resist, and even
destroy, Aons. If a few more of the monks had possessed that power, then the
battle could easily have gone another way.

Ien’s familiar bubble-like ball of light floated approvingly at Raoden’s side.
The Seon’s restoration almost made up for the dear friends Raoden had lost
during the final battle to restore Elantris. Karata and the others would be
missed. Ien claimed to remember nothing of his time of madness, but something
seemed a little … different about the Seon. He was more quiet than normal, even
more thoughtful. As soon as he had some free time, Raoden planned to
interrogate the other Elantrians in the hopes of discovering more about the
Seons. It disturbed him that throughout his studies, readings, and learning, he
had never discovered exactly how Seons were created—if, indeed, they were even
creations of AonDor.

That wasn’t the only thing that bothered him, however. There was also the
question of Shuden’s strange ChayShan dance. Onlookers, including Lukel,
claimed that the Jindo had managed to defeat one of Dilaf’s monks alone—with
his eyes closed. Some even said they had seen the young baron glowing as he
fought. Raoden was beginning to suspect there was more than one way to access
the Dor—far more. And one of those methods was in the hands of the most brutal,
domineering tyrant in Opelon: Wyrn Wulfden the Fourth, Regent of All Creation.

Apparently, Sarene noticed Raoden’s inattention, for she elbowed him in the
side when Omin’s speech began to wind down. Ever the stateswoman, she was
poised, in control, and alert. Not to mention beautiful.

They performed the ceremony, exchanging Korathi pendants that bore Aon Omi and
pledging their lives and deaths to one another. The pendant he gave to Sarene
had been delicately carved from pure jade by Taan himself, then overlaid with
bands of gold to match her hair. Sarene’s own gift was less extravagant, but
equally fitting. Somewhere she had found a heavy black stone that polished up
as if it were metal, and its reflective darkness complimented Raoden’s silvery
skin.

With that, Omin proclaimed to all of Arelon that its king was married. The
cheering began, and Sarene leaned over to kiss him.

“Was it everything you hoped for?” Raoden asked. “You said you have been
anticipating this moment for your entire life.”

“It was wonderful,” Sarene replied. “However, there is one thing I have looked
forward to even more than my wedding.”

Raoden raised an eyebrow.

She smiled mischievously. “The wedding night.”

Raoden laughed his reply, wondering what he had gotten himself, and Arelon,
into by bringing Sarene to Arelon.

