# EPILOGUE
[Metadata]: # {05}
[Descriptor]: # {05}
[Author]: # {sanderson}
# EPILOGUE
The day was warm and bright, a complete contrast to the day of Iadon’s burial.
Sarene stood outside Kae, regarding the former king’s barrow. Everything Iadon
had fought for had been overturned; Elantris had been revitalized and serfdom
proclaimed illegal. Of course, his son did sit on the throne of Arelon, even if
that throne was inside of Elantris now.

Only a week had passed since the wedding, but so much had happened. Raoden had
ended up allowing the nobility to keep their titles, though he had first tried
to abolish the entire system. The people wouldn’t have it. It seemed unnatural
for there not to be counts, barons, or other lords. So, Raoden had instead
twisted the system to his own ends. He made each lord a servant of Elantris,
charging them with the responsibility of caring for the people in remote parts
of the country. The nobility became less aristocrats and more food
distributors—which, in a way, was what they should have been in the first
place.

Sarene watched him now, speaking with Shuden and Lukel, his skin glowing even
in the sunlight. The priests who said the fall of Elantris had revealed its
occupants’ true selves had not known Raoden. This was the true him, the glowing
beacon, the powerful source of pride and hope. No matter how metallically
bright his skin became, it could never match the radiance of his soul.

Beside Raoden stood the quiet Galladon, his skin glowing as well, though in a
different way. It was darker, like polished iron, a remnant of his Duladen
heritage. The large man’s head was still bald. Sarene had been surprised at
that fact, for all the other Elantrians had grown heads of white hair. When
asked about the oddity, Galladon had simply shrugged in his characteristic
manner, mumbling, “Seems right to me. I’ve been bald since I hit my third
decade. Kolo?”

Just behind Raoden and Lukel, she could make out the silver-skinned form of
Adien, Daora’s second son. According to Lukel, the Shaod had taken Adien five
years before, but the family had determined to cover up his transformation with
makeup rather than throw him into Elantris.

Adien’s true nature was no more baffling than that of his father. Kiin hadn’t
been willing to explain much, but Sarene saw the confirmation in her uncle’s
eyes. Just over ten years ago, he had led his fleets against Sarene’s father in
an attempt to steal the throne—a throne that Sarene was beginning to believe
might legally have belonged to Kiin. If it was true that Kiin was the older
brother, then he should have inherited, not Eventeo. Her father still wouldn’t
speak on the subject, but she intended to get her answers eventually.

As she pondered, she noticed a carriage pulling up to the grave site. The door
opened and Torena climbed out, leading her overweight father, Count Ahan. Ahan
hadn’t been the same since Roial’s death; he spoke in a dazed, sickly voice,
and he had lost an alarming amount of weight. The others hadn’t forgiven him
for his part in the duke’s execution, but their scorn could never match the
self-loathing he must feel.

Raoden caught her eye, nodding slightly. It was time. Sarene strode past
Iadon’s grave and four just like it—the resting places of Roial, Eondel,
Karata, and a man named Saolin. This last barrow held no body, but Raoden had
insisted that it be raised with the others.

This area was to become a memorial, a way of remembering those who had fought
for Arelon—as well as the man who had tried to crush it. Every lesson had two
sides. It was as important for them to remember Iadon’s sickening greed as it
was to remember Roial’s sacrifice.

She slowly approached one final grave. The earth was raised high like the
others, forming a barrow that would someday be covered with grass and foliage.
For now, however, it was barren, the freshly piled earth still soft. Sarene
hadn’t needed to lobby hard for its creation. They all now knew the debt they
owed to the man buried within. Hrathen of Fjorden, high priest and holy gyorn
of Shu-Dereth. They had left his funeral until the last.

Sarene turned to address the crowd, Raoden at their front. “I will not speak
long,” she said, “for though I had more contact with the man Hrathen than most
of you, I did not know him. I always assumed that I could come to understand a
man through being his enemy, and I thought that I understood Hrathen—his sense
of duty, his powerful will, and his determination to save us from ourselves.

“I did not see his internal conflict. I could not know the man whose heart
drove him, eventually, to reject all that he had once believed in the name of
what he knew was right. I never knew the Hrathen who placed the lives of others
ahead of his own ambition. These things were hidden, but in the end they are
what proved most important to him.

“When you remember this man, think not of an enemy. Think of a man who longed
to protect Arelon and its people. Think of the man he became, the hero who
saved your king. My husband and I would have been killed by the monster of
Dakhor, had Hrathen not arrived to protect us.

“Most important, remember Hrathen as the one who gave that vital warning that
saved Teod’s fleets. If the armada had fallen, then be assured that Teod
wouldn’t have been the only country to suffer. Wyrn’s armies would have fallen
on Arelon, Elantris or no Elantris, and you all would be fighting for survival
at this moment—if, that is, you were even still alive.”

Sarene paused, letting her eyes linger on the grave. At its head stood a
carefully arranged stack of bloodred armor. Hrathen’s cloak hung on the end of
a sword, its point driven into the soft earth. The crimson cape flapped in the
wind.

“No,” Sarene said. “When you speak of this man, let it be known that he died in
our defense. Let it be said that after all else, Hrathen, gyorn of Shu-Dereth,
was not our enemy. He was our savior.”

