# Part 2 - CHAPTER 31
[Metadata]: # {03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 31
Saolin didn’t open his eyes as he sank into the pool, but he did stop mumbling.
He bobbed for a moment, then took a sharp breath, reaching his hands toward the
heavens. After that, he melted into the blue liquid.

Raoden watched the process solemnly. They had waited for three days, hoping
against all that the grizzled soldier would regain his wits. He had not. They
had brought him to the pool partially because his wound was so terrible, and
partially because Raoden knew that he could never enter the Hall of the Fallen
with Saolin inside. The mantra “I have failed my lord Spirit” would have been
too much.

“Come, sule,” Galladon said. “He’s gone.”

“Yes, he is,” Raoden said. And it’s my fault. For once, the burdens and agonies
of his body seemed insignificant compared with those of his soul.


They returned to him. First as a trickle, then as a flood. It took days for
them to realize, and believe, that Sarene wasn’t going to return. No more
handouts—no more eating, waiting, and eating again. Then they came back, as if
suddenly awakened from a stupor, remembering that once—not so long ago—there
had been purpose in their lives.

Raoden turned them back to their old jobs—cleaning, farming, and building. With
proper tools and materials, the work became less an exercise in intentional
time wasting and more a productive means of rebuilding New Elantris. Piecemeal
roofs were replaced with more durable, functional creations. Additional seed
corn provided a chance for a second planting, one much larger and ambitious
than the first. The short wall around New Elantris was reinforced and
expanded—though, for the moment, Shaor’s men remained quiet. Raoden knew,
however, that the food they had gathered from Sarene’s cart wouldn’t last long.
The wildmen would return.

The numbers that came to him after Sarene were much greater than those that had
followed him before. Raoden was forced to acknowledge that despite the
temporary setbacks they caused, Sarene’s excursions into Elantris had
ultimately been beneficial. She had proven to the people that no matter how
much their hunger hurt, simply feeding their bellies wasn’t enough. Joy was
more than just an absence of discomfort.

So, when they came back to him, they no longer worked for food. They worked
because they feared what they would become if they did not.


“He shouldn’t be here, Galladon,” Raoden said as he studied the Fjordell priest
from atop their garden-roof observation point.

“You’re certain that’s the gyorn?” Galladon asked.

“He says so in that prayer of his. Besides, he’s definitely Fjordell. That
frame of his is too large to be Aonic.”

“Fjordells don’t get taken by the Shaod,” Galladon said stubbornly. “Only
people from Arelon, Teod, and occasionally Duladel.”

“I know,” Raoden said, sitting back in frustration. “Perhaps it’s just
percentages. There aren’t many Fjordells in Arelon—perhaps that’s why they
never get taken.”

Galladon shook his head. “Then why don’t Jindos ever get taken? There’s plenty
of them living along the spice route.”

“I don’t know,” Raoden said.

“Listen to him pray, sule,” Galladon said scoffingly. “As if the rest of us
hadn’t tried that already.”

“I wonder how long he’ll wait.”

“Three days already,” Galladon said. “Must be starting to get hungry. Kolo?”

Raoden nodded. Even after three days of almost continual prayer, the gyorn’s
voice was firm. Everything else considered, Raoden had to respect the man’s
determination.

“Well, when he finally realizes he’s not getting anywhere, we’ll invite him to
join us,” Raoden said.

“Trouble, sule,” Galladon warned. Raoden followed the Dula’s gesture, picking
out a few huddled shapes in the shadows to the gyorn’s left.

Raoden cursed, watching Shaor’s men slink from the alleyway. Apparently, their
food had run out even more quickly than Raoden had assumed. They had probably
returned to the courtyard to look for scraps, but they found something much
more promising: the still full basket of food at the gyorn’s feet.

“Come on,” Raoden urged, turning to climb down from the roof. There was a time
when Shaor’s men might have gone directly for the food. However, recent events
had changed the wild men. They had begun wounding indiscriminately—as if they
had realized that the fewer mouths opposed them, the more likely they were to
get food.

“Doloken burn me for helping a gyorn,” Galladon muttered, following.
Unfortunately, he and Raoden moved too slowly. They were too late … to save
Shaor’s men.

Raoden rounded the side of the building as the first wildman jumped at the
gyorn’s back. The Fjordell leapt to his feet, spinning with near-inhuman speed
and catching Shaor’s man by the head. There was a snap as the gyorn cracked his
opponent’s neck, then threw him against the wooden gate. The other two attacked
in unison. One met with a powerful spinning kick that tossed him across the
courtyard like a pile of rags. The other received three successive punches to
the face, then a kick to the midsection. The madman’s howl of rage cut off with
a whine as the gyorn placed another kick at the side of the man’s head.

Raoden stumbled to a halt, mouth half open.

Galladon snorted. “Should have realized. Derethi priests can take care of
themselves. Kolo?”

Raoden nodded slowly, watching the priest return smoothly to his knees and
resume his prayers. Raoden had heard that all Derethi priests were trained in
the infamous monasteries of Fjorden, where they were required to undergo
vigorous physical training. However, he hadn’t realized that a middle-aged
gyorn would maintain his skills.

The two wildmen who could still move crawled away, while the other one lay
where the gyorn had tossed him, whimpering pitifully with his broken neck.

“It’s a waste,” Raoden whispered. “We could have used those men back in New
Elantris.”

“I don’t see what we can do about it,” Galladon said with a shake of his head.

Raoden stood, turning toward the market section of Elantris. “I do,” he said
with determination.


They penetrated Shaor’s territory so quickly and directly that they got nearly
to the bank before they were noticed. Raoden didn’t respond when Shaor’s men
began to howl—he continued to walk, resolute, focused on his goal. Galladon,
Karata, and Dashe—Karata’s former second was one of the few experienced
fighting men left in Raoden’s camp—accompanied him. Each nervously carried a
medium-sized sack in his arms.

Shaor’s men followed them, cutting off their escape. After the losses they had
received over the last few weeks, there could only be a couple of dozen men
left in Shaor’s band, but those few seemed to multiply and shift in the
shadows.

Galladon shot Raoden an apprehensive look. Raoden could tell what he was
thinking. You’d better be sure as Doloken you know what you’re doing, sule….

Raoden set his jaw firmly. He had only a single hope—his belief in the rational
nature of the human soul.

Shaor was much the same as before. Though her men must have delivered some of
their spoils to her, one would never have known it from her screaming. “Bring
me food!” she wailed, her voice audible long before they entered the bank. “I
want food!”

Raoden led his small group into the bank. Shaor’s remaining followers filed in
behind, approaching slowly, waiting for their goddess’s inevitable command to
kill the intruders.

Raoden moved first. He nodded to the others, and each dropped their sacks. Corn
spilled across the uneven floor of the bank, mixing with the slime and falling
into cracks and crevices. Howls sounded behind them, and Raoden waved his
people to the side as Shaor’s men descended upon the corn.

“Kill them!” Shaor yelled belatedly, but her followers were too busy stuffing
their mouths.

Raoden and the others left as simply as they had come.


The first one approached New Elantris barely a few hours later. Raoden stood
beside the large fire they had kindled atop one of the taller buildings. The
blaze required many of their precious wood scraps, and Galladon had been
against it from the start. Raoden ignored the objections. Shaor’s men needed to
see the fire to make the connection—the leap that would bring them back to
sensibility.

The first wild man appeared out of the evening’s darkness. He moved furtively,
his stance nervous and bestial. He cradled a ripped sack, a couple of handfuls
of grain clutched within.

Raoden motioned for his warriors to move back. “What do you want?” he asked the
madman.

The man stared back dumbly.

“I know you understand me,” Raoden said. “You can’t have been in here long—six
months at the most. That’s not enough to forget language, even if you want to
convince yourself that it is.”

The man held up the sack, his hands glistening with slime.

“What?” Raoden insisted.

“Cook,” the man finally said.

The grain they’d dropped had been seed corn, hardened over the winter to be
planted in spring. Though they had most certainly tried, Shaor’s men wouldn’t
have been able to chew or swallow it without great pain.

And so, Raoden had hoped that somewhere in the back of their abandoned minds,
these men would remember that they had once been human. Hoped that they would
recall civilization, and the ability to cook. Hoped they would confront their
humanity.

“I won’t cook your food for you,” Raoden said. “But I will let you do it
yourself.”

