# PART 3 - CHAPTER 57
[Metadata]: # {04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {04.03}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 57
Hrathen watched as “Raoden” strode into the throne room. No one challenged the
impostor’s claim—this man, Raoden or not, would soon be king. Sarene’s move was
a brilliant stroke. Telrii assassinated, a pretender on the throne … Hrathen’s
plans were in serious danger.

Hrathen eyed this pretender, feeling an odd surge of hatred as he saw the way
that Sarene looked at the man. Hrathen could see the love in her eyes. Could
that foolish adoration really be serious? Where had this man come from so
suddenly? And how had he managed to capture Sarene, who was normally so
discerning?

Regardless, she had apparently given her heart to him. Logically, Hrathen knew
his jealousy was foolish. Hrathen’s own relationship with the girl had been one
of antagonism, not of affection. Why should he be jealous of another man? No,
Hrathen needed to be levelheaded. Only one month remained until the armies of
united Derethi would wash over Arelon, slaughtering the people—Sarene included.
Hrathen had to work quickly if he was going to find a way to convert the
kingdom with so little time remaining.

Hrathen pulled back as Raoden began the coronation. Many a king ordered his
enemies’ incarceration as a first royal decree, and Hrathen didn’t want his
presence to give the impostor a reminder.

He was, however, close enough to the front to witness the transformation.
Hrathen was confused by the sight; the Shaod was supposed to come suddenly, but
not that suddenly. The oddity forced him to reconsider his assumptions. What if
Raoden hadn’t died? What if he had been hiding in Elantris all along? Hrathen
had found a way to feign being an Elantrian. What if this man had done the
same?

Hrathen was shocked by the transformation, but he was even more shocked when
the people of Arelon did nothing about it. Sarene gave her speech, and people
just stood dully. They did not stop her from crowning the Elantrian king.

Hrathen felt sick. He turned, and by happenstance he saw Dilaf slipping away
from the crowd. Hrathen trailed behind—for once, he shared Dilaf’s disgust. He
was amazed that the people of Arelon could act so illogically.

At that moment, Hrathen realized his mistake. Dilaf had been right: If Hrathen
had focused more on Elantris, the people would have been too disgusted to grant
Raoden kingship. Hrathen had neglected to instill in his followers a true sense
of Jaddeth’s holy will. He had used popularity to convert, rather than
doctrine. The result was a fickle congregation, capable of returning to their
old ways as quickly as they had left.

It is this cursed deadline! Hrathen thought to himself as he strode down Kae’s
quickly darkening evening streets. Three months was not enough time to build a
stable following.

Ahead of him, Dilaf turned down a side street. Hrathen paused. That wasn’t the
way to the chapel—it was the way to the center of the city. Curiosity
overcoming brooding, Hrathen turned to follow the arteth, staying far enough
behind to diffuse the clicking of his armored feet on the cobblestones. He
needn’t have worried; the arteth strode through the blackening night with
single-minded purpose, not bothering to look back.

Dusk had almost passed, and darkness cloaked the market square. Hrathen lost
track of Dilaf in the waning light and stopped, looking around at the quiet
tents.

Suddenly, lights appeared around him.

A hundred torches winked into existence from within dozens of different tents.
Hrathen frowned, and then his eyes opened wide as men began to pour from the
tents, torchlight glistening off bare backs.

Hrathen stumbled back in horror. He knew those twisted figures. Arms like
knotted tree branches. Skin pulled tight over strange ridges and unspoken
symbols.

Though the night was quiet, memories howled in Hrathen’s ears. The tents and
merchants had been a ruse. That was why so many Fjordells had come to the
Arelene Market despite the political chaos, and that was why they had stayed
when others left. They weren’t merchants at all, but warriors. The invasion of
Arelon was to begin a month early.

Wyrn had sent the monks of Dakhor.

