# Part 2 - CHAPTER 35
[Metadata]: # {03.08}
[Descriptor]: # {03.08}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 35
“A month and a half and you’ve already dethroned the king. Never let it be said
that you don’t work quickly, ’Ene.” Her father’s words were jovial, though his
glowing face betrayed concern. He knew, as she did, that chaos in the wake of
an uprooted government could be dangerous for both peasant and noble.

“Well, it isn’t as if I intended it,” Sarene protested. “Merciful Domi, I tried
to save the fool. He shouldn’t have gotten mixed up in the Mysteries.”

Her father chuckled. “I should never have sent you over there. You were bad
enough when we let you visit our enemies.”

“You didn’t ‘send’ me here, Father,” Sarene said. “This was my idea.”

“I’m glad to know that my opinion counts for so much in my daughter’s eyes,”
Eventeo said.

Sarene felt herself soften. “I’m sorry, Father,” she said with a sigh. “I’ve
been on edge ever since … you don’t know how horrible it was.”

“Oh, I do—unfortunately. How in Domi’s name could a monstrosity like the
Mysteries come from a religion as innocent as Jesker?”

“The same way Shu-Dereth and Shu-Korath could both come from the teachings of
one little Jindoeese man,” Sarene replied with a shake of her head.

Eventeo sighed. “So, Iadon is dead?”

“You’ve heard?” Sarene asked with surprise.

“I sent a few new spies into Arelon recently, ’Ene,” her father said. “I’m not
going to leave my daughter alone in a country on the edge of destruction
without at least keeping an eye on her.”

“Who?” Sarene asked curiously.

“You don’t need to know,” her father said.

“They must have a Seon,” Sarene mused. “Otherwise you wouldn’t know about
Iadon—he only hanged himself last night.”

“I’m not going to tell you, ’Ene,” Eventeo said with an amused tone. “If you
knew who it was, you would inevitably decide to appropriate him for your own
purposes.”

“Fine,” Sarene said. “But when this is all over, you’d better tell me who it
was.”

“You don’t know him.”

“Fine,” Sarene repeated, feigning indifference.

Her father laughed. “So, tell me about Iadon. How in Domi’s name did he get a
rope?”

“Lord Eondel must have arranged it,” Sarene guessed, resting her elbows on her
desk. “The count thinks like a warrior, and this was a very efficient solution.
We don’t have to force an abdication, and suicide restored some dignity to the
monarchy.”

“Bloodthirsty this afternoon, are we ’Ene?”

Sarene shivered. “You didn’t see it, Father. The king didn’t just murder that
girl, he … enjoyed doing it.”

“Ah,” Eventeo said. “My sources say Duke Telrii will probably take the throne.”

“Not if we can help it,” Sarene said. “Telrii is even worse than Iadon. Even if
he weren’t a Derethi sympathizer, he’d make a terrible king.”

“’Ene, a civil war will help no one.”

“It won’t come to that, Father,” Sarene promised. “You don’t understand how
unmilitaristically minded these people are. They lived for centuries under
Elantrian protection—they think the presence of a few overweight guards on the
city wall is enough to dissuade invaders. Their only real troops belong to Lord
Eondel’s legion, which he’s ordered to gather at Kae. We might just be able to
get Roial crowned before anyone’s the wiser.”

“You’ve united behind him, then?”

“He’s the only one rich enough to challenge Telrii,” Sarene explained. “I
didn’t have enough time to stamp out Iadon’s foolish monetary-title system.
That is what the people are accustomed to, and so we’re going to have to use
it, for now.”

A knock at the door was followed by a maid with a lunch tray. Sarene had
returned to live in the palace after spending only one night in Roial’s manor,
despite her allies’ concerns. The palace was a symbol, and she hoped it would
lend her authority. The maid put the tray on the table and departed.

“Was that lunch?” Her father seemed to have a sixth sense regarding food.

“Yes,” Sarene said, cutting herself a piece of cornbread.

“Is it good?”

Sarene smiled. “You shouldn’t ask, Father. You’ll only upset yourself.”

Eventeo sighed. “I know. Your mother has a new fascination—Hraggish weed soup.”

“Is it good?” Sarene asked. Her mother was the daughter of a Teoish diplomat,
and had spent most of her growing years in Jindo. As a result, she had picked
up some very odd dietary preferences—ones she forced upon the entire palace and
its staff.

“It’s horrible.”

“Pity,” Sarene said. “Now, where did I put that butter?”

Her father groaned.

“Father,” Sarene chided. “You know you need to lose weight.” While the king was
nowhere as large—in either muscle or fat—as his brother Kiin, he was more
portly than he was stocky.

“I don’t see why,” Eventeo said. “Did you know that in Duladel they consider
fat people attractive? They don’t care about Jindoeese notions of health, and
they’re perfectly happy. Besides, where has it been proven that butter makes
you fat?”

“You now what the Jindos say, Father,” Sarene said. “If it burns, it isn’t
healthy.”

Eventeo sighed. “I haven’t had a cup of wine in ten years.”

“I know, Father. I used to live with you, remember?”

“Yes, but she didn’t make you stay away from alcohol.”

“I’m not overweight,” Sarene pointed out. “Alcohol burns.”

“So does Hraggish weed soup,” Eventeo replied, his voice turning slightly
impish. “At least, it does if you dry it out. I tried.”

Sarene laughed. “I doubt Mother responded very well to that little experiment.”

“She just gave me one of her looks—you know how she is.”

“Yes,” Sarene said, recalling her mother’s features. Sarene had spent far too
much time on diplomatic missions in the last few years to suffer from
homesickness now, but it would be nice to be back in Teod—especially
considering the seemingly endless series of surprises and disasters that had
filled the last few weeks.

“Well, ’Ene, I have to go hold court,” her father finally said. “I’m glad you
occasionally take the time to call your poor old father—especially to let him
know when you’ve overthrown an entire nation. Oh, one more thing. As soon as we
found out about Iadon’s suicide, Seinalan commandeered one of my fastest ships
and set sail for Arelon. He should be arriving within a few days.”

“Seinalan?” Sarene asked with surprise. “What part does the patriarch have in
all this?”

“I don’t know—he wouldn’t tell me. But, I really have to go, ’Ene. I love you.”

“I love you too, Father.”


“I’ve never met the patriarch,” Roial confessed from his seat in Kiin’s dining
room. “Is he much like Father Omin?”

“No,” Sarene said firmly. “Seinalan is a self-serving egotist with enough pride
to make a Derethi gyorn look humble.”

“Princess!” Eondel said with indignation. “You’re talking about the father of
our Church!”

“That doesn’t mean I have to like him,” Sarene said.

Eondel’s face whitened as he reached reflexively for the Aon Omi pendant around
his neck.

Sarene scowled. “You don’t have to ward off evil, Eondel. I’m not going to
reject Domi just because He put a fool in charge of His Church; fools need to
have a chance to serve too.”

Eondel’s eyes turned down toward his hand; then he lowered it with an
embarrassed look. Roial, however, was laughing quietly to himself.

“What?” Sarene demanded.

“It’s just that I was considering something, Sarene,” the old man said with a
smile. “I don’t think I’ve ever met anyone, male or female, that’s quite as
opinionated as you are.”

“Then you’ve lived a sheltered life, my duke,” Sarene informed. “And where is
Lukel, anyway?”

Kiin’s table wasn’t as comfortable as Roial’s study, but for some reason they
all felt most at home in Kiin’s dining room. While most people added personal
touches to their study or reception room, Kiin’s love was his food, and the
dining room the place where he shared his talent. The room’s
decorations—mementos from Kiin’s travels including everything from dried
vegetables to a large, ornamental axe—were comfortingly familiar. There was
never any discussion about it; they all just naturally came to this room when
they met.

They had to wait a few more moments before Lukel finally decided to return.
Eventually, they heard the door open and close, then her cousin’s amiable face
popped in the door. Ahan and Kiin were with him.

“Well?” Sarene asked.

“Telrii definitely intends to take the throne,” Lukel said.

“Not with my legion backing Roial, he won’t,” Eondel said.

“Unfortunately, my dear general,” Ahan said, settling his bulk into a chair,
“your legion isn’t here. You have barely a dozen men at your disposal.”

“It’s more than Telrii has,” Sarene pointed out.

“Not anymore, it isn’t,” Ahan said. “The Elantris City Guard left their posts
to set up camp outside Telrii’s mansion.”

Eondel snorted. “The Guard is hardly more than a club for second sons who want
to pretend they’re important.”

“True,” Ahan said. “But there are over six hundred people in that club. At
fifty-to-one odds, even I would fight against your legion. I’m afraid the
balance of power has shifted in Telrii’s favor.”

“This is bad,” Roial agreed. “Telrii’s superior wealth was a great problem
before, but now …”

“There’s got to be a way,” Lukel said.

“I don’t see one,” Roial confessed.

The men frowned, deep in thought. However, they had all been pondering this
very problem for two days. Even if they’d had the military edge, the other
aristocrats would be hesitant to support Roial, who was the less wealthy man.

As Sarene studied each lord in turn, her eyes fell on Shuden. He seemed
hesitant rather than worried.

“What?” she asked quietly.

“I think I may have a way,” he said tentatively.

“Speak on, man,” Ahan said.

“Well, Sarene is still very wealthy,” Shuden explained. “Raoden left her at
least five hundred thousand deos.”

“We discussed this, Shuden,” Lukel said. “She has a lot of money, but still
less than Roial.”

“True,” Shuden agreed. “But together they would have far more than Telrii.”

The room grew quiet.

“Your marriage contract is technically void, my lady,” Ashe said from behind.
“It dissolved as soon as Iadon killed himself, thereby removing his line from
the throne. The moment someone else becomes king—be it Telrii or Roial—the
treaty will end, and you will cease to be an Arelish princess.”

Shuden nodded. “If you unify your fortune with that of Lord Roial, it would not
only give you the money to stand against Telrii, it would also legitimize the
duke’s claim. Don’t assume that lineage doesn’t matter in Arelon. The nobles
would much rather give their loyalty to one of Iadon’s relatives.”

Roial found her with eyes like those of a benevolent grandfather. “I must admit
that young Shuden has a point. The marriage would be strictly political,
Sarene.”

Sarene took a breath. Things happened so quickly. “I understand, my lord. We
will do what must be done.”

And so, for the second time in only two months, Sarene was engaged to be
married.


“That wasn’t very romantic, I’m afraid,” Roial apologized. The meeting was
over, and Roial had discreetly offered to escort Sarene back to the palace. The
others, including Ashe, had realized that the two needed to talk alone.

“It’s all right, my lord,” Sarene said with a slight smile. “That is how
political marriages are supposed to be—dry, contrived, but extremely useful.”

“You’re very pragmatic.”

“I have to be, my lord.”

Roial frowned. “Must we return to the ‘my lords,’ Sarene? I thought we were
beyond that.”

“I’m sorry, Roial,” Sarene said. “It’s just hard to separate my personal self
from my political self.”

Roial nodded. “I meant what I said, Sarene. This will be strictly a union of
convenience—do not fear yourself obligated in any other way.”

Sarene rode quietly for a moment, listening to the horse’s hooves clop in front
of them. “There will need to be heirs.”

Roial laughed quietly. “No, Sarene. Thank you, but no. Even if such were
physically possible, I couldn’t go through with it. I am an old man, and can’t
possibly survive more than a few years. This time, your wedding contract won’t
forbid you from remarrying after I die. When I’m gone, you can finally choose a
man of your own preference—by then we will have replaced Iadon’s silly system
with something more stable, and your children with the third husband will
inherit the throne.”

Third husband. Roial spoke as if he were already dead, herself a widow twice
over. “Well,” she said, “if things do happen as you suggest, then at least I
wouldn’t have trouble attracting a husband. The throne would be a tempting
prize, even if I were attached to it.”

Roial’s face hardened. “This is something I’ve been meaning to discuss with
you, Sarene.”

“What?”

“You’re far too harsh on yourself. I’ve heard the way you speak—you assume that
nobody wants you.”

“They don’t,” Sarene said flatly. “Trust me.”

Roial shook his head. “You’re an excellent judge of character, Sarene—except
your own. Often, our own opinions of ourselves are the most unrealistic. You
may see yourself as an old maid, child, but you are young, and you are
beautiful. Just because you’ve had misfortune in your past doesn’t mean you
have to give up on your future.”

He looked into her eyes. For all his mischievous shows, this was a man of
sagely understanding. “You will find someone to love you, Sarene,” Roial
promised. “You are a prize—a prize even greater than that throne you’ll be
attached to.”

Sarene blushed, looking down. Still … his words were encouraging. Perhaps she
did have a hope. She would probably be in her mid-thirties, but she would have
at least one more chance to find the right man.

“Anyway,” Roial said. “Our wedding will have to come soon if we are going to
beat Telrii.”

“What do you suggest?”

“The day of Iadon’s funeral,” Roial said. “Technically, Iadon’s reign doesn’t
end until his burial.”

Four days. It would be a short engagement indeed.

“I just worry at the necessity of putting you through all of this,” Roial said.
“It can’t be easy to consider marrying such a dusty old man.”

Sarene laid her hand on that of the duke, smiling at the sweetness in his tone.
“All things considered, my lord, I think I’m rather fortunate. There are very
few men in this world I would actually consider it an honor to be forced to
marry.”

Roial smiled a wrinkly smile, his eyes twinkling. “It’s a shame Ahan’s already
married, isn’t it?”

Sarene removed her hand and swatted him on the shoulder. “I’ve had enough
emotional shocks for one week, Roial—I’ll kindly thank you not to make me sick
to my stomach as well.”

The duke laughed at length. When his merriment died down, however, another
sound replaced it—yelling. Sarene tensed, but the yells weren’t ones of anger
or pain. They seemed joyful and excited. Confused, she looked out the carriage
window and saw a crowd of people surging through a cross street.

“What in the name of Domi is that?” Roial asked.

Their carriage drew closer, allowing Sarene to make out a tall form at the
center of the crowd.

Sarene grew numb. “But … but that’s impossible!”

“What?” Roial asked, squinting.

“It’s Hrathen,” Sarene said with wide eyes, “He’s left Elantris!” Then she
realized something else. The gyorn’s face was unspotted. Flesh-colored.

“Merciful Domi—he’s been healed!”

