# Part 2 - CHAPTER 29
[Metadata]: # {03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 29
“My lady, are you injured?” Ashe’s deep voice was wrought with concern.

Sarene tried to wipe her eyes, but the tears kept coming. “No,” she said
through her quiet sobs. “I’m fine.”

Obviously unconvinced, the Seon floated around her in a slow semicircle,
searching for any outward signs of injury. Houses and shops passed quickly
beyond the carriage window as the vehicle sped them back to the palace. Eondel,
the carriage’s owner, had stayed behind at the gate.

“My lady,” Ashe said, his tone frank. “What is wrong?”

“I was right, Ashe,” she said, trying to laugh at her stupidity through the
tears. “I should be happy; I was right about him all along.”

“Spirit?”

Sarene nodded, then rested her head against the back of the seat, staring up at
the carriage’s ceiling. “He was withholding food from the people. You should
have seen them, Ashe—their starvation had driven them mad. Spirit’s warriors
kept them away from the courtyard, but they must have finally gotten hungry
enough to fight back. I can’t imagine how they did it—they didn’t have armor or
swords, just their hunger. He didn’t even try to deny it. He just stood there,
watching his schemes fall apart, a stash of hoarded food at his feet.”

Sarene raised her hands to her face, holding her head in frustration. “Why am I
so stupid?”

Ashe pulsed with concern.

“I knew what he was doing. Why does it bother me to find out I was right?”
Sarene took a deep breath, but it caught in her throat. Ashe had been right:
She had allowed herself to get too caught up in Spirit and Elantris. She had
become too emotionally involved to act on her suspicions.

The result was a disaster. The nobility had responded to Elantrian pain and
wretchedness. Long-held prejudices had weakened, the Korathi teachings of
temperate understanding proving their influence. Now, however, the nobility
would only remember that they had been attacked. Sarene could only thank Domi
that none of them had been hurt.

Sarene’s thinking was interrupted by the sounds of armor clinking outside of
her window. Recouping her composure the best she could, Sarene poked her head
out the window to see what was causing the ruckus. A double line of men in
chain and leather marched past her carriage, their livery black and red. It was
Iadon’s personal guard, and they were heading for Elantris.

Sarene felt a chill as she watched the grim-faced warriors. “Idos Domi,” she
whispered. There was hardness in these men’s eyes—they were prepared to kill.
To slaughter.


At first, the coachman resisted Sarene’s commands that he drive more quickly,
but few men found it easy to resist a determined Teoish princess. They arrived
at the palace shortly, and Sarene hopped from the carriage without waiting for
the coachman to pull down the steps.

Her reputation with the palace staff was growing, and most knew to get out of
her way as she stalked through the hallways. The guards at Iadon’s study were
also growing used to her, and they simply sighed resignedly as they pushed open
the doors for her.

The king’s face fell visibly as she entered. “Whatever it is, it will wait. We
have a crisis—”

Sarene slammed her open palms down on Iadon’s desk, shaking the wood and
knocking over the penstand. “What in the blessed name of Domi do you think
you’re doing?”

Iadon reddened with frustrated anger, standing. “There has been an attack on
members of my court! It is my duty to respond.”

“Don’t preach to me about duty, Iadon,” Sarene countered. “You’ve been looking
for an excuse to destroy Elantris for ten years now—only the people’s
superstitions kept you back.”

“Your point?” he asked coldly.

“I am not going to be the one who gives you that excuse!” she said. “Withdraw
your men.”

Iadon snorted. “You of all people should appreciate the quickness of my
response, Princess. It was your honor that was slighted by that attack.”

“I’m perfectly capable of protecting my own honor, Iadon. Those troops move in
direct opposition to everything I’ve accomplished these last few weeks.”

“It was a fool’s project, anyway,” Iadon declared, dropping a collection of
papers to the table. The top sheet ruffled from the motion, and Sarene could
read its scribbled commands. The words “Elantris’s” and “extermination” stood
out, stark and foreboding.

“Go back to your room, Sarene,” the king said. “This will all be over in a
matter of hours.”

For the first time Sarene realized how she must look, her face red and mussed
from the tears, her simple monochrome dress stained with sweat and Elantris
grime, and her disheveled hair pulled back into an unraveling braid.

The moment of insecurity disappeared as she looked back at the king and saw the
satisfaction in his eyes. He would massacre the entire group of starving,
helpless people in Elantris. He would kill Spirit. All because of her.

“You listen to me, Iadon,” Sarene said, her voice sharp and cold. She held the
king’s eyes, drawing upon her nearly six-foot height to tower over the shorter
man. “You will withdraw your soldiers from Elantris. You will leave those
people alone. Otherwise, I will begin to tell people what I know about you.”

Iadon snorted.

“Defiance, Iadon?” she asked. “I think you’ll feel differently when everyone
knows the truth. You know they already think you a fool. They pretend to obey
you, but you know—you know in that whispering part of your heart that they mock
you with their obedience. You think they didn’t hear about your lost ships? You
think they weren’t laughing to themselves at how their king would soon be as
poor as a baron? Oh they knew. How will you face them, Iadon, when they learn
how you really survived? When I show them how I rescued your income, how I gave
you the contracts in Teod, how I saved your crown.”

As she spoke, she punctuated each remark by stabbing her finger at his chest.
Beads of sweat appeared on his brow as he began to crack beneath her unyielding
gaze.

“You are a fool, Iadon,” she hissed. “I know it, your nobles know it, and the
world knows it. You have taken a great nation and squashed it in your greedy
hands. You have enslaved the people and you have defiled Arelon’s honor. And,
despite it all, your country grows poorer. Even you, the king, are so destitute
that only a gift from Teod lets you keep your crown.”

Iadon shied away unnerved. The king seemed to shrink, his arrogant act
withering before her anger.

“How will it look, Iadon?” she whispered. “How will it feel to have the entire
court know you are indebted to a woman? A foolish girl at that? You would be
revealed. Everyone would know what you are. Nothing more than an insecure,
trivial, incapable invalid.”

Iadon plopped down into his seat. Sarene handed him a pen.

“Repeal it,” she demanded.

His fingers shook as he scribbled a countermand at the bottom of the page, then
stamped it with his personal seal.

Sarene snatched up the paper, then stalked from the room. “Ashe, stop those
soldiers! Tell them new orders are coming.”

“Yes, my lady,” the Seon replied, shooting down the corridor toward a window,
moving more quickly than even a galloping horse.

“You!” Sarene ordered, slapping the rolled-up sheet of paper against a guard’s
breastplate. “Take this to Elantris.”

The man accepted the paper uncertainly.

“Run!” Sarene ordered.

He did.

Sarene folded her arms, watching the man dash down the hallway. Then she turned
to regard the second guard. He began to twitch nervously beneath her gaze.

“Um, I’ll make sure he gets there,” the man stuttered, then took off behind his
companion.

Sarene stood for a moment, then turned back to the king’s study, pulling the
doors closed. She was left with the sight of Iadon, slumped in his chair,
elbows on the desktop and head cradled in his hands. The king was sobbing
quietly to himself.


By the time Sarene reached Elantris, the new orders had long since arrived.
Iadon’s guard stood uncertainly before the gates. She told them to go home, but
their captain refused, claiming that he had received orders not to attack, but
he didn’t have any orders to return. A short time later a courier arrived,
delivering commands to do just that. The captain shot her an irritable look,
then ordered his men back to the palace.

Sarene stayed a little longer, making the strenuous climb to the top of the
wall to gaze down at the courtyard. Her food cart stood abandoned in the center
of the square, overturned with broken boxes running in a jagged line before it.
There were bodies, too—fallen members of the attacking party, their corpses
rotting in the muck.

Sarene froze, her muscles stiffening. One of the corpses was still moving. She
leaned over the stone railing, staring down at the fallen man. The distance was
great, but she could still see the distinct lines of the man’s legs—lying a
dozen feet from his chest. Some powerful blow had separated him at the waist.
There was no way he could have survived such a wound. Yet, insanely, his arms
waved in the air with hopeless randomness.

“Merciful Domi,” Sarene whispered, her hand rising to her breast, her fingers
seeking out her small Korathi pendant. She scanned the courtyard with
disbelieving eyes. Some of the other bodies were moving as well, despite
horrible wounds.

They say that the Elantrians are dead, she realized. That they are the deceased
whose minds refuse to rest. Her eyes open for the first time, Sarene realized
how the Elantrians survived without food. They didn’t need to eat.

But, why then did they?

Sarene shook her head, trying to clear her mind of both confusion and the
struggling corpses below. As she did so, her eyes fell on another figure. It
knelt in the shadow of Elantris’s wall, its posture somehow bespeaking
incredible sorrow. Sarene felt herself drawn along the walkway in the direction
of the form, her hand dragging along the stone railing. She stopped when she
stood above him.

Somehow she knew the figure belonged to Spirit. He was clutching a body in his
arms, rocking back and forth with his head bowed. The message was clear: Even a
tyrant could love those who followed him.

I saved you, Sarene thought. The king would have destroyed you, but I saved
your life. It wasn’t for you, Spirit. It was for all those poor people that you
rule over.

Spirit didn’t notice her.

She tried to remain angry at him. However, looking down and sensing his agony,
she couldn’t lie—even to herself. The day’s events disturbed her for several
reasons. She was angry at having her plans disrupted. She regretted that she
would no longer be able to feed the struggling Elantrians. She was unhappy with
the way the aristocracy would see Elantris.

But she was also saddened that she would never be able to see him again. Tyrant
or not, he had seemed like a good man. Perhaps … perhaps only a tyrant could
lead in a place like Elantris. Perhaps he was the best that the people had.

Regardless, she would probably never see him again. She would never again look
into those eyes that, despite the emaciated form of his body, seemed so vibrant
and alive. There was a complexity in them that she would never be able to
unravel.

It was over.


She sought refuge in the only place in Kae she felt safe. Kiin let her in, then
held her as she fell into his arms. It was a perfectly humiliating end to a
very emotional day. However, the hug was worth it. She had decided as a child
that her uncle was very good at hugging, his broad arms and enormous chest
sufficient to envelope even a tall and gangly girl.

Sarene finally released him, wiping her eyes, disappointed in herself for
crying again. Kiin simply placed a large hand on her shoulder and led her into
the dining room, where the rest of the family sat around the table, even Adien.

Lukel had been talking animatedly, but he cut off as he saw Sarene. “Speak the
name of the lion,” he said, quoting a Jindoeese proverb, “and he will come to
feast.”

Adien’s haunted, slightly unfocused eyes found her face. “Six hundred and
seventy-two steps from here to Elantris,” he whispered.

There was silence for a moment. Then Kaise jumped up onto her chair. “Sarene!
Did they really try and eat you?”

“No, Kaise,” Sarene replied, finding a seat. “They just wanted some of our
food.”

“Kaise, leave your cousin alone,” Daora ordered firmly. “She has had a full
day.”

“And I missed it,” Kaise said sullenly, plopping down in her seat. Then she
turned angry eyes on her brother. “Why did you have to get sick?”

“It wasn’t my fault,” Daorn protested, still a little wan. He didn’t seem very
disappointed to have missed the battle.

“Hush, children,” Daora repeated.

“It’s all right,” Sarene said. “I can talk about it.”

“Well, then,” Lukel said, “is it true?”

“Yes,” Sarene said. “Some Elantrians attacked us, but no one got hurt—at least,
not on our side.”

“No,” Lukel said. “Not that—I meant about the king. Is it true that you yelled
him into submission?”

Sarene grew sick. “That got out?”

Lukel laughed. “They say your voice carried all the way to the main hall. Iadon
still hasn’t left his study.”

“I might have gotten a little carried away,” Sarene said.

“You did the right thing, dear,” Daora assured her. “Iadon is far too
accustomed to having the court jump when he so much as sneezes. He probably
didn’t know what to do when someone actually stood up to him.”

“It wasn’t that hard,” Sarene said with a shake of her head. “Beneath all the
bluster he’s very insecure.”

“Most men are, dear,” Daora said.

Lukel chuckled. “Cousin, what did we ever do without you? Life was so boring
before you decided to sail over and mess it all up for us.”

“I would rather it stayed a little less messed up,” Sarene mumbled. “Iadon
isn’t going to react too well when he recovers.”

“If he gets out of line, you can always just yell at him again,” Lukel said.

“No,” Kiin said, his gruff voice solemn. “She’s right. Monarchs can’t afford to
be reprimanded in public. We might have a much harder time of things when this
is all through.”

“Either that or he’ll just give up and abdicate in favor of Sarene,” Lukel said
with a laugh.

“Just as your father feared,” Ashe’s deep voice noted as he floated in the
window. “He always worried that Arelon wouldn’t be able to deal with you, my
lady.”

Sarene smiled feebly. “Did they go back?”

“They did,” the Seon said. She had sent him to follow Iadon’s guards, in case
they decided to ignore their orders. “The captain immediately went to see the
king. He left when His Majesty refused to open his doors.”

“It wouldn’t do for a soldier to see his king bawling like a child,” Lukel
noted.

“Anyway,” the Seon continued, “I—”

He was interrupted by an insistent knock at the door. Kiin disappeared, then
returned with an eager Lord Shuden.

“My lady,” he said bowing slightly to Sarene. Then he turned to Lukel. “I just
heard some very interesting news.”

“It’s all true,” Lukel said. “We asked Sarene.”

Shuden shook his head. “It isn’t about that.”

Sarene looked up with concern. “What else could possibly happen today?”

Shuden’s eyes twinkled. “You’ll never guess who the Shaod took last night.”

