# Part 2 - CHAPTER 52
[Metadata]: # {03.25}
[Descriptor]: # {03.25}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 52
“Ow!” Raoden complained as Galladon stuck the needle into his cheek.

“Stop whining,” the Dula ordered, pulling the thread tight.

“Karata’s much better at this,” Raoden said. He sat before a mirror in their
rooms at Roial’s mansion, his head cocked to the side, watching Galladon sew
the sword wound.

“Well, wait until we get back to Elantris, then,” the Dula said grumpily,
punctuating the remark by sticking Raoden again.

“No,” Raoden said with a sigh, “I’ve waited too long already—I can feel this
one ripping a little bit each time I smile. Why couldn’t she have hit me on the
arm?”

“Because we’re Elantrians, sule,” Galladon explained. “If a bad thing can
happen to us, it will. You’re lucky to escape with only this. In fact, you’re
lucky you were even able to fight at all with that body of yours.”

“It wasn’t easy,” Raoden said, keeping his head still as the Dula worked.
“That’s why I had to end it so quickly.”

“Well, you fight better than I expected.”

“I had Eondel teach me,” Raoden said. “Back when I was trying to find ways to
prove that my father’s laws were foolish. Eondel chose fencing because he
thought it would be most useful to me, as a politician. I never figured I’d end
up using it to keep my wife from slicing me to pieces.”

Galladon snorted in amusement as he stabbed Raoden again, and Raoden gritted
his teeth against the pain. The doors were all bolted tightly and the drapes
closed, for Raoden had needed to drop his illusionary mask to let Galladon sew.
The duke had been kind enough to board them—Roial seemed to be the only one of
Raoden’s former friends who was intrigued, rather than annoyed, by his Kaloo
personality.

“All right, sule,” Galladon said, tugging the final stitch.

Raoden nodded, looking at himself in the mirror. He had almost begun to think
that the handsome Duladen face belonged to him. That was dangerous. He had to
remember that he was still an Elantrian, with all the weaknesses and pains of
his kind, despite the unconcerned personality he had adopted.

Galladon still wore his mask. The Aon illusions were good as long as Raoden
left them alone. Whether they were drawn in air or in mud, Aons could be
destroyed only by another Elantrian. The books claimed that an Aon inscribed in
dust would continue to function even if the pattern was scuffed or erased.

The illusions were attached to their underclothes, allowing them to change
outfits each day without needing to redraw the Aon. Galladon’s illusion was
that of a nondescript, broad-faced Dula, an image Raoden had found at the back
of his book. Raoden’s face had been much harder to choose.

“How’s my personality?” Raoden asked, pulling out the AonDor book to begin
re-creating his illusion. “Am I convincing?”

Galladon shrugged, taking a seat on Raoden’s bed. “I wouldn’t have believed you
were a Dula, but they seem to. I don’t think you could have made a better
choice, anyway. Kolo?”

Raoden nodded as he drew. The Arelish nobility were too well known, and Sarene
would have immediately seen through any attempt at pretending to be from Teod.
Assuming he wanted to speak Aonic, that left only Duladen. It had been obvious
from his failed attempts to imitate Galladon’s accent that he could never make
a convincing member of the Duladen underclass; even his pronunciation of a
simple word such as “kolo” had sent Galladon into gales of laughter.
Fortunately, there were a good number of lesser-known Duladen citizens—men who
had been mayors of small towns or members of unimportant councils—who spoke
flawless Aonic. Raoden had met many such individuals, and mimicking their
personality required only a sense of flamboyance and a nonchalant attitude.

Getting the clothing had been a little difficult—requiring Raoden, in another
illusion, to go purchase it from the Arelene Market. Since his official
arrival, however, he’d been able to get some better-tailored outfits. He
thought he played a fairly good Dula, though not everyone was convinced.

“I think Sarene’s suspicious,” Raoden said, finishing the Aon and watching it
spin around him and mold to his face.

“She’s a bit more skeptical than most.”

“True,” Raoden said. He intended to tell her who he was as soon as possible,
but she had resisted any attempts by “Kaloo” to get her alone; she’d even
refused the letter he’d sent, returning it unopened.

Fortunately, things were going better with the rest of the nobility. Since
Raoden had left Elantris two days before, entrusting New Elantris to Karata’s
care, he had managed to wiggle his way into Arelish high society with an ease
that surprised even him. The nobles were too busy worrying about Telrii’s rule
to question Kaloo’s background. In fact, they had latched on to him with
startling vigor. Apparently, the sense of free-willed silliness he brought to
gatherings gave the nobles a chance to laugh and forget the chaos of the last
few weeks. So he soon became a necessary guest at any function.

Of course, the true test was going to be getting himself into Roial and
Sarene’s secret meetings. If he was ever going to do any good for Arelon, he
needed to be admitted into that special group. They were the ones who were
working to determine the fate of the country. Galladon was skeptical about
Raoden’s chances—of course, Galladon was skeptical about everything. Raoden
smiled to himself; he was the one who had actually started the meetings. It
seemed ironic that he should now be forced to work to regain admittance.

Kaloo’s face once again masking his own, Raoden pulled on his green
gloves—articles that held the illusion that made his arms seem
non-Elantrian—then spun and twirled for Galladon. “And the magnificent Kaloo
returns.”

“Please, sule, not in private. I come close enough to strangling you in
public.”

Raoden chuckled. “Ah, what a life. Loved by all women, envied by every man.”

Galladon snorted. “Loved by all of the women but one, you mean.”

“Well, she did invite me to spar with her any time I wanted,” Raoden said,
smiling as he walked over to pull open the drapes.

“Even if it was just to get another chance to impale you,” Galladon said. “You
should be glad she hit you on the face, where the illusion covered the wound.
If she’d stabbed through your clothing, it would have been very difficult to
explain why your cut didn’t bleed. Kolo?”

Raoden slid open the balcony door, walking out to look over Roial’s gardens. He
sighed as Galladon joined him. “Tell me this. Why is it that every time I meet
her, Sarene is determined to hate me?”

“Must be love,” Galladon said.

Raoden laughed wryly. “Well, at least this time it’s Kaloo she hates, rather
than the real me. I suppose I can forgive her for that—I’ve almost gotten to
the point where I hate him too.”

A knock came at the door, drawing their attention. Galladon looked at him and
he nodded. Their costumes and faces were complete. Galladon, playing the part
of a servant, walked over and unlocked the door. Roial stood outside.

“My lord,” Raoden said, approaching with outreached arms and a broad smile. “I
trust your day has been as fine as my own!”

“It has, Citizen Kaloo,” Roial said. “May I come in?”

“Certainly, certainly,” Raoden said. “It is, after all, your house. We are so
unspeakably indebted to your kindness that I know I shall never manage to repay
you.”

“Nonsense, citizen,” Roial said. “Though, speaking of payments, you will be
pleased to know that I made a good trade on those lamp mounts you gave me. I
deposited your credit in an account at my bank—it should be enough to see that
you live comfortably for several years at least.”

“Excellent!” Raoden proclaimed. “We shall immediately seek another place to
reside.”

“No, no,” the old duke said, holding up his hands. “Stay here as long as you
wish. I get so few visitors in my old age that even this small house often
seems too large.”

“Then we shall stay as long as you suffer us!” Raoden declared with
characteristically Duladen lack of decorum. It was said that the moment you
invited a Dula to stay, you would never get rid of him—or his family.

“Tell me, citizen,” Roial said, strolling to the balcony. “Where did you find a
dozen lamp mounts made of solid gold?”

“Family heirlooms,” Raoden said. “I pried them off our mansion walls even as
the people burned it down.”

“It must have been horrible,” Roial said, leaning against the balcony rail.

“Worse than horrible,” Raoden said with somberness. Then he smiled. “But those
times are over now, my lord. I have a new country and new friends! You shall
become my family now.”

Roial nodded absently, then shot wary eyes back at Galladon.

“I see something occupies your mind, Lord Roial,” Raoden said. “Fear not to
speak it—good Dendo has been with me since I was born; he is worthy of any
man’s trust.”

Roial nodded, turning back to look out over his estate. “I do not mention the
harsh times in your homeland indiscriminately, citizen. You said they are over
now, but I fear for us the terror is just beginning.”

“Ah, you speak of the problems with the throne,” Raoden said with a click of
his tongue.

“Yes, citizen,” Roial said. “Telrii is not a strong leader. I fear Arelon will
soon fall to Duladel’s fate. We have Fjordell wolves nipping at us, smelling
blood, but our nobility pretends to see nothing more than favored hounds.”

“Oh troubled times,” Raoden said. “Where can I go to find simple peace?”

“Sometimes we must make our own peace, citizen.”

“What do you mean?” Raoden asked, trying to keep the excitement out of his
voice.

“Citizen, I hope I do not injure you when I point out that the others see you
as rather frivolous.”

Raoden laughed. “I hope they see me that way, my lord. I should hate to think
I’ve been playing the fool for nothing.”

Roial smiled. “I sense a wit in you that is not completely masked by your
foppishness, citizen. Tell me, how did you manage to escape from Duladen?”

“I am afraid that is one secret which must remain untold, my lord,” Raoden
said. “There are those who would suffer dearly if their part in my escape
became known.”

Roial nodded. “I understand. The important part is that you survived when your
countrymen did not. Do you know how many refugees came up through the border
when the Republic fell?”

“I am afraid not, my lord,” Raoden replied. “I was a little busy at the time.”

“None,” Roial said. “Not a single one that I know of—yourself excluded. I hear
that the republicans were too shocked to even think of escaping.”

“My people are slow to act, my lord,” Raoden said with upraised hands. “In this
case, our lax manner proved our downfall. The revolution rolled over us while
we were still discussing what to have for dinner.”

“But you escaped.”

“I escaped,” Raoden agreed.

“You have already been through what we might have to suffer, and that makes
your advice valuable—no matter what the others may think.”

“There is a way to escape Duladel’s fate, my lord,” Raoden said cautiously.
“Though it could be dangerous. It would involve a … change in leadership.”

Roial’s eyes narrowed knowingly, and he nodded. Something passed between
them—an understanding of the duke’s offer and Raoden’s willingness.

“You speak of dangerous things,” Roial warned.

“I have been though a lot, my lord. I would not be averse to a little more
danger if it provided me a means of living the rest of my life in peace.”

“I cannot guarantee that will happen,” Roial said.

“And I cannot guarantee that this balcony won’t suddenly collapse, sending us
to our doom. All we can do is count on luck, and our wits, to protect us.”

Roial nodded. “You know the house of the merchant Kiin?”

“Yes.”

“Meet me there tonight at sunset.”

Raoden nodded, and the duke excused himself. As the door shut, Raoden winked at
Galladon. “And you thought I couldn’t do it.”

“I’ll never doubt you again,” Galladon said dryly.

“The secret was Roial, my friend,” Raoden said, pulling the balcony door shut
as he walked back into the room. “He sees through most façades—but, unlike
Sarene, his primary question is not ‘Why is this man trying to fool me?’ but
‘How can I make use of what I know?’ I gave him hints, and he responded.”

Galladon nodded. “Well, you’re in. Now what will you do?”

“Find a way to put Roial on the throne instead of Telrii,” Raoden said, picking
up a cloth and a jar of brown makeup. He smeared some of the makeup on the
cloth, then tucked the cloth in his pocket.

Galladon raised an eyebrow. “And what is that?” he asked, nodding to the cloth.

“Something I hope I won’t have to use.”

