# Part 2 - CHAPTER 40
[Metadata]: # {03.13}
[Descriptor]: # {03.13}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 40
“There should be a way to get up there,” Raoden said, shading his eyes as he
looked at the Elantris city wall. During the last few hours the sun had
emerged, burning away the morning mists. It hadn’t, however, brought much
warmth with it.

Galladon frowned. “I don’t see how, sule. Those walls are rather high.”

“You forget, my friend,” Raoden said, “the walls weren’t made to keep people
in, or even really to keep enemies out. The old Elantrians built stairs and
viewing platforms on the outside of the wall—there should be others in here.”

Galladon grunted. Ever since the Guards had mysteriously disappeared from the
walls, Raoden had wanted to find a way up. The walls belonged to Elantris, not
the outside world. From them, perhaps they could find out what was happening in
Kae.

The Guard’s inattentiveness bothered him. The disappearance was fortunate, in a
way; it lessened the possibility that someone would notice New Elantris.
However, Raoden could only think of a couple of reasons why the soldiers would
leave their post on the walls, and the most likely one was also the most
worrisome. Could the East finally have invaded?

Raoden knew that an invasion was all too possible. Wyrn was too opportunistic
to let a gem like post-Reod Arelon go unmolested forever. Fjorden would attack
eventually. And, if Arelon fell before Wyrn’s holy war, then Elantris would be
destroyed. The Derethi priests would see to that.

Raoden didn’t voice his fears to the other Elantrians, but he did act on them.
If he could place men on the walls, then he would have prior warning of an
army’s approach. Perhaps with advance notice, Raoden would have time to hide
his people. One of the three empty, ruined towns outside of Elantris was
probably their best hope. He would lead them there, if he had the chance.

Assuming he was in any condition to help. The Dor had come against him twice in
the last four days. Fortunately, while the pain was growing stronger, so was
his resolve. Now, at least, he understood.

“There,” Galladon said, pointing to an outcropping.

Raoden nodded. There was a chance the stone column held a stairwell. “Let’s
go.”

They were far from New Elantris, which was positioned in the center of the city
to hide it from prying wall-top eyes. Here, in old Elantris, the slime still
covered all. Raoden smiled: The dirt and grime was becoming repulsive to him
again. For a while he had almost forgotten how disgusting it was.

They didn’t get very far. Soon after Galladon pointed out the stairwell, a
messenger from New Elantris appeared from a side street behind them. The man
approached on quick feet, waving toward Raoden.

“My lord Spirit,” the man said.

“Yes, Tenrao?” Raoden asked, turning.

“A newcomer has been thrown into the city, my lord.”

Raoden nodded. He preferred to greet each newcomer personally. “Shall we go?”
he asked Galladon.

“The walls will wait,” the Dula agreed.


The newcomer turned out to be a she. The woman sat with her back to the gate,
her knees pulled up against her chest, her head buried in her sacrificial
robes.

“She’s a feisty one, my lord,” said Dashe, who had been serving as watcher when
the newcomer arrived. “She screamed at the gate for a full ten minutes after
they tossed her in. Then she threw her offering basket against the wall and
sank down like she is now.”

Raoden nodded. Most newcomers were too stunned to do much besides wander. This
one had strength.

Raoden gestured for the others to remain behind; he didn’t want to make her
nervous by bringing a crowd. He strolled forward until he was directly in front
of her, then squatted down to regard her at eye level.

“Hello, there,” he said affably. “I’m willing to guess you’ve had an awful
day.”

The woman looked up. When he saw her face, Raoden nearly lost his balance in
surprise. Her skin was splotched and her hair was missing, but she had the same
thin face and round, mischievous eyes. Princess Sarene. His wife.

“You don’t know the half of it, Spirit,” she said, a small, ironic smile coming
to her lips.

“I’ll bet I understand more than you think I do,” Raoden said. “I’m here to
make things a little less dreary.”

“What?” Sarene asked, her voice suddenly turning bitter. “Are you going to
steal the offering the priests gave me?”

“Well, I will if you really want me to,” Raoden said. “Though I don’t think we
need it. Someone was kind enough to deliver us several large batches of food a
few weeks back.”

Sarene regarded him with hostile eyes. She hadn’t forgotten his betrayal.

“Come with me,” he urged, holding out his hand.

“I don’t trust you anymore, Spirit.”

“Did you ever?”

Sarene paused, then shook her head. “I wanted to, but I knew that I shouldn’t.”

“Then you never really gave me a chance, did you?” He stretched his hand out a
little closer. “Come with me.”

She regarded him for a moment, studying his eyes. Eventually she reached out
her fine, thin-fingered hand and placed it in his own for the first time,
allowing him to pull her to her feet.

