# Part 2 - CHAPTER 53
[Metadata]: # {03.26}
[Descriptor]: # {03.26}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 53
“What is he doing here?” Sarene demanded, standing at the doorway to Kiin’s
kitchen. The idiot Kaloo sat inside, dressed in a montage of garish reds and
oranges. He spoke animatedly with Kiin and Roial, and apparently hadn’t noticed
her arrival.

Lukel closed the door behind her, then glanced toward the Dula with apparent
distaste. Her cousin was known as one of the wittiest, most colorful men in
Kae. Kaloo’s reputation, however, had quickly eclipsed even Lukel’s, leaving
the young merchant a bitter second.

“Roial invited him for some reason,” Lukel muttered.

“Has Roial gone mad?” Sarene asked, perhaps more loudly than she should have.
“What if that cursed Dula is a spy?”

“A spy for whom?” Kaloo asked merrily. “I don’t think your pompous king has the
political acumen to hire spies—and let me assure you, no matter how much I
exasperate you, Princess, I bother Fjordells even more. That gyorn would rather
stab himself in the chest than pay me for information.”

Sarene flushed with embarrassment, an action that only sent Kaloo into another
peal of laughter.

“I think, Sarene, you will find Citizen Kaloo’s opinions helpful,” Roial said.
“This man sees things differently from Arelenes, and he also has a fresh
opinion of events in Kae. I seem to remember that you yourself used a similar
argument when you first joined us. Do not discount Kaloo’s value because he
happens to be a little more eccentric than you find comfortable.”

Sarene frowned, but allowed herself to be rebuked. The duke’s observations held
weight; it would be helpful to have a new perspective. For some reason Roial
seemed to trust Kaloo. She could sense a mutual respect between them.
Grudgingly, she admitted that perhaps the duke had seen something in Kaloo that
she hadn’t. The Dula had, after all, been staying with Roial for several days.

Ahan was late, as usual. Shuden and Eondel spoke quietly at one end of the
table, their subdued conversation a stark contrast to Kaloo’s vibrant
narrative. Kiin had provided appetizers—crackers with some sort of creamy white
glaze atop them. Despite her insistences that he not prepare dinner, Kiin had
obviously been unable to let this many people congregate without giving them
something to eat. Sarene smiled; she doubted that other treasonous conspiracies
enjoyed gourmet snacks.

A few moments later, Ahan waddled in, not bothering to knock. He plopped
himself down in his customary seat and proceeded to attack the crackers.

“We’re all here, then,” Sarene said, speaking sharply to interrupt Kaloo. All
heads turned toward her as she stood. “I trust you all have given our
predicament much thought. Does anyone want to start?”

“I will,” Ahan said. “Maybe Telrii can be persuaded not to convert to
Shu-Dereth.”

Sarene sighed. “I thought we discussed this, Ahan. Telrii isn’t debating
whether or not to convert; he’s waiting to see how much money he can get out of
Wyrn.”

“If only we had more troops,” Roial said with a shake of his head. “With a
proper army, we could intimidate Telrii. Sarene, what chance is there of
getting aid from Teod?”

“Not much,” Sarene said, sitting. “Remember, my father swore himself to
Shu-Dereth. Besides, Teod has a wonderful navy, but few ground troops. Our
country has a small population—we survive by sinking our enemies before they
land.”

“I hear there are resistance fighters in Duladel,” Shuden suggested. “They
harass caravans occasionally.”

All eyes turned toward Kaloo, who raised his hands palms forward. “Trust me, my
friends, you do not want their help. The men of which you speak are mostly
former republicans, like myself. They can duel one another with fine
proficiency, but a syre isn’t much good against a trained solider, especially
if he has five friends beside him. The resistance only survives because the
Fjordells are too lazy to chase it out of the swamps.”

Shuden frowned. “I thought they were hiding in the caves of the Duladen
Steppes.”

“There are several pockets of them,” Kaloo said smoothly, though Sarene
detected a hint of uncertainty in his eyes. Who are you? she thought as the
conversation moved forward.

“I think we should bring the people into it,” Lukel said. “Telrii has indicated
that he intends to maintain the plantation system. If we encourage the common
people to our cause, they should be willing to rise against him.”

“It could work,” Eondel said. “Lady Sarene’s plan to sharecrop my peasants has
given them a taste of freedom, and they’ve grown far more self-confident over
the last few months. But, it would take a great deal of time—you don’t train
men to fight overnight.”

“Agreed,” Roial said. “Telrii will be Derethi long before we finish, and
Hrathen’s proclamation will be law.”

“I could pretend to be Derethi for a while,” Lukel said. “If only while I’m
planning the king’s demise.”

Sarene shook her head. “If we give Shu-Dereth that kind of foothold in Arelon,
we’ll never be free of it.”

“It’s only a religion, Sarene,” Ahan said. “I think we should focus on real
problems.”

“You don’t think Shu-Dereth is a ‘real problem,’ Ahan?” Sarene asked. “Why
don’t you try and explain that to Jindo and Duladel?”

“She’s right,” Roial said. “Fjorden embraced Shu-Dereth as a vehicle for
domination. If those priests convert Arelon, then Wyrn will rule here no matter
who we put on the throne.”

“Then raising an army of peasants is out?” Shuden asked, bringing the
conversation back on topic.

“Too time-consuming,” Roial said.

“Besides,” Kaloo noted, “I don’t think you want to throw this country into war.
I’ve seen what a bloody revolution can do to a nation—it breaks the people’s
spirit to fight one another. The men in the Elantris City Guard might be fools,
but they are still your countrymen. Their blood would be on your hands.”

Sarene looked up at the comment, made without a hint of Kaloo’s normal
flamboyance. Something about him made her increasingly suspicious.

“Then what?” Lukel said with exasperation. “We can’t fight Telrii and we can’t
wait for him to convert. What do we do?”

“We could kill him,” Eondel said quietly.

“Well?” Sarene asked. She hadn’t expected that suggestion to come out quite so
early in the meeting.

“It has merits,” Kiin agreed, showing a cold dispassion that Sarene had never
seen in him before. “Assassinating Telrii would solve a lot of problems.”

The room fell quiet. Sarene felt a bitter taste in her mouth as she studied the
men. They knew what she knew. She had determined long before the meeting began
that this was the only way.

“Ah, one man’s death to save a nation,” Kaloo whispered.

“It seems the only alternative,” Kiin said with a shake of his head.

“Perhaps,” the Dula said. “Though I wonder if we aren’t underestimating the
people of Arelon.”

“We already discussed this,” Lukel said. “We don’t have enough time to rally
the peasants.”

“Not just the peasants, young Lukel,” Kaloo said, “but the nobility. Have you
not sensed their hesitance to back Telrii? Have you not seen the discomfort in
their eyes? A king with no support is no king at all.”

“And the Guard?” Kiin asked pointedly.

“I wonder if we couldn’t turn them,” Kaloo said. “Certainly they could be
persuaded to see that what they have done is not right.”

“You” had become “we.” Sarene’s brow furled; she almost had it. There was
something familiar about his words….

“It’s an interesting suggestion,” Roial said.

“The Guard and the nobility support Telrii because they don’t see another
alternative,” Kaloo explained. “Lord Roial was shamed by the failed wedding,
and Lady Sarene was thrown into Elantris. Now, however, the embarrassment has
been removed. Perhaps if we can show the Guard the ultimate result of their
decision—occupation by Fjorden and a virtual enslavement of our people—they
will realize that they supported the wrong man. Give men an honest choice, and
I believe they will choose wisely.”

That was it. Sarene knew that faith somewhere—that pure belief in the basic
goodness of all men. And, when she suddenly realized where she had seen it
before, she couldn’t stop herself from jumping up and yelping in surprise.


Raoden cringed, immediately recognizing his mistake. He had let go of Kaloo too
quickly, allowing too much of his true self to show. The others hadn’t noticed
the change, but Sarene—dear suspicious Sarene—hadn’t been so lax. He looked
into her shocked, wide eyes, and knew that she knew. Somehow, despite their
short time together, she had recognized him when his best friends could not.

Uh-oh, he thought to himself.


“Sarene?” Roial asked. “Princess, are you all right?”

Sarene looked around sheepishly, standing in front of her chair. She quickly
forgot her embarrassment, however, as her eyes fell on the furtive Kaloo.

“No, my lord, I don’t think so,” she said. “I think we need a break.”

“We haven’t really been going that long …” Lukel said.

Sarene silenced him with a look, and no one else braved her wrath.

“A break it is,” Roial said slowly.

“Good,” Kiin said, rising from his seat. “I have some Hraggish meatwraps
cooling out back. I’ll go get them.”

Sarene was so flustered that she barely even considered chastising her uncle
for preparing a meal when she had expressly told him not to. She shot Kaloo a
telling look, then stalked away from the table, apparently on her way to the
privy. She waited in Kiin’s study for a moment before the hapless impostor
finally strolled around the corner.

Sarene grabbed his shirt and all but threw him against the wall as she pressed
her face up against his.

“Spirit?” she demanded. “What in the name of Gracious Domi are you doing here?”

Spirit looked to the side apprehensively. “Not so loudly, Sarene! How do you
think those men would react if they discovered they’d been sitting with an
Elantrian?”

“But … how?” she asked, her anger turning to excitement as she realized it
really was him. She reached up to wiggle his nose, which was far too long to be
his real one. She was surprised when her fingers passed through the tip as if
it weren’t there.

“You were right about the Aons, Sarene,” Spirit said quickly. “They’re maps of
Arelon—all I had to do was add one line, and the entire system started working
again.”

“One line?”

“The Chasm,” Spirit explained. “It caused the Reod. It was enough of a change
in the landscape that its presence needs to be reflected in the Aons.”

“It works!” Sarene said. Then she released his shirt and gave him a bitter
punch to the side. “You’ve been lying to me!”

“Ow!” Spirit complained. “Please, no punching—my body doesn’t heal, remember?”

Sarene gasped. “That didn’t …?”

“Change when we fixed AonDor?” Spirit asked. “No. I’m still an Elantrian under
this illusion. There’s something else wrong with AonDor.”

Sarene resisted the urge to punch him again. “Why did you lie to me?”

Spirit smiled. “Oh, and you’re going to try and tell me it wasn’t more fun this
way?”

“Well …”

He laughed. “Only you would consider that a valid excuse, my princess.
Actually, I never got the chance to tell you. Every time I tried to approach
you these last few days, you ducked away—and you ignored the letter I sent you.
I couldn’t just jump in front of you and drop my illusion. I actually came to
Kiin’s last night in the hopes I would see you in the window.”

“You did?” Sarene asked with a smile.

“Ask Galladon,” Raoden said. “He’s back at Roial’s right now eating all of the
duke’s Jaadorian candy. Did you know he had a weakness for sweets?”

“The duke or Galladon?”

“Both. Look, they’re going to wonder what’s taking us so long.”

“Let them,” Sarene said. “All the other women have been mooning over Kaloo so
much, it’s about time I fell into line.”

Spirit began to chuckle, then he caught the dangerous look in her eyes and let
it taper off. “It really was the only way, Sarene. I didn’t have much choice—I
had to act the part.”

“I think you acted it a little too well,” she said. Then she smiled, unable to
remain angry.

He obviously caught the softening in her eyes, for he untensed. “You have to
admit, it was fun at times. I had no idea you were that good of a fencer.”

Sarene smiled slyly. “My talents are plentiful, Spirit. And apparently so are
yours—I had no idea you were that good of an actor. I hated you!”

“It’s nice to feel appreciated,” Spirit said, letting his arms wrap around her.

Suddenly she was aware of his close proximity. His body was room temperature,
and the unnatural coolness was unnerving. However, rather than pulling away,
she let her head rest on his shoulder. “So, why did you come? You should be
back in New Elantris, preparing your people. Why risk coming out into Kae?”

“To find you,” he said.

She smiled. That was the right answer.

“And,” he continued, “to keep you all from slaughtering each other. This
country certainly is a mess, isn’t it?”

Sarene sighed. “And it’s partially my fault.”

Spirit reached up to put his hands on her neck, rotating her head so she could
see into his eyes. His face was different, but those eyes were the same. Deep
and blue. How had she ever mistaken him for anyone else?

“You are not allowed to berate yourself, Sarene,” he said. “I get enough of
that from Galladon. You’ve done a wonderful job here—better than I could have
even imagined. I assumed that these men would stop meeting after I left.”

Sarene paused, shaking herself from the trance of being lost in those eyes.
“What was that you just said? After you left …?”

Voices called from the other room, and Spirit winked at her, his eyes
twinkling. “We need to go back in. “But … let’s just say I have something else
I need to tell you, once the meeting is through and we can speak more
privately.”

She nodded in a half daze. Spirit was in Kae, and AonDor worked. She walked
back into the dining room and sat down at the table, and Spirit entered the
room a few moments later. One chair was still empty, however.

“Where’s Ahan?” Sarene asked.

Kiin frowned. “He left,” he declared in a bitter tone.

Lukel laughed, shooting Sarene a smile. “The count claims that something he ate
didn’t agree with him. He … stepped out.”

“It’s impossible,” Kiin grumbled. “There was nothing in those crackers that
could have upset his stomach.”

“I’m sure it wasn’t the crackers, Uncle,” Sarene said with a smile. “It must be
something he ate before he came.”

Lukel laughed in agreement. “Domi knows, that man eats so much it’s a wonder he
doesn’t end up sick every night by pure laws of probability.”

“Well, we should continue without him,” Roial said. “There’s no telling how
long he will be indisposed.”

“Agreed,” Sarene said, preparing to begin again.

Roial, however, beat her to it. He stood slowly, his old body looking
surprisingly weak. The duke sighed, shaking his head. “If you will all forgive
me, I have something to say.”

The nobles nodded, sensing the duke’s solemnity.

“I will not lie to you; I never once debated whether or not action should be
taken against Telrii. He and I have spent the last ten years as mercantile
enemies. He is a flagrant, wasteful man—he will make a worse king, even, than
Iadon. His willingness to even consider Hrathen’s silly proclamation was the
final proof I needed.

“No, my reason for demanding more time before we met was not to wonder if we
should depose Telrii. The reason I asked for more time was to wait for some …
associates of mine to arrive.”

“Associates?” Sarene said.

“Assassins,” Roial said. “Men I have hired out of Fjorden. Not all the people
of that country are perfectly loyal to their god—some are sworn to gold
instead.”

“Where are they?” Sarene asked.

“Staying in an inn not far away,” Roial said.

“But,” Sarene said with confusion, “just last week you warned us against
letting bloodshed advance our revolt.”

Roial bowed his head. “The guilt was speaking, dear Sarene, for I had already
sent for these men. However, I have changed my mind. This young man from Dula—”

Roial was interrupted by the sound of feet clomping in the entry hallway: Ahan
had returned. Odd, Sarene thought to herself as she turned, I didn’t hear the
front door close.

When she turned, it was not Ahan she found standing in the doorway. Instead,
she was confronted by a group of armed soldiers with a well-dressed man at
their front. King Telrii.

Sarene jumped up, but her yell of surprise was lost among other similar
exclamations. Telrii stepped to the side, allowing a dozen men in Elantris City
Guard uniforms to fill the room. They were followed by the portly Count Ahan.

“Ahan!” Roial said. “What have you done?”

“I finally got you, old man,” the count said gleefully, his jowls shaking. “I
told you I would. Joke about how my caravans to Svorden are doing now, you
cursed old idiot. We’ll see how yours do while you spend the next few years in
prison.”

Roial shook a mournful, white-haired head. “You fool … Didn’t you realize when
this stopped being a game? We aren’t playing with fruits and silks anymore.”

“Protest if you will,” Ahan said with a triumphant shake of his finger. “But
you have to admit, I got you! I’ve been waiting to do this for months—I could
never get Iadon to believe me. Can you believe that he actually thought you
incapable of betraying him? He claimed your old friendship went too deep.”

Roial sighed, regarding Telrii, who was smiling broadly, obviously enjoying the
exchange. “Oh, Ahan,” Roial said. “You have always been so fond of acting
without thought.”

Sarene was stunned. She couldn’t move, or even speak. Traitors were supposed to
be men with dark eyes and sour dispositions. She couldn’t connect that image
with Ahan. He was arrogant and impetuous, but she liked him. How could someone
she liked do something so horrible?

Telrii snapped his fingers, and a soldier stepped forward and rammed his sword
directly into Duke Roial’s belly. Roial gasped, then crumpled with a moan.

“Thus are the judgments of your king,” Telrii said.

Ahan yelled, eyes widening in his fat face. “No! You said prison!” He rushed
past Telrii, blubbering as he knelt beside Roial.

“Did I?” Telrii asked. Then he pointed at two of his soldiers. “You two, gather
some men and find those assassins, then …” He tapped his thin thoughtfully. “…
throw them off the walls of Elantris.”

The two men saluted, then marched from the room.

“The rest of you,” Telrii said, “kill these traitors. Start with the dear
princess. Let it be known that this is the punishment for all those who try to
usurp the throne.”

“No!” Shuden and Eondel yelled in unison.

The soldiers started to move, and Sarene found herself behind a protective wall
formed by Shuden, Eondel, and Lukel. Only Eondel was armed, however, and they
were faced by ten men.

“Interesting you should mention usurpers, Duke Telrii,” a voice said from
across the table. “I was under the impression that the throne belonged to
Iadon’s family.”

Sarene followed the sound. Her eyes found Spirit—or, at least, someone wearing
Spirit’s clothing. He had pale Aonic skin, sandy brown hair, and keen blue
eyes. Spirit’s eyes. But his face didn’t show any signs of Elantris’s taint. He
tossed a rag on the table, and she could see the brown stains on one side—as if
he wanted them to believe he had simply wiped away his makeup to reveal a
completely different face underneath.

Telrii gasped, stumbling back against the wall. “Prince Raoden!” he choked.
“No! You died. They told me you were dead!”

Raoden. Sarene felt numb. She stared at the man Spirit, wondering who he was,
and if she had ever really known him.

Spirit looked at the soldiers. “Would you dare slay the true king of Arelon?”
he demanded.

The Guard members stepped back, faces confused and frightened.

“Men, protect me!” Telrii yelped, turning and scrambling from the room. The
soldiers watched their leader flee, then unceremoniously joined him, leaving
the conspirators alone.

Spirit—Raoden—hopped over the table, brushing past Lukel. He shoved the still
blubbering Ahan out of his way and knelt next to Kiin—the only one who had
thought to try treating Roial’s wound. Sarene watched dumbly from behind, her
senses paralyzed. It was obvious that Kiin’s care would be nowhere near enough
to save the duke. The sword had passed completely through the man’s body,
delivering a painful wound that was certainly mortal.

“Raoden!” Duke Roial gasped. “You have returned to us!”

“Be still, Roial,” Raoden said, stabbing the air with his finger. Light burst
from its tip as he began to draw.

“I should have known it was you,” the duke rambled. “All of that silly talk
about trusting the people. Can you believe I actually started to agree with
you? I should have sent those assassins to do their work the moment they
arrived.”

“You are too good a man for that, Roial,” Spirit said, his voice taut with
emotion.

Roial’s eyes focused, perceiving for the first time the Aon that Spirit was
drawing above him. He breathed out in awe. “Have you returned the beautiful
city as well?”

Spirit didn’t respond, instead concentrating on his Aon. He drew differently
from the way he had before, his fingers moving more dexterously and quickly. He
finished the Aon with a small line near the bottom. It began to glow warmly,
bathing Roial in its light. As Sarene watched, the edges of Roial’s wound
seemed to pull together slightly. A scratch on Roial’s face disappeared, and
several of the liver spots on his scalp faded.

Then the light fell away, the wound still belching blood with each futile pump
of the duke’s dying heart.

Spirit cursed. “It’s too weak,” he said, desperately beginning another Aon.
“And I haven’t studied the healing modifiers! I don’t know how to target just
one part of the body.”

Roial reached up with a quivering arm and grabbed Spirit’s hand. The partially
completed Aon faded away as the duke’s movement caused Spirit to make a
mistake. Spirit did not start again, bowing his head as if weeping.

“Do not cry, my boy,” Roial said. “Your return is blessed. You cannot save this
tired old body, but you can save the kingdom. I will die in peace, knowing you
are here to protect it.”

Spirit cupped the old man’s face in his hands. “You did a wonderful job with
me, Roial,” he whispered, and Sarene felt intensely that she was intruding.
“Without you to watch over me, I would have turned out like my father.”

“No, boy,” Roial said. “You were more like your mother from the start. Domi
bless you.”

Sarene turned away then as the duke’s death turned gruesome, his body spasming
and blood coming to his lips. When she turned back, blinking the tears from her
eyes, Raoden was still kneeling over the old man’s corpse. Finally he took a
deep breath and stood, turning to regard the rest of them with sad—but
firm—eyes. Beside her, Sarene felt Shuden, Eondel, and Lukel fall to their
knees, bowing their heads reverently.

“My king,” Eondel said, speaking for all of them.

“My … husband,” Sarene realized with shock.

