# Part 1 - CHAPTER 15
[Metadata]: # {02.15}
[Descriptor]: # {02.15}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 15
At night, when all melted into a uniform blackness, Hrathen could almost see
Elantris’s grandeur. Silhouetted against the star-filled sky, the fallen
buildings cast off their mantle of despair and became memories; memories of a
city crafted with skill and care, a city where every stone was a piece of
functional art; memories of towers that stretched to the sky—fingers tickling
the stars—and of domes that spread like venerable hills.

And it had all been an illusion. Beneath the greatness had been wreckage, a
filthy sore now exposed. How easy it was to look past heresies gilded with
gold. How simple it had been to assume that outward strength bespoke inward
righteousness.

“Dream on, Elantris,” Hrathen whispered, turning to stroll along the top of the
great wall that enclosed the city. “Remember what you used to be and try to
hide your sins beneath the blanket of darkness. Tomorrow the sun will rise, and
all will be revealed once again.”

“My lord? Did you say something?”

Hrathen turned. He had barely noticed the guard passing him on the wall, the
man’s heavy spear resting over his shoulder and his wan torch nearly dead.

“No. I was only whispering to myself.”

The guard nodded, continuing his rounds. They were growing accustomed to
Hrathen, who had visited Elantris nearly every night this week, pacing its
walls in thought. Though he had an additional purpose behind his visit this
particular time, most nights he simply came to be alone and think. He wasn’t
sure what drew him to the city. Part of it was curiosity. He had never beheld
Elantris in its power, and couldn’t understand how anything—even a city so
grand—had repeatedly withstood the might of Fjorden, first militarily, then
theologically.

He also felt a responsibility toward the people—or whatever they were—that
lived in Elantris. He was using them, holding them up as an enemy to unite his
followers. He felt guilty; the Elantrians he had seen were not devils, but
wretches afflicted as if by a terrible disease. They deserved pity, not
condemnation. Still, his devils they would become, for he knew that it was the
easiest, and most harmless, way to unify Arelon. If he turned the people
against their government, as he had done in Duladel, there would be death. This
way would lead to bloodshed as well, but he hoped much less.

Oh, what burdens we must accept in the service of Your empire, Lord Jaddeth,
Hrathen thought to himself. It didn’t matter that he had acted in the name of
the Church, or that he had saved thousands upon thousands of souls. The
destruction Hrathen had caused in Duladel ground against his soul like a
millstone. People who had trusted him were dead, and an entire society had been
cast into chaos.

But, Jaddeth required sacrifices. What was one man’s conscience when compared
with the glory of His rule? What was a little guilt when a nation was now
unified beneath Jaddeth’s careful eye? Hrathen would ever bear the scars of
what he had done, but it was better that one man suffer than an entire nation
continue in heresy.

Hrathen turned away from Elantris, looking instead toward the twinkling lights
of Kae. Jaddeth had given him another opportunity. This time he would do things
differently. There would be no dangerous revolution, no bloodbath caused by one
class turning against another. Hrathen would apply pressure carefully until
Iadon folded, and another, more agreeable man took his place. The nobility of
Arelon would convert easily, then. The only ones who would truly suffer, the
scapegoats in his strategy, were the Elantrians.

It was a good plan. He was certain he could crush this Arelish monarchy without
much effort; it was already cracked and weak. The people of Arelon were so
oppressed that he could institute a new government swiftly, before they even
received word of Iadon’s fall. No revolution. Everything would be clean.

Unless he made a mistake. He had visited the farms and cities around Kae; he
knew that the people were stressed beyond their ability to bend. If he gave
them too much of a chance, they would rise up and slaughter the entire noble
class. The possibility made him nervous—mostly because he knew that if it
happened, he would make use of it. The logical gyorn within him would ride the
destruction as if it were a fine stallion, using it to make Derethi followers
out of an entire nation.

Hrathen sighed, turning and continuing his stroll. The wall walk here was kept
clean by the guard, but if he strayed too far, he would reach a place covered
with a dark, oily grime. He wasn’t certain what had caused it, but it seemed to
completely coat the wall, once one got away from the central gate area.

Before he reached the grime, however, he spotted the group of men standing
along the wall walk. They were dressed in cloaks, though the night wasn’t cold
enough to require it. Perhaps they thought the garments made them more
nondescript. However, if that was the intention, then perhaps Duke Telrii
should have chosen to wear something other than a rich lavender cloak set with
silver embroidery.

Hrathen shook his head at the materialism. The men we must work with to
accomplish Jaddeth’s goals….

Duke Telrii did not lower his hood, nor did he bow properly, as Hrathen
approached—though, of course, Hrathen hadn’t really expected him to do either.
The duke did, however, nod to his guards, who withdrew to allow them privacy.

Hrathen strolled over to stand beside Duke Telrii, resting against the wall’s
parapet and staring out over the city of Kae. Lights twinkled; so many people
in the city were rich that lamp oil and candles were plentiful. Hrathen had
visited some large cities that grew as dark as Elantris when night fell.

“Aren’t you going to ask why I wanted to meet with you?” Telrii asked.

“You’re having second thoughts about our plan,” Hrathen said simply.

Telrii paused, apparently surprised that Hrathen understood him so readily.
“Yes, well. If you know that already, then perhaps you are having second
thoughts as well.”

“Not at all,” Hrathen said. “Your mannerism—the furtive way you wanted to
meet—was what gave you away.”

Telrii frowned. This was a man accustomed to being dominant in any
conversation. Was that why he was wavering? Had Hrathen offended him? No,
studying Telrii’s eyes, Hrathen could tell that wasn’t it. Telrii had been
eager, at first, to enter into the bargain with Fjorden, and he had certainly
seemed to enjoy throwing his party this evening. What had changed?

I can’t afford to let this opportunity pass, Hrathen thought. If only he had
more time. Fewer than eighty days remained of his three-month deadline. If he
had been given even a year, he could have worked with more delicacy and
precision. Unfortunately, he had no such luxury, and a blunt attack using
Telrii was his best bet for a smooth change in leadership.

“Why don’t you tell me what is bothering you?” Hrathen said.

“Yes, well,” Telrii said carefully. “I’m just not sure that I want to work with
Fjorden.”

Hrathen raised an eyebrow. “You didn’t have that uncertainty before.”

Telrii eyed Hrathen from beneath his hood. In the dark moonlight, it looked
like his birthmark was simply a continuation of the shadows, and it gave his
features an ominous cast—or, at least, it would have, had his extravagant
costume not ruined the effect.

Telrii simply frowned. “I heard some interesting things at the party tonight,
Gyorn. Are you really the one who was assigned to Duladel before its collapse?”

Ah, so that’s it, Hrathen thought. “I was there.”

“And now you’re here,” Telrii said. “You wonder why a nobleman is made
uncomfortable by that news? The entire Republican class—the rulers of
Duladel—were slaughtered in that revolution! And my sources claim that you had
a great deal to do with that.”

Perhaps the man wasn’t as foolish as Hrathen thought. Telrii’s concern was a
valid one; Hrathen would have to speak with delicacy. He nodded toward Telrii’s
guards, who stood a short distance down the wall walk. “Where did you get those
soldiers, my lord?”

Telrii paused. “What does that have to do with anything?”

“Humor me,” Hrathen said.

Telrii turned, glancing at the soldiers. “I recruited them away from the
Elantris City Guard. I hired them to be my bodyguards.”

Hrathen nodded. “And, how many such guards do you employ?”

“Fifteen,” Telrii said.

“How would you judge their skill?”

Telrii shrugged. “Good enough, I suppose. I’ve never actually seen them fight.”

“That’s probably because they never have fought,” Hrathen said. “None of the
soldiers here in Arelon have ever seen combat.”

“What is your point, Gyorn?” Telrii asked testily.

Hrathen turned, nodding toward the Elantris City Guard post, lit in the
distance by torches at the base of the wall. “The Guard is what, five hundred
strong? Perhaps seven hundred? If you include local policing forces and
personal guards, such as your own, there are perhaps a thousand soldiers in the
city of Kae. Added to Lord Eondel’s legion, you still have well below fifteen
hundred professional soldiers in the vicinity.”

“And?” Telrii asked.

Hrathen turned. “Do you really think that Wyrn needs a revolution to take
control of Arelon?”

“Wyrn doesn’t have an army,” Telrii said. “Fjorden only has a basic defense
force.”

“I didn’t speak of Fjorden,” Hrathen said. “I spoke of Wyrn, Regent of all
Creation, leader of Shu-Dereth. Come now, Lord Telrii. Let us be frank. How
many soldiers are there in Hrovell? In Jaador? In Svorden? In the other nations
of the East? These are people who have sworn themselves Derethi. You don’t
think they would rise up at Wyrn’s command?”

Telrii paused.

Hrathen nodded as he saw understanding growing in the duke’s eyes. The man
didn’t understand the half of it. The truth was, Wyrn didn’t even need an army
of foreigners to conquer Arelon. Few outside the high priesthood understood the
second, more powerful force Wyrn had at his call: the monasteries. For
centuries, the Derethi priesthood had been training its monks in war,
assassination, and … other arts. Arelon’s defenses were so weak that a single
monastery’s personnel could probably conquer the country.

Hrathen shivered at the thought of the … monks trained inside of Dakhor
Monastery gaining access to defenseless Arelon. He glanced down at his arm, the
place where—beneath his plate armor—he bore the marks of his time there. These
were not things that could be explained to Telrii, however.

“My lord,” Hrathen said frankly, “I am here in Arelon because Wyrn wants to
give the people a chance for peaceful conversion. If he wanted to crush the
country, he could. Instead, he sent me. My only intention is to find a way to
convert the people of Arelon.”

Telrii nodded slowly.

“The first step in converting this country,” Hrathen said, “is making certain
that the government is favorable to the Derethi cause. This would require a
change in leadership—it would require putting a new king on the throne.”

“I have your word, then?” Telrii said.

“You will have the throne,” Hrathen said.

Telrii nodded—this was obviously what he had been waiting for. Hrathen’s
promises before had been vague, but he could no longer afford to be
uncommitted. His promises gave Telrii verbal proof that Hrathen was trying to
undermine the throne—a calculated risk, but Hrathen was very good at such
calculations.

“There will be those who oppose you,” Telrii warned.

“Such as?”

“The woman, Sarene,” Telrii said. “Her supposed idiocy is an obvious act. My
informants say that she’s taken an unhealthy interest in your activities, and
she was asking about you at my party this evening.”

Telrii’s astuteness surprised Hrathen. The man seemed so pretentious, so
flagrant—yet there was obviously a measure of competence to him. That could be
an advantage or a disadvantage.

“Do not worry about the girl,” Hrathen said. “Just take the money we have
provided and wait. Your opportunity will come soon. You heard of the news the
king received tonight?”

Telrii paused, then nodded.

“Things are moving along as promised,” Hrathen said. “Now we just have to be
patient.”

“Very well,” Telrii said. He still had his reservations, but Hrathen’s
logic—mixed with the outright promise of the throne—had obviously been enough
to sway him. The duke nodded with uncustomary respect to Hrathen. Then he waved
to his guards, moving to walk away.

“Duke Telrii,” Hrathen said, a thought occurring to him.

Telrii paused, turning back.

“Do your soldiers still have friends in the Elantris City Guard?” Hrathen
asked.

Telrii shrugged. “I assume so.”

“Double your men’s pay,” Hrathen said, too quietly for Telrii’s bodyguards to
hear. “Speak well of the Elantris City Guard to them, and give them time off to
spend with their former comrades. It might be … beneficial to your future to
have it known amongst the Guard that you are a man who rewards those that give
him allegiance.”

“You’ll provide the funds to pay my men extra?” Telrii asked carefully.

Hrathen rolled his eyes. “Very well.”

Telrii nodded, then walked off to join his guards.

Hrathen turned, leaning against the wall, looking back out over Kae. He would
have to wait for a short period before returning to the steps and descending.
Telrii was still worried about proclaiming Derethi allegiance, and hadn’t
wanted to be seen openly meeting with Hrathen. The man was overly worried, but
perhaps it was better for him to appear religiously conservative for the
moment.

It disturbed Hrathen that Telrii had mentioned Sarene. For some reason, the
pert Teoish princess had decided to oppose Hrathen, though he had given her no
overt reason to do so. It was ironic, in a way; she didn’t know it, but Hrathen
was her greatest ally, not her dire enemy. Her people would convert one way or
another. Either they would respond to Hrathen’s humane urgings, or they would
be crushed by the Fjordell armies.

Hrathen doubted he would ever be able to convince her of that truth. He saw the
mistrust in her eyes—she would immediately assume that whatever he said was a
lie. She loathed him with the irrational hatred of one who subconsciously knew
that her own faith was inferior. Korathi teachings had withered in every major
nation to the East, just as they would in Arelon and Teod. Shu-Korath was too
weak; it lacked virility. Shu-Dereth was strong and powerful. Like two plants
competing for the same ground, Shu-Dereth would strangle Shu-Korath.

Hrathen shook his head, waited for a safe period of time, then finally turned
to walk back along the wall toward the steps that ran down into Kae. As he
arrived, he heard an echoing thump from below, and he paused in surprise. It
sounded like the city gates had just been closed.

“What was that?” Hrathen asked, approaching several guards who stood in a ring
of glittering torchlight.

The guards shrugged, though one pointed at two forms walking through the
darkened courtyard below. “They must have caught someone trying to escape.”

Hrathen wrinkled his brow. “Does that happen often?”

The guard shook his head. “Most of them are too mindless to try escaping. Every
once in a while, one tries to scurry away, but we always catch ’em.”

“Thank you,” Hrathen said, leaving the guards behind as he began the long
descent to the city below. At the foot of the stairs he found the main
guardhouse. The captain was inside, his eyes drowsy as if he had just awakened.

“Trouble, Captain?” Hrathen asked.

The captain turned with surprise. “Oh, it’s you, Gyorn. No, no trouble. Just
one of my lieutenants doing something he shouldn’t have.”

“Letting some Elantrians back into the city?” Hrathen asked.

The captain frowned, but nodded. Hrathen had met the man several times, and at
each encounter he had fostered the captain’s greed with a few coins. This man
was nearly his.

“Next time, Captain,” Hrathen said, reaching onto his belt and pulling out a
pouch, “I can offer you a different option.”

The captain’s eyes shone as Hrathen began to pull gold wyrnings—stamped with
Wyrn Wulfden’s head—out of the pouch.

“I have been wanting to study one of these Elantrians up close, for theological
reasons,” Hrathen explained, setting a pile of coins on the table. “I would be
appreciative if the next captured Elantrian found his way to my chapel before
being thrown back into the city.”

“That can probably be arranged, my lord,” the captain said, slipping the coins
off the table with an eager hand.

“No one would have to know about it, of course,” Hrathen said.

“Of course, my lord.”

