# Part 2 - CHAPTER 42
[Metadata]: # {03.15}
[Descriptor]: # {03.15}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 42
Hrathen was back in control. Like a hero from the old Svordish epics, he had
descended to the underworld—physically, mentally, and spiritually—and returned
a stronger man. Dilaf’s hold was broken. Only now could Hrathen see that the
chains Dilaf had used to bind him had been forged from Hrathen’s own envy and
insecurity. He had felt threatened by Dilaf’s passion, for he had felt his own
faith inferior. Now, however, his resolve was firm—as it had been when he first
arrived in Arelon. He would be the savior of this people.

Dilaf backed down unhappily. The arteth grudgingly promised to hold no meetings
or sermons without Hrathen’s overt permission. And, in exchange for being
officially named head arteth of the chapel, Dilaf also consented to relieve his
numerous odivs from their vows, instead swearing them to the less binding
position of krondet. The biggest change, however, wasn’t in the arteth’s
actions, but in Hrathen’s confidence. As long as Hrathen knew that his faith
was as strong as Dilaf’s, then the arteth would not be able to manipulate him.

Dilaf would not, however, relent in his pursuit of Elantris’s destruction.
“They are unholy!” the arteth insisted as they walked toward the chapel. This
night’s sermon had been extremely successful; Hrathen could now claim over
three-fourths of the local Arelish nobility as Derethi members or sympathizers.
Telrii would crown himself within the week, and as soon as his rule stabilized
a bit, he would announce his conversion to Shu-Dereth. Arelon was Hrathen’s,
and he still had a month left before Wyrn’s deadline.

“The Elantrians have served their purpose, Arteth,” Hrathen explained to Dilaf
as they walked. It was cold this night, though not cold enough for one’s breath
to mist.

“Why do you forbid me to preach against them, my lord?” Dilaf’s voice was
bitter—now that Hrathen forbade him to speak about Elantris, the arteth’s
speeches seemed almost emasculated.

“Preaching against Elantris no longer has a point,” Hrathen said, matching
Dilaf’s anger with logic. “Do not forget that our hate had a purpose. Now that
I have proven Jaddeth’s supreme power over Elantris, we have effectively shown
that our God is true, while Domi is false. The people understand that
subconsciously.”

“But the Elantrians are still unholy.”

“They are vile, they are blasphemous, and they are definitely unholy. But right
now they are also unimportant. We need to focus on the Derethi religion itself,
showing the people how to link themselves to Jaddeth by swearing fealty to
yourself or one of the other arteths. They sense our power, and it is our duty
to show them how to partake of it.”

“And Elantris goes free?” Dilaf demanded.

“No, most certainly not,” Hrathen said. “There will be time enough to deal with
it after this nation—and its monarch—is firmly in Jaddeth’s grasp.”

Hrathen smiled to himself, turning away from the scowling Dilaf.

It’s over, he realized. I actually did it—I converted the people without a
bloody revolution. He wasn’t finished yet, however. Arelon was his, but one
nation still remained.

Hrathen had plans for Teod.

