# Part 2 - CHAPTER 44
[Metadata]: # {03.17}
[Descriptor]: # {03.17}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 44
Even as she spoke, Sarene worried about what Spirit had said. Without her, the
others had no legitimate claim on the throne. Even Roial was stumped; they
could only watch helplessly as Telrii solidified control over the nobility. She
expected to receive news of Telrii’s coronation by the end of the day.

It took her a few moments to realize the look of stunned shock her comment had
caused Spirit. He had fallen back into one of the room’s chairs, his eyes wide.
She chastened herself for lack of tact; this was, after all, Spirit’s king she
was talking about. So much had happened in court the last few weeks that she
had grown desensitized.

“I’m sorry,” Sarene said. “That was a little blunt, wasn’t it?”

“Iadon is dead?” Spirit asked in a quiet voice.

Sarene nodded. “It turns out he was involved with the Jeskeri Mysteries. When
that got out, he hanged himself rather than face the shame.” She didn’t expand
on her role in the events; there was no need to complicate them further.

“Jeskeri?” Spirit repeated, then his face turned dark and he gritted his teeth.
“I always though of him as a fool, but … How far did his … involvement go?”

“He was sacrificing his cooks and maids,” Sarene said, feeling sick. There was
a reason she had avoided explaining these things.

Spirit apparently noticed her pallor. “I’m sorry.”

“It’s all right,” Sarene said. However, she knew no matter what else happened,
no matter where she went in her life, the shadowed vision of Iadon’s sacrifice
would always lurk in her mind.

“Telrii is king then?” Spirit asked.

“Soon,” Sarene said. “He might have been crowned already.”

Spirit shook his head. “What about Duke Roial? He’s both richer and more
respected. He should have taken the throne.”

“He’s not richer anymore,” Sarene said. “Fjorden has supplemented Telrii’s
income. He’s a Derethi sympathizer, which, I’m afraid, has increased his social
standing.”

Spirit’s brow furled. “Being a Derethi sympathizer makes one popular? I’ve
missed a lot, haven’t I?”

“How long have you been in here?”

“A year,” Spirit answered offhandedly. That matched what some of the other New
Elantrians had told her. No one knew for certain how long Spirit had been in
the city, but they all guessed at least a year. He had seized control of the
rival gangs in recent weeks, but that wasn’t the sort of thing a person
accomplished without a great deal of planning and work.

“I guess that answers how Telrii got the Guard to back him,” Spirit mumbled.
“They’ve always been far too eager to support whoever seemed most popular at
the moment.”

Sarene nodded. “They relocated to the duke’s mansion shortly before I was
thrown in here.”

“All right,” Spirit said. “You’re going to have to start at the beginning—I
need as much information as you can give me.”

So, she explained. She began with the fall of the Duladen Republic and
Fjorden’s increasing threat. She told him of her engagement to Prince Raoden,
and of the Derethi incursions into Arelon. As she spoke, she realized that
Spirit understood the political climate of Arelon more soundly than she would
have thought possible. He quickly grasped the implications of Iadon’s
posthumous declaration. He knew a lot about Fjorden, though he didn’t have a
working knowledge of how dangerous its priests could be; he was more worried
about Wyrn-controlled soldiers.

Most impressive was his understanding of the various lords and nobles of
Arelon. Sarene didn’t need to explain their personalities and temperaments;
Spirit already knew them. In fact, he seemed to understand them better than
Sarene herself. When she questioned him on the matter, he simply explained that
in Arelon it was vital to know of each noble with a rank of baron or higher.
Many times a lesser nobleman’s only means of advancement was to make deals and
take contracts with the more powerful aristocrats, for they controlled the
markets.

Only one thing beyond the king’s death shocked him.

“You were going to marry Roial?” he asked incredulously.

Sarene smiled. “I can’t believe it either—the plan developed rather quickly.”

“Roial?” Spirit asked again. “The old rascal! He must have thoroughly enjoyed
suggesting that idea.”

“I found the duke to be an unquestionable gentleman,” Sarene said.

Spirit eyed her with a look that said “And I thought you were a better judge of
character.”

“Besides,” she continued, “he didn’t suggest it. Shuden did.”

“Shuden?” Spirit said. Then, after a moment’s thought, he nodded. “Yes, that
does sound like a connection he would make, though I can’t see him even
mentioning the word ‘marriage.’ The very concept of matrimony frightens him.”

“Not anymore,” Sarene said. “He and Ahan’s daughter are growing very close.”

“Shuden and Torena?” Spirit asked, even more dumbfounded. Then, he regarded
Sarene with narrowed eyes. “Wait a moment—how were you going to marry Roial? I
thought you were already married.”

“To a dead man,” Sarene huffed.

“But your wedding contract said you could never marry again.”

“How did you know that?” Sarene asked with narrowed eyes.

“You explained it just a few minutes ago.”

“I did not.”

“Sure you did—didn’t she, Galladon?”

The large Dula, who was flipping through Sarene’s political book, didn’t even
look up. “Don’t look at me, sule. I’m not getting involved.”

“Anyway,” Spirit said, turning away from his friend. “How is it that you were
going to marry Roial?”

“Why not?” Sarene asked. “I never knew this Raoden. Everyone says he was a fine
prince, but what do I owe him? My contract with Arelon dissolved when Iadon
died; the only reason I made the treaty in the first place was to provide a
link between Arelon and my homeland. Why would I honor a contract with a dead
man when I could form a more promising one with the future king of Arelon?”

“So you only agreed to marry the prince for politics.” His tone sounded hurt
for some reason, as if her relationship with the crown prince of Arelon
reflected directly on its aristocracy.

“Of course,” Sarene said. “I am a political creature, Spirit. I did what was
best for Teod—and for the same reason I was going to marry Roial.”

He nodded, still looking a bit melancholy.

“So, I was in the throne room, ready to marry the duke,” Sarene continued,
ignoring Spirit’s pique. What right did he have to question her motives? “And
that was exactly when the Shaod took me.”

“Right then?” Spirit asked. “It happened at your wedding?”

Sarene nodded, suddenly feeling very insecure. It seemed that every time she
was about to find acceptance, something disastrous alienated her once again.

Galladon snorted. “Well, now we know why she didn’t want to talk about it.
Kolo?”

Spirit’s hand found her shoulder. “I’m sorry.”

“It’s over now,” Sarene said with a shake of her head. “We need to worry about
Telrii’s coronation. With Fjorden supporting him …”

“We can worry about Telrii, but I doubt there’s anything we can do. If only
there were a way to contact the outside!”

Suddenly ashamed, Sarene’s eyes darted up to where Ashe hid in the room’s
shadows, his Aon nearly invisible. “There might be a way,” she admitted.

Spirit looked up as Sarene waved to Ashe. Ashe started to glow, the Aon’s light
expanding into a luminescent ball around him. As the Seon floated down to hover
above her desk, Sarene shot Spirit an embarrassed look.

“A Seon?” he said appreciatively.

“You’re not angry at me for hiding him?” Sarene asked.

Spirit chuckled. “In all honesty, Sarene, I expected you to hold some things
back from me. You seem like the type of person who needs secrets, if only for
the sake of having them.”

Sarene blushed slightly at the astute comment. “Ashe, go check with Kiin and
the others. I want to know the moment Telrii declares himself king.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said, hovering away.

Spirit fell silent. He hadn’t commented on Ashe’s inexplicable lack of Shaod
madness—but, of course, Spirit couldn’t know that Ashe had been Sarene’s own
Seon.

They waited in silence, and Sarene didn’t interrupt Spirit’s thoughts. She had
given him an overwhelming mass of information, and she could see his mind
picking through it behind his eyes.

He was hiding things from her as well. Not that she mistrusted him. Whatever
his secrets were, he probably felt he had a good reason for keeping them. She
had been involved with politics far too long to take the holding of secrets as
a personal offense.

That didn’t, of course, mean she wasn’t going to find out what she could. So
far, Ashe hadn’t been able to discover anything about a second son of Ien
Plantation’s ruler, but he was very restricted in his movements. She had
allowed him to reveal himself only to Kiin and the others; she didn’t know why
he had survived where other Seons did not, but she didn’t want to lose any
potential edge his existence might give her.

Apparently realizing they weren’t going to go anywhere soon, the Dula Galladon
shuffled over to one of the chairs and seated himself. Then he closed his eyes
and appeared to fall asleep. He might be unstereotypically pessimistic, but he
was still a Dula. It was said that his people were so relaxed that they could
fall asleep in any position at any time.

Sarene eyed the large man. Galladon didn’t seem to like her. But, then, he was
so determinedly grouchy that she couldn’t tell. He seemed a well of knowledge
at times, but in other areas he was completely ignorant—and totally unconcerned
by that fact. He seemed to take everything in stride, but he complained about
it at the same time.

By the time Ashe came back, Sarene had returned her attention to the book on
political cover-ups. The Seon had to make a throat-clearing sound before she
even realized he was there. Spirit looked up as well, though the Dula continued
snoring until his friend elbowed him in the stomach. Then all three sets of
eyes turned to Ashe.

“Well?” Sarene asked.

“It is done, my lady,” Ashe informed them. “Telrii is king.”

