# PART 3 - CHAPTER 55
[Metadata]: # {04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {04.01}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 55
It seemed unnatural to look at Elantris from the outside. Raoden belonged in
the city. It was as if he stood outside of his own body, looking at it from
another person’s perspective. He should no more be separated from Elantris than
his spirit should be separated from his body.

He stood with Sarene atop Kiin’s fortresslike house in the noonday sun. The
merchant, showing both foresight and healthy paranoia following the massacre
ten years before, had built his mansion more like a castle than a house. It was
a compact square, with straight stone walls and narrow windows, and it even
stood atop a hill. The roof had a pattern of stones running along its lip, much
like the battlements atop a city wall. It was against one such stone that
Raoden leaned now, Sarene pressed close to his side, her arms around his waist
as they regarded the city.

Soon after Roial’s death the night before, Kiin had barred his doors and
informed them that he had enough supplies stockpiled to last years. Though
Raoden doubted the doors would survive long against a determined attack, he
welcomed the feelings of safety Kiin inspired. There was no telling how Telrii
would react to Raoden’s appearance. Chances were, however, that he would give
up all pretense and seek Fjordell aid. The Elantris Guard might have been
hesitant to attack Raoden, but Fjordell troops would have no such inhibitions.

“I should have figured it out,” Sarene mumbled at Raoden’s side.

“Hum?” Raoden asked, raising his eyebrows. She was wearing one of Daora’s
dresses—which was, of course, too short for her, though Raoden rather liked the
amount of leg it showed. She wore her short blond wig, which was cut in a style
that made her look younger than she was, a schoolgirl instead of a mature
woman. Well, Raoden revised, a six-foot-tall schoolgirl.

Sarene raised her head, looking into his eyes. “I can’t believe I didn’t put it
together. I was even suspicious about your—meaning Raoden’s—disappearance. I
assumed the king had killed you off, or at least exiled you.”

“He certainly would have liked to,” Raoden said. “He tried to send me away on
numerous occasions, but I usually wiggled out of it somehow.”

“It was so obvious!” Sarene said, resting her head on his shoulder with a
petulant thud. “The cover-up, the embarrassment … it makes perfect sense.”

“It’s easy to see the answers once the puzzle is solved, Sarene,” Raoden said.
“I’m not surprised that no one connected my disappearance with Elantris—that
isn’t the sort of thing an Arelene would assume. People don’t talk about
Elantris, and they certainly don’t want to associate it with those they love.
They would prefer to believe that I’d died than know that I’d been taken by the
Shaod.”

“But I’m not an Arelene,” Sarene said. “I don’t have the same biases.”

“You lived with them,” Raoden said. “You couldn’t help being affected by their
disposition. Besides, you haven’t lived around Elantris—you didn’t know how the
Shaod worked.”

Sarene huffed to herself. “And you let me go along in ignorance. My own
husband.”

“I gave you a clue,” he protested.

“Yes, about five minutes before you revealed yourself.”

Raoden chuckled, pulling her close. No matter what else happened, he was glad
he had made the decision to leave Elantris. This short time with Sarene was
worth it.

After a few moments, he realized something. “I’m not, you know.”

“Not what?”

“Your husband. At least, the relationship is disputable. The betrothal contract
said our marriage would be binding if either of us died before the wedding. I
didn’t die—I went to Elantris. Though they’re essentially the same thing, the
contract’s words were very specific.”

Sarene looked up with concern.

He laughed quietly. “I’m not trying to get out of it, Sarene,” he said. “I’m
just saying we should make it formal, just so everyone’s mind is put at ease.”

Sarene thought for a moment, then she nodded sharply. “Definitely. I’ve been
engaged twice during the last two months, and I never got a wedding. A girl
deserves a good wedding.”

“A queen’s wedding,” Raoden agreed.

Sarene sighed as she looked back at Kae. The city seemed cold and lifeless,
almost unpopulated. The political uncertainty was destroying the economy of
Arelon as surely as Iadon’s rule had destroyed its spirit. Where there should
have been busy commerce, only a few hearty pedestrians slipped furtively
through the streets. The only exception was the great city square, which held
the tents of the Arelene Market. While some of the merchants had decided to cut
their losses—moving on to Teod to sell what they could—a surprising number had
stayed. What could have persuaded so many to remain to try and push wares upon
a people that just weren’t buying?

The only other place that showed any sign of activity was the palace. Elantris
City Guard members had been poring over the area like worried insects all
morning. Sarene had sent her Seon to investigate, but he had yet to return.

“He was such a good man,” Sarene said softly.

“Roial?” Raoden asked. “Yes, he was. The duke was the role model I needed when
my father proved unworthy.”

Sarene chuckled softly. “When Kiin first introduced Roial to me, he said he
wasn’t sure if the duke helped us because he loved Arelon, or because he was
just bored.”

“Many people took Roial’s craftiness as a sign of deceitfulness,” Raoden said.
“They were wrong; Roial was clever, and he enjoyed intrigue, but he was a
patriot. He taught me to believe in Arelon, even after its many stumbles.”

“He was like a wily old grandfather,” Sarene said. “And he almost became my
husband.”

“I still can’t believe that,” Raoden said. “I loved Roial … but to imagine him
married? To you?”

Sarene laughed. “I don’t think we believed it either. Of course, that doesn’t
mean we wouldn’t have gone through with it.”

Raoden sighed, rubbing her shoulder. “If only I had known what capable hands I
was leaving Arelon in. It would have saved me a great deal of worry.”

“And New Elantris?” Sarene asked. “Is Karata watching it?”

“New Elantris watches itself without much trouble,” Raoden said. “But, I did
send Galladon back this morning with instructions to begin teaching the people
AonDor. If we fail here, I don’t want to leave Elantris unable to protect
itself.”

“There probably isn’t much time left.”

“Time enough to make sure they learn an Aon or two,” Raoden said. “They deserve
to know the secret to their power.”

Sarene smiled. “I always knew you would find the answer. Domi doesn’t let your
kind of dedication go wasted.”

Raoden smiled. The night before, she had made him draw several dozen Aons to
prove that they actually worked. Of course, they hadn’t been enough to save
Roial.

A rock of guilt burned in Raoden’s chest. If he had known the proper modifiers,
he might have been able to save Roial. A gut wound took a long time to kill a
man; Raoden could have healed each organ separately, then sealed the skin.
Instead, he had been able only to draw a general Aon that affected Roial’s
entire body. The Aon’s power, already weak, had been diluted so much by the
broad target that it did no good.

Raoden had stayed up late memorizing modifiers. AonDor healing was a complex,
difficult art, but he was determined to make certain no one else died because
of his inability. It would take months of memorizing, but he would learn the
modifier for every organ, muscle, and bone.

Sarene turned back to her contemplation of the city. She retained a strong grip
on Raoden’s waist—Sarene did not like heights, especially if she didn’t have
something to hold on to. Looking over at the top of her head, Raoden suddenly
remembered something from the night’s studies.

Reaching out, he pulled off her wig. It resisted as the glue held, then fell
away, revealing the stubble underneath. Sarene turned with questioning, annoyed
eyes, but Raoden was already drawing.

It wasn’t a complex Aon; it required him only to stipulate a target, how the
target was to be affected, and a length of time. When he finished, her hair
began to grow. It went lethargically, sliding out of her head like a breath
slowly exhaled. In a few minutes, however, it was finished—her long golden hair
once again reaching to the middle of her back.

Sarene ran disbelieving fingers through the hair. Then she looked up at Raoden
with teary eyes. “Thank you,” she whispered, pulling him close. “You have no
idea what that means.”

After a moment, she pulled back, staring at him with intent, silvery gray eyes.
“Show yourself to me.”

“My face?” Raoden asked.

Sarene nodded.

“You’ve seen it before,” he said hesitantly.

“I know, but I’m getting too used to this one. I want to see the real you.”

The determination in her eyes stopped him from arguing further. With a sigh, he
reached up, tapping the collar of his undershirt with his index finger. To him,
nothing changed, but he could feel Sarene stiffen as the illusion fell away. He
felt suddenly ashamed, and hurriedly began to draw the Aon again, but she
stopped him.

“It isn’t as horrid as you think, Raoden,” she said, running her fingers across
his face. “They say your bodies are like corpses, but that isn’t true. Your
skin may be discolored and a little wrinkled, but there is still flesh
underneath.”

Her finger found the cut on his cheek, and she gasped slightly. “I did this,
didn’t I?”

Raoden nodded. “As I said—I had no idea how good of a fencer you are.”

Sarene ran her finger down the wound. “It confused me terribly when I couldn’t
find the wound. Why does the illusion show your expressions, but not a cut?”

“It’s complicated,” Raoden said. “You have to link each muscle in the face with
its companion in the illusion. I could never have figured it out myself—the
equations are all in one of my books.”

“But you altered the illusion so quickly last night, changing from Kaloo to
Raoden.”

He smiled. “That’s because I had two illusions on, one connected to my
undershirt and the other to my coat. As soon as I dissolved the one on the top,
the one underneath showed. I’m just glad it looks enough like me that the
others recognized it. There weren’t, of course, any equations describing how to
create my own face—I had to figure that out on my own.”

“You did a good job.”

“I extrapolated from my Elantrian face, telling the illusion to use it as a
base.” He smiled. “You’re a lucky woman, having a man who can change faces at
any time. You’ll never get bored.”

Sarene snorted. “I like this one just fine. This is the face that loved me when
it thought I was an Elantrian, all rank and title abandoned.”

“You think you can get used to this?” Raoden asked.

“Raoden, I was going to marry Roial last week. He was a dear old man, but he
was so incredibly homely that rocks looked handsome when he stood next to
them.”

Raoden laughed. Despite everything—Telrii, Hrathen, and poor Roial’s demise—his
heart was jubilant.

“What are they doing?” Sarene said, looking back at the palace.

Raoden turned to follow her view—an action that bumped Sarene forward slightly.
She reacted by locking a deathlike grip on Raoden’s shoulder, her fingers
biting into his flesh. “Don’t do that!”

“Oops,” he said, putting an arm around her shoulder. “I forgot about your fear
of heights.”

“I am not afraid of heights,” Sarene said, still holding on to his arm. “I just
get dizzy.”

“Of course,” Raoden said, squinting at the palace. He could barely make out a
group of soldiers doing something in the grounds before the building. They were
laying out blankets or sheets of some sort.

“It’s too far,” Sarene said. “Where is Ashe?”

Raoden reached up and sketched Aon Nae—a large circular character—in the air
before them. When he was finished, the air inside Aon Nae’s circle rippled like
water, then cleared to show a magnified view of the city. Placing his palm in
the center of the circle, Raoden maneuvered the Aon until it was pointing at
the palace. The view unblurred itself, and they were able to see the soldiers
with such detail that they could read their rank insignias.

“That’s useful,” Sarene noted as Raoden raised the Aon slightly. The soldiers
were indeed laying out sheets—sheets with what appeared to be bodies on them.
Raoden grew cold as he moved the disk along the line of corpses. The last two
corpses in the row were familiar.

Sarene gasped in horror as Eondel’s and Telrii’s dead faces came into focus.

