# Part 1 - CHAPTER 26
[Metadata]: # {02.26}
[Descriptor]: # {02.26}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 26
The gate slammed shut as Sarene’s cart rolled back into Kae. “You’re certain
he’s the one in charge?” she asked.

Ashe bobbed slightly. “You were correct, my lady—my information about the gang
leaders was outdated. They call this newcomer Lord Spirit. His rise was a
recent event—most hadn’t heard of him more than a month ago, though one man
claims that Lord Spirit and Shaor are the same person. The reports agree that
he defeated both Karata and Aanden. Apparently, the second confrontation
involved an enormous battle of some sort.”

“Then the people I’m meeting with are impostors,” Sarene said, tapping her
cheek as she rode in the back of the cart. It was hardly fitting transportation
for a princess, but none of the day’s nobles had offered her a ride in their
coaches. She had intended to ask Shuden, but he had disappeared—the young
Torena had beat Sarene to him.

“Apparently they are, my lady. Are you angered?” Ashe asked the question
carefully. He had made it quite clear he still thought her preoccupation with
Spirit was an unnecessary distraction.

“No, not really. You have to expect a measure of subterfuge in any political
engagement.” Or, so she said. Political necessity or not, she wanted Spirit to
be honest with her. She was actually beginning to trust him, and that worried
her.

He chose to confide in her for some reason. Around the others he was bright and
cheerful, but no man could be that one-sidedly optimistic. When he spoke only
to Sarene, he was more honest. She could see pain in his eyes, unexplained
sorrows and worries. This man, warlord or not, cared about Elantris.

Like all Elantrians, he was more corpse than man: his skin wan and dry, his
scalp and eyebrows completely hairless. Her revulsion was decreasing every day,
however, as she grew accustomed to the city. She wasn’t to the point where she
could see beauty in the Elantrians, but at least she wasn’t physically sickened
by them any longer.

Still, she forced herself to remain aloof from Spirit’s overtures of
friendship. She had spent too long in politics to let herself become
emotionally open with an opponent. And he was definitely an opponent—no matter
how affable. He played with her, presenting false gang leaders to distract,
while he himself supervised her distributions. She couldn’t even be certain
that he was honoring their agreements. For all she knew, the only ones allowed
to receive food were Spirit’s followers. Perhaps he seemed so optimistic
because she was inadvertently helping him reign supreme over the city.

The cart hit an especially large bump, and Sarene thumped against its wooden
floor. A couple of empty boxes toppled off the pile, nearly falling on top of
her.

“Next time we see Shuden,” she mumbled sullenly, rubbing her posterior, “remind
me to kick him.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said complacently.


She didn’t have to wait long. Unfortunately, she also didn’t have a chance to
do much kicking. She could probably have impaled Shuden if she had wished, but
that wouldn’t have made her very popular with the court women. This happened to
be one of the days the women had chosen to practice their fencing, and Shuden
attended the meeting, as usual—though he rarely participated. Thankfully, he
also refrained from doing his ChayShan exercise. The women moped over him
enough as it was.

“They’re actually improving,” Eondel said appreciatively, watching the women
spar. Each had a steel practice sword, as well as a kind of uniform—a jumpsuit
much like the one Sarene wore, but with a short ring of cloth hanging down from
the waist, as if to imitate a skirt. The cloth loop was thin and useless, but
it made the women comfortable, so Sarene didn’t say anything—no matter how
silly she thought it looked.

“You sound surprised, Eondel,” Sarene said. “Were you that unimpressed with my
ability to teach?”

The stately warrior stiffened. “No, Your Highness, never—”

“She’s teasing you, my lord,” Lukel said, rapping Sarene on the head with a
rolled-up piece of paper as he approached. “You shouldn’t let her get away with
things like that. It only encourages her.”

“What’s this?” Sarene said, snatching the paper from Lukel.

“Our dear king’s income figures,” Lukel explained as he removed a bright red
sourmelon from his pocket and took a bite. He still hadn’t revealed how he’d
managed to get a shipment of the fruit an entire month before the season began,
a fact that was making the rest of the mercantile community rabid with
jealousy.

Sarene looked over the figures. “Is he going to make it?”

“Barely,” Lukel said with a smile. “But his earnings in Teod, coupled with his
tax income, should be respectable enough to keep him from embarrassment.
Congratulations, Cousin, you’ve saved the monarchy.”

Sarene rerolled the paper. “Well, that’s one less thing we have to worry
about.”

“Two,” Lukel corrected, a bit of pink juice rolling down his cheek. “Our dear
friend Edan has fled the country.”

“What?” Sarene asked.

“It’s true, my lady,” Eondel said. “I heard the news just this morning. Baron
Edan’s lands border the Chasm down in southern Arelon, and recent rains caused
some mudslides involving his fields. Edan decided to cut his losses, and was
last seen heading for Duladel.”

“Where he’ll soon discover that the new monarchy is rather unimpressed with
Arelish titles,” Lukel added. “I think Edan will make a nice farmer, don’t
you?”

“Wipe your mouth,” Sarene said with a reproving look. “It’s not kind to make
light of another’s misfortune.”

“Misfortune comes as Domi wills,” Lukel said.

“You never liked Edan in the first place,” Sarene said.

“He was spineless, arrogant, and would have betrayed us if he’d ever found the
nerve. What wasn’t there to like?” Lukel continued to munch on his fruit with a
self-satisfied smirk.

“Well, someone is certainly proud of himself this afternoon,” Sarene noted.

“He is always like that after he makes a good business deal, Your Highness,”
Eondel said. “He’ll be insufferable for another week at least.”

“Ah, just wait for the Arelene Market,” Lukel said. “I’ll make a killing.
Anyway, Iadon is busy looking for someone rich enough to buy Edan’s barony, so
you shouldn’t have to worry about him bothering you for a little while.”

“I wish I could say the same for you,” Sarene replied, turning her attention
back to her still battling students. Eondel was right: They were improving.
Even the older ones seemed to be bursting with energy. Sarene held up her hand,
drawing their attention, and the sparring fell off.

“You’re doing very well,” Sarene said as the room fell silent. “I am
impressed—some of you are already better than many of the women I knew back in
Teod.”

There was a general air of satisfaction about the women as they listened to
Sarene’s praise.

“However, there is one thing that bothers me,” Sarene said, beginning to pace.
“I thought you women intended to prove your strength, to show that you were
good for more than making the occasional embroidered pillowcase. However, so
far only one of you has truly shown me that she wants to change things in
Arelon. Torena, tell them what you did today.”

The thin girl yelped slightly as Sarene said her name, then looked sheepishly
at her companions. “I went to Elantris with you?”

“Indeed,” Sarene said. “I have invited each woman in this room several times,
but only Torena has had the courage to accompany me into Elantris.”

Sarene stopped her pacing to regard the uncomfortable women. None of them would
look at her—not even Torena, who appeared to be feeling guilty by association.

“Tomorrow I will go into Elantris again, and this time, no men will accompany
me beyond the regular guards. If you really want to show this town that you are
as strong as your husbands, you will accompany me.”

Sarene stood in her place, looking over the women. Heads raised hesitantly,
eyes focusing on her. They would come. They were frightened near to death, but
they would come. Sarene smiled.

The smile, however, was only half genuine. Standing as she was, before them
like a general before his troops, she realized something. It was happening
again.

It was just like Teod. She could see respect in their eyes; even the queen
herself looked to Sarene for advice now. However, respect her as they did, they
would never accept her. When Sarene entered a room, it fell silent; when she
left, conversations began again. It was as if they thought her above their
simple discussions. By serving as a model for what they wanted to become,
Sarene had alienated herself from them.

Sarene turned, leaving the women to their practicing. The men were the same.
Shuden and Eondel respected her—even considered her a friend—but they would
never think about her romantically. Despite his professed annoyance with
courtly games of matrimony, Shuden was reacting favorably to Torena’s
advances—but he had never once looked at Sarene. Eondel was far older than she,
but Sarene could sense his feelings toward her. Respect, admiration, and a
willingness to serve. It was as if he didn’t even realize she was a woman.

Sarene knew that she was married now, and shouldn’t be thinking about such
things, but it was hard to regard herself as wedded. There had been no
ceremony, and she had known no husband. She craved something—a sign that at
least some of the men found her attractive, though she never would have
responded to any such advances. The point was irrelevant; the men of Arelon
feared her as much as they respected her.

She had grown up without affection outside of her family, and it appeared she
would continue that way. At least she had Kiin and his family. Still, if she
had come to Arelon searching for acceptance, then she had failed. She would
have to be content with respect.

A deep, scratchy voice sounded behind her, and Sarene turned to find that Kiin
had joined Lukel and Eondel.

“Uncle?” she asked. “What are you doing here?”

“I got home and found the house empty,” Kiin said. “There’s only one person who
would dare steal a man’s entire family.”

“She didn’t steal us, Father,” Lukel joked. “We just heard that you were going
to make Hraggish weed soup again.”

Kiin regarded his jovial son for a moment, rubbing his chin where his beard
once grew. “He got a good sale, then?”

“A very lucrative one,” Eondel said.

“Domi protect us,” Kiin grumbled, settling his stout body into a nearby chair.
Sarene took a seat next to him.

“You heard about the king’s projected earnings, ’Ene?” Kiin asked.

“Yes, Uncle.”

Kiin nodded. “I never thought I’d see the day when I was encouraged by Iadon’s
success. Your plan to save him worked, and from what I hear, Eondel and the
rest are expected to bring forth exemplary crops.”

“Then why do you look so worried?” Sarene asked.

“I’m getting old, ’Ene, and old men tend to worry. Most recently I’ve been
concerned about your excursions into Elantris. Your father would never forgive
me if something happened to you in there.”

“Not that he’s going to forgive you anytime soon anyway,” Sarene said
offhandedly.

Kiin grunted. “That’s the truth.” Then he stopped, turning suspicious eyes her
direction. “What do you know of that?”

“Nothing,” Sarene admitted. “But I’m hoping you will rectify my ignorance.”

Kiin shook his head. “Some things are better left unrectified. Your father and
I were both a whole lot more foolish when we were younger. Eventeo might be a
great king, but he’s a pathetic brother. Of course, I won’t soon win any awards
for my fraternal affection either.”

“But what happened?”

“We had a … disagreement.”

“What kind of disagreement?”

Kiin laughed his bellowing, raspy laugh. “No, ’Ene, I’m not as easy to
manipulate as your larks over there. You just keep on wondering about this one.
And don’t pout.”

“I never pout,” Sarene said, fighting hard to keep her voice from sounding
childish. When it became apparent that her uncle wasn’t going to offer any more
information, Sarene finally changed the subject. “Uncle Kiin, are there any
secret passages in Iadon’s palace?”

“I’d be surprised as the Three Virgins if there aren’t,” he replied. “Iadon is
just about the most paranoid man I’ve ever known. He must have at least a dozen
escape routes in that fortress he calls home.”

Sarene resisted the urge to point out that Kiin’s home was as much a fortress
as the king’s. As their conversation lulled, Kiin turned to ask Eondel about
Lukel’s sourmelon deal. Eventually, Sarene stood and retrieved her syre, then
walked out onto the practice floor. She fell into form and began moving through
a solo pattern.

Her blade whipped and snapped, the well-practiced motions now routine, and her
mind soon began to wander. Was Ashe right? Was she allowing herself to become
distracted by Elantris and its enigmatic ruler? She couldn’t lose track of her
greater tasks—Hrathen was planning something, and Telrii couldn’t possibly be
as indifferent as he made himself out to be. She had a lot of things she needed
to watch, and she had enough experience with politics to realize how easy it
was to overextend oneself.

However, she was increasingly interested in Spirit. It was rare to find someone
politically skilled enough to hold her attention, but in Arelon she had found
two. In a way, Spirit was even more fascinating than the gyorn. While Hrathen
and she were very frank about their enmity, Spirit somehow manipulated and
foiled her while at the same time acting like an old friend. Most alarmingly,
she almost didn’t care.

Instead of being outraged when she filled his demands with useless items, he
had seemed impressed. He had even complimented her on her frugality, noting
that the cloth she sent must have been bought at a discount, considering its
color. In all things he remained friendly, indifferent to her sarcasm.

And she felt herself responding. There, in the center of the cursed city, was
finally a person who seemed willing to accept her. She wished she could laugh
at his clever remarks, agree with his observations, and share his concerns. The
more confrontational she tried to be, the less threatened he was. He actually
seemed to appreciate her defiance.

“Sarene, dear?” Daora’s quiet voice broke through her contemplations. Sarene
made one final sweep of her sword, then stood up, dazed. Sweat streamed down
her face, running along the inside of her collar. She hadn’t realized how
vigorous her training had become.

She relaxed, resting the tip of her syre on the floor. Daora’s hair was pulled
into a neat bun, and her uniform was unstained by sweat. As usual, the woman
did all things with grace—even exercise.

“Do you want to talk about it, dear?” Daora asked with a coaxing tone. They
stood to the side of room, the thumping of feet and slapping of blades masking
the conversation from prying ears.

“About what?” Sarene asked with confusion.

“I’ve seen that look before, child,” Daora said comfortingly. “He’s not for
you. But, of course, you’ve realized that, haven’t you?”

Sarene paled. How could she know? Could the woman read thoughts? Then, however,
Sarene followed her aunt’s gaze. Daora was looking at Shuden and Torena, who
were laughing together as the young girl showed Shuden a few basic thrusts.

“I know it must be hard, Sarene,” Daora said, “being locked into a marriage
with no chance for affection … never knowing your husband, or feeling the
comfort of his love. Perhaps in a few years, after your place here in Arelon is
more secure, you could allow yourself a relationship that is … covert. It is
much too soon for that now, however.”

Daora’s eyes softened as she watched Shuden clumsily drop the sword. The
normally reserved Jindo was laughing uncontrollably at his mistake. “Besides,
child,” Daora continued, “this one is meant for another.”

“You think …?” Sarene began.

Daora placed a hand on Sarene’s arm, squeezing it lightly and smiling. “I’ve
seen the look in your eyes these last few days, and I’ve also seen the
frustration. The two emotions go together more often than youthful hearts
expect.”

Sarene shook her head and laughed slightly. “I assure you, Aunt,” she said
affectionately, yet firmly, “I have no interest in Lord Shuden.”

“Of course, dear,” Daora said, patting her arm, then retreating.

Sarene shook her head, walking over to get a drink. What were these “signs”
Daora had claimed to see in her? The woman was usually so observant; what had
made her misjudge so grievously in this instance? Sarene liked Shuden, of
course, but not romantically. He was too quiet and, like Eondel, a bit too
rigid for her taste. Sarene was well aware that she would need a man who would
know when to give her space, but who also wouldn’t let her bend him in any way
she chose.

With a shrug, Sarene put Daora’s misguided assumptions from her mind, then sat
down to contemplate just how she was going to throw awry Spirit’s latest, and
most detailed, list of demands.

