# Part 2 - CHAPTER 47
[Metadata]: # {03.20}
[Descriptor]: # {03.20}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 47
The gates slammed shut. This time they didn’t lock Sarene in Elantris, but out
of it. Emotions snapped at her soul like a pack of angry wolves, each one
demanding her attention. Five days before, she had though her life ruined. She
had wished, prayed, and begged for Domi to heal her. Now she found herself
craving to return to her damnation, as long as Spirit was there.

Domi, however, had made the decision for her. Spirit was right: She could no
more live in Elantris than he could exist outside of the city. The worlds, and
the demands of their flesh, were far too different.

A hand fell on her shoulder. Shaking off her numbness, Sarene turned. There
weren’t many men she had to crane her neck to look up at. Hrathen.

“Jaddeth has preserved you, Princess,” he said in a lightly accented voice.

Sarene shook his arm away. “I don’t know how you did this, priest, but I know
one thing with absolute certainty. I owe your god nothing.”

“Your father thinks differently, Princess,” Hrathen said, his face hard.

“For a man whose religion claims to spread truth, priest, your lies are
strikingly vulgar.”

Hrathen smiled thinly. “Lies? Why don’t you go and speak with him? In a way, it
could be said that you gave us Teod. Convert the king, and often you convert
the kingdom as well.”

“Impossible!” Sarene said, growing uncertain. Gyorns were usually far to wily
to tell direct falsehoods.

“You fought with wisdom and cleverness, Princess,” Hrathen said, taking a slow
step forward and extending his gauntleted hand. “But true wisdom knows when
further fighting is pointless. I have Teod, and Arelon will soon be mine as
well. Do not be like the stonelark, ever trying to dig a pit in the sand’s wet
beaches and ever having your work destroyed by the tide. Embrace Shu-Dereth,
and let your efforts become more than vanity.”

“I will die first!”

“You already have,” the gyorn pointed out. “And I brought you back.” He took
another step forward, and Sarene shied back, pulling her hands up against her
chest.

Steel whipped in the sunlight, and suddenly the point of Eondel’s sword was at
Hrathen’s neck. Sarene felt herself enfolded in enormous, powerful arms, a
scratchy voice crying out in joy beside her.

“Blessed be Domi’s name!” Kiin praised, lifting her off the ground with his
hug.

“Blessed be Jaddeth’s name,” Hrathen said, sword tip still pressed against his
flesh. “Domi left this one to rot.”

“Say no more, priest,” Eondel said, angling his sword threateningly.

Hrathen snorted. Then, moving more quickly than Sarene’s eyes could track, the
gyorn bent backward and pulled his head out of the sword’s range. He kicked at
the same time, smashing his foot into Eondel’s hand and knocking the weapon
free.

Hrathen spun, crimson cape billowing, bloodred hand plucking the sword from the
air. Steel reflected sunlight as Hrathen spun the weapon. He snapped its tip
against the cobblestones, holding it as a king would his scepter. Then, he let
it drop, the hilt falling back into Eondel’s stunned hand. The priest stepped
forward, passing the confused general.

“Time moves like a mountain, Sarene,” Hrathen whispered, so close that his
breastplate nearly brushed against Kiin’s protective arms. “It comes so slowly
that most don’t even notice its passing. It will, however, crush those who
don’t move before it.”

With that he spun, his cape fluttering against both Eondel and Kiin as he
marched away.

Kiin watched Hrathen go, hatred in his eyes. Finally, he turned to Eondel.
“Come, General. Let’s take Sarene home to rest.”

“There is no time for rest, Uncle,” Sarene said. “I need you to gather our
allies. We must meet as soon as possible.”

Kiin raised an eyebrow. “There will be time enough for that later, ’Ene. You’re
in no condition—”

“I’ve had a fine vacation, Uncle,” she declared, “but there is work to be done.
Perhaps when it is finished, I’ll be able to escape back to Elantris. For now,
we need to worry about stopping Telrii from giving our country to Wyrn. Send
messengers to Roial and Ahan. I want to meet with them as soon as possible.”

Her uncle’s face looked utterly dumbfounded.

“Well, she seems all right,” Eondel noted, smiling.

_______


The cooks in her father’s household had learned one thing: When Sarene wanted
to eat, she could eat.

“You’d better move faster, Cousin,” Lukel said as she finished her fourth
plate. “You looked like you almost had time to taste that one.”

Sarene ignored him, motioning for Kiin to bring in the next delicacy. She had
been told that if one starved oneself long enough, the stomach would shrink,
thereby reducing the amount of food one could eat. The man who had invented
that theory would have thrown up his hands in despair if he could have seen
Sarene feasting.

She sat at the table across from Lukel and Roial. The elderly duke had just
arrived, and when he had seen Sarene, she thought for a moment he was going to
collapse from the shock. Instead, he had breathed a prayer to Domi, seating
himself speechlessly in the chair across from her.

“I can honestly say that I have never seen a woman eat this much,” Duke Roial
noted appreciatively. There was still a hint of disbelieving wonder in his eyes
as he looked at her.

“She’s a Teoish giantess,” Lukel said. “I don’t think it’s fair to make
comparisons between Sarene and regular women.”

“If I weren’t so busy eating, I’d respond to that,” Sarene said, waving her
fork at them. She hadn’t realized exactly how hungry she was until she’d
entered Kiin’s kitchen, where the lingering scents of past banquets hung in the
air like a delectable fog. She was only now appreciating how useful it was to
have a world-traveled chef as an uncle.

Kiin entered with a pan of semi-boiling meat and vegetables in a red sauce.
“It’s Jindoeese RaiDomo Mai. The name means ‘meat with fiery skin.’ You’re
fortunate I had the proper ingredients, the Jindo RaiDel pepper had a poor crop
last season, and …” He trailed off as Sarene began heaping meat onto her plate.
“You don’t care, do you?” he asked with a sigh. “I could have boiled it in
dishwater, and it would be the same to you.”

“I understand, Uncle,” Sarene said. “You suffer for your art.”

Kiin sat down, looking at the empty dishes scattered across the table. “Well,
you certainly inherited the family appetite.”

“She’s a big girl,” Lukel said. “It takes a lot of fuel to keep that body
going.”

Sarene shot him a look between bites.

“Is she slowing down at all?” Kiin asked. “I’m running out of supplies.”

“Actually,” Sarene said, “I think this should about do it. You don’t understand
what it was like in there, gentlemen. I did actually enjoy myself, but there
wasn’t a lot of food to be had.”

“I’m surprised there was any at all,” Lukel said. “Elantrians like to eat.”

“But they don’t actually need to,” Kiin said, “so they can afford to
stockpile.”

Sarene kept eating, not looking up at her uncle and cousin. Her mind, however,
paused. How did they know so much about Elantrians?

“Whatever the conditions, Princess,” Roial said, “we thank Domi for your safe
return.”

“It isn’t as miraculous as it seems, Roial,” Sarene said. “Did anyone count how
many days Hrathen was in Elantris?”

“Four or five,” Lukel said after a moment’s thought.

“I’d be willing to bet it was five days—exactly the same amount of time it took
me to get thrown in and then be ‘healed.’”

Roial nodded. “The gyorn had something to do with this. Have you spoken with
your father yet?”

Sarene felt her stomach turn. “No. I’m … going to do that soon.”

There was a knock at the door, and a few moments later Eondel entered, Shuden
in tow. The young Jindo had been out riding with Torena.

As he entered, the baron’s face broke into an uncharacteristically wide smile.
“We should have known you’d be back, Sarene. If anyone could be sent to hell
and return untouched, it would be you.”

“Not exactly untouched,” Sarene said raising her hand to feel her bald scalp.
“Did you find anything?”

“Here, my lady,” Eondel said, holding out a short blond wig. “It was the best I
could find—most of the others felt so thick I would have sworn they were made
of horse hair.”

Sarene looked over the wig with a critical eye—it would barely come down to her
shoulders. But, it was better than baldness. In her estimation, her hair was
the greatest loss incurred by her exile. It was going to take years to grow it
to a decent length again.

“Too bad no one gathered up my own hair,” she said, tucking the wig away until
she could find time to put it on properly.

“We didn’t exactly anticipate your return, Cousin,” Lukel said, picking at the
last few pieces of meat in the pan. “It was probably still attached to your
veil when we burned it.”

“Burned it?”

“Arelish custom, ’Ene,” Kiin explained. “When someone is thrown into Elantris,
we burn their possessions.”

“Everything?” Sarene asked weakly.

“I’m afraid so,” Kiin said with embarrassment.

Sarene closed her eyes, exhaling. “Never mind,” she said, regarding them.
“Where’s Ahan?”

“At Telrii’s palace,” Roial said.

Sarene frowned. “What’s he doing there?”

Kiin shrugged. “We figured we should send someone, at least, to make an
overture to the new king. We’re going to have to work with him, so we might as
well see what kind of cooperation we can expect.”

Sarene eyed her companions. Despite their obvious joy at seeing her, she sensed
something in their expressions. Defeat. They had worked so hard to keep Telrii
off the throne, and they had failed. Inside, Sarene barely acknowledged that
she felt many of the same emotions. She felt sick. She couldn’t decide what she
wanted; everything was so confused. Fortunately, her sense of duty provided
guidance. Spirit was correct: Arelon was in serious danger. She didn’t want to
even contemplate the things Hrathen had said about her father—she only knew
that no matter what else happened, she had to protect Arelon. For Elantris’s
sake.

“You speak as if there weren’t anything we could do about Telrii’s claim of the
throne,” Sarene said to the quiet room.

“What could we do?” Lukel said. “Telrii’s been crowned, and the nobility
supports him.”

“So does Wyrn,” Sarene reminded. “Sending Ahan is a good idea, but I doubt
you’ll find any leniency in Telrii’s reign—for us, or for the rest of Arelon.
My lords, Raoden should have been king, and I am his wife. I feel responsible
for his people. They suffered under Iadon. If Telrii turns this kingdom over to
Wyrn, then Arelon will become nothing more than another Fjordell province.”

“What are you implying, Sarene?” Shuden asked.

“That we take action against Telrii—any action we can.”

The table fell silent. Finally, Roial spoke. “This is different from what we
were doing before, Sarene. We opposed Iadon, but we did not plan to remove him.
If we take direct action against Telrii, then we will be traitors to the
Crown.”

“Traitors to the Crown, but not the people,” Sarene said. “In Teod, we respect
the king because he protects us. It is a bargain—a formal agreement. Iadon did
nothing to protect Arelon. He built no army to keep Fjorden away, he devised no
legal system to insure that his subjects were treated fairly, and he did
nothing to care for the spiritual welfare of his nation. My instincts warn me
that Telrii will be even worse.”

Roial sighed. “I don’t know, Sarene. Iadon overthrew the Elantrians to seize
his power, and now you suggest that we do the same thing. How much of this can
a country stand before it breaks apart?”

“How much of Hrathen’s string pulling do you think it can stand?” Sarene asked
pointedly.

The gathered lords looked at each other. “Let us sleep on it, Sarene,” Shuden
requested. “You speak of difficult matters—ones that should not be entered into
without careful meditation.”

“Agreed,” Sarene said. She was looking forward to the night’s rest herself. For
the first time in almost a week, she was going to actually be warm as she
slept.

The lords nodded, rising to go their separate ways. Roial hung back for a
moment. “It looks as if there is no reason to continue our betrothal, is there,
Sarene?”

“I don’t think so, my lord. If we take the throne now, it will be through
force, not manipulation of politics.”

The elderly man nodded wistfully. “Ah, it was far too good to be true anyway,
my dear. Goodnight, then.”

“Goodnight,” Sarene said, smiling fondly as the aged duke left. Three
engagements and no weddings. She was amassing a poor track record indeed. With
a sigh, she watched Roial close the door, then turned to Kiin, who was
fastidiously clearing away the remains of her meal.

“Uncle,” she said. “Telrii has moved into the palace and my things have been
burned. I find myself suddenly without lodgings. Might I accept your offer of
two months ago and move in here?”

Kiin chuckled. “My wife will be seriously annoyed if you don’t, ’Ene. She spent
the last hour preparing a room for you.”


Sarene sat on her new bed, wearing one of her aunt’s nightgowns. Her legs were
pulled tightly against her chest, and her bowed head was sorrowful.

Ashe fuzzed for a moment, her father’s face disappearing as the Seon returned
to his normal shape. He was silent for a long moment before saying, “I am
sorry, my lady.”

Sarene nodded, her bald head rubbing against her knees. Hrathen had not been
lying—he hadn’t even been exaggerating. Her father had converted to Shu-Dereth.

The ceremony hadn’t been performed yet; there were no Derethi priests in Teod.
However, it was apparent that as soon as Hrathen finished with Arelon, he
intended to travel to her homeland and personally collect her father’s formal
oath. The oath would place Eventeo at the bottom of the Derethi hierarchy,
forcing him to submit to the whims of even a simple priest.

No amount of raving or explaining had changed her father’s resolve. Eventeo was
an honest man. He had sworn to Hrathen that if Sarene returned safely, he would
convert. It didn’t matter that the gyorn’s trickery was behind both her curse
and restoration; the king would honor his promise.

Where Eventeo led, Teod would follow. It would take time, of course; the people
of Teod were not sheep. However, as the arteths flooded her homeland, the
people would give ear where they would have given only fists before—all because
they knew that their king was Derethi. Teod had been changed forever.

And he had done it for her. Of course, he claimed that he also knew it was best
for the country. No matter how good Teod’s navy was, sheer numbers insured that
a determined Fjordell campaign would eventually punch through the armada.
Eventeo claimed he would not fight a hopeless war.

Yet, this was the same man who had instructed Sarene that principle was always
worth fighting to protect. Eventeo had sworn that truth was immutable, and that
no battle—even a hopeless one—was in vain when defending what was right. But,
apparently, his love was stronger than truth. She was flattered, but the
emotion made her sick. Teod would fall because of her, becoming just another
Fjordell state, its king little more than Wyrn’s servant.

Eventeo had implied that she should lead Arelon to do as he had done, though
she could tell from his voice that he was proud when she refused. She would
protect Arelon, and Elantris. She would struggle for the survival of her
religion, because Arelon—poor sickly Arelon—was now Shu-Korath’s final
sanctuary. Where Arelon had once been a nation populated by gods, now it would
serve as the final haven for Domi Himself.

