# Part 2 - CHAPTER 48
[Metadata]: # {03.21}
[Descriptor]: # {03.21}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 48
Hrathen sat in the palace waiting room with growing dissatisfaction. Around
him, the signs of a changing government were already evident. It seemed
remarkable that one man could own so many tapestries, rugs, and brocades. The
palace sitting room was so draped with cloth plushness that Hrathen had been
forced to shove a virtual mountain of pillows out of the way before finding a
stone ledge upon which to seat himself.

He sat near the stone hearth, jaw clenched as he regarded the assembled
nobility. As could be expected, Telrii had quite suddenly become a very busy
man. Every nobleman, landholder, and ambitious merchant in the city wanted to
pay his “respects” to the new king. Dozens waited in the sitting room, many
without firm appointments. They hid their impatience poorly, but not a one was
brave enough to voice annoyance at the treatment.

Their inconvenience was unimportant. The intolerable factor was Hrathen’s
inclusion in the group. The rabble of supposed nobility was a pandering,
indolent lot. Hrathen, however, was backed by the power of Wyrn’s kingdom and
Jaddeth’s empire—the very power that had given Telrii the wealth he needed to
claim the throne.

And yet Hrathen was forced to wait. It was maddening, it was discourteous, and
it was unbelievable. Yet Hrathen had no choice but to endure it. Backed by
Wyrn’s power though he was, he had no troops, no might to force Telrii’s hand.
He could not denounce the man openly—despite his frustration, Hrathen’s
political instinct was too keen to let him do something like that. He had
worked hard to get a potential sympathizer on the throne; only a fool would let
his own pride ruin such an opportunity. Hrathen would wait, tolerating
disrespect for a short time, to achieve the eventual prize.

An attendant entered the room, draped in fine silks—the exaggerated livery of
Telrii’s personal heralds. The room’s occupants perked up, several men standing
and straightening their clothing.

“Gyorn Hrathen,” the attendant announced.

The noblemen wilted, and Hrathen stood and brushed past them with a dismissive
step. It was about time.

Telrii waited beyond. Hrathen paused just inside the door, regarding the
chamber with displeasure. The room had once been Iadon’s study, and at that
time it had been marked by a businessman’s efficiency. Everything had been well
placed and orderly; the furniture had been comfortable without being lavish.

Telrii had changed that. Attendants stood at the sides of the room, and beside
them sat carts heaped with exotic foods, purchased from the merchants of the
Arelene Market. Telrii reclined in a massive pile of cushions and silks, a
pleasant smile on his purple-birthmarked face. Rugs coated the floor, and
tapestries overlapped one another on the walls.

The men I am forced to work with … Hrathen thought with an inward sigh. Iadon,
at least, had been businesslike.

“Ah, Hrathen,” Telrii said with a smile. “Welcome.”

“Your Majesty,” Hrathen said, masking his disgust. “I was hoping we could speak
in private.”

Telrii sighed. “Very well,” he said with a wave of his hand, dismissing the
attendants. They left, pulling the outer doors closed.

“Now,” Telrii said, “why have you come? Are you interested in the tariffs on
your merchants setting up for the Arelene Market?”

Hrathen frowned. “I have more important matters to consider, Your Majesty. As
do you. I have come to collect on the promises of our allegiance.”

“Promises, Hrathen?” Telrii asked idly. “I made no promises.”

And so the game began. “You are to join the Derethi religion,” Hrathen said.
“That was the deal.”

“I made no such deal, Hrathen,” Telrii said. “You offered me funds; I accepted
them. You have my gratitude for the support, as I said that you would.”

“I will not squabble with you, merchant,” Hrathen said, wondering how much
money Telrii would demand to “remember” their agreement. “I am no sycophant to
be baited. If you do not do as Jaddeth expects, then I will find someone else.
Do not forget what happened to your predecessor.”

Telrii snorted. “Don’t take credit for something you had no hand in, priest.
Iadon’s fall was, as I recall, caused by the Teoish princess. You were in
Elantris at the time. Now, if Fjorden wishes a Derethi on the throne of Arelon,
that can probably be arranged. There will be, however, a price.”

Finally, Hrathen thought. He clenched his jaw, feigning anger, and waited a
moment. Then he sighed. “Very well. How much—”

“However,” Telrii interrupted, “it is not a price you can pay.”

Hrathen froze. “Excuse me?”

“Yes,” Telrii said. “My price must be paid by someone with a little more …
authority than yourself. You see, I’ve learned that Derethi priests cannot
appoint men to their own position in the Church hierarchy.”

Hrathen felt a chill grow within him as he connected the pieces of Telrii’s
statements. “You can’t possibly be serious,” he whispered.

“I know more than you assume, Hrathen,” Telrii said. “You think me a fool,
ignorant of the ways of the East? Kings bow to gyorns. What power will I hold
if I let you make me into nothing more than a Derethi slave? No, that will not
do for me. I don’t plan to bow anytime one of your priests comes to visit. I
will convert to your religion, but I will do so only with the promise of an
ecclesiastic rank to match my civil one. Not just King Telrii, but Gyorn
Telrii.”

Hrathen shook his head in wonder. How easily this man claimed that he was not
“ignorant” of the ways of the East, yet even Fjordell children knew enough
doctrine to laugh at such a ridiculous suggestion. “My lord Telrii,” he said
with amusement. “You have no idea—”

“I said, Hrathen,” Telrii interrupted, “that there is nothing you can do for
me. I have sought to deal with a higher power.”

Hrathen’s apprehension returned. “What are you saying?”

“Wyrn,” Telrii said with a wide smile. “I sent him a messenger several days
ago, informing him of my demand. You are no longer necessary, Hrathen. You may
withdraw.”

Hrathen stood, stunned. The man had sent a letter to Wyrn himself … Telrii had
made demands of the Regent of All Creation? “You are a foolish, foolish man,”
Hrathen whispered, finally realizing the severity of his problems. When Wyrn
received that message …

“Go!” Telrii repeated pointing toward the door.

Slightly dazed, Hrathen did as commanded.

