# Part 1 - CHAPTER 10
[Metadata]: # {02.10}
[Descriptor]: # {02.10}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 10
_Proper People(From Chapter 7)_
_Prince Raoden of Arelon: Shaod and new resident of Elantris_
_Galloden of Duladel: Shaod and Arelon by blood_
_Mareshe: Another new member of Elantris_

_More Newcomers_
_Maare(She):Simple Housewife_
_Riil(He):Workman_
_Saolin: Soldier in Count Eondel's legion_

_Ien: Seon of Raoden_

_Gang Leaders of Elantris_
_Shaor(He): Ruler of the market section_
_Karata(She): Ruler of the palace section_
_Aanden(He): Ruler of university section_


## Raoden and Galloden recruit three more newcomers
“Sule, I don’t think this is a good idea.” Galladon’s whisper was
unenthusiastic as he crouched next to Raoden.

“Hush,” Raoden ordered, peeking around the corner toward the courtyard. The
gangs had heard about Raoden’s recruitment of Mareshe, and were convinced that
he intended to start his own rival gang. When Raoden and Galladon had arrived
the day before to look for newcomers, they had found a group of Aanden’s men
waiting for them. The reception hadn’t been pleasant. Fortunately, they had
escaped without any broken bones or stubbed toes, but this time Raoden intended
to be a little more subtle.

“What if they’re waiting for us again?” Galladon asked.

“They probably are,” Raoden said. “Which is why you should keep your voice
down. Come on.”

Raoden slipped around the corner and into an alleyway. His toe pained him as he
walked, as did his scraped hands and a bruise he had picked up on his arm. In
addition, the hunger called to him, a phantom passion from within.

Galladon sighed. “I’m not so bored with death that I want to abandon it in
favor of an existence of pure pain. Kolo?”

Raoden turned back with tolerant eyes. “Galladon, someday you’re going to get
over this determined pessimism of yours, and all of Elantris will collapse from
the shock.”

“Pessimism?” Galladon demanded as Raoden crept down the alleyway. “Pessimism?
Me? Dulas are the most lighthearted, easygoing people in Opelon! We look at
each day with—Sule? Don’t you dare leave when I’m defending myself!”

Raoden ignored the large Dula. He also tried to ignore his pains, sharp though
they were. His new leather shoes helped immensely; despite Galladon’s
reservations, Mareshe had created a product to match his considerable ego. The
shoes were sturdy, with a strong, protective sole, but the soft leather—from
the covers of Galladon’s books—fit perfectly and didn’t rub.

Peeking carefully around the corner, Raoden studied the courtyard. Shaor’s men
weren’t visible, but they were probably hiding nearby. Raoden perked up as he
saw the city gate swinging open. The day had brought a new arrival. However, he
was shocked when the Elantris City Guard pushed not one, but three separate
white-clothed forms through the gate.

“Three?” Raoden said.

“The Shaod is unpredictable, sule,” Galladon said, creeping up behind him.

“This changes everything,” Raoden said with annoyance.

“Good. Let’s go—the others can have today’s offering. Kolo?”

“What? And miss such a grand opportunity? Galladon, I’m disappointed in you.”

The Dula grumbled something Raoden couldn’t catch, and Raoden reached back to
clap the big man reassuringly on the shoulder. “Don’t worry—I have a plan.”

“Already?”

“We have to move quickly—any minute now one of those three is going to take a
step, and then our opening will be gone.”

“Doloken,” Galladon muttered. “What are you going to do?”

“Nothing. You, however, are going to have a nice stroll out there in the
courtyard.”

“What?” Galladon asked. “Sule, you’ve gone kayana again. If I go out there, the
gangs are going to see me!”

“Exactly,” Raoden said with a smile. “Just make sure you run very quickly, my
friend. We wouldn’t want them to catch you.”

“You’re serious,” Galladon said with growing apprehension.

“Unfortunately. Now get moving—lead them off to the left, and I’ll do the rest.
We’ll meet back where we left Mareshe.”

Galladon huffed something about “not being worth all the dried meat in the
world,” but he let Raoden push him into the courtyard. A moment later a series
of startled growls came from the building where Shaor’s men usually hid. The
feral men burst out, forgetting the three newcomers in their hatred of the man
who had wronged them just a few days earlier.

Galladon shot one final withering look in Raoden’s direction, then took off at
a dash, choosing a street at random and leading Shaor’s men away. Raoden gave
him a moment, then ran out into the middle of the courtyard, making a great
show of breathing deeply, as if from exhaustion.

“Which way did he go?” he demanded sharply of the three confused newcomers.

“Who?” one of them finally ventured.

“The large Dula! Quickly, man, which way did he go? He has the cure!”

“The cure?” the man asked with surprise.

“Of course. It’s very rare, but there should be enough for all of us, if you
tell me which way he went. Don’t you want to get out of here?”

The newcomer raised a wavering hand and pointed at the path Galladon had taken.

“Come on!” Raoden urged. “Unless we move quickly we’ll lose him forever!” With
that, he started running.

The three newcomers stood for a moment; then, Raoden’s sense of urgency too
much for them, they followed. All three of their first steps, therefore, were
to the north—the direction that would have made them the property of Shaor’s
men. The other two gangs could only watch with frustration as all three dashed
away.


## Raoden and Mareshe make introductions with the three newcomers
“What can you do?” Raoden asked.

The woman shrugged. “Maare is my name, my lord. I was a simple housewife. I
have no special skills to speak of.”

Raoden snorted. “If you’re like any other housewife, then you’re probably more
skilled than anyone here. Can you weave?”

“Of course, my lord.”

Raoden nodded thoughtfully. “And you?” he asked of the next man.

“Riil, a workman, my lord. I spent most of my time building on my master’s
plantation.”

“Hauling bricks?”

“At first, my lord,” the man said. He had the wide hands and ingenuous face of
a worker, but his eyes were keen and intelligent. “I spent years learning with
the journeymen. I hoped that my master would send me to apprentice.”

“You’re very old to be an apprentice,” Raoden noted.

“I know, my lord, but it was a hope. Not many of the peasantry have room for
hopes anymore, even ones so simple.”

Raoden nodded again. The man didn’t speak like a peasant, but few people in
Arelon did. Ten years ago, Arelon had been a land of opportunity, and most of
its people had been at least slightly educated. Many of the men in his father’s
court complained that learning had ruined the peasantry for good work,
selectively forgetting that they themselves had been members of the same
“peasantry” a decade earlier.

“All right, how about you?” Raoden asked the next man.

The third newcomer, a well-muscled man with a nose that appeared to have been
broken at least a dozen times, regarded Raoden with hesitant eyes. “Before I
answer, I want to know just why I should listen to you.”

“Because I just saved your life,” Raoden said.

“I don’t understand. What happened to that other man?”

“He should show up in a few minutes.”

“But—”

“We weren’t really chasing him,” Raoden said. “We were getting you three out of
danger. Mareshe, please explain.”

The artisan jumped at the chance. With wild gestures he explained his narrow
escape two days earlier, making it appear that he had been on the verge of
death before Raoden appeared and helped him to safety. Raoden smiled; Mareshe
had a melodramatic soul. The artist’s voice rose and fell like a well-written
symphony. Listening to the man’s narrative, even Raoden nearly believed he had
done something incredibly noble.

Mareshe finished with a proclamation that Raoden was trustworthy, and
encouraged them all to listen to him. At the end, even the burly, hook-nosed
man was attentive.

“My name is Saolin, Lord Spirit,” the man said, “and I was a soldier in Count
Eondel’s personal legion.”

“I know Eondel,” Raoden said with a nod. “He’s a good man—a soldier himself
before he was granted a title. You were probably trained well.”

“We are the best soldiers in the country, sir,” Saolin said proudly.

Raoden smiled. “It isn’t hard to best most of the soldiers in our poor country,
Saolin. However, I’d match Eondel’s legion against soldiers from any nation—I
always found them to be men of honor, discipline, and skill. Much like their
leader. Giving Eondel a title is one of the few intelligent things Iadon has
done recently.”

“As I understand it, my lord, the king didn’t have much choice,” Saolin said
with a smile, showing a mouth that was missing a couple of teeth. “Eondel has
amassed quite a large fortune by hiring out his personal forces to the Crown.”

“That’s the truth,” Raoden said with a laugh. “Well, Saolin, I am glad to have
you. A professional soldier of your skill will certainly make us all feel a lot
safer around here.”

“Whatever Your Lordship needs,” Saolin said, his face growing serious. “I
pledge you my sword. I know little about religion besides saying my prayers,
and I don’t really understand what’s going on here, but a man who speaks well
of Lord Eondel is a good man in my estimation.”

Raoden clasped Saolin on the shoulder, ignoring the fact that the grizzled
soldier didn’t have a sword to pledge anymore. “I appreciate and accept your
protection, friend. But I warn you, this is no easy burden you take upon
yourself. I’m quickly amassing enemies in here, and it is going to require a
great deal of vigilance to make sure we aren’t surprised by an attack.”

“I understand, my lord,” Saolin said fervently. “But, by Domi, I won’t let you
down!”

“And what of us, my lord?” asked Riil the builder.

“I have a grand project in store for you two as well,” Raoden said. “Look up
and tell me what you see.”

Riil raised his eyes to the sky, his eyes confused. “I see nothing, my lord.
Should I?”

Raoden laughed. “Not a thing, Riil. That’s the problem—the roof to this
building must have fallen in years ago. Despite that, it’s one of the largest
and least-degenerate buildings I’ve found. I don’t suppose your training
included some experience in roof building?”

Riil smiled. “It certainly did, my lord. You have materials?”

“That’s going to be the tricky part, Riil. All of the wood in Elantris is
either broken or rotted.”

“That is a problem,” Riil acknowledged. “Perhaps if we dried out the wood, then
mixed it with clay….”

“It isn’t an easy task, Riil, Maare,” Raoden said.

“We’ll give it our best try, my lord,” Maare assured him.

“Good,” Raoden said with an approving nod. His bearing, coupled with their
insecurity, made them quick to listen. It wasn’t loyalty, not yet. Hopefully,
time would gain him their trust as well as their words.

“Now, Mareshe,” Raoden continued, “please explain to our new friends about what
it means to be an Elantrian. I don’t want Riil falling off the top of a
building before he realizes breaking his neck won’t necessarily mean an end to
the pain.”

“Yes, my lord,” Mareshe said, eyeing the newcomers’ food, which was sitting on
a relatively clean section of the floor. The hunger was affecting him already.

Raoden carefully chose a few items from offerings, then nodded to the rest.
“Divide this up amongst yourselves and eat it. Saving it won’t do any good—the
hunger is going to start immediately, and you might as well get this down
before it has time to make you greedy.”

The four nodded, and Mareshe began to explain the limitations of life in
Elantris as he divided the food. Raoden watched for a moment, then turned away
to think.

## Raoden and Galloden discuss life and the universe on Elantris
“Sule, my hama would love you. She always complained that I don’t get enough
exercise.” Raoden looked up as Galladon strode into the room.

“Welcome back, my friend,” Raoden said with a smile. “I was beginning to
worry.”

Galladon snorted. “I didn’t see you worrying when you shoved me out into that
courtyard. Seen worms on hooks treated more kindly. Kolo?”

“Ah, but you made such fantastic bait,” Raoden said. “Besides, it worked. We
got the newcomers, and you appear remarkably bruise-free.”

“A state of being that is most likely a source of grand displeasure to Shaor’s
dogs.”

“How did you escape them?” Raoden asked, handing Galladon the loaf of bread he
had grabbed for the Dula. Galladon regarded it, then ripped it in half and
offered one part to Raoden, who held up his hand forestallingly.

Galladon shrugged an “okay, starve if it suits you” shrug, and began to gnaw on
the loaf. “Ran into a building with a collapsed set of stairs, then went out
the back door,” he explained between mouthfuls. “I threw some rocks up onto the
roof when Shaor’s men entered. After what you did to them the other day, they
just assumed I was up there. They’re probably still sitting there waiting for
me.”

“Smooth,” Raoden said.

“Somebody didn’t leave me much choice.”

Galladon continued to eat in quiet, listening to the newcomers discuss their
various “important duties.” “You going to tell all of them that?” he asked in a
quiet voice.

“What’s that?”

“The newcomers, sule. You made them all think they are of vital importance,
just like Mareshe. Shoes are nice, but not a matter of life and death.”

Raoden shrugged. “People do a better job when they assume they’re important.”

Galladon was quiet for another short moment before speaking again. “They’re
right.”

“Who?”

“The other gangs. You are starting your own gang.”

Raoden shook his head. “Galladon, that is just a tiny part of it. No one
accomplishes anything in Elantris—they’re all either too busy squabbling over
food or contemplating their misery. The city needs a sense of purpose.”

“We’re dead, sule,” Galladon said. “What purpose can we have besides
suffering?”

“That’s exactly the problem. Everyone’s convinced that their lives are over
just because their hearts stopped beating.”

“That’s usually a pretty good indication, sule,” Galladon said dryly.

“Not in our case, my friend. We need to convince ourselves that we can go on.
The Shaod isn’t causing all the pain here—I’ve seen people on the outside lose
hope too, and their souls end up just as emaciated as those poor wretches in
the square. If we can restore even a tiny bit of hope to these people, then
their lives will improve drastically.” He emphasized the word “lives,” looking
Galladon right in the eyes.

“The other gangs aren’t just going to sit around and watch you steal all their
offerings, sule,” Galladon said. “They’re going to get tired of you very
quickly.”

“Then I’ll just have to be ready for them.” Raoden nodded toward the large
building around them. “This will make a rather good base of operations,
wouldn’t you say? It has this open room in the middle, with all of those
smaller ones at the back.”

Galladon squinted upward. “You could have picked a building with a roof.”

“Yes, I know,” Raoden replied. “But this one suits my purpose. I wonder what it
used to be.”

“A church,” Galladon said. “Korathi.”

“How do you know?” Raoden asked with surprise.

“Has the feel, sule.”

“Why would there be a Korathi church in Elantris?” Raoden argued. “The
Elantrians were their own gods.”

“But they were very lenient gods. There was supposed to be a grand Korathi
chapel here in Elantris, the most beautiful of its kind. It was built as an
offering of friendship to the people of Teod.”

“That seems so odd,” Raoden said with a shake of his head. “Gods of one
religion building a monument to Domi.”

“Like I said. The Elantrians were very lax gods. They didn’t really care if the
people worshipped them—they were secure in their divinity. Until the Reod came
along. Kolo?”

“You seem to know quite a bit, Galladon,” Raoden noted.

“And since when has that been a sin?” Galladon said with a huff. “You’ve lived
in Kae all your life, sule. Maybe instead of asking why I know these things,
you should wonder why you don’t.”

“Point taken,” Raoden said, glancing to the side. Mareshe was still deeply
involved in his explanation of an Elantrian’s danger-fraught life. “He’s not
going to be done anytime soon. Come on, there’s something I want to do.”

“Does it involve running?” Galladon asked in a pained voice.

“Only if they spot us.”


## Raoden and Galloden spy on Aanden before exchanging stories of their pasts
Raoden recognized Aanden. It was difficult to see—the Shaod brought profound
changes—but Raoden had a knack for faces. The so-called Baron of Elantris was a
short man with a sizable paunch and a long drooping mustache that was obviously
fake. Aanden did not look noble—of course, few noblemen Raoden knew looked very
aristocratic.

Regardless, Aanden was no baron. The man before Raoden, seated on a throne of
gold and presiding over a court of sickly-looking Elantrians, had been called
Taan. He had been one of Kae’s finest sculptors before the Shaod took him, but
he had not been of noble blood. Of course, Raoden’s own father had been nothing
more than a simple trader until chance had made him king. In Elantris, Taan had
apparently taken advantage of a similar opportunity.

The years in Elantris had not been kind to Taan. The man was blubbering
incoherently to his court of rejects.

“He’s mad?” Raoden asked, crouched outside the window they were using to spy on
Aanden’s court.

“We each have our own way of dealing with death, sule,” Galladon whispered.
“The rumors say Aanden’s insanity was a conscious decision. They say that after
being thrown into Elantris he looked around and said, ‘There’s no way I can
face this sane.’ After that, he declared himself Baron Aanden of Elantris and
began giving orders.”

“And people follow him?”

“Some do,” Galladon whispered with a shrug. “He may be mad, but so is the rest
of the world—at least, to the eyes of one who’s been thrown in here. Kolo?
Aanden is a source of authority. Besides, maybe he was a baron on the outside.”

“He wasn’t. He was a sculptor.”

“You knew him?”

“I met him once,” Raoden said with a nod. Then he looked back at Galladon with
inquisitive eyes. “Where did you hear the rumors about him?”

“Can we move back first, sule?” Galladon requested. “I’d rather not end up a
participant in one of Aanden’s mock trials and executions.”

“Mock?”

“Everything’s mock but the axe.”

“Ah. Good idea—I’ve seen all I needed to.”

The two men moved back, and as soon as they were a few streets away from the
university, Galladon answered Raoden’s question. “I talk to people, sule;
that’s where I get my information. Granted, the great majority of the city’s
people are Hoed, but there’re enough conscious ones around to talk with. Of
course, my mouth is what got me in trouble with you. Maybe if I’d kept it shut
I’d still be sitting on those steps enjoying myself, rather than spying on one
of the most dangerous men in the city.”

“Perhaps,” Raoden said. “But you wouldn’t be having half as much fun. You’d be
chained to your boredom.”

“I’m so glad you liberated me, sule.”

“Anytime.”

Raoden thought as they walked, trying to decide on a plan of action should
Aanden ever come looking for him. It hadn’t taken Raoden long to adjust to
walking on Elantris’s uneven, slime-covered streets; his still painful toe was
a wonderful motivator. He was actually beginning to regard the dun-colored
walls and grime as normal, which bothered him much more than the city’s
dirtiness ever had.

“Sule,” Galladon eventually asked. “Why did you want to see Aanden? You
couldn’t have known you’d recognize him.”

Raoden shook his head. “If Aanden had been a baron from the outside, I would
have known him almost immediately.”

“You’re certain?”

Raoden nodded absently.

Galladon was silent for a few more streets, then spoke with sudden
understanding. “Now, sule, I’m not very good with these Aons you Arelenes hold
in such esteem, but unless I’m completely wrong, the Aon for ‘spirit’ is Rao.”

“Yes,” Raoden said hesitantly.

“And doesn’t the king of Arelon have a son named Raoden?”

“He did.”

“And here you are, sule, claiming to know all the barons in Arelon. You’re
obviously a man with a good education, and you give commands easily.”

“You could say that,” Raoden said.

“Then, to top it all off, you call yourself ‘Spirit.’ Pretty suspicious. Kolo?”

Raoden sighed. “I should have picked a different name, eh?”

“By Doloken, boy! You’re telling me you’re the crown prince of Arelon?”

“I was the crown prince of Arelon, Galladon,” Raoden corrected. “I lost the
title when I died.”

“No wonder you’re so frustrating. I’ve spent my entire life trying to avoid
royalty, and here I end up with you. Burning Doloken!”

“Oh quiet down,” Raoden said. “It’s not like I’m really royalty—it’s been in
the family for less than a generation.”

“That’s long enough, sule,” Galladon said sullenly.

“If it helps, my father didn’t think I was fit to rule. He tried everything to
keep me from the throne.”

Galladon snorted. “I’d be scared to see the man Iadon found fit to rule. Your
father’s an idiot—no offense intended.”

“None taken,” Raoden replied. “And I trust you’ll keep my identity secret.”

Galladon sighed. “If you wish.”

“I do. If I’m going to do any good in Elantris, I need to win followers because
they like what I’m doing, not because they feel a patriotic obligation.”

Galladon nodded. “You could have at least told me, sule.”

“You said we shouldn’t talk about our pasts.”

“True.”

Raoden paused. “Of course, you know what this means.”

Galladon eyed him suspiciously. “What?”

“Now that you know who I was, you have to tell me who you were. It’s only
fair.”

Galladon’s response was long in coming. They had almost arrived at the church
before he spoke. Raoden slowed his walk, not wanting to break off his friend’s
narration by arriving at their destination. He needn’t have worried—Galladon’s
declaration was brief and pointed.

“I was a farmer,” he said curtly.

“A farmer?” Raoden had been expecting something more.

“And an orchard-keeper. I sold my fields and bought an apple farm because I
figured it would be easier—you don’t have to replant trees every year.”

“Was it?” Raoden asked. “Easier, I mean?”

Galladon shrugged. “I thought it was, though I know a couple of wheat farmers
that would argue with me until the sun set. Kolo?” The larger man looked at
Raoden with an insightful eye. “You don’t think I’m telling the truth about my
past, do you?”

Raoden smiled, spreading his hands before him. “I’m sorry, Galladon, but you
just don’t seem like a farmer to me. You have the build for it, but you seem
too …”

“Intelligent?” Galladon asked. “Sule, I’ve seen some farmers with minds so
sharp you could have used their heads to scythe grain.”

“I don’t doubt that you have,” Raoden said. “But, intelligent or not, those
types still tend to be uneducated. You are a learned man, Galladon.”

“Books, sule, are a wonderful thing. A wise farmer has time to study, assuming
he lives in a country such as Duladen, where men are free.”

Raoden raised an eyebrow. “So, you’re going to hold to this farmer story?”

“It’s the truth, sule,” Galladon said. “Before I became an Elantrian, I was a
farmer.”

Raoden shrugged. Perhaps. Galladon had been able to predict the rain, as well
as do a number of other eminently practical things. Still, it seemed like there
was something more, something he wasn’t ready to share yet.

“All right,” Raoden said appreciatively. “I believe you.”

## Raoden's old Seon, Ien, approaches Raoden, but does not recognize him
Galladon nodded curtly, his expression saying he was very glad the matter was
settled. Whatever he was hiding, it wouldn’t come out this day. So, instead,
Raoden took the opportunity to ask a question that had been bothering him since
the first day he came into Elantris.

“Galladon,” he asked, “where are the children?”

“Children, sule?”

“Yes, if the Shaod strikes randomly, then it should strike children as well as
adults.”

Galladon nodded. “It does. I’ve seen babes barely old enough to walk get thrown
in those gates.”

“Then where are they? I only see adults.”

“Elantris is a harsh place, sule,” Galladon said quietly as they strode through
the doors to Raoden’s broken-down church. “Children don’t last very long here.”

“Yes, but—” Raoden cut himself off as he saw something flicker in the corner of
his eye. He turned with surprise.

“A Seon,” Galladon said, noticing the glowing ball.

“Yes,” Raoden said, watching the Seon float slowly through the open ceiling and
spin in a lazy circle around the two men. “It’s so sad how they just drift
around the city like this. I …” he trailed off, squinting slightly, trying to
make out which Aon glowed at the center of the strange, silent Seon.

“Sule?” Galladon asked.

“Idos Domi,” Raoden whispered. “It’s Ien.”

“The Seon? You recognize it?”

Raoden nodded, holding out his hand with the palm up. The Seon floated over and
alighted on his proffered palm for a moment; then it began to float away,
flitting around the room like a careless butterfly.

“Ien was my Seon,” Raoden said. “Before I was thrown in here.” He could see the
Aon at Ien’s center now. The character looked … weak, somehow. It glowed
unevenly, sections of the character very dim, like …

Like the blotches on an Elantrian’s skin, Raoden realized, watching Ien float
away. The Seon headed for the wall of the church, continuing on until he
bounced against it. The small ball of light hovered for a moment, contemplating
the wall, then spun away to float in a different direction. There was an
awkwardness to the Seon’s motion—as if Ien could barely keep himself upright in
the air. He jerked occasionally, and constantly moved in slow, dizzy loops.

Raoden’s stomach turned as he regarded what was left of his friend. He’d
avoided thinking about Ien too much during his days in Elantris; he knew what
happened to Seons when their masters were taken by the Shaod. He’d
assumed—perhaps hoped—that Ien had been destroyed by the Shaod, as sometimes
happened.

Raoden shook his head. “Ien used to be so wise. I never knew a creature, Seon
or man, more thoughtful than he.”

“I’m … sorry, sule,” Galladon said solemnly.

Raoden held out his hand again, and the Seon approached dutifully, as it had
once done for the young boy Raoden—a boy who hadn’t yet learned that Seons were
more valuable as friends than as servants.

Does he recognize me? Raoden wondered, watching the Seon lurch slightly in the
air before him. Or is it just the familiar gesture that he recognizes?

Raoden would probably never know. After hovering above the palm for a second,
the Seon lost interest and floated away again.

“Oh, my dear friend,” Raoden whispered. “And I thought the Shaod had been harsh
to me.”

