# Part 2 - CHAPTER 36
[Metadata]: # {03.09}
[Descriptor]: # {03.09}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 36
When dawn signaled the fifth day of Hrathen’s exile, he knew that he had made a
mistake. He would die in Elantris. Five days was too long to go without drink,
and he knew there was no water to be had in the city of the damned.

He didn’t regret his actions—he had behaved in the most logical way. It had
been desperate logic, but rational nonetheless. Had he continued in Kae, he
would have grown more impotent with each turning day. No, it was much better to
die of dehydration.

He grew increasingly delirious as the fifth day passed. At times, he saw Dilaf
laughing over him; at others the Teoish princess did the same. Once he even
thought he saw Jaddeth himself, His face burning red with the heat of Godly
disappointment as he looked down on Hrathen. The delusions soon changed,
however. He no longer saw faces, no longer felt humiliated and scorned. In
their place, he was confronted with something much more horrid.

Memories of Dakhor.

Once again, the dark, hollow cubicles of the monastery surrounded him. Screams
echoed through the black stone hallways, cries of bestial agony mixing with
solemn chanting. Chanting that had a strange power to it. The boy Hrathen knelt
obediently, waiting, crouched in a cubical no larger than a closet, sweat
streaming past terrified eyes, knowing that eventually they would come for him.

Rathbore Monastery trained assassins, Fjeldor Monastery trained spies. Dakhor …
Dakhor Monastery trained demons.


His delirium broke sometime in the early afternoon, releasing him for a
time—like a cat allowing its prey to run free one last time before striking a
deadly blow. Hrathen roused his weakened body from the hard stones, his matted
clothing sticking to the slimy surface. He didn’t remember pulling into a fetal
position. With a sigh, Hrathen rubbed a hand over his dirty, grime-stained
scalp—a senseless but reflexive attempt to wipe away the dirt. His fingers
scraped against something rough and gristly. Stubble.

Hrathen sat upright, shock providing momentary strength. He reached with
trembling fingers, searching out the small flask that had contained his
sacrificial wine. He wiped the glass as best he could with a dirty sleeve, then
peered at his spectral reflection. It was distorted and unclear, but it was
enough. The spots were gone. His skin, though covered with dirt, was as fresh
and unblemished as it had been five days before.

Forton’s potion had finally worn off.

He had begun to think that it never would, that Forton had forgotten to make
the effects temporary. It was amazing enough that the Hroven man could create a
potion that made one’s body mimic the afflictions of an Elantrian. But Hrathen
had misjudged the apothecary: he had done as asked, even if the effects had
lasted a bit longer than expected.

Of course, if Hrathen didn’t get himself out of Elantris quickly, he might
still die. Hrathen stood, gathering his remaining strength and bolstering it
with excited adrenaline. “Behold!” he screamed toward the guardhouse above.
“Witness the power and glory of Lord Jaddeth! I have been healed!”

There was no response. Perhaps it was too far for his voice to carry. Then,
looking along the walls, he noticed something. There were no Guards. No patrols
or watches marched their rounds, no telltale tips of spears marked their
presence. They had been there the day before … or, had it been the day before
that? The last three days had become something of a blur in his mind—one
extended set of prayers, hallucinations, and the occasional exhausted nap.

Where had the guards gone? They considered it their solemn duty to watch
Elantris, as if anything threatening could ever come from the rotting city. The
Elantris City Guard performed a useless function, but that function gave them
notoriety. The Guards would never give up their posts.

Except they had. Hrathen began to scream again, feeling the strength leak from
his body. If the Guard wasn’t there to open the gates, then he was doomed.
Irony tickled at his mind—the only Elantrian to ever be healed would die
because of a collection of incompetent, negligent guards.

The gate suddenly cracked open. Another hallucination? But then a head poked
through the gap—the avaricious captain that Hrathen had been nurturing.

“My lord …?” the guard asked hesitantly. Then, looking Hrathen up and down with
wide eyes, he inhaled sharply. “Gracious Domi! It’s true—you’ve been healed!”

“Lord Jaddeth had heard my pleas, Captain,” Hrathen announced with what
strength he could manage. “The taint of Elantris has been removed from my
body.”

The captain’s head disappeared for a moment. Then, slowly, the gate opened all
the way, revealing a group of wary guards.

“Come, my lord.”

Hrathen rose to his feet—he hadn’t even noticed sinking to his knees—and walked
on shaky legs to the gate. He turned, resting his hand on the wood—one side
filthy and grime-stained, the other side bright and clean—and looked back at
Elantris. A few huddled shapes watched him from the top of a building.

“Enjoy your damnation, my friends,” Hrathen whispered, then motioned for the
guards to shut the gate.

“I really shouldn’t be doing this, you know,” the captain said. “Once a man is
thrown into Elantris …”

“Jaddeth rewards those who obey Him, Captain,” Hrathen said. “Often at the
hands of His servants.”

The captain’s eyes brightened, and Hrathen was suddenly very grateful he had
begun bribing the man. “Where are the rest of your men, Captain?”

“Protecting the new king,” the captain said proudly.

“New king?” Hrathen asked.

“You’ve missed a lot, my lord. Lord Telrii rules in Arelon now—or, at least, he
will as soon as Iadon’s funeral is over.”

Weakened as he was, Hrathen could only stand in shock. Iadon dead? Telrii
seizing control? How could five days bring about such drastic events?

“Come,” Hrathen said firmly. “You can explain it to me on the way to the
chapel.”


The crowds gathered around him as he walked; the captain owned no carriage, and
Hrathen didn’t want to bother waiting for one. For the moment, the exhilaration
of a plan fulfilled was enough to keep him moving.

The crowds helped as well. As news spread, the people—servants, merchants, and
nobles alike—came to stare at the recovered Elantrian. All parted before him,
regarding him with looks that ranged from stunned to worshipful, some reaching
out to touch his Elantrian robe in awe.

The trip was crowded, but uneventful—except for one moment when he looked down
a side street and recognized the Teoish princess’s head poking out of a
carriage window. In that moment, Hrathen felt a sense of fulfillment that
rivaled the day he had become a full gyorn. His healing wasn’t just unexpected,
it was unfathomable. There was no way Sarene could have planned for it. For
once, Hrathen had total and complete advantage.

When he reached the chapel, Hrathen turned to the mass of people with raised
hands. His clothing was still stained, but he held himself as if to make the
grime a badge of pride. The dirt signaled his suffering, proving that he had
traveled to the very pit of damnation and returned with his soul intact.

“People of Arelon!” he yelled. “Know ye this day who is Master! Let your hearts
and souls be guided by the religion which can offer evidence of divine support.
Lord Jaddeth is the only God in Sycla. If you need proof of this, look at my
hands that are clean from rot, my face that is pure and unblemished, and my
scalp rough with stubble. Lord Jaddeth tested me, and as I relied on Him, He
blessed me. I have been healed!”

He lowered his hands and the crowd roared their approval. Many had probably
doubted after Hrathen’s apparent fall, but they would return with renewed
dedication. The converts he made now would be stronger than any that had come
before.

Hrathen entered the chapel, and the people remained outside. Hrathen walked
with increasing fatigue, the energy of the moment finally giving way to five
days’ worth of strain. He flopped to his knees before the altar, bowing his
head in sincere prayer.

It didn’t bother him that the miracle was an effect of Forton’s potion—Hrathen
had found that most supposed miracles were either natural or the result of
human intervention. Jaddeth was behind them, as He was behind all things, using
natural phenomena to increase the faith of man.

Hrathen raised praises to God for giving him the capacity to think of the plan,
the means to execute it, and the climate to make it succeed. The captain’s
arrival had certainly been a result of divine will. That the man would leave
Telrii’s camp just when Hrathen needed him, and that he would hear Hrathen
yelling through the thick wood, was simply too much to be a coincidence.
Jaddeth might not have “cursed” Hrathen with the Shaod, but He had certainly
been behind the plan’s success.

Drained, Hrathen finished his prayer and lurched to his feet. As he did so, he
heard a chapel door open behind him. When he turned, Dilaf stood behind him.
Hrathen sighed. This was a confrontation he had hoped to avoid until he’d had
some rest.

Dilaf, however, fell to his knees before Hrathen. “My hroden,” he whispered.

Hrathen blinked in surprise. “Yes, Arteth?”

“I doubted you, my hroden,” Dilaf confessed. “I thought Lord Jaddeth had cursed
you for incompetence. Now I see that your faith is much stronger than I
realized. I know why you were chosen to hold the position of gyorn.”

“Your apology is accepted, Arteth,” Hrathen said, trying to keep the fatigue
from his voice. “All men question in times of trial—the days following my exile
must have been difficult for you and the other priests.”

“We should have had more faith.”

“Learn from these events then, Arteth, and next time do not allow yourself to
doubt. You may go.”

Dilaf moved to leave. As the man rose, Hrathen studied his eyes. There was
respect there, but not as much penitence as the arteth was trying to show. He
looked more confused than anything; he was amazed and unsettled, but he was not
pleased. The battle was not over yet.

Too tired to worry about Dilaf for the moment, Hrathen stumbled back to his
quarters and pulled open the door. His possessions were piled in one corner of
the room, as if waiting to be hauled away for disposal. Suddenly apprehensive,
Hrathen rushed to the pile. He found the Seon trunk beneath a pile of clothing;
its lock was broken. Hrathen opened the lid with anxious fingers and pulled out
the steel box inside. The front of the box was covered with scrapes, scratches,
and dents.

Hurriedly, Hrathen opened the box. Several of the levers were bent, and the
dial stuck, so he was extremely relieved when he heard the lock click open. He
lifted the lid with anxious hands. The Seon floated inside, unperturbed. The
three remaining vials of potion lay next to it; two had cracked, leaking their
contents into the bottom of the box.

“Did anyone open this box since I last spoke through you?” Hrathen asked.

“No, my lord,” the Seon replied in her melancholy voice.

“Good,” Hrathen said, snapping the lid closed. After that, he drank a careful
amount of wine from a flask he got from the pile, then collapsed on the bed and
fell asleep.

_______


It was dark when he awakened. His body was still tired, but he forced himself
to rise. A vital piece of his plans could not wait. He summoned a particular
priest, who arrived a short time later. The priest, Dothgen, was a tall man
with a powerful Fjordell build and muscles that even managed to bulge through
his red Derethi robes.

“Yes, my lord?” Dothgen asked.

“You were trained in Rathbore Monastery, were you not, Arteth?” Hrathen asked.

“I was, my lord,” the man responded in a deep voice.

“Good,” Hrathen said, holding up the last vial of potion. “I have need of your
special skills.”

“Who is it for, my lord?” the priest asked. Like every graduate of Rathbore,
Dothgen was a trained assassin. He had received far more specialized training
than Hrathen had at Ghajan Monastery, the place Hrathen had gone after Dakhor
proved too much for him. Only a gyorn or a ragnat, however, could make use of
Rathbore-trained priests without Wyrn’s permission.

Hrathen smiled.

