# Part 2 - CHAPTER 34
[Metadata]: # {03.07}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 34
Raoden was wrong about Shaor’s men. A few of them came to him that night to
cook their food, the light of consciousness shining weakly in their eyes. The
rest—the majority of Shaor’s followers—did not.

They came to him for another reason.

He watched several of them pull a large stone block on one of Mareshe’s sleds.
Their minds were gone—their capacity for rational thought atrophied somehow by
their extended submersion in bestial madness. While several had recovered—if
only partially—the rest seemed beyond help. They never made the connection
between fires and cooking; they had simply stood howling over the grain,
outraged and confused by their inability to devour it.

No, these men had not fallen into his trap. But, they had come anyway—for
Raoden had dethroned their god.

He had entered Shaor’s territory and had escaped unscathed. He had power over
food; he could make it inedible for one but succulent for another. His soldiers
had repeatedly defeated Shaor’s band. To their simple, degenerate minds there
was only one thing to do when faced by a god more powerful than their own:
convert.

They came to him the morning after his attempt at restoring their intelligence.
He had been walking the perimeter of New Elantris’s short defensive wall, and
seen them slinking down one of the city’s main thoroughfares. He had raised the
call, thinking they had finally decided to mount a coordinated attack.

But Shaor’s men had not come to fight. That had come to give him a gift: the
head of their former god. Or, at least, her hair. The lead madman had tossed
the golden wig at Raoden’s feet, its follicles stained with dark, stagnant
Elantrian blood.

Despite searching, his people never found Shaor’s body.

Then, the fleece of their fallen goddess lying in the slime before them, the
wildmen had bowed their faces to the ground in supplication. They now did
exactly as Raoden said in all things. In turn, he had rewarded them with
morsels of food, just as one would a favored pet.

It disturbed him, using men like beasts. He made other efforts to restore their
rational minds, but even after just two days he knew that it was a futile hope.
These men had surrendered their intellect—and, regardless of whether psychology
or the Dor was to blame, it would never return.

They were remarkably well behaved—docile, even. The pain didn’t seem to affect
them, and they performed any duty, no matter how menial or laborious. If Raoden
told them to push on a building until it fell over, he would return days later
to find them still standing against the same wall, their palms pressed against
the belligerent stone. Yet, despite their apparent obedience, Raoden didn’t
trust them. They had murdered Saolin; they had even killed their former master.
They were calm only because their god currently demanded it.

“Kayana,” Galladon declared, joining him.

“There’s not much left, is there?” Karata agreed.

The Kayana was Galladon’s name for them. It meant the “Insane.”

“Poor souls,” Raoden whispered.

Galladon nodded. “You sent for us, sule?”

“Yes, I did. Come with me.”

_______


The increased manpower of the Kayana had given Mareshe and his workers the
means to reconstruct some stone furniture, thereby conserving their already
dwindling wood resources. Raoden’s new table inside the chapel was the same one
that he had used to make Taan remember his stonecarving days. A large
crack—patched with mortar—ran down the middle, but other than that it was
remarkably intact, the carvings worn but distinct.

The table held several books. The recent restoration of New Elantris required
Raoden’s leadership, making it difficult for him to sneak away to the hidden
library, so he had brought out several volumes. The people were accustomed to
seeing him with books, and hadn’t thought to question him—even though these
tomes still had leather covers on them.

He studied AonDor with increasing urgency. The pain had grown. Sometimes, it
struck with such ferocity that Raoden collapsed, struggling against the agony.
It was still manageable, if only barely, but it was growing worse. It had been
a month and a half since he entered Elantris, and he doubted he would see
another month come and go.

“I don’t see why you insist on sharing every AonDor detail with us, sule,”
Galladon said, sighing as Raoden approached an open tome. “I barely understand
half of what you tell us.”

“Galladon, you must force yourself to remember these things,” Raoden said. “No
matter what you claim, I know you have the intellect for it.”

“Perhaps,” Galladon admitted, “but that doesn’t mean I enjoy it. AonDor is your
hobby, not mine.”

“Listen, my friend,” Raoden said, “I know AonDor holds the secret to our curse.
In time, with study, we can find the clues we need. But,” he continued, holding
up a finger, “if something should happen to me, then there has to be someone to
continue my work.”

Galladon snorted. “You’re about as close to becoming a Hoed as I am to being a
Fjordell.”

I hide it well. “That doesn’t matter,” Raoden said. “It is foolish not to have
a backup. I’ll write these things down, but I want you two to hear what I have
to say.”

Galladon sighed. “All right, sule, what have you discovered? Another modifier
to increase the range of an Aon?”

Raoden smiled. “No, this is far more interesting. I know why Elantris is
covered with slime.”

Karata and Galladon perked up. “Really?” Karata asked, looking down at the open
book. “Does it explain that here?”

“No, it’s a combination of several things,” Raoden said. “The key element,
however, is right here.” He pointed to an illustration.

“Aon Ashe?” Galladon asked.

“Correct,” Raoden said. “You know that Elantrian skin was so silvery that some
people claimed it glowed.”

“It did,” Galladon said. “Not brightly, but when my father walked into a dark
room, you could see his outline.”

“Well, the Dor was behind it,” Raoden explained. “Every Elantrian’s body is
connected constantly to the Dor. The same link existed between Elantris itself
and the Dor, though the scholars don’t know why. The Dor infused the entire
city, making stone and wood shine as if some quiet flame were burning within.”

“It must have been difficult to sleep,” Karata noted.

“You could cover it up,” Raoden said. “But the effect of the lighted city was
so spectacular that many Elantrians just accepted it as natural, learning to
sleep even with the glow.”

“Fascinating,” Galladon said indifferently. “So, what does this have to do with
slime?”

“There are fungi and molds that live on light, Galladon,” Raoden explained.
“The Dor’s illumination was different from regular light, however, and it
attracted a different kind of fungus. Apparently, a thin translucent film grew
on most things. The Elantrians didn’t bother to clean it off—it was practically
imperceptible, and it actually enhanced the radiance. The mold was tough, and
it didn’t make much mess. Until it died.”

“The light faded …” Karata said.

“And the fungi rotted,” Raoden said with a nod. “Since the mold once covered
the entire city, now the slime does as well.”

“So, what’s the point?” Galladon asked with a yawn.

“This is another string in the web,” Raoden explained, “another clue as to what
happened when the Reod struck. We have to work backward, my friend. We are only
now starting to learn symptoms of an event that happened ten years ago. Maybe
after we understand everything the Reod did, we can begin to guess what might
have caused it.”

“The slime explanation makes sense, my prince,” Karata said. “I’ve always known
that there was something unnatural about that grime. I’ve stood outside in the
rain, watching waves of water pound against a stone wall without cleaning it a
speck.”

“The slime is oily,” Raoden said, “and repels water. Have you heard Kahar talk
about how difficult it is to scrub away?”

Karata nodded, leafing through the tome. “These books contain much
information.”

“They do,” Raoden said. “Though the scholars who wrote them could be
frustratingly obscure. It takes a great deal of studying to find answers to
specific questions.”

“Such as?” Karata asked.

Raoden frowned. “Well, for one thing, I haven’t found a single book that
mentions how to make Seons.”

“None at all?” Karata asked with surprise.

Raoden shook his head. “I always assumed that Seons were created by AonDor, but
if so, the books don’t explain how. A lot of them talk about the Passing of
famous Seons from one person to another, but that’s about it.”

“Passing?” Karata asked with a frown.

“Giving the Seon to another person,” Raoden said. “If you have one, you can
give it to someone else—or you can tell it who it’s supposed to go and serve if
you should die.”

“So, a regular person could have a Seon?” she asked. “I thought it was only
noblemen.”

Raoden shook his head. “It’s all up to the previous owner.”

“Though a nobleman’s not likely to Pass his Seon to some random peasant,”
Galladon said. “Seons, like wealth, tend to say in the family. Kolo?”

Karata frowned. “So … what happens if the owner dies, and hasn’t told the Seon
who to move on to?”

Raoden paused, then shrugged, looking to Galladon.

“Don’t look at me, sule,” Galladon said. “I never had a Seon.”

“I don’t know,” Raoden admitted. “I guess it would just choose its next master
on its own.”

“And if it didn’t want to?” Karata asked.

“I don’t think it would have a choice,” Raoden said. “There’s … something about
Seons and their masters. They’re bonded, somehow. Seons go mad when their
masters are taken by the Shaod, for instance. I think they were created to
serve—it’s part of their magic.”

Karata nodded.

“My lord Spirit!” called an approaching voice.

Raoden raised an eyebrow, closing the tome.

“My lord,” Dashe said as he rushed through the door. The tall Elantrian looked
more confused than worried.

“What is it, Dashe?” Raoden asked.

“It’s the gyorn, my lord,” Dashe said with an excited look. “He’s been healed.”

