# Part 1 - CHAPTER 6
[Metadata]: # {02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 6
_Relevent People_
_Gyorn Hrathen: High Priest of Herethi religion from Fjordell_
_Dilaf: His slave_

_Svrakiss: Pagans of the Herethi religion_

_Other notes_
_King Iadon of Arelon_
_Princess Sarene of Teod_
_Jaddeth, Divine Ruler of the Herethi religion_
_Kae, Capital of Arelon_

## Dilaf and Hrathen discuss the king and the princess before talking of revolt
“There is no hope for the king, I’m afraid.” Hrathen folded his arms across his
breastplate thoughtfully as he looked back at the throne room. “Your Grace?”
Dilaf asked.

“King Iadon,” Hrathen explained. “I had hoped to save him—though I never really
expected the nobility to follow me without a fight. They’re too entrenched in
their ways. Perhaps if we had gotten to them right after the Reod. Of course,
we weren’t sure that whatever disease had taken the Elantrians wouldn’t affect
us as well.”

“Jaddeth struck down the Elantrians,” Dilaf said fervently.

“Yes,” Hrathen said, not bothering to look down at the shorter man. “But
ofttimes Jaddeth uses natural processes to bring about His will. A plague will
kill Fjordell as well as Arelene.”

“Jaddeth would protect his chosen.”

“Of course,” Hrathen said distractedly, shooting one more dissatisfied glance
down the hallway toward the throne room. He had made the offer out of duty,
knowing that the easiest way to save Arelon would be to convert its ruler, but
he hadn’t expected Iadon to respond favorably. If only the king knew how much
suffering he could forestall with a simple profession of faith.

It was too late now; Iadon had formally rejected Jaddeth. He would have to
become an example. However, Hrathen would have to be careful. Memories of the
Duladen revolution were still stark in Hrathen’s mind—the death, blood, and
chaos. Such a cataclysm had to be avoided. Hrathen was a stern man, and a
determined one, but he was no lover of carnage.

Of course, with only three months’ time, he might not have a choice. If he was
going to succeed, he might have to incite a revolt. More death and more
chaos—horrible things to throw upon a nation that had still hadn’t recovered
from its last violent revolution. However, Jaddeth’s empire would not sit still
and wait because a few ignorant nobles refused to accept the truth.

“I suppose I expected too much of them,” Hrathen mumbled. “They are, after all,
only Arelenes.”

Dilaf made no response to the comment.

“I noticed someone odd in the throne room, Arteth,” Hrathen said as they turned
and walked out of the palace, passing both sculpture and servant without so
much as a glance. “Perhaps you can help me identify her. She was Aonic, but she
was taller than most Arelenes, and her hair was much lighter than the average
Arelish brown. She looked out of place.”

“What was she wearing, Your Holiness?” Dilaf asked.

“Black. All black with a yellow sash.”

“The new princess, Your Grace,” Dilaf hissed, his voice suddenly hateful.

“New princess?”

“She arrived yesterday, the same as yourself. She was to be married to Iadon’s
son Raoden.”

Hrathen nodded. He hadn’t attended the prince’s funeral, but he had heard of
the event. He hadn’t known, however, of the impending marriage. The betrothal
must have occurred recently. “She’s still here,” he asked, “even though the
prince died?”

Dilaf nodded. “Unfortunately for her, the royal engagement contract made her
his wife the moment he died.”

“Ah,” Hrathen said. “Where is she from?”

“Teod, Your Grace,” Dilaf said.

Hrathen nodded, understanding the hatred in Dilaf ‘s voice. Arelon, despite the
blasphemous city of Elantris, at least showed some possibility for redemption.
Teod, however, was the homeland of Shu-Korath—a degenerate sect of Shu-Keseg,
the parent religion of Shu-Dereth. The day Teod fell beneath Fjorden’s glory
would be a joyous day indeed.

“A Teoish princess could be a problem,” Hrathen mused.

“Nothing can hinder Jaddeth’s empire.”

“If nothing could hinder it, Arteth, then it would already encompass the entire
planet. Jaddeth takes pleasure in allowing His servants to serve Him, and
grants us glory in bending the foolish before our will. And of all the fools in
the world, Teoish fools are the most dangerous.”

“How could one woman be a danger to you, Your Holiness?”

“Well, for one thing, her marriage means that Teod and Arelon have a formal
blood bond. If we aren’t careful, we’ll have to fight them both at once. A man
is more likely to think himself a hero when he has an ally to support him.”

“I understand, Your Grace.”

Hrathen nodded, sweeping out into the sunlight. “Pay attention, Arteth, and I
will teach you a very important lesson—one that few people know, and even fewer
can properly use.”

“What lesson is that?” Dilaf asked, following close behind.

Hrathen smiled slightly. “I will show you the way to destroy a nation—the means
by which the man of Jaddeth can topple kingdoms and seize control of the
people’s souls.”

“I am … eager to learn, Your Grace.”

“Good,” Hrathen said, looking across Kae at the enormous wall of Elantris. It
rose above the city like a mountain. “Take me up there. I wish to view the
fallen lords of Arelon.”


## Hrathen and Dilaf look out and analyze their target
When Hrathen had first arrived at the Outer City of Kae, he had noted how
indefensible it was. Now, standing atop the wall of Elantris, Hrathen could see
that he had actually underestimated how pathetic Kae’s fortifications were.
Beautiful, terraced steps ran up the outside of Elantris’s wall, providing
outside access to the top. They were firm, stone constructions; it would be
impossible to destroy them in an emergency. If Kae’s inhabitants retreated into
Elantris, they would be trapped, not protected.

There were no archers. The Elantris City Guard members carried large, unwieldy
spears that looked like they were far too heavy to be thrown. They held
themselves with a proud air, wearing unarmored yellow-and-brown uniforms, and
they obviously considered themselves far above the regular city militia. From
what Hrathen had heard, however, the Guard wasn’t even really necessary to keep
the Elantrians in. The creatures rarely tried to escape, and the city wall was
far too large for the Guard to patrol extensively. The force was more of a
public-relations operation than a true military; the people of Kae felt much
more comfortable living beside Elantris when they knew a troop of soldiers
watched the city. However, Hrathen suspected that in a war, the Guard members
would be hard-pressed to defend themselves, let alone protect Kae’s population.

Arelon was a ripe jewel waiting to be pillaged. Hrathen had heard of the days
of chaos directly following Elantris’s fall, and of the incalculable treasures
that had been plundered from the magnificent city. Those valuables were now
concentrated in Kae, where the new nobility lived practically unguarded. He had
also heard that, despite the thievery, a large percentage of Elantris’s
wealth—pieces of art too large to move easily, or smaller items that hadn’t
been plundered before Iadon began enforcing the city’s isolation—remained
locked within Elantris’s forbidden walls.

Only superstition and inaccessibility kept Elantris and Kae from being raped by
invaders. The smaller thieving bands were still too frightened of Elantris’s
reputation. The larger bands were either under Fjordell control—and therefore
wouldn’t attack unless instructed to do so—or had been bribed to stay away by
Kae’s nobles. Both situations were extremely temporary in nature.

And that was the basic reason Hrathen felt justified in taking extreme action
to bring Arelon under Fjorden control—and protection. The nation was an egg
balanced on the peak of a mountain, just waiting for the first breeze to plunge
it to the hard ground below. If Fjorden didn’t conquer Arelon soon, then the
kingdom would certainly collapse beneath the weight of a dozen different
problems. Beyond inept leadership, Arelon suffered from an overtaxed working
class, religious uncertainty, and dwindling resources. All of these factors
competed to deliver the final blow.

His thoughts were interrupted by the sound of harsh breathing behind him. Dilaf
stood on the other side of the wall walk, looking out over Elantris. His eyes
were wide, like those of a man who had been punched in the stomach, and his
teeth were clenched. Hrathen half expected him to start frothing at the mouth.

“I hate them,” Dilaf whispered in a harsh, almost unintelligible voice.

Hrathen crossed the wall walk to stand beside Dilaf. Since the wall had not
been constructed for military purposes, there were no battlements, but both
sides had raised parapets for safety. Hrathen rested against one of these,
looking out to study Elantris.

There wasn’t much to see; he’d been in slums more promising than Elantris. The
buildings were so decayed that it was a miracle any of them still had roofs,
and the stench was revolting. At first he doubted anything could possibly be
alive inside the city, but then he saw some forms running furtively along the
side of a building. They were crouched with their hands outstretched, as if
prepared to fall on all fours. One paused, looking up, and Hrathen saw his
first Elantrian.

It was bald, and at first Hrathen thought its skin was dark, like that of a
member of the Jindo noble caste. However, he could see splotches of light gray
on the creature’s skin as well—great uneven pale masses, like lichen on a
stone. He squinted, leaning forward against the parapet. He couldn’t make out
the Elantrian’s eyes, but somehow Hrathen knew they would be wild and feral,
darting around like those of an anxious animal.

The creature took off with its companions—its pack. So this is what the Reod
did, Hrathen mused to himself. It made beasts out of gods. Jaddeth had simply
taken what was in their hearts and showed it for the world to see. According to
Derethi philosophy, the only thing that separated men from the animals was
religion. Men could serve Jaddeth’s empire; beasts could serve only their
lusts. The Elantrians represented the ultimate flaw of human arrogance: they
had set themselves up as gods. Their hubris had earned their fate. In another
situation, Hrathen would have been content in leaving them to their punishment.

However, he happened to need them.

Hrathen turned to Dilaf. “The first step in taking control of a nation, Arteth,
is the simplest. You find someone to hate.”


## Hrathen and Dilaf discuss psychological manipulation
“Tell me of them, Arteth,” Hrathen requested, entering his room inside the
chapel. “I want to know everything you know.”

“They are foul, loathsome creatures,” Dilaf hissed, entering behind Hrathen.
“Thinking of them makes my heart grow sick and my mind feel tainted. I pray
every day for their destruction.”

Hrathen closed the door to his chambers, dissatisfied. It was possible for a
man to be too passionate. “Arteth, I understand you have strong feelings,”
Hrathen said sternly, “but if you are to be my odiv you will need to see
through your prejudices. Jaddeth has placed these Elantrians before us with a
purpose in mind, and I cannot discover that purpose if you refuse to tell me
anything useful.”

Dilaf blinked, taken aback. Then, for the first time since their visit to
Elantris, a level of sanity returned to his eyes. “Yes, Your Grace.”

Hrathen nodded. “Did you see Elantris before its fall?”

“Yes.”

“Was it as beautiful as people say?”

Dilaf nodded sullenly. “Pristine, kept white by the hands of slaves.”

“Slaves?”

“All of Arelon’s people were slaves to the Elantrians, Your Grace. They were
false gods, giving promises of salvation in exchange for sweat and labor.”

“And their legendary powers?”

“Lies, like their supposed divinity. A carefully crafted hoax to earn them
respect and fear.”

“Following the Reod, there was chaos, correct?”

“Chaos, killing, riots, and panic, Your Grace. Then the merchants seized
power.”

“And the Elantrians?” Hrathen asked, walking over to take a seat at his desk.

“There were few left,” Dilaf said. “Most had been killed in the riots. Those
remaining were confined to Elantris, as were all men that the Shaod took from
that day forward. They looked much as you just saw them, wretched and subhuman.
Their skin was patched with black scars, like someone had pulled away the flesh
and revealed the darkness underneath.”

“And the transformations? Did they abate at all after the Reod?” Hrathen asked.

“They continue, Your Grace. They happen all across Arelon.”

“Why do you hate them so, Arteth?”

The question came suddenly, and Dilaf paused. “Because they are unholy.”

“And?”

“They lied to us, Your Grace. They made promises of eternity, but they couldn’t
even maintain their own divinity. We listened to them for centuries, and were
rewarded with a group of impotent, vile cripples.”

“You hate them because they disappointed you,” Hrathen said.

“Not me, my people. I was a follower of Derethi years before the Reod.”

Hrathen frowned. “Then you are convinced that there is nothing supernatural
about the Elantrians other than the fact that Jaddeth has cursed them?”

“Yes, Your Grace. As I said, the Elantrians created many falsehoods to
reinforce their divinity.”

Hrathen shook his head, then stood and began to remove his armor. Dilaf moved
to help, but Hrathen waved the arteth away. “How, then, do you explain the
sudden transformation of ordinary people into Elantrians, Arteth?”

Dilaf didn’t have a response.

“Hate has weakened your ability to see, Arteth,” Hrathen said, hanging his
breastplate on the wall beside his desk and smiling. He had just experienced a
flash of brilliance; a portion of his plan suddenly fit into place. “You assume
because Jaddeth did not give them powers, they did not have any.”

Dilaf’s face grew pale. “What you say is—”

“Not blasphemy, Arteth. Doctrine. There is another supernatural force besides
our God.”

“The Svrakiss,” Dilaf said quietly.

“Yes.” Svrakiss. The souls of the dead men who hated Jaddeth, the opponents to
all that was holy. According to Shu-Dereth, there was nothing more bitter than
a soul who had had its chance and thrown it away.

“You think the Elantrians are Svrakiss?” Dilaf asked.

“It is accepted doctrine that the Svrakiss can control the bodies of the evil,”
Hrathen said, unbuckling his greaves. “Is it so hard to believe that all this
time they have been controlling bodies of the Elantrians, making them appear as
gods to fool the simpleminded and unspiritual?”

There was a light in Dilaf’s eyes; the concept was not new to the arteth,
Hrathen realized. Suddenly his flash of inspiration didn’t seem quite so
brilliant.

Dilaf regarded Hrathen for a moment, then spoke. “You don’t really believe it,
do you?” he asked, his voice uncomfortably accusatory for one speaking to his
hroden.

Hrathen was careful not to let discomfort show. “It doesn’t matter, Arteth. The
connection is logical; people will follow it. Right now all they see are the
abject remnants of what were once aristocrats—men do not loathe such, they pity
them. Demons, however, are something everyone can hate. If we denounce the
Elantrians as devils, then we will have success. You already hate the
Elantrians; that is fine. To make others join you, however, you’ll have to give
them more of a reason than ‘they disappointed us.’”

“Yes, Your Grace.”

“We are religious men, Arteth, and we must have religious enemies. The
Elantrians are our Svrakiss, no matter if they possess the souls of evil men
long dead or evil men now living.”

“Of course, Your Holiness. We will destroy them then?” There was eagerness in
Dilaf’s face.

“Eventually. Right now, we will use them. You will find that hate can unify
people more quickly and more fervently than devotion ever could.”

