# Part 1 - CHAPTER 5
[Metadata]: # {02.05}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 5
“Merciful Domi,” Sarene asked with surprise, “where did he come from?”

The gyorn strode into the king’s throne room with the arrogance characteristic
of his kind. He wore the shining bloodred armor of a Derethi high priest, an
extravagant crimson cloak billowing out behind him, though he bore no weapon.
It was a costume meant to impress—and, despite what Sarene thought of the
gyorns themselves, she had to admit that their clothing was effective. Of
course, it was mostly for show; even in Fjorden’s martial society, few people
could walk as easily as this gyorn while wearing full plate armor. The metal
was probably so thin and light that it would be useless in battle.

The gyorn marched past her without a second glance, his eyes focused directly
on the king. He was young for a gyorn, probably in his forties, and his short,
well-styled black hair had only a trace of gray in it.

“You knew there was a Derethi presence in Elantris, my lady,” Ashe said,
floating beside her as usual, one of only two Seons in the room. “Why should
you be surprised to see a Fjordell priest?”

“That is a full gyorn, Ashe. There are only twenty of them in the entire
Fjordell Empire. There may be some Derethi believers in Kae, but not enough to
warrant a visit from a high priest. Gyorns are extremely miserly with their
time.”

Sarene watched the Fjordell man stride through the room, cutting through groups
of people like a bird tearing through a cloud of gnats. “Come on,” she
whispered to Ashe, making her way through the peripheral crowd toward the front
of the room. She didn’t want to miss what the gyorn said.

She needn’t have worried. When the man spoke, his firm voice boomed through the
throne room. “King Iadon,” he said, with only the slightest nod of his head in
place of a bow. “I, Gyorn Hrathen, bring you a message from Wyrn Wulfden the
Fourth. He thinks that it is time our two nations shared more than a common
border.” He spoke with the thick, melodic accent of a native Fjordell.

Iadon looked up from his ledgers with a barely masked scowl. “What more does
Wyrn want? We already have a trade treaty with Fjorden.”

“His Holiness fears for the souls of your people, Your Majesty,” Hrathen said.

“Well, then, let him convert them. I have always allowed your priests complete
freedom to preach in Arelon.”

“The people respond too slowly, Your Majesty. They require a push—a sign, if
you will. Wyrn thinks it is time you yourself converted to Shu-Dereth.”

This time Iadon didn’t even bother masking the annoyance in his tone. “I
already believe in Shu-Korath, priest. We serve the same God.”

“Derethi is the only true form of Shu-Keseg,” Hrathen said darkly.

Iadon waved a dismissive hand. “I care nothing for the squabbles between the
two sects, priest. Go convert someone who doesn’t believe—there are still
plenty of Arelenes who hold to the old religion.”

“You should not dismiss the offering of Wyrn so casually,” the gyorn warned.

“Honestly, priest, do we need to go through this? Your threats hold no
weight—Fjorden hasn’t held any real influence for two centuries. Do you
seriously think to intimidate me with how powerful you used to be?”

Hrathen’s eyes grew dangerous. “Fjorden is more powerful now than it ever was
before.”

“Really?” Iadon asked. “Where is your vast empire? Where are your armies? How
many countries have you conquered in the last century? Maybe someday you people
will realize that your empire collapsed three hundred years ago.”

Hrathen paused for a moment; then he repeated his introductory nod and spun
around, his cloak billowing dramatically as he stalked toward the door.
Sarene’s prayers were not answered, however—he didn’t step on it and trip
himself. Just before Hrathen left, he turned to shoot one final, disappointed
look at the throne room. His gaze however, found Sarene instead of the king.
Their eyes locked for a moment, and she could see a slight hint of confusion as
he studied her unusual height and blond Teoish hair. Then he was gone, and the
room burst into a hundred prattling conversations.

King Iadon snorted and turned back to his ledgers.

“He doesn’t see,” Sarene whispered. “He doesn’t understand.”

“Understand what, my lady?” Ashe asked.

“How dangerous that gyorn is.”

“His Majesty is a merchant, my lady, not a true politician. He doesn’t see
things the same way you do.”

“Even so,” Sarene said, speaking quietly enough that only Ashe could hear.
“King Iadon should be experienced enough to recognize that what Hrathen said—at
least about Fjorden—was completely true. The Wyrns are more powerful now than
they were centuries ago, even at the height of the Old Empire’s power.”

“It is hard to look past military might, especially when one is a relatively
new monarch,” Ashe said. “King Iadon cannot fathom how Fjorden’s army of
priests could be more influential than its warriors ever were.”

Sarene tapped her cheek for a moment in thought. “Well, Ashe, at least now you
don’t have to worry about my causing too much unrest amongst Kae’s nobility.”

“I seriously doubt that, my lady. How else would you spend your time?”

“Oh, Ashe,” she said sweetly. “Why would I bother with a bunch of incompetent
would-be nobles when I can match wits with a full gyorn?” Then, more seriously,
she continued. “Wyrn picks his high priests well. If Iadon doesn’t watch that
man—and it doesn’t seem like he will—then Hrathen will convert this city out
from under him. What good will my sacrificial marriage do for Teod if Arelon
gives itself to our enemies?”

“You may be overreacting, my lady,” Ashe said with a pulse. The words were
familiar—it seemed that Ashe often felt a need to say them to her.

Sarene shook her head. “Not this time. Today was a test, Ashe. Now Hrathen will
feel justified in taking action against the king—he has convinced himself that
Arelon is indeed ruled by a blasphemer. He’ll try to find a way to overthrow
Iadon’s throne, and Arelon’s government will collapse for the second time in
ten years. This time it won’t be the merchant class that fills the void of
leadership—it will be the Derethi priesthood.”

“So you are going to help Iadon?” Ashe said with an amused tone.

“He is my sovereign king.”

“Despite your opinion that he is insufferable?”

“Anything is better than Fjordell rule. Besides, maybe I was wrong about
Iadon.” Things hadn’t gone too poorly between the two of them since that first
embarrassing meeting. Iadon had practically ignored her at Raoden’s funeral,
which had suited Sarene just fine; she’d been too busy watching for
discrepancies in the ceremony. Unfortunately, the event had occurred with a
disappointing level of orthodoxy, and no predominant noblemen had given
themselves away by failing to show up or by looking too guilty during the
proceedings.

“Yes …” she said. “Perhaps Iadon and I can get along by just ignoring each
other.”

“What in the name of Burning Domi are you doing back in my court, girl!” the
king swore from behind her.

Sarene raised her eyes to the sky in a look of resignation, and Ashe pulsed a
quiet laugh as she turned to face King Iadon.

“What?” she asked, trying her best to sound innocent.

“You!” Iadon barked, pointing at her. He was understandably in a bad mood—of
course, from what she heard, Iadon was rarely in a good mood. “Don’t you
understand that women aren’t to come to my court unless they’re invited?”

Sarene blinked her eyes in confusion. “No one told me that, Your Majesty,” she
said, intentionally trying to sound as if she didn’t have a wit in her head.

Iadon grumbled something about foolish women, shaking his head at her obvious
lack of intelligence.

“I just wanted to see the paintings,” Sarene said, putting a quaver in her
voice, as if she were on the brink of crying.

Iadon held his hand palm-forward in the air to forestall any more of her
drivel, turning back to his ledgers. Sarene barely kept herself from smiling as
she wiped her eyes and pretended to study the painting behind her.

“That was unexpected,” Ashe said quietly.

“I’ll deal with Iadon later,” Sarene mumbled. “I have someone more important to
worry about now.”

“I just never thought I’d see the day when you, of all women, gave into the
feminine stereotype—even if it was just an act.”

“What?” Sarene asked, fluttering her eyes. “Me, act?”

Ashe snorted.

“You, know, I’ve never been able to figure out how you Seons manage sounds like
that,” Sarene said. “You don’t have noses—how can you snort?”

“Years of practice, my lady,” Ashe replied. “Am I truly going to have to suffer
your whimpering every time you speak with the king?”

Sarene shrugged. “He expects women to be foolish, so I’ll be foolish. It’s much
easier to manipulate people when they assume you can’t gather enough wits to
remember your own name.”

“’Ene?” a sudden voice bellowed. “Is that you?” The deep, scratchy voice was
oddly familiar. It was as if the speaker had a sore throat, though she had
never heard someone with a sore throat yell so loudly.

Sarene turned hesitantly. An enormous man—taller, broader, pudgier, and more
muscled than seemed possible—shoved his way through the crowd in her direction.
He was dressed in a broad blue silken doublet—she shuddered to think of how
many worms had toiled to make it—and wore the ruffle-cuffed trousers of an
Arelish courtier.

“It is you!” the man exclaimed. “We thought you weren’t coming for another
week!”

“Ashe,” Sarene mumbled, “who is this lunatic and what does he want with me?”

“He looks familiar, my lady. I’m sorry, my memory isn’t what it used to be.”

“Ha!” the enormous man said, scooping her up into a bear hug. It was an odd
feeling—her bottom half squished into his oversized gut while her face was
crushed by his hard, well-muscled chest. She resisted the urge to whimper,
waiting and hoping the man would drop her before she passed out. Ashe would
probably go for help if her face started to change colors.

Fortunately, the man let go long before she asphyxiated, instead holding her by
her shoulders at arms length. “You’ve changed. When I last saw you, you were
only knee high.” Then he looked over her tall figure. “Well … I doubt you were
ever knee high, but you were certainly no taller than a waist. Your mother
always said you’d be a lanky one!”

Sarene shook her head. The voice was slightly familiar, but she couldn’t place
his features. She usually had such a good memory for faces…. Unless….

“Hunkey Kay?” she asked hesitantly. “Gracious Domi! What happened to your
beard?”

“Arelish nobles don’t wear beards, little one. I haven’t had one in years.”

It was him. The voice was different, the beardless face unfamiliar, but the
eyes were the same. She remembered looking up at those wide brown eyes, always
full of laughter. “Hunkey Kay,” she mumbled distractedly. “Where’s my present?”

Her uncle Kiin laughed, his odd scratchy voice making it sound more like a
wheeze than a chortle. Those had always been the first words out of her mouth
when he came to visit; her uncle brought the most exotic of gifts, delights
that were extravagant enough to be unique even to the daughter of a king.

“I’m afraid I forgot the present this time, little one.”

Sarene blushed. However, before she could squeak out an apology, Hunkey Kay
wrapped a large arm around her shoulder and began towing her out of the throne
room.

“Come, you have to meet my wife.”

“Wife?” Sarene asked with a shocked voice. It had been over a decade since she
had seen Kiin, but she remembered one fact quite clearly. Her uncle had been a
sworn bachelor and a confirmed rascal. “Hunkey Kay is married?”

“You aren’t the only one who has grown over the last ten years,” Kiin rasped.
“Oh, and as cute as it is to hear you call me ‘Hunkey Kay,’ you’ll probably
want to call me Uncle Kiin now.”

Sarene blushed again. “Hunkey Kay” had been the creation of a child unable to
pronounce her uncle’s name.

“So, how’s your father doing?” the large man asked. “Acting properly regal, I
assume.”

“He’s doing fine, Uncle,” she replied. “Though I’m sure he would be surprised
to find you living in the court of Arelon.”

“He knows.”

“No, he thinks you left on one of your voyages and settled on one of the far
islands.”

“Sarene, if you’re as quick-witted a woman as you were a girl, then you should
have learned by now to separate the truth from the stories.”

The statement came like a bucketful of icy water. She vaguely remembered
watching her uncle’s ship sail away one day and asking her father when Hunkey
Kay was going to return. Eventeo’s face had been morose when he replied that
this time Hunkey Kay would be taking a long, long voyage.

“But why?” she asked. “All this time you were living just a few days’ trip from
home, and you never came to visit?”

“Stories for another day, little one,” Kiin said with a shake of his head.
“Right now, you need to meet the monster of a woman who finally managed to
capture your uncle.”


Kiin’s wife was hardly a monster. In fact, she was one of the most beautiful
mature women Sarene had ever seen. Daora had a strong face with sharp,
statuesque features and a well-styled head of auburn hair. She was not what
Sarene would ever have placed with her uncle—of course, her most recent
memories of Kiin were over a decade old.

Kiin’s large, castle-like mansion was not a surprise. She remembered that her
uncle had been a merchant of some sort, and her memories were highlighted by
expensive gifts and Kiin’s exotic clothing. He had not only been the younger
son of a king, but he had also been an extremely successful businessman.
Something he still was, appartently. He’d been out of the city on business
until that morning, which was why she hadn’t seen him at the funeral.

The greatest shock was the children. Despite the fact that Sarene knew he was
married, she just couldn’t reconcile her recollections of the unruly Hunkey Kay
with the concept of fatherhood. Her preconceptions were neatly shattered the
moment Kiin and Daora opened the door to the mansion’s dining hall.

“Father’s home!” called the voice of a young girl.

“Yes, Father’s home,” Kiin said with a suffering voice. “And no, I didn’t bring
you anything. I’ve only been gone a few minutes.”

“I don’t care what you did or didn’t bring me. I just want to eat.” The
speaker, a young girl about ten years old, had a very serious, adult-sounding
voice. She wore a pink dress tied with white ribbon, and had a bob of stark
blond hair on her head.

“When do you not want to eat, Kaise?” a little boy, who looked almost identical
to the girl, asked with a sour look.

“Children, don’t squabble,” Daora said firmly. “We have a guest.”

“Sarene,” Kiin declared, “meet your cousins. Kaise and Daorn. The two biggest
headaches in your poor uncle’s life.”

“Now, Father, you know you would have gone mad from boredom long ago without
them,” a man said from the far doorway. The newcomer was of average Arelish
height, which meant he was an inch or two shorter than Sarene, with a lean
build and a strikingly handsome, hawkish face. His hair had been parted down
the center and flopped down on either side of his face. A woman with black hair
stood at his side, her lips slightly pursed as she studied Sarene.

The man bowed slightly to Sarene. “Your Highness,” he said with only a hint of
a smile on his lips.

“My son Lukel,” Kiin explained.

“Your son?” Sarene asked with surprise. Young children she could accept, but
Lukel was a few years older than she was. That meant …

“No,” Kiin said with a shake of his head. “Lukel is from Daora’s previous
marriage.”

“Not that that makes me any less his son,” Lukel said with a broad smile. “You
can’t escape responsibility for me that easily.”

“Domi himself wouldn’t dare take responsibility for you,” Kiin said. “Anyway,
that’s Jalla next to him.”

“Your daughter?” Sarene asked as Jalla curtsied.

“Daughter-in-law,” the dark-haired woman explained, her speech thick with an
accent.

“You’re Fjordell?” Sarene asked. The hair had been a clue, but the name and
accent were giveaways.

“Svordish,” Jalla corrected—not that it was much different. The small kingdom
of Svorden was all but a Fjordell province.

“Jalla and I studied together at the Svordish university,” Lukel explained. “We
were married last month.”

“Congratulations,” Sarene said. “It’s nice to know I’m not the only newlywed in
the room.” Sarene meant the comment lightly, but was unable to keep the
bitterness out of her voice. She felt Kiin’s large hand grip her shoulder.

“I’m sorry, ’Ene,” he said softly. “I wasn’t going to bring it up, but … You
deserved better than this; you were always such a happy child.”

“No loss to me,” Sarene said with an indifference she didn’t feel. “It isn’t
like I knew him, Uncle.”

“Even still,” Daora said, “it must have been a shock.”

“You could say that,” Sarene agreed.

“If it helps,” Kiin said, “Prince Raoden was a good man. One of the best I have
ever known. If you knew a little more about Arelish politics, then you would
understand that I don’t use those words lightly when referring to a member of
Iadon’s court.”

Sarene nodded slightly. Part of her was happy to hear she hadn’t misjudged
Raoden by his letters; the other half thought it would have been easier to
continue thinking that he was like his father.

“Enough talk about dead princes!” a small but insistent voice decided from the
table. “If we don’t eat soon, Father will have to stop complaining about me
because I’ll be dead.”

“Yes, Kiin,” Daora agreed, “you should probably go to the kitchen and make sure
your feast isn’t burning.”

Kiin snorted. “I have each dish cooking on a precise schedule. It would be
impossible for one to …” The large man trailed off, sniffing the air. Then he
swore and barreled out of the room.

“Uncle Kiin is cooking dinner?” Sarene asked with amazement.

“Your uncle is one of the best chefs in this town, dear,” Daora said.

“Uncle Kiin?” Sarene repeated. “Cook?”

Daora nodded, as if it were an everyday occurrence. “Kiin has traveled more
places in this world than anyone in Arelon, and he brought back recipes from
each one. I believe tonight he’s fixing something he learned in Jindo.”

“Does this mean we’re going to eat?” Kaise asked pointedly.

“I hate Jindoeese food,” Daorn complained, his voice almost indistinguishable
from that of his sister. “It’s too spicy.”

“You don’t like anything unless it has a handful of sugar mixed in,” Lukel
teased, mussing his half brother’s hair.

“Daorn, go run and get Adien.”

“Another one?” Sarene asked.

Daora nodded. “The last. Lukel’s full brother.”

“He’s probably sleeping,” Kaise said. “Adien’s always sleeping. I think it’s
because his mind is only half awake.”

“Kaise, little girls who say such things about their brothers often end up in
bed without supper,” Daora informed. “Daorn, get moving.”


“You don’t look like a princess,” Kaise said. The girl sat primly on her chair
beside Sarene. The dining room had a homey, studylike feel, filled with dark
wood paneling and relics from Kiin’s traveling days.

“What do you mean?” Sarene asked, trying to figure out how to use the odd
Jindoeese dining utensils. There were two of them, one with a sharp pointed end
and the other with a flat shoveled end. Everyone else was eating with them as
if it were second nature, and Sarene was determined not to say anything. She
would figure them out on her own or she wouldn’t get much to eat. The latter
was looking much more likely.

“Well, for one thing you’re way too tall,” Kaise said.

“Kaise,” her mother warned in a threatening tone.

“Well it’s true. All of the books say princesses are petite. I’m not exactly
sure what petite means, but I don’t think she’s it.”

“I’m Teoish,” Sarene said, successfully spearing something that looked like a
marinated piece of shrimp. “We’re all this tall.”

“Father’s Teoish too, Kaise,” Daorn said. “And you know how tall he is.”

“But father’s fat,” Kaise pointed out. “Why aren’t you fat too, Sarene?”

Kiin, who had just appeared out of the kitchen doors, absently rapped his
daughter on the head with the bottom of a serving tray as he passed. “Just as I
thought,” he mumbled, listening to the ringing sound created by the metal pan,
“your head is completely hollow. I guess that explains a lot.”

Kaise rubbed her head petulantly before turning back to her meal, muttering, “I
still think princesses should be smaller. Besides, princesses are supposed to
have good table manners; cousin Sarene’s dropped about half of her meal on the
floor. Who ever heard of a princess that didn’t know how to use MaiPon sticks?”

Sarene blushed, looking down at the foreign utensils.

“Don’t listen to her, ’Ene,” Kiin laughed, setting another succulent-smelling
dish on the table. “This is Jindoeese food—it’s made with so much grease that
if half of it doesn’t end up on the floor, then something’s wrong. You’ll get
the hang of those sticks eventually.”

“You can use a spoon, if you want,” Daorn said helpfully. “Adien always does.”

Sarene’s eyes were immediately drawn to the fourth child. Adien was a
thin-faced boy in his late teens. He had a pale white complexion and a strange,
discomforting cast to his face. He ate awkwardly, his motions stiff and
uncontrolled. As he ate, he mumbled to himself—repeating numbers, as far as
Sarene could tell. Sarene had met people like him before, children whose minds
weren’t completely whole.

“Father, the meal is delicious,” Lukel said, drawing the attention away from
his brother. “I don’t believe you’ve ever fixed this shrimp dish before.”

“It’s called HaiKo,” Kiin said in his raspy voice. “I learned it off a
traveling merchant while you were studying in Svorden last year.”

“Sixteen million four hundred thousand seven hundred and seventy-two,” Adien
mumbled. “That’s how many steps it is to Svorden.”

Sarene paused slightly at Adien’s addition, but the rest of the family paid him
no heed, so she did likewise. “It truly is wonderful, Uncle,” Sarene said. “I
would never have figured you for a chef.”

“I’ve always enjoyed it,” Kiin explained, sitting down in his chair. “I would
have fixed you some things back when I visited Teod, but your mother’s head
cook had this inane idea that royalty didn’t belong in the kitchen. I tried to
explain to her that, in a way, I partially owned the kitchens, but she still
would never let me set foot inside to prepare a meal.”

“Well, she did us all a disservice,” Sarene said. “You don’t do all of the
cooking, do you?”

Kiin shook his head. “Fortunately, no. Daora is quite the cook herself.”

Sarene blinked in surprise. “You mean you don’t have a cook to fix your meals
for you?”

Kiin and Daora shook their heads in unison.

“Father is our cook,” Kaise said.

“No servers or butlers either?” Sarene asked. She had assumed the lack of
servants was due to an odd desire on Kiin’s part to keep this particular meal
personal.

“None at all,” Kiin said.

“But why?”

Kiin looked at his wife, then back at Sarene. “Sarene, do you know what
happened here ten years ago?”

“The Reod?” Sarene asked. “The Punishment?”

“Yes, but do you know what that means?”

Sarene thought for a moment, then shrugged slightly. “The end of the
Elantrians.”

Kiin nodded. “You probably never met an Elantrian—you were still young when the
Reod hit. It is hard to explain how much this country changed when the disaster
struck. Elantris used to be the most beautiful city in the world—trust me, I’ve
been everywhere else. It was a monument of glowing stone and lustrous metal,
and its inhabitants looked like they were chiseled from the same materials.
Then … they fell.”

“Yes, I’ve studied this before,” Sarene said with a nod. “Their skin turned
dark with black spots, and their hair began to fall from their skulls.”

“You can say that with the knowledge of books,” Kiin said, “but you weren’t
here when it happened. You can’t know the horror that comes from seeing gods
turn wretched and foul. Their fall destroyed the Arelish government, throwing
the country into total chaos.”

He paused for a moment, then continued. “It was the servants who started the
revolution, Sarene. The very day their masters fell, the servants turned on
them. Some—mostly the country’s current nobility—say it was because the lower
class in Elantris was treated too well, that their pampered natures inspired
them to cast down their former rulers at the first sign of weakness. I think it
was simply fear—ignorant fear that the Elantrians had a vile disease, mixed
with the terror that comes from seeing someone you had worshipped stricken down
before you.

“Either way, the servants are the ones who did the most damage. First in small
groups, then in an incredibly destructive riot, killing any Elantrian they
could find. The most powerful Elantrians went first, but the killings spread to
the weaker ones as well.

“It didn’t stop with the Elantrians either—the people attacked families,
friends, and even those who had been appointed to positions by the Elantrians.
Daora and I watched it all, horrified and thankful that there were no
Elantrians in the family. Because of that night, we haven’t ever been able to
convince ourselves to hire servants.”

“Not that we really need them,” Daora said. “You’d be surprised at how much you
can get done on your own.”

“Especially when you have a couple of children to do the dirty jobs,” Kiin said
with a sly smile.

“Is that all we’re good for, Father?” Lukel said with a laugh. “Scrubbing
floors?”

“It’s the only reason I’ve ever found for having kids,” Kiin said. “Your mother
and I only had Daorn because we decided we needed another couple of hands to
wash chamber pots.”

“Father, please,” Kaise said. “I’m trying to eat.”

“Merciful Domi help the man who interrupts Kaise’s supper,” Lukel said with a
chuckle.

“Princess Kaise,” the little girl corrected.

“Oh, so my little girl’s a princess now?” Kiin asked with amusement.

“If Sarene can be one, then so can I. After all, you’re her uncle, and that
should make you a prince. Right, Father?”

“Technically yes,” Kiin said. “Though I don’t think I officially have a title
anymore.”

“They probably kicked you out because you spoke of chamber pots during supper,”
Kaise said. “Princes can’t do that sort of thing, you know. It’s horrible table
manners.”

“Of course,” Kiin said with a fond smile. “I wonder why I never realized that
before.”

“So,” Kaise continued. “If you are a prince, then your daughter is a princess.”

“I’m afraid it doesn’t work that way, Kaise,” Lukel said. “Father’s not king,
so his kids would be barons or counts, not princes.”

“Is that true?” Kaise asked with a disappointed tone.

“I’m afraid so,” Kiin said. “However, trust me. Anyone who claims you’re not a
princess, Kaise, hasn’t ever listened to you complain at bedtime.”

The little girl thought for a moment and, apparently unsure how to take the
comment, simply turned back to her dinner. Sarene wasn’t paying much attention;
her mind had frozen at the part where her uncle had said “I don’t think I
officially have a title anymore.” It smelled of politics. Sarene thought she
knew every important event that had happened in Teod’s court during the last
fifty years, and she knew nothing of Kiin being officially stripped of his
title.

Before she could ponder any more on the incongruity, Ashe floated in through a
window. In the excitement of the dinner, Sarene had almost forgotten that she’d
sent him to follow the Gyorn Hrathen.

The ball of light stopped hesitantly in the air near the window. “My lady, am I
interrupting?”

“No, Ashe, come in and meet my family.”

“You have a Seon!” Daorn exclaimed with amazement. For once his sister seemed
too stunned to speak.

“This is Ashe,” Sarene explained. “He’s been serving my house for over two
centuries, and he’s the wisest Seon I’ve ever known.”

“My lady, you exaggerate,” Ashe said modestly, yet at the same time she noticed
he was glowing a bit brighter.

“A Seon …” Kaise said with quiet wonder, her dinner forgotten.

“They’ve always been rare,” Kiin said, “now more than ever.”

“Where did you get him?” Kaise asked.

“From my mother,” Sarene said. “She Passed Ashe to me when I was born.” The
Passing of a Seon—it was one of the finest gifts a person could receive.
Someday, Sarene would have to Pass Ashe, selecting a new ward for him to watch
over and care for. She had planned it to be one of her children, or perhaps
grandchildren. The possibility of either ever existing, however, was looking
increasingly unlikely….

“A Seon,” Kaise said with wonder. She turned to Sarene, eyes alight with
excitement. “Can I play with him after supper?”

“Play with me?” Ashe asked uncertainly.

“Can I please, Cousin Sarene?” Kaise begged.

“I don’t know,” Sarene said with a smile. “I seem to recall a few comments
about my height.”

The little girl’s look of disappointed chagrin was a source of great amusement
to all. It was at that moment, among their laughter, that Sarene began to feel
her tension ease for the first time since leaving her homeland a week before.

