# PART 3 - CHAPTER 62
[Metadata]: # {04.08}
[Descriptor]: # {04.08}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 62
Sarene and Hrathen shambled down the city street, their nondescript cloaks
pulled close. Hrathen kept his hood up to hide his dark hair. The people of
Teod had gathered in the streets, wondering why their king had brought the
armada into the bay. Many wandered in the direction of the docks, and with
these Sarene and Hrathen mingled, stooped and subservient, trying their best to
look commonplace.

“When we arrive, we will seek passage on one of the merchant ships,” Hrathen
said quietly. “They will bolt from Teod as soon as the armada launches. There
are several places in Hrovell that don’t see a Derethi priest for months at a
time. We can hide there.”

“You talk as if Teod will fall,” Sarene whispered back. “You may go, priest,
but I will not leave my homeland.”

“If you value its safety, you will,” Hrathen snapped. “I know Dilaf—he is a man
obsessed. If you stay in Teod, so will he. If you leave, perhaps he will
follow.”

Sarene ground her teeth. The gyorn’s words had apparent sense in them, but it
was possible he was concocting things to get her to accompany him. Of course,
there was no reason for him to do such a thing. What cared he for Sarene? She
had been his fervent enemy.

They moved slowly, unwilling to set themselves apart from the crowd by
increasing their speed. “You didn’t really answer my question before, priest,”
Sarene whispered. “You have turned against your religion. Why?”

Hrathen walked in silence for a moment. “I … I don’t know, woman. I have
followed Shu-Dereth since I was a child—the structure and formality of it have
always called to me. I joined the priesthood. I … thought I had faith. It
turned out, however, that the thing I grew to believe was not Shu-Dereth after
all. I don’t know what it is.”

“Shu-Korath?”

Hrathen shook his head. “That is too simple. Belief is not simply Korathi or
Derethi, one or the other. I still believe Dereth’s teachings. My problem is
with Wyrn, not God.”


Horrified at his show of weakness before the girl, Hrathen quickly steeled his
heart against further questions. Yes, he had betrayed Shu-Dereth. Yes, he was a
traitor. But, for some reason, he felt calm now that he had made the decision.
He had caused blood and death in Duladel. He would not let that happen again.

He had convinced himself that the Republic’s fall was a necessary tragedy. Now
he had dispelled that illusion. His work in Duladel had been no more ethical
than what Dilaf had attempted here in Teod. Ironically, by opening himself to
truth, Hrathen had also exposed himself to the guilt of his past atrocities.

One thing, however, kept him from despair—the knowledge that whatever else
happened to him, no matter what he had done, he could say that he now followed
the truth in his heart. He could die and face Jaddeth with courage and pride.

The thought crossed his mind right before he felt the stab of pain in his
chest. He reached over in surprise, grunting as he brought his hand up. His
fingers were stained with blood. He felt his feet weaken, and he slumped
against a building, ignoring Sarene’s startled cry. Confused, he looked out
into the crowd, and his eyes fell on the face of his murderer. He knew the man.
His name was Fjon—the priest Hrathen had sent home from Kae the very day he had
arrived. That had been two months ago. How had Fjon found him? How …? It was
impossible.

Fjon smiled, then disappeared into the throng of people.

As the darkness closed in, Hrathen discarded all questions. Instead his view
and consciousness was filled with Sarene’s worried face. The woman who had
destroyed him. Because of her, he had finally rejected the lies he had believed
all of his life.

She would never know that he had come to love her.

Goodbye, my princess, he thought. Jaddeth, be merciful to my soul. I only did
the best I could.


Sarene watched the light fading from Hrathen’s eyes.

“No!” she cried, pressing her hand against his wound in a futile attempt to
stop the blood. “Hrathen, don’t you dare leave me alone here!”

He didn’t respond. She had fought with him over the fate of two countries, but
had never really known who he was. She never would.

A startled scream shocked Sarene back into the tangible world. People gathered
around her, upset by the sight of a dying man in the street. Stunned, Sarene
realized she had become the center of attention. She lifted her hand, pulled
away as if to hide, but it was too late. Several bare-chested forms appeared
from an alley to investigate the disturbance. One of them had blood on his
face, the sign of a broken nose.


Fjon slipped away from the crowd, exulting at the ease of his first kill. They
had told him that it would be simple: He needed only to knife a single man, and
then he would be admitted into the monastery of Rathbore, where he would be
trained as an assassin.

You were right, Hrathen, he thought. They did give me a new way to serve
Jaddeth’s empire—an important one.

How ironic that the man he had been ordered to kill had turned out to be
Hrathen himself. How had Wyrn known that Fjon would find Hrathen here, on the
streets of Teod of all places? Fjon would probably never know; Lord Jaddeth
moved in ways beyond the understanding of men. But Fjon had performed his duty.
His period of penance was over.

With a merry step, Fjon went back to his inn and ordered breakfast.


“Leave me,” Lukel said with a pained tone. “I’m nearly dead—see to the others.”

“Stop whining,” Raoden said, drawing Aon Ien in the air above the wounded
Lukel. He crossed it with the Chasm line, and the wound in the merchant’s leg
re-sealed instantly. Not only did Raoden know the proper modifiers this time,
but his Aons had the power of Elantris behind them. With the resurrection of
the city, AonDor had regained its legendary strength.

Lukel looked down, experimentally bending his leg and feeling where the cut had
been. Then he frowned. “You know, you could have left a scar. I had to go
through an awful lot to get that wound—you should have seen how courageous I
was. My grandchildren are going to be disappointed that I don’t have any scars
to show them.”

“They’ll live,” Raoden said, rising and walking away.

“What’s wrong with you?” Lukel said from behind. “I thought we won.”

We won, Raoden thought, but I failed. They had searched the city—there was no
sign of Sarene, Dilaf, or Hrathen. Raoden had captured a straggling Derethi
soldier and demanded to know where they were, but the man had pled ignorance,
and Raoden had released him with disgust.

He brooded, watching the people celebrate. Despite the deaths, despite the
near-complete destruction of Kae, they were happy. Fjorden had been cast out
and Elantris had returned. The days of the gods had come again. Unfortunately,
Raoden couldn’t enjoy the sweetness of his victory. Not without Sarene.

Galladon approached slowly, ambling away from the group of Elantrians. The mass
of sliver-skinned people were, for the most part, disoriented. Many of them had
been Hoed for years, and knew nothing of current events.

“They’re going to be—” the Dula began.

“My lord Raoden!” a voice suddenly interrupted—a voice Raoden recognized.

“Ashe?” he asked anxiously, seeking out the Seon.

“Your Majesty!” Ashe said, zipping across the courtyard. “A Seon just spoke
with me. The princess! She is in Teod, my lord. My kingdom is under attack as
well!”

“Teod?” Raoden asked, dumbfounded. “How in Domi’s name did she get there?”


Sarene backed away, wishing desperately for a weapon. The townspeople noticed
Dilaf and his warriors and, seeing the Fjordells’ odd twisted bodies and
malevolent eyes, scattered in fright. Sarene’s reflexes urged her to join them,
but such a move would only put her directly in Dilaf’s hands. The small monk’s
warriors quickly fanned out to cut off Sarene’s escape.

Dilaf approached—his face stained with drying blood, his bare torso sweating in
Teod’s cold air, the intricate patterns beneath the skin on his arms and chest
bulging, his lips curved in a wicked smile. At that moment, Sarene knew that
this man was the most horrifying thing she would ever see.


Raoden climbed to the top of Elantris’s wall, taking the steps two at a time,
his restored Elantrian muscles moving more quickly and tirelessly than even
those of his pre-Shaod self.

“Sule!” Galladon called with concern, rushing up behind him.

Raoden didn’t respond. He topped the wall, pushing his way through the crowds
of people who stood looking over the remains of Kae. They parted as they
realized who he was, some kneeling and mumbling “Your Majesty.” Their voices
were awed. In him they saw a return to their former lives. Hopeful, luxurious
lives filled with ample food and time. Lives nearly forgotten over a decade of
tyranny.

Raoden gave them no heed, continuing until he stood on the northern wall, which
overlooked the broad blue Sea of Fjorden. On the other side of those waters lay
Teod. And Sarene.

“Seon,” Raoden ordered, “show me the exact direction Teod’s capital is from
this point.”

Ashe hovered for a moment, then moved to a spot in front of Raoden, marking a
point on the horizon. “If you wanted to sail to Teod, my lord, you would go in
this direction.”

Raoden nodded, trusting the Seon’s innate sense of direction. He began to draw.
He constructed Aon Tia with frantic hands, his fingers tracing patterns he had
learned by rote, never thinking they would do any good. Now, with Elantris
somehow feeding the Aons’ strength, lines no longer simply appeared in the air
when he drew—they exploded. Light streamed from the Aon, as if his fingers were
ripping tiny holes through a mighty dam, allowing only some of the water to
squirt through.

“Sule!” Galladon said, finally catching up to him. “Sule, what is going on?”
Then, apparently recognizing the Aon, he cursed. “Doloken, Raoden, you don’t
know what you’re doing!”

“I am going to Teod,” Raoden said, continuing to draw.

“But sule,” Galladon protested. “You yourself told me how dangerous Aon Tia can
be. What was it you said? If you don’t know the exact distance you need to
travel, you could be killed. You can’t go into this blind. Kolo?”

“It’s the only way, Galladon,” Raoden said. “I have to at least try.”

Galladon shook his head, laying a hand on Raoden’s shoulder. “Sule, a
meaningless attempt won’t prove anything but your stupidity. Do you even know
how far it is to Teod?”

Raoden’s hand fell slowly to his side. He was no geographer; he knew Teod was
about four days’ sail, but he had no practical knowledge of how many miles or
feet that was. He had to work a frame of reference into Aon Tia, give it some
sort of measurement, so that it knew how far to send him.

Galladon nodded, clapping Raoden on the shoulder. “Prepare a ship!” the Dula
ordered to a group of soldiers—the last remnants of the Elantris City Guard.

It will be too late! Raoden thought with sorrow. What good is power, what good
is Elantris, if I can’t use it to protect the one I love?

“One million, three hundred twenty-seven thousand, forty-two,” said a voice
from behind Raoden.

Raoden turned with surprise. Adien stood a short distance away, his skin
shining with a silvery Elantrian glow. His eyes betrayed none of the mental
retardation that had cursed him since birth; instead they stared lucidly ahead.

“Adien,” Raoden said with surprise. “You’re …”

The young man, looking strikingly like Lukel now that he was healed, stepped
forward. “I … I feel like my entire life has been a dream, Raoden. I remember
everything that happened. But, I couldn’t interact—I couldn’t say anything.
That’s changed now, but one thing remains the same. My mind … I’ve always been
able to figure numbers….”

“Footsteps,” Raoden whispered.

“One million, three hundred twenty-seven thousand, forty-two,” Adien repeated.
“That is how many steps it is to Teod. Measure my stride, and use that as your
unit.”

“Hurry, my lord!” Ashe exclaimed with fear. “She’s in danger. Mai—he’s watching
the princess now. He says she’s surrounded. Oh, Domi! Hurry!”

“Where, Seon!” Raoden snapped, kneeling down and measuring Adien’s stride with
a strip of cloth.

“Near the docks, my lord,” Ashe said. “She’s standing on the main road leading
to the docks!”

“Adien!” Raoden said, drawing a line in his Aon that duplicated the length of
the boy’s stride.

“One million, three hundred twenty-six thousand, eight hundred and five,” Adien
said. “That will take you to the docks.” He looked up, frowning. “I … I’m not
sure how I know that. I went there as a child once, but …”

It’ll have to be enough, Raoden thought. He reached up and wrote a modifier
beside his Aon, telling it to transport him one million, three hundred
twenty-six thousand, eight hundred and five lengths of the line.

“Sule, this is insane!” Galladon said.

Raoden looked at his friend, nodded in agreement, then with a broad stroke drew
the Chasm line across his Aon.

“You are in charge of Arelon until I return, my friend,” Raoden said as Aon Tia
began to shake, spewing light before him. He reached up and grabbed the center
of the trembling Aon, and his fingers latched on to it, as if it were solid.

Idos Domi, he prayed, if you have ever heard my prayers before, direct my path
now. Then, hoping Ashe had the angle correct, he felt the Aon’s power rush
through and envelop his body. A moment later the world disappeared.


Sarene pressed her back against the hard brick wall. Dilaf approached with
gleeful eyes. He crept forward, his line of monks closing on Sarene.

It was over. There was nowhere for her to run.

Suddenly, a spray of light crashed into one of the monks, throwing the creature
into the air. Stupefied, Sarene watched the monk’s body as it arced before her,
then fell to the ground with a thud. The other monks paused, stunned.

A figure dashed between the surprised line of monks, scrambling toward Sarene.
His skin was silvery, his hair a blazing white, his face …

“Raoden?” she asked with shock.

Dilaf growled, and Sarene yelped as the priest dove at Raoden, moving
supernaturally quickly. Yet somehow Raoden reacted just as quickly, spinning
and backing away before Dilaf’s attack. The king’s hand whipped out, scrawling
a quick Aon in the air.

A burst of light shot from the Aon, the air warping and twisting around it. The
bolt took Dilaf in the chest and exploded, throwing the monk backward. Dilaf
crashed into the side of a building and collapsed to the ground. Then, however,
the priest groaned, stumbling back to his feet.

Raoden cursed. He dashed the short distance and grabbed Sarene. “Hold on,” he
ordered, his free hand tracing another Aon. The designs Raoden crafted around
Aon Tia were complex, but his hand moved dexterously. He finished it just as
Dilaf’s men reached them.

Sarene’s body lurched, much as it had when Dilaf had brought them to Teod.
Light surrounded her, shaking and pulsing. A brief second later the world
returned. Sarene stumbled in confusion, falling against the familiar Teoish
cobblestones.

She looked up with surprise. About fifty feet down the street she could see the
bare chests of Dilaf’s monks standing in a confused circle. One of them raised
a hand, pointing at Raoden and Sarene.

“Idos Domi!” Raoden cursed. “I forgot what the books said! The Aons grow weaker
the farther one goes from Elantris.”

“You can’t get us home?” Sarene asked, climbing to her feet.

“Not by Aon, I can’t,” Raoden said. Then, taking her hand, he started running.

Her mind was so full of questions the entire world seemed a confused jumble.
What had happened to Raoden? How had he recovered from the wound Dilaf gave
him? She choked the questions back. It was enough that he had come.


Frantic, Raoden searched for a means of escape. Perhaps alone he could have
outrun Dilaf’s men, but never with Sarene in tow. Their street emptied onto the
docks, where Teod’s large warships were ponderously moving from the bay to
engage a fleet bearing Fjorden’s flag. A man in royal green robes stood at the
far side of the docks, conversing with a couple of adjuncts. King
Eventeo—Sarene’s father. The king didn’t see them, instead turning to walk in a
rushed step down a side alley.

“Father!” Sarene yelled out, but the distance was too far.

Raoden could hear footsteps approaching. He spun, thrusting Sarene behind him,
and raised his arms to begin an Aon Daa with each hand. The Aons were weaker in
Teod, but they weren’t ineffectual.

Dilaf held up a hand, slowing his men. Raoden froze, unwilling to commit
himself to a final battle unless he had to. What was Dilaf waiting for?

Bare-chested monks poured from alleys and streets. Dilaf smiled, waiting as his
warriors gathered. Within a few minutes his group had grown from twelve to
fifty, and Raoden’s odds had plummeted from bad to hopeless.

“Not much of a rescue,” Sarene muttered, stepping forward to stand next to
Raoden, staring down the group of monstrosities with a contemptuous air.

Her defiant irony brought a smile to Raoden’s lips. “Next time, I’ll remember
to bring an army with me.”


Dilaf’s monks charged. Raoden completed his duplicate Aons—sending out a pair
of powerful energy blasts—then quickly began drawing again. Yet, holding to his
waist with tense hands, Sarene could see that Raoden wouldn’t finish before the
supernaturally quick warriors arrived.

The docks shook with a powerful force. Wood cracked and stone shattered, and an
explosion of wind blasted across her. She had to cling to Raoden’s somehow more
stable body to keep from being thrown to the ground. When she finally dared
open her eyes, they were surrounded by hundreds of silver-skinned forms.

“Aon Daa!” Galladon ordered with a booming voice.

Two hundred hands raised in the air, scribbling Aons. About half of them made
mistakes, their Aons evaporating. Enough finished, however, to send a wave of
destruction toward Dilaf’s men that was so powerful it tore completely through
the first few monks.

Bodies collapsed and others were thrown backward. The remaining monks paused in
shock, staring at the Elantrians.

Then the Dakhor scattered in an offensive charge, turning from Raoden and
Sarene to attack this new foe.


Dilaf was the only one of his men who thought to duck. The rest, confidently
arrogant in their strength, simply allowed the powerful blasts to hit them.

Fools! Dilaf thought as he rolled away. Every Dakhor was blessed with special
skills and powers. They all had increased strength and nearly indestructible
bones, but only Dilaf bore the power that made him resistant to attacks by the
Dor—a power that had required the deaths of fifty men to create. He felt,
rather than saw, as his men were torn apart by the Elantrians’ attack.

The remaining monks were horribly outnumbered. They attacked bravely, trying to
kill as many of the vile Elantrians as they could. They had been trained well.
They would die fighting. Dilaf yearned to join them.

But he did not. Some thought him mad, but he was not a fool. The screams in his
head demanded revenge, and there was still a way left. One way to get vengeance
on the Teoish princess and her Elantrians. One way to fulfill Wyrn’s commands.
One way to turn the tide of this battle.

Dilaf scrambled away, stumbling slightly as a bolt of energy sprayed against
his back. His bone wardings held, and he was left unharmed by the attack.

When he had entered the docks a few moments before, he had seen King Eventeo
disappear down a side alley. He now dashed toward that same alley.

His prey would follow.


“Raoden!” Sarene said, pointing at the fleeing Dilaf.

“Let him go,” Raoden said. “He can do no more damage.”

“But that’s the way my father went!” Sarene said, tugging him toward the alley.

She’s right, Raoden thought with a curse. He took off behind Dilaf. Sarene
waved him on, and he left her behind, letting his newly reconditioned Elantrian
legs carry him to the alleyway at an extraordinary speed. The other Elantrians
didn’t see him go, but continued to fight the monks.

Raoden entered the alleyway, barely puffing. Dilaf tackled him a second later.
The monk’s powerful body appeared out of a shadowed corner, slamming Raoden
into the alley wall.

Raoden cried out, feeling his ribs crack. Dilaf backed away, unsheathing his
sword with a smile. The priest lunged forward, and Raoden barely rolled away in
time to avoid being impaled. As it was, Dilaf’s attack sliced through the flesh
of Raoden’s left forearm, spilling silvery-white Elantrian blood.

Raoden gasped as pain washed through his arm. This pain, however, was weak and
dull compared to his former agonies. He forgot it quickly, rolling again as
Dilaf’s blade sought his heart. If his heart stopped again, Raoden would die.
Elantrians were strong and quick-healing, but they were not immortal.

As he dodged, Raoden searched through his memory of Aons. Thinking quickly, he
rolled to his feet, rapidly scribbling Aon Edo before him. It was a simple
character, requiring only six strokes, and he finished it before Dilaf could
make a third attack. The Aon flashed briefly, and then a thin wall of light
appeared between himself and Dilaf.

Dilaf tested the wall hesitantly with the tip of his sword, and the wall
resisted. The more one pressed against it, the more it drew from the Dor,
pressing back with equal strength. Dilaf could not reach him.

Casually, Dilaf reached up and tapped the wall with his bare hand. His palm
flashed briefly, and the wall shattered, shards of light scattering through the
air.

Raoden cursed his stupidity—this was the man who had destroyed his illusionary
face just a day before. Somehow, Dilaf had the power to negate Aons. Raoden
jumped back, but the sword snapped forward more quickly. The tip did not strike
Raoden’s chest, but struck his hand instead.

Raoden cried out as the sword pierced his right palm. He brought his other hand
up to cup it around the injured one, but the wound on his forearm blazed with
renewed vigor. Both hands were incapacitated; he could no longer draw Aons.
Dilaf’s next attack was a casual kick, and Raoden’s already wounded ribs
cracked further. He cried out and dropped to his knees.

Dilaf laughed, tapping Raoden on the side of the face with the tip of his
sword. “The Skaze are right, then. Elantrians are not indestructible.”

Raoden didn’t answer.

“I will still win, Elantrian,” Dilaf said, his voice passionate and frenzied.
“After Wyrn’s fleets defeat the Teoish armada, I will gather my troops and
march on Elantris.”

“No one defeats the Teoish armada, priest,” a feminine voice interjected, a
blade flashing out to strike at Dilaf’s head.

The priest yelped, barely bringing his own sword up in time to block Sarene’s
attack. She had found a sword somewhere, and she whipped it in a pattern that
moved too quickly for Raoden to track. He smiled at Dilaf’s surprise,
remembering how easily the princess had defeated his own skills. Her weapon was
thicker than a syre, but she still handled it with remarkable proficiency.

Dilaf, however, was no ordinary man. The bone patterns beneath his skin started
glowing as he blocked Sarene’s attack, and his body began to move even more
quickly. Soon Sarene stopped advancing, and almost immediately she was forced
to begin retreating. The battle ended as Dilaf’s sword pierced her shoulder.
Sarene’s weapon clanged to the cobblestones, and she stumbled, slumping down
next to Raoden.

“I’m sorry,” she whispered.

Raoden shook his head. No one could be expected to win a sword fight against
one such as Dilaf.

“And my revenge begins,” Dilaf whispered reverently, bringing up his sword.
“You may stop yelling, my love.”

Raoden grabbed Sarene protectively with a bleeding hand. Then he paused. There
was something moving behind Dilaf—a form in the shadows of the alleyway.

Frowning, Dilaf turned to follow Raoden’s gaze. A figure stumbled from the
darkness, holding his side in pain. The figure was a tall, broad-chested man
with dark hair and determined eyes. Though the man no longer wore his armor,
Raoden recognized him. The gyorn, Hrathen.

Strangely, Dilaf didn’t seem happy to see his companion. The Dakhor monk spun,
raising his sword, eyes flashing with anger. He leapt, screaming something in
Fjordell, and swung his sword at the obviously weakened gyorn.

Hrathen stopped, then whipped his arm out from beneath his cloak. Dilaf’s sword
hit the flesh of Hrathen’s forearm.

And stopped.

Sarene gasped beside Raoden. “He’s one of them!” she whispered.

It was true. Dilaf’s weapon scraped along Hrathen’s arm, pushing back the
sleeve there and revealing the skin beneath. The arm was not that of a normal
man; it showed twisting patterns beneath the skin, the outcroppings of bone
that were the sign of a Dakhor monk.

Dilaf, obviously, was surprised by the revelation as well. The monk stood
stunned as Hrathen’s hand whipped out and grabbed Dilaf by the neck.

Dilaf began to curse, squirming in Hrathen’s grasp. The gyorn, however, began
to stand up straighter, his grip tightening. Beneath his cloak, Hrathen was
bare-chested, and Raoden could see that his skin there bore no Dakhor markings,
though it was wet with blood from a wound at his side. Only the bones in his
arm had the strange twisted patterns. Why the partial transformation?

Hrathen stood tall, ignoring Dilaf, though the monk began to swing at Hrathen’s
enhanced arm with his short sword. The blows bounced off, so Dilaf swung at
Hrathen’s side instead. The sword bit deeply into Hrathen’s flesh, but the
gyorn didn’t even grunt. Instead, he tightened his grip on Dilaf’s neck, and
the little monk gasped, dropping his sword in pain.

Hrathen’s arm began to glow.

The strange, twisting lines beneath Hrathen’s skin took on an eerie radiance as
the gyorn lifted Dilaf off the ground. Dilaf squirmed and twisted, his breath
coming in gasps. He struggled to escape, prying at Hrathen’s fingers, but the
gyorn’s grip was firm.

Hrathen held Dilaf aloft, as if toward the heavens. He stared upward, toward
the sky, eyes strangely unfocused, Dilaf proffered like some sort of holy
offering. The gyorn stood there for a long moment, immobile, arm glowing, Dilaf
becoming more and more frantic.

There was a snap. Dilaf stopped struggling. Hrathen lowered the body with a
slow motion, then tossed it aside, the glow in his arm fading. He looked toward
Raoden and Sarene, stood quietly for a moment, then toppled forward lifelessly.


When Galladon arrived a few moments later, Raoden was trying unsuccessfully to
heal Sarene’s shoulder with his wounded hands. The large Dula took in the
scene, then nodded for a couple of Elantrians to check on Dilaf and Hrathen’s
corpses. Then Galladon settled down, letting Raoden tell him how to draw Aon
Ien. A few moments later, Raoden’s hands and ribs had been restored, and he
moved to help Sarene.

She sat quietly. Despite her wound, she had already checked on Hrathen. He was
dead. In fact, either one of the wounds in his sides should have killed him
long before he managed to break Dilaf’s neck. Something about his Dakhor
markings had kept him alive. Raoden shook his head, drawing a healing Aon for
Sarene’s shoulder. He still didn’t have an explanation as to why the gyorn had
saved them, but he quietly blessed the man’s intervention.

“The armada?” Sarene asked anxiously as Raoden drew.

“Looks to me like it’s doing fine,” Galladon said with a shrug. “Your father is
searching for you—he came to the docks soon after we arrived.”

Raoden drew the Chasm line, and the wound in Sarene’s arm disappeared.

“I have to admit, sule, you are lucky as Doloken,” Galladon said. “Jumping here
blind was just about the most idiotic thing I’ve ever seen a man do.”

Raoden shrugged, pulling Sarene tight. “It was worth it. Besides, you followed,
didn’t you?”

Galladon snorted. “We had Ashe call ahead to make sure you arrived safely.
We’re not kayana, unlike our king.”

“All right,” Sarene declared firmly. “Somebody is going to start explaining
things to me right now.”

