# Part 2 - CHAPTER 51
[Metadata]: # {03.24}
[Descriptor]: # {03.24}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 51
The market’s tents were a bright burst of color in the center of the city.
Hrathen walked among them, noting the unsold wares and empty streets with
dissatisfaction. Many of the merchants were from the East, and they had spent a
great deal of money shipping their cargoes to Arelon for the spring market. If
they failed to sell their goods, the losses would be a financial blow from
which they might never recover.

Most of the merchants, displaying dark Fjordell colorings, bowed their heads
respectfully at his passing. Hrathen had been away so long—first in Duladel,
then in Arelon—that he had almost forgotten what it was like to be treated with
proper deference. Even as they bowed their heads, Hrathen could see something
in these merchants’ eyes. An edginess. They had planned for this market for
months, their wares and passage purchased long before King Iadon’s death. Even
with the upheaval, they had no choice but to try and sell what they could.

Hrathen’s cloak billowed behind him as he toured the market, his armor clinking
comfortably with each step. He displayed a confidence he didn’t feel, trying to
give the merchants some measure of security. Things were not well, not at all.
His hurried call via Seon to Wyrn had come too late; Telrii’s message had
already arrived. Fortunately, Wyrn had displayed only slight anger at Telrii’s
pre-sumptuousness.

Time was short. Wyrn had indicated that he had little patience for fools, and
he would never—of course—name a foreigner to the title of gyorn. Yet Hrathen’s
subsequent meetings with Telrii had not gone well. Though he seemed to be a bit
more reasonable than he had been the day he’d tossed Hrathen out, the king
still resisted all suggestions of monetary compensation. His lethargy to
convert gave mixed signs to the rest of Arelon.

The empty market was a manifestation of the Arelish nobility’s confused state.
Suddenly, they weren’t certain if it were better to be a Derethi sympathizer or
not—so they simply hid. Balls and parties slowed, and men hesitated to visit
the markets, instead waiting to see what their monarch would do. Everything
hung on Telrii’s decision.

It will come, Hrathen, he told himself. You still have a month left. You have
time to persuade, cajole, and threaten. Telrii will come to understand the
foolishness of his request, and he will convert.

Yet, despite self-assurances, Hrathen felt as if he were at a precipice. He
played a dangerous game of balance. The Arelish nobility weren’t really his,
not yet. Most of them were still more concerned about appearances than
substance. If he delivered Arelon to Wyrn, he would deliver a batch of
halfhearted converts at best. He hoped it would be enough.

Hrathen paused as he saw a flutter of movement near a tent at his side. The
tent was a large blue structure with extravagant embroidery and large winglike
pavilions to the sides. The breeze brought hints of spice and smoke: an incense
merchant.

Hrathen frowned. He was certain he had seen the distinctive bloodred of a
Derethi robe as someone ducked inside the tent. The arteths were supposed to be
in solitary meditation at the moment, not idly shopping. Determined to discover
which priest had disobeyed his command, Hrathen strode across the path and
entered the tent.

It was dark inside, the thick canvas walls blocking out sunlight. A lantern
burned at one side of the tent, but the large structure was so piled with
boxes, barrels, and bins that Hrathen could see only shadows. He stood for a
moment, eyes adjusting. There didn’t seem to be anyone inside the tent, not
even a merchant.

He stepped forward, moving through waves of scents both pungent and enticing.
Sweetsands, soaps, and oils all perfumed the air, and the mixture of their many
odors left the mind confused. Near the back of the tent, he found the solitary
lantern sitting beside a box of ashes, the remnants of burned incense. Hrathen
pulled off his gauntlet, then reached to rub the soft powder between his
fingers.

“The ashes are like the wreckage of your power, are they not, Hrathen?” a voice
asked.

Hrathen spun, startled by the sound. A shadowed figure stood in the tent behind
him, a familiar form in Derethi robes.

“What are you doing here?” Hrathen asked, turning from Dilaf and brushing off
his hand, then replacing his gauntlet.

Dilaf didn’t respond. He stood in the darkness, his unseen face unnerving in
its stare.

“Dilaf?” Hrathen repeated, turning. “I asked you a question.”

“You have failed here, Hrathen,” Dilaf whispered. “The fool Telrii is playing
with you. You, a gyorn of Shu-Dereth. Men do not make demands of the Fjordell
Empire, Hrathen. They should not.”

Hrathen felt his face redden. “What know you of such things?” he snapped.
“Leave me be, Arteth.”

Dilaf didn’t move. “You were close, I admit, but your foolishness cost you the
victory.”

“Bah!” Hrathen said, brushing past the small man in the darkness, walking
toward the exit. “My battle is far from over—I still have time left.”

“Do you?” Dilaf asked. Out of the corner of his eye, Hrathen saw Dilaf approach
the ashes, running his fingers through them. “It has all slipped away, hasn’t
it, Hrathen? My victory is so sweet in the face of your failure.”

Hrathen paused, then laughed, looking back at Dilaf. “Victory? What victory
have you achieved? What …?”

Dilaf smiled. In the wan light of the lantern, his face pocketed with shadow,
he smiled. The expression, filled with the passion, the ambition, and the zeal
that Hrathen had noted on that first day so long ago, was so disturbing that
Hrathen’s question died on his lips. In the flickering light, the arteth seemed
not a man at all, but a Svrakiss, sent to torment Hrathen.

Dilaf dropped his handful of ashes, then walked past Hrathen, throwing open the
tent flap and striding out into the light.

“Dilaf?” Hrathen asked in a voice far too soft for the arteth to hear. “What
victory?”

