# Part 1 - CHAPTER 14
[Metadata]: # {02.14}
[Descriptor]: # {02.14}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 14
Sarene had about as much talent for needlepoint as she did for painting. Not
that she let it stop her from trying—no matter how much she worked to become a
part of what were traditionally considered masculine activities, Sarene felt an
intense need to prove that she could be as feminine and ladylike as anyone
else. It wasn’t her fault that she just wasn’t any good at it.

She held up her embroidering hoop. It was supposed to depict a crimson
sisterling sitting on a branch, its beak open in song. Unfortunately, she had
drawn the pattern herself—which meant it hadn’t been all that good in the first
place. That, coupled with her startling inability to follow the lines, had
produced something that resembled a squashed tomato more than it did a bird.

“Very nice, dear,” Eshen said. Only the incurably bubbly queen could deliver
such a compliment without sarcasm.

Sarene sighed, dropping her hoop to her lap and grabbing some brown thread for
the branch.

“Don’t worry, Sarene,” Daora said. “Domi gives everyone different levels of
talent, but he always rewards diligence. Continue to practice and you will
improve.”

You say that with such ease, Sarene thought with a mental scowl. Daora’s own
hoop was filled with a detailed masterpiece of embroidered perfection. She had
entire flocks of birds, each one tiny yet intricate, hovering and spinning
through the branches of a statuesque oak. Kiin’s wife was the embodiment of
aristocratic virtue.

Daora didn’t walk, she glided, and her every action was smooth and graceful.
Her makeup was striking—her lips bright red and her eyes mysterious—but it had
been applied with masterful subtlety. She was old enough to be stately, yet
young enough to be known for her remarkable beauty. In short, she was the type
of woman Sarene would normally hate—if she weren’t also the kindest, most
intelligent woman in the court.

After a few moments of quiet, Eshen began to talk, as usual. The queen seemed
frightened of silence, and was constantly speaking or prompting others to do
so. The other women in the group were content to let her lead—not that anyone
would have wanted to try wrestling control of a conversation from Eshen.

The queen’s embroidery group consisted of about ten women. At first, Sarene had
avoided their meetings, instead focusing her attention on the political court.
However, she had soon realized that the women were as important as any civil
matter; gossip and idle chatting spread news that couldn’t be discussed in a
formal setting. Sarene couldn’t afford to be out of the chain, she just wished
she didn’t have to reveal her ineptitude to take part.

“I heard that Lord Waren, son of the Baron of Kie Plantation, has had quite the
religious experience,” Eshen said. “I knew his mother—she was a very decent
woman. Quite proficient at knitting. Next year, when sweaters come back in, I’m
going to force Iadon to wear one—it isn’t seemly for a king to appear
unconscious of fashion. His hair is quite too long.”

Daora pulled a stitch tight. “I have heard the rumors about young Waren. It
seems odd to me that now, after years of being a devout Korathi, he would
suddenly convert to Shu-Dereth.”

“They’re all but the same religion anyway,” Atara said offhandedly. Duke
Telrii’s wife was a small woman—even for an Arelene—with shoulder-length auburn
curls. Her clothing and jewelry was by far the richest in the room, a
compliment to her husband’s extravagance, and her stitching patterns were
always conservative and unimaginative.

“Don’t say such things around the priests,” warned Seaden, Count Ahan’s wife.
The largest woman in the room, her girth nearly matched that of her husband.
“They act as if your soul depends on whether you call God Domi or Jaddeth.”

“The two do have some very striking differences,” Sarene said, trying to shield
her mangled embroidering from the eyes of her companions.

“Maybe if you’re a priest,” Atara said with a quiet twitter of a laugh. “But
those things hardly make any difference to us.”

“Of course,” Sarene said. “We are, after all, only women.” She looked up from
her needlepoint discreetly, smiling at the reaction her statement sparked.
Perhaps the women of Arelon weren’t quiet as subservient as their men assumed.

The quiet continued for only a few moments before Eshen spoke again. “Sarene,
what do women do in Teod to pass the time?”

Sarene raised an eyebrow in surprise; she had never heard the queen ask such a
straightforward question. “What do you mean, Your Majesty?”

“What do they do?” Eshen repeated. “I’ve heard things, you understand—as I have
about Fjorden, where they say it gets so cold in the winter that trees
sometimes freeze and explode. An easy way to make wood chips, I suppose. I
wonder if they can make it happen on command.”

Sarene smiled. “We find things to do, Your Majesty. Some women like to
embroider, though others of us find different pursuits.”

“Like what?” asked Torena, the unmarried daughter of Lord Ahan—though Sarene
still found it hard to believe that a person so slight of frame could have come
from a pair as bulbous as Ahan and Seaden. Torena was normally quiet during
these gatherings, her wide brown eyes watching the proceedings with a spark
that hinted at a buried intelligence.

“Well, the king’s courts are open to all, for one thing,” Sarene said
nonchalantly. Her heart sang, however: this was the kind of opportunity she had
been anticipating with excitement.

“You would go listen to the cases?” Torena asked, her quiet, high-pitched voice
growing increasingly interested.

“Often,” Sarene said. “Then I would talk about them with my friends.”

“Did you fight one another with swords?” asked the overweight Seaden, her face
eager.

Sarene paused, a little taken aback. She looked up to find nearly every head in
the room staring at her. “What makes you ask that?”

“That’s what they say about women from Teod, dear,” Daora said calmly, the only
woman who was still working on her needlepoint.

“Yes,” Seaden said. “We’ve always heard it—they say that women in Teod kill one
another for the sport of the men.”

Sarene raised an eyebrow. “We call it fencing, Lady Seaden. We do it for our
own amusement, not that of our men—and we definitely do not kill one another.
We use swords, but the tips have little knobs on them, and we wear thick
clothing. I’ve never heard of anyone suffering an injury greater than a twisted
ankle.”

“Then it’s true?” little Torena breathed with amazement. “You do use swords.”

“Some of us,” Sarene said. “I rather enjoyed it, actually. Fencing was my
favorite sport.” The women’s eyes shone with an appalling level of
bloodlust—like the eyes of hounds that had been locked in a very small room for
far too long. Sarene had hoped to instill a measure of political interest in
these women, to encourage them to take an active role in the management of the
country, but apparently that was too subtle an approach. They needed something
more direct.

“I could teach you, if you wanted,” Sarene offered.

“To fight?” Atara asked, astounded.

“Of course,” Sarene said. “It’s not that difficult. And please, Lady Atara, we
call it fencing. Even the most understanding of men gets a bit uncomfortable
when he thinks of women ‘fighting.’”

“We couldn’t …” Eshen began.

“Why not?” Sarene asked.

“Swordplay is frowned upon by the king, dear,” Daora explained. “You’ve
probably noticed that none of the noblemen here carry swords.”

Sarene frowned. “I was going to ask about that.”

“Iadon considers it too commonplace,” Eshen said. “He calls fighting peasant’s
work. He’s studied them rather a lot—he’s a fine leader, you know, and a fine
leader has to know a lot about a lot of things. Why, he can tell you what the
weather is like in Svorden at any time of the year. His ships are the most
sturdy, and fastest in the business.”

“So none of the men can fight?” Sarene asked with amazement.

“None except for Lord Eondel and perhaps Lord Shuden,” Torena said, her face
taking on a dreamy look as she mentioned Shuden’s name. The young, dark-skinned
nobleman was a favorite among the women of court, his delicate features and
impeccable manners capturing even the most steady of hearts.

“Don’t forget Prince Raoden,” Atara added. “I think he had Eondel teach him to
fight just to spite his father. He was always doing things like that.”

“Well, all the better,” Sarene said. “If none of the men fight, then King Iadon
can’t very well object to our learning.”

“What do you mean?” Torena asked.

“Well, he says it’s beneath him,” Sarene explained. “If that’s true, then it
should be perfect for us. After all, we are only women.”

Sarene smiled mischievously, an expression that spread across most of the faces
in the room.


“Ashe, where did I put my sword?” Sarene said, on her knees beside her bed,
fumbling around beneath it.

“Your sword, my lady?” Ashe asked.

“Never mind, I’ll find it later. What did you discover?”

Ashe pulsed quietly, as if wondering just what sort of trouble she was getting
into, before speaking. “I’m afraid I don’t have much to report, my lady.
Elantris is a very delicate subject, and I have been able to learn very
little.”

“Anything will help,” Sarene said, turning to her wardrobe. She had a ball to
attend this night.

“Well, my lady, most of the people in Kae don’t want to speak of the city.
Kae’s Seons didn’t know very much, and the mad Seons inside of Elantris seem
incapable of enough thought to respond to my questions. I even tried
approaching the Elantrians themselves, but many appeared scared of me, and the
others only begged me for food—as if I could carry it to them. Eventually, I
found the best source of information to be the soldiers that guard the city
walls.”

“I’ve heard of them,” Sarene said, looking over her clothing. “They’re supposed
to be the most elite fighting group in Arelon.”

“And they are very quick to tell you so, my lady,” Ashe said. “I doubt many of
them would know what to do in a battle, though they seem quite proficient at
cards and drinking. They tend to keep their uniforms well pressed, however.”

“Typical of a ceremonial guard,” Sarene said, picking through the row of black
garments, her skin quivering at the thought of donning yet another flat,
colorless monstrosity of a dress. As much as she respected the memory of
Raoden, she couldn’t possibly wear black again.

Ashe bobbed in the air at her comment. “I am afraid, my lady, that Arelon’s
most ‘elite’ military group hardly does the country any credit. Yet, they are
the city’s most informed experts regarding Elantris.”

“And what did they have to say?”

Ashe drifted over to the closet, watching as she rifled through her choices.
“Not much. People in Arelon don’t talk to Seons as quickly as they once did.
There was a time, I barely recall, when the population loved us. Now they are …
reserved, almost frightened.”

“They associate you with Elantris,” Sarene said, glancing longingly toward the
dresses she had brought with her from Teod.

“I know, my lady,” Ashe said. “But we had nothing to do with the fall of the
city. There is nothing to fear from a Seon. I wish … But, well, that is
irrelevant. Despite their reticence, I did get some information. It appears
that Elantrians lose more than their human appearance when the Shaod takes
them. The guards seem to think that the individual completely forgets who he or
she used to be, becoming something more like an animal than a human. This
certainly seems the case for the Elantrian Seons I spoke to.”

Sarene shivered. “But, Elantrians can talk—some asked you for food.”

“They did,” Ashe said. “The poor souls hardly even seemed animal; most of them
were crying or mumbling in some way. I’m inclined to think they had lost their
minds.”

“So the Shaod is mental as well as physical,” Sarene said speculatively.

“Apparently, my lady. The guards also spoke of several despotic lords that rule
the city. Food is so valuable that the Elantrians vigorously attack anyone
bearing it.”

Sarene frowned. “How are the Elantrians fed?”

“They aren’t, as far as I can tell.”

“Then how do they live?” Sarene asked.

“I do not know, my lady. It is possible that the city exists in a feral state,
with the mighty living upon the weak.”

“No society could survive like that.”

“I don’t believe they have a society, my lady,” Ashe said. “They are a group of
miserable, cursed individuals that your God appears to have forgotten—and the
rest of the country is trying very hard to follow His example.”

Sarene nodded thoughtfully. Then, determined, she pulled off her black dress
and rifled through the clothing at the back of her closet. She presented
herself for Ashe’s appraisal a few minutes later.

“What do you think?” she asked, twirling. The dress was crafted of a thick,
golden material that was almost metallic in its shine. It was overlaid with
black lace, and had a high, open collar, like a man’s. The collar was
constructed from a stiff material, which was matched in the cuffs. The sleeves
were very wide, as was the body of the dress, which billowed outward and
continued all the way to the floor, hiding her feet. It was the kind of dress
that made one feel regal. Even a princess needed reminders once in a while.

“It isn’t black, my lady,” Ashe pointed out.

“This part is,” Sarene objected, pointing to the long cape at the back. The
cape was actually part of the dress, woven into the neck and shoulders so
carefully that it seemed to grow from the lace.

“I don’t think that the cape is enough to make it a widow’s dress, my lady.”

“It will have to do,” Sarene said, studying herself in the mirror. “If I wear
one more of those dresses Eshen gave me, then you’ll have to throw me into
Elantris for going insane.”

“Are you certain the front is … appropriate?”

“What?” Sarene said.

“It’s rather low-cut, my lady,”

“I’ve seen much worse, even here in Arelon.”

“Yes, my lady, but those were all unmarried women.”

Sarene smiled. Ashe was always so sensitive—especially in regards to her. “I
have to at least wear it once—I’ve never had the chance. I got it in from
Duladel the week before I left Teod.”

“If you say so, my lady,” Ashe said, pulsing slightly. “Is there anything else
you would like me to try and find out?”

“Did you visit the dungeons?”

“I did,” Ashe said. “I’m sorry, my lady—I found no secret alcoves hiding
half-starved princes. If Iadon locked his son away, then he wasn’t foolish
enough to do it in his own palace.”

“Well, it was worth a look,” Sarene said with a sigh. “I didn’t think you would
find anything—we should probably be searching for the assassin who wielded the
knife instead.”

“True,” Ashe said. “Perhaps you might try prompting the queen for information?
If the prince really was killed by an intruder, she might know something.”

“I’ve tried, but Eshen is … well, it’s not hard to get information out of her.
Getting her to stay on topic, however … Honestly, how a woman like that ended
up married to Iadon is beyond me.”

“I suspect, my lady,” Ashe said, “that the arrangement was more financial than
it was social. Much of Iadon’s original governmental funds came from Eshen’s
father.”

“That makes sense,” Sarene said, smiling slightly and wondering what Iadon
thought of the bargain now. He’d gotten his money, true, but he’d also ended up
spending several decades listening to Eshen’s prattle. Perhaps that was why he
seemed so frustrated by women in general.

“Regardless,” Sarene said, “I don’t think the queen knows anything about
Raoden—but I’ll keep trying.”

Ashe bobbed. “And, what shall I do?”

Sarene paused. “Well, I’ve been thinking about Uncle Kiin lately. Father never
mentions him anymore. I was wondering—do you know if Kiin was ever officially
disinherited?”

“I don’t know, my lady,” Ashe said. “Dio might know; he works much more closely
with your father.”

“See if you can dig anything up—there might be some rumors here in Arelon about
what happened. Kiin is, after all, one of the most influential people in Kae.”

“Yes, my lady. Anything else?”

“Yes,” Sarene decided with a wrinkle of her nose. “Find someone to take those
black dresses away—I’ve decided I won’t be needing them anymore.”

“Of course, my lady,” Ashe said with a suffering tone.


Sarene glanced out the carriage window as it approached Duke Telrii’s mansion.
Reports said that Telrii had been very free with ball invitations, and the
number of carriages on the road this evening seemed to confirm the information.
Torches lined the pathway, and the mansion grounds were brilliantly lit with a
combination of lanterns, torches, and strange colorful flames.

“The duke has spared no expense,” Shuden noted.

“What are they, Lord Shuden?” Sarene asked, nodding toward one of the bright
flames, which burned atop a tall metal pole.

“Special rocks imported from the south.”

“Rocks that burn? Like coal?”

“They burn much more quickly than coal,” the young Jindoeese lord explained.
“And they are extremely expensive. It must have cost Telrii a fortune to light
this pathway.” Shuden frowned. “This seems extravagant, even for him.”

“Lukel mentioned that the duke is somewhat wasteful,” Sarene said, remembering
her conversation in Iadon’s throne room.

Shuden nodded. “But he’s far more clever than most will credit. The duke is
easy with his money, but there is usually a purpose behind his frivolity.”
Sarene could see the young baron’s mind working as the coach pulled to a stop,
as if trying to discern the exact nature of the aforementioned “purpose.”

The mansion itself was bursting with people. Women in bright dresses
accompanied men in the straight-coated suits that were the current masculine
fashion. The guests only slightly outnumbered the white-clothed servants who
bustled through the crowd, carrying food and drink or changing lanterns. Shuden
helped Sarene from the carriage, then led her into the main ballroom with a
gait that was practiced at navigating crowds.

“You have no idea how happy I am you offered to come with me,” Shuden confided
as they entered the room. A large band played at one end of the hallway, and
couples either spun through the center of the room in dance or stood around the
wide periphery in conversation. The room was bright with colored lights, the
rocks they had seen outside burning intensely from placements atop banisters or
poles. There were even chains of tiny candles wrapped around several of the
pillars—contraptions that probably had to be refilled every half hour.

“Why is that, my lord?” Sarene asked, gazing at the colorful scene. Even living
as a princess, she had never seen such beauty and opulence. Light, sound, and
color mixed intoxicatingly.

Shuden followed her gaze, not really hearing her question. “One would never
know this country is dancing on the lip of destruction,” he muttered.

The statement struck like a solemn death knell. There was a reason Sarene had
never seen such lavishness—wondrous as it was, it was also incredibly wasteful.
Her father was a prudent ruler; he would never allow such profligacy.

“That is always how it is, though, isn’t it?” Shuden asked. “Those who can
least afford extravagance seem to be the ones most determined to spend what
they have left.”

“You are a wise man, Lord Shuden,” Sarene said.

“No, just a man who tries to see to the heart of things,” he said, leading her
to a side gallery where they could find drinks.

“What was that you were saying before?”

“What?” Shuden asked. “Oh, I was explaining how you are going to save me quite
a bit of distress this evening.”

“Why is that?” she asked as he handed her a cup of wine.

Shuden smiled slightly, taking a sip of his own drink. “There are some who, for
one reason or another, consider me quite … eligible. Many of them won’t realize
who you are, and will stay away, trying to judge their new competitor. I might
actually have some time to enjoy myself tonight.”

Sarene raised an eyebrow. “Is it really that bad?”

“I usually have to beat them away with a stick,” Shuden replied, holding out
his arm to her.

“One would almost think you never intended to marry, my lord,” Sarene said with
a smile, accepting his proffered arm.

Shuden laughed. “No, it is nothing like that, my lady. Let me assure you, I am
quite interested in the concept—or, at least, the theory behind it. However,
finding a woman in this court whose twittering foolishness doesn’t cause my
stomach to turn, that is another thing entirely. Come, if I am right, then we
should be able to find a place much more interesting than the main ballroom.”

Shuden led her through the masses of ballgoers. Despite his earlier comments,
he was very civil—even pleasant—to the women who appeared from the crowd to
welcome him. Shuden knew every one by name—a feat of diplomacy, or good
breeding, in itself.

Sarene’s respect for Shuden grew as she watched the reactions of those he met.
No faces turned dark as he approached, and few gave him the haughty looks that
were common in so-called genteel societies. Shuden was well liked, though he
was far from the most lively of men. She sensed that his popularity came not
from his ability to entertain, but from his refreshing honesty. When Shuden
spoke, he was always polite and considerate, but completely frank. His exotic
origin gave him the license to say things that others could not.

Eventually they arrived at a small room at the top of a flight of stairs. “Here
we are,” Shuden said with satisfaction, leading her through the doorway. Inside
they found a smaller, but more skilled, band playing stringed instruments. The
decorations in this room were more subdued, but the servants were holding
plates of food that seemed even more exotic than those down below. Sarene
recognized many of the faces from court, including the one most important.

“The king,” she said, noticing Iadon standing near the far corner. Eshen was at
his side in a slim green dress.

Shuden nodded. “Iadon wouldn’t miss a party like this, even if it is being held
by Lord Telrii.”

“They don’t get along?”

“They get along fine. They’re just in the same business. Iadon runs a merchant
fleet—his ships travel the sea of Fjorden, as do those of Telrii. That makes
them rivals.”

“I think it’s odd that he’s here either way,” Sarene said. “My father never
goes to these kinds of things.”

“That is because he has grown up, Lady Sarene. Iadon is still infatuated with
his power, and takes every opportunity to enjoy it.” Shuden looked around with
keen eyes. “Take this room, for example.”

“This room?”

Shuden nodded. “Whenever Iadon comes to a party, he chooses a room aside from
the main one and lets the important people gravitate toward him. The nobles are
used to it. The man throwing the ball usually hires a second band, and knows to
start a second, more exclusive party apart from the main ball. Iadon has made
it known that he doesn’t want to associate with people who are too far beneath
him—this gathering is only for dukes and well-placed counts.”

“But you are a baron,” Sarene pointed out as the two of them drifted into the
room.

Shuden smiled, sipping his wine. “I am a special case. My family forced Iadon
to give us our title, where most of the others gained their ranks through
wealth and begging. I can take certain liberties that no other baron would
assume, for Iadon and I both know I once got the better of him. I can usually
only spend a short time here in the inner room—an hour at most. Otherwise I
stretch the king’s patience. Of course, that is all beside the point tonight.”

“Why is that?”

“Because I have you,” Shuden said. “Do not forget, Lady Sarene. You outrank
everyone in this room except for the royal couple themselves.”

Sarene nodded. While she was quite accustomed to the idea of being
important—she was, after all, the daughter of a king—she wasn’t used to the
Arelish penchant for pulling rank.

“Iadon’s presence changes things,” she said quietly as the king noticed her.
His eyes passed over her dress, obviously noting its less than black state, and
his face grew dark.

Maybe the dress wasn’t such a good idea, Sarene admitted to herself. However,
something else quickly drew her attention. “What is he doing here?” she
whispered as she noticed a bright form standing like a red scar in the midst of
the ballgoers.

Shuden followed her eyes. “The gyorn? He’s been coming to the court balls since
the day he got here. He showed up at the first one without an invitation, and
held himself with such an air of self-importance that no one has dared neglect
inviting him since.”

Hrathen spoke with a small group of men, his brilliant red breastplate and cape
stark against the nobles’ lighter colors. The gyorn stood at least a head
taller than anyone in the room, and his shoulder plates extended a foot on
either side. All in all, he was very hard to miss.

Shuden smiled. “No matter what I think of the man, I am impressed with his
confidence. He simply walked into the king’s private party that first night and
began talking to one of the dukes—he barely even nodded to the king.
Apparently, Hrathen considers the title of gyorn equal to anything in this
room.”

“Kings bow to gyorns in the East,” Sarene said. “They practically grovel when
Wyrn visits.”

“And it all came from one elderly Jindo,” Shuden noted, pausing to replace
their cups with wine from a passing servant. It was a much better vintage. “It
always interests me to see what you people have done with Keseg’s teachings.”

“‘You people’?” Sarene asked. “I’m Korathi—don’t lump me together with the
gyorn.”

Shuden held up a hand. “I apologize. I didn’t mean to be offensive.”

Sarene paused. Shuden spoke Aonic as a native and lived in Arelon, so she had
assumed him to be Korathi. She had misjudged. Shuden was still Jindoeese—his
family would have believed in Shu-Keseg, the parent religion of both Korath and
Dereth. “But,” she said, thinking out loud, “Jindo is Derethi now.”

Shuden’s face darkened slightly, eyeing the gyorn. “I wonder what the great
master thought when his two students, Korath and Dereth, left to preach to the
lands northward. Keseg taught of unity. But what did he mean? Unity of mind, as
my people assume? Unity of love, as your priests claim? Or is it the unity of
obedience, as the Derethi believe? In the end, I am left to ponder how mankind
managed to complicate such a simple concept.”

He paused, then shook his head. “Anyway, yes, my lady, Jindo is Derethi now. My
people allow Wyrn to assume that the Jindo have been converted because it is
better than fighting. Many are now questioning that decision, however. The
arteths are growing increasingly demanding.”

Sarene nodded. “I agree. Shu-Dereth must be stopped—it is a perversion of the
truth.”

Shuden paused. “I didn’t say that, Lady Sarene. The soul of Shu-Keseg is
acceptance. There is room for all teachings. The Derethi think they are doing
what is right.” Shuden stopped, looking over at Hrathen, before continuing.
“That one, however, is dangerous.”

“Why him and not others?”

“I visited one of Hrathen’s sermons,” Shuden said. “He doesn’t preach from his
heart, Lady Sarene, he preaches from his mind. He looks for numbers in his
conversions, paying no attention to the faith of his followers. This is
dangerous.”

Shuden scanned Hrathen’s companions. “That one bothers me as well,” he said,
pointing to a man whose hair was so blond it was almost white.

“Who is he?” Sarene asked with interest.

“Waren, first son of Baron Diolen,” Shuden said. “He shouldn’t be here in this
room, but he is apparently using his close association with the gyorn as an
invitation. Waren used to be a notably pious Korathi, but he claims to have
seen a vision of Jaddeth commanding that he convert to Shu-Dereth.”

“The ladies were talking about this earlier,” Sarene said, eyeing Waren. “You
don’t believe him?”

“I have always suspected Waren’s religiousness to be an exhibition. He is an
opportunist, and his extreme piety gained him notoriety.”

Sarene studied the white-haired man, worried. He was very young, but he carried
himself as a man of accomplishment and control. His conversion was a dangerous
sign. The more such people Hrathen gathered, the more difficult he would be to
stop.

“I shouldn’t have waited so long,” she said.

“For what?”

“To come to these balls. Hrathen has a week’s edge on me.”

“You act as if it were a personal struggle between you two,” Shuden noted with
a smile.

Sarene didn’t take the comment lightly. “A personal struggle with the fates of
nations at stake.”

“Shuden!” a voice said. “I see that you are lacking your customary circle of
admirers.”

“Good evening, Lord Roial,” Shuden said, bowing slightly as the old man
approached. “Yes, thanks to my companionship, I have been able to avoid most of
that tonight.”

“Ah, the lovely Princess Sarene,” Roial said, kissing her hand. “Apparently,
your penchant for black has waned.”

“It was never that strong to begin with, my lord,” she said with a curtsy.

“I can imagine,” Roial said with a smile. Then he turned back to Shuden. “I had
hoped that you wouldn’t realize your good fortune, Shuden. I might have stolen
the princess and kept off a few of the leeches myself.”

Sarene regarded the elderly man with surprise.

Shuden chuckled. “Lord Roial is, perhaps, the only bachelor in Arelon whose
affection is more sought-after than my own. Not that I am jealous. His Lordship
diverts some of the attention from me.”

“You?” Sarene asked, looking at the spindly old man. “Women want to marry you?”
Then, remembering her manners, she added a belated “my lord,” blushing
furiously at the impropriety of her words.

Roial laughed. “Don’t worry about offending me, young Sarene. No man my age is
much to look at. My dear Eoldess has been dead for twenty years, and I have no
son. My fortune has to pass to someone, and every unmarried girl in the realm
realizes that fact. She would only have to indulge me for a few years, bury me,
then find a lusty young lover to help spend my money.”

“My lord is too cynical,” Shuden noted.

“My lord is too realistic,” Roial said with a snort. “Though I’ll admit, the
idea of forcing one of those young puffs into my bed is tempting. I know they
all think I’m too old to make them perform their duties as a wife, but they
assume wrong. If I were going to let them steal my fortune, I’d at least make
them work for it.”

Shuden blushed at the comment, but Sarene only laughed. “I knew it. You really
are nothing but a dirty old man.”

“Self-professedly so,” Roial agreed with a smile. Then, looking over at
Hrathen, he continued. “How’s our overly armored friend doing?”

“Bothering me by his mere noxious presence, my lord,” Sarene replied.

“Watch him, Sarene,” Roial said. “I hear that our dear lord Telrii’s sudden
good fortune isn’t a matter of pure luck.”

Shuden’s eyes grew suspicious. “Duke Telrii has declared no allegiance to
Derethi.”

“Not openly, no,” Roial agreed. “But my sources say that there is something
between those two. One thing is certain: There has rarely been a party like
this in Kae, and the duke is throwing it for no obvious reason. One begins to
wonder just what Telrii is advertising, and why he wants us to know how wealthy
he is.”

“An interesting thought, my lord,” Sarene said.

“Sarene?” Eshen’s voice called from the other side of the room. “Dear, would
you come over here?”

“Oh no,” Sarene said, looking over at the queen, who was waving her to
approach. “What do you suppose this is about?”

“I’m intrigued to find out,” Roial said with a sparkle in his eyes.

Sarene acknowledged the queen’s gesture, approaching the royal couple and
curtsying politely. Shuden and Roial followed more discreetly, placing
themselves within earshot.

Eshen smiled as Sarene approached. “Dear, I was just explaining to my husband
about the idea we came up with this morning. You know, the one about
exercising?” Eshen nodded her head toward the king enthusiastically.

“What is this nonsense, Sarene?” the king demanded. “Women playing with
swords?”

“His Majesty wouldn’t want us to get fat, would he?” Sarene asked innocently.

“No, of course not,” the king said. “But you could just eat less.”

“But, I do so like to exercise, Your Majesty.”

Iadon took a deep, suffering breath. “But surely there is some other form of
exercise you women could do?”

Sarene blinked, trying to hint that she might be close to tears. “But, Your
Majesty, I’ve done this ever since I was a child. Surely the king can have
nothing against a foolish womanly pastime.”

The king stopped, eyeing her. She might have overdone it that last time. Sarene
assumed her best look of hopeless idiocy and smiled.

Finally, he just shook his head. “Bah, do whatever you want, woman. I don’t
want you spoiling my evening.”

“The king is very wise,” Sarene said, curtsying and backing away.

“I had forgotten about that,” Shuden whispered to her as she rejoined him. “The
act must be quite the burden to maintain.”

“It is useful sometimes,” Sarene said. They were about to withdraw when Sarene
noticed a courier approaching the king. She placed her hand on Shuden’s arm,
indicating that she wanted to wait a moment where she could still hear Iadon.

The messenger whispered something in Iadon’s ear, and the king’s eyes grew wide
with frustration. “What!”

The man moved to whisper again, and the king pushed him back. “Just say it,
man. I can’t stand all that whispering.”

“It happened just this week, Your Majesty,” the man explained.

Sarene edged closer.

“How odd.” A slightly accented voice suddenly drifted in their direction.
Hrathen stood a short distance away. He wasn’t watching them, but somehow he
was directing his voice at the king—as if he were intentionally allowing his
words to be overheard. “I wouldn’t have thought the king would discuss
important matters where the dull-minded can hear. Such people tend to be so
confused by events that it is a disservice to allow them the opportunity.”

Most of the people around her didn’t even appear to have heard the gyorn’s
comment. The king, however, had. Iadon regarded Sarene for a moment, then
grabbed his messenger by the arm and strode quickly from the room, leaving a
startled Eshen behind. As Sarene watched the king leave, Hrathen’s eyes caught
her own, and he smiled slightly before turning back to his companions.

“Can you believe that?” Sarene said, fuming. “He did that on purpose!”

Shuden nodded. “Often, my lady, our deceptions turn on us.”

“The gyorn is good,” Roial said. “It’s always a masterful stroke when you can
turn someone’s guise to your advantage.”

“I have often found that no matter what the circumstance, it is most useful to
be oneself,” Shuden said. “The more faces we try to wear, the more confused
they become.”

Roial nodded slightly, smiling. “True. Boring, perhaps, but true.”

Sarene was barely listening. She had assumed that she was the one doing the
manipulating; she had never realized the disadvantage it gave her. “The façade
is troubling,” she admitted. Then she sighed, turning back to Shuden. “But I am
stuck with it, at least with the king. Honestly though, I doubt he would have
regarded me any other way, no matter how I acted.”

“You’re probably right,” Shuden said. “The king is rather shortsighted when it
comes to women.”

The king returned a few moments later, his face dark, his humor obviously
ruined by whatever news he had received. The courier escaped with a look of
relief, and as he left, Sarene caught sight of a new figure entering the room.
Duke Telrii was customarily pompous in bright reds and golds, his fingers
speckled with rings. Sarene watched him closely, but he didn’t join—or even
acknowledge—the gyorn Hrathen. In fact, he seemed to doggedly ignore the
priest, instead making the proper hostly overtures, visiting with each group of
guests in turn.

“You’re right, Lord Roial,” Sarene finally said.

Roial looked up from his conversation with Shuden. “Hum?”

“Duke Telrii,” Sarene said, nodding to the man. “There’s something between him
and the gyorn.”

“Telrii is a troublesome one,” Roial said. “I’ve never quite been able to
figure out his motivations. At times, it seems he wants nothing more than coin
to pad his coffers. At others …”

Roial trailed off as Telrii, as if noticing their study of him, turned toward
Sarene’s group. He smiled and drifted in their direction, Atara at his side.
“Lord Roial,” he said with a smooth, almost uncaring, voice. “Welcome. And,
Your Highness. I don’t believe we’ve been properly introduced.”

Roial did the honors. Sarene curtsied as Telrii sipped at his wine and
exchanged pleasantries with Roial. There was a startling level of … nonchalance
about him. While few noblemen actually cared about the topics they discussed,
most had the decency to at least sound interested. Telrii made no such
concession. His tone was flippant, though not quite to the level of being
insulting, and his manner uninterested. Beyond the initial address, he
completely ignored Sarene, obviously satisfied that she was of no discernible
significance.

Eventually, the duke sauntered away, and Sarene watched him go with annoyance.
If there was one thing she loathed, it was being ignored. Finally, she sighed
and turned to her companion. “All right, Lord Shuden, I want to mingle. Hrathen
has a week’s lead, but Domi be cursed if I’m going to let him stay ahead of
me.”


It was late. Shuden had wanted to leave hours ago, but Sarene had been
determined to forge on, plowing through hundreds of people, making contacts
like a madwoman. She made Shuden introduce her to everyone he knew, and the
faces and names had quickly become a blur. However, repetition would bring
familiarity.

Eventually, she let Shuden bring her back to the palace, satisfied with the
day’s events. Shuden let her off and wearily bid her goodnight, claiming he was
glad that Ahan was next in line to take her to a ball. “Your company was
delightful,” he explained, “but I just can’t keep up with you!”

Sarene found it hard to keep up with herself sometimes. She practically
stumbled her way into the palace, so drowsy with fatigue and wine that she
could barely keep her eyes open.

Shouts echoed through the hallway.

Sarene frowned, turning a corner to find the king’s guard scrambling around,
yelling at one another and generally making a rather large nuisance of
themselves.

“What is going on?” she asked, holding her head.

“Someone broke into the palace tonight,” a guard explained. “Snuck right
through the king’s bedchambers.”

“Is anyone hurt?” Sarene asked, suddenly coming alert. Iadon and Eshen had left
the party hours before her and Shuden.

“Thank Domi, no,” the guard said. Then, he turned to two soldiers. “Take the
princess to her room and stand guard at the door,” he ordered. “Goodnight, Your
Highness. Don’t worry—they’re gone now.”

Sarene sighed, noting the yelling and bustle of the guards, their armor and
weapons clanking as they periodically ran through the hallways. She doubted
that she would be able to have a good night with so much ruckus, no matter how
tired she was.

