# Part 1 - CHAPTER 9
[Metadata]: # {02.09}
[Descriptor]: # {02.09}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 9
_Previous People_
_Gyorn Hrathen: High Priest of Herethi religion from Fjordell_
_Dilaf: His slave_

_Duke Telrii_

_Nobels of Elantris_ 
_Idan_
_Ramear_
_Waren_

## Hrathen and Dilaf discuss Sarene
If Dilaf had been a dog, he would have been growling. Probably frothing at the
mouth as well, Hrathen decided. The arteth was even worse than he usually was
after visiting Elantris’s wall.

Hrathen turned to look back at the city. They had nearly reached their chapel,
but the enormous wall surrounding Elantris was still visible behind them. Atop
it somewhere was the infuriating young woman who had somehow gotten the best of
him this day.

“She was magnificent,” Hrathen said in spite of himself. Like any of his kind,
he had an unquestioned prejudice when it came to the Teoish people. Teod had
banished Derethi ministers from the country fifty years ago following a small
misunderstanding, and had never consented to let them back in. The Teoish king
had come quite near to banishing the Fjordell ambassadors as well. There wasn’t
a single known Teoish member of Shu-Dereth, and the Teoish royal house was
infamous for its biting denunciations of all things Derethi.

Still, it was invigorating to meet a person who could so easily foil one of his
sermons. Hrathen had preached Shu-Dereth so long, had made such an art of
manipulating the public mind, that he hardly found challenge in it any longer.
His success in Duladel a half year ago had proven that one could even cause
nations to crumble, if one were capable enough.

Unfortunately, in Duladel there had been little opposition. The Dulas
themselves were too open, too accepting, to present a true challenge. In the
end, with the shambles of a government dead at his feet, Hrathen had found
himself disappointed. It had been almost too easy.

“Yes, she is impressive,” he said.

“She is accursed above all others,” Dilaf hissed. “A member of the only race
hated by Lord Jaddeth.”

So that was what was bothering him. Many Fjordells assumed that there was no
hope for the Teos. It was foolishness, of course—a simple justification that
infused Fjorden’s historical enemies with theological hatred. Still, many
people believed it—and apparently Dilaf was among them.

“Jaddeth hates no one but those who hate Him,” Hrathen said.

“They do hate Him.”

“Most of them have never even heard His name preached, Arteth,” Hrathen said.
“Their king, yes; he is most likely cursed for his injunction against Derethi
priests. However, the people haven’t even been given a chance. Once Arelon
falls to Lord Jaddeth, then we can worry about penetrating Teod. The country
won’t last long with the rest of the civilized world pitted against it.”

“It will be destroyed,” Dilaf prophesied with angry eyes. “Jaddeth will not
wait while our arteths preach His name against the unyielding walls of Teoish
hearts.”

“Lord Jaddeth can only come when all men are united beneath Fjordell rule,
Arteth,” Hrathen said, turning away from his contemplation of Elantris and
moving to enter the chapel. “That includes the ones in Teod.”

Dilaf’s response was softly spoken, but every word sounded powerfully in
Hrathen’s ears. “Perhaps,” the Arelish priest whispered. “But there is another
way. Lord Jaddeth will rise when every living soul is united—the Teoish will be
no obstacle if we destroy them. When the final Teo heaves his last sigh, when
the Elantrians have been burned from the face of Sycla, then all men will
follow Wyrn. Then Jaddeth will come.”

The words were disturbing. Hrathen had come to save Arelon, not to burn it. It
might be necessary to undermine the monarchy, and perhaps he would have to
spill some noble blood, but the end result would be the redemption of an entire
nation. To Hrathen, uniting all mankind meant converting them to Derethi, not
murdering those who didn’t believe.

Except, perhaps his way was wrong. Wyrn’s patience seemed only slightly greater
than Dilaf’s—the three-month time limit proved that much. Suddenly Hrathen felt
an extreme sense of urgency. Wyrn meant his words: Unless Hrathen converted
Arelon, the country would be destroyed.

“Great Jaddeth Below …” Hrathen whispered, invoking his deity’s name—an action
he reserved for only the most sacred of times. Right or wrong, he didn’t want
the blood of an entire kingdom—even a heretical one—on his hands. He must
succeed.

## Hrathen discusses plans with the nobles of Elantris
Fortunately, his loss to the Teoish girl hadn’t been as complete as she
probably assumed. When Hrathen arrived at the meeting place—a large suite in
one of Kae’s finest inns—many of the nobles he had invited were waiting for
him. The speech on Elantris’s wall had been only one part of his plan to
convert these men.

“Greetings, Lords,” Hrathen said with a nod of his head.

“Don’t pretend everything is fine between us, priest,” said Idan, one of the
younger, more vocal nobles. “You promised your words would bring power. It
appears powerful confusion was the only thing they produced.”

Hrathen waved his hand dismissively. “My speech baffled one simpleminded girl.
It is said the fair princess has trouble remembering which is her right hand
and which is her left. I wouldn’t have expected her to understand my
speech—don’t tell me that you, Lord Idan, were similarly lost.”

Idan blushed. “Of course not, my lord. It’s just that … I failed to see how
conversion could grant us power.”

“The power, my lord, comes in the perception of your enemy.” Hrathen strolled
through the room, the ever-present Dilaf at his side, and chose a seat. Some
gyorns preferred to use a standing posture as a form of intimidation, but
Hrathen found it more useful to sit. More often than not, sitting made his
listeners—especially those who were standing—uncomfortable. One appeared more
in control when one could captivate an audience without towering over them.

Sure enough, Idan and the others soon found their seats as well. Hrathen rested
his elbows on the armrests, then clasped his hands and regarded his audience in
silence. His brow furled slightly as his eyes fell on one face near the back of
the room. The man was older, perhaps in his late forties, and wore rich
clothing. The most telling part of the man’s appearance was the large purplish
birthmark on the left side of his neck and face.

Hrathen hadn’t invited Duke Telrii to the meeting. The duke was one of the most
powerful men in Arelon, and Hrathen had kept his invitations to the younger
nobles. He had assumed that he had little chance in convincing powerful men to
follow him; young men impatient to move up the aristocratic ladder were usually
easier to manipulate. Hrathen would have to speak carefully this night—a
powerful alliance could be his reward.

“Well?” Idan finally asked, fidgeting beneath Hrathen’s stare. “Who are they
then? Who do you perceive as our enemy?”

“The Elantrians,” Hrathen said simply. He could feel Dilaf tense by his side as
he mentioned the word.

Idan’s discomfort left as he chuckled, shooting looks at several of his
companions. “The Elantrians have been dead for a decade, Fjordell. They are
hardly a threat.”

“No, my young lord,” Hrathen said. “They live on.”

“If you can call it that.”

“I don’t mean those pitiful mongrels inside the city,” Hrathen said. “I mean
the Elantrians that live in the people’s minds. Tell me, Idan. Have you ever
met a man who thought the Elantrians would return someday?”

Idan’s chuckles faded away as he considered the question.

“Iadon’s rule is far from absolute,” Hrathen said. “He is more of a regent than
a king. The people don’t really expect him to be monarch for long—they’re
waiting for their blessed Elantrians to return. Many call the Reod false, a
kind of ‘test’ to see who will remain true to the old pagan religion. You have
all heard how people speak of Elantris in whispers.”

Hrathen’s words held weight. He had been in Kae for only a few days, but he had
listened and researched well during that time. He was exaggerating the opinion,
but he knew it existed.

“Iadon doesn’t see the danger,” Hrathen continued softly. “He doesn’t see that
his leadership is suffered, rather than accepted. As long as the people have a
physical reminder of Elantris’s might, they will fear—and as long as they fear
something more than they fear their king, none of you will have power. Your
titles came from the king; your power is connected to him. If he is impotent,
then you are as well.”

They were listening now. At the heart of every nobleman was an incurable
insecurity. Hrathen hadn’t met an aristocrat yet who wasn’t at least in part
convinced that the peasants laughed at him behind his back.

“Shu-Korath doesn’t recognize the danger,” Hrathen continued. “The Korathi do
nothing to denounce the Elantrians, and therefore perpetuate the public’s hope.
Irrational though it may be, the people want to believe Elantris will be
restored. They imagine how grand it used to be, their memories enhanced by a
decade of stories—it is human nature to believe that other places and other
times are better than the here and now. If you ever want to hold true
domination over Arelon, my dear noble friends, then you must abolish your
people’s foolish hopes. You must find a way to free them from Elantris’s grip.”

Young Idan nodded enthusiastically. Hrathen pursed his lips with
dissatisfaction: The boy noble had been too easily swayed. As was often the
case, the most outspoken man was the least discerning. Ignoring Idan, Hrathen
judged the expressions of the others. They were thoughtful, but not convinced.
The more mature Telrii sat quietly at the back, rubbing the large ruby on one
of his rings, watching Hrathen with a musing expression.

Their uncertainty was good. Men as fickle-minded as Idan were of no use to him;
those so easily won would be lost just as quickly. “Tell me, men of Arelon,”
Hrathen said, changing his argument subtly, “have you traveled the countries of
the East?”

There were several nods. During the last few years, the East had seen a flood
of visitors from Arelon touring through the old Fjordell Empire. Hrathen
strongly suspected that the new aristocracy of Arelon, even more insecure than
most nobles, felt a desire to prove its level of cultured refinement by
associating with kingdoms such as Svorden, the cultural epicenter of the East.

“If you have visited the powerful countries of the East, my friends, then you
know of the influence available to those who align themselves with the Derethi
priesthood.” “Influence” was, perhaps, an understatement. No king ruled east of
the Dathreki Mountains unless he professed allegiance to Shu-Dereth, and the
most desirable and lucrative governmental positions always fell to those who
were diligent in their worship of Jaddeth.

There was a promise implicit in Hrathen’s words and—no matter what else they
might discuss this night, no matter what other arguments Hrathen put forth—this
was what would win their support. It was no secret that Derethi priests took a
keen interest in politics; and most people knew that gaining the endorsement of
the church was usually enough to insure political victory. This was the promise
the noblemen had come expecting to hear, and this was why the Teoish girl’s
complaints hadn’t affected them. Theological disputes were far from these men’s
minds; Shu-Dereth or Shu-Korath, it mattered little to them. All they needed
was an assurance that a sudden outpouring of piety on their parts would in turn
be rewarded with temporal blessings—very tangible and spendable ones.

“Enough wordplay, priest,” said Ramear, one of the younger nobles. He was a
hawk-faced second son of an unimportant baron, a man with a sharp Aonic nose
and a reputation for straightforwardness—a reputation he apparently deserved.
“I want promises. Are you saying that if we convert to Derethi, you will grant
us greater holdings?”

“Jaddeth rewards his followers,” Hrathen said noncommittally.

“And how will he reward us?” Ramear demanded. “Shu-Dereth holds no power in
this kingdom, priest.”

“Lord Jaddeth holds power everywhere, friend,” Hrathen said. Then, to forestall
further demands, he continued. “It is true that as of yet He has few followers
in Arelon. The world, however, is dynamic, and few things can stand against
Jaddeth’s empire. Remember Duladel, my friends. Arelon has remained untouched
for so long because we haven’t bothered to spare the effort it would take to
convert her.” A lie, but only a modest one. “The first problem is Elantris.
Remove it from the people’s minds, and they will gravitate toward
Shu-Dereth—Shu-Korath is too tranquil, too indolent. Jaddeth will grow in the
people’s awareness, and as He does, they will look for role models within the
ranks of the aristocracy—men who hold to the same ideals as themselves.”

“And then we will be rewarded?” Ramear asked pointedly.

“The people will never suffer rulers who don’t believe as they do. As recent
history has shown, my friends, kings and monarchies are hardly eternal.”

Ramear sat back to contemplate the priest’s words. Hrathen had to be careful
yet; it was quite possible that only a few of these men would end up supporting
him, and he didn’t want to give the others evidence against him. Lenient as he
may be with regards to religion, King Iadon wouldn’t suffer Hrathen’s preaching
long if he found it treasonous.

Later, after Hrathen sensed firm conviction in his fledgling nobles, he would
give them more concrete promises. And, no matter what his opponents might say,
Hrathen’s promises were trustworthy: as little as he liked working with men
whose allegiance could be bought, it was a firm tenet of Shu-Dereth that
ambition should be rewarded. Besides, it was beneficial to have a reputation
for honesty, if only so that one could lie at crucial moments.

“It will take time to unseat an entire religion and set up a new one in its
place,” mused Waren, a thin man with a head of nearly white blond hair. Waren
was known for his strict piety; Hrathen had been rather surprised when he
accompanied his cousin Idan to the meeting. It appeared that Waren’s renowned
faith was less a matter of religious fervor than it was one of political
advantage. Winning him, and his reputation, would be a great help to Hrathen’s
cause.

“You would be surprised, young Lord Waren,” Hrathen said. “Until very recently,
Duladel was the seat of one of the world’s oldest religions. Now, as far as
Fjordell recorders can tell, that religion has been completely wiped out—at
least in its pure form.”

“Yes,” Waren said, “but the collapse of the Jesker religion and the Duladen
Republic are events that had been building for years, perhaps even centuries.”

“But you cannot deny that when that change in power occurred, it came swiftly,”
Hrathen said.

Waren paused. “True.”

“The fall of the Elantrians was likewise swift,” Hrathen said. “Change can come
with blinding speed, Lord Waren—but those who are prepared can profit quite
substantially from it. You say that the fall of Jesker was building for years …
well, I suggest to you that the Korathi religion has been in decline for a
similar amount of time. It used to hold much sway in the East. Now, its
influence has been relegated to only Teod and Arelon.”

Waren paused thoughtfully. He appeared to be a man of intelligence and
shrewdness, and seemed swayed by Hrathen’s logic. It was possible that Hrathen
had misjudged the Arelish nobility. Most of them were as hopeless as their
king, but a surprising number showed promise. Perhaps they realized just how
precarious their positions were—their people starving, their aristocracy
inexperienced, and the full attention of the Fjordell Empire turned upon them.
When the storm hit, most of Arelon would be surprised like rodents stunned by a
bright light. These few lords, however, might just be worth saving.

“My lords, I hope you will review my offers with more wisdom than your king,”
Hrathen said. “These are difficult times, and those who don’t have the Church’s
support will find life harsh in the coming months. Remember who and what I
represent.”

“Remember Elantris,” a voice, Dilaf’s, hissed from beside Hrathen. “Do not
forget the well of desecration that pollutes our land. They sleep, and they
wait, clever as always. They wait to capture you—all of you—and drag you into
their embrace. You must cleanse the world of them before they cleanse it of
you.”

There was an uncomfortable moment of silence. Finally—the arteth’s sudden
exclamation having spoiled his rhythm—Hrathen leaned back in his chair,
crossing his fingers before him to show that the meeting was at an end. The
nobles left, their troubled faces showing that they understood the difficult
decision Hrathen had placed before them. Hrathen studied them, deciding which
ones it would be safe to contact again. Idan was his, and with him would
inevitably come several of his followers. Hrathen probably had Ramear as well,
assuming he met privately with the man and offered him a solid promise of
backing. There were a couple of others like Ramear, and then there was Waren,
whose eyes were tinged with what looked like respect. Yes, he could do grand
things with that one.

They were a politically weak, relatively unimportant lot, but they were a
beginning. As Shu-Dereth gained followers, increasingly important nobles would
throw their weight behind Hrathen. Then, when the country finally collapsed
beneath the weight of political unrest, economic uncertainty, and martial
threats, Hrathen would reward his followers with positions in the new
government.

The key to reaching that success was still sitting at the back of the meeting,
watching quietly. Duke Telrii’s air was stately, his face calm, but his
reputation for extravagance spoke of great potential.

“My lord Telrii, a moment please,” Hrathen requested, rising. “I have a special
proposal that might be of interest to you.”

