# PART 3 - CHAPTER 60
[Metadata]: # {04.06}
[Descriptor]: # {04.06}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 60
Galladon hid in the shadows, careful not to move until the gyorn and his
strange, bare-chested companions were gone. Then, motioning to Karata, he crept
up to Raoden’s body. “Sule?”

Raoden did not move.

“Doloken, Sule!” Galladon said, choked with emotion. “Don’t do this to me!”

A noise came from Raoden’s mouth, and Galladon leaned in eagerly, listening.

“Failed …” Raoden whispered. “Failed my love …” The mantra of the fallen;
Raoden had joined the Hoed.

Galladon sank down on the hard cobblestones, his body shaking as he wept
tearlessly. The last hour had been a horror. Galladon and Karata had been at
the library, planning how to lead the people away from Elantris. They had heard
the screams even at that distance, but by the time they had arrived at New
Elantris, no one but Hoed remained. As far as he knew, he and Karata were the
last two conscious Elantrians.

Karata placed a hand on his shoulder. “Galladon, we should go. This place is
not safe.”

“No,” Galladon said, climbing to his feet. “I have a promise to keep.” He
looked up at the mountain slope just outside of Kae, a slope that held a
special pool of water. Then, reaching down, he tied his jacket around Raoden to
cover the wound, and hefted his friend up onto his shoulder.

“Raoden made me vow to give him peace,” Galladon said. “After I see to him, I
intend to do the same for myself. We are the last, Karata; there is no more
room for us in this world.”

The woman nodded, moving to take part of Raoden’s burden on herself. Together,
the two of them began the hike that would end in oblivion.


Lukel didn’t struggle; there was little use in it. His father, however, was a
different story. It took three Fjordells to bind Kiin and throw him on a
horse—and even then, the large man managed to get off the odd kick at a passing
head.

Eventually, one of the soldiers thought to smash him on the back of the skull
with a rock, and Kiin fell still.

Lukel held his mother and wife close as the warriors herded them toward
Elantris. There was a long line of people—nobles gathered from the corners of
Kae, their clothing and faces ragged. Soldiers kept a watchful eye on the
captives—as if any of them had the courage or will left to try escaping. Most
of the people didn’t even look up as they were pushed through the streets.

Kaise and Daorn clung to Lukel, wide-eyed and frightened. Lukel pitied them the
most, for their youth. Adien walked along behind him, apparently unconcerned.
He slowly counted the steps as he moved. “Three hundred fifty-seven, three
hundred fifty-eight, three hundred fifty-nine …”

Lukel knew that they were marching to their own execution. He saw the bodies
that lined the streets, and he understood that these men were not intent on
domination. They were here to commit a massacre, and no massacre would be
complete with victims left alive.

He considered fighting back, grabbing a sword in some hopeless feat of heroism.
But in the end, he simply plodded along with the others. He knew that he was
going to die, and he knew there was nothing he could do to stop it. He was no
warrior. The best he could hope for was a quick end.


Hrathen stood next to Dilaf, remaining perfectly still as instructed. They
stood in a circle—fifty Dakhor, Sarene, and Hrathen, with one solitary monk in
the center. The Dakhor raised their hands, and the men on either side of
Hrathen placed a hand on his shoulder. His heart began to pound as the monks
began to glow, the bone inscriptions beneath their skin shining. There was a
jarring sensation, and Kae vanished around them.

They reappeared in an unfamiliar city. The houses lining the nearby street were
tall and connected, rather than separated and squat like those of Kae. They had
arrived in Teod.

The group still stood in a circle, but Hrathen did not fail to notice that the
man in the center was now missing. Hrathen shuddered, images from his youth
returning. The monk in the center had been fuel, his flesh and soul burned
away—a sacrifice in return for the instantaneous transportation to Teod.

Dilaf stepped forward, leading his men up the street. As far as Hrathen could
tell, Dilaf had brought the bulk of his monks with him, leaving Arelon in the
care of regular Fjordell soldiers and a few Dakhor overseers. Arelon and
Elantris had been defeated; the next battle was Teod. Hrathen could tell from
Dilaf’s eyes that the monk would not be satisfied until every person of Aonic
descent was dead.

Dilaf chose a building with a flat roof and motioned for his men to climb. It
was easy for them, their enhanced strength and agility helping them leap and
scramble up surfaces no normal man could possibly scale. Hrathen felt himself
lifted and thrown over a monk’s shoulder, and the ground fell away as he was
carted up the side of the wall—carried without difficulty despite his plate
armor. The Dakhor were unnatural monstrosities, but one couldn’t help being
awed at their power.

The monk dropped Hrathen unceremoniously on the roof, his armor clanking
against the stone. As Hrathen pulled himself to his feet, his eyes found those
of the princess. Sarene’s face was a tempest of hatred. She blamed him, of
course. She didn’t realize that, in a way, Hrathen was as much a prisoner as
she.

Dilaf stood at the edge of the roof, scanning the city. A fleet of ships was
pulling into Teod’s enormous bay.

“We are early,” Dilaf said, squatting down. “We will wait.”


Galladon could almost imagine that the city was peaceful. He stood on a
mountainside boulder, watching the morning’s light creep across Kae—as if an
invisible hand were pulling back a dark shade. He could almost convince himself
that the rising smoke was coming from chimneys, not the ashen wrecks of
buildings. He could nearly believe that the specks lining the streets were not
bodies, but bushes or boxes, the crimson blood on the streets a trick of the
early sunlight.

Galladon turned away from the city. Kae might be peaceful, but it was the peace
of death, not of serenity. Dreaming otherwise did little good. Perhaps if he
had been less inclined to delusion, he wouldn’t have let Raoden pull him out of
Elantris’s gutters. He wouldn’t have allowed one man’s simplistic optimism to
cloud his mind; he wouldn’t have begun to believe that life in Elantris could
be anything but pain. He wouldn’t have dared to hope.

Unfortunately, he had listened. Like a rulo, he had allowed himself to give in
to Raoden’s dreams. Once, he’d thought that he could no longer feel hope; he’d
chased it far away, wary of its fickle tricks. He should have left it there.
Without hope, he wouldn’t have to worry about disappointment.

“Doloken, sule,” Galladon mumbled, looking down at the mindless Raoden, “you
certainly made a mess of me.”

The worst of it was, he still hoped. The light that Raoden had kindled still
flickered inside Galladon’s chest, no matter how hard he tried to stomp it out.
The images of New Elantris’s destruction were still crisp in his memory.
Mareshe, an enormous, ragged hole torn in his chest. The quiet craftsman Taan,
his face crushed beneath a large stone, but his fingers still twitching. The
old Kahar—who had cleaned all of New Elantris practically by himself—missing an
arm and both legs.

Galladon had stood amid the carnage, screaming at Raoden for abandoning them,
for leaving them behind. Their prince had betrayed them for Sarene.

And still, he hoped.

It was like a small rodent, cowering in the corner of his soul, frightened by
the anger, the rage, and the despair. Yet every time he tried to grab hold of
it, the hope slipped to another part of his heart. It was what had spurred him
to leave the dead behind, to crawl from Elantris in search of Raoden, believing
for some irrational reason that the prince could still fix everything.

You are the fool, Galladon. Not Raoden, Galladon told himself bitterly. He
couldn’t help being what he was. You, however, know better.

Yet, he hoped. A part of Galladon still believed that Raoden would somehow make
things better. This was the curse his friend had set upon him, the wicked seed
of optimism that refused to be uprooted. Galladon still had hope, and he
probably would until the moment he gave himself up to the pool.

Silently, Galladon nodded to Karata, and they picked Raoden up, ready to trek
the last short distance to the pond. In few minutes he would be rid of both
hope and despair.


Elantris was dark, even though dawn was breaking. The tall walls made a shadow,
keeping the sunlight out, expanding the night for a few moments. It was here,
at one side of the broad entry plaza, that the soldiers deposited Lukel and the
other nobles. Another group of Fjordells was building an enormous pile of wood,
hauling scraps of buildings and furniture into the city.

Surprisingly, there were very few of the strange demon warriors; only three
directed the work. The rest of the men were regular soldiers, their armor
covered with red surcoats marking them as Derethi monks. The worked quickly,
keeping their eyes off of their prisoners, apparently trying not to think too
hard about what the wood would be used for.

Lukel tried not to think about that either.

Jalla pulled close to him, her body trembling with fright. Lukel had tried to
convince her to plead for freedom because of her Svordish blood, but she would
not go. She was so quiet and unassertive that some mistook her for weak, but if
they could have seen her as she was, voluntarily staying with her husband
though it meant certain death, they would have realized their mistake. Of all
the deals, trades, and recognitions Lukel had won, the prize of Jalla’s heart
was by far the most valuable.

His family pulled close to him, Daora and the children having no place to turn
now that Kiin was unconscious. Only Adien stood apart, staring at the pile of
lumber. He kept mumbling some number to himself.

Lukel searched through the crowd of nobles, trying to smile and give
encouragement, though he himself felt little confidence. Elantris would be
their grave. As he looked, Lukel noticed a figure standing near the back of the
group, hidden by bodies. He was moving slowly, his hands waving in front of
himself.

Shuden? Lukel thought. The Jindo’s eyes were closed, his hands moving fluidly
in some sort of pattern. Lukel watched his friend with confusion, wondering if
the Jindo’s mind had snapped; then he remembered the strange dance that Shuden
had done that first day in Sarene’s fencing class. ChayShan.

Shuden moved his hands slowly, giving only a bare hint of the fury that was to
come. Lukel watched with growing determination, somehow understanding. Shuden
was no warrior. He practiced his dance for exercise, not for combat. However,
he was not going to let the ones he loved be murdered without some sort of
fight. He would rather die struggling than sit and wait, hoping that fate would
send them a miracle.

Lukel took a breath, feeling ashamed. He searched around him, his eyes finding
a table leg that one of the soldiers had dropped nearby. When the time came,
Shuden would not fight alone.


Raoden floated, senseless and unaware. Time meant nothing to him—he was time.
It was his essence. Occasionally he would bob toward the surface of what he had
once called consciousness, but as he approached he would feel pain, and back
away. The agony was like a lake’s surface: if he broke through it, the pain
would return and envelop him.

Those times he got close to the surface of pain, however, he thought he saw
images. Visions that might have been real, but were probably just reflections
of his memory. He saw Galladon’s face, concerned and angry at the same time. He
saw Karata, her eyes heavy with despair. He saw a mountain landscape, covered
with scrub and rocks.

It was all immaterial to him.


“I often wish that they’d just let her die.”

Hrathen looked up. Dilaf’s voice was introspective, as if he were talking to
himself. However, the priest’s eyes were focused on Hrathen.

“What?” Hrathen asked hesitantly.

“If only they had let her die …” Dilaf trailed off. He sat at the edge of the
rooftop, watching the ships gather below, his face reminiscent. His emotions
had always been unstable. No man could keep Dilaf’s level of ardor burning for
long without doing emotional damage to his mind. A few more years, and Dilaf
would probably be completely insane.

“I was already fifty years old back then, Hrathen,” Dilaf said. “Did you know
that? I have lived nearly seventy years, though my body doesn’t look older than
twenty. She thought I was the most handsome man she’d ever seen, even though my
body had been twisted and destroyed to fit the mold of an Arelene.”

Hrathen remained quiet. He had heard of such things, that the incantations of
Dakhor could actually change the way a person looked. The process had
undoubtedly been very painful.

“When she fell sick, I took her to Elantris,” Dilaf mumbled, his legs pulled
tightly against his chest. “I knew it was pagan, I knew it was blasphemous, but
even forty years as a Dakhor wasn’t enough to keep me away … not when I thought
Elantris could save her. Elantris can heal, they said, while Dakhor cannot. And
I took her.”

The monk was no longer looking at Hrathen. His eyes were unfocused. “They
changed her,” he whispered. “They said the spell went wrong, but I know the
truth. They knew me, and they hated me. Why, then, did they have to put their
curse on Seala? Her skin turned black, her hair fell out, and she began to die.
She screamed at night, yelling that the pain was eating her from the inside.
Eventually she threw herself off the city wall.”

Dilaf’s voice turned reverently mournful. “I found her at the bottom, still
alive. Still alive, despite the fall. And I burned her. She never stopped
screaming. She screams still. I can hear her. She will scream until Elantris is
gone.”


They reached the ledge, behind which lay the pool, and Galladon laid Raoden
down. The prince slumped idly against the stone, his head hanging slightly over
the side of the cliff, his unfocused eyes staring out over the city of Kae.
Galladon leaned back against the rock face, next to the door of the tunnel that
led down to Elantris. Karata slumped next to him in exhaustion. They would wait
a brief moment, then find oblivion.


Once the wood was gathered, the soldiers began a new pile—this one of bodies.
The soldiers went searching through the city, seeking the corpses of Elantrians
who had been slain. Lukel realized something as he watched the pile grow. They
weren’t all dead. In fact, most of them weren’t.

Most of them had wounds so grievous that it sickened Lukel to look at them, yet
their arms and legs twitched, their lips moving. Elantrians, Lukel thought with
amazement, the dead whose minds continue to live.

The pile of bodies grew higher. There were hundreds of them, all of the
Elantrians that had been collecting in the city for ten years. None of them
resisted; they simply allowed themselves to be heaped, their eyes uncaring,
until the pile of bodies was larger than the pile of wood.

“Twenty-seven steps to the bodies,” Adien whispered suddenly, walking away from
the crowd of nobles. Lukel reached for his brother, but it was too late.

A soldier yelled for Adien to get back with the others. Adien didn’t respond.
Angry, the soldier slashed at Adien with a sword, leaving a large gash in his
chest. Adien stumbled, but kept walking. No blood came from the wound. The
soldier’s eyes opened wide, and he jumped back, making a ward against evil.
Adien approached the pile of Elantrians and joined its ranks, flopping down
among them and then lying still.

Adien’s secret of five years had finally been revealed. He had joined his
people.


“I remember you, Hrathen.” Dilaf was smiling now, his grin wicked and demonic.
“I remember you as a boy, when you came to us. It was just before I left for
Arelon. You were frightened then, as you are frightened now. You ran from us,
and I watched you go with satisfaction. You were never meant to be Dakhor—you
are far too weak.”

Hrathen felt chilled. “You were there?”

“I was gragdet by then, Hrathen,” Dilaf said. “Do you remember me?”

Then, looking into the man’s eyes, Hrathen had a flash of remembrance. He
remembered evil eyes in the body of a tall, unmerciful man. He remembered
chants. He remembered fires. He remembered screams—his screams—and a face
hanging above him. They were the same eyes.

“You!” Hrathen said with a gasp.

“You remember.”

“I remember,” Hrathen said with a dull chill. “You were the one that convinced
me to leave. In my third month, you demanded that one of your monks use his
magic and send you to Wyrn’s palace. The monk complied, giving up his life to
transport you a distance that you could have walked in fifteen minutes.”

“Absolute obedience is required, Hrathen,” Dilaf whispered. “Occasional tests
and examples bring loyalty from the rest.” Then, pausing, he looked out over
the bay. The armada was docked, waiting as per Dilaf’s order. Hrathen scanned
the horizon, and he could see several dark specks—the tips of masts. Wyrn’s
army was coming.

“Come,” Dilaf ordered, rising to his feet. “We have been successful; the Teoish
armada has docked. They will not be able to stop our fleet from landing. I have
only one duty remaining—the death of King Eventeo.”


A vision sprung into Raoden’s impassive mind. He tried to ignore it. Yet, for
some reason, it refused to leave. He saw it through the shimmering surface of
his pain—a simple picture.

It was Aon Rao. A large square with four circles around it, lines connecting
them to the center. It was a widely used Aon—especially among the Korathi—for
its meaning. Spirit. Soul.

Floating in the white eternity, Raoden’s mind tried to discard the image of Aon
Rao. It was something from a previous existence, unimportant and forgotten. He
didn’t need it any longer. Yet, even as he strove to remove the image, another
sprung up in its place.

Elantris. Four walls forming a square. The four outer cities surrounding it,
their borders circles. A straight road leading from each city to Elantris.

Merciful Domi!


The soldiers opened several barrels of oil, and Lukel watched with revulsion as
they began pouring them over the heap of bodies. Three shirtless warriors stood
at the side, singing some sort of chant in a foreign language that sounded too
harsh and unfamiliar to be Fjordell. We will be next, Lukel realized.

“Don’t look,” Lukel ordered his family, turning away as the soldiers prepared
Elantris for immolation.


King Eventeo stood in the distance, a small honor guard surrounding him. He
bowed his head as Dilaf approached. The monk smiled, preparing his knife.
Eventeo though he was presenting his country for surrender—he didn’t realize
that he was offering it up for a sacrifice.

Hrathen walked beside Dilaf, thinking about necessity and duty. Men would die,
true, but their loss would not be meaningless. The entire Fjordell Empire would
grow stronger for the victory over Teod. The hearts of men would increase in
faith. It was the same thing Hrathen himself had done in Arelon. He had tried
to convert the people for political reasons, using politics and popularity. He
had bribed Telrii to convert, giving no heed to saving the man’s soul. It was
the same thing. What was a nation of unbelievers when compared with all of
Shu-Dereth?

Yet, even as he rationalized, his stomach grew sick.

I was sent to save these people, not to slaughter them!

Dilaf held Princess Sarene by the neck, her mouth gagged. Eventeo looked up and
smiled reassuringly as they approached. He could not see the knife in Dilaf’s
hand.

“I have waited for this,” Dilaf whispered softly. At first, Hrathen thought the
priest referred to the destruction of Teod. But Dilaf wasn’t looking at the
king. He was looking at Sarene, the blade of his knife pressed into her back.

“You, Princess, are a disease,” Dilaf whispered in Sarene’s ear, his voice
barely audible to Hrathen. “Before you came to Kae, even the Arelenes hated
Elantris. You are the reason they forgot that loathing. You associated with the
unholy ones, and you even descended to their level. You are worse than they
are—you are one who is not cursed, but seeks to be cursed. I considered killing
your father first and making you watch, but now I realize it will be much worse
the other way around. Think of old Eventeo watching you die, Princess. Ponder
that image as I send you to Jaddeth’s eternal pits of torment.”

She was crying, the tears staining her gag.


Raoden struggled toward consciousness. The pain hit him like an enormous block
of stone, halting his progress, his mind recoiling in agony. He threw himself
against it, and the torment washed over him. He slowly forced his way through
the resistant surface, coming to a laborious awareness of the world outside
himself.

He wanted to scream, to scream over and over again. The pain was incredible.
However, with the pain, he felt something else. His body. He was moving, being
dragged along the ground. Images washed into his mind as sight returned. He was
being pulled toward something round and blue.

The pool.

NO! he thought desperately. Not yet! I know the answer!


Raoden screamed suddenly, twitching. Galladon was so surprised that he dropped
the body.

Raoden stumbled forward, trying to get his footing, and fell directly into the
pool.

