# Part 1 - CHAPTER 19
[Metadata]: # {02.19}
[Descriptor]: # {02.19}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 19
The city of Elantris glowed brilliantly. The very stones shone, as if each one
held a fire within. The shattered domes had been restored, their smooth,
egglike surfaces blossoming across the landscape. Thin spires stabbed the air
like streaks of light. The wall was no longer a barrier, for its gates were
left permanently open—it existed not to protect, but for cohesion. The wall was
part of the city somehow, an essential element of the whole, without which
Elantris would not be complete.

And amid the beauty and the glory were the Elantrians. Their bodies seemed to
shine with the same inner light as the city, their skin a luminous pale silver.
Not metallic, just … pure. Their hair was white, but not the worn-out dull gray
or yellow of the aged. It was the blazing white of steel heated to an extreme
temperature—a color free of impurities, a powerful, focused white.

Their bearings were equally striking. The Elantrians moved through their city
with an air of complete control. The men were handsome and tall—even the short
ones—and the women were undeniably beautiful—even the homely ones. They were
unhurried; they strolled rather than walked, and they were quick to greet those
they met. There was a power in them, however. It radiated from their eyes and
underlay their motions. It was easy to understand why these beings were
worshipped as gods.

Equally unmistakable were the Aons. The ancient glyphs covered the city; they
were etched into walls, painted on doors, and written on signs. Most of them
were inert—simple markings, rather than runes with an arcane purpose. Others,
however, obviously held energy. Throughout the city stood large metal plates
carved with Aon Tia, and occasionally an Elantrian would approach and place his
or her hand in the center of the character. The Elantrian’s body would flash,
and then disappear in a circular burst of light, his body instantly transported
to another section of the city.

Amid the glory was a small family of Kae townspeople. Their clothing was rich
and fine, their words were educated, but their skin did not glow. There were
other regular people in the city—not as many as the Elantrians, but a fair
number nonetheless. This comforted the boy, giving him a familiar reference.

The father carried his young son tightly, looking around with distrust. Not
everyone adored the Elantrians; some were suspicious. The boy’s mother gripped
her husband’s arm with tense fingers. She had never been inside Elantris,
though she had lived in Kae for over a decade. Unlike the boy’s father, she was
more nervous than distrustful. She was worried about her son’s wound, anxious
as any mother whose child was near death.

Suddenly, the boy felt the pain in his leg. It was blinding and intense,
stemming from the festering wound and shattered bone in his thigh. He had
fallen from someplace high, and his leg had snapped so soundly the shattered
bone had torn through the skin to jut into the air.

His father had hired the best surgeons and doctors, but they had been unable to
stop the infection. The bone had been set as well as possible, considering that
it had fractured in at least a dozen places. Even without the infection, the
boy would walk with a limp the rest of his days. With the infection …
amputation seemed the only recourse. Secretly, the doctors feared it was too
late for even that solution; the wound had occurred high on the leg, and the
infection had probably spread to the torso. The father had demanded the truth.
He knew his son was dying. And so he had come to Elantris, despite his lifelong
distrust of its gods.

They took the boy to a domed building. He nearly forgot his pain as the door
opened on its own, sliding inward without a sound. His father stopped abruptly
before the door, as if reconsidering his actions, but his mother tugged
insistently on the man’s arm. His father nodded, bowing his head and entering
the building.

Light shone from glowing Aons on the walls. A woman approached, her white hair
long and full, her silvery face smiling encouragingly. She ignored his father’s
distrust, her eyes sympathetic as she took the boy from hesitant arms. She laid
him carefully on a soft mat, then brought her hand into the air above him, her
long, thin index finger pointing at nothing.

The Elantrian moved her hand slowly, and the air began to glow. A trail of
light followed her finger. It was like a rupture in the air, a line that
radiated with deep intensity. It was as if a river of light were trying to
force its way through the small crack. The boy could feel the power, he could
sense it raging to be free, but only this little was allowed to escape. Even
that little was so bright that he could barely see for the light.

The woman traced carefully, completing Aon Ien—but it wasn’t just Aon Ien, it
was more complex. The core was the familiar Aon of healing, but there were
dozens of lines and curves at the sides. The boy’s brow wrinkled—he had been
taught the Aons by his tutors, and it seemed odd that the woman should change
this one so drastically.

The beautiful Elantrian made one final mark at the side of her complex
construction, and the Aon began to glow even more intensely. The boy felt a
burning in his leg, then a burning up through his torso. He began to yell, but
the light suddenly vanished. The boy opened his eyes with surprise; the
afterimage of Aon Ien still burned into his vision. He blinked, looking down.
The wound was gone. Not even a scar remained.

But he could still feel the pain. It burned him, cut him, caused his soul to
tremble. It should have been gone, but it was not.

“Rest now, little one,” the Elantrian said in a warm voice, pushing him back.

His mother was weeping with joy, and even his father looked satisfied. The boy
wanted to yell at them, to scream that something was wrong. His leg hadn’t been
healed. The pain still remained.

No! Something is wrong! He tried to say, but he couldn’t. He couldn’t speak….


“No!” Raoden yelled, sitting upright with a sudden motion. He blinked a few
times, disoriented in the darkness. Finally, he took a few deep breaths,
putting his hand to his head. The pain did remain; it was growing so strong
that it even corrupted his dreams. He had dozens of tiny wounds and bruises
now, even though he had been in Elantris for only three weeks. He could feel
each one distinctly, and together they formed a unified frontal assault on
sanity.

Raoden groaned, leaning forward and grabbing his legs as he fought the pain.
His body could no longer sweat, but he could feel it trembling. He clamped his
teeth shut, gritting them against the surge of agony. Slowly, laboriously, he
reasserted control. He rebuffed the pain, soothing his tortured body until,
finally, he released his legs and stood.

It was growing worse. He knew it shouldn’t be so bad yet; he hadn’t even been
in Elantris for a month. He also knew that the pain was supposed to be steady,
or so everyone said, but for him it seemed to come in waves. It was always
there—always ready to pounce on him in a moment of weakness.

Sighing, Raoden pushed open the door to his chambers. He still found it odd
that Elantrians should sleep. Their hearts no longer beat, they no longer
needed breath. Why did they need sleep? The others, however, could give him no
answers. The only true experts had died ten years previously.

So, Raoden slept, and with that sleep came dreams. He had been eight when he
broke his leg. His father had been loath to bring him into the city; even
before the Reod, Iadon had been suspicious of Elantris. Raoden’s mother, dead
some twelve years now, had insisted.

The child Raoden hadn’t understood how close he’d come to death. He had felt
the pain, however, and the beautiful peace of its removal. He remembered the
beauty of both the city and its occupants. Iadon had spoken harshly of Elantris
as they left, and Raoden had contradicted the words with vehemence. It was the
first time Raoden could remember taking a position against his father. After
that, there had been many others.

As Raoden entered the main chapel, Saolin left his attendant position beside
Raoden’s chamber, falling into place beside him. Over the last week, the
soldier had gathered a group of willing men and formed them into a squad of
guards.

“You know I am flattered by your attentiveness, Saolin,” Raoden said. “But is
it really necessary?”

“A lord requires an honor guard, Lord Spirit,” Saolin explained. “It wouldn’t
be proper for you to go about alone.”

“I’m not a lord, Saolin,” Raoden said. “I’m just a leader—there is to be no
nobility in Elantris.”

“I understand, my lord,” Saolin said with a nod, obviously not seeing the
paradox within his own words. “However, the city is still a dangerous place.”

“As you wish, Saolin,” Raoden said. “How goes the planting?”

“Galladon has finished his plowing,” Saolin said. “He has already organized the
planting teams.”

“I shouldn’t have slept so long,” Raoden said, looking out the chapel window to
notice how high the sun had risen. He left the building, Saolin close behind,
and walked around a neat cobblestone path to the gardens. Kahar and his crew
had cleaned off the stones, and then Dahad—one of Taan’s followers—had used his
skills with stoneworking to reset them.

The planting was already well under way. Galladon oversaw the work with a
careful eye, his gruff tongue quick to point out any errors. However, there was
a peace about the Dula. Some men were farmers because they had no other choice,
but Galladon seemed to find true enjoyment in the activity.

Raoden remembered clearly that first day, when he had tempted Galladon with the
bit of dried meat. His friend’s pain had barely been under control back
then—Raoden had been scared of the Dula several times during those first days.
Now none of that remained. Raoden could see it in Galladon’s eyes and in his
bearing: He had found the “secret,” as Kahar had put it. Galladon was in
control again. Now the only one Raoden had to fear was himself.

His theories were working better than even he had expected—but only on everyone
else. He had brought peace and purpose to the dozens who followed him, but he
couldn’t do the same for himself. The pain still burned him. It threatened him
every morning when he awoke and stayed with him every moment he was conscious.
He was more purposeful than any of the others, and was the most determined to
see Elantris succeed. He filled his days, leaving no empty moments to
contemplate his suffering. Nothing worked. The pain continued to build.

“My lord, watch out!” Saolin yelled.

Raoden jumped, turning as a growling, bare-chested Elantrian charged from a
darkened hallway, running toward Raoden. Raoden barely had time to step
backward as the wildman lifted a rusted iron bar and swung it directly at
Raoden’s face.

Bare steel flashed out of nowhere, and Saolin’s blade parried the blow. The
bestial newcomer halted, reorienting himself to a new foe. He moved too slowly.
Saolin’s practiced hand delivered a thrust directly through the madman’s
abdomen. Then, knowing that such a blow wouldn’t stop an Elantrian, Saolin
swung a mighty backhand, separating the madman’s head from his body. There was
no blood.

The corpse tumbled to the ground, and Saolin saluted Raoden with his blade,
shooting him a gap-toothed smile of reassurance. Then he spun around to face a
group of wildmen charging down a nearby street toward them.

Stunned, Raoden stumbled backward. “Saolin, no! There are too many of them!”

Fortunately, Saolin’s men had heard the commotion. Within seconds, there were
five of them—Saolin, Dashe, and three other soldiers—standing against the
attack. They fought in an efficient line, blocking their enemy’s path to the
rest of the gardens, working with the coordination of trained soldiers.

Shaor’s men were more numerous, but their rage was no match for martial
efficiency. They attacked solitarily, and their fervor made them stupid. In
moments the battle was over, the few remaining attackers dashing away in
retreat.

Saolin cleaned his blade efficiently, then turned with the others. They saluted
Raoden in coordination.

The entire battle had happened almost more quickly than Raoden could follow.
“Good work,” he finally managed to say.

A grunt came from his side, where Galladon knelt beside the decapitated body of
the first attacker. “They must have heard we had corn in here,” the Dula
mumbled. “Poor rulos.”

Raoden nodded solemnly, regarding the fallen madmen. Four of them lay on the
ground, clutching various wounds—all of which would have been fatal had they
not been Elantrians. As it was, they could only moan in torment. Raoden felt a
stab of familiarity. He knew what that pain felt like.

“This cannot continue,” he said quietly.

“I don’t see how you can stop it, sule,” Galladon replied at his side. “These
are Shaor’s men; not even he has much control over them.”

Raoden shook his head. “I will not save the people of Elantris and leave them
to fight all the days of their lives. I will not build a society on death.
Shaor’s followers might have forgotten that they are men, but I have not.”

Galladon frowned. “Karata and Aanden, they were possibilities—if distant ones.
Shaor is another story, sule. There isn’t a smear of humanity left in these
men—you can’t reason with them.”

“Then I’ll have to give them their reason back,” Raoden said.

“And how, sule, do you intend to do that?”

“I will find a way.”

Raoden knelt by the fallen madman. A tickle in the back of his mind warned him
that he recognized this man from recent experience. Raoden couldn’t be certain,
but he thought that the man had been one of Taan’s followers, one of the men
Raoden had confronted during Dashe’s attempted raid.

So, it’s true, Raoden thought with a crimp in his stomach. Many of Taan’s
followers had come to join Raoden, but the larger part had not. It was
whispered that many of these had found their way to the merchant sector of
Elantris, joining with Shaor’s wildmen. It wasn’t all that unlikely, Raoden
supposed—the men had been willing to follow the obviously unbalanced Aanden,
after all. Shaor’s band was only a short step away from that.

“Lord Spirit?” Saolin asked hesitantly. “What should we do with them?”

Raoden turned pitying eyes on the fallen. “They are of no danger to us now,
Saolin. Let’s put them with the others.”


Soon after his success with Aanden’s gang, and the subsequent swell in his
band’s numbers, Raoden had done something he’d wanted to from the beginning. He
started gathering the fallen of Elantris.

He took them off the streets and out of the gutters, searched through buildings
both destroyed and standing, trying to find every man, woman, and child in
Elantris who had given in to their pain. The city was large, and Raoden’s
manpower was limited, but so far they had collected hundreds of people. He
ordered them placed in the second building Kahar had cleaned, a large open
structure he had originally intended to use as a meeting place. The Hoed would
still suffer, but at least they could do it with a little decency.

And they wouldn’t have to do it alone. Raoden had asked the people in his band
to visit the Hoed. There were usually a couple of Elantrians walking among
them, talking soothingly and trying to make them as comfortable as possible
considering the circumstances. It wasn’t much—and no one could stomach much
time among the Hoed—but Raoden had convinced himself that it helped. He
followed his own counsel, visiting the Hall of the Fallen at least once a day,
and it seemed to him that they were improving. The Hoed still groaned, mumbled,
or stared blankly, but the more vocal ones seemed quieter. Where the Hall had
once been a place of fearful screams and echoes, it was now a subdued realm of
quiet mumblings and despair.

Raoden moved among them gravely, helping carry one of the fallen wildmen. There
were only four to deposit; he had ordered the fifth man, the one Saolin had
beheaded, buried. As far as anyone could tell, an Elantrian died when he was
completely beheaded—at least, their eyes didn’t move, nor did their lips try to
speak, if the head was completely separated from the body.

As he walked through the Hoed, Raoden listened to their quiet murmurings.

“Beautiful, once so very beautiful….”

“Life, life, life, life, life….”

“Oh Domi, where are you? When will it end? Oh Domi….”

He usually had to block the words out after a time, lest they drive him
insane—or worse, reawaken the pain within his own body. Ien was there, floating
around sightless heads and weaving between fallen bodies. The Seon spent a lot
of time in the room. It was strangely fitting.

They left the Hall a solemn group, quiet and content to keep to their own
thoughts. Raoden only spoke when he noticed the tear in Saolin’s robes.

“You’re wounded!” Raoden said with surprise.

“It is nothing, my lord,” Saolin said indifferently.

“That kind of modesty is fine on the outside, Saolin, but not here. You must
accept my apology.”

“My lord,” Saolin said seriously. “Being an Elantrian only makes me more proud
to wear this wound. I received it protecting our people.”

Raoden turned a tormented look back at the Hall. “It only brings you one step
closer …”

“No, my lord, I don’t think it does. Those people gave in to their pain because
they couldn’t find purpose—their torture was meaningless, and when you can’t
find reason in life, you tend to give up on it. This wound will hurt, but each
stab of pain will remind me that I earned it with honor. That is not such a bad
thing, I think.”

Raoden regarded the old soldier with a look of respect. On the outside he
probably would have been close to retirement. In Elantris, with the Shaod as an
equalizer, he looked about the same as anyone else. One couldn’t tell age by
looks, but perhaps one could tell it through wisdom.

“You speak discerningly, my friend,” Raoden said. “I accept your sacrifice with
humility.”

The conversation was interrupted by the slap of feet against cobblestones. A
moment later Karata dashed into view, her feet coated with fresh sludge from
outside the chapel area. Kahar would be furious: she had forgotten to wipe down
her feet, and now she was tracking slime over his clean cobblestones.

Karata obviously didn’t care about slime at the moment. She surveyed the group
quickly, making sure no one was missing. “I heard Shaor attacked. Were there
any casualties?”

“Five. All on their side,” Raoden said.

“I should have been here,” she said with a curse. During the last few days, the
determined woman had been overseeing the relocation of her people to the chapel
area; she agreed that a central, unified group would be more effective, and the
chapel area was cleaner. Oddly enough, the idea of cleaning the palace had
never occurred to her. To most Elantrians, the sludge was accepted as an
irrevocable part of life.

“You have important things to do,” Raoden said. “You couldn’t have anticipated
Shaor would attack.”

Karata didn’t like the answer, but she fell into line beside him without
further complaint.

“Look at him, sule,” Galladon said, smiling slightly beside him. “I would never
have thought it possible.”

Raoden looked up, following the Dula’s gaze. Taan knelt beside the road,
inspecting the carvings on a short wall with childlike wonder. The squat-bodied
former baron had spent the entire week cataloguing each carving, sculpture, or
relief in the chapel area. He had already discovered, in his words, “at least a
dozen new techniques.” The changes in Taan were remarkable, as was his sudden
lack of interest in leadership. Karata still maintained a measure of influence
in the group, accepting Raoden as the ultimate voice but retaining most of her
authority. Taan, however, didn’t bother to give orders; he was too busy with
his studies.

His people—the ones who had decided to join with Raoden—didn’t seem to mind.
Taan now estimated that about thirty percent of his “court” had found its way
to Raoden’s band, trickling in as small groups. Raoden hoped that most of the
others had chosen solitude instead; he found the idea of seventy percent of
Taan’s large band joining with Shaor very disturbing. Raoden had all of
Karata’s people, but her gang had always been the smallest—if most efficient—of
the three. Shaor’s had always been the largest; its members had just lacked the
cohesion and the motivation to attack the other gangs. The occasional newcomers
Shaor’s men had been given had sated their bloodlust.

No longer. Raoden would accept no quarter with the madmen, would not allow them
to torment innocent newcomers. Karata and Saolin now retrieved everyone thrown
into the city, bringing them safely to Raoden’s band. So far, the reaction from
Shaor’s men had not been good—and Raoden feared that it would only grow worse.

I’ll have to do something about them, he thought. That, however, was a problem
for another day. He had studies he needed to get to for the moment.

Once they reached the chapel, Galladon went back to his planting, Saolin’s men
dispersed to their patrols, and Karata decided—despite her earlier
protests—that she should return to the palace. Soon only Raoden and Saolin were
left.

After the battle and sleeping so late, over half the day’s light had already
been wasted, and Raoden attacked his studies with determination. While Galladon
planted and Karata evacuated the palace, it was Raoden’s self-appointed duty to
decipher as much as he could about AonDor. He was becoming increasingly
convinced that the ancient magic of the characters held the secret of
Elantris’s fall.

He reached through one of the chapel windows and pulled out the thick AonDor
tome sitting on a table inside. So far, it hadn’t been as helpful as he had
hoped. It was not an instruction manual, but a series of case studies
explaining odd or interesting events surrounding AonDor. Unfortunately, it was
extremely advanced. Most of the book gave examples of what wasn’t supposed to
happen, and so Raoden needed to use reverse reasoning to decipher the logic of
AonDor.

So far he had been able to determine very little. It was becoming obvious that
the Aons were only starting points—the most basic figures one could draw to
produce an effect. Just like the expanded healing Aon from his dream, advanced
AonDor consisted of drawing a base Aon in the center, then proceeding to draw
other figures—sometimes just dots and lines—around it. The dots and lines were
stipulations, narrowing or broadening the power’s focus. With careful drawing,
for instance, a healer could specify which limb was to be healed, what exactly
was to be done to it, and how an infection was to be cleansed.

The more Raoden read, the less he was beginning to see Aons as mystical
symbols. They seemed more like mathematical computations. While most any
Elantrian could draw the Aons—all it required was a steady hand and a basic
knowledge of how to write the characters—the masters of AonDor were the ones
who could swiftly and accurately delineate dozens of smaller modifications
around the central Aon. Unfortunately, the book assumed that its reader had a
comprehensive knowledge of AonDor, and passed over most of the basic
principles. The few illustrations included were so incredibly complex that
Raoden usually couldn’t even tell which character was the base Aon without
referring to the text.

“If only he would explain what it means to ‘channel the Dor’!” Raoden
exclaimed, rereading a particularly annoying passage that kept using the
phrase.

“Dor, sule?” Galladon asked, turning away from his planting. “That sounds like
a Duladen term.”

Raoden sat upright. The character used in the book to represent “Dor” was an
uncommon one—not really an Aon at all, but simply a phonetic representation. As
if the word had been transliterated from a different language.

“Galladon, you’re right!” Raoden said. “It isn’t Aonic at all.”

“Of course not—it can’t be an Aon, it only has one vowel in it.”

“That’s a simplistic way of putting it, my friend.”

“But it’s true. Kolo?”

“Yes, I suppose it is,” Raoden said. “That doesn’t matter right now—what
matters is Dor. Do you know what it means?”

“Well, if it’s the same word, then it refers to something in Jesker.”

“What do the Mysteries have to do with this?” Raoden asked suspiciously.

“Doloken, sule!” Galladon swore. “I’ve told you, Jesker and the Mysteries are
not the same thing! What Opelon calls the ‘Jeskeri Mysteries’ is no more
related to Duladel’s religion than it is to Shu-Keseg.”

“Point taken,” Raoden said, raising his hands. “Now, tell me about Dor.”

“It’s hard to explain, sule,” Galladon said, leaning on a makeshift hoe he had
crafted out of a pole and some rocks. “Dor is the unseen power—it is in
everything, but cannot be touched. It affects nothing, yet it controls
everything. Why do rivers flow?”

“Because the water is pulled downwards, just like everything else. The ice
melts in the mountains, and it has to have a place to go.”

“Correct,” Galladon said. “Now, a different question. What makes the water want
to flow?”

“I wasn’t aware that it needed to.”

“It does, and the Dor is its motivation,” Galladon said. “Jesker teaches that
only humans have the ability—or the curse—of being oblivious to the Dor. Did
you know that if you take a bird away from its parents and raise it in your
house, it will still learn to fly?”

Raoden shrugged.

“How did it learn, sule? Who taught it to fly?”

“The Dor?” Raoden asked hesitantly.

“That is correct.”

Raoden smiled; the explanation sounded too religiously mysterious to be useful.
But then he thought of his dream, his memories of what had happened so long
ago. When the Elantrian healer had drawn her Aon, it appeared as if a tear were
appearing in the air behind her finger. Raoden could still feel the chaotic
power raging behind that tear, the massive force trying to press its way
through the Aon to get at him. It sought to overwhelm him, to break him down
until he became part of it. However, the healer’s carefully constructed Aon had
funneled the power into a usable form, and it had healed Raoden’s leg instead
of destroying him.

That force, whatever it had been, was real. It was there behind the Aons he
drew, weak though they were. “That must be it…. Galladon, that’s why we are
still alive!”

“What are you babbling about, sule?” Galladon said, looking up from his work
with tolerance.

“That is why we live on, even though our bodies don’t work anymore!” Raoden
said with excitement. “Don’t you see? We don’t eat, yet we get the energy to
keep moving. There must be some link between Elantrians and the Dor—it feeds
our bodies, providing the energy we need to survive.”

“Then why doesn’t it give us enough to keep our hearts moving and our skin from
turning gray?” Galladon asked, unconvinced.

“Because it’s barely enough,” Raoden explained. “AonDor no longer works—the
power that once fueled the city has been reduced to a bare trickle. The
important thing is, it’s not gone. We can still draw Aons, even if they are
weak and don’t do anything, and our minds continue to live, even if our bodies
have given up. We just need to find a way to restore it to full power.”

“Oh, is that all?” Galladon asked. “You mean we need to fix what is broken?”

“I guess so,” Raoden said. “The important thing is realizing there’s a link
between ourselves and the Dor, Galladon. Not only that—but there must be some
sort of link between this land and the Dor.”

Galladon frowned. “Why do you say that?”

“Because AonDor was developed in Arelon and nowhere else,” Raoden said. “The
text says that the farther one traveled from Elantris, the weaker the AonDor
powers became. Besides—only people from Arelon are taken by the Shaod. It can
take Teoish people, but only if they’re living in Arelon at the time. Oh, and
it takes the occasional Dula as well.”

“I hadn’t noticed.”

“There’s some link between this land, the Arelish people, and the Dor,
Galladon,” Raoden said. “I’ve never heard of a Fjordell getting taken by the
Shaod, no matter how long he lives in Arelon. Dulas are a mixed people—half
Jindo, half Aonic. Where was your farm in Duladen?”

Galladon frowned. “In the north, sule.”

“The part that borders Arelon,” Raoden said triumphantly. “It has something to
do with the land, and with our Aonic bloodlines.”

Galladon shrugged. “It sounds like it makes sense, sule, but I’m just a simple
farmer—what know I of such things?”

Raoden snorted, not bothering to respond to the comment. “But why? What’s the
connection? Maybe the Fjordell are right—maybe Arelon is cursed.”

“Hypothesize away, sule,” Galladon said, turning back to his work. “I don’t see
much empirical good to it, though.”

“All right. Well, I’ll stop theorizing as soon as you tell me where a simple
farmer learned the word ‘empirical.’”

Galladon didn’t respond, but Raoden thought he could hear the Dula chuckling
softly.

