# PART 3 - CHAPTER 58
[Metadata]: # {04.04}
[Descriptor]: # {04.04}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 58
Raoden awoke to strange sounds. He lay disoriented for a moment in Roial’s
mansion. The wedding wasn’t slated to happen until the following afternoon, and
so Raoden had chosen to sleep in Kaloo’s rooms back in Roial’s mansion instead
of staying at Kiin’s house, where Sarene had already taken the guest bedroom.

The sounds came again—sounds of fighting.

Raoden leaped from his bed and threw open the balcony doors, staring out over
the gardens and into Kae. Smoke billowed in the night sky, fires blazing
throughout the city. Screams were audible, rising from the darkness like the
cries of the damned, and metal clanged against metal from someplace nearby.

Hurriedly throwing on a jacket, Raoden rushed through the mansion. Turning a
corner, he stumbled across a squad of Guardsmen battling for their lives
against a group of … demons.

They were bare-chested, and their eyes seemed to burn. They looked like men,
but their flesh was ridged and disfigured, as if a carved piece of metal had
somehow been inserted beneath the skin. One of Raoden’s soldiers scored a hit,
but the weapon left barely a mark—scratching where it should have sliced. A
dozen soldiers lay dying on the floor, but the five demons looked unharmed. The
remaining soldiers fought with terror, their weapons ineffective, their members
dying one by one.

Raoden stumbled backward in horror. The lead demon jumped at a soldier, dodging
the man’s thrust with inhuman speed, then impaling him on a wicked-looking
sword.

Raoden froze. He recognized this demon. Though its body was twisted like the
rest, its face was familiar. It was Dilaf, the Fjordell priest.

Dilaf smiled, eyeing Raoden. Raoden scrambled for one of the fallen soldiers’
weapons, but he was too slow. Dilaf darted across the room, moving like the
wind, and brought his fist up into Raoden’s stomach. Raoden gasped in pain and
dropped to the floor.

“Bring him,” the creature ordered.

_______


“Make certain you deliver these tonight,” Sarene said, pulling the lid closed
on the final box of supplies.

The beggar nodded, casting an apprehensive glance toward the wall of Elantris,
which stood only a few feet away.

“You needn’t be so afraid, Hoid,” Sarene said. “You have a new king now. Things
are going to change in Arelon.”

Hoid shrugged. Despite Telrii’s death, the beggar refused to meet with Sarene
during the day. Hoid’s people had spent ten years fearing Iadon and his farms;
they weren’t used to acting without the enveloping presence of night, no matter
how legal their intentions. Sarene would have used someone else to make the
delivery, but Hoid and his men already knew how and where to deposit the boxes.
Besides, she would rather the populace of Arelon not discover what was in this
particular shipment.

“These boxes are more heavy than the ones before, my lady,” Hoid noted
astutely. There was a reason he had managed to survive a decade on the streets
of Kae without being caught.

“What the boxes contain is none of your business,” Sarene replied, handing him
a pouch of coins.

Hoid nodded, his face hidden in the darkness of his hood. Sarene had never seen
his face, but she assumed from his voice that he was an older man.

She shivered in the night, eager to get back to Kiin’s house. The wedding was
set for the next day, and Sarene had a hard time containing her excitement.
Despite all the trials, difficulties, and setbacks, there was finally an
honorable king on the throne of Arelon. And, after years of waiting, Sarene had
finally found someone her heart was as willing to marry as her mind.

“Goodnight then, my lady,” Hoid said, following the train of beggars who slowly
climbed the stairs of Elantris’s wall.

Sarene nodded to Ashe. “Go tell them that a shipment is coming, Ashe.”

“Yes, my lady,” Ashe said with a bob, and hovered away to follow Hoid’s
beggars.

Pulling her shawl close, Sarene climbed into her carriage and ordered the
coachman home. Hopefully, Galladon and Karata would understand why she had sent
crates full of swords and bows. Raoden’s apprehensive warning earlier in the
day had disturbed Sarene immensely. She kept worrying about New Elantris and
its bright, accepting people, and so she had finally decided to do something.

Sarene sighed as the carriage rolled down the quiet street. The weapons
probably wouldn’t help much; the people of New Elantris were not soldiers. But
it had been something she could do.

The carriage pulled to a sudden stop. Sarene frowned, opening her mouth to call
out a question to the coachman. Then she paused. Now that the rumbling of the
coach had ceased, she could hear something. Something that sounded faintly like
… screams. She smelled the smoke a second later. Sarene pulled back the
carriage curtain, poking her head out the window. She found a scene as if from
hell itself.

The carriage stood at an intersection. Three streets were calm, but the one
directly before her blazed red. Fires billowed from homes, and corpses slumped
on the cobblestones. Men and women ran screaming through the streets; others
simply stood in dazed shock. Among them stalked shirtless warriors, their skin
glistening with sweat in the firelight.

It was a slaughter. The strange warriors killed with dispassion, cutting down
man, woman, and child alike with casual swipes of their swords. Sarene watched
for a stunned moment before screaming at the coachman to turn them around. The
man shook himself from his stupor, whipping at the horses to turn.

Sarene’s yell died in her throat as one of the shirtless warriors noticed the
carriage. The soldier dashed toward them as the carriage began to turn. Sarene
yelled a warning to the coachman too late. The strange warrior leapt, sailing
an incredible distance to land on the carriage horse’s back. The soldier
crouched lithely upon the beast’s flesh, and for the first time Sarene could
see the inhuman twisting of his body, the chilling fire in his eyes.

Another short hop took the soldier to the top of the carriage. The vehicle
rocked slightly, and the coachman screamed.

Sarene threw open her door and stumbled out. She scrambled across the
cobblestones, shoes thrown from her feet in haste. Just up the street, away
from the fires, lay Kiin’s house. If she could only—

The coachman’s body slammed into a building beside her, then slumped to the
ground. Sarene screamed, lurching back, nearly tripping. To the side, the
demonic creature was a dark silhouette in the firelight as he dropped from the
carriage top, prowling slowly along the street toward her. Though his motions
seemed casual, he moved with a lithe alertness. Sarene could see the unnatural
shadows and pockets beneath his skin, as if his skeleton had been twisted and
carved.

Pushing down another scream, Sarene scrambled away, running up the hill toward
her uncle’s house. Not fast enough. Catching her would barely be a game for
this monster; she could hear his footsteps behind. Approaching. Faster and
faster. She could see the lights up ahead, but—

Something grabbed her ankle. Sarene jerked as the creature yanked with
incredible strength, twisting her leg and spinning her so she smashed to the
ground on her side. Sarene rolled onto her back, gasping at the pain.

The twisted figure loomed above her. She could hear it whispering in a foreign
tongue. Fjordell.

Something dark and massive slammed into the monster, throwing it backward. Two
figures struggled in the darkness. The creature howled, but the newcomer
bellowed louder. Dazed, Sarene pushed herself up, watching the shadowed forms.
An approaching light soon unmasked them. The shirtless warrior was expected.
The other was not.

“Kiin?” Sarene asked.

Her uncle held an enormous axe, large as a man’s chest. He smashed it into the
creature’s back as it wiggled across the stones, reaching for its sword. The
creature cursed in pain, though the axe didn’t penetrate far. Kiin wrenched the
weapon free, then raised it in a mighty swing and brought it down directly into
the demon’s face.

The creature grunted, but did not stop moving. Neither did Kiin. He swung again
and again, hacking at the monster’s head with repeated swings, howling Teoish
battle cries in his scratchy voice. Bones crunched, and finally the creature
stopped moving.

Something touched her arm, and Sarene yelped. Lukel, kneeling beside her,
raised his lantern. “Come on!” he urged, grabbing her hand and pulling her to
her feet.

They dashed the short distance to Kiin’s mansion, her uncle lumbering behind.
They pushed through the doors, then stumbled into the kitchen, where a
frightened group waited for their return. Daora rushed to her husband as Lukel
slammed the door.

“Lukel, collapse the entryway,” Kiin ordered.

Lukel complied, throwing the lever Sarene had always mistaken for a
torch-holder. A second later there was a mighty crash from the entryway, and
dust poured through the kitchen door.

Sarene plopped into a chair, staring at the quiet room. Shuden was there, and
he had managed to find Torena, who sniffled quietly in his arms. Daorn, Kaise,
and Adien huddled in a corner with Lukel’s wife. Raoden was not there.

“What … what are those things?” Sarene asked, looking up at Lukel.

Her cousin shook his head. “I don’t know. The attack started just a short time
ago, and we were worried that something had happened to you. We were outside
waiting—it’s a good thing Father spotted your coach down at the bottom of the
hill.”

Sarene nodded, still a bit numb.

Kiin stood with his wife in one arm, looking down at the bloodied axe in his
other hand. “I swore I would never take up this cursed weapon again,” he
whispered.

Daora patted her husband’s shoulder. Despite her shock, Sarene realized that
she recognized the axe. It used to hang on the kitchen wall, with other
mementoes of Kiin’s travels. Yet he had held the weapon with obvious skill. The
axe wasn’t a simple ornament as she had assumed. Looking closely, she could see
nicks and scratches on its blade. Etched into the steel was a heraldic Aon—Aon
Reo. The character meant “punishment.”

“Why would a merchant need to know how to use one of those?” Sarene asked,
almost to herself.

Kiin shook his head. “A merchant wouldn’t.”

Sarene knew of only one person who had used Aon Reo, though he was more a myth
than a man. “They called him Dreok,” she whispered. “The pirate Crushthroat.”

“That was always a mistake,” Kiin said in his raspy voice. “The true name was
Dreok Crushedthroat.”

“He tried to steal the throne of Teod from my father,” Sarene said, looking up
into Kiin’s eyes.

“No,” Kiin said, turning away. “Dreok wanted what belonged to him. He tried to
take back the throne that his younger brother, Eventeo, stole—stole right from
under Dreok’s nose while he foolishly wasted his life on pleasure trips.”


Dilaf strode into the chapel, his face bright with satisfaction. One of his
monks dropped an unconscious Raoden next to the far wall.

“This, my dear Hrathen,” Dilaf said, “is how you deal with heretics.”

Appalled, Hrathen turned away from the window. “You are massacring the entire
town, Dilaf! What is the point? Where is the glory for Jaddeth in this?”

“Do not question me!” Dilaf screamed, his eyes blazing. His raging zeal had
finally been released.

Hrathen turned away. Of all the titles in the hierarchy of the Derethi Church,
only two outranked gyorn: Wyrn, and gragdet—leader of a monastery. The gragdets
were usually discounted, for they generally had little to do with the world
outside their monasteries. Apparently that had changed.

Hrathen ran his eyes over Dilaf’s bare chest, seeing the twisted patterns that
had always been hiding beneath the arteth’s robes. Hrathen’s stomach turned at
the lines and curves that ran like varicose veins beneath the man’s skin. It
was bone, Hrathen knew—hard, unyielding bone. Dilaf wasn’t just a monk, and he
wasn’t just a gragdet; he was monk and gragdet of the most infamous monastery
in Fjorden. Dakhor. The Order of Bone.

The prayers and incantations used to create Dakhor monks were secret; even the
gyorns didn’t know them. A few months after a boy was initiated into the Dakhor
order, his bones started to grow and twist, adopting strange patterns like
those visible beneath Dilaf’s skin. Somehow, each of those patterns gave its
bearer abilities, such as heightened speed and strength.

Horrible images washed through Hrathen’s mind. Images of priests chanting over
him; memories of an awesome pain rising within, the pain of his bones
reshaping. It had been too much—the darkness, the screams, the torment. Hrathen
had left after just a few months to join a different monastery.

He had not left behind the nightmares or memories, however. One did not easily
forget Dakhor.

“So you were a Fjordell all this time?” Hrathen whispered.

“You never suspected, did you?” Dilaf asked with a smile. “You should have
realized. It is far easier to imitate an Arelene speaking Fjordell than it is
for an actual man of Arelon to learn the Holy Language so perfectly.”

Hrathen bowed his head. His duty was clear; Dilaf was his superior. He didn’t
know how long Dilaf had been in Arelon—the Dakhor lived unusually long
lives—but it was obvious that Dilaf had been planning Kae’s destruction for a
very long time.

“Oh, Hrathen,” Dilaf said with a laugh. “You never did understand your place,
did you? Wyrn didn’t send you to convert Arelon.”

Hrathen looked up with surprise. He had a letter from Wyrn that said otherwise.

“Yes, I know of your orders, Gyorn,” Dilaf said. “Reread that letter sometime.
Wyrn didn’t send you to Arelon to convert, he sent you to inform the people of
their impending destruction. You were a distraction, something for people like
Eventeo to focus their attention on while I prepared for the city’s invasion.
You did your job perfectly.”

“Distraction …?” Hrathen asked. “But the people …”

“Were never to be saved, Hrathen,” Dilaf said. “Wyrn always intended to destroy
Arelon. He needs such a victory to insure his grip on the other
countries—despite your efforts, our control of Duladel is tenuous. The world
needs to know what happens to those who blaspheme against Jaddeth.”

“These people don’t blaspheme,” Hrathen said, feeling his anger rise. “They
don’t even know Jaddeth! How can we expect them to be righteous if we don’t
give them a chance to convert!”

Dilaf’s hand shot out, slapping Hrathen across the face. Hrathen stumbled back,
cheek flaring with pain from the blow—delivered by an unnaturally strong hand,
hardened by extra bones.

“You forget to whom you speak, Gyorn,” Dilaf snapped. “This people is unholy.
Only Arelenes and Teos can become Elantrians. If we destroy them, then we end
the heresy of Elantris forever!”

Hrathen ignored his throbbing cheek. With growing numbness, he finally realized
how deeply Dilaf’s hatred went. “You will slaughter them all? You would murder
an entire nation of people?”

“It is the only way to be certain,” Dilaf said, smiling.

