# Part 2 - CHAPTER 49
[Metadata]: # {03.22}
[Descriptor]: # {03.22}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 49
At first Raoden stayed away from the library, because it reminded him of her.
Then, he found himself drawn back to it—because it reminded him of her.

Instead of thinking about his loss, Raoden focused on the connection Sarene had
made. He studied Aon after Aon, noticing other features of the landscape in
their forms. Aon Eno, the character for water, included a wiggling line that
matched the meanderings of the Aredel River. The character for wood—Aon
Dii—included several circles that represented the southern forests.

The Aons were maps of the land, each one a slightly different rendering of the
same general picture. Each one had the three basic lines—the coast line, the
mountain line, and the dot for Lake Alonoe. Many often had a line at the bottom
to represent the Kalomo River, which separated Arelon from Duladel.

Some of the features completely baffled him, however. Why did Aon Mea, the
character for thoughtfulness have an X that crossed somewhere in the middle of
the Eon County? Why was Aon Rii specked with two dozen seemingly random dots?
The answers might have been held in one of the library’s tomes, but so far he
had found nothing in the way of explanation.

The Dor attacked him at least twice a day now. Each battle seemed like it would
be his last, and each time he seemed a little weaker when the fight was
through—as if his energy were a finite well, dribbling a little lower with each
confrontation. The question was not whether he would fall or not, but whether
he would find the secret before he did.


Raoden pounded the map with frustration. Five days had passed since Sarene’s
departure, and he still couldn’t find the answer. He was beginning to feel that
he would continue for eternity, agonizingly close to the secret of AonDor yet
forever unable to find it.

The large map, now hung from the wall near his desk, fluttered as he pushed it
flat, studying its lines. Its edges were worn with age, and the ink was
beginning to fade. The map had lived through Elantris’s glory and collapse; how
he wished it could speak, whisper to him the mysteries it knew.

He shook his head, sitting down in Sarene’s chair, his foot knocking over one
of her book stacks. With a sigh, he leaned back in the chair and began to
draw—seeking solace in the Aons.

He had recently moved on to a new, more advanced AonDor technique. The texts
explained that Aons were more powerful when drawn with attention not only to
line length and slant, but line width as well. While they would still work if
the lines were all the same width, variance in the proper locations added extra
control and strength.

So, Raoden practiced as they instructed, using his fifthfinger to draw small
lines and his thumb to construct larger ones. He could also use tools—such as a
stick or a quill—to draw the lines. Fingers were the convention, but form
mattered far more than the utensils used. After all, the Elantrians had used
AonDor to carve permanent symbols into rock and stone—and had even constructed
them from wire, pieces of wood, and a host of other materials. Apparently, it
was difficult to create AonDor characters from physical materials, but the Aons
still had their same effect, regardless of whether they were drawn in the air
or smelted from steel.

His practice was futile. It didn’t matter how efficient his Aons were; none of
them worked. He used his fingernails to draw some lines so delicate that they
were nearly invisible; he drew others with three fingers side by side—exactly
as instructed in his texts. And it was pointless. All his memorization, all of
his work. Why had he even bothered?

Feet snapped in the hallway. Mareshe’s newest technological advance was shoes
with thick leather soles, studded with nails. Raoden watched through his
translucent Aon as the door opened and Galladon entered.

“Her Seon just stopped by again, sule,” the Dula said.

“Is he still here?”

Galladon shook his head. “He left almost immediately—he wanted me to tell you
that she’s finally convinced the lords to rebel against King Telrii.”

Sarene had been sending her Seon to give them daily reports of her activities—a
service that was a mixed blessing. Raoden knew he should listen to what was
happening on the outside, but he longed for the stress-free relative ignorance
of before. Then, he had only needed to worry about Elantris; now he had to fret
over the entire kingdom—a fact he had to stomach along with the painful
knowledge that there was nothing he could do to help.

“Did Ashe say when the next supply dump would come?”

“Tonight.”

“Good,” Raoden said. “Did he say if she would come herself?”

“Same stipulations as before, sule,” Galladon said with a shake of his head.

Raoden nodded, keeping the melancholy out of his face. He didn’t know what
means Sarene was using to deliver the supplies, but for some reason Raoden and
the others weren’t allowed to retrieve the boxes until after their deliverers
had gone.

“Stop moping, sule,” Galladon said with a grunt. “It doesn’t suit you—it takes
a fine sense of pessimism to brood with any sort of respectability.”

Raoden couldn’t help smiling. “I’m sorry. It just seems that no matter how hard
I push against our problems, they just push back equally.”

“Still no progress with AonDor?”

“No,” Raoden said. “I checked older maps with new ones, looking for changes in
the coast or the mountain range, but nothing seems to have changed. I’ve tried
drawing the basic lines with slightly different slants, but that’s fruitless.
The lines won’t appear unless I put them at exactly the right slant—the same
slant as always. Even the lake is in the same place, unchanged. I can’t see
what is different.”

“Maybe none of the basic lines have changed, sule,” Galladon said. “Perhaps
something needs to be added.”

“I considered that—but what? I know of no new rivers or lakes, and there
certainly aren’t any new mountains in Arelon.” Raoden finished his Aon—Aon
Ehe—with a dissatisfied stroke of his thumb. He looked at the Aon’s center, the
core that represented Arelon and its features. Nothing had changed.

Except. When the Reod occurred, the land cracked. “The Chasm!” Raoden
exclaimed.

“The Chasm?” Galladon said skeptically. “That was caused by the Reod, Sule, not
the other way around.”

“But what if it wasn’t?” Raoden said with excitement. “What if the earthquake
came just before the Reod? It caused the crack to the south, and suddenly all
of the Aons were invalid—they all needed an extra line to function. All of
AonDor, and therefore Elantris, would have fallen immediately.”

Raoden focused on the Aon hanging just before him. With a hesitant hand, he
swiped his finger across the glowing character in an approximation of where the
Chasm stood. Nothing happened—no line appeared. The Aon flashed and
disappeared.

“I guess that is that, sule,” Galladon said.

“No,” Raoden said, starting the Aon again. His fingers whipped and spun. He
moved with a speed even he hadn’t realized he’d achieved, re-creating the Aon
in a matter of seconds. He paused at the end, hand hovering at the bottom,
below the three basic lines. He could almost feel …

He stabbed the Aon and slashed his finger through the air. And a small line
streaked across the Aon behind it.

Then it hit him. The Dor attacked with a roaring surge of power, and this time
it hit no wall. It exploded through Raoden like a river. He gasped, basking in
its power for just a moment. It burst free like a beast that had been kept
trapped in a small space for far too long. It almost seemed … joyful.

Then it was gone, and he stumbled, dropping to his knees.

“Sule?” Galladon asked with concern.

Raoden shook his head, unable to explain. His toe still burned, he was still an
Elantrian, but the Dor had been freed. He had … fixed something. The Dor would
come against him no more.

Then he heard a sound—like that of a burning fire. His Aon, the one he had
drawn before him, was glowing brightly. Raoden yelped, gesturing for Galladon
to duck as the Aon bent around itself, its lines distorting and twirling in the
air until they formed a disk. A thin prick of red light appeared in the disk’s
center, then expanded, the burning sounds rising to a clamor. The Aon became a
twisting vortex of fire; Raoden could feel the heat as he stumbled back.

It burst, spitting out a horizontal column of flame through the air just above
Galladon’s head. The column crashed into a bookshelf, immolating the structure
in a massive explosion. Books and flaming pages were tossed into the air,
slamming into walls and other bookcases.

The column of fire disappeared, the heat suddenly gone, and Raoden’s skin felt
clammy in contrast. A few burning scraps of paper fluttered to the ground. All
that was left of the bookcase was a smoldering pile of charcoal.

“What was that?” Galladon demanded.

“I think I just destroyed the biology section,” Raoden replied with wonder.


“Next time, sule, I recommend that you not test your theories with Aon Ehe.
Kolo?” Galladon set down a pile of mostly burned books. They had spent the last
hour cleaning up the library, making certain they doused any smoldering flame.

“Agreed,” Raoden said, too happy to be defensive. “That just happened to be the
one I was practicing—it wouldn’t have been so dramatic if I hadn’t put so many
modifiers on it.”

Galladon looked back over the library. A dark scar still marked the place of
the incinerated bookcase, and several piles of half-charred tomes lay scattered
around the room.

“Shall we try another?” Raoden asked.

Galladon snorted. “As long as no fire is involved.”

Raoden nodded, raising his hand to begin Aon Ashe. He finished the character’s
double box shape and added the Chasm line. He stepped back, waiting anxiously.

The Aon began to glow. The light started at the tip of the coast line, then
burned through the entire Aon like flames sweeping across a pool of oil. The
lines turned red at first, then, like metal in a forge, turned a bright white.
The color stabilized, bathing the area in soft luminescence.

“It works, sule,” Galladon whispered. “By Doloken—you actually did it!”

Raoden nodded with excitement. He approached the Aon hesitantly, putting his
hand up against it. There was no heat—just as the books had explained. One
thing was wrong, however.

“It’s not as bright as it should be,” he said.

“How can you be sure?” Galladon asked. “This is the first one you’ve seen
work.”

Raoden shook his head. “I’ve read enough to know. An Aon Ashe this big should
be powerful enough to light the entire library—it’s barely as bright as a
lantern.”

He reached up, tapping the Aon in the center. The glow faded immediately, the
Aon’s lines vanishing one at a time, as if some invisible finger were undrawing
them. Then he drew another Aon Ashe, this time including all the
power-increasing modifiers he knew. When this Aon finally stabilized, it
appeared slightly brighter than the first one, but nowhere near as powerful as
it should have been.

“Something is still wrong,” Raoden said. “That Aon should be too bright for us
to look at.”

“You think the Chasm line is wrong?” Galladon asked.

“No, it was obviously a large part of the problem. AonDor works now, but it’s
handicapped in power. There must be something else—another line, perhaps, that
we need to add.”

Galladon glanced down at his arms. Even against the dark-brown Dula skin, it
was easy to make out his sickly Elantrian splotches. “Try a healing Aon, sule.”

Raoden nodded, tracing Aon Ien in the air. He added a modification stipulating
Galladon’s body as the target, as well as all three power-increasing marks. He
finished with the small Chasm line. The Aon flashed briefly then disappeared.

“Do you feel anything?” Raoden asked.

The Dula shook his head. Then, raising his arm, he inspected the cut on his
elbow—an injury caused just the other day when he slipped in one of the fields.
It was unchanged.

“The pain is still there, sule,” Galladon said with disappointment. “And my
heart does not beat.”

“That Aon didn’t behave properly,” Raoden said. “It disappeared like before,
when we didn’t know about the Chasm line. The Dor couldn’t find a target for
its power.”

“Then what good is it, sule?” Galladon’s voice was bitter with frustration.
“We’ll still rot in this city.”

Raoden laid a comforting hand on the Dula’s shoulder. “It isn’t useless,
Galladon. We have the power of the Elantrians—some of it might not work, but
that might just be because we haven’t experimented enough. Think about it! This
is the power that gave Elantris its beauty, the power that fed all of Arelon.
Don’t give up hope when we’re so close.”

Galladon looked at him, then smiled ruefully. “No one can give up when you’re
around, sule. You utterly refuse to let a man despair.”


As they tried more Aons, it became more apparent that something was still
blocking the Dor. They made a stack of papers float, but not an entire book.
They turned one of the walls blue, then changed it back, and Raoden managed to
convert a smile pile of charcoal into a few grains of corn. The results were
encouraging, but many Aons failed completely.

Any Aon, for instance, that targeted either of them flashed away ineffectually.
Their clothing was a valid target, but their flesh was not; Raoden broke off
the tip of his thumbnail and tried to make that float, and was completely
unsuccessful. The only theory Raoden could offer was the one he had expressed
earlier.

“Our bodies are frozen in the middle of being changed, Galladon,” he explained,
watching a sheet of paper hover in front of him, then burst into flames. Linked
Aons appeared to work. “The Shaod hasn’t finished with us—whatever’s keeping
the Aons from reaching their full potential is also stopping us from becoming
true Elantrians. Until our transformation is finished, it appears that no Aons
can affect us.”

“I still don’t understand that first explosion, sule,” Galladon said,
practicing Aon Ashe in front of himself. The Dula knew only a few Aons, and his
thick-fingered hands had trouble drawing them precisely. Even as he spoke, he
made a slight error, and the character faded away. He frowned, then continued
his question. “It seemed so powerful. Why hasn’t anything else worked that
well?”

“I’m not sure,” Raoden said. A few moments earlier he had hesitantly redrawn
Aon Ehe with the same modifications, creating the complex rune that was
supposed to form another column of flame. Instead, the Aon had barely sputtered
out enough fire to warm a cup of tea. He suspected that the first explosion had
something do with the Dor’s surge through him … an expression of its
long-awaited freedom.

“Perhaps there was some sort of buildup in the Dor,” Raoden said. “Like a
pocket of gas trapped in the top of a cave. The first Aon I drew drained that
reserve.”

Galladon shrugged. There was just so much they didn’t understand. Raoden sat
for a moment, eyes falling on one of his tomes, a thought occurring.

He rushed over to his stack of AonDor books, selecting a large volume that
contained nothing but page after page of Aon diagrams. Galladon, whom he had
left behind midsentence, followed with a grumpy expression, peeking over
Raoden’s shoulder at the page Raoden chose.

The Aon was extensive and complex. Raoden had to take several steps to the side
as he drew it, the modifications and stipulations going far beyond the central
Aon. His arm ached by the time he had finished, and the construction hung in
the air like a wall of glowing lines. Then, it began to gleam, and the sheet of
inscriptions twisted, turning and wrapping around Raoden. Galladon yelped in
surprise at the suddenly bright light.

In a few seconds, the light vanished. Raoden could tell from the startled look
on Galladon’s face that he had been successful.

“Sule … you’ve done it! You’ve healed yourself!”

“I’m afraid not,” Raoden said with a shake of his head. “It’s only an illusion.
Look.” He held up his hands, which were still gray and spotted with black. His
face, however, was different. He walked over, regarding his reflection in a
polished plaque on the end of a bookshelf.

The garbled image showed an unfamiliar face—it was free from spots, true, but
it didn’t look anything like his real face had before the Shaod had taken him.

“An illusion?” Galladon asked.

Raoden nodded. “It’s based on Aon Shao, but there are so many things mixed in
that the base Aon is almost irrelevant.”

“But it shouldn’t work on you,” Galladon said. “I thought we decided the Aons
couldn’t target Elantrians.”

“It doesn’t,” Raoden said, turning. “It targets my shirt. The illusion is like
an article of clothing—it only covers up my skin; it doesn’t change anything.”

“Then what good is it?”

Raoden smiled. “It is going to get us out of Elantris, my friend.”

