# Part 2 - CHAPTER 30
[Metadata]: # {03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 30
Hrathen didn’t try to hide his transformation. He walked solemnly from his
chambers, exposing his damnation to the entire chapel. Dilaf was in the middle
of morning services. It was worth the loss of hair and skin color to see the
short Arelish priest stumble backward in horrified shock.

The Korathi priests came for Hrathen a short time later. They gave him a large,
enveloping white robe to hide his disfiguration, then led him from the now
empty chapel. Hrathen smiled to himself as he saw the confused Dilaf watching
from his alcove, his eyes openly hating Hrathen for the first time.

The Korathi priests took him to their chapel, stripped him, and washed his now
black-spotted body with water from the Aredel river. Then they wrapped him in a
white robe constructed of thick, raglike strips of cloth. After washing and
clothing him, the priests stepped back and allowed Omin to approach. The short,
balding leader of Arelish Korathi blessed Hrathen quietly, tracing the symbol
of Aon Omi on his chest. The Arelish man’s eyes betrayed just a hint of
satisfaction.

After that, they led Hrathen through the city streets, chanting. However, at
the city itself they found a large squadron of troops wearing Iadon’s colors
blocking their path. The soldiers stood with hands on weapons, speaking in
hushed tones. Hrathen regarded them with surprise; he recognized men preparing
for battle. Omin argued with the captain of the Elantris City Guard for a time
while the other priests pulled Hrathen into a squat building beside the
guardhouse—a holding place, carved with Aon Omi.

Hrathen watched through the room’s small window as two winded guards galloped
up and presented Iadon’s soldiers with a rolled-up sheet of paper. The captain
read it, frowning, then turned to argue with the messenger. After this Omin
returned, explaining that they would have to wait.

And wait they did—the better part of two hours.

Hrathen had heard that the priests would only throw people into Elantris during
a certain time of day, but apparently it was a window of time, and not a
specific moment. Eventually, the priests stuffed a small basket of food in
Hrathen’s arms, offered one final prayer to their pitiful god, and pushed him
through the gates.

He stood in the city, his head bald, his skin tainted with large black
splotches. An Elantrian. The city was much the same at eye level as it had been
from the wall—filthy, rotting, and unholy. It held nothing for him. He spun
around, tossing aside the meager basket of food and dropping to his knees.

“Oh, Jaddeth, Lord of all Creation,” he began, his voice loud and firm. “Hear
now the petition of a servant in your empire. Lift this taint from my blood.
Restore me to life. I implore you with all the power of my position as a holy
gyorn.”

There was no response. So, he repeated the prayer. Again, and again, and again….

