# Part 2 - CHAPTER 45
[Metadata]: # {03.18}
[Descriptor]: # {03.18}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 45
Hrathen stood in the moonlight atop the Elantris City wall, curiously studying
the hole. One of the stairwell barricades was broken and scarred, the boards
pulled free. The hole was strikingly similar to one that might have been made
by rodents—Elantrian rodents, seeking to escape from their nest. This was one
of the sections of the wall kept clean by the Guard, and some slime tracks from
the stairwell gave ample proof that those below had been up the wall several
times.

Hrathen strolled away from the stairwell. He was probably the only one who knew
about the hole; Elantris was now watched by only two or three Guards, and they
rarely—if ever—patrolled the wall walk. For now, he wouldn’t tell the Guards
about the hole. It didn’t matter to him if the Elantrians snuck out of their
city. They wouldn’t be able to go anywhere; their appearance was too
distinctive. Besides, he didn’t want to bother the people with worries about
Elantris; he wanted them to remain focused on their new king, and the
allegiances he would soon declare.

He walked, Elantris to his right, Kae to his left. A small concentration of
lights shone in the evening’s darkness—the royal palace, now Telrii’s home. The
Arelish nobility, eager to show devotion to their new king, were in near
unanimous attendance at his coronation party—each man vying to prove his
loyalty. The pompous former duke was obviously enjoying the attention.

Hrathen continued to stroll in the calm night, feet clinking against the
stones. Telrii’s coronation had occurred with expected flair. The former duke,
now king, was an easy man to understand, and men who could be understood could
be manipulated. Let him enjoy his diversion for the moment. On the morrow, the
time would come for payment of debts.

Telrii would undoubtedly demand more money from Hrathen before he joined
Shu-Dereth. Telrii would think himself clever, and would assume that the crown
gave him even greater leverage with Fjorden. Hrathen, of course, would feign
indignation at the cash demands, all the while understanding what Telrii never
could. Power was not in wealth, but in control—money was worthless before a man
who refused to be bought. The king would never understand that the wyrnings he
demanded wouldn’t give him power, but would instead put him beneath the power
of another. As he glutted himself on coins, Arelon would slip away from him.

Hrathen shook his head, feeling mildly guilty. He used Telrii because the king
made himself such a wonderful tool. However, there would be no conversion in
Telrii’s heart—no true acceptance of Jaddeth or His empire. Telrii’s promises
would be as empty as the power of his throne. And yet, Hrathen would use him.
It was logical, and as Hrathen had come to understand, the strength of his
faith was in its logic. Telrii might not believe, but his children—raised
Derethi—would. One man’s meaningless conversion would provide for the salvation
of a kingdom.

As he walked, Hrathen found his eyes consistently drawn toward the darkened
streets of Elantris. He tried to focus his thoughts on Telrii and the impending
conquest of Arelon, but another matter tickled at his mind.

Grudgingly, Hrathen admitted to himself that he had wanted to walk the wall of
Elantris this night for more than one reason. He was worried about the
princess. The emotion bothered him, of course, but he didn’t deny that he felt
it. Sarene had been a wonderful opponent, and he knew how dangerous Elantris
could be. He had realized this when he gave the poisoning order, determining
the risk to be worth the gain. After waiting three days, however, his resolve
was beginning to waver. He needed her to live for more reason than one.

So, Hrathen watched the streets, foolishly hoping that he might see her below
and console his conscience that she was unharmed. Of course, he hadn’t seen
anything of the sort; in fact, there didn’t seem to be any Elantrians about
this evening. Hrathen didn’t know if they had just moved to other parts of the
city, or if the place had grown so violent that they had destroyed themselves.
For the princess’s sake, he hoped the second was not true.

“You are the gyorn, Hrathen,” a sudden voice said.

Hrathen spun, eyes searching for the man who had approached him unseen and
unheard. A Seon hovered behind him, glowing vibrantly in the darkness. Hrathen
squinted, reading the Aon at its center. Dio.

“I am he,” Hrathen said cautiously.

“I come on behalf of my master, King Eventeo of Teod,” the Seon said with a
melodious voice. “He wishes to speak with you.”

Hrathen smiled. He had been wondering how long it would take Eventeo to contact
him. “I am anxious to hear what His Majesty has to say.”

The Seon pulsed as its light pulled inward, outlining the face of a man with an
oval face and a full chin.

“Your Majesty,” Hrathen said with a slight nod. “How may I serve you?”

“No need for useless civility, Gyorn,” Eventeo said flatly. “You know what I
want.”

“Your daughter.”

The king’s head nodded. “I know that somehow you have power over this sickness.
What would it take for you to heal Sarene?”

“I have no power of myself,” Hrathen said humbly. “It was Lord Jaddeth who
performed the healing.”

The king paused. “Then, what would it take for your Jaddeth to heal my
daughter?”

“The Lord might be persuaded if you gave Him some form of encouragement,”
Hrathen said. “The faithless receive no miracles, Your Majesty.”

King Eventeo slowly bowed his head—he had obviously known what Hrathen would
demand. He must love his daughter very much.

“It will be as you say, priest,” Eventeo promised. “If my daughter returns
safely from that city, I will convert to Shu-Dereth. I knew it was coming
anyway.”

Hrathen smiled broadly. “I will see if I can … encourage Lord Jaddeth to return
the princess, Your Majesty.”

Eventeo nodded. His face was that of a man defeated. The Seon ended the contact
and floated away without a word.

Hrathen smiled, the final piece of his plan falling into place. Eventeo had
made a wise decision. This way, at least, he got to demand something in return
for his conversion—even if it was something he would have received anyway.

Hrathen looked down at Elantris, more anxious than ever that Sarene return to
him unharmed. It was beginning to appear that within the next few months he
would be able to hand Wyrn not one heathen nation, but two.

