# Part 1 - CHAPTER 21
[Metadata]: # {02.21}
[Descriptor]: # {02.21}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 21
Hrathen sat down in his chair, wearing a red Derethi robe instead of his armor,
as he often did when he was in his chambers.

The knock that came at his door was expected. “Come in,” he said.

Arteth Thered entered. A man of good Fjordell stock, Thered had a strong, tall
frame, dark hair, and squareish features. He was still well muscled from his
days training in the monastery.

“Your Grace,” the man said, bowing and falling to his knees with a proper sign
of respect.

“Arteth,” Hrathen said, lacing his fingers in front of himself. “During my time
here, I’ve been watching the local priests. I have been impressed with your
service in Jaddeth’s kingdom, and I have decided to offer you the position of
head arteth of this chapel.”

Thered looked up with surprise. “Your Grace?”

“I had thought that I would have to wait to appoint a new head arteth until a
new batch of priests arrived from Fjorden,” Hrathen said. “But, as I said, you
have impressed me. I decided to offer you the position.”

And, of course, he added in his mind, I don’t have time to wait. I need someone
to administrate the chapel now so that I can focus on other tasks.

“My lord …” the arteth said, obviously overwhelmed. “I cannot accept this
position.”

Hrathen froze. “What?” No Derethi priest would refuse a position of such power.

“I’m sorry, my lord,” the man repeated, looking down.

“What reason have you for this decision, Arteth?” Hrathen demanded.

“I can give none, Your Grace. I just … It just wouldn’t be right for me to take
the position. May I withdraw?”

Hrathen waved his hand, disturbed. Ambition was such a cardinal Fjordell
attribute; how had a man such as Thered lost his pride so quickly? Had Fjon
really weakened the priests in Kae so soundly?

Or … was something else behind this man’s refusal? A nagging voice inside of
Hrathen whispered that the banished Fjon was not to blame. Dilaf—Dilaf had
something to do with Thered’s refusal.

The thought was probably just paranoia, but it spurred Hrathen forward with his
next item of business. Dilaf had to be dealt with; despite his stunt with the
Elantrian, the arteth was growing increasingly influential with the other
priests. Hrathen reached into a desk drawer, pulling out a small envelope. He
had made a mistake with Dilaf. While it was possible to channel a zealot’s
ardor, Hrathen currently had neither the time nor the energy to do so. The
future of an entire kingdom depended on Hrathen’s ability to focus, and he
hadn’t realized how much attention Dilaf would require.

It could not continue. Hrathen’s world was one of control and predictability,
his religion a logical exercise. Dilaf was like a boiling pot of water poured
on Hrathen’s ice. In the end, they would both just end up weakened and
dissipated, like puffs of steam in the wind. And after they were gone, Arelon
would die.

Hrathen put on his armor and left his room, entering the chapel. Several
supplicants knelt in prayerful silence, and priests moved about busily. The
chapel’s vaulted ceilings and spirited architecture was familiar—this was where
he should be most comfortable. Too often, however, Hrathen found himself
fleeing up to the walls of Elantris. Though he told himself that he simply went
to the walls because their height gave him a vantage over Kae, he knew that
there was another reason. He went, in part, because he knew that Elantris was a
place that Dilaf would never voluntarily go.

Dilaf’s chamber was a small alcove much like the one Hrathen himself had
occupied as an arteth many years ago. Dilaf looked up from his desk as Hrathen
pushed open the room’s simple wooden door.

“My hroden?” the arteth said, standing with surprise. Hrathen rarely visited
his chambers.

“I have an important task for you, Arteth,” Hrathen said. “One I cannot trust
to anyone else.”

“Of course, my hroden,” Dilaf said submissively, bowing his head. However, his
eyes narrowed with suspicion. “I serve with devotion, knowing I am part of the
chain linked to Lord Jaddeth himself.”

“Yes,” Hrathen said dismissively. “Arteth, I need you to deliver a letter.”

“A letter?” Dilaf looked up with confusion.

“Yes,” Hrathen said flatly. “It is vital Wyrn know of our progress here. I have
written him a report, but the matters discussed therein are very delicate. If
it should be lost, irreparable damage could be done. I have chosen you, my
odiv, to deliver it in person.”

“That will take weeks, my hroden!”

“I know. I will have to go without your service for a time, but I will be
comforted by the knowledge that you are engaged in a vital mission.”

Dilaf lowered his eyes, his hands falling to rest lightly on the top of his
table. “I go as my hroden commands.”

Hrathen paused, frowning slightly. It was impossible for Dilaf to escape; the
hroden-odiv relationship was irrevocably binding. When one’s master commanded,
one obeyed. Even so, Hrathen had expected more from Dilaf. A ploy of some kind.
An attempt to wiggle out of the assignment.

Dilaf accepted the letter with apparent subservience. Maybe this was what he
wanted all along, Hrathen realized. A way into Fjorden. His position as odiv to
a gyorn would give him power and respect in the East. Perhaps Dilaf’s only
purpose in antagonizing Hrathen had been to get out of Arelon.

Hrathen turned and walked back out into the chapel’s hollow sermon hall. The
event had been even more painless than he had hoped. He held back a sigh of
relief, stepping with a bit more confidence as he walked toward his chambers.

A voice sounded from behind. Dilaf’s voice. Speaking softly—yet with enough
projection to be heard. “Send out messengers,” the arteth ordered to one of the
dorvens. “We leave for Fjorden in the morning.”

Hrathen nearly kept walking. He almost didn’t care what Dilaf was planning or
what he did, as long as he left. However, Hrathen had spent too long in
positions of leadership—too long as a political being—to let such a statement
pass. Especially from Dilaf.

Hrathen spun. “We? I ordered only you, Arteth.”

“Yes, my lord,” Dilaf said. “However, surely you don’t expect me to leave my
odivs behind.”

“Odivs?” Hrathen asked. As an official member of the Derethi priesthood, Dilaf
was able to swear odivs just as Hrathen had, continuing the chain that linked
all men to Jaddeth. Hrathen hadn’t even considered, however, that the man might
call odivs of his own. When had he found the time?

“Who, Dilaf?” Hrathen asked sharply. “Whom did you make your odiv?”

“Several people, my hroden,” Dilaf responded evasively.

“Names, Arteth.”

And he began to name them. Most priests called one or two odivs, several of the
gyorns had as many as ten. Dilaf had over thirty. Hrathen grew increasingly
stunned as he listened. Stunned, and angry. Somehow, Dilaf made odivs out of
all Hrathen’s most useful supporters—including Waren and many of the other
aristocrats.

Dilaf finished his list, turning traitorously humble eyes toward the floor.

“An interesting list,” Hrathen said slowly. “And who do you intend to take with
you, Arteth?”

“Why, all of them, my lord,” Dilaf said innocently. “If this letter is as
important as my lord implies, then I must give it proper protection.”

Hrathen closed his eyes. If Dilaf took all of the people he had mentioned, then
it would leave Hrathen stripped of supporters—assuming, that was, they would
go. The calling of odiv was very demanding; most normal Derethi believers, even
many priests, were sworn to the less restrictive position of krondet. A krondet
listened to the counsel of his hroden, but was not morally bound to do what he
was told.

It was well within Dilaf’s power to make his odivs accompany him to Fjorden.
Hrathen could have no control over what the arteth did with his sworn
followers; it would be a grave breach of protocol to order Dilaf to leave them
behind. However, if Dilaf did try to take them, it would undoubtedly be a
disaster. These men were new to Shu-Dereth; they didn’t know how much power
they had given Dilaf. If the arteth tried to drag them to Fjorden, it was
unlikely they would follow.

And if that happened, Hrathen would be forced to excommunicate every single one
of them. Shu-Dereth would be ruined in Arelon.

Dilaf continued his preparations as if he hadn’t noticed Hrathen’s internal
battle. Not that it was much of a conflict—Hrathen knew what he had to do.
Dilaf was unstable. It was possible that he was bluffing, but equally likely
that he would destroy Hrathen’s efforts in spiteful retribution.

Hrathen gritted his teeth until his jaw throbbed. Hrathen might have stopped
Dilaf’s attempt to burn the Elantrian, but the arteth had obviously realized
what Hrathen’s next move would be. No, Dilaf didn’t want to go to Fjorden. He
might have been unstable, but he was also much better prepared than Hrathen had
assumed.

“Wait,” Hrathen ordered as Dilaf’s messenger turned to leave. If that man left
the chapel, all would be ruined. “Arteth, I have changed my mind.”

“My hroden?” Dilaf asked, poking his head out of his chamber.

“You will not go to Fjorden, Dilaf.”

“But my lord …”

“No, I cannot do without you.” The lie made Hrathen’s stomach clinch tightly.
“Find someone else to deliver the message.”

With that, Hrathen spun and stalked toward his chambers.

“I am, as always, my hroden’s humble servant,” Dilaf whispered, the room’s
acoustics carrying the words directly to Hrathen’s ears.


Hrathen fled again.

He needed to think, to clear his mind. He had spent several hours stewing in
his office, angry at both Dilaf and himself. Finally, he could stand it no
longer, and so he absconded to the night streets of Kae.

As usual, he directed his path toward Elantris’s wall. He sought height, as if
rising above the dwellings of man could give him a better perspective on life.

“Spare some coins, sir?” pled a voice.

Hrathen stopped in surprise; he had been so distracted that he hadn’t noticed
the rag-clothed beggar at his feet. The man was old and obviously had poor
sight, for he was squinting up at Hrathen in the darkness. Hrathen frowned,
realizing for the first time that he had never seen a beggar in Kae.

A youth, dressed in clothing no better than that of the old man, hobbled around
the corner. The boy froze, blanching pale white. “Not him, you old fool!” he
hissed. Then, to Hrathen, he quickly said, “I’m sorry, my lord. My father loses
his wits sometimes and thinks he is a beggar. Please forgive us.” He moved to
grab the old man’s arm.

Hrathen held up his hand commandingly, and the youth stopped, growing another
shade paler. Hrathen knelt down beside the elderly man, who was smiling with a
half-senile daze. “Tell me, old man,” Hrathen asked, “why do I see so few
beggars in the city?”

“The king forbids begging in his city, good sir,” the man croaked. “It is a
poor sign of prosperity to have us on his streets. If he finds us, he sends us
back to the farms.”

“You say too much,” the youth warned, his frightened face indicating that he
was very close to abandoning the old man and bolting away.

The elderly beggar wasn’t finished. “Yes, good sir, we mustn’t let him catch
us. Hide outside the city, we do.”

“Outside the city?” Hrathen pressed.

“Kae isn’t the only town here, you know. There used to be four of them, all
surrounding Elantris, but the others dried up. Not enough food for so many
people in such a small area, they said. We hide in the ruins.”

“Are there many of you?” Hrathen asked.

“No, not many. Only those who’ve the nerve to run away from the farms.” The old
man’s eyes took on a dreamy look. “I wasn’t always a beggar, good sir. Used to
work in Elantris—I was a carpenter, one of the best. I didn’t make a very good
farmer, though. The king was wrong there, good sir—he sent me to the fields,
but I was too old to work in them, so I ran away. Came here. The merchants in
the town, they give us money sometimes. But we can only beg after night comes,
and never from the high nobles. No, sir, they would tell the king.”

The old man squinted up at Hrathen—as if realizing for the first time why the
boy was so apprehensive. “You don’t look much like a merchant, good sir,” he
said hesitantly.

“I’m not,” Hrathen responded, dropping a bag of coins in the man’s hand. “That
is for you.” Then he dropped a second bag beside the first. “That is for the
others. Good night, old man.”

“Thank you, good sir!” the man cried.

“Thank Jaddeth,” Hrathen said.

“Who is Jaddeth, good sir?”

Hrathen bowed his head. “You’ll know soon enough, old man. One way or another,
you’ll know.”


The breeze was gusty and strong atop the wall of Elantris, and it whipped at
Hrathen’s cape with glee. It was a cool ocean wind, bearing the briny scent of
saltwater and sea life. Hrathen stood between two burning torches, leaning
against the low parapet and looking out over Kae.

The city wasn’t very large, not when compared with the sheer mass of Elantris,
but it could have been far better fortified. He felt his old dissatisfaction
returning. He hated being in a place that couldn’t protect itself. Perhaps that
was part of the stress he was feeling with this assignment.

Lights sparked throughout Kae, most of them streetlamps, including a series
that ran along the short wall that marked the formal border of the city. The
wall ran in a perfect circle—so perfect, in fact, that Hrathen would have
remarked upon it had he been in any other city. Here it was just another
remnant of fallen Elantris’s glory. Kae had spilled out beyond that inner wall,
but the old border remained—a ring of flame running around the center of the
city.

“It was so much nicer, once,” a voice said behind him.

Hrathen turned with surprise. He had heard the footsteps approaching, but he
had simply assumed it was one of the guards making his rounds. Instead he found
a short, bald Arelene in a simple gray robe. Omin, head of the Korathi religion
in Kae.

Omin approached the edge, pausing beside Hrathen and studying the city. “Of
course, that was back then, when the Elantrians still ruled. The city’s fall
was probably good for our souls. Still, I can’t help recalling those days with
awe. Do you realize that no one in all of Arelon went without food? The
Elantrians could turn stone into corn and dirt into steak. Confronted by those
memories, I am left wondering. Could devils do that much good in this world?
Would they even want to?”

Hrathen didn’t respond. He simply stood, leaning with his arms crossed on top
of the parapet, the wind churning his hair. Omin fell silent.

“How did you find me?” Hrathen finally asked.

“It is well known that you spend your nights up here,” the squat priest
explained. He could barely rest his arms on the parapet. Hrathen considered
Dilaf short, but this man made the arteth look like a giant. “Your supporters
say you come here and plan how to defeat the vile Elantrians,” Omin continued,
“and your opponents say you come because you feel guilty for condemning a
people who have already been cursed.”

Hrathen turned, looking down into the little man’s eyes. “And what do you say?”

“I say nothing,” Omin said. “It doesn’t matter to me why you climb these
stairs, Hrathen. I do, however, wonder why you preach hatred of the Elantrians
when you yourself simply pity them.”

Hrathen didn’t respond immediately, tapping his gauntleted finger against the
stone parapet with a repetitious click. “It’s not so hard, once you accustom
yourself to it,” he finally said. “A man can force himself to hate if he
wishes, especially if he convinces himself that it is for a higher good.”

“The oppression of the few brings salvation to the many?” Omin asked, a slight
smile on his face, as if he found the concept ridiculous.

“You’d best not mock, Arelene,” Hrathen warned. “You have few options, and we
both know the least painful one will require you to do as I do.”

“To profess hatred where I have none? I will never do that, Hrathen.”

“Then you will become irrelevant,” Hrathen said simply.

“Is that the way it must be, then?”

“Shu-Korath is docile and unassuming, priest,” Hrathen said. “Shu-Dereth is
vibrant and dynamic. It will sweep you away like a roaring flood rushing
through a stagnant pool.”

Omin smiled again. “You act as if truth were something to be influenced by
persistence, Hrathen.”

“I’m not speaking of truth or falsehood; I am simply referring to physical
inevitability. You cannot stand against Fjorden—and where Fjorden rules,
Shu-Dereth teaches.”

“One cannot separate truth from actions, Hrathen,” Omin said with a shake of
his bald head. “Physically inevitable or not, truth stands above all things. It
is independent of who has the best army, who can deliver the longest sermons,
or even who has the most priests. It can be pushed down, but it will always
surface. Truth is the one thing you can never intimidate.”

“And if Shu-Dereth is the truth?” Hrathen demanded.

“Then it will prevail,” Omin said. “But I didn’t come to argue with you.”

“Oh?” Hrathen said with raised eyebrows.

“No,” Omin said. “I came to ask you a question.”

“Then ask, priest, and leave me to my thoughts.”

“I want to know what happened,” Omin began speculatively. “What happened,
Hrathen? What happened to your faith?”

“My faith?” Hrathen asked with shock.

“Yes,” Omin said, his words soft, almost meandering. “You must have believed at
one point, otherwise you wouldn’t have pursued the priesthood long enough to
become a gyorn. You lost it somewhere, though. I have listened to your sermons.
I hear logic and complete understanding—not to mention determination. I just
don’t hear any faith, and I wonder what happened to it.”

Hrathen hissed inward slowly, drawing a deep breath between his teeth. “Go,” he
finally ordered, not bothering to look down at the priest.

Omin didn’t answer, and Hrathen turned. The Arelish man was already gone,
strolling down the wall with a casual step, as if he had forgotten Hrathen were
there.

Hrathen stood on the wall for a long time that night.

