# Part 2 - CHAPTER 50
[Metadata]: # {03.23}
[Descriptor]: # {03.23}
[Author]: # {sanderson}

# CHAPTER 50
“What took you so long?”

“I couldn’t find Spirit, my lady,” Ashe explained, floating into her carriage
window. “So I had to deliver the message to Master Galladon. After that, I went
to check on King Telrii.”

Sarene tapped her cheek with annoyance. “How is he doing, then?”

“Galladon or the king, my lady?”

“The king.”

“His Majesty is quite busy lounging in his palace while half of Arelon’s
nobility waits outside,” the Seon said with a disapproving tone. “I believe his
largest current complaint is that there aren’t enough young women left on the
palace staff.”

“We’ve exchanged one idiot for another,” Sarene said with a shake of her head.
“How did that man ever acquire enough wealth to become a duke?”

“He didn’t, my lady,” Ashe explained. “His brother did most of the work. Telrii
inherited upon the man’s death.”

Sarene sighed, leaning back as the carriage hit a bump. “Is Hrathen there?”

“Often, my lady,” Ashe said. “Apparently, he visits the king on a daily basis.”

“What are they waiting for?” Sarene asked with frustration. “Why doesn’t Telrii
just convert?”

“No one is certain, my lady.”

Sarene frowned. The continued game left her baffled. It was well known that
Telrii had attended Derethi meetings, and there was no reason for him to
maintain an illusion of Korathi conservatism. “No new news on that proclamation
the gyorn has supposedly drafted?” she asked with trepidation.

“No, my lady,” came the blessed reply. Rumors claimed that Hrathen had drawn up
a bill that would force all of Arelon to convert to Shu-Dereth or face
incarceration. Though the merchants put on a face of normalcy, holding the
spring Arelene Market, the entire city was on edge with a sense of tense
anxiety.

Sarene could easily imagine the future. Soon Wyrn would send a fleet of priests
into Arelon, followed closely by his warrior monks. Telrii, at first a
sympathizer, then a convert, would eventually become less than a pawn. In just
a few years Arelon wouldn’t be just a country of Derethi believers, but a
virtual extension of Fjorden itself.

Once Hrathen’s bill passed, the priest would waste no time in arresting Sarene
and the others. They would be locked away or, more likely, executed. After
that, there would be no one to oppose Fjorden. The entire civilized world would
belong to Wyrn, a final fulfillment of the Old Empire’s dream.

And yet, despite all of this, her allies debated and talked. None of them
believed that Telrii would actually sign a document forcing conversion; such
atrocities didn’t happen in their world. Arelon was a peaceful kingdom; even
the so-called riots of a decade past hadn’t been that destructive—unless one
was an Elantrian. Her friends wanted to move carefully. Their caution was
understandable, laudable even, but their timing was terrible. It was a good
thing she had an opportunity to practice fencing this day. She needed to
release a little aggression.

As if in response to her thoughts, the carriage pulled to a halt in front of
Roial’s manor. In the wake of Telrii’s move into the palace, the women had
relocated their fencing practice to the old duke’s gardens. The weather of late
had been warm and breezy, as if spring had decided to stay this time, and Duke
Roial had welcomed them.

Sarene had been surprised when the women insisted that they continue the
fencing practice. However, the ladies had shown strength in their resolve. This
one meeting would continue, every second day, as it had for over a month now.
Apparently, Sarene wasn’t the only one who needed an opportunity to work out
her frustration with a sword.

She climbed out of the carriage, dressed in her usual white jumpsuit and
wearing her new wig. As she rounded the building, she could make out the sounds
of syres clashing in the background. With shade and a wooden floor, Roial’s
garden pavilion was a perfect place for practice. Most of the women had already
arrived, and they greeted Sarene with smiles and curtsies. None of them had
quite gotten over her sudden return from Elantris; now they regarded her with
even more respect, and fear, than they had before. Sarene nodded back with
polite affection. She liked these women, even if she could never be one of
them.

Seeing them, however, reminded her of the strange loss she still felt at having
left Elantris behind. It wasn’t just Spirit; Elantris was the one place where
she could remember feeling unconditional acceptance. She had not been a
princess, she had been something far better—a member of a community where every
individual was vital. She had felt warmth from those motley-skinned Elantrians,
a willingness to accept her into their lives and give her part of themselves.

There, in the center of the most cursed city in the world, Spirit had
constructed a society that exemplified Korathi teachings. The church taught of
the blessings of unity; it was ironic that the only people who practiced such
ideals were those who had been damned.

Sarene shook her head, snapping her sword forward in a practice thrust,
beginning her warm-ups. She had spent her adult life in an unending quest to
find acceptance and love. When, at long last, she had finally found both, she
had left them behind.

She wasn’t sure how long she practiced—she fell into her forms easily once the
warm-ups were finished. Her thoughts rotated around Elantris, Domi, her
feelings, and the indecipherable ironies of life. She was sweating heavily by
the time she realized the other women had stopped sparring.

Sarene looked up with surprise. Everyone was huddled at one side of the
pavilion, chattering among themselves and looking at something Sarene couldn’t
see. Curious, she edged her way to the side until her superior height gave her
a good look at the object of their attention. A man.

He was dressed in fine blue and green silks, a feathered hat on his head. He
had the creamy brown skin of a Duladen aristocrat—not as dark as Shuden’s, but
not as light as Sarene’s. His features were round and happy, and he had a
foppish, unconcerned air. Duladen indeed. The dark-skinned servant at his side
was massive and bulky, like most Dulas of lower birth. She had never seen
either man before.

“What is going on here?” Sarene demanded.

“His name is Kaloo, my lady,” Ashe explained, floating over to her. “He arrived
a few moments ago. Apparently, he’s one of the few Duladen Republicans that
escaped the massacre last year. He has been hiding in southern Arelon until
just recently, when he heard that King Iadon was looking for a man to take
Baron Edan’s holdings.”

Sarene frowned; something about the man bothered her. The women suddenly burst
into laughter at one of his comments, giggling as if the Dula were an old and
favored member of the court. By the time the laughter died down, the Dula had
noticed Sarene.

“Ah,” Kaloo said, bowing ornately. “This must be the Princess Sarene. They say
you are the most fair woman in all of Opelon.”

“You should not believe all of the things that people say, my lord,” Sarene
replied slowly.

“No,” he agreed, looking up into her eyes. “Only the ones that are true.”

Despite herself, Sarene started to blush. She did not like men who could do
that to her. “I’m afraid you have caught us off guard, my lord,” Sarene said
through narrowed eyes. “We have been exercising quite vigorously, and are in no
position to receive you like proper ladies.”

“I apologize for my abrupt arrival, Your Highness,” Kaloo said. Despite the
polite words, he appeared unconcerned that he had interrupted an obviously
private gathering. “Upon arriving in this glorious city, I first paid my
respects to the palace—but was told that I would have to wait for at least a
week to see the king himself. I put my name on the lists, then had my coachman
drive me around your lovely city. I had heard of the illustrious Duke Roial,
and decided to pay him a visit. How surprised I was to find all these lovelies
in his gardens!”

Sarene snorted, but her rebuttal was interrupted by the arrival of Duke Roial.
Apparently, the old man had finally realized that his property had been invaded
by a roving Dula. As the duke approached, Kaloo gave another one of his silly
bows, sweeping his large, floppy hat out in front of him. Then he launched into
praises of the duke, telling Roial how honored he was to meet such a venerable
man.

“I don’t like him,” Sarene declared quietly to Ashe.

“Of course not, my lady,” Ashe said. “You never have gotten along very well
with Duladen aristocrats.”

“It’s more than that,” Sarene insisted. “Something about him seems false. He
doesn’t have an accent.”

“Most Republic citizens spoke Aonic quite fluently, especially if they lived
near the border. I have met several Dulas in my time without hint of an
accent.”

Sarene just frowned. As she watched the man perform, she realized what it was.
Kaloo was too stereotypical. He represented everything a Duladen aristocrat was
said to be—foolishly haughty, overdressed and overmannered, and completely
indifferent when it came to just about everything. This Kaloo was like a cliché
that shouldn’t exist, a living representation of the idealized Duladen noble.

Kaloo finished his introductions and moved on to a dramatic retelling of his
arrival story. Roial took it all in with a smile; the duke had done lots of
business with Dulas, and apparently knew that the best way to deal with them
was to smile and nod occasionally.

One of the women handed Kaloo a cup. He smiled his thanks and downed the wine
in a single gulp, never breaking his narrative as he immediately brought his
hand back into the conversation. Dulas didn’t just talk with their mouths, they
used their entire bodies as part of the storytelling experience. Silks and
feathers fluttered as Kaloo described his surprise at finding King Iadon dead
and a new king on the throne.

“Perhaps my lord would care to join us,” Sarene said, interrupting Kaloo—which
was often the only way to enter a conversation with a Dula.

Kaloo blinked in surprise. “Join you?” he asked hesitantly, his flow of words
stopping for a brief moment. Sarene could sense a break in character as he
reoriented himself. She was becoming increasingly certain that this man was not
who he claimed. Fortunately, her mind had just alighted on a method to test
him.

“Of course, my lord,” Sarene said. “Duladen citizens are said to be the finest
fencers in all of the land—better, even, than Jaadorians. I am certain the
ladies here would be much intrigued to see a true master at work.”

“I am very thankful at the offer, Your Gracious Highness,” Kaloo began, “but I
am hardly dressed—”

“We will make it a quick bout, my lord,” Sarene said, picking up her bag and
sliding out her two finest syres—the ones with sharpened points rather than
simple balls. She whipped one through the air expertly as she smiled at the
Dula.

“All right,” the Dula said, tossing aside his hat. “Let us have a bout, then.”

Sarene stopped, trying to judge whether he was bluffing. She hadn’t intended to
actually fight him; otherwise she wouldn’t have chosen the dangerous blades.
She considered for a moment, and then, with a casual shrug, tossed him one of
the weapons. If he was bluffing, then she intended to call him in a very
embarrassing—and potentially painful—way.

Kaloo pulled off his bright turquoise jacket, revealing the ruffled green shirt
underneath; then, surprisingly, he fell into a fencing stance, his hand raised
behind him, the tip of his syre raised offensively.

“All right,” Sarene said, then attacked.

Kaloo jumped backward at the onslaught, twirling around the stunned Duke Roial
as he parried Sarene’s blows. There were several startled cries from the women
as Sarene pushed through them, snapping her blade at the offending Dula. Soon
she emerged into the sunlight, jumping off the wooden dais and landing barefoot
in the soft grass.

As shocked as they were at the impropriety of the battle, the women made
certain not to miss a single blow. Sarene could see them following as she and
Kaloo moved out into the flat courtyard at the center of Roial’s gardens.

The Dula was surprisingly good, but he was no master. He spent too much time
parrying her attacks, obviously unable to do much but defend. If he truly was a
member of the Duladen aristocracy, then he was one of their poorer fencers.
Sarene had met a few citizens who were worse than she, but on average three out
of four could defeat her.

Kaloo abandoned his air of apathy, concentrating solely on keeping Sarene’s
syre from slicing him apart. They moved all the way across the courtyard, Kaloo
retreating a few steps with each new exchange. He seemed surprised when he
stepped onto brick instead of grass, arriving at the fountain centerpiece of
Roial’s gardens.

Sarene advanced more vigorously as Kaloo stumbled up onto the brick deck. She
forced him back until his thigh struck the edge of the fountain itself. There
was nowhere else for him to go—or so she thought. She watched with surprise as
the Dula leapt into the water. With a kick of his leg, he sent a splash in her
direction, then leapt out of the fountain to her right.

Sarene’s syre pierced the water as Kaloo passed through the air beside her. She
felt the tip of her blade strike something soft, and the nobleman let out a
quiet, almost unnoticeable, yelp of pain. Sarene spun, raising her blade to
strike again, but Kaloo was on his knee, his syre stuck point-first into the
soft earth. He held up a bright yellow flower to Sarene.

“Ah, my lady,” he said in a dramatic voice. “You have found my secret—never
have I been able to face a beautiful woman in combat. My heart melts, my knees
shake, and my sword refuses to strike.” He bowed his head, proffering the
flower. The collected women behind him sighed dreamily.

Sarene lowered her sword uncertainly. Where had he gotten the flower? With a
sigh, she accepted the gift. They both knew that his excuse was nothing more
than a sneaky method of escaping embarrassment—but Sarene had to respect his
cleverness. He had not only managed to avoid looking like a fool, but had
impressed the women with his courtly sense of romance at the same time.

Sarene studied the man closely, searching for a wound. She’d been certain her
blade had scratched him on the face as he jumped out of the fountain, but there
was no sign of a hit. Uncertain, she looked down at the tip of her syre. There
was no blood on it. She must have missed after all.

The women clapped at the show, and they began to urge the dandy back toward the
pavilion. As he left, Kaloo looked back at her and smiled—not the silly,
foppish smile he had used before, but a more knowing, sly smile. A smile she
found strikingly familiar for some reason. He performed another one of his
ridiculous bows, then allowed himself to be led away.

