# Zen and the Hero's Journey

I want to keep this article short and sweet.

## Personal Background

Recently, I have mentioned to many people that I have broken through a barrier
in my meditation practice, but I have not been able to fully articulate what
that barrier is to the people I have told it to. So far, everyone just has to
trust me that my meditation experience is that much better now. This article is
my attempt at remedying this situation.

## Before

In the past, I have struggled to figure out the "correct" way to meditate. I
read many things that talked about "letting the breath happen naturally" and
not trying to control anything. I have also read many things about focusing
solely on the breath, and letting any distractions that enter pass and leave
your mind.

My undersatnding of what meditation was before my most recent revelation was
that the guru, or meditator, is supposed to sit perfectly still (or as still as
they are able) in a seated position. The more you are able to focus on the
breath without distraction, the better, and distractions are seen as things
that you have to accept, but as the practice continues, the distraction will
go away.

I had "Faith" that meditation worked, but I wasn't seeing much practical
benefit from it.

Meditation was something for me that I would use like a stress ball. WHen I was
feeling anxious or depressed, I would attempt to meditate. I would sit in a
lotus or half-lotus position, and I would focus on the breath for as long as I
could stand. Any pains in my back I ignored, any discomfort in my seating
position I told myself would get worked through in time.

I didn't meditate often, but I would say that this sort of meditation was
invaluble to me for the ten or so years that I practiced it.

## Wim Hof

My first breakthrough in meditation actually didn't come from any resource on
meditation. I discovered the man named "Wim Hof".

Wim Hof is a polish man who is known for breaking many world records when it
comes to cold temperature and cold temperature survival. He has run marathons
on the arctic caps, and he has hiked halfway up everest.

He has established a method that he uses to combat the cold. He calls it the
Wim Hof Method (WHM for short).

This is a practice of performing power breaths, followed by breath retentions.

The Wim Hof method is pretty strict, but he also does a good job introducing it
to new people. Within six months of learning the method, I would say that I
became proficient with how the power breathes effect my Prana, and I also
became proficient in directing the flow of blood into and out of the brain
using muscle contractions and relaxations.

## Combined

The break through for me was understanding that both of these strict methods of
meditation (I didn't realize how much like meditation the WHM was) can be
combined to form a fluid, cohesive, form of meditation.

This is what my meditation pracitce looks like today.

During my planned 20 minute break at work, I walk down the stairs towards the
ground level, then I walk up the stairs to my car. During this time, I am
thinking about what my breath is doing, and I am thinking about how I feel.
When I approach my car, I unlock it, open the door, and gather meditation
materials, usually a mat and block. I then go to the top of the parking garage,
and I lay out the mat to face the sun. I then place down the block, and I sit
on that. From there, I start with "flow breathing", meaning I simply let the
breath happen naturally to warm up. Warm up can take anywhere from 1-3 minutes
for me, but not more than that.

After warm up, I then move on to the exercises. I never have a set plan for
what I am going to practice before the session, but after the warm up, I have a
good idea of what sorts of things I want to practice for that session. During
this time, I will come up with a ten or so minute routine which will conisist
of different breathing techniques. It is usually three cycles. The first will
be a yin cycle (lunar breathing) followed by a yang cycle (solar breathing)
followed by a tao cycle (breath of fire). Once all three of those have been
connected, I will do a similar cool down, and return to my work.

# Conclusion

I am still very new to meditation. The first technique of meditation, while it
was better than nothing, certainly left something to be desired. With my new
method, I am already starting to see the benefits such as increased focus and
clarity of thought.

I want to close with two paraphrased quotes from Sam Harris.

    Demand the same clarity in meditation that you demand from everything else.
    Meditation is preperation for the worst day of your life.

Both of these things I have found to be increasing true as I continue my
meditation practice.

Meditation is about adapting your practice every day to the body that you have
that day. The body I have today is different than the body I had yesterday,
which is different than the body I will have tomorrow. Each day is a new
experience.

The trick for me was understanding that all of the rigourous techniques can be
applied to a fluid practice. Not only that, but it can be done in a way where
the strengths of fluidity counteract the weaknesses of rididity and vice versa.
It's in understanding that connection that I have been able to connect to a
much deeper and much more fullfilling sense of meditation.
