# PART II - CHAPTER V. ON THE EVE OF THE FETE - II
[Metadata]: # {02.05.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER V. ON THE EVE OF THE FETE
II
# II
Two days after the incident I have described I met her in a numerous company,
who were driving out on some expedition in three coaches, surrounded by others
on horseback. She beckoned to me, stopped her carriage, and pressingly urged me
to join their party. A place was found for me in the carriage, and she
laughingly introduced me to her companions, gorgeously attired ladies, and
explained to me that they were all going on a very interesting expedition. She
was laughing, and seemed somewhat excessively happy. Just lately she had been
very lively, even playful, in fact.

The expedition was certainly an eccentric one. They were all going to a house
the other side of the river, to the merchant Sevastyanov's. In the lodge of
this merchant's house our saint and prophet, Semyon Yakovlevitch, who was
famous not only amongst us but in the surrounding provinces and even in
Petersburg and Moscow, had been living for the last ten years, in retirement,
ease, and comfort. Every one went to see him, especially visitors to the
neighbourhood, extracting from him some crazy utterance, bowing down to him,
and leaving an offering. These offerings were sometimes considerable, and if
Semyon Yakovlevitch did not himself assign them to some other purpose were
piously sent to some church or more often to the monastery of Our Lady. A monk
from the monastery was always in waiting upon Semyon Yakovlevitch with this
object.

All were in expectation of great amusement. No one of the party had seen Semyon
Yakovlevitch before, except Lyamshin, who declared that the saint had given
orders that he should be driven out with a broom, and had with his own hand
flung two big baked potatoes after him. Among the party I noticed Pyotr
Stepanovitch, again riding a hired Cossack horse, on which he sat extremely
badly, and Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, also on horseback. The latter did not
always hold aloof from social diversions, and on such occasions always wore an
air of gaiety, although, as always, he spoke little and seldom. When our party
had crossed the bridge and reached the hotel of the town, someone suddenly
announced that in one of the rooms of the hotel they had just found a traveller
who had shot himself, and were expecting the police. At once the suggestion was
made that they should go and look at the suicide. The idea met with approval:
our ladies had never seen a suicide. I remember one of them said aloud on the
occasion, "Everything's so boring, one can't be squeamish over one's
amusements, as long as they're interesting." Only a few of them remained
outside. The others went in a body into the dirty corridor, and amongst the
others I saw, to my amazement, Lizaveta Nikolaevna. The door of the room was
open, and they did not, of course, dare to prevent our going in to look at the
suicide. He was quite a young lad, not more than nineteen. He must have been
very good-looking, with thick fair hair, with a regular oval face, and a fine,
pure forehead. The body was already stiff, and his white young face looked like
marble. On the table lay a note, in his handwriting, to the effect that no one
was to blame for his death, that he had killed himself because he had
"squandered" four hundred roubles. The word "squandered" was used in the
letter; in the four lines of his letter there were three mistakes in spelling.
A stout country gentleman, evidently a neighbour, who had been staying in the
hotel on some business of his own, was particularly distressed about it. From
his words it appeared that the boy had been sent by his family, that is, a
widowed mother, sisters, and aunts, from the country to the town in order that,
under the supervision of a female relation in the town, he might purchase and
take home with him various articles for the trousseau of his eldest sister, who
was going to be married. The family had, with sighs of apprehension, entrusted
him with the four hundred roubles, the savings of ten years, and had sent him
on his way with exhortations, prayers, and signs of the cross. The boy had till
then been well-behaved and trustworthy. Arriving three days before at the town,
he had not gone to his relations, had put up at the hotel, and gone straight to
the club in the hope of finding in some back room a "travelling banker," or at
least some game of cards for money. But that evening there was no "banker"
there or gambling going on. Going back to the hotel about midnight he asked for
champagne, Havana cigars, and ordered a supper of six or seven dishes. But the
champagne made him drunk, and the cigar made him sick, so that he did not touch
the food when it was brought to him, and went to bed almost unconscious. Waking
next morning as fresh as an apple, he went at once to the gipsies' camp, which
was in a suburb beyond the river, and of which he had heard the day before at
the club. He did not reappear at the hotel for two days. At last, at five
o'clock in the afternoon of the previous day, he had returned drunk, had at
once gone to bed, and had slept till ten o'clock in the evening. On waking up
he had asked for a cutlet, a bottle of Chateau d'Yquem, and some grapes, paper,
and ink, and his bill. No one noticed anything special about him; he was quiet,
gentle, and friendly. He must have shot himself at about midnight, though it
was strange that no one had heard the shot, and they only raised the alarm at
midday, when, after knocking in vain, they had broken in the door. The bottle
of Chateau d'Yquem was half empty, there was half a plateful of grapes left
too. The shot had been fired from a little three-chambered revolver, straight
into the heart. Very little blood had flowed. The revolver had dropped from his
hand on to the carpet. The boy himself was half lying in a corner of the sofa.
Death must have been instantaneous. There was no trace of the anguish of death
in the face; the expression was serene, almost happy, as though there were no
cares in his life. All our party stared at him with greedy curiosity. In every
misfortune of one's neighbour there is always something cheering for an
onlooker--whoever he may be. Our ladies gazed in silence, their companions
distinguished themselves by their wit and their superb equanimity. One observed
that his was the best way out of it, and that the boy could not have hit upon
anything more sensible; another observed that he had had a good time if only
for a moment. A third suddenly blurted out the inquiry why people had begun
hanging and shooting themselves among us of late, as though they had suddenly
lost their roots, as though the ground were giving way under every one's feet.
People looked coldly at this raisonneur. Then Lyamshin, who prided himself on
playing the fool, took a bunch of grapes from the plate; another, laughing,
followed his example, and a third stretched out his hand for the Chateau
d'Yquem. But the head of police arriving checked him, and even ordered that the
room should be cleared. As every one had seen all they wanted they went out
without disputing, though Lyamshin began pestering the police captain about
something. The general merrymaking, laughter, and playful talk were twice as
lively on the latter half of the way.

We arrived at Semyon Yakovlevitch's just at one o'clock. The gate of the rather
large house stood unfastened, and the approach to the lodge was open. We learnt
at once that Semyon Yakovlevitch was dining, but was receiving guests. The
whole crowd of us went in. The room in which the saint dined and received
visitors had three windows, and was fairly large. It was divided into two equal
parts by a wooden lattice-work partition, which ran from wall to wall, and was
three or four feet high. Ordinary visitors remained on the outside of this
partition, but lucky ones were by the saint's invitation admitted through the
partition doors into his half of the room. And if so disposed he made them sit
down on the sofa or on his old leather chairs. He himself invariably sat in an
old-fashioned shabby Voltaire arm-chair. He was a rather big, bloated-looking,
yellow-faced man of five and fifty, with a bald head and scanty flaxen hair. He
wore no beard; his right cheek was swollen, and his mouth seemed somehow
twisted awry. He had a large wart on the left side of his nose; narrow eyes,
and a calm, stolid, sleepy expression. He was dressed in European style, in a
black coat, but had no waistcoat or tie. A rather coarse, but white shirt,
peeped out below his coat. There was something the matter with his feet, I
believe, and he kept them in slippers. I've heard that he had at one time been
a clerk, and received a rank in the service. He had just finished some fish
soup, and was beginning his second dish of potatoes in their skins, eaten with
salt. He never ate anything else, but he drank a great deal of tea, of which he
was very fond. Three servants provided by the merchant were running to and fro
about him. One of them was in a swallow-tail, the second looked like a workman,
and the third like a verger. There was also a very lively boy of sixteen.
Besides the servants there was present, holding a jug, a reverend, grey-headed
monk, who was a little too fat. On one of the tables a huge samovar was
boiling, and a tray with almost two dozen glasses was standing near it. On
another table opposite offerings had been placed: some loaves and also some
pounds of sugar, two pounds of tea, a pair of embroidered slippers, a foulard
handkerchief, a length of cloth, a piece of linen, and so on. Money offerings
almost all went into the monk's jug. The room was full of people, at least a
dozen visitors, of whom two were sitting with Semyon Yakovlevitch on the other
side of the partition. One was a grey-headed old pilgrim of the peasant class,
and the other a little, dried-up monk, who sat demurely, with his eyes cast
down. The other visitors were all standing on the near side of the partition,
and were mostly, too, of the peasant class, except one elderly and
poverty-stricken lady, one landowner, and a stout merchant, who had come from
the district town, a man with a big beard, dressed in the Russian style, though
he was known to be worth a hundred thousand.

All were waiting for their chance, not daring to speak of themselves. Four were
on their knees, but the one who attracted most attention was the landowner, a
stout man of forty-five, kneeling right at the partition, more conspicuous than
any one, waiting reverently for a propitious word or look from Semyon
Yakovlevitch. He had been there for about an hour already, but the saint still
did not notice him.

Our ladies crowded right up to the partition, whispering gaily and laughingly
together. They pushed aside or got in front of all the other visitors, even
those on their knees, except the landowner, who remained obstinately in his
prominent position even holding on to the partition. Merry and greedily
inquisitive eyes were turned upon Semyon Yakovlevitch, as well as lorgnettes,
pince-nez, and even opera-glasses. Lyamshin, at any rate, looked through an
opera-glass. Semyon Yakovlevitch calmly and lazily scanned all with his little
eyes.

"Milovzors! Milovzors!" he deigned to pronounce, in a hoarse bass, and slightly
staccato.

All our party laughed: "What's the meaning of 'Milovzors'?" But Semyon
Yakovlevitch relapsed into silence, and finished his potatoes. Presently he
wiped his lips with his napkin, and they handed him tea.

As a rule, he did not take tea alone, but poured out some for his visitors, but
by no means for all, usually pointing himself to those he wished to honour. And
his choice always surprised people by its unexpectedness. Passing by the
wealthy and the high-placed, he sometimes pitched upon a peasant or some
decrepit old woman. Another time he would pass over the beggars to honour some
fat wealthy merchant. Tea was served differently, too, to different people,
sugar was put into some of the glasses and handed separately with others, while
some got it without any sugar at all. This time the favoured one was the monk
sitting by him, who had sugar put in; and the old pilgrim, to whom it was given
without any sugar. The fat monk with the jug, from the monastery, for some
reason had none handed to him at all, though up till then he had had his glass
every day.

"Semyon Yakovlevitch, do say something to me. I've been longing to make your
acquaintance for ever so long," carolled the gorgeously dressed lady from our
carriage, screwing up her eyes and smiling. She was the lady who had observed
that one must not be squeamish about one's amusements, so long as they were
interesting. Semyon Yakovlevitch did not even look at her. The kneeling
landowner uttered a deep, sonorous sigh, like the sound of a big pair of
bellows.

"With sugar in it!" said Semyon Yakovlevitch suddenly, pointing to the wealthy
merchant. The latter moved forward and stood beside the kneeling gentleman.

"Some more sugar for him!" ordered Semyon Yakovlevitch, after the glass had
already been poured out. They put some more in. "More, more, for him!" More was
put in a third time, and again a fourth. The merchant began submissively
drinking his syrup.

"Heavens!" whispered the people, crossing themselves. The kneeling gentleman
again heaved a deep, sonorous sigh.

"Father! Semyon Yakovlevitch!" The voice of the poor lady rang out all at once
plaintively, though so sharply that it was startling. Our party had shoved her
back to the wall. "A whole hour, dear father, I've been waiting for grace.
Speak to me. Consider my case in my helplessness."

"Ask her," said Semyon Yakovlevitch to the verger, who went to the partition.

"Have you done what Semyon Yakovlevitch bade you last time?" he asked the widow
in a soft and measured voice.

"Done it! Father Semyon Yakovlevitch. How can one do it with them?" wailed the
widow. "They're cannibals; they're lodging a complaint against me, in the
court; they threaten to take it to the senate. That's how they treat their own
mother!"

"Give her!" Semyon Yakovlevitch pointed to a sugar-loaf. The boy skipped up,
seized the sugar-loaf and dragged it to the widow.

"Ach, father; great is your merciful kindness. What am I to do with so much?"
wailed the widow.

"More, more," said Semyon Yakovlevitch lavishly.

They dragged her another sugar-loaf. "More, more!" the saint commanded. They
took her a third, and finally a fourth. The widow was surrounded with sugar on
all sides. The monk from the monastery sighed; all this might have gone to the
monastery that day as it had done on former occasions.

"What am I to do with so much," the widow sighed obsequiously. "It's enough to
make one person sick!... Is it some sort of a prophecy, father?"

"Be sure it's by way of a prophecy," said someone in the crowd.

"Another pound for her, another!" Semyon Yakovlevitch persisted.

There was a whole sugar-loaf still on the table, but the saint ordered a pound
to be given, and they gave her a pound.

"Lord have mercy on us!" gasped the people, crossing themselves. "It's surely a
prophecy."

"Sweeten your heart for the future with mercy and loving kindness, and then
come to make complaints against your own children; bone of your bone. That's
what we must take this emblem to mean," the stout monk from the monastery, who
had had no tea given to him, said softly but self-complacently, taking upon
himself the rôle of interpreter in an access of wounded vanity.

"What are you saying, father?" cried the widow, suddenly infuriated. "Why, they
dragged me into the fire with a rope round me when the Verhishins' house was
burnt, and they locked up a dead cat in my chest. They are ready to do any
villainy...."

"Away with her! Away with her!" Semyon Yakovlevitch said suddenly, waving his
hands.

The verger and the boy dashed through the partition. The verger took the widow
by the arm, and without resisting she trailed to the door, keeping her eyes
fixed on the loaves of sugar that had been bestowed on her, which the boy
dragged after her.

"One to be taken away. Take it away," Semyon Yakovlevitch commanded to the
servant like a workman, who remained with him. The latter rushed after the
retreating woman, and the three servants returned somewhat later bringing back
one loaf of sugar which had been presented to the widow and now taken away from
her. She carried off three, however.

"Semyon Yakovlevitch," said a voice at the door. "I dreamt of a bird, a
jackdaw; it flew out of the water and flew into the fire. What does the dream
mean?"

"Frost," Semyon Yakovlevitch pronounced.

"Semyon Yakovlevitch, why don't you answer me all this time? I've been
interested in you ever so long," the lady of our party began again.

"Ask him!" said Semyon Yakovlevitch, not heeding her, but pointing to the
kneeling gentleman.

The monk from the monastery to whom the order was given moved sedately to the
kneeling figure.

"How have you sinned? And was not some command laid upon you?"

"Not to fight; not to give the rein to my hands," answered the kneeling
gentleman hoarsely.

"Have you obeyed?" asked the monk.

"I cannot obey. My own strength gets the better of me."

"Away with him, away with him! With a broom, with a broom!" cried Semyon
Yakovlevitch, waving his hands. The gentleman rushed out of the room without
waiting for this penalty.

"He's left a gold piece where he knelt," observed the monk, picking up a
half-imperial.

"For him!" said the saint, pointing to the rich merchant. The latter dared not
refuse it, and took it.

"Gold to gold," the monk from the monastery could not refrain from saying.

"And give him some with sugar in it," said the saint, pointing to Mavriky
Nikolaevitch. The servant poured out the tea and took it by mistake to the
dandy with the pince-nez.

"The long one, the long one!" Semyon Yakovlevitch corrected him.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch took the glass, made a military half-bow, and began
drinking it. I don't know why, but all our party burst into peals of laughter.

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch," cried Liza, addressing him suddenly. "That kneeling
gentleman has gone away. You kneel down in his place."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch looked at her in amazement.

"I beg you to. You'll do me the greatest favour. Listen, Mavriky Nikolaevitch,"
she went on, speaking in an emphatic, obstinate, excited, and rapid voice. "You
must kneel down; I must see you kneel down. If you won't, don't come near me. I
insist, I insist!"

I don't know what she meant by it; but she insisted upon it relentlessly, as
though she were in a fit. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, as we shall see later, set down
these capricious impulses, which had been particularly frequent of late, to
outbreaks of blind hatred for him, not due to spite, for, on the contrary, she
esteemed him, loved him, and respected him, and he knew that himself--but from
a peculiar unconscious hatred which at times she could not control.

In silence he gave his cup to an old woman standing behind him, opened the door
of the partition, and, without being invited, stepped into Semyon
Yakovlevitch's private apartment, and knelt down in the middle of the room in
sight of all. I imagine that he was deeply shocked in his candid and delicate
heart by Liza's coarse and mocking freak before the whole company. Perhaps he
imagined that she would feel ashamed of herself, seeing his humiliation, on
which she had so insisted. Of course no one but he would have dreamt of
bringing a woman to reason by so naïve and risky a proceeding. He remained
kneeling with his imperturbable gravity--long, tall, awkward, and ridiculous.
But our party did not laugh. The unexpectedness of the action produced a
painful shock. Every one looked at Liza.

"Anoint, anoint!" muttered Semyon Yakovlevitch.

Liza suddenly turned white, cried out, and rushed through the partition. Then a
rapid and hysterical scene followed. She began pulling Mavriky Nikolaevitch up
with all her might, tugging at his elbows with both hands.

"Get up! Get up!" she screamed, as though she were crazy. "Get up at once, at
once. How dare you?"

Mavriky Nikolaevitch got up from his knees. She clutched his arms above the
elbow and looked intently into his face. There was terror in her expression.

"Milovzors! Milovzors!" Semyon Yakovlevitch repeated again.

She dragged Mavriky Nikolaevitch back to the other part of the room at last.
There was some commotion in all our company. The lady from our carriage,
probably intending to relieve the situation, loudly and shrilly asked the saint
for the third time, with an affected smile:

"Well, Semyon Yakovlevitch, won't you utter some saying for me? I've been
reckoning so much on you."

"Out with the ----, out with the ----," said Semyon Yakovlevitch, suddenly
addressing her, with an extremely indecent word. The words were uttered
savagely, and with horrifying distinctness. Our ladies shrieked, and rushed
headlong away, while the gentlemen escorting them burst into Homeric laughter.
So ended our visit to Semyon Yakovlevitch.

At this point, however, there took place, I am told, an extremely enigmatic
incident, and, I must own, it was chiefly on account of it that I have
described this expedition so minutely.

I am told that when all flocked out, Liza, supported by Mavriky Nikolaevitch,
was jostled against Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch in the crush in the doorway. I must
mention that since that Sunday morning when she fainted they had not approached
each other, nor exchanged a word, though they had met more than once. I saw
them brought together in the doorway. I fancied they both stood still for an
instant, and looked, as it were, strangely at one another, but I may not have
seen rightly in the crowd. It is asserted, on the contrary, and quite
seriously, that Liza, glancing at Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, quickly raised her
hand to the level of his face, and would certainly have struck him if he had
not drawn back in time. Perhaps she was displeased with the expression of his
face, or the way he smiled, particularly just after such an episode with
Mavriky Nikolaevitch. I must admit I saw nothing myself, but all the others
declared they had, though they certainly could not all have seen it in such a
crush, though perhaps some may have. But I did not believe it at the time. I
remember, however, that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was rather pale all the way
home.

