# PART II - CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION - III
[Metadata]: # {02.04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION
III
# III
Outside influences, too, had come into play in the matter, however. Pyotr
Stepanovitch certainly had some designs on his parent. In my opinion he
calculated upon reducing the old man to despair, and so to driving him to some
open scandal of a certain sort. This was to serve some remote and quite other
object of his own, of which I shall speak hereafter. All sorts of plans and
calculations of this kind were swarming in masses in his mind at that time, and
almost all, of course, of a fantastic character. He had designs on another
victim besides Stepan Trofimovitch. In fact, as appeared afterwards, his
victims were not few in number, but this one he reckoned upon particularly, and
it was Mr. von Lembke himself.

Andrey Antonovitch von Lembke belonged to that race, so favoured by nature,
which is reckoned by hundreds of thousands at the Russian census, and is
perhaps unconscious that it forms throughout its whole mass a strictly
organised union. And this union, of course, is not planned and premeditated,
but exists spontaneously in the whole race, without words or agreements as a
moral obligation consisting in mutual support given by all members of the race
to one another, at all times and places, and under all circumstances. Andrey
Antonovitch had the honour of being educated in one of those more exalted
Russian educational institutions which are filled with the youth from families
well provided with wealth or connections. Almost immediately on finishing their
studies the pupils were appointed to rather important posts in one of the
government departments. Andrey Antonovitch had one uncle a colonel of
engineers, and another a baker. But he managed to get into this aristocratic
school, and met many of his fellow-countrymen in a similar position. He was a
good-humoured companion, was rather stupid at his studies, but always popular.
And when many of his companions in the upper forms--chiefly Russians--had
already learnt to discuss the loftiest modern questions, and looked as though
they were only waiting to leave school to settle the affairs of the universe,
Andrey Antonovitch was still absorbed in the most innocent schoolboy interests.
He amused them all, it is true, by his pranks, which were of a very simple
character, at the most a little coarse, but he made it his object to be funny.
At one time he would blow his nose in a wonderful way when the professor
addressed a question to him, thereby making his schoolfellows and the professor
laugh. Another time, in the dormitory, he would act some indecent living
picture, to the general applause, or he would play the overture to "Fra
Diavolo" with his nose rather skilfully. He was distinguished, too, by
intentional untidiness, thinking this, for some reason, witty. In his very last
year at school he began writing Russian poetry.

Of his native language he had only an ungrammatical knowledge, like many of his
race in Russia. This turn for versifying drew him to a gloomy and depressed
schoolfellow, the son of a poor Russian general, who was considered in the
school to be a great future light in literature. The latter patronised him. But
it happened that three years after leaving school this melancholy schoolfellow,
who had flung up his official career for the sake of Russian literature, and
was consequently going about in torn boots, with his teeth chattering with
cold, wearing a light summer overcoat in the late autumn, met, one day on the
Anitchin bridge, his former protégé, "Lembka," as he always used to be called
at school. And, what do you suppose? He did not at first recognise him, and
stood still in surprise. Before him stood an irreproachably dressed young man
with wonderfully well-kept whiskers of a reddish hue, with pince-nez, with
patent-leather boots, and the freshest of gloves, in a full overcoat from
Sharmer's, and with a portfolio under his arm. Lembke was cordial to his old
schoolfellow, gave him his address, and begged him to come and see him some
evening. It appeared, too, that he was by now not "Lembka" but "Von Lembke."
The schoolfellow came to see him, however, simply from malice perhaps. On the
staircase, which was covered with red felt and was rather ugly and by no means
smart, he was met and questioned by the house-porter. A bell rang loudly
upstairs. But instead of the wealth which the visitor expected, he found Lembke
in a very little side-room, which had a dark and dilapidated appearance,
partitioned into two by a large dark green curtain, and furnished with very old
though comfortable furniture, with dark green blinds on high narrow windows.
Von Lembke lodged in the house of a very distant relation, a general who was
his patron. He met his visitor cordially, was serious and exquisitely polite.
They talked of literature, too, but kept within the bounds of decorum. A
manservant in a white tie brought them some weak tea and little dry, round
biscuits. The schoolfellow, from spite, asked for some seltzer water. It was
given him, but after some delays, and Lembke was somewhat embarrassed at having
to summon the footman a second time and give him orders. But of himself he
asked his visitor whether he would like some supper, and was obviously relieved
when he refused and went away. In short, Lembke was making his career, and was
living in dependence on his fellow-countryman, the influential general.

He was at that time sighing for the general's fifth daughter, and it seemed to
him that his feeling was reciprocated. But Amalia was none the less married in
due time to an elderly factory-owner, a German, and an old comrade of the
general's. Andrey Antonovitch did not shed many tears, but made a paper
theatre. The curtain drew up, the actors came in, and gesticulated with their
arms. There were spectators in the boxes, the orchestra moved their bows across
their fiddles by machinery, the conductor waved his baton, and in the stalls
officers and dandies clapped their hands. It was all made of cardboard, it was
all thought out and executed by Lembke himself. He spent six months over this
theatre. The general arranged a friendly party on purpose. The theatre was
exhibited, all the general's five daughters, including the newly married Amalia
with her factory-owner, numerous fraus and frauleins with their men folk,
attentively examined and admired the theatre, after which they danced. Lembke
was much gratified and was quickly consoled.

The years passed by and his career was secured. He always obtained good posts
and always under chiefs of his own race; and he worked his way up at last to a
very fine position for a man of his age. He had, for a long time, been wishing
to marry and looking about him carefully. Without the knowledge of his
superiors he had sent a novel to the editor of a magazine, but it had not been
accepted. On the other hand, he cut out a complete toy railway, and again his
creation was most successful. Passengers came on to the platform with bags and
portmanteaux, with dogs and children, and got into the carriages. The guards
and porters moved away, the bell was rung, the signal was given, and the train
started off. He was a whole year busy over this clever contrivance. But he had
to get married all the same. The circle of his acquaintance was fairly wide,
chiefly in the world of his compatriots, but his duties brought him into
Russian spheres also, of course. Finally, when he was in his thirty-ninth year,
he came in for a legacy. His uncle the baker died, and left him thirteen
thousand roubles in his will. The one thing needful was a suitable post. In
spite of the rather elevated style of his surroundings in the service, Mr. von
Lembke was a very modest man. He would have been perfectly satisfied with some
independent little government post, with the right to as much government timber
as he liked, or something snug of that sort, and he would have been content all
his life long. But now, instead of the Minna or Ernestine he had expected,
Yulia Mihailovna suddenly appeared on the scene. His career was instantly
raised to a more elevated plane. The modest and precise man felt that he too
was capable of ambition.

Yulia Mihailovna had a fortune of two hundred serfs, to reckon in the old
style, and she had besides powerful friends. On the other hand Lembke was
handsome, and she was already over forty. It is remarkable that he fell
genuinely in love with her by degrees as he became more used to being betrothed
to her. On the morning of his wedding day he sent her a poem. She liked all
this very much, even the poem; it's no joke to be forty. He was very quickly
raised to a certain grade and received a certain order of distinction, and then
was appointed governor of our province.

Before coming to us Yulia Mihailovna worked hard at moulding her husband. In
her opinion he was not without abilities, he knew how to make an entrance and
to appear to advantage, he understood how to listen and be silent with
profundity, had acquired a quite distinguished deportment, could make a speech,
indeed had even some odds and ends of thought, and had caught the necessary
gloss of modern liberalism. What worried her, however, was that he was not very
open to new ideas, and after the long, everlasting plodding for a career, was
unmistakably beginning to feel the need of repose. She tried to infect him with
her own ambition, and he suddenly began making a toy church: the pastor came
out to preach the sermon, the congregation listened with their hands before
them, one lady was drying her tears with her handkerchief, one old gentleman
was blowing his nose; finally the organ pealed forth. It had been ordered from
Switzerland, and made expressly in spite of all expense. Yulia Mihailovna, in
positive alarm, carried off the whole structure as soon as she knew about it,
and locked it up in a box in her own room. To make up for it she allowed him to
write a novel on condition of its being kept secret. From that time she began
to reckon only upon herself. Unhappily there was a good deal of shallowness and
lack of judgment in her attitude. Destiny had kept her too long an old maid.
Now one idea after another fluttered through her ambitious and rather
over-excited brain. She cherished designs, she positively desired to rule the
province, dreamed of becoming at once the centre of a circle, adopted political
sympathies. Von Lembke was actually a little alarmed, though, with his official
tact, he quickly divined that he had no need at all to be uneasy about the
government of the province itself. The first two or three months passed indeed
very satisfactorily. But now Pyotr Stepanovitch had turned up, and something
queer began to happen.

The fact was that young Verhovensky, from the first step, had displayed a
flagrant lack of respect for Andrey Antonovitch, and had assumed a strange
right to dictate to him; while Yulia Mihailovna, who had always till then been
so jealous of her husband's dignity, absolutely refused to notice it; or, at
any rate, attached no consequence to it. The young man became a favourite, ate,
drank, and almost slept in the house. Von Lembke tried to defend himself,
called him "young man" before other people, and slapped him patronisingly on
the shoulder, but made no impression. Pyotr Stepanovitch always seemed to be
laughing in his face even when he appeared on the surface to be talking
seriously to him, and he would say the most startling things to him before
company. Returning home one day he found the young man had installed himself in
his study and was asleep on the sofa there, uninvited. He explained that he had
come in, and finding no one at home had "had a good sleep."

Von Lembke was offended and again complained to his wife. Laughing at his
irritability she observed tartly that he evidently did not know how to keep up
his own dignity; and that with her, anyway, "the boy" had never permitted
himself any undue familiarity, "he was naïve and fresh indeed, though not
regardful of the conventions of society." Von Lembke sulked. This time she made
peace between them. Pyotr Stepanovitch did not go so far as to apologise, but
got out of it with a coarse jest, which might at another time have been taken
for a fresh offence, but was accepted on this occasion as a token of
repentance. The weak spot in Andrey Antonovitch's position was that he had
blundered in the first instance by divulging the secret of his novel to him.
Imagining him to be an ardent young man of poetic feeling and having long
dreamed of securing a listener, he had, during the early days of their
acquaintance, on one occasion read aloud two chapters to him. The young man had
listened without disguising his boredom, had rudely yawned, had vouchsafed no
word of praise; but on leaving had asked for the manuscript that he might form
an opinion of it at his leisure, and Andrey Antonovitch had given it him. He
had not returned the manuscript since, though he dropped in every day, and had
turned off all inquiries with a laugh. Afterwards he declared that he had lost
it in the street. At the time Yulia Mihailovna was terribly angry with her
husband when she heard of it.

"Perhaps you told him about the church too?" she burst out almost in dismay.

Von Lembke unmistakably began to brood, and brooding was bad for him, and had
been forbidden by the doctors. Apart from the fact that there were signs of
trouble in the province, of which we will speak later, he had private reasons
for brooding, his heart was wounded, not merely his official dignity. When
Andrey Antonovitch had entered upon married life, he had never conceived the
possibility of conjugal strife, or dissension in the future. It was
inconsistent with the dreams he had cherished all his life of his Minna or
Ernestine. He felt that he was unequal to enduring domestic storms. Yulia
Mihailovna had an open explanation with him at last.

"You can't be angry at this," she said, "if only because you've still as much
sense as he has, and are immeasurably higher in the social scale. The boy still
preserves many traces of his old free-thinking habits; I believe it's simply
mischief; but one can do nothing suddenly, in a hurry; you must do things by
degrees. We must make much of our young people; I treat them with affection and
hold them back from the brink."

"But he says such dreadful things," Von Lembke objected. "I can't behave
tolerantly when he maintains in my presence and before other people that the
government purposely drenches the people with vodka in order to brutalise them,
and so keep them from revolution. Fancy my position when I'm forced to listen
to that before every one."

As he said this, Von Lembke recalled a conversation he had recently had with
Pyotr Stepanovitch. With the innocent object of displaying his Liberal
tendencies he had shown him his own private collection of every possible kind
of manifesto, Russian and foreign, which he had carefully collected since the
year 1859, not simply from a love of collecting but from a laudable interest in
them. Pyotr Stepanovitch, seeing his object, expressed the opinion that there
was more sense in one line of some manifestoes than in a whole government
department, "not even excluding yours, maybe."

Lembke winced.

"But this is premature among us, premature," he pronounced almost imploringly,
pointing to the manifestoes.

"No, it's not premature; you see you're afraid, so it's not premature."

"But here, for instance, is an incitement to destroy churches."

"And why not? You're a sensible man, and of course you don't believe in it
yourself, but you know perfectly well that you need religion to brutalise the
people. Truth is honester than falsehood...."

"I agree, I agree, I quite agree with you, but it is premature, premature in
this country..." said Von Lembke, frowning.

"And how can you be an official of the government after that, when you agree to
demolishing churches, and marching on Petersburg armed with staves, and make it
all simply a question of date?"

Lembke was greatly put out at being so crudely caught.

"It's not so, not so at all," he cried, carried away and more and more
mortified in his amour-propre. "You're young, and know nothing of our aims, and
that's why you're mistaken. You see, my dear Pyotr Stepanovitch, you call us
officials of the government, don't you? Independent officials, don't you? But
let me ask you, how are we acting? Ours is the responsibility, but in the long
run we serve the cause of progress just as you do. We only hold together what
you are unsettling, and what, but for us, would go to pieces in all directions.
We are not your enemies, not a bit of it. We say to you, go forward, progress,
you may even unsettle things, that is, things that are antiquated and in need
of reform. But we will keep you, when need be, within necessary limits, and so
save you from yourselves, for without us you would set Russia tottering,
robbing her of all external decency, while our task is to preserve external
decency. Understand that we are mutually essential to one another. In England
the Whigs and Tories are in the same way mutually essential to one another.
Well, you're Whigs and we're Tories. That's how I look at it."

Andrey Antonovitch rose to positive eloquence. He had been fond of talking in a
Liberal and intellectual style even in Petersburg, and the great thing here was
that there was no one to play the spy on him.

Pyotr Stepanovitch was silent, and maintained an unusually grave air. This
excited the orator more than ever.

"Do you know that I, the 'person responsible for the province,'" he went on,
walking about the study, "do you know I have so many duties I can't perform one
of them, and, on the other hand, I can say just as truly that there's nothing
for me to do here. The whole secret of it is, that everything depends upon the
views of the government. Suppose the government were ever to found a republic,
from policy, or to pacify public excitement, and at the same time to increase
the power of the governors, then we governors would swallow up the republic;
and not the republic only. Anything you like we'll swallow up. I, at least,
feel that I am ready. In one word, if the government dictates to me by
telegram, _activité dévorante_, I'll supply _activité dévorante_. I've told
them here straight in their faces: 'Dear sirs, to maintain the equilibrium and
to develop all the provincial institutions one thing is essential; the increase
of the power of the governor.' You see it's necessary that all these
institutions, the zemstvos, the law-courts, should have a two-fold existence,
that is, on the one hand, it's necessary they should exist (I agree that it is
necessary), on the other hand, it's necessary that they shouldn't. It's all
according to the views of the government. If the mood takes them so that
institutions seem suddenly necessary, I shall have them at once in readiness.
The necessity passes and no one will find them under my rule. That's what I
understand by _activité dévorante_, and you can't have it without an increase
of the governor's power. We're talking _tête-à-tête_. You know I've already
laid before the government in Petersburg the necessity of a special sentinel
before the governor's house. I'm awaiting an answer."

"You ought to have two," Pyotr Stepanovitch commented.

"Why two?" said Von Lembke, stopping short before him.

"One's not enough to create respect for you. You certainly ought to have two."

Andrey Antonovitch made a wry face.

"You... there's no limit to the liberties you take, Pyotr Stepanovitch. You
take advantage of my good-nature, you say cutting things, and play the part of
a _bourru bienfaisant_...."

"Well, that's as you please," muttered Pyotr Stepanovitch; "anyway you pave the
way for us and prepare for our success."

"Now, who are 'we,' and what success?" said Von Lembke, staring at him in
surprise. But he got no answer.

Yulia Mihailovna, receiving a report of the conversation, was greatly
displeased.

"But I can't exercise my official authority upon your favourite," Andrey
Antonovitch protested in self-defence, "especially when we're _tête-à-tête_....
I may say too much... in the goodness of my heart."

"From too much goodness of heart. I didn't know you'd got a collection of
manifestoes. Be so good as to show them to me."

"But... he asked to have them for one day."

"And you've let him have them, again!" cried Yulia Mihailovna getting angry.
"How tactless!"

"I'll send someone to him at once to get them."

"He won't give them up."

"I'll insist on it," cried Von Lembke, boiling over, and he jumped up from his
seat. "Who's he that we should be so afraid of him, and who am I that I
shouldn't dare to do any thing?"

"Sit down and calm yourself," said Yulia Mihailovna, checking him. "I will
answer your first question. He came to me with the highest recommendations.
He's talented, and sometimes says extremely clever things. Karmazinov tells me
that he has connections almost everywhere, and extraordinary influence over the
younger generation in Petersburg and Moscow. And if through him I can attract
them all and group them round myself, I shall be saving them from perdition by
guiding them into a new outlet for their ambitions. He's devoted to me with his
whole heart and is guided by me in everything."

"But while they're being petted... the devil knows what they may not do. Of
course, it's an idea..." said Von Lembke, vaguely defending himself, "but...
but here I've heard that manifestoes of some sort have been found in X
district."

"But there was a rumour of that in the summer--manifestoes, false bank-notes,
and all the rest of it, but they haven't found one of them so far. Who told
you?"

"I heard it from Von Blum."

"Ah, don't talk to me of your Blum. Don't ever dare mention him again!"

Yulia Mihailovna flew into a rage, and for a moment could not speak. Von Blum
was a clerk in the governor's office whom she particularly hated. Of that
later.

"Please don't worry yourself about Verhovensky," she said in conclusion. "If he
had taken part in any mischief he wouldn't talk as he does to you, and every
one else here. Talkers are not dangerous, and I will even go so far as to say
that if anything were to happen I should be the first to hear of it through
him. He's quite fanatically devoted to me."

I will observe, anticipating events that, had it not been for Yulia
Mihailovna's obstinacy and self-conceit, probably nothing of all the mischief
these wretched people succeeded in bringing about amongst us would have
happened. She was responsible for a great deal.

