# PART III - CHAPTER VII. STEPAN TROFIMOVITCH'S LAST WANDERING - III
[Metadata]: # {03.07.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER VII. STEPAN TROFIMOVITCH'S LAST WANDERING
III
# III
It was Varvara Petrovna herself. She had arrived, with Darya Pavlovna, in a
closed carriage drawn by four horses, with two footmen. The marvel had happened
in the simplest way: Anisim, dying of curiosity, went to Varvara Petrovna's the
day after he reached the town and gossiped to the servants, telling them he had
met Stepan Trofimovitch alone in a village, that the latter had been seen by
peasants walking by himself on the high road, and that he had set off for
Spasov by way of Ustyevo accompanied by Sofya Matveyevna. As Varvara Petrovna
was, for her part, in terrible anxiety and had done everything she could to
find her fugitive friend, she was at once told about Anisim. When she had heard
his story, especially the details of the departure for Ustyevo in a cart in the
company of some Sofya Matveyevna, she instantly got ready and set off
post-haste for Ustyevo herself.

Her stern and peremptory voice resounded through the cottage; even the landlord
and his wife were intimidated. She had only stopped to question them and make
inquiries, being persuaded that Stepan Trofimovitch must have reached Spasov
long before. Learning that he was still here and ill, she entered the cottage
in great agitation.

"Well, where is he? Ah, that's you!" she cried, seeing Sofya Matveyevna, who
appeared at that very instant in the doorway of the next room. "I can guess
from your shameless face that it's you. Go away, you vile hussy! Don't let me
find a trace of her in the house! Turn her out, or else, my girl, I'll get you
locked up for good. Keep her safe for a time in another house. She's been in
prison once already in the town; she can go back there again. And you, my good
man, don't dare to let anyone in while I am here, I beg of you. I am Madame
Stavrogin, and I'll take the whole house. As for you, my dear, you'll have to
give me a full account of it all."

The familiar sounds overwhelmed Stepan Trofimovitch. He began to tremble. But
she had already stepped behind the screen. With flashing eyes she drew up a
chair with her foot, and, sinking back in it, she shouted to Dasha:

"Go away for a time! Stay in the other room. Why are you so inquisitive? And
shut the door properly after you."

For some time she gazed in silence with a sort of predatory look into his
frightened face.

"Well, how are you getting on, Stepan Trofimovitch? So you've been enjoying
yourself?" broke from her with ferocious irony.

_"Chère,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch faltered, not knowing what he was saying, "I've
learnt to know real life in Russia... _et je prêcherai l'Evangile._"

"Oh, shameless, ungrateful man!" she wailed suddenly, clasping her hands. "As
though you had not disgraced me enough, you've taken up with... oh, you
shameless old reprobate!"

_"Chère..."_ His voice failed him and he could not articulate a syllable but
simply gazed with eyes wide with horror.

"Who is she?"

"_C'est un ange; c'était plus qu'un ange pour moi._ She's been all night... Oh,
don't shout, don't frighten her, _chère, chère..._"

With a loud noise, Varvara Petrovna pushed back her chair, uttering a loud cry
of alarm.

"Water, water!"

Though he returned to consciousness, she was still shaking with terror, and,
with pale cheeks, looked at his distorted face. It was only then, for the first
time, that she guessed the seriousness of his illness.

"Darya," she whispered suddenly to Darya Pavlovna, "send at once for the
doctor, for Salzfish; let Yegorytch go at once. Let him hire horses here and
get another carriage from the town. He must be here by night."

Dasha flew to do her bidding. Stepan Trofimovitch still gazed at her with the
same wide-open, frightened eyes; his blanched lips quivered.

"Wait a bit, Stepan Trofimovitch, wait a bit, my dear!" she said, coaxing him
like a child. "There, there, wait a bit! Darya will come back and... My
goodness, the landlady, the landlady, you come, anyway, my good woman!"

In her impatience she ran herself to the landlady.

"Fetch that woman back at once, this minute. Bring her back, bring her back!"

Fortunately Sofya Matveyevna had not yet had time to get away and was only just
going out of the gate with her pack and her bag. She was brought back. She was
so panic-stricken that she was trembling in every limb. Varvara Petrovna
pounced on her like a hawk on a chicken, seized her by the hand and dragged her
impulsively to Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Here, here she is, then. I've not eaten her. You thought I'd eaten her."

Stepan Trofimovitch clutched Varvara Petrovna's hand, raised it to his eyes,
and burst into tears, sobbing violently and convulsively.

"There, calm yourself, there, there, my dear, there, poor dear man! Ach, mercy
on us! Calm yourself, will you?" she shouted frantically. "Oh, you bane of my
life!"

"My dear," Stepan Trofimovitch murmured at last, addressing Sofya Matveyevna,
"stay out there, my dear, I want to say something here...."

Sofya Matveyevna hurried out at once.

_"Chérie... chérie..."_ he gasped.

"Don't talk for a bit, Stepan Trofimovitch, wait a little till you've rested.
Here's some water. Do wait, will you!"

She sat down on the chair again. Stepan Trofimovitch held her hand tight. For a
long while she would not allow him to speak. He raised her hand to his lips and
fell to kissing it. She set her teeth and looked away into the corner of the
room.

_"Je vous aimais,"_ broke from him at last. She had never heard such words from
him, uttered in such a voice.

"H'm!" she growled in response.

_"Je vous aimais toute ma vie... vingt ans!"_

She remained silent for two or three minutes.

"And when you were getting yourself up for Dasha you sprinkled yourself with
scent," she said suddenly, in a terrible whisper.

Stepan Trofimovitch was dumbfounded.

"You put on a new tie..."

Again silence for two minutes.

"Do you remember the cigar?"

"My friend," he faltered, overcome with horror.

"That cigar at the window in the evening... the moon was shining... after the
arbour... at Skvoreshniki? Do you remember, do you remember?" She jumped up
from her place, seized his pillow by the corners and shook it with his head on
it. "Do you remember, you worthless, worthless, ignoble, cowardly, worthless
man, always worthless!" she hissed in her furious whisper, restraining herself
from speaking loudly. At last she left him and sank on the chair, covering her
face with her hands. "Enough!" she snapped out, drawing herself up. "Twenty
years have passed, there's no calling them back. I am a fool too."

_"Je vous aimais."_ He clasped his hands again.

"Why do you keep on with your _aimais_ and _aimais_? Enough!" she cried,
leaping up again. "And if you don't go to sleep at once I'll... You need rest;
go to sleep, go to sleep at once, shut your eyes. Ach, mercy on us, perhaps he
wants some lunch! What do you eat? What does he eat? Ach, mercy on us! Where is
that woman? Where is she?"

There was a general bustle again. But Stepan Trofimovitch faltered in a weak
voice that he really would like to go to sleep _une heure,_ and then _un
bouillon, un thé.... enfin il est si heureux._ He lay back and really did seem
to go to sleep (he probably pretended to). Varvara Petrovna waited a little,
and stole out on tiptoe from behind the partition.

She settled herself in the landlady's room, turned out the landlady and her
husband, and told Dasha to bring her _that_ woman. There followed an
examination in earnest.

"Tell me all about it, my good girl. Sit down beside me; that's right. Well?"

"I met Stepan Trofimovitch..."

"Stay, hold your tongue! I warn you that if you tell lies or conceal anything,
I'll ferret it out. Well?"

"Stepan Trofimovitch and I... as soon as I came to Hatovo..." Sofya Matveyevna
began almost breathlessly.

"Stay, hold your tongue, wait a bit! Why do you gabble like that? To begin
with, what sort of creature are you?"

Sofya Matveyevna told her after a fashion, giving a very brief account of
herself, however, beginning with Sevastopol. Varvara Petrovna listened in
silence, sitting up erect in her chair, looking sternly straight into the
speaker's eyes.

"Why are you so frightened? Why do you look at the ground? I like people who
look me straight in the face and hold their own with me. Go on."

She told of their meeting, of her books, of how Stepan Trofimovitch had regaled
the peasant woman with vodka... "That's right, that's right, don't leave out
the slightest detail," Varvara Petrovna encouraged her.

At last she described how they had set off, and how Stepan Trofimovitch had
gone on talking, "really ill by that time," and here had given an account of
his life from the very beginning, talking for some hours. "Tell me about his
life."

Sofya Matveyevna suddenly stopped and was completely nonplussed.

"I can't tell you anything about that, madam," she brought out, almost crying;
"besides, I could hardly understand a word of it."

"Nonsense! You must have understood something."

"He told a long time about a distinguished lady with black hair." Sofya
Matveyevna flushed terribly though she noticed Varvara Petrovna's fair hair and
her complete dissimilarity with the "brunette" of the story.

"Black-haired? What exactly? Come, speak!"

"How this grand lady was deeply in love with his honour all her life long and
for twenty years, but never dared to speak, and was shamefaced before him
because she was a very stout lady...."

"The fool!" Varvara Petrovna rapped out thoughtfully but resolutely.

Sofya Matveyevna was in tears by now.

"I don't know how to tell any of it properly, madam, because I was in a great
fright over his honour; and I couldn't understand, as he is such an
intellectual gentleman."

"It's not for a goose like you to judge of his intellect. Did he offer you his
hand?"

The speaker trembled.

"Did he fall in love with you? Speak! Did he offer you his hand?" Varvara
Petrovna shouted peremptorily.

"That was pretty much how it was," she murmured tearfully. "But I took it all
to mean nothing, because of his illness," she added firmly, raising her eyes.

"What is your name?"

"Sofya Matveyevna, madam."

"Well, then, let me tell you, Sofya Matveyevna, that he is a wretched and
worthless little man.... Good Lord! Do you look upon me as a wicked woman?"

Sofya Matveyevna gazed open-eyed.

"A wicked woman, a tyrant? Who has ruined his life?"

"How can that be when you are crying yourself, madam?"

Varvara Petrovna actually had tears in her eyes.

"Well, sit down, sit down, don't be frightened. Look me straight in the face
again. Why are you blushing? Dasha, come here. Look at her. What do you think
of her? Her heart is pure...."

And to the amazement and perhaps still greater alarm of Sofya Matveyevna, she
suddenly patted her on the cheek.

"It's only a pity she is a fool. Too great a fool for her age. That's all
right, my dear, I'll look after you. I see that it's all nonsense. Stay near
here for the time. A room shall be taken for you and you shall have food and
everything else from me... till I ask for you."

Sofya Matveyevna stammered in alarm that she must hurry on.

"You've no need to hurry. I'll buy all your books, and meantime you stay here.
Hold your tongue; don't make excuses. If I hadn't come you would have stayed
with him all the same, wouldn't you?"

"I wouldn't have left him on any account," Sofya Matveyevna brought out softly
and firmly, wiping her tears.

It was late at night when Doctor Salzfish was brought. He was a very
respectable old man and a practitioner of fairly wide experience who had
recently lost his post in the service in consequence of some quarrel on a point
of honour with his superiors. Varvara Petrovna instantly and actively took him
under her protection. He examined the patient attentively, questioned him, and
cautiously pronounced to Varvara Petrovna that "the sufferer's" condition was
highly dubious in consequence of complications, and that they must be prepared
"even for the worst." Varvara Petrovna, who had during twenty years got
accustomed to expecting nothing serious or decisive to come from Stepan
Trofimovitch, was deeply moved and even turned pale. "Is there really no hope?"

"Can there ever be said to be absolutely no hope? But..." She did not go to bed
all night, and felt that the morning would never come. As soon as the patient
opened his eyes and returned to consciousness (he was conscious all the time,
however, though he was growing weaker every hour), she went up to him with a
very resolute air.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, one must be prepared for anything. I've sent for a
priest. You must do what is right...."

Knowing his convictions, she was terribly afraid of his refusing. He looked at
her with surprise.

"Nonsense, nonsense!" she vociferated, thinking he was already refusing. "This
is no time for whims. You have played the fool enough."

"But... am I really so ill, then?"

He agreed thoughtfully. And indeed I was much surprised to learn from Varvara
Petrovna afterwards that he showed no fear of death at all. Possibly it was
that he simply did not believe it, and still looked upon his illness as a
trifling one.

He confessed and took the sacrament very readily. Every one, Sofya Matveyevna,
and even the servants, came to congratulate him on taking the sacrament. They
were all moved to tears looking at his sunken and exhausted face and his
blanched and quivering lips.

"_Oui, mes amis,_ and I only wonder that you... take so much trouble. I shall
most likely get up to-morrow, and we will... set off.... _Toute cette
cérémonie_... for which, of course, I feel every proper respect... was..."

"I beg you, father, to remain with the invalid," said Varvara Petrovna
hurriedly, stopping the priest, who had already taken off his vestments. "As
soon as tea has been handed, I beg you to begin to speak of religion, to
support his faith."

The priest spoke; every one was standing or sitting round the sick-bed.

"In our sinful days," the priest began smoothly, with a cup of tea in his hand,
"faith in the Most High is the sole refuge of the race of man in all the trials
and tribulations of life, as well as its hope for that eternal bliss promised
to the righteous."

Stepan Trofimovitch seemed to revive, a subtle smile strayed on his lips.

_"Mon père, je vous remercie et vous êtes bien bon, mais..."_

"No _mais_ about it, no _mais_ at all!" exclaimed Varvara Petrovna, bounding up
from her chair. "Father," she said, addressing the priest, "he is a man who...
he is a man who... You will have to confess him again in another hour! That's
the sort of man he is."

Stepan Trofimovitch smiled faintly.

"My friends," he said, "God is necessary to me, if only because He is the only
being whom one can love eternally."

Whether he was really converted, or whether the stately ceremony of the
administration of the sacrament had impressed him and stirred the artistic
responsiveness of his temperament or not, he firmly and, I am told, with great
feeling uttered some words which were in flat contradiction with many of his
former convictions.

"My immortality is necessary if only because God will not be guilty of
injustice and extinguish altogether the flame of love for Him once kindled in
my heart. And what is more precious than love? Love is higher than existence,
love is the crown of existence; and how is it possible that existence should
not be under its dominance? If I have once loved Him and rejoiced in my love,
is it possible that He should extinguish me and my joy and bring me to
nothingness again? If there is a God, then I am immortal. _Voilà ma profession
de foi._"

"There is a God, Stepan Trofimovitch, I assure you there is," Varvara Petrovna
implored him. "Give it up, drop all your foolishness for once in your life!" (I
think she had not quite understood his _profession de foi_.)

"My friend," he said, growing more and more animated, though his voice broke
frequently, "as soon as I understood... that turning of the cheek, I...
understood something else as well. _J'ai menti toute ma vie,_ all my life, all!
I should like... but that will do to-morrow.... To-morrow we will all set out."

Varvara Petrovna burst into tears. He was looking about for someone.

"Here she is, she is here!" She seized Sofya Matveyevna by the hand and led her
to him. He smiled tenderly.

"Oh, I should dearly like to live again!" he exclaimed with an extraordinary
rush of energy. "Every minute, every instant of life ought to be a blessing to
man... they ought to be, they certainly ought to be! It's the duty of man to
make it so; that's the law of his nature, which always exists even if
hidden.... Oh, I wish I could see Petrusha... and all of them... Shatov..."

I may remark that as yet no one had heard of Shatov's fate--not Varvara
Petrovna nor Darya Pavlovna, nor even Salzfish, who was the last to come from
the town.

Stepan Trofimovitch became more and more excited, feverishly so, beyond his
strength.

"The mere fact of the ever present idea that there exists something infinitely
more just and more happy than I am fills me through and through with tender
ecstasy--and glorifies me--oh, whoever I may be, whatever I have done! What is
far more essential for man than personal happiness is to know and to believe at
every instant that there is somewhere a perfect and serene happiness for all
men and for everything.... The one essential condition of human existence is
that man should always be able to bow down before something infinitely great.
If men are deprived of the infinitely great they will not go on living and will
die of despair. The Infinite and the Eternal are as essential for man as the
little planet on which he dwells. My friends, all, all: hail to the Great Idea!
The Eternal, Infinite Idea! It is essential to every man, whoever he may be, to
bow down before what is the Great Idea. Even the stupidest man needs something
great. Petrusha... oh, how I want to see them all again! They don't know, they
don't know that that same Eternal, Grand Idea lies in them all!"

Doctor Salzfish was not present at the ceremony. Coming in suddenly, he was
horrified, and cleared the room, insisting that the patient must not be
excited.

Stepan Trofimovitch died three days later, but by that time he was completely
unconscious. He quietly went out like a candle that is burnt down. After having
the funeral service performed, Varvara Petrovna took the body of her poor
friend to Skvoreshniki. His grave is in the precincts of the church and is
already covered with a marble slab. The inscription and the railing will be
added in the spring.

Varvara Petrovna's absence from town had lasted eight days. Sofya Matveyevna
arrived in the carriage with her and seems to have settled with her for good. I
may mention that as soon as Stepan Trofimovitch lost consciousness (the morning
that he received the sacrament) Varvara Petrovna promptly asked Sofya
Matveyevna to leave the cottage again, and waited on the invalid herself
unassisted to the end, but she sent for her at once when he had breathed his
last. Sofya Matveyevna was terribly alarmed by Varvara Petrovna's proposition,
or rather command, that she should settle for good at Skvoreshniki, but the
latter refused to listen to her protests.

"That's all nonsense! I will go with you to sell the gospel. I have no one in
the world now."

"You have a son, however," Salzfish observed.

"I have no son!" Varvara Petrovna snapped out--and it was like a prophecy.

