# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - IV
[Metadata]: # {01.02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.04}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.
IV
# IV
Our prince travelled for over three years, so that he was almost forgotten in
the town. We learned from Stepan Trofimovitch that he had travelled all over
Europe, that he had even been in Egypt and had visited Jerusalem, and then had
joined some scientific expedition to Iceland, and he actually did go to
Iceland. It was reported too that he had spent one winter attending lectures in
a German university. He did not write often to his mother, twice a year, or
even less, but Varvara Petrovna was not angry or offended at this. She accepted
submissively and without repining the relations that had been established once
for all between her son and herself. She fretted for her "Nicolas" and dreamed
of him continually. She kept her dreams and lamentations to herself. She seemed
to have become less intimate even with Stepan Trofimovitch. She was forming
secret projects, and seemed to have become more careful about money than ever.
She was more than ever given to saving money and being angry at Stepan
Trofimovitch's losses at cards.

At last, in the April of this year, she received a letter from Paris from
Praskovya Ivanovna Drozdov, the widow of the general and the friend of Varvara
Petrovna's childhood. Praskovya Ivanovna, whom Varvara Petrovna had not seen or
corresponded with for eight years, wrote, informing her that Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch had become very intimate with them and a great friend of her
only daughter, Liza, and that he was intending to accompany them to
Switzerland, to Verney-Montreux, though in the household of Count K. (a very
influential personage in Petersburg), who was now staying in Paris. He was
received like a son of the family, so that he almost lived at the count's. The
letter was brief, and the object of it was perfectly clear, though it contained
only a plain statement of the above-mentioned facts without drawing any
inferences from them. Varvara Petrovna did not pause long to consider; she made
up her mind instantly, made her preparations, and taking with her her protégée,
Dasha (Shatov's sister), she set off in the middle of April for Paris, and from
there went on to Switzerland. She returned in July, alone, leaving Dasha with
the Drozdovs. She brought us the news that the Drozdovs themselves had promised
to arrive among us by the end of August.

The Drozdovs, too, were landowners of our province, but the official duties of
General Ivan Ivanovitch Drozdov (who had been a friend of Varvara Petrovna's
and a colleague of her husband's) had always prevented them from visiting their
magnificent estate. On the death of the general, which had taken place the year
before, the inconsolable widow had gone abroad with her daughter, partly in
order to try the grape-cure which she proposed to carry out at Verney-Montreux
during the latter half of the summer. On their return to Russia they intended
to settle in our province for good. She had a large house in the town which had
stood empty for many years with the windows nailed up. They were wealthy
people. Praskovya Ivanovna had been, in her first marriage, a Madame Tushin,
and like her school-friend, Varvara Petrovna, was the daughter of a government
contractor of the old school, and she too had been an heiress at her marriage.
Tushin, a retired cavalry captain, was also a man of means, and of some
ability. At his death he left a snug fortune to his only daughter Liza, a child
of seven. Now that Lizaveta Nikolaevna was twenty-two her private fortune might
confidently be reckoned at 200,000 roubles, to say nothing of the
property--which was bound to come to her at the death of her mother, who had no
children by her second marriage. Varvara Petrovna seemed to be very well
satisfied with her expedition. In her own opinion she had succeeded in coming
to a satisfactory understanding with Praskovya Ivanovna, and immediately on her
arrival she confided everything to Stepan Trofimovitch. She was positively
effusive with him as she had not been for a very long time.

"Hurrah!" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, and snapped his fingers.

He was in a perfect rapture, especially as he had spent the whole time of his
friend's absence in extreme dejection. On setting off she had not even taken
leave of him properly, and had said nothing of her plan to "that old woman,"
dreading, perhaps, that he might chatter about it. She was cross with him at
the time on account of a considerable gambling debt which she had suddenly
discovered. But before she left Switzerland she had felt that on her return she
must make up for it to her forsaken friend, especially as she had treated him
very curtly for a long time past. Her abrupt and mysterious departure had made
a profound and poignant impression on the timid heart of Stepan Trofimovitch,
and to make matters worse he was beset with other difficulties at the same
time. He was worried by a very considerable money obligation, which had weighed
upon him for a long time and which he could never hope to meet without Varvara
Petrovna's assistance. Moreover, in the May of this year, the term of office of
our mild and gentle Ivan Ossipovitch came to an end. He was superseded under
rather unpleasant circumstances. Then, while Varvara Petrovna was still away,
there followed the arrival of our new governor, Andrey Antonovitch von Lembke,
and with that a change began at once to be perceptible in the attitude of
almost the whole of our provincial society towards Varvara Petrovna, and
consequently towards Stepan Trofimovitch. He had already had time anyway to
make some disagreeable though valuable observations, and seemed very
apprehensive alone without Varvara Petrovna. He had an agitating suspicion that
he had already been mentioned to the governor as a dangerous man. He knew for a
fact that some of our ladies meant to give up calling on Varvara Petrovna. Of
our governor's wife (who was only expected to arrive in the autumn) it was
reported that though she was, so it was heard, proud, she was a real
aristocrat, and "not like that poor Varvara Petrovna." Everybody seemed to know
for a fact, and in the greatest detail, that our governor's wife and Varvara
Petrovna had met already in society and had parted enemies, so that the mere
mention of Madame von Lembke's name would, it was said, make a painful
impression on Varvara Petrovna. The confident and triumphant air of Varvara
Petrovna, the contemptuous indifference with which she heard of the opinions of
our provincial ladies and the agitation in local society, revived the flagging
spirits of Stepan Trofimovitch and cheered him up at once. With peculiar,
gleefully-obsequious humour, he was beginning to describe the new governor's
arrival.

"You are no doubt aware, _excellente amie_," he said, jauntily and coquettishly
drawling his words, "what is meant by a Russian administrator, speaking
generally, and what is meant by a new Russian administrator, that is the
newly-baked, newly-established... _ces interminables mots Russes!_ But I don't
think you can know in practice what is meant by administrative ardour, and what
sort of thing that is."

"Administrative ardour? I don't know what that is."

"Well... _Vous savez chez nous... En un mot,_  set the most insignificant
nonentity to sell miserable tickets at a railway station, and the nonentity
will at once feel privileged to look down on you like a Jupiter, _pour montrer
son pouvoir_ when you go to take a ticket. 'Now then,' he says, 'I shall show
you my power'... and in them it comes to a genuine, administrative ardour. _En
un mot,_ I've read that some verger in one of our Russian churches
abroad--_mais c'est très curieux_--drove, literally drove a distinguished
English family, _les dames charmantes_, out of the church before the beginning
of the Lenten service... _vous savez ces chants et le livre de Job_... on the
simple pretext that 'foreigners are not allowed to loaf about a Russian church,
and that they must come at the time fixed....' And he sent them into fainting
fits.... That verger was suffering from an attack of administrative ardour, _et
il a montré son pouvoir_."

"Cut it short if you can, Stepan Trofimovitch."

"Mr. von Lembke is making a tour of the province now. _En un mot,_ this Andrey
Antonovitch, though he is a russified German and of the Orthodox persuasion,
and even--I will say that for him--a remarkably handsome man of about forty..."

"What makes you think he's a handsome man? He has eyes like a sheep's."

"Precisely so. But in this I yield, of course, to the opinion of our ladies."

"Let's get on, Stepan Trofimovitch, I beg you! By the way, you're wearing a red
neck-tie. Is it long since you've taken to it?"

"I've... I've only put it on to-day."

"And do you take your constitutional? Do you go for a four-mile walk every day
as the doctor told you to?"

"N-not... always."

"I knew you didn't! I felt sure of that when I was in Switzerland!" she cried
irritably. "Now you must go not four but six miles a day! You've grown terribly
slack, terribly, terribly! You're not simply getting old, you're getting
decrepit.... You shocked me when I first saw you just now, in spite of your red
tie, _quelle idee rouge_! Go on about Von Lembke if you've really something to
tell me, and do finish some time, I entreat you, I'm tired."

"_En un mot,_ I only wanted to say that he is one of those administrators who
begin to have power at forty, who, till they're forty, have been stagnating in
insignificance and then suddenly come to the front through suddenly acquiring a
wife, or some other equally desperate means.... That is, he has gone away
now... that is, I mean to say, it was at once whispered in both his ears that I
am a corrupter of youth, and a hot-bed of provincial atheism.... He began
making inquiries at once."

"Is that true?"

"I took steps about it, in fact. When he was 'informed' that you 'ruled the
province,' _vous savez,_ he allowed himself to use the expression that 'there
shall be nothing of that sort in the future.'"

"Did he say that?"

"That 'there shall be nothing of the sort in future,' and, _avec cette
morgue_.... His wife, Yulia Mihailovna, we shall behold at the end of August,
she's coming straight from Petersburg."

"From abroad. We met there."

_"Vraiment?"_

"In Paris and in Switzerland. She's related to the Drozdovs."

"Related! What an extraordinary coincidence! They say she is ambitious and...
supposed to have great connections."

"Nonsense! Connections indeed! She was an old maid without a farthing till she
was five-and-forty. But now she's hooked her Von Lembke, and, of course, her
whole object is to push him forward. They're both intriguers."

"And they say she's two years older than he is?"

"Five. Her mother used to wear out her skirts on my doorsteps in Moscow; she
used to beg for an invitation to our balls as a favour when my husband was
living. And this creature used to sit all night alone in a corner without
dancing, with her turquoise fly on her forehead, so that simply from pity I
used to have to send her her first partner at two o'clock in the morning. She
was five-and-twenty then, and they used to rig her out in short skirts like a
little girl. It was improper to have them about at last."

"I seem to see that fly."

"I tell you, as soon as I arrived I was in the thick of an intrigue. You read
Madame Drozdov's letter, of course. What could be clearer? What did I find?
That fool Praskovya herself--she always was a fool--looked at me as much as to
ask why I'd come. You can fancy how surprised I was. I looked round, and there
was that Lembke woman at her tricks, and that cousin of hers--old Drozdov's
nephew--it was all clear. You may be sure I changed all that in a twinkling,
and Praskovya is on my side again, but what an intrigue!"

"In which you came off victor, however. Bismarck!"

"Without being a Bismarck I'm equal to falseness and stupidity wherever I meet
it, falseness, and Praskovya's folly. I don't know when I've met such a flabby
woman, and what's more her legs are swollen, and she's a good-natured
simpleton, too. What can be more foolish than a good-natured simpleton?"

"A spiteful fool, _ma bonne amie,_ a spiteful fool is still more foolish,"
Stepan Trofimovitch protested magnanimously.

"You're right, perhaps. Do you remember Liza?"

_"Charmante enfant!"_

"But she's not an _enfant_ now, but a woman, and a woman of character. She's a
generous, passionate creature, and what I like about her, she stands up to that
confiding fool, her mother. There was almost a row over that cousin."

"Bah, and of course he's no relation of Lizaveta Nikolaevna's at all.... Has he
designs on her?"

"You see, he's a young officer, not by any means talkative, modest in fact. I
always want to be just. I fancy he is opposed to the intrigue himself, and
isn't aiming at anything, and it was only the Von Lembke's tricks. He had a
great respect for Nicolas. You understand, it all depends on Liza. But I left
her on the best of terms with Nicolas, and he promised he would come to us in
November. So it's only the Von Lembke who is intriguing, and Praskovya is a
blind woman. She suddenly tells me that all my suspicions are fancy. I told her
to her face she was a fool. I am ready to repeat it at the day of judgment. And
if it hadn't been for Nicolas begging me to leave it for a time, I wouldn't
have come away without unmasking that false woman. She's been trying to
ingratiate herself with Count K. through Nicolas. She wants to come between
mother and son. But Liza's on our side, and I came to an understanding with
Praskovya. Do you know that Karmazinov is a relation of hers?"

"What? A relation of Madame von Lembke?"

"Yes, of hers. Distant."

"Karmazinov, the novelist?"

"Yes, the writer. Why does it surprise you? Of course he considers himself a
great man. Stuck-up creature! She's coming here with him. Now she's making a
fuss of him out there. She's got a notion of setting up a sort of literary
society here. He's coming for a month, he wants to sell his last piece of
property here. I very nearly met him in Switzerland, and was very anxious not
to. Though I hope he will deign to recognise me. He wrote letters to me in the
old days, he has been in my house. I should like you to dress better, Stepan
Trofimovitch; you're growing more slovenly every day.... Oh, how you torment
me! What are you reading now?"

"I... I..."

"I understand. The same as ever, friends and drinking, the club and cards, and
the reputation of an atheist. I don't like that reputation, Stepan
Trofimovitch; I don't care for you to be called an atheist, particularly now. I
didn't care for it in old days, for it's all nothing but empty chatter. It must
be said at last."

_"Mais, ma chère..."_

"Listen, Stepan Trofimovitch, of course I'm ignorant compared with you on all
learned subjects, but as I was travelling here I thought a great deal about
you. I've come to one conclusion."

"What conclusion?"

"That you and I are not the wisest people in the world, but that there are
people wiser than we are."

"Witty and apt. If there are people wiser than we are, then there are people
more right than we are, and we may be mistaken, you mean? _Mais, ma bonne
amie,_ granted that I may make a mistake, yet have I not the common, human,
eternal, supreme right of freedom of conscience? I have the right not to be
bigoted or superstitious if I don't wish to, and for that I shall naturally be
hated by certain persons to the end of time. _Et puis, comme on trouve toujours
plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I thoroughly agree with that..."

"What, what did you say?"

"I said, _on trouve toujours plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I
thoroughly..."

"I'm sure that's not your saying. You must have taken it from somewhere."

"It was Pascal said that."

"Just as I thought...it's not your own. Why don't you ever say anything like
that yourself, so shortly and to the point, instead of dragging things out to
such a length? That's much better than what you said just now about
administrative ardour..."

_"Ma foi, chère..." _why? In the first place probably because I'm not a Pascal
after all, _et puis_... secondly, we Russians never can say anything in our own
language.... We never have said anything hitherto, at any rate...."

"H'm! That's not true, perhaps. Anyway, you'd better make a note of such
phrases, and remember them, you know, in case you have to talk.... Ach, Stephan
Trofimovitch. I have come to talk to you seriously, quite seriously."

_"Chère, chère amie!"_

"Now that all these Von Lembkes and Karmazinovs.... Oh, my goodness, how you
have deteriorated!... Oh, my goodness, how you do torment me!... I should have
liked these people to feel a respect for you, for they're not worth your little
finger--but the way you behave!... What will they see? What shall I have to
show them? Instead of nobly standing as an example, keeping up the tradition of
the past, you surround yourself with a wretched rabble, you have picked up
impossible habits, you've grown feeble, you can't do without wine and cards,
you read nothing but Paul de Kock, and write nothing, while all of them write;
all your time's wasted in gossip. How can you bring yourself to be friends with
a wretched creature like your inseparable Liputin?"

"Why is he _mine_ and _inseparable_?" Stepan Trofimovitch protested timidly.

"Where is he now?" Varvara Petrovna went on, sharply and sternly.

"He... he has an infinite respect for you, and he's gone to S----k, to receive
an inheritance left him by his mother."

"He seems to do nothing but get money. And how's Shatov? Is he just the same?"

_"Irascible, mais bon."_

"I can't endure your Shatov. He's spiteful and he thinks too much of himself."

"How is Darya Pavlovna?"

"You mean Dasha? What made you think of her?" Varvara Petrovna looked at him
inquisitively. "She's quite well. I left her with the Drozdovs. I heard
something about your son in Switzerland. Nothing good."

_"Oh, c'est un histoire bien bête! Je vous attendais, ma bonne amie, pour vous
raconter..."_

"Enough, Stepan Trofimovitch. Leave me in peace. I'm worn out. We shall have
time to talk to our heart's content, especially of what's unpleasant. You've
begun to splutter when you laugh, it's a sign of senility! And what a strange
way of laughing you've taken to!... Good Heavens, what a lot of bad habits
you've fallen into! Karmazinov won't come and see you! And people are only too
glad to make the most of anything as it is.... You've betrayed yourself
completely now. Well, come, that's enough, that's enough, I'm tired. You really
might have mercy upon one!"

Stepan Trofimovitch "had mercy," but he withdrew in great perturbation.

