# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - II
[Metadata]: # {02.06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY
II
# II
A combination of circumstances had arisen which Mr. von Lembke was quite unable
to deal with. In the very district where Pyotr Stepanovitch had been having a
festive time a sub-lieutenant had been called up to be censured by his
immediate superior, and the reproof was given in the presence of the whole
company. The sub-lieutenant was a young man fresh from Petersburg, always
silent and morose, of dignified appearance though small, stout, and
rosy-cheeked. He resented the reprimand and suddenly, with a startling shriek
that astonished the whole company, he charged at his superior officer with his
head bent down like a wild beast's, struck him, and bit him on the shoulder
with all his might; they had difficulty in getting him off. There was no doubt
that he had gone out of his mind; anyway, it became known that of late he had
been observed performing incredibly strange actions. He had, for instance,
flung two ikons belonging to his landlady out of his lodgings and smashed up
one of them with an axe; in his own room he had, on three stands resembling
lecterns, laid out the works of Vogt, Moleschott, and Buchner, and before each
lectern he used to burn a church wax-candle. From the number of books found in
his rooms it could be gathered that he was a well-read man. If he had had fifty
thousand francs he would perhaps have sailed to the island of Marquisas like
the "cadet" to whom Herzen alludes with such sprightly humour in one of his
writings. When he was seized, whole bundles of the most desperate manifestoes
were found in his pockets and his lodgings.

Manifestoes are a trivial matter too, and to my thinking not worth troubling
about. We have seen plenty of them. Besides, they were not new manifestoes;
they were, it was said later, just the same as had been circulated in the X
province, and Liputin, who had travelled in that district and the neighbouring
province six weeks previously, declared that he had seen exactly the same
leaflets there then. But what struck Andrey Antonovitch most was that the
overseer of Shpigulin's factory had brought the police just at the same time
two or three packets of exactly the same leaflets as had been found on the
lieutenant. The bundles, which had been dropped in the factory in the night,
had not been opened, and none of the factory-hands had had time to read one of
them. The incident was a trivial one, but it set Andrey Antonovitch pondering
deeply. The position presented itself to him in an unpleasantly complicated
light.

In this factory the famous "Shpigulin scandal" was just then brewing, which
made so much talk among us and got into the Petersburg and Moscow papers with
all sorts of variations. Three weeks previously one of the hands had fallen ill
and died of Asiatic cholera; then several others were stricken down. The whole
town was in a panic, for the cholera was coming nearer and nearer and had
reached the neighbouring province. I may observe that satisfactory sanitary
measures had been, so far as possible, taken to meet the unexpected guest. But
the factory belonging to the Shpigulins, who were millionaires and
well-connected people, had somehow been overlooked. And there was a sudden
outcry from every one that this factory was the hot-bed of infection, that the
factory itself, and especially the quarters inhabited by the workpeople, were
so inveterately filthy that even if cholera had not been in the neighbourhood
there might well have been an outbreak there. Steps were immediately taken, of
course, and Andrey Antonovitch vigorously insisted on their being carried out
without delay within three weeks. The factory was cleansed, but the Shpigulins,
for some unknown reason, closed it. One of the Shpigulin brothers always lived
in Petersburg and the other went away to Moscow when the order was given for
cleansing the factory. The overseer proceeded to pay off the workpeople and, as
it appeared, cheated them shamelessly. The hands began to complain among
themselves, asking to be paid fairly, and foolishly went to the police, though
without much disturbance, for they were not so very much excited. It was just
at this moment that the manifestoes were brought to Andrey Antonovitch by the
overseer.

Pyotr Stepanovitch popped into the study unannounced, like an intimate friend
and one of the family; besides, he had a message from Yulia Mihailovna. Seeing
him, Lembke frowned grimly and stood still at the table without welcoming him.
Till that moment he had been pacing up and down the study and had been
discussing something _tête-à-tête_ with his clerk Blum, a very clumsy and surly
German whom he had brought with him from Petersburg, in spite of the violent
opposition of Yulia Mihailovna. On Pyotr Stepanovitch's entrance the clerk had
moved to the door, but had not gone out. Pyotr Stepanovitch even fancied that
he exchanged significant glances with his chief.

"Aha, I've caught you at last, you secretive monarch of the town!" Pyotr
Stepanovitch cried out laughing, and laid his hand over the manifesto on the
table. "This increases your collection, eh?"

Andrey Antonovitch flushed crimson; his face seemed to twitch.

"Leave off, leave off at once!" he cried, trembling with rage. "And don't you
dare... sir..."

"What's the matter with you? You seem to be angry!"

"Allow me to inform you, sir, that I've no intention of putting up with your
_sans façon_ henceforward, and I beg you to remember..."

"Why, damn it all, he is in earnest!"

"Hold your tongue, hold your tongue"--Von Lembke stamped on the carpet--"and
don't dare..."

God knows what it might have come to. Alas, there was one circumstance involved
in the matter of which neither Pyotr Stepanovitch nor even Yulia Mihailovna
herself had any idea. The luckless Andrey Antonovitch had been so greatly upset
during the last few days that he had begun to be secretly jealous of his wife
and Pyotr Stepanovitch. In solitude, especially at night, he spent some very
disagreeable moments.

"Well, I imagined that if a man reads you his novel two days running till after
midnight and wants to hear your opinion of it, he has of his own act discarded
official relations, anyway.... Yulia Mihailovna treats me as a friend; there's
no making you out," Pyotr Stepanovitch brought out, with a certain dignity
indeed. "Here is your novel, by the way." He laid on the table a large heavy
manuscript rolled up in blue paper.

Lembke turned red and looked embarrassed.

"Where did you find it?" he asked discreetly, with a rush of joy which he was
unable to suppress, though he did his utmost to conceal it.

"Only fancy, done up like this, it rolled under the chest of drawers. I must
have thrown it down carelessly on the chest when I went out. It was only found
the day before yesterday, when the floor was scrubbed. You did set me a task,
though!"

Lembke dropped his eyes sternly.

"I haven't slept for the last two nights, thanks to you. It was found the day
before yesterday, but I kept it, and have been reading it ever since. I've no
time in the day, so I've read it at night. Well, I don't like it; it's not my
way of looking at things. But that's no matter; I've never set up for being a
critic, but I couldn't tear myself away from it, my dear man, though I didn't
like it! The fourth and fifth chapters are... they really are... damn it all,
they are beyond words! And what a lot of humour you've packed into it; it made
me laugh! How you can make fun of things _sans que cela paraisse!_ As for the
ninth and tenth chapters, it's all about love; that's not my line, but it's
effective though. I was nearly blubbering over Egrenev's letter, though you've
shown him up so cleverly.... You know, it's touching, though at the same time
you want to show the false side of him, as it were, don't you? Have I guessed
right? But I could simply beat you for the ending. For what are you setting up?
Why, the same old idol of domestic happiness, begetting children and making
money; 'they were married and lived happy ever afterwards'--come, it's too
much! You will enchant your readers, for even I couldn't put the book down; but
that makes it all the worse! The reading public is as stupid as ever, but it's
the duty of sensible people to wake them up, while you... But that's enough.
Good-bye. Don't be cross another time; I came in to you because I had a couple
of words to say to you, but you are so unaccountable..."

Andrey Antonovitch meantime took his novel and locked it up in an oak bookcase,
seizing the opportunity to wink to Blum to disappear. The latter withdrew with
a long, mournful face.

"I am not unaccountable, I am simply... nothing but annoyances," he muttered,
frowning but without anger, and sitting down to the table. "Sit down and say
what you have to say. It's a long time since I've seen you, Pyotr Stepanovitch,
only don't burst upon me in the future with such manners... sometimes, when one
has business, it's..."

"My manners are always the same...."

"I know, and I believe that you mean nothing by it, but sometimes one is
worried.... Sit down."

Pyotr Stepanovitch immediately lolled back on the sofa and drew his legs under
him.

