# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - VII
[Metadata]: # {01.03.07}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.07}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS
VII
# VII
Stepan Trofimovitch stood a moment reflecting, looked at me as though he did
not see me, took up his hat and stick and walked quietly out of the room. I
followed him again, as before. As we went out of the gate, noticing that I was
accompanying him, he said:

"Oh yes, you may serve as a witness..._de l'accident. Vous m'accompagnerez,
n'est-ce pas?_"

"Stepan Trofimovitch, surely you're not going there again? Think what may come
of it!"

With a pitiful and distracted smile, a smile of shame and utter despair, and at
the same time of a sort of strange ecstasy, he whispered to me, standing still
for an instant:

"I can't marry to cover 'another man's sins'!"

These words were just what I was expecting. At last that fatal sentence that he
had kept hidden from me was uttered aloud, after a whole week of shuffling and
pretence. I was positively enraged.

"And you, Stepan Verhovensky, with your luminous mind, your kind heart, can
harbour such a dirty, such a low idea... and could before Liputin came!"

He looked at me, made no answer and walked on in the same direction. I did not
want to be left behind. I wanted to give Varvara Petrovna my version. I could
have forgiven him if he had simply with his womanish faint-heartedness believed
Liputin, but now it was clear that he had thought of it all himself long
before, and that Liputin had only confirmed his suspicions and poured oil on
the flames. He had not hesitated to suspect the girl from the very first day,
before he had any kind of grounds, even Liputin's words, to go upon. Varvara
Petrovna's despotic behaviour he had explained to himself as due to her haste
to cover up the aristocratic misdoings of her precious "Nicolas" by marrying
the girl to an honourable man! I longed for him to be punished for it.

"_Oh, Dieu, qui est si grand et si bon!_ Oh, who will comfort me!" he
exclaimed, halting suddenly again, after walking a hundred paces.

"Come straight home and I'll make everything clear to you," I cried, turning
him by force towards home.

"It's he! Stepan Trofimovitch, it's you? You?" A fresh, joyous young voice rang
out like music behind us.

We had seen nothing, but a lady on horseback suddenly made her appearance
beside us--Lizaveta Nikolaevna with her invariable companion. She pulled up her
horse.

"Come here, come here quickly!" she called to us, loudly and merrily. "It's
twelve years since I've seen him, and I know him, while he.... Do you really
not know me?"

Stepan Trofimovitch clasped the hand held out to him and kissed it reverently.
He gazed at her as though he were praying and could not utter a word.

"He knows me, and is glad! Mavriky Nikolaevitch, he's delighted to see me! Why
is it you haven't been to see us all this fortnight? Auntie tried to persuade
me you were ill and must not be disturbed; but I know Auntie tells lies. I kept
stamping and swearing at you, but I had made up my mind, quite made up my mind,
that you should come to me first, that was why I didn't send to you. Heavens,
why he hasn't changed a bit!" She scrutinised him, bending down from the
saddle. "He's absurdly unchanged. Oh, yes, he has wrinkles, a lot of wrinkles,
round his eyes and on his cheeks some grey hair, but his eyes are just the
same. And have I changed? Have I changed? Why don't you say something?"

I remembered at that moment the story that she had been almost ill when she was
taken away to Petersburg at eleven years old, and that she had cried during her
illness and asked for Stepan Trofimovitch.

"You... I..." he faltered now in a voice breaking with joy. "I was just crying
out 'who will comfort me?' and I heard your voice. I look on it as a miracle
_et je commence à croire_."

"_En Dieu! En Dieu qui est là-haut et qui est si grand et si bon!_ You see, I
know all your lectures by heart. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, what faith he used to
preach to me then, _en Dieu qui est si grand et si bon!_ And do you remember
your story of how Columbus discovered America, and they all cried out, 'Land!
land!'? My nurse Alyona Frolovna says I was light-headed at night afterwards,
and kept crying out 'land! land!' in my sleep. And do you remember how you told
me the story of Prince Hamlet? And do you remember how you described to me how
the poor emigrants were transported from Europe to America? And it was all
untrue; I found out afterwards how they were transited. But what beautiful fibs
he used to tell me then, Mavriky Nikolaevitch! They were better than the truth.
Why do you look at Mavriky Nikolaevitch like that? He is the best and finest
man on the face of the globe and you must like him just as you do me! _Il fait
tout ce que je veux._ But, dear Stepan Trofimovitch, you must be unhappy again,
since you cry out in the middle of the street asking who will comfort you.
Unhappy, aren't you? Aren't you?"

"Now I'm happy...."

"Aunt is horrid to you?" she went on, without listening. "She's just the same
as ever, cross, unjust, and always our precious aunt! And do you remember how
you threw yourself into my arms in the garden and I comforted you and
cried--don't be afraid of Mavriky Nikolaevitch; he has known all about you,
everything, for ever so long; you can weep on his shoulder as long as you like,
and he'll stand there as long as you like! ... Lift up your hat, take it off
altogether for a minute, lift up your head, stand on tiptoe, I want to kiss you
on the forehead as I kissed you for the last time when we parted. Do you see
that young lady's admiring us out of the window? Come closer, closer! Heavens!
How grey he is!"

And bending over in the saddle she kissed him on the forehead.

"Come, now to your home! I know where you live. I'll be with you directly, in a
minute. I'll make you the first visit, you stubborn man, and then I must have
you for a whole day at home. You can go and make ready for me."

And she galloped off with her cavalier. We returned. Stepan Trofimovitch sat
down on the sofa and began to cry.

_"Dieu, Dieu."_ he exclaimed, _"enfin une minute de bonheur!"_

Not more than ten minutes afterwards she reappeared according to her promise,
escorted by her Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

_"Vous et le bonheur, vous arrivez en même temps!"_ He got up to meet her.

"Here's a nosegay for you; I rode just now to Madame Chevalier's, she has
flowers all the winter for name-days. Here's Mavriky Nikolaevitch, please make
friends. I wanted to bring you a cake instead of a nosegay, but Mavriky
Nikolaevitch declares that is not in the Russian spirit."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was an artillery captain, a tall and handsome man of
thirty-three, irreproachably correct in appearance, with an imposing and at
first sight almost stern countenance, in spite of his wonderful and delicate
kindness which no one could fail to perceive almost the first moment of making
his acquaintance. He was taciturn, however, seemed very self-possessed and made
no efforts to gain friends. Many of us said later that he was by no means
clever; but this was not altogether just.

I won't attempt to describe the beauty of Lizaveta Nikolaevna. The whole town
was talking of it, though some of our ladies and young girls indignantly
differed on the subject. There were some among them who already detested her,
and principally for her pride. The Drozdovs had scarcely begun to pay calls,
which mortified them, though the real reason for the delay was Praskovya
Ivanovna's invalid state. They detested her in the second place because she was
a relative of the governor's wife, and thirdly because she rode out every day
on horseback. We had never had young ladies who rode on horseback before; it
was only natural that the appearance of Lizaveta Nikolaevna on horseback and
her neglect to pay calls was bound to offend local society. Yet every one knew
that riding was prescribed her by the doctor's orders, and they talked
sarcastically of her illness. She really was ill. What struck me at first sight
in her was her abnormal, nervous, incessant restlessness. Alas, the poor girl
was very unhappy, and everything was explained later. To-day, recalling the
past, I should not say she was such a beauty as she seemed to me then. Perhaps
she was really not pretty at all. Tall, slim, but strong and supple, she struck
one by the irregularities of the lines of her face. Her eyes were set somewhat
like a Kalmuck's, slanting; she was pale and thin in the face with high
cheek-bones, but there was something in the face that conquered and fascinated!
There was something powerful in the ardent glance of her dark eyes. She always
made her appearance "like a conquering heroine, and to spread her conquests."
She seemed proud and at times even arrogant. I don't know whether she succeeded
in being kind, but I know that she wanted to, and made terrible efforts to
force herself to be a little kind. There were, no doubt, many fine impulses and
the very best elements in her character, but everything in her seemed
perpetually seeking its balance and unable to find it; everything was in chaos,
in agitation, in uneasiness. Perhaps the demands she made upon herself were too
severe, and she was never able to find in herself the strength to satisfy them.

She sat on the sofa and looked round the room.

"Why do I always begin to feel sad at such moments; explain that mystery, you
learned person? I've been thinking all my life that I should be goodness knows
how pleased at seeing you and recalling everything, and here I somehow don't
feel pleased at all, although I do love you.... Ach, heavens! He has my
portrait on the wall! Give it here. I remember it! I remember it!"

An exquisite miniature in water-colour of Liza at twelve years old had been
sent nine years before to Stepan Trofimovitch from Petersburg by the Drozdovs.
He had kept it hanging on his wall ever since.

"Was I such a pretty child? Can that really have been my face?"

She stood up, and with the portrait in her hand looked in the looking-glass.

"Make haste, take it!" she cried, giving back the portrait. "Don't hang it up
now, afterwards. I don't want to look at it."

She sat down on the sofa again. "One life is over and another is begun, then
that one is over--a third begins, and so on, endlessly. All the ends are
snipped off as it were with scissors. See what stale things I'm telling you.
Yet how much truth there is in them!"

She looked at me, smiling; she had glanced at me several times already, but in
his excitement Stepan Trofimovitch forgot that he had promised to introduce me.

"And why have you hung my portrait under those daggers? And why have you got so
many daggers and sabres?"

He had as a fact hanging on the wall, I don't know why, two crossed daggers and
above them a genuine Circassian sabre. As she asked this question she looked so
directly at me that I wanted to answer, but hesitated to speak. Stepan
Trofimovitch grasped the position at last and introduced me.

"I know, I know," she said, "I'm delighted to meet you. Mother has heard a
great deal about you, too. Let me introduce you to Mavriky Nikolaevitch too,
he's a splendid person. I had formed a funny notion of you already. You're
Stepan Trofimovitch's confidant, aren't you?"

I turned rather red.

"Ach, forgive me, please. I used quite the wrong word: not funny at all, but
only..." She was confused and blushed. "Why be ashamed though at your being a
splendid person? Well, it's time we were going, Mavriky Nikolaevitch! Stepan
Trofimovitch, you must be with us in half an hour. Mercy, what a lot we shall
talk! Now I'm your confidante, and about everything, _everything,_ you
understand?"

Stepan Trofimovitch was alarmed at once.

"Oh, Mavriky Nikolaevitch knows everything, don't mind him!"

"What does he know?"

"Why, what do you mean?" she cried in astonishment. "Bah, why it's true then
that they're hiding it! I wouldn't believe it! And they're hiding Dasha, too.
Aunt wouldn't let me go in to see Dasha to-day. She says she's got a headache."

"But... but how did you find out?"

"My goodness, like every one else. That needs no cunning!"

"But does every one else...?"

"Why, of course. Mother, it's true, heard it first through Alyona Frolovna, my
nurse; your Nastasya ran round to tell her. You told Nastasya, didn't you? She
says you told her yourself."

"I... I did once speak," Stepan Trofimovitch faltered, crimsoning all over,
"but... I only hinted... _j'étais si nerveux et malade, et puis_..."

She laughed.

"And your confidant didn't happen to be at hand, and Nastasya turned up. Well
that was enough! And the whole town's full of her cronies! Come, it doesn't
matter, let them know; it's all the better. Make haste and come to us, we dine
early.... Oh, I forgot," she added, sitting down again; "listen, what sort of
person is Shatov?"

"Shatov? He's the brother of Darya Pavlovna."

"I know he's her brother! What a person you are, really," she interrupted
impatiently. "I want to know what he's like; what sort of man he is."

_"C'est un pense-creux d'ici. C'est le meilleur et le plus irascible homme du
monde."_

"I've heard that he's rather queer. But that wasn't what I meant. I've heard
that he knows three languages, one of them English, and can do literary work.
In that case I've a lot of work for him. I want someone to help me and the
sooner the better. Would he take the work or not? He's been recommended to
me...."

"Oh, most certainly he will. _Et vous ferez un bienfait_...."

"I'm not doing it as a _bienfait_. I need someone to help me."

"I know Shatov pretty well," I said, "and if you will trust me with a message
to him I'll go to him this minute."

"Tell him to come to me at twelve o'clock to-morrow morning. Capital! Thank
you. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, are you ready?"

They went away. I ran at once, of course, to Shatov.

_"Mon ami!"_ said Stepan Trofimovitch, overtaking me on the steps. "Be sure to
be at my lodging at ten or eleven o'clock when I come back. Oh, I've acted very
wrongly in my conduct to you and to every one."

