# PART III - CHAPTER VI. A BUSY NIGHT - II
[Metadata]: # {03.06.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER VI. A BUSY NIGHT
II
# II
He first went home, and carefully, without haste, packed his trunk. At six
o'clock in the morning there was a special train from the town. This early
morning express only ran once a week, and was only a recent experiment. Though
Pyotr Stepanovitch had told the members of the quintet that he was only going
to be away for a short time in the neighbourhood, his intentions, as appeared
later, were in reality very different. Having finished packing, he settled
accounts with his landlady to whom he had previously given notice of his
departure, and drove in a cab to Erkel's lodgings, near the station. And then
just upon one o'clock at night he walked to Kirillov's, approaching as before
by Fedka's secret way.

Pyotr Stepanovitch was in a painful state of mind. Apart from other extremely
grave reasons for dissatisfaction (he was still unable to learn anything of
Stavrogin), he had, it seems--for I cannot assert it for a fact--received in
the course of that day, probably from Petersburg, secret information of a
danger awaiting him in the immediate future. There are, of course, many legends
in the town relating to this period; but if any facts were known, it was only
to those immediately concerned. I can only surmise as my own conjecture that
Pyotr Stepanovitch may well have had affairs going on in other neighbourhoods
as well as in our town, so that he really may have received such a warning. I
am convinced, indeed, in spite of Liputin's cynical and despairing doubts, that
he really had two or three other quintets; for instance, in Petersburg and
Moscow, and if not quintets at least colleagues and correspondents, and
possibly was in very curious relations with them. Not more than three days
after his departure an order for his immediate arrest arrived from
Petersburg--whether in connection with what had happened among us, or
elsewhere, I don't know. This order only served to increase the overwhelming,
almost panic terror which suddenly came upon our local authorities and the
society of the town, till then so persistently frivolous in its attitude, on
the discovery of the mysterious and portentous murder of the student
Shatov--the climax of the long series of senseless actions in our midst--as
well as the extremely mysterious circumstances that accompanied that murder.
But the order came too late: Pyotr Stepanovitch was already in Petersburg,
living under another name, and, learning what was going on, he made haste to
make his escape abroad.... But I am anticipating in a shocking way.

He went in to Kirillov, looking ill-humoured and quarrelsome. Apart from the
real task before him, he felt, as it were, tempted to satisfy some personal
grudge, to avenge himself on Kirillov for something. Kirillov seemed pleased to
see him; he had evidently been expecting him a long time with painful
impatience. His face was paler than usual; there was a fixed and heavy look in
his black eyes.

"I thought you weren't coming," he brought out drearily from his corner of the
sofa, from which he had not, however, moved to greet him.

Pyotr Stepanovitch stood before him and, before uttering a word, looked
intently at his face.

"Everything is in order, then, and we are not drawing back from our resolution.
Bravo!" He smiled an offensively patronising smile. "But, after all," he added
with unpleasant jocosity, "if I am behind my time, it's not for you to
complain: I made you a present of three hours."

"I don't want extra hours as a present from you, and you can't make me a
present... you fool!"

"What?" Pyotr Stepanovitch was startled, but instantly controlled himself.
"What huffiness! So we are in a savage temper?" he rapped out, still with the
same offensive superciliousness. "At such a moment composure is what you need.
The best thing you can do is to consider yourself a Columbus and me a mouse,
and not to take offence at anything I say. I gave you that advice yesterday."

"I don't want to look upon you as a mouse."

"What's that, a compliment? But the tea is cold--and that shows that everything
is topsy-turvy. Bah! But I see something in the window, on a plate." He went to
the window. "Oh oh, boiled chicken and rice!... But why haven't you begun upon
it yet? So we are in such a state of mind that even chicken..."

"I've dined, and it's not your business. Hold your tongue!"

"Oh, of course; besides, it's no consequence--though for me at the moment it is
of consequence. Only fancy, I scarcely had any dinner, and so if, as I suppose,
that chicken is not wanted now... eh?"

"Eat it if you can."

"Thank you, and then I'll have tea."

He instantly settled himself at the other end of the sofa and fell upon the
chicken with extraordinary greediness; at the same time he kept a constant
watch on his victim. Kirillov looked at him fixedly with angry aversion, as
though unable to tear himself away.

"I say, though," Pyotr Stepanovitch fired off suddenly, while he still went on
eating, "what about our business? We are not crying off, are we? How about that
document?"

"I've decided in the night that it's nothing to me. I'll write it. About the
manifestoes?"

"Yes, about the manifestoes too. But I'll dictate it. Of course, that's nothing
to you. Can you possibly mind what's in the letter at such a moment?"

"That's not your business."

"It's not mine, of course. It need only be a few lines, though: that you and
Shatov distributed the manifestoes and with the help of Fedka, who hid in your
lodgings. This last point about Fedka and your lodgings is very important--the
most important of all, indeed. You see, I am talking to you quite openly."

"Shatov? Why Shatov? I won't mention Shatov for anything."

"What next! What is it to you? You can't hurt him now."

"His wife has come back to him. She has waked up and has sent to ask me where
he is."

"She has sent to ask you where he is? H'm... that's unfortunate. She may send
again; no one ought to know I am here."

Pyotr Stepanovitch was uneasy.

"She won't know, she's gone to sleep again. There's a midwife with her, Arina
Virginsky."

"So that's how it was.... She won't overhear, I suppose? I say, you'd better
shut the front door."

"She won't overhear anything. And if Shatov comes I'll hide you in another
room."

"Shatov won't come; and you must write that you quarrelled with him because he
turned traitor and informed the police... this evening... and caused his
death."

"He is dead!" cried Kirillov, jumping up from the sofa.

"He died at seven o'clock this evening, or rather, at seven o'clock yesterday
evening, and now it's one o'clock."

"You have killed him!... And I foresaw it yesterday!"

"No doubt you did! With this revolver here." (He drew out his revolver as
though to show it, but did not put it back again and still held it in his right
hand as though in readiness.) "You are a strange man, though, Kirillov; you
knew yourself that the stupid fellow was bound to end like this. What was there
to foresee in that? I made that as plain as possible over and over again.
Shatov was meaning to betray us; I was watching him, and it could not be left
like that. And you too had instructions to watch him; you told me so yourself
three weeks ago...."

"Hold your tongue! You've done this because he spat in your face in Geneva!"

"For that and for other things too--for many other things; not from spite,
however. Why do you jump up? Why look like that? Oh oh, so that's it, is it?"

He jumped up and held out his revolver before him. Kirillov had suddenly
snatched up from the window his revolver, which had been loaded and put ready
since the morning. Pyotr Stepanovitch took up his position and aimed his weapon
at Kirillov. The latter laughed angrily.

"Confess, you scoundrel, that you brought your revolver because I might shoot
you.... But I shan't shoot you... though... though..."

And again he turned his revolver upon Pyotr Stepanovitch, as it were
rehearsing, as though unable to deny himself the pleasure of imagining how he
would shoot him. Pyotr Stepanovitch, holding his ground, waited for him, waited
for him till the last minute without pulling the trigger, at the risk of being
the first to get a bullet in his head: it might well be expected of "the
maniac." But at last "the maniac" dropped his hand, gasping and trembling and
unable to speak.

"You've played your little game and that's enough." Pyotr Stepanovitch, too,
dropped his weapon. "I knew it was only a game; only you ran a risk, let me
tell you: I might have fired."

And he sat down on the sofa with a fair show of composure and poured himself
out some tea, though his hand trembled a little. Kirillov laid his revolver on
the table and began walking up and down.

"I won't write that I killed Shatov... and I won't write anything now. You
won't have a document!"

"I shan't?"

"No, you won't."

"What meanness and what stupidity!" Pyotr Stepanovitch turned green with
resentment. "I foresaw it, though. You've not taken me by surprise, let me tell
you. As you please, however. If I could make you do it by force, I would. You
are a scoundrel, though." Pyotr Stepanovitch was more and more carried away and
unable to restrain himself. "You asked us for money out there and promised us
no end of things.... I won't go away with nothing, however: I'll see you put
the bullet through your brains first, anyway."

"I want you to go away at once." Kirillov stood firmly before him.

"No, that's impossible." Pyotr Stepanovitch took up his revolver again. "Now in
your spite and cowardice you may think fit to put it off and to turn traitor
to-morrow, so as to get money again; they'll pay you for that, of course. Damn
it all, fellows like you are capable of anything! Only don't trouble yourself;
I've provided for all contingencies: I am not going till I've dashed your
brains out with this revolver, as I did to that scoundrel Shatov, if you are
afraid to do it yourself and put off your intention, damn you!"

"You are set on seeing my blood, too?"

"I am not acting from spite; let me tell you, it's nothing to me. I am doing it
to be at ease about the cause. One can't rely on men; you see that for
yourself. I don't understand what fancy possesses you to put yourself to death.
It wasn't my idea; you thought of it yourself before I appeared, and talked of
your intention to the committee abroad before you said anything to me. And you
know, no one has forced it out of you; no one of them knew you, but you came to
confide in them yourself, from sentimentalism. And what's to be done if a plan
of action here, which can't be altered now, was founded upon that with your
consent and upon your suggestion?... your suggestion, mind that! You have put
yourself in a position in which you know too much. If you are an ass and go off
to-morrow to inform the police, that would be rather a disadvantage to us; what
do you think about it? Yes, you've bound yourself; you've given your word,
you've taken money. That you can't deny...."

Pyotr Stepanovitch was much excited, but for some time past Kirillov had not
been listening. He paced up and down the room, lost in thought again.

"I am sorry for Shatov," he said, stopping before Pyotr Stepanovitch again.

"Why so? I am sorry, if that's all, and do you suppose..."

"Hold your tongue, you scoundrel," roared Kirillov, making an alarming and
unmistakable movement; "I'll kill you."

"There, there, there! I told a lie, I admit it; I am not sorry at all. Come,
that's enough, that's enough." Pyotr Stepanovitch started up apprehensively,
putting out his hand.

Kirillov subsided and began walking up and down again.

"I won't put it off; I want to kill myself now: all are scoundrels."

"Well, that's an idea; of course all are scoundrels; and since life is a
beastly thing for a decent man..."

"Fool, I am just such a scoundrel as you, as all, not a decent man. There's
never been a decent man anywhere."

"He's guessed the truth at last! Can you, Kirillov, with your sense, have
failed to see till now that all men are alike, that there are none better or
worse, only some are stupider, than others, and that if all are scoundrels
(which is nonsense, though) there oughtn't to be any people that are not?"

"Ah! Why, you are really in earnest?" Kirillov looked at him with some wonder.
"You speak with heat and simply.... Can it be that even fellows like you have
convictions?"

"Kirillov, I've never been able to understand why you mean to kill yourself. I
only know it's from conviction... strong conviction. But if you feel a yearning
to express yourself, so to say, I am at your service.... Only you must think of
the time."

"What time is it?"

"Oh oh, just two." Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at his watch and lighted a
cigarette.

"It seems we can come to terms after all," he reflected.

"I've nothing to say to you," muttered Kirillov.

"I remember that something about God comes into it... you explained it to me
once--twice, in fact. If you stopped yourself, you become God; that's it, isn't
it?"

"Yes, I become God."

Pyotr Stepanovitch did not even smile; he waited. Kirillov looked at him
subtly.

"You are a political impostor and intriguer. You want to lead me on into
philosophy and enthusiasm and to bring about a reconciliation so as to disperse
my anger, and then, when I am reconciled with you, beg from me a note to say I
killed Shatov."

Pyotr Stepanovitch answered with almost natural frankness.

"Well, supposing I am such a scoundrel. But at the last moments does that
matter to you, Kirillov? What are we quarrelling about? Tell me, please. You
are one sort of man and I am another--what of it? And what's more, we are both
of us..."

"Scoundrels."

"Yes, scoundrels if you like. But you know that that's only words."

"All my life I wanted it not to be only words. I lived because I did not want
it to be. Even now every day I want it to be not words."

"Well, every one seeks to be where he is best off. The fish... that is, every
one seeks his own comfort, that's all. That's been a commonplace for ages and
ages."

"Comfort, do you say?"

"Oh, it's not worth while quarrelling over words."

"No, you were right in what you said; let it be comfort. God is necessary and
so must exist."

"Well, that's all right, then."

"But I know He doesn't and can't."

"That's more likely."

"Surely you must understand that a man with two such ideas can't go on living?"

"Must shoot himself, you mean?"

"Surely you must understand that one might shoot oneself for that alone? You
don't understand that there may be a man, one man out of your thousands of
millions, one man who won't bear it and does not want to."

"All I understand is that you seem to be hesitating.... That's very bad."

"Stavrogin, too, is consumed by an idea," Kirillov said gloomily, pacing up and
down the room. He had not noticed the previous remark.

"What?" Pyotr Stepanovitch pricked up his ears. "What idea? Did he tell you
something himself?"

"No, I guessed it myself: if Stavrogin has faith, he does not believe that he
has faith. If he hasn't faith, he does not believe that he hasn't."

"Well, Stavrogin has got something else worse than that in his head," Pyotr
Stepanovitch muttered peevishly, uneasily watching the turn the conversation
had taken and the pallor of Kirillov.

"Damn it all, he won't shoot himself!" he was thinking. "I always suspected it;
it's a maggot in the brain and nothing more; what a rotten lot of people!"

"You are the last to be with me; I shouldn't like to part on bad terms with
you," Kirillov vouchsafed suddenly.

Pyotr Stepanovitch did not answer at once. "Damn it all, what is it now?" he
thought again.

"I assure you, Kirillov, I have nothing against you personally as a man, and
always..."

"You are a scoundrel and a false intellect. But I am just the same as you are,
and I will shoot myself while you will remain living."

"You mean to say, I am so abject that I want to go on living."

He could not make up his mind whether it was judicious to keep up such a
conversation at such a moment or not, and resolved "to be guided by
circumstances." But the tone of superiority and of contempt for him, which
Kirillov had never disguised, had always irritated him, and now for some reason
it irritated him more than ever--possibly because Kirillov, who was to die
within an hour or so (Pyotr Stepanovitch still reckoned upon this), seemed to
him, as it were, already only half a man, some creature whom he could not allow
to be haughty.

"You seem to be boasting to me of your shooting yourself."

"I've always been surprised at every one's going on living," said Kirillov, not
hearing his remark.

"H'm! Admitting that's an idea, but..."

"You ape, you assent to get the better of me. Hold your tongue; you won't
understand anything. If there is no God, then I am God."

"There, I could never understand that point of yours: why are you God?"

"If God exists, all is His will and from His will I cannot escape. If not, it's
all my will and I am bound to show self-will."

"Self-will? But why are you bound?"

"Because all will has become mine. Can it be that no one in the whole planet,
after making an end of God and believing in his own will, will dare to express
his self-will on the most vital point? It's like a beggar inheriting a fortune
and being afraid of it and not daring to approach the bag of gold, thinking
himself too weak to own it. I want to manifest my self-will. I may be the only
one, but I'll do it."

"Do it by all means."

"I am bound to shoot myself because the highest point of my self-will is to
kill myself with my own hands."

"But you won't be the only one to kill yourself; there are lots of suicides."

"With good cause. But to do it without any cause at all, simply for self-will,
I am the only one."

"He won't shoot himself," flashed across Pyotr Stepanovitch's mind again.

"Do you know," he observed irritably, "if I were in your place I should kill
someone else to show my self-will, not myself. You might be of use. I'll tell
you whom, if you are not afraid. Then you needn't shoot yourself to-day,
perhaps. We may come to terms."

"To kill someone would be the lowest point of self-will, and you show your
whole soul in that. I am not you: I want the highest point and I'll kill
myself."

"He's come to it of himself," Pyotr Stepanovitch muttered malignantly.

"I am bound to show my unbelief," said Kirillov, walking about the room. "I
have no higher idea than disbelief in God. I have all the history of mankind on
my side. Man has done nothing but invent God so as to go on living, and not
kill himself; that's the whole of universal history up till now. I am the first
one in the whole history of mankind who would not invent God. Let them know it
once for all."

"He won't shoot himself," Pyotr Stepanovitch thought anxiously.

"Let whom know it?" he said, egging him on. "It's only you and me here; you
mean Liputin?"

"Let every one know; all will know. There is nothing secret that will not be
made known. _He_ said so."

And he pointed with feverish enthusiasm to the image of the Saviour, before
which a lamp was burning. Pyotr Stepanovitch lost his temper completely.

"So you still believe in Him, and you've lighted the lamp; 'to be on the safe
side,' I suppose?"

The other did not speak.

"Do you know, to my thinking, you believe perhaps more thoroughly than any
priest."

"Believe in whom? In _Him?_ Listen." Kirillov stood still, gazing before him
with fixed and ecstatic look. "Listen to a great idea: there was a day on
earth, and in the midst of the earth there stood three crosses. One on the
Cross had such faith that he said to another, 'To-day thou shalt be with me in
Paradise.' The day ended; both died and passed away and found neither Paradise
nor resurrection. His words did not come true. Listen: that Man was the
loftiest of all on earth, He was that which gave meaning to life. The whole
planet, with everything on it, is mere madness without that Man. There has
never been any like Him before or since, never, up to a miracle. For that is
the miracle, that there never was or never will be another like Him. And if
that is so, if the laws of nature did not spare even Him, have not spared even
their miracle and made even Him live in a lie and die for a lie, then all the
planet is a lie and rests on a lie and on mockery. So then, the very laws of
the planet are a lie and the vaudeville of devils. What is there to live for?
Answer, if you are a man."

"That's a different matter. It seems to me you've mixed up two different
causes, and that's a very unsafe thing to do. But excuse me, if you are God? If
the lie were ended and if you realised that all the falsity comes from the
belief in that former God?"

"So at last you understand!" cried Kirillov rapturously. "So it can be
understood if even a fellow like you understands. Do you understand now that
the salvation for all consists in proving this idea to every one? Who will
prove it? I! I can't understand how an atheist could know that there is no God
and not kill himself on the spot. To recognise that there is no God and not to
recognise at the same instant that one is God oneself is an absurdity, else one
would certainly kill oneself. If you recognise it you are sovereign, and then
you won't kill yourself but will live in the greatest glory. But one, the
first, must kill himself, for else who will begin and prove it? So I must
certainly kill myself, to begin and prove it. Now I am only a god against my
will and I am unhappy, because I am bound to assert my will. All are unhappy
because all are afraid to express their will. Man has hitherto been so unhappy
and so poor because he has been afraid to assert his will in the highest point
and has shown his self-will only in little things, like a schoolboy. I am
awfully unhappy, for I'm awfully afraid. Terror is the curse of man.... But I
will assert my will, I am bound to believe that I don't believe. I will begin
and will make an end of it and open the door, and will save. That's the only
thing that will save mankind and will re-create the next generation physically;
for with his present physical nature man can't get on without his former God, I
believe. For three years I've been seeking for the attribute of my godhead and
I've found it; the attribute of my godhead is self-will! That's all I can do to
prove in the highest point my independence and my new terrible freedom. For it
is very terrible. I am killing myself to prove my independence and my new
terrible freedom."

His face was unnaturally pale, and there was a terribly heavy look in his eyes.
He was like a man in delirium. Pyotr Stepanovitch thought he would drop on to
the floor.

"Give me the pen!" Kirillov cried suddenly, quite unexpectedly, in a positive
frenzy. "Dictate; I'll sign anything. I'll sign that I killed Shatov even.
Dictate while it amuses me. I am not afraid of what the haughty slaves will
think! You will see for yourself that all that is secret shall be made
manifest! And you will be crushed.... I believe, I believe!"

Pyotr Stepanovitch jumped up from his seat and instantly handed him an inkstand
and paper, and began dictating, seizing the moment, quivering with anxiety.

"I, Alexey Kirillov, declare..."

"Stay; I won't! To whom am I declaring it?"

Kirillov was shaking as though he were in a fever. This declaration and the
sudden strange idea of it seemed to absorb him entirely, as though it were a
means of escape by which his tortured spirit strove for a moment's relief.

"To whom am I declaring it? I want to know to whom?"

"To no one, every one, the first person who reads it. Why define it? The whole
world!"

"The whole world! Bravo! And I won't have any repentance. I don't want
penitence and I don't want it for the police!"

"No, of course, there's no need of it, damn the police! Write, if you are in
earnest!" Pyotr Stepanovitch cried hysterically.

"Stay! I want to put at the top a face with the tongue out."

"Ech, what nonsense," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch crossly, "you can express all
that without the drawing, by--the tone."

"By the tone? That's true. Yes, by the tone, by the tone of it. Dictate, the
tone."

"I, Alexey Kirillov," Pyotr Stepanovitch dictated firmly and peremptorily,
bending over Kirillov's shoulder and following every letter which the latter
formed with a hand trembling with excitement, "I, Kirillov, declare that
to-day, the --th October, at about eight o'clock in the evening, I killed the
student Shatov in the park for turning traitor and giving information of the
manifestoes and of Fedka, who has been lodging with us for ten days in
Filipov's house. I am shooting myself to-day with my revolver, not because I
repent and am afraid of you, but because when I was abroad I made up my mind to
put an end to my life."

"Is that all?" cried Kirillov with surprise and indignation.

"Not another word," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, waving his hand, attempting to
snatch the document from him.

"Stay." Kirillov put his hand firmly on the paper. "Stay, it's nonsense! I want
to say with whom I killed him. Why Fedka? And what about the fire? I want it
all and I want to be abusive in tone, too, in tone!"

"Enough, Kirillov, I assure you it's enough," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch almost
imploringly, trembling lest he should tear up the paper; "that they may believe
you, you must say it as obscurely as possible, just like that, simply in hints.
You must only give them a peep of the truth, just enough to tantalise them.
They'll tell a story better than ours, and of course they'll believe themselves
more than they would us; and you know, it's better than anything--better than
anything! Let me have it, it's splendid as it is; give it to me, give it to
me!"

And he kept trying to snatch the paper. Kirillov listened open-eyed and
appeared to be trying to reflect, but he seemed beyond understanding now.

"Damn it all," Pyotr Stepanovitch cried all at once, ill-humouredly, "he hasn't
signed it! Why are you staring like that? Sign!"

"I want to abuse them," muttered Kirillov. He took the pen, however, and
signed. "I want to abuse them."

"Write _'Vive la république,'_ and that will be enough."

"Bravo!" Kirillov almost bellowed with delight. "_'Vive la république
démocratique sociale et universelle ou la mort!'_ No, no, that's not it.
_'Liberté, égalité, fraternité ou la mort.'_ There, that's better, that's
better." He wrote it gleefully under his signature.

"Enough, enough," repeated Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"Stay, a little more. I'll sign it again in French, you know. '_De Kirillov,
gentilhomme russe et citoyen du monde._' Ha ha!" He went off in a peal of
laughter. "No, no, no; stay. I've found something better than all. Eureka!
_'Gentilhomme, séminariste russe et citoyen du monde civilisé!'_ That's better
than any...." He jumped up from the sofa and suddenly, with a rapid gesture,
snatched up the revolver from the window, ran with it into the next room, and
closed the door behind him.

Pyotr Stepanovitch stood for a moment, pondering and gazing at the door.

"If he does it at once, perhaps he'll do it, but if he begins thinking, nothing
will come of it."

Meanwhile he took up the paper, sat down, and looked at it again. The wording
of the document pleased him again.

"What's needed for the moment? What's wanted is to throw them all off the scent
and keep them busy for a time. The park? There's no park in the town and
they'll guess its Skvoreshniki of themselves. But while they are arriving at
that, time will be passing; then the search will take time too; then when they
find the body it will prove that the story is true, and it will follow that's
it all true, that it's true about Fedka too. And Fedka explains the fire, the
Lebyadkins; so that it was all being hatched here, at Filipov's, while they
overlooked it and saw nothing--that will quite turn their heads! They will
never think of the quintet; Shatov and Kirillov and Fedka and Lebyadkin, and
why they killed each other--that will be another question for them. Oh, damn it
all, I don't hear the shot!"

Though he had been reading and admiring the wording of it, he had been
listening anxiously all the time, and he suddenly flew into a rage. He looked
anxiously at his watch; it was getting late and it was fully ten minutes since
Kirillov had gone out.... Snatching up the candle, he went to the door of the
room where Kirillov had shut himself up. He was just at the door when the
thought struck him that the candle had burnt out, that it would not last
another twenty minutes, and that there was no other in the room. He took hold
of the handle and listened warily; he did not hear the slightest sound. He
suddenly opened the door and lifted up the candle: something uttered a roar and
rushed at him. He slammed the door with all his might and pressed his weight
against it; but all sounds died away and again there was deathlike stillness.

He stood for a long while irresolute, with the candle in his hand. He had been
able to see very little in the second he held the door open, but he had caught
a glimpse of the face of Kirillov standing at the other end of the room by the
window, and the savage fury with which the latter had rushed upon him. Pyotr
Stepanovitch started, rapidly set the candle on the table, made ready his
revolver, and retreated on tiptoe to the farthest corner of the room, so that
if Kirillov opened the door and rushed up to the table with the revolver he
would still have time to be the first to aim and fire.

Pyotr Stepanovitch had by now lost all faith in the suicide. "He was standing
in the middle of the room, thinking," flashed like a whirlwind through Pyotr
Stepanovitch's mind, "and the room was dark and horrible too.... He roared and
rushed at me. There are two possibilities: either I interrupted him at the very
second when he was pulling the trigger or... or he was standing planning how to
kill me. Yes, that's it, he was planning it.... He knows I won't go away
without killing him if he funks it himself--so that he would have to kill me
first to prevent my killing him.... And again, again there is silence. I am
really frightened: he may open the door all of a sudden.... The nuisance of it
is that he believes in God like any priest.... He won't shoot himself for
anything! There are lots of these people nowadays 'who've come to it of
themselves.' A rotten lot! Oh, damn it, the candle, the candle! It'll go out
within a quarter of an hour for certain.... I must put a stop to it; come what
may, I must put a stop to it.... Now I can kill him.... With that document here
no one would think of my killing him. I can put him in such an attitude on the
floor with an unloaded revolver in his hand that they'd be certain he'd done it
himself.... Ach, damn it! how is one to kill him? If I open the door he'll rush
out again and shoot me first. Damn it all, he'll be sure to miss!"

He was in agonies, trembling at the necessity of action and his own indecision.
At last he took up the candle and again approached the door with the revolver
held up in readiness; he put his left hand, in which he held the candle, on the
doorhandle. But he managed awkwardly: the handle clanked, there was a rattle
and a creak. "He will fire straightway," flashed through Pyotr Stepanovitch's
mind. With his foot he flung the door open violently, raised the candle, and
held out the revolver; but no shot nor cry came from within.... There was no
one in the room.

He started. The room led nowhere. There was no exit, no means of escape from
it. He lifted the candle higher and looked about him more attentively: there
was certainly no one. He called Kirillov's name in a low voice, then again
louder; no one answered.

"Can he have got out by the window?" The casement in one window was, in fact,
open. "Absurd! He couldn't have got away through the casement." Pyotr
Stepanovitch crossed the room and went up to the window. "He couldn't
possibly." All at once he turned round quickly and was aghast at something
extraordinary.

Against the wall facing the windows on the right of the door stood a cupboard.
On the right side of this cupboard, in the corner formed by the cupboard and
the wall, stood Kirillov, and he was standing in a very strange way;
motionless, perfectly erect, with his arms held stiffly at his sides, his head
raised and pressed tightly back against the wall in the very corner, he seemed
to be trying to conceal and efface himself. Everything seemed to show that he
was hiding, yet somehow it was not easy to believe it. Pyotr Stepanovitch was
standing a little sideways to the corner, and could only see the projecting
parts of the figure. He could not bring himself to move to the left to get a
full view of Kirillov and solve the mystery. His heart began beating violently,
and he felt a sudden rush of blind fury: he started from where he stood, and,
shouting and stamping with his feet, he rushed to the horrible place.

But when he reached Kirillov he stopped short again, still more overcome,
horror-stricken. What struck him most was that, in spite of his shout and his
furious rush, the figure did not stir, did not move in a single limb--as though
it were of stone or of wax. The pallor of the face was unnatural, the black
eyes were quite unmoving and were staring away at a point in the distance.
Pyotr Stepanovitch lowered the candle and raised it again, lighting up the
figure from all points of view and scrutinising it. He suddenly noticed that,
although Kirillov was looking straight before him, he could see him and was
perhaps watching him out of the corner of his eye. Then the idea occurred to
him to hold the candle right up to the wretch's face, to scorch him and see
what he would do. He suddenly fancied that Kirillov's chin twitched and that
something like a mocking smile passed over his lips--as though he had guessed
Pyotr Stepanovitch's thought. He shuddered and, beside himself, clutched
violently at Kirillov's shoulder.

Then something happened so hideous and so soon over that Pyotr Stepanovitch
could never afterwards recover a coherent impression of it. He had hardly
touched Kirillov when the latter bent down quickly and with his head knocked
the candle out of Pyotr Stepanovitch's hand; the candlestick fell with a clang
on the ground and the candle went out. At the same moment he was conscious of a
fearful pain in the little finger of his left hand. He cried out, and all that
he could remember was that, beside himself, he hit out with all his might and
struck three blows with the revolver on the head of Kirillov, who had bent down
to him and had bitten his finger. At last he tore away his finger and rushed
headlong to get out of the house, feeling his way in the dark. He was pursued
by terrible shouts from the room.

"Directly, directly, directly, directly." Ten times. But he still ran on, and
was running into the porch when he suddenly heard a loud shot. Then he stopped
short in the dark porch and stood deliberating for five minutes; at last he
made his way back into the house. But he had to get the candle. He had only to
feel on the floor on the right of the cupboard for the candlestick; but how was
he to light the candle? There suddenly came into his mind a vague recollection:
he recalled that when he had run into the kitchen the day before to attack
Fedka he had noticed in passing a large red box of matches in a corner on a
shelf. Feeling with his hands, he made his way to the door on the left leading
to the kitchen, found it, crossed the passage, and went down the steps. On the
shelf, on the very spot where he had just recalled seeing it, he felt in the
dark a full unopened box of matches. He hurriedly went up the steps again
without striking a light, and it was only when he was near the cupboard, at the
spot where he had struck Kirillov with the revolver and been bitten by him,
that he remembered his bitten finger, and at the same instant was conscious
that it was unbearably painful. Clenching his teeth, he managed somehow to
light the candle-end, set it in the candlestick again, and looked about him:
near the open casement, with his feet towards the right-hand corner, lay the
dead body of Kirillov. The shot had been fired at the right temple and the
bullet had come out at the top on the left, shattering the skull. There were
splashes of blood and brains. The revolver was still in the suicide's hand on
the floor. Death must have been instantaneous. After a careful look round,
Pyotr Stepanovitch got up and went out on tiptoe, closed the door, left the
candle on the table in the outer room, thought a moment, and resolved not to
put it out, reflecting that it could not possibly set fire to anything. Looking
once more at the document left on the table, he smiled mechanically and then
went out of the house, still for some reason walking on tiptoe. He crept
through Fedka's hole again and carefully replaced the posts after him.

