# PART III - CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION - III
[Metadata]: # {03.04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION
III
# III
Kirillov was sitting on his leather sofa drinking tea, as he always was at that
hour. He did not get up to meet them, but gave a sort of start and looked at
the new-comers anxiously.

"You are not mistaken," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, "it's just that I've come
about."

"To-day?"

"No, no, to-morrow... about this time." And he hurriedly sat down at the table,
watching Kirillov's agitation with some uneasiness. But the latter had already
regained his composure and looked as usual.

"These people still refuse to believe in you. You are not vexed at my bringing
Liputin?"

"To-day I am not vexed; to-morrow I want to be alone."

"But not before I come, and therefore in my presence."

"I should prefer not in your presence."

"You remember you promised to write and to sign all I dictated."

"I don't care. And now will you be here long?"

"I have to see one man and to remain half an hour, so whatever you say I shall
stay that half-hour."

Kirillov did not speak. Liputin meanwhile sat down on one side under the
portrait of the bishop. That last desperate idea gained more and more
possession of him. Kirillov scarcely noticed him. Liputin had heard of
Kirillov's theory before and always laughed at him; but now he was silent and
looked gloomily round him.

"I've no objection to some tea," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, moving up. "I've just
had some steak and was reckoning on getting tea with you."

"Drink it. You can have some if you like."

"You used to offer it to me," observed Pyotr Stepanovitch sourly.

"That's no matter. Let Liputin have some too."

"No, I... can't."

"Don't want to or can't?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, turning quickly to him.

"I am not going to here," Liputin said expressively.

Pyotr Stepanovitch frowned.

"There's a flavour of mysticism about that; goodness knows what to make of you
people!"

No one answered; there was a full minute of silence.

"But I know one thing," he added abruptly, "that no superstition will prevent
any one of us from doing his duty."

"Has Stavrogin gone?" asked Kirillov.

"Yes."

"He's done well."

Pyotr Stepanovitch's eyes gleamed, but he restrained himself.

"I don't care what you think as long as every one keeps his word."

"I'll keep my word."

"I always knew that you would do your duty like an independent and progressive
man."

"You are an absurd fellow."

"That may be; I am very glad to amuse you. I am always glad if I can give
people pleasure."

"You are very anxious I should shoot myself and are afraid I might suddenly
not?"

"Well, you see, it was your own doing--connecting your plan with our work.
Reckoning on your plan we have already done something, so that you couldn't
refuse now because you've let us in for it."

"You've no claim at all."

"I understand, I understand; you are perfectly free, and we don't come in so
long as your free intention is carried out."

"And am I to take on myself all the nasty things you've done?"

"Listen, Kirillov, are you afraid? If you want to cry off, say so at once."

"I am not afraid."

"I ask because you are making so many inquiries."

"Are you going soon?"

"Asking questions again?"

Kirillov scanned him contemptuously.

"You see," Pyotr Stepanovitch went on, getting angrier and angrier, and unable
to take the right tone, "you want me to go away, to be alone, to concentrate
yourself, but all that's a bad sign for you--for you above all. You want to
think a great deal. To my mind you'd better not think. And really you make me
uneasy."

"There's only one thing I hate, that at such a moment I should have a reptile
like you beside me."

"Oh, that doesn't matter. I'll go away at the time and stand on the steps if
you like. If you are so concerned about trifles when it comes to dying, then...
it's all a very bad sign. I'll go out on to the steps and you can imagine I
know nothing about it, and that I am a man infinitely below you."

"No, not infinitely; you've got abilities, but there's a lot you don't
understand because you are a low man."

"Delighted, delighted. I told you already I am delighted to provide
entertainment... at such a moment."

"You don't understand anything."

"That is, I... well, I listen with respect, anyway."

"You can do nothing; even now you can't hide your petty spite, though it's not
to your interest to show it. You'll make me cross, and then I may want another
six months." Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at his watch. "I never understood your
theory, but I know you didn't invent it for our sakes, so I suppose you would
carry it out apart from us. And I know too that you haven't mastered the idea
but the idea has mastered you, so you won't put it off."

"What? The idea has mastered me?"

"Yes."

"And not I mastered the idea? That's good. You have a little sense. Only you
tease me and I am proud."

"That's a good thing, that's a good thing. Just what you need, to be proud."

"Enough. You've drunk your tea; go away."

"Damn it all, I suppose I must"--Pyotr Stepanovitch got up--"though it's early.
Listen, Kirillov. Shall I find that man--you know whom I mean--at
Myasnitchiha's? Or has she too been lying?"

"You won't find him, because he is here and not there."

"Here! Damn it all, where?"

"Sitting in the kitchen, eating and drinking."

"How dared he?" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, flushing angrily. "It was his duty to
wait... what nonsense! He has no passport, no money!"

"I don't know. He came to say good-bye; he is dressed and ready. He is going
away and won't come back. He says you are a scoundrel and he doesn't want to
wait for your money."

"Ha ha! He is afraid that I'll... But even now I can... if... Where is he, in
the kitchen?"

Kirillov opened a side door into a tiny dark room; from this room three steps
led straight to the part of the kitchen where the cook's bed was usually put,
behind the partition. Here, in the corner under the ikons, Fedka was sitting
now, at a bare deal table. Before him stood a pint bottle, a plate of bread,
and some cold beef and potatoes on an earthenware dish. He was eating in a
leisurely way and was already half drunk, but he was wearing his sheep-skin
coat and was evidently ready for a journey. A samovar was boiling the other
side of the screen, but it was not for Fedka, who had every night for a week or
more zealously blown it up and got it ready for "Alexey Nilitch, for he's such
a habit of drinking tea at nights." I am strongly disposed to believe that, as
Kirillov had not a cook, he had cooked the beef and potatoes that morning with
his own hands for Fedka.

"What notion is this?" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, whisking into the room. "Why
didn't you wait where you were ordered?"

And swinging his fist, he brought it down heavily on the table.

Fedka assumed an air of dignity.

"You wait a bit, Pyotr Stepanovitch, you wait a bit," he began, with a
swaggering emphasis on each word, "it's your first duty to understand here that
you are on a polite visit to Mr. Kirillov, Alexey Nilitch, whose boots you
might clean any day, because beside you he is a man of culture and you are
only--foo!"

And he made a jaunty show of spitting to one side. Haughtiness and
determination were evident in his manner, and a certain very threatening
assumption of argumentative calm that suggested an outburst to follow. But
Pyotr Stepanovitch had no time to realise the danger, and it did not fit in
with his preconceived ideas. The incidents and disasters of the day had quite
turned his head. Liputin, at the top of the three steps, stared inquisitively
down from the little dark room.

"Do you or don't you want a trustworthy passport and good money to go where
you've been told? Yes or no?"

"D'you see, Pyotr Stepanovitch, you've been deceiving me from the first, and so
you've been a regular scoundrel to me. For all the world like a filthy human
louse--that's how I look on you. You've promised me a lot of money for shedding
innocent blood and swore it was for Mr. Stavrogin, though it turns out to be
nothing but your want of breeding. I didn't get a farthing out of it, let alone
fifteen hundred, and Mr. Stavrogin hit you in the face, which has come to our
ears. Now you are threatening me again and promising me money--what for, you
don't say. And I shouldn't wonder if you are sending me to Petersburg to plot
some revenge in your spite against Mr. Stavrogin, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
reckoning on my simplicity. And that proves you are the chief murderer. And do
you know what you deserve for the very fact that in the depravity of your heart
you've given up believing in God Himself, the true Creator? You are no better
than an idolater and are on a level with the Tatar and the Mordva. Alexey
Nilitch, who is a philosopher, has expounded the true God, the Creator, many a
time to you, as well as the creation of the world and the fate that's to come
and the transformation of every sort of creature and every sort of beast out of
the Apocalypse, but you've persisted like a senseless idol in your deafness and
your dumbness and have brought Ensign Erkel to the same, like the veriest evil
seducer and so-called atheist...."

"Ah, you drunken dog! He strips the ikons of their setting and then preaches
about God!"

"D'you see, Pyotr Stepanovitch, I tell you truly that I have stripped the
ikons, but I only took out the pearls; and how do you know? Perhaps my own tear
was transformed into a pearl in the furnace of the Most High to make up for my
sufferings, seeing I am just that very orphan, having no daily refuge. Do you
know from the books that once, in ancient times, a merchant with just such
tearful sighs and prayers stole a pearl from the halo of the Mother of God, and
afterwards, in the face of all the people, laid the whole price of it at her
feet, and the Holy Mother sheltered him with her mantle before all the people,
so that it was a miracle, and the command was given through the authorities to
write it all down word for word in the Imperial books. And you let a mouse in,
so you insulted the very throne of God. And if you were not my natural master,
whom I dandled in my arms when I was a stripling, I would have done for you
now, without budging from this place!"

Pyotr Stepanovitch flew into a violent rage.

"Tell me, have you seen Stavrogin to-day?"

"Don't you dare to question me. Mr. Stavrogin is fairly amazed at you, and he
had no share in it even in wish, let alone instructions or giving money. You've
presumed with me."

"You'll get the money and you'll get another two thousand in Petersburg, when
you get there, in a lump sum, and you'll get more."

"You are lying, my fine gentleman, and it makes me laugh to see how easily you
are taken in. Mr. Stavrogin stands at the top of the ladder above you, and you
yelp at him from below like a silly puppy dog, while he thinks it would be
doing you an honour to spit at you."

"But do you know," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch in a rage, "that I won't let you
stir a step from here, you scoundrel, and I'll hand you straight over to the
police."

Fedka leapt on to his feet and his eyes gleamed with fury. Pyotr Stepanovitch
pulled out his revolver. Then followed a rapid and revolting scene: before
Pyotr Stepanovitch could take aim, Fedka swung round and in a flash struck him
on the cheek with all his might. Then there was the thud of a second blow, a
third, then a fourth, all on the cheek. Pyotr Stepanovitch was dazed; with his
eyes starting out of his head, he muttered something, and suddenly crashed full
length to the ground.

"There you are; take him," shouted Fedka with a triumphant swagger; he
instantly took up his cap, his bag from under the bench, and was gone. Pyotr
Stepanovitch lay gasping and unconscious. Liputin even imagined that he had
been murdered. Kirillov ran headlong into the kitchen.

"Water!" he cried, and ladling some water in an iron dipper from a bucket, he
poured it over the injured man's head. Pyotr Stepanovitch stirred, raised his
head, sat up, and looked blankly about him.

"Well, how are you?" asked Kirillov. Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at him intently,
still not recognising him; but seeing Liputin peeping in from the kitchen, he
smiled his hateful smile and suddenly got up, picking up his revolver from the
floor.

"If you take it into your head to run away to-morrow like that scoundrel
Stavrogin," he cried, pouncing furiously on Kirillov, pale, stammering, and
hardly able to articulate his words, "I'll hang you... like a fly... or crush
you... if it's at the other end of the world... do you understand!"

And he held the revolver straight at Kirillov's head; but almost at the same
minute, coming completely to himself, he drew back his hand, thrust the
revolver into his pocket, and without saying another word ran out of the house.
Liputin followed him. They clambered through the same gap and again walked
along the slope holding to the fence. Pyotr Stepanovitch strode rapidly down
the street so that Liputin could scarcely keep up with him. At the first
crossing he suddenly stopped.

"Well?" He turned to Liputin with a challenge.

Liputin remembered the revolver and was still trembling all over after the
scene he had witnessed; but the answer seemed to come of itself irresistibly
from his tongue:

"I think... I think that..."

"Did you see what Fedka was drinking in the kitchen?"

"What he was drinking? He was drinking vodka."

"Well then, let me tell you it's the last time in his life he will drink vodka.
I recommend you to remember that and reflect on it. And now go to hell; you are
not wanted till to-morrow. But mind now, don't be a fool!"

Liputin rushed home full speed.

