# PART II - CHAPTER III. THE DUEL - IV
[Metadata]: # {02.03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03.04}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER III. THE DUEL
IV
# IV
He learned at once from Alexey Yegorytch that Varvara Petrovna had been very
glad to hear that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had gone out for a ride--the first
time he had left the house after eight days' illness. She had ordered the
carriage, and had driven out alone for a breath of fresh air "according to the
habit of the past, as she had forgotten for the last eight days what it meant
to breathe fresh air."

"Alone, or with Darya Pavlovna?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch interrupted the old
man with a rapid question, and he scowled when he heard that Darya Pavlovna
"had declined to go abroad on account of indisposition and was in her rooms."

"Listen, old man," he said, as though suddenly making up his mind. "Keep watch
over her all to-day, and if you notice her coming to me, stop her at once, and
tell her that I can't see her for a few days at least... that I ask her not to
come myself.... I'll let her know myself, when the time comes. Do you hear?"

"I'll tell her, sir," said Alexey Yegorytch, with distress in his voice,
dropping his eyes.

"Not till you see clearly she's meaning to come and see me of herself, though."

"Don't be afraid, sir, there shall be no mistake. Your interviews have all
passed through me, hitherto. You've always turned to me for help."

"I know. Not till she comes of herself, anyway. Bring me some tea, if you can,
at once."

The old man had hardly gone out, when almost at the same instant the door
reopened, and Darya Pavlovna appeared in the doorway. Her eyes were tranquil,
though her face was pale.

"Where have you come from?" exclaimed Stavrogin.

"I was standing there, and waiting for him to go out, to come in to you. I
heard the order you gave him, and when he came out just now I hid round the
corner, on the right, and he didn't notice me."

"I've long meant to break off with you, Dasha... for a while... for the
present. I couldn't see you last night, in spite of your note. I meant to write
to you myself, but I don't know how to write," he added with vexation, almost
as though with disgust.

"I thought myself that we must break it off. Varvara Petrovna is too suspicious
of our relations."

"Well, let her be."

"She mustn't be worried. So now we part till the end comes."

"You still insist on expecting the end?"

"Yes, I'm sure of it."

"But nothing in the world ever has an end."

"This will have an end. Then call me. I'll come. Now, good-bye."

"And what sort of end will it be?" smiled Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"You're not wounded, and... have not shed blood?" she asked, not answering his
question.

"It was stupid. I didn't kill anyone. Don't be uneasy. However, you'll hear all
about it to-day from every one. I'm not quite well."

"I'm going. The announcement of the marriage won't be to-day?" she added
irresolutely.

"It won't be to-day, and it won't be to-morrow. I can't say about the day after
to-morrow. Perhaps we shall all be dead, and so much the better. Leave me
alone, leave me alone, do."

"You won't ruin that other... mad girl?"

"I won't ruin either of the mad creatures. It seems to be the sane I'm ruining.
I'm so vile and loathsome, Dasha, that I might really send for you, 'at the
latter end,' as you say. And in spite of your sanity you'll come. Why will you
be your own ruin?"

"I know that at the end I shall be the only one left you, and... I'm waiting
for that."

"And what if I don't send for you after all, but run away from you?"

"That can't be. You will send for me."

"There's a great deal of contempt for me in that."

"You know that there's not only contempt."

"Then there is contempt, anyway?"

"I used the wrong word. God is my witness, it's my greatest wish that you may
never have need of me."

"One phrase is as good as another. I should also have wished not to have ruined
you."

"You can never, anyhow, be my ruin; and you know that yourself, better than
anyone," Darya Pavlovna said, rapidly and resolutely. "If I don't come to you I
shall be a sister of mercy, a nurse, shall wait upon the sick, or go selling
the gospel. I've made up my mind to that. I cannot be anyone's wife. I can't
live in a house like this, either. That's not what I want.... You know all
that."

"No, I never could tell what you want. It seems to me that you're interested in
me, as some veteran nurses get specially interested in some particular invalid
in comparison with the others, or still more, like some pious old women who
frequent funerals and find one corpse more attractive than another. Why do you
look at me so strangely?"

"Are you very ill?" she asked sympathetically, looking at him in a peculiar
way. "Good heavens! And this man wants to do without me!"

"Listen, Dasha, now I'm always seeing phantoms. One devil offered me yesterday,
on the bridge, to murder Lebyadkin and Marya Timofyevna, to settle the marriage
difficulty, and to cover up all traces. He asked me to give him three roubles
on account, but gave me to understand that the whole operation wouldn't cost
less than fifteen hundred. Wasn't he a calculating devil! A regular shopkeeper.
Ha ha!"

"But you're fully convinced that it was an hallucination?"

"Oh, no; not a bit an hallucination! It was simply Fedka the convict, the
robber who escaped from prison. But that's not the point. What do you suppose I
did! I gave him all I had, everything in my purse, and now he's sure I've given
him that on account!"

"You met him at night, and he made such a suggestion? Surely you must see that
you're being caught in their nets on every side!"

"Well, let them be. But you've got some question at the tip of your tongue, you
know. I see it by your eyes," he added with a resentful and irritable smile.

Dasha was frightened.

"I've no question at all, and no doubt whatever; you'd better be quiet!" she
cried in dismay, as though waving off his question.

"Then you're convinced that I won't go to Fedka's little shop?"

"Oh, God!" she cried, clasping her hands. "Why do you torture me like this?"

"Oh, forgive me my stupid joke. I must be picking up bad manners from them. Do
you know, ever since last night I feel awfully inclined to laugh, to go on
laughing continually forever so long. It's as though I must explode with
laughter. It's like an illness.... Oh! my mother's coming in. I always know by
the rumble when her carriage has stopped at the entrance."

Dasha seized his hand.

"God save you from your demon, and... call me, call me quickly!"

"Oh! a fine demon! It's simply a little nasty, scrofulous imp, with a cold in
his head, one of the unsuccessful ones. But you have something you don't dare
to say again, Dasha?"

She looked at him with pain and reproach, and turned towards the door.

"Listen," he called after her, with a malignant and distorted smile. "If...
Yes, if, in one word, if... you understand, even if I did go to that little
shop, and if I called you after that--would you come then?"

She went out, hiding her face in her hands, and neither turning nor answering.

"She will come even after the shop," he whispered, thinking a moment, and an
expression of scornful disdain came into his face. "A nurse! H'm!... but
perhaps that's what I want."

