# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - X
[Metadata]: # {01.03.10}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.10}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS
X
# X
Stepan Trofimovitch was awaiting me with hysterical impatience. It was an hour
since he had returned. I found him in a state resembling intoxication; for the
first five minutes at least I thought he was drunk. Alas, the visit to the
Drozdovs had been the finishing-stroke.

"_Mon ami!_ I have completely lost the thread... Lise... I love and respect
that angel as before; just as before; but it seems to me they both asked me
simply to find out something from me, that is more simply to get something out
of me, and then to get rid of me.... That's how it is."

"You ought to be ashamed!" I couldn't help exclaiming.

"My friend, now I am utterly alone. _Enfin, c'est ridicule._  Would you believe
it, the place is positively packed with mysteries there too. They simply flew
at me about those ears and noses, and some mysteries in Petersburg too. You
know they hadn't heard till they came about the tricks Nicolas played here four
years ago. 'You were here, you saw it, is it true that he is mad?' Where they
got the idea I can't make out. Why is it that Praskovya is so anxious Nicolas
should be mad? The woman will have it so, she will. _Ce Maurice,_ or what's his
name, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, _brave homme tout de même..._ but can it be for his
sake, and after she wrote herself from Paris to _cette pauvre amie?... Enfin,_
this Praskovya, as _cette chère amie_ calls her, is a type. She's Gogol's
Madame Box, of immortal memory, only she's a spiteful Madame Box, a malignant
Box, and in an immensely exaggerated form."

"That's making her out a regular packing-case if it's an exaggerated form."

"Well, perhaps it's the opposite; it's all the same, only don't interrupt me,
for I'm all in a whirl. They are all at loggerheads, except Lise, she keeps on
with her 'Auntie, auntie!' but Lise's sly, and there's something behind it too.
Secrets. She has quarrelled with the old lady. _Cette pauvre_ auntie tyrannises
over every one it's true, and then there's the governor's wife, and the
rudeness of local society, and Karmazinov's 'rudeness'; and then this idea of
madness, _ce Lipoutine, ce que je ne comprends pas..._ and... and they say
she's been putting vinegar on her head, and here are we with our complaints and
letters.... Oh, how I have tormented her and at such a time! _Je suis un
ingrat!_ Only imagine, I come back and find a letter from her; read it, read
it! Oh, how ungrateful it was of me!"

He gave me a letter he had just received from Varvara Petrovna. She seemed to
have repented of her "stay at home." The letter was amiable but decided in
tone, and brief. She invited Stepan Trofimovitch to come to her the day after
to-morrow, which was Sunday, at twelve o'clock, and advised him to bring one of
his friends with him. (My name was mentioned in parenthesis). She promised on
her side to invite Shatov, as the brother of Darya Pavlovna. "You can obtain a
final answer from her: will that be enough for you? Is this the formality you
were so anxious for?"

"Observe that irritable phrase about formality. Poor thing, poor thing, the
friend of my whole life! I confess the sudden determination of my whole future
almost crushed me.... I confess I still had hopes, but now _tout est dit._ I
know now that all is over. _C'est terrible!_ Oh, that that Sunday would never
come and everything would go on in the old way. You would have gone on coming
and I'd have gone on here...."

"You've been upset by all those nasty things Liputin said, those slanders."

"My dear, you have touched on another sore spot with your friendly finger. Such
friendly fingers are generally merciless and sometimes unreasonable; _pardon,_
you may not believe it, but I'd almost forgotten all that, all that nastiness,
not that I forgot it, indeed, but in my foolishness I tried all the while I was
with Lise to be happy and persuaded myself I was happy. But now... Oh, now I'm
thinking of that generous, humane woman, so long-suffering with my contemptible
failings--not that she's been altogether long-suffering, but what have I been
with my horrid, worthless character! I'm a capricious child, with all the
egoism of a child and none of the innocence. For the last twenty years she's
been looking after me like a nurse, _cette pauvre_ auntie, as Lise so
charmingly calls her.... And now, after twenty years, the child clamours to be
married, sending letter after letter, while her head's in a vinegar-compress
and... now he's got it--on Sunday I shall be a married man, that's no joke....
And why did I keep insisting myself, what did I write those letters for? Oh, I
forgot. Lise idolizes Darya Pavlovna, she says so anyway; she says of her
'_c'est un ange,_ only rather a reserved one.' They both advised me, even
Praskovya. ... Praskovya didn't advise me though. Oh, what venom lies concealed
in that 'Box'! And Lise didn't exactly advise me: 'What do you want to get
married for,' she said, 'your intellectual pleasures ought to be enough for
you.' She laughed. I forgive her for laughing, for there's an ache in her own
heart. You can't get on without a woman though, they said to me. The
infirmities of age are coming upon you, and she will tuck you up, or whatever
it is.... _Ma foi,_ I've been thinking myself all this time I've been sitting
with you that Providence was sending her to me in the decline of my stormy
years and that she would tuck me up, or whatever they call it... _enfin,_
she'll be handy for the housekeeping. See what a litter there is, look how
everything's lying about. I said it must be cleared up this morning, and look
at the book on the floor! _La pauvre amie_ was always angry at the untidiness
here. ... Ah, now I shall no longer hear her voice! _Vingt ans!_ And it seems
they've had anonymous letters. Only fancy, it's said that Nicolas has sold
Lebyadkin his property. _C'est un monstre; et enfin_ what is Lebyadkin? Lise
listens, and listens, ooh, how she listens! I forgave her laughing. I saw her
face as she listened, and _ce Maurice..._I shouldn't care to be in his shoes
now, _brave homme tout de même,_ but rather shy; but never mind him...."

He paused. He was tired and upset, and sat with drooping head, staring at the
floor with his tired eyes. I took advantage of the interval to tell him of my
visit to Filipov's house, and curtly and dryly expressed my opinion that
Lebyadkin's sister (whom I had never seen) really might have been somehow
victimised by Nicolas at some time during that mysterious period of his life,
as Liputin had called it, and that it was very possible that Lebyadkin received
sums of money from Nicolas for some reason, but that was all. As for the
scandal about Darya Pavlovna, that was all nonsense, all that brute Liputin's
misrepresentations, that this was anyway what Alexey Nilitch warmly maintained,
and we had no grounds for disbelieving him. Stepan Trofimovitch listened to my
assurances with an absent air, as though they did not concern him. I mentioned
by the way my conversation with Kirillov, and added that he might be mad.

"He's not mad, but one of those shallow-minded people," he mumbled listlessly.
"_Ces gens-là supposent la nature et la societé humaine autres que Dieu ne les
a faites et qu'elles ne sont réellement._ People try to make up to them, but
Stepan Verhovensky does not, anyway. I saw them that time in Petersburg _avec
cette chère amie_ (oh, how I used to wound her then), and I wasn't afraid of
their abuse or even of their praise. I'm not afraid now either. _Mais parlons
d'autre chose...._ I believe I have done dreadful things. Only fancy, I sent a
letter yesterday to Darya Pavlovna and... how I curse myself for it!"

"What did you write about?"

"Oh, my friend, believe me, it was all done in a noble spirit. I let her know
that I had written to Nicolas five days before, also in a noble spirit."

"I understand now!" I cried with heat. "And what right had you to couple their
names like that?"

"But, _mon cher,_ don't crush me completely, don't shout at me; as it is I'm
utterly squashed like... a black-beetle. And, after all, I thought it was all
so honourable. Suppose that something really happened... _en Suisse_...or was
beginning. I was bound to question their hearts beforehand that I..._enfin,_
that I might not constrain their hearts, and be a stumbling-block in their
paths. I acted simply from honourable feeling."

"Oh, heavens! What a stupid thing you've done!" I cried involuntarily.

"Yes, yes," he assented with positive eagerness. "You have never said anything
more just, _c'était bête, mais que faire? Tout est dit._ I shall marry her just
the same even if it be to cover 'another's sins.' So there was no object in
writing, was there?"

"You're at that idea again!"

"Oh, you won't frighten me with your shouts now. You see a different Stepan
Verhovensky before you now. The man I was is buried. _Enfin, tout est dit._ And
why do you cry out? Simply because you're not getting married, and you won't
have to wear a certain decoration on your head. Does that shock you again? My
poor friend, you don't know woman, while I have done nothing but study her. 'If
you want to conquer the world, conquer yourself'--the one good thing that
another romantic like you, my bride's brother, Shatov, has succeeded in saying.
I would gladly borrow from him his phrase. Well, here I am ready to conquer
myself, and I'm getting married. And what am I conquering by way of the whole
world? Oh, my friend, marriage is the moral death of every proud soul, of all
independence. Married life will corrupt me, it will sap my energy, my courage
in the service of the cause. Children will come, probably not my own
either--certainly not my own: a wise man is not afraid to face the truth.
Liputin proposed this morning putting up barricades to keep out Nicolas;
Liputin's a fool. A woman would deceive the all-seeing eye itself. _Le bon
Dieu_ knew what He was in for when He was creating woman, but I'm sure that she
meddled in it herself and forced Him to create her such as she is... and with
such attributes: for who would have incurred so much trouble for nothing? I
know Nastasya may be angry with me for free-thinking, but..._enfin, tout est
dit._"

He wouldn't have been himself if he could have dispensed with the cheap gibing
free-thought which was in vogue in his day. Now, at any rate, he comforted
himself with a gibe, but not for long.

"Oh, if that day after to-morrow, that Sunday, might never come!" he exclaimed
suddenly, this time in utter despair. "Why could not this one week be without a
Sunday--_si le miracle existe_? What would it be to Providence to blot out one
Sunday from the calendar? If only to prove His power to the atheists _et que
tout soit dit!_ Oh, how I loved her! Twenty years, these twenty years, and she
has never understood me!"

"But of whom are you talking? Even I don't understand you!" I asked, wondering.

"_Vingt ans!_ And she has not once understood me; oh, it's cruel! And can she
really believe that I am marrying from fear, from poverty? Oh, the shame of it!
Oh, Auntie, Auntie, I do it for you!... Oh, let her know, that Auntie, that she
is the one woman I have adored for twenty years! She must learn this, it must
be so, if not they will need force to drag me under _ce qu'on appelle le_
wedding-crown."

It was the first time I had heard this confession, and so vigorously uttered. I
won't conceal the fact that I was terribly tempted to laugh. I was wrong.

"He is the only one left me now, the only one, my one hope!" he cried suddenly,
clasping his hands as though struck by a new idea. "Only he, my poor boy, can
save me now, and, oh, why doesn't he come! Oh, my son, oh, my Petrusha.... And
though I do not deserve the name of father, but rather that of tiger,
yet..._Laissez-moi, mon ami,_ I'll lie down a little, to collect my ideas. I am
so tired, so tired. And I think it's time you were in bed. _Voyez vous,_ it's
twelve o'clock...."

