# PART III - CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED - III
[Metadata]: # {03.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED
III
# III
He rushed off to overtake Lizaveta Nikolaevna. She had not got far away, only a
few steps, from the house. She had been detained by Alexey Yegorytch, who was
following a step behind her, in a tail coat, and without a hat; his head was
bowed respectfully. He was persistently entreating her to wait for a carriage;
the old man was alarmed and almost in tears.

"Go along. Your master is asking for tea, and there's no one to give it to
him," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, pushing him away. He took Liza's arm.

She did not pull her arm away, but she seemed hardly to know what she was
doing; she was still dazed.

"To begin with, you are going the wrong way," babbled Pyotr Stepanovitch. "We
ought to go this way, and not by the garden, and, secondly, walking is
impossible in any case. It's over two miles, and you are not properly dressed.
If you would wait a second, I came in a droshky; the horse is in the yard. I'll
get it instantly, put you in, and get you home so that no one sees you."

"How kind you are," said Liza graciously.

"Oh, not at all. Any humane man in my position would do the same...."

Liza looked at him, and was surprised.

"Good heavens! Why I thought it was that old man here still."

"Listen. I am awfully glad that you take it like this, because it's all such a
frightfully stupid convention, and since it's come to that, hadn't I better
tell the old man to get the carriage at once. It's only a matter of ten minutes
and we'll turn back and wait in the porch, eh?"

"I want first... where are those murdered people?"

"Ah! What next? That was what I was afraid of.... No, we'd better leave those
wretched creatures alone; it's no use your looking at them."

"I know where they are. I know that house."

"Well? What if you do know it? Come; it's raining, and there's a fog. (A nice
job this sacred duty I've taken upon myself.) Listen, Lizaveta Nikolaevna! It's
one of two alternatives. Either you come with me in the droshky--in that case
wait here, and don't take another step, for if we go another twenty steps we
must be seen by Mavriky Nikolaevitch."

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch! Where? Where?"

"Well, if you want to go with him, I'll take you a little farther, if you like,
and show you where he sits, but I don't care to go up to him just now. No,
thank you."

"He is waiting for me. Good God!" she suddenly stopped, and a flush of colour
flooded her face.

"Oh! Come now. If he is an unconventional man! You know, Lizaveta Nikolaevna,
it's none of my business. I am a complete outsider, and you know that yourself.
But, still, I wish you well.... If your 'fairy boat' has failed you, if it has
turned out to be nothing more than a rotten old hulk, only fit to be chopped
up..."

"Ah! That's fine, that's lovely," cried Liza.

"Lovely, and yet your tears are falling. You must have spirit. You must be as
good as a man in every way. In our age, when woman.... Foo, hang it," Pyotr
Stepanovitch was on the point of spitting. "And the chief point is that there
is nothing to regret. It may all turn out for the best. Mavriky Nikolaevitch is
a man.... In fact, he is a man of feeling though not talkative, but that's a
good thing, too, as long as he has no conventional notions, of course...."

"Lovely, lovely!" Liza laughed hysterically.

"Well, hang it all... Lizaveta Nikolaevna," said Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly
piqued. "I am simply here on your account.... It's nothing to me.... I helped
you yesterday when you wanted it yourself. To-day ... well, you can see Mavriky
Nikolaevitch from here; there he's sitting; he doesn't see us. I say, Lizaveta
Nikolaevna, have you ever read 'Polenka Saxe'?"

"What's that?"

"It's the name of a novel, 'Polenka Saxe.' I read it when I was a student....
In it a very wealthy official of some sort, Saxe, arrested his wife at a summer
villa for infidelity.... But, hang it; it's no consequence! You'll see, Mavriky
Nikolaevitch will make you an offer before you get home. He doesn't see us
yet."

"Ach! Don't let him see us!" Liza cried suddenly, like a mad creature. "Come
away, come away! To the woods, to the fields!"

And she ran back.

"Lizaveta Nikolaevna, this is such cowardice," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch,
running after her. "And why don't you want him to see you? On the contrary, you
must look him straight in the face, with pride.... If it's some feeling about
that... some maidenly... that's such a prejudice, so out of date... But where
are you going? Where are you going? Ech! she is running! Better go back to
Stavrogin's and take my droshky.... Where are you going? That's the way to the
fields! There! She's fallen down!..."

He stopped. Liza was flying along like a bird, not conscious where she was
going, and Pyotr Stepanovitch was already fifty paces behind her. She stumbled
over a mound of earth and fell down. At the same moment there was the sound of
a terrible shout from behind. It came from Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had seen
her flight and her fall, and was running to her across the field. In a flash
Pyotr Stepanovitch had retired into Stavrogin's gateway to make haste and get
into his droshky.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was already standing in terrible alarm by Liza, who had
risen to her feet; he was bending over her and holding her hands in both of
his. All the incredible surroundings of this meeting overwhelmed him, and tears
were rolling down his cheeks. He saw the woman for whom he had such reverent
devotion running madly across the fields, at such an hour, in such weather,
with nothing over her dress, the gay dress she wore the day before now crumpled
and muddy from her fall.... He could not utter a word; he took off his
greatcoat, and with trembling hands put it round her shoulders. Suddenly he
uttered a cry, feeling that she had pressed her lips to his hand.

"Liza," he cried, "I am no good for anything, but don't drive me away from
you!"

"Oh, no! Let us make haste away from here. Don't leave me!" and, seizing his
hand, she drew him after her. "Mavriky Nikolaevitch," she suddenly dropped her
voice timidly, "I kept a bold face there all the time, but now I am afraid of
death. I shall die soon, very soon, but I am afraid, I am afraid to die...."
she whispered, pressing his hand tight.

"Oh, if there were someone," he looked round in despair. "Some passer-by! You
will get your feet wet, you... will lose your reason!"

"It's all right; it's all right," she tried to reassure him. "That's right. I
am not so frightened with you. Hold my hand, lead me.... Where are we going
now? Home? No! I want first to see the people who have been murdered. His wife
has been murdered they say, and he says he killed her himself. But that's not
true, is it? I want to see for myself those three who've been killed... on my
account... it's because of them his love for me has grown cold since last
night.... I shall see and find out everything. Make haste, make haste, I know
the house... there's a fire there.... Mavriky Nikolaevitch, my dear one, don't
forgive me in my shame! Why forgive me? Why are you crying? Give me a blow and
kill me here in the field, like a dog!"

"No one is your judge now," Mavriky Nikolaevitch pronounced firmly. "God
forgive you. I least of all can be your judge."

But it would be strange to describe their conversation. And meanwhile they
walked hand in hand quickly, hurrying as though they were crazy. They were
going straight towards the fire. Mavriky Nikolaevitch still had hopes of
meeting a cart at least, but no one came that way. A mist of fine, drizzling
rain enveloped the whole country, swallowing up every ray of light, every gleam
of colour, and transforming everything into one smoky, leaden,
indistinguishable mass. It had long been daylight, yet it seemed as though it
were still night. And suddenly in this cold foggy mist there appeared coming
towards them a strange and absurd figure. Picturing it now I think I should not
have believed my eyes if I had been in Lizaveta Nikolaevna's place, yet she
uttered a cry of joy, and recognised the approaching figure at once. It was
Stepan Trofimovitch. How he had gone off, how the insane, impracticable idea of
his flight came to be carried out, of that later. I will only mention that he
was in a fever that morning, yet even illness did not prevent his starting. He
was walking resolutely on the damp ground. It was evident that he had planned
the enterprise to the best of his ability, alone with his inexperience and lack
of practical sense. He wore "travelling dress," that is, a greatcoat with a
wide patent-leather belt, fastened with a buckle and a pair of new high boots
pulled over his trousers. Probably he had for some time past pictured a
traveller as looking like this, and the belt and the high boots with the
shining tops like a hussar's, in which he could hardly walk, had been ready
some time before. A broad-brimmed hat, a knitted scarf, twisted close round his
neck, a stick in his right hand, and an exceedingly small but extremely tightly
packed bag in his left, completed his get-up. He had, besides, in the same
right hand, an open umbrella. These three objects--the umbrella, the stick, and
the bag--had been very awkward to carry for the first mile, and had begun to be
heavy by the second.

"Can it really be you?" cried Liza, looking at him with distressed wonder,
after her first rush of instinctive gladness.

_"Lise,"_ cried Stepan Trofimovitch, rushing to her almost in delirium too.
"_Chère, chère_.... Can you be out, too... in such a fog? You see the glow of
fire. _Vous êtes malheureuse, n'est-ce pas?_ I see, I see. Don't tell me, but
don't question me either. _Nous sommes tous malheureux mais il faut les
pardonner tous. Pardonnons, Lise,_ and let us be free forever. To be quit of
the world and be completely free. _Il faut pardonner, pardonner, et
pardonner!"_

"But why are you kneeling down?"

"Because, taking leave of the world, I want to take leave of all my past in
your person!" He wept and raised both her hands to his tear-stained eyes. "I
kneel to all that was beautiful in my life. I kiss and give thanks! Now I've
torn myself in half; left behind a mad visionary who dreamed of soaring to the
sky. _Vingt-deux ans,_ here. A shattered, frozen old man. A tutor _chez ce
marchand, s'il existe pourtant ce marchand...._ But how drenched you are,
_Lise!"_ he cried, jumping on to his feet, feeling that his knees too were
soaked by the wet earth. "And how is it possible... you are in such a dress...
and on foot, and in these fields?... You are crying! _Vous êtes malheureuse._
Bah, I did hear something.... But where have you come from now?" He asked
hurried questions with an uneasy air, looking in extreme bewilderment at
Mavriky Nikolaevitch. _"Mais savez-vous l'heure qu'il est?"_

"Stepan Trofimovitch, have you heard anything about the people who've been
murdered?... Is it true? Is it true?"

"These people! I saw the glow of their work all night. They were bound to end
in this...." His eyes flashed again. "I am fleeing away from madness, from a
delirious dream. I am fleeing away to seek for Russia. _Existe-t-elle, la
Russie? Bah! C'est vous, cher capitaine!_ I've never doubted that I should meet
you somewhere on some high adventure.... But take my umbrella, and--why must
you be on foot? For God's sake, do at least take my umbrella, for I shall hire
a carriage somewhere in any case. I am on foot because Stasie (I mean,
Nastasya) would have shouted for the benefit of the whole street if she'd found
out I was going away. So I slipped away as far as possible incognito. I don't
know; in the _Voice_ they write of there being brigands everywhere, but I
thought surely I shouldn't meet a brigand the moment I came out on the road.
_Chère Lise,_ I thought you said something of someone's being murdered. _Oh,
mon Dieu!_ You are ill!"

"Come along, come along!" cried Liza, almost in hysterics, drawing Mavriky
Nikolaevitch after her again. "Wait a minute, Stepan Trofimovitch!" she came
back suddenly to him. "Stay, poor darling, let me sign you with the cross.
Perhaps, it would be better to put you under control, but I'd rather make the
sign of the cross over you. You, too, pray for 'poor' Liza--just a little,
don't bother too much about it. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, give that baby back his
umbrella. You must give it him. That's right.... Come, let us go, let us go!"

They reached the fatal house at the very moment when the huge crowd, which had
gathered round it, had already heard a good deal of Stavrogin, and of how much
it was to his interest to murder his wife. Yet, I repeat, the immense majority
went on listening without moving or uttering a word. The only people who were
excited were bawling drunkards and excitable individuals of the same sort as
the gesticulatory cabinet-maker. Every one knew the latter as a man really of
mild disposition, but he was liable on occasion to get excited and to fly off
at a tangent if anything struck him in a certain way. I did not see Liza and
Mavriky Nikolaevitch arrive. Petrified with amazement, I first noticed Liza
some distance away in the crowd, and I did not at once catch sight of Mavriky
Nikolaevitch. I fancy there was a moment when he fell two or three steps behind
her or was pressed back by the crush. Liza, forcing her way through the crowd,
seeing and noticing nothing round her, like one in a delirium, like a patient
escaped from a hospital, attracted attention only too quickly, of course. There
arose a hubbub of loud talking and at last sudden shouts. Some one bawled out,
"It's Stavrogin's woman!" And on the other side, "It's not enough to murder
them, she wants to look at them!" All at once I saw an arm raised above her
head from behind and suddenly brought down upon it. Liza fell to the ground. We
heard a fearful scream from Mavriky Nikolaevitch as he dashed to her assistance
and struck with all his strength the man who stood between him and Liza. But at
that instant the same cabinetmaker seized him with both arms from behind. For
some minutes nothing could be distinguished in the scrimmage that followed. I
believe Liza got up but was knocked down by another blow. Suddenly the crowd
parted and a small space was left empty round Liza's prostrate figure, and
Mavriky Nikolaevitch, frantic with grief and covered with blood, was standing
over her, screaming, weeping, and wringing his hands. I don't remember exactly
what followed after; I only remember that they began to carry Liza away. I ran
after her. She was still alive and perhaps still conscious. The cabinet-maker
and three other men in the crowd were seized. These three still deny having
taken any part in the dastardly deed, stubbornly maintaining that they have
been arrested by mistake. Perhaps it's the truth. Though the evidence against
the cabinet-maker is clear, he is so irrational that he is still unable to
explain what happened coherently. I too, as a spectator, though at some
distance, had to give evidence at the inquest. I declared that it had all
happened entirely accidentally through the action of men perhaps moved by
ill-feeling, yet scarcely conscious of what they were doing--drunk and
irresponsible. I am of that opinion to this day.

