# PART II - CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued) - IV
[Metadata]: # {02.02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02.04}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued)
IV
# IV
"A knife, a knife," he repeated with uncontrollable anger, striding along
through the mud and puddles, without picking his way. It is true that at
moments he had a terrible desire to laugh aloud frantically; but for some
reason he controlled himself and restrained his laughter. He recovered himself
only on the bridge, on the spot where Fedka had met him that evening. He found
the man lying in wait for him again. Seeing Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch he took off
his cap, grinned gaily, and began babbling briskly and merrily about something.
At first Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch walked on without stopping, and for some time
did not even listen to the tramp who was pestering him again. He was suddenly
struck by the thought that he had entirely forgotten him, and had forgotten him
at the very moment when he himself was repeating, "A knife, a knife." He seized
the tramp by the collar and gave vent to his pent-up rage by flinging him
violently against the bridge. For one instant the man thought of fighting, but
almost at once realising that compared with his adversary, who had fallen upon
him unawares, he was no better than a wisp of straw, he subsided and was
silent, without offering any resistance. Crouching on the ground with his
elbows crooked behind his back, the wily tramp calmly waited for what would
happen next, apparently quite incredulous of danger. He was right in his
reckoning. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had already with his left hand taken off his
thick scarf to tie his prisoner's arms, but suddenly, for some reason, he
abandoned him, and shoved him away. The man instantly sprang on to his feet,
turned round, and a short, broad boot-knife suddenly gleamed in his hand.

"Away with that knife; put it away, at once!" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch commanded
with an impatient gesture, and the knife vanished as instantaneously as it had
appeared.

Without speaking again or turning round, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went on his
way. But the persistent vagabond did not leave him even now, though now, it is
true, he did not chatter, and even respectfully kept his distance, a full step
behind.

They crossed the bridge like this and came out on to the river bank, turning
this time to the left, again into a long deserted back street, which led to the
centre of the town by a shorter way than going through Bogoyavlensky Street.

"Is it true, as they say, that you robbed a church in the district the other
day?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked suddenly.

"I went in to say my prayers in the first place," the tramp answered, sedately
and respectfully as though nothing had happened; more than sedately, in fact,
almost with dignity. There was no trace of his former "friendly" familiarity.
All that was to be seen was a serious, business-like man, who had indeed been
gratuitously insulted, but who was capable of overlooking an insult.

"But when the Lord led me there," he went on, "ech, I thought what a heavenly
abundance! It was all owing to my helpless state, as in our way of life there's
no doing without assistance. And, now, God be my witness, sir, it was my own
loss. The Lord punished me for my sins, and what with the censer and the
deacon's halter, I only got twelve roubles altogether. The chin setting of St.
Nikolay of pure silver went for next to nothing. They said it was plated."

"You killed the watchman?"

"That is, I cleared the place out together with that watchman, but afterwards,
next morning, by the river, we fell to quarrelling which should carry the sack.
I sinned, I did lighten his load for him."

"Well, you can rob and murder again."

"That's the very advice Pyotr Stepanovitch gives me, in the very same words,
for he's uncommonly mean and hard-hearted about helping a fellow-creature. And
what's more, he hasn't a ha'p'orth of belief in the Heavenly Creator, who made
us out of earthly clay; but he says it's all the work of nature even to the
last beast. He doesn't understand either that with our way of life it's
impossible for us to get along without friendly assistance. If you begin to
talk to him he looks like a sheep at the water; it makes one wonder. Would you
believe, at Captain Lebyadkin's, out yonder, whom your honour's just been
visiting, when he was living at Filipov's, before you came, the door stood open
all night long. He'd be drunk and sleeping like the dead, and his money
dropping out of his pockets all over the floor. I've chanced to see it with my
own eyes, for in our way of life it's impossible to live without
assistance...."

"How do you mean with your own eyes? Did you go in at night then?"

"Maybe I did go in, but no one knows of it."

"Why didn't you kill him?"

"Reckoning it out, I steadied myself. For once having learned for sure that I
can always get one hundred and fifty roubles, why should I go so far when I can
get fifteen hundred roubles, if I only bide my time. For Captain Lebyadkin
(I've heard him with my own ears) had great hopes of you when he was drunk; and
there isn't a tavern here--not the lowest pot-house--where he hasn't talked
about it when he was in that state. So that hearing it from many lips, I began,
too, to rest all my hopes on your excellency. I speak to you, sir, as to my
father, or my own brother; for Pyotr Stepanovitch will never learn that from
me, and not a soul in the world. So won't your excellency spare me three
roubles in your kindness? You might set my mind at rest, so that I might know
the real truth; for we can't get on without assistance."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch laughed aloud, and taking out his purse, in which he
had as much as fifty roubles, in small notes, threw him one note out of the
bundle, then a second, a third, a fourth. Fedka flew to catch them in the air.
The notes dropped into the mud, and he snatched them up crying, "Ech! ech!"
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch finished by flinging the whole bundle at him, and,
still laughing, went on down the street, this time alone. The tramp remained
crawling on his knees in the mud, looking for the notes which were blown about
by the wind and soaking in the puddles, and for an hour after his spasmodic
cries of "Ech! ech!" were still to be heard in the darkness.

