# PART II - CHAPTER I. NIGHT - VI
[Metadata]: # {02.01.06}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01.06}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER I. NIGHT
VI
# VI
The door of the empty house in which Shatov was lodging was not closed; but,
making his way into the passage, Stavrogin found himself in utter darkness, and
began feeling with his hand for the stairs to the upper story. Suddenly a door
opened upstairs and a light appeared. Shatov did not come out himself, but
simply opened his door. When Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was standing in the
doorway of the room, he saw Shatov standing at the table in the corner, waiting
expectantly.

"Will you receive me on business?" he queried from the doorway.

"Come in and sit down," answered Shatov. "Shut the door; stay, I'll shut it."

He locked the door, returned to the table, and sat down, facing Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. He had grown thinner during that week, and now he seemed in a
fever.

"You've been worrying me to death," he said, looking down, in a soft
half-whisper. "Why didn't you come?"

"You were so sure I should come then?"

"Yes, stay, I have been delirious... perhaps I'm delirious now.... Stay a
moment."

He got up and seized something that was lying on the uppermost of his three
bookshelves. It was a revolver.

"One night, in delirium, I fancied that you were coming to kill me, and early
next morning I spent my last farthing on buying a revolver from that
good-for-nothing fellow Lyamshin; I did not mean to let you do it. Then I came
to myself again... I've neither powder nor shot; it has been lying there on the
shelf till now; wait a minute...."

He got up and was opening the casement.

"Don't throw it away, why should you?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch checked him.
"It's worth something. Besides, tomorrow people will begin saying that there
are revolvers lying about under Shatov's window. Put it back, that's right; sit
down. Tell me, why do you seem to be penitent for having thought I should come
to kill you? I have not come now to be reconciled, but to talk of something
necessary. Enlighten me to begin with. You didn't give me that blow because of
my connection with your wife?"

"You know I didn't, yourself," said Shatov, looking down again.

"And not because you believed the stupid gossip about Darya Pavlovna?"

"No, no, of course not! It's nonsense! My sister told me from the very
first..." Shatov said, harshly and impatiently, and even with a slight stamp of
his foot.

"Then I guessed right and you too guessed right," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went
on in a tranquil voice. "You are right. Marya Timofyevna Lebyadkin is my lawful
wife, married to me four and a half years ago in Petersburg. I suppose the blow
was on her account?"

Shatov, utterly astounded, listened in silence.

"I guessed, but did not believe it," he muttered at last, looking strangely at
Stavrogin.

"And you struck me?"

Shatov flushed and muttered almost incoherently:

"Because of your fall... your lie. I didn't go up to you to punish you... I
didn't know when I went up to you that I should strike you... I did it because
you meant so much to me in my life... I..."

"I understand, I understand, spare your words. I am sorry you are feverish.
I've come about a most urgent matter."

"I have been expecting you too long." Shatov seemed to be quivering all over,
and he got up from his seat. "Say what you have to say... I'll speak too...
later."

He sat down.

"What I have come about is nothing of that kind," began Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, scrutinising him with curiosity. "Owing to certain
circumstances I was forced this very day to choose such an hour to come and
tell you that they may murder you."

Shatov looked wildly at him.

"I know that I may be in some danger," he said in measured tones, "but how can
you have come to know of it?"

"Because I belong to them as you do, and am a member of their society, just as
you are."

"You... you are a member of the society?"

"I see from your eyes that you were prepared for anything from me rather than
that," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with a faint smile. "But, excuse me, you
knew then that there would be an attempt on your life?"

"Nothing of the sort. And I don't think so now, in spite of your words,
though... though there's no being sure of anything with these fools!" he cried
suddenly in a fury, striking the table with his fist. "I'm not afraid of them!
I've broken with them. That fellow's run here four times to tell me it was
possible... but"--he looked at Stavrogin--"what do you know about it, exactly?"

"Don't be uneasy; I am not deceiving you," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went on,
rather coldly, with the air of a man who is only fulfilling a duty. "You
question me as to what I know. I know that you entered that society abroad, two
years ago, at the time of the old organisation, just before you went to
America, and I believe, just after our last conversation, about which you wrote
so much to me in your letter from America. By the way, I must apologise for not
having answered you by letter, but confined myself to..."

"To sending the money; wait a bit," Shatov interrupted, hurriedly pulling out a
drawer in the table and taking from under some papers a rainbow-coloured note.
"Here, take it, the hundred roubles you sent me; but for you I should have
perished out there. I should have been a long time paying it back if it had not
been for your mother. She made me a present of that note nine months ago,
because I was so badly off after my illness. But, go on, please...."

He was breathless.

"In America you changed your views, and when you came back you wanted to
resign. They gave you no answer, but charged you to take over a printing press
here in Russia from someone, and to keep it till you handed it over to someone
who would come from them for it. I don't know the details exactly, but I fancy
that's the position in outline. You undertook it in the hope, or on the
condition, that it would be the last task they would require of you, and that
then they would release you altogether. Whether that is so or not, I learnt it,
not from them, but quite by chance. But now for what I fancy you don't know;
these gentry have no intention of parting with you."

"That's absurd!" cried Shatov. "I've told them honestly that I've cut myself
off from them in everything. That is my right, the right to freedom of
conscience and of thought.... I won't put up with it! There's no power which
could..."

"I say, don't shout," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch said earnestly, checking him.
"That Verhovensky is such a fellow that he may be listening to us now in your
passage, perhaps, with his own ears or someone else's. Even that drunkard,
Lebyadkin, was probably bound to keep an eye on you, and you on him, too, I
dare say? You'd better tell me, has Verhovensky accepted your arguments now, or
not?"

"He has. He has said that it can be done and that I have the right...."

"Well then, he's deceiving you. I know that even Kirillov, who scarcely belongs
to them at all, has given them information about you. And they have lots of
agents, even people who don't know that they're serving the society. They've
always kept a watch on you. One of the things Pyotr Verhovensky came here for
was to settle your business once for all, and he is fully authorised to do so,
that is at the first good opportunity, to get rid of you, as a man who knows
too much and might give them away. I repeat that this is certain, and allow me
to add that they are, for some reason, convinced that you are a spy, and that
if you haven't informed against them yet, you will. Is that true?"

Shatov made a wry face at hearing such a question asked in such a matter-of
fact tone.

"If I were a spy, whom could I inform?" he said angrily, not giving a direct
answer. "No, leave me alone, let me go to the devil!" he cried suddenly,
catching again at his original idea, which agitated him violently. Apparently
it affected him more deeply than the news of his own danger. "You, you,
Stavrogin, how could you mix yourself up with such shameful, stupid,
second-hand absurdity? You a member of the society? What an exploit for
Stavrogin!" he cried suddenly, in despair.

He clasped his hands, as though nothing could be a bitterer and more
inconsolable grief to him than such a discovery.

"Excuse me," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, extremely surprised, "but you seem
to look upon me as a sort of sun, and on yourself as an insect in comparison. I
noticed that even from your letter in America."

"You... you know.... Oh, let us drop me altogether," Shatov broke off suddenly,
"and if you can explain anything about yourself explain it.... Answer my
question!" he repeated feverishly.

"With pleasure. You ask how I could get into such a den? After what I have told
you, I'm bound to be frank with you to some extent on the subject. You see,
strictly speaking, I don't belong to the society at all, and I never have
belonged to it, and I've much more right than you to leave them, because I
never joined them. In fact, from the very beginning I told them that I was not
one of them, and that if I've happened to help them it has simply been by
accident as a man of leisure. I took some part in reorganising the society, on
the new plan, but that was all. But now they've changed their views, and have
made up their minds that it would be dangerous to let me go, and I believe I'm
sentenced to death too."

"Oh, they do nothing but sentence to death, and all by means of sealed
documents, signed by three men and a half. And you think they've any power!"

"You're partly right there and partly not," Stavrogin answered with the same
indifference, almost listlessness. "There's no doubt that there's a great deal
that's fanciful about it, as there always is in such cases: a handful magnifies
its size and significance. To my thinking, if you will have it, the only one is
Pyotr Verhovensky, and it's simply good-nature on his part to consider himself
only an agent of the society. But the fundamental idea is no stupider than
others of the sort. They are connected with the _Internationale._ They have
succeeded in establishing agents in Russia, they have even hit on a rather
original method, though it's only theoretical, of course. As for their
intentions here, the movements of our Russian organisation are something so
obscure and almost always unexpected that really they might try anything among
us. Note that Verhovensky is an obstinate man."

"He's a bug, an ignoramus, a buffoon, who understands nothing in Russia!" cried
Shatov spitefully.

"You know him very little. It's quite true that none of them understand much
about Russia, but not much less than you and I do. Besides, Verhovensky is an
enthusiast."

"Verhovensky an enthusiast?"

"Oh, yes. There is a point when he ceases to be a buffoon and becomes a madman.
I beg you to remember your own expression: 'Do you know how powerful a single
man may be?' Please don't laugh about it, he's quite capable of pulling a
trigger. They are convinced that I am a spy too. As they don't know how to do
things themselves, they're awfully fond of accusing people of being spies."

"But you're not afraid, are you?"

"N--no. I'm not very much afraid.... But your case is quite different. I warned
you that you might anyway keep it in mind. To my thinking there's no reason to
be offended in being threatened with danger by fools; their brains don't affect
the question. They've raised their hand against better men than you or me. It's
a quarter past eleven, though." He looked at his watch and got up from his
chair. "I wanted to ask you one quite irrelevant question."

"For God's sake!" cried Shatov, rising impulsively from his seat.

"I beg your pardon?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at him inquiringly.

"Ask it, ask your question for God's sake," Shatov repeated in indescribable
excitement, "but on condition that I ask you a question too. I beseech you to
allow me... I can't... ask your question!"

Stavrogin waited a moment and then began. "I've heard that you have some
influence on Marya Timofyevna, and that she was fond of seeing you and hearing
you talk. Is that so?"

"Yes... she used to listen..." said Shatov, confused.

"Within a day or two I intend to make a public announcement of our marriage
here in the town."

"Is that possible?" Shatov whispered, almost with horror.

"I don't quite understand you. There's no sort of difficulty about it,
witnesses to the marriage are here. Everything took place in Petersburg,
perfectly legally and smoothly, and if it has not been made known till now, it
is simply because the witnesses, Kirillov, Pyotr Verhovensky, and Lebyadkin
(whom I now have the pleasure of claiming as a brother-in-law) promised to hold
their tongues."

"I don't mean that... You speak so calmly... but good! Listen! You weren't
forced into that marriage, were you?"

"No, no one forced me into it." Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch smiled at Shatov's
importunate haste.

"And what's that talk she keeps up about her baby?" Shatov interposed
disconnectedly, with feverish haste.

"She talks about her baby? Bah! I didn't know. It's the first time I've heard
of it. She never had a baby and couldn't have had: Marya Timofyevna is a
virgin."

"Ah! That's just what I thought! Listen!"

"What's the matter with you, Shatov?"

Shatov hid his face in his hands, turned away, but suddenly clutched Stavrogin
by the shoulders.

"Do you know why, do you know why, anyway," he shouted, "why you did all this,
and why you are resolved on such a punishment now!"

"Your question is clever and malignant, but I mean to surprise you too; I fancy
I do know why I got married then, and why I am resolved on such a punishment
now, as you express it."

"Let's leave that... of that later. Put it off. Let's talk of the chief thing,
the chief thing. I've been waiting two years for you."

"Yes?"

"I've waited too long for you. I've been thinking of you incessantly. You are
the only man who could move... I wrote to you about it from America."

"I remember your long letter very well."

"Too long to be read? No doubt; six sheets of notepaper. Don't speak! Don't
speak! Tell me, can you spare me another ten minutes?... But now, this
minute... I have waited for you too long."

"Certainly, half an hour if you like, but not more, if that will suit you."

"And on condition, too," Shatov put in wrathfully, "that you take a different
tone. Do you hear? I demand when I ought to entreat. Do you understand what it
means to demand when one ought to entreat?"

"I understand that in that way you lift yourself above all ordinary
considerations for the sake of loftier aims," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch with
a faint smile. "I see with regret, too, that you're feverish."

"I beg you to treat me with respect, I insist on it!" shouted Shatov, "not my
personality--I don't care a hang for that, but something else, just for this
once. While I am talking... we are two beings, and have come together in
infinity... for the last time in the world. Drop your tone, and speak like a
human being! Speak, if only for once in your life with the voice of a man. I
say it not for my sake but for yours. Do you understand that you ought to
forgive me that blow in the face if only because I gave you the opportunity of
realising your immense power. ... Again you smile your disdainful, worldly
smile! Oh, when will you understand me! Have done with being a snob! Understand
that I insist on that. I insist on it, else I won't speak, I'm not going to for
anything!"

His excitement was approaching frenzy. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch frowned and
seemed to become more on his guard.

"Since I have remained another half-hour with you when time is so precious," he
pronounced earnestly and impressively, "you may rest assured that I mean to
listen to you at least with interest... and I am convinced that I shall hear
from you much that is new."

He sat down on a chair.

"Sit down!" cried Shatov, and he sat down himself.

"Please remember," Stavrogin interposed once more, "that I was about to ask a
real favour of you concerning Marya Timofyevna, of great importance for her,
anyway...."

"What?" Shatov frowned suddenly with the air of a man who has just been
interrupted at the most important moment, and who gazes at you unable to grasp
the question.

"And you did not let me finish," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went on with a smile.

"Oh, nonsense, afterwards!" Shatov waved his hand disdainfully, grasping, at
last, what he wanted, and passed at once to his principal theme.

