# PART II - CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING - II
[Metadata]: # {02.10.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.10.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING
II
# II
Lembke suddenly came in with rapid steps, accompanied by the chief of police,
looked absent-mindedly at us and, taking no notice of us, was about to pass
into his study on the right, but Stepan Trofimovitch stood before him blocking
his way. The tall figure of Stepan Trofimovitch, so unlike other people, made
an impression. Lembke stopped.

"Who is this?" he muttered, puzzled, as if he were questioning the chief of
police, though he did not turn his head towards him, and was all the time
gazing at Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Retired college assessor, Stepan Trofimovitch Verhovensky, your Excellency,"
answered Stepan Trofimovitch, bowing majestically. His Excellency went on
staring at him with a very blank expression, however.

"What is it?" And with the curtness of a great official he turned his ear to
Stepan Trofimovitch with disdainful impatience, taking him for an ordinary
person with a written petition of some sort.

"I was visited and my house was searched to-day by an official acting in your
Excellency's name; therefore I am desirous..."

"Name? Name?" Lembke asked impatiently, seeming suddenly to have an inkling of
something. Stepan Trofimovitch repeated his name still more majestically.

"A-a-ah! It's... that hotbed... You have shown yourself, sir, in such a
light.... Are you a professor? a professor?"

"I once had the honour of giving some lectures to the young men of the X
university."

"The young men!" Lembke seemed to start, though I am ready to bet that he
grasped very little of what was going on or even, perhaps, did not know with
whom he was talking.

"That, sir, I won't allow," he cried, suddenly getting terribly angry. "I won't
allow young men! It's all these manifestoes? It's an assault on society, sir, a
piratical attack, filibustering.... What is your request?"

"On the contrary, your wife requested me to read something to-morrow at her
fête. I've not come to make a request but to ask for my rights...."

"At the fête? There'll be no fête. I won't allow your fête. A lecture? A
lecture?" he screamed furiously.

"I should be very glad if you would speak to me rather more politely, your
Excellency, without stamping or shouting at me as though I were a boy."

"Perhaps you understand whom you are speaking to?" said Lembke, turning
crimson.

"Perfectly, your Excellency."

"I am protecting society while you are destroying it!... You... I remember
about you, though: you used to be a tutor in the house of Madame Stavrogin?"

"Yes, I was in the position... of tutor... in the house of Madame Stavrogin."

"And have been for twenty years the hotbed of all that has now accumulated...
all the fruits.... I believe I saw you just now in the square. You'd better
look out, sir, you'd better look out; your way of thinking is well known. You
may be sure that I keep my eye on you. I cannot allow your lectures, sir, I
cannot. Don't come with such requests to me."

He would have passed on again.

"I repeat that your Excellency is mistaken; it was your wife who asked me to
give, not a lecture, but a literary reading at the fête to-morrow. But I
decline to do so in any case now. I humbly request that you will explain to me
if possible how, why, and for what reason I was subjected to an official search
to-day? Some of my books and papers, private letters to me, were taken from me
and wheeled through the town in a barrow."

"Who searched you?" said Lembke, starting and returning to full consciousness
of the position. He suddenly flushed all over. He turned quickly to the chief
of police. At that moment the long, stooping, and awkward figure of Blum
appeared in the doorway.

"Why, this official here," said Stepan Trofimovitch, indicating him. Blum came
forward with a face that admitted his responsibility but showed no contrition.

_"Vous ne faites que des bêtises,"_ Lembke threw at him in a tone of vexation
and anger, and suddenly he was transformed and completely himself again.

"Excuse me," he muttered, utterly disconcerted and turning absolutely crimson,
"all this... all this was probably a mere blunder, a misunderstanding...
nothing but a misunderstanding."

"Your Excellency," observed Stepan Trofimovitch, "once when I was young I saw a
characteristic incident. In the corridor of a theatre a man ran up to another
and gave him a sounding smack in the face before the whole public. Perceiving
at once that his victim was not the person whom he had intended to chastise but
someone quite different who only slightly resembled him, he pronounced angrily,
with the haste of one whose moments are precious--as your Excellency did just
now--'I've made a mistake... excuse me, it was a misunderstanding, nothing but
a misunderstanding.' And when the offended man remained resentful and cried
out, he observed to him, with extreme annoyance: 'Why, I tell you it was a
misunderstanding. What are you crying out about?'"

"That's... that's very amusing, of course"--Lembke gave a wry smile--"but...
but can't you see how unhappy I am myself?"

He almost screamed, and seemed about to hide his face in his hands.

This unexpected and piteous exclamation, almost a sob, was almost more than one
could bear. It was probably the first moment since the previous day that he had
full, vivid consciousness of all that had happened--and it was followed by
complete, humiliating despair that could not be disguised--who knows, in
another minute he might have sobbed aloud. For the first moment Stepan
Trofimovitch looked wildly at him; then he suddenly bowed his head and in a
voice pregnant with feeling pronounced:

"Your Excellency, don't trouble yourself with my petulant complaint, and only
give orders for my books and letters to be restored to me...."

He was interrupted. At that very instant Yulia Mihailovna returned and entered
noisily with all the party which had accompanied her. But at this point I
should like to tell my story in as much detail as possible.

