## CHAPTER X.

ISAIAH FOMITCH--THE BATH--BAKLOUCHIN.


But the Christmas holidays were approaching, and the convicts looked
forward to them with solemnity. From their mere appearance it was easy
to see that something extraordinary was about to arrive. Four days
before the holidays they were to be taken to the bath; every one was
pleased, and was making preparations. We were to go there after dinner.
On this occasion there was no work in the afternoon, and of all the
convicts the one who was most pleased, and showed the greatest activity,
was a certain Isaiah Fomitch Bumstein, a Jew, of whom I spoke in my
fifth chapter. He liked to remain stewing in the bath until he became
unconscious. Whenever I think of the prisoner's bath, which is a thing
not to be forgotten, the first thought that presents itself to my memory
is of that very glorious and eternally to be remembered, Isaiah Fomitch
Bumstein, my prison companion. Good Lord! what a strange man he was! I
have already said a few words about his face. He was fifty years of age,
his face wrinkled, with frightful scars on his cheeks and on his
forehead, and the thin, weak body of a fowl. His face expressed
perpetual confidence in himself, and, I may almost say, perfect
happiness. I do not think he was at all sorry to be condemned to hard
labour. He was a jeweller by trade, and as there was no other in the
town, he had always plenty of work to do, and was more or less well
paid. He wanted nothing, and lived, so to say, sumptuously, without
spending all that he gained, for he saved money and lent it out to the
other convicts at interest. He possessed a tea-urn, a mattress, a
tea-cup, and a blanket. The Jews of the town did not refuse him their
patronage. Every Saturday he went under escort to the synagogue (which
was authorised by the law); and he lived like a fighting cock.
Nevertheless, he looked forward to the expiration of his term of
imprisonment in order to get married. He was the most comic mixture of
simplicity, stupidity, cunning, timidity, and bashfulness; but the
strangest thing was that the convicts never laughed, or seriously mocked
him--they only teased him for amusement. Isaiah Fomitch was a subject of
distraction and amusement for every one.

"We have only one Isaiah Fomitch, we will take care of him," the
convicts seemed to say; and as if he understood this, he was proud of
his own importance. From the account given to me it appeared he had
entered the convict prison in the most laughable manner (it took place
before my arrival). Suddenly one evening a report was spread in the
convict prison that a Jew had been brought there, who at that moment was
being shaved in the guard-house, and that he was immediately afterwards
to be taken to the barracks. As there was not a single Jew in the
prison, the convicts looked forward to his entry with impatience, and
surrounded him as soon as he passed the great gates. The officer on
service took him to the civil prison, and pointed out the place where
his plank bedstead was to be.

Isaiah Fomitch held in his hand a bag containing the things given to
him, and some other things of his own. He put down his bag, took his
place at the plank bedstead, and sat down there with his legs crossed,
without daring to raise his eyes. People were laughing all round him.
The convicts ridiculed him by reason of his Jewish origin. Suddenly a
young convict left the others, and came up to him, carrying in his hand
an old pair of summer trousers, dirty, torn, and mended with old rags.
He sat down by the side of Isaiah Fomitch, and struck him on the
shoulder.

"Well, my dear fellow," said he, "I have been waiting for the last six
years; look up and tell me how much you will give for this article,"
holding up his rags before him.

Isaiah Fomitch was so dumbfounded that he did not dare to look at the
mocking crowd, with mutilated and frightful countenances, now grouped
around him, and did not speak a single word, so frightened was he. When
he saw who was speaking to him he shuddered, and began to examine the
rags carefully. Every one waited to hear his first words.

"Well, cannot you give me a silver rouble for it? It is certainly worth
that," said the would-be vendor smiling, and looking towards Isaiah
Fomitch with a wink.

"A silver rouble! no; but I will give you seven kopecks."

These were the first words pronounced by Isaiah Fomitch in the convict
prison. A loud laugh was heard from all sides.

"Seven kopecks! Well, give them to me; you are lucky, you are indeed.
Look! Take care of the pledge, you answer for it with your head."

"With three kopecks for interest; that will make ten kopecks you will
owe me," said the Jew, at the same time slipping his hand into his
pocket to get out the sum agreed upon.

"Three kopecks interest--for a year?"

"No, not for a year, for a month."

"You are a terrible screw, what is your name?"

"Isaiah Fomitch."

"Well, Isaiah Fomitch, you ought to get on. Good-bye."

The Jew examined once more the rags on which he had lent seven kopecks,
folded them up, and put them carefully away in his bag. The convicts
continued to laugh at him.

In reality every one laughed at him, but, although every prisoner owed
him money, no one insulted him; and when he saw that every one was well
disposed towards him, he gave himself haughty airs, but so comic that
they were at once forgiven.

Luka, who had known many Jews when he was at liberty, often teased him,
less from malice than for amusement, as one plays with a dog or a
parrot. Isaiah Fomitch knew this and did not take offence.

"You will see, Jew, how I will flog you."

"If you give me one blow I will return you ten," replied Isaiah Fomitch
valiantly.

"Scurvy Jew."

"As scurvy as you like; I have in any case plenty of money."

"Bravo! Isaiah Fomitch. We must take care of you. You are the only Jew
we have; but they will send you to Siberia all the same."

"I am already in Siberia."

"They will send you farther on."

"Is not the Lord God there?"

"Of course, he is everywhere."

"Well, then! With the Lord God, and money, one has all that is
necessary."

"What a fellow he is!" cries every one around him.

The Jew sees that he is being laughed at, but does not lose courage. He
gives himself airs. The flattery addressed to him causes him much
pleasure, and with a high, squealing falsetto, which is heard throughout
the barracks, he begins to sing, "la, la, la, la," to an idiotic and
ridiculous tune; the only song he was heard to sing during his stay at
the convict prison. When he made my acquaintance, he assured me solemnly
that it was the song, and the very air, that was sung by 600,000 Jews,
small and great, when they crossed the Red Sea, and that every Israelite
was ordered to sing it after a victory gained over an enemy.

The eve of each Saturday the convicts came from the other barracks to
ours, expressly to see Isaiah Fomitch celebrating his Sabbath. He was so
vain, so innocently conceited, that this general curiosity flattered him
immensely. He covered the table in his little corner with a pedantic
air of importance, opened a book, lighted two candles, muttered some
mysterious words, and clothed himself in a kind of chasuble, striped,
and with sleeves, which he preserved carefully at the bottom of his
trunk. He fastened to his hands leather bracelets, and finally attached
to his forehead, by means of a ribbon, a little box, which made it seem
as if a horn were starting from his head. He then began to pray. He read
in a drawling voice, cried out, spat, and threw himself about with wild
and comic gestures. All this was prescribed by the ceremonies of his
religion. There was nothing laughable or strange in it, except the airs
which Isaiah Fomitch gave himself before us in performing his
ceremonies. Then he suddenly covered his head with both hands, and began
to read with many sobs. His tears increased, and in his grief he almost
lay down upon the book his head with the ark upon it, howling as he did
so; but suddenly in the midst of his despondent sobs he burst into a
laugh, and recited with a nasal twang a hymn of triumph, as if he were
overcome by an excess of happiness.

"Impossible to understand it," the convicts would sometimes say to one
another. One day I asked Isaiah Fomitch what these sobs signified, and
why he passed so suddenly from despair to triumphant happiness. Isaiah
Fomitch was very pleased when I asked him these questions. He explained
to me directly that the sobs and tears were provoked by the loss of
Jerusalem, and that the law ordered the pious Jew to groan and strike
his breast; but at the moment of his most acute grief he was suddenly to
remember that a prophecy had foretold the return of the Jews to
Jerusalem, and he was then to manifest overflowing joy, to sing, to
laugh, and to recite his prayers with an expression of happiness in his
voice and on his countenance. This sudden passage from one phase of
feeling to another delighted Isaiah Fomitch, and he explained to me this
ingenious prescription of his faith with the greatest satisfaction.

One evening, in the midst of his prayers, the Major entered, followed by
the officer of the guard and an escort of soldiers. All the prisoners
got immediately into line before their camp-bedsteads. Isaiah Fomitch
alone continued to shriek and gesticulate. He knew that his worship was
authorised, and that no one could interrupt him, so that in howling in
the presence of the Major he ran no risk. It pleased him to throw
himself about beneath the eyes of the chief.

The Major approached within a few steps. Isaiah Fomitch turned his back
to the table, and just in front of the officer began to sing his hymn of
triumph, gesticulating and drawling out certain syllables. When he came
to the part where he had to assume an expression of extreme happiness,
he did so by blinking with his eyes, at the same time laughing and
nodding his head in the direction of the Major. The latter was at first
much astonished; then he burst into a laugh, called out, "Idiot!" and
went away, while the Jew still continued to shriek. An hour later, when
he had finished, I asked him what he would have done if the Major had
been wicked enough and foolish enough to lose his temper.

"What Major?"

"What Major! Did you not see him? He was only two steps from you, and
was looking at you all the time." But Isaiah Fomitch assured me as
seriously as possible that he had not seen the Major, for while he was
saying his prayers he was in such a state of ecstasy that he neither saw
nor heard anything that was taking place around him.

I can see Isaiah Fomitch wandering about on Saturday throughout the
prison, endeavouring to do nothing, as the law prescribes to every Jew.
What improbable anecdotes he told me! Every time he returned from the
synagogue he always brought me some news of St. Petersburg, and the most
absurd rumours imaginable from his fellow Jews of the town, who
themselves had received them at first hand. But I have already spoken
too much of Isaiah Fomitch.

In the whole town there were only two public baths. The first, kept by a
Jew, was divided into compartments, for which one paid fifty kopecks. It
was frequented by the aristocracy of the town.

The other bath, old, dirty, and close, was destined for the people. It
was there that the convicts were taken. The air was cold and clear. The
prisoners were delighted to get out of the fortress and have a walk
through the town. During the walk their laughter and jokes never ceased.
A platoon of soldiers, with muskets loaded, accompanied us. It was quite
a sight for the town's-people. When we had reached our destination, the
bath was so small that it did not permit us all to enter at once. We
were divided into two bands, one of which waited in the cold room while
the other one bathed in the hot one. Even then, so narrow was the room
that it was difficult for us to understand how half of the convicts
could stand together in it.

Petroff kept close to me. He remained by my side without my having
begged him to do so, and offered to rub me down. Baklouchin, a convict
of the special section, offered me at the same time his services. I
recollect this prisoner, who was called the "Sapper," as the gayest and
most agreeable of all my companions. We had become intimate friends.
Petroff helped me to undress, because I was generally a long time
getting my things off, not being yet accustomed to the operation; and it
was almost as cold in the dressing-room as outside the doors.

It is very difficult for a convict who is still a novice to get his
things off, for he must know how to undo the leather straps which fasten
on the chains. These leather straps are buckled over the shirt, just
beneath the ring which encloses the leg. One pair of straps costs sixty
kopecks, and each convict is obliged to get himself a pair, for it would
be impossible to walk without their assistance. The ring does not
enclose the leg too tightly. One can pass the finger between the iron
and the flesh; but the ring rubs against the calf, so that in a single
day the convict who walks without leather straps, gets his skin broken.

To take off the straps presents no difficulty. It is not the same with
the clothes. To get the trousers off is in itself a prodigious
operation, and the same may be said of the shirt whenever it has to be
changed. The first who gave us lessons in this art was Koreneff, a
former chief of brigands, condemned to be chained up for five years. The
convicts are very skilful at the work, and do it readily.

I gave a few kopecks to Petroff to buy soap and a bunch of the twigs
with which one rubs oneself in the bath. Bits of soap were given to the
convicts, but they were not larger than pieces of two kopecks. The soap
was sold in the dressing-room, as well as mead, cakes of white flour,
and boiling water; for each convict received but one pailful, according
to the agreement made between the proprietor of the bath and the
administration of the prison. The convicts who wished to make themselves
thoroughly clean, could for two kopecks buy another pailful, which the
proprietor handed to them through a window pierced in the wall for that
purpose. As soon as I was undressed, Petroff took me by the arm and
observed to me that I should find it difficult to walk with my chains.

"Drag them up on to your calves," he said to me, holding me by the arms
at the same time, as if I were an old man. I was ashamed at his care,
and assured him that I could walk well enough by myself, but he did not
believe me. He paid me the same attention that one gives to an awkward
child. Petroff was not a servant in any sense of the word. If I had
offended him, he would have known how to deal with me. I had promised
him nothing for his assistance, nor had he asked me for anything. What
inspired him with so much solicitude for me?

Represent to yourself a room of twelve feet long by as many broad, in
which a hundred men are all crowded together, or at least eighty, for we
were in all two hundred divided into two sections. The steam blinded us;
the sweat, the dirt, the want of space, were such that we did not know
where to put a foot down. I was frightened and wished to go out. Petroff
hastened to reassure me. With great trouble we succeeded in raising
ourselves on to the benches, by passing over the heads of the convicts,
whom we begged to bend down, in order to let us pass; but all the
benches were already occupied. Petroff informed me that I must buy a
place, and at once entered into negotiations with the convict who was
near the window. For a kopeck this man consented to cede me his place.
After receiving the money, which Petroff held tight in his hand, and
which he had prudently provided himself with beforehand, the man crept
just beneath me into a dark and dirty corner. There was there, at least,
half an inch of filth; even the places above the benches were occupied,
the convicts swarmed everywhere. As for the floor there was not a place
as big as the palm of the hand which was not occupied by the convicts.
They sent the water in spouts out of their pails. Those who were
standing up washed themselves pail in hand, and the dirty water ran all
down their body to fall on the shaved heads of those who were sitting
down. On the upper bench, and the steps which led to it, were heaped
together other convicts who washed themselves more thoroughly, but these
were in small number. The populace does not care to wash with soap and
water, it prefers stewing in a horrible manner, and then inundating
itself with cold water. That is how the common people take their bath.
On the floor could be seen fifty bundles of rods rising and falling at
the same time, the holders were whipping themselves into a state of
intoxication. The steam became thicker and thicker every minute, so that
what one now felt was not a warm but a burning sensation, as from
boiling pitch. The convicts shouted and howled to the accompaniment of
the hundred chains shaking on the floor. Those who wished to pass from
one place to another got their chains mixed up with those of their
neighbours, and knocked against the heads of the men who were lower down
than they. Then there were volleys of oaths as those who fell dragged
down the ones whose chains had become entangled in theirs. They were all
in a state of intoxication of wild exultation. Cries and shrieks were
heard on all sides. There was much crowding and crushing at the window
of the dressing-room through which the hot water was delivered, and
much of it got spilt over the heads of those who were seated on the
floor before it arrived at its destination. We seemed to be fully at
liberty; and yet from time to time, behind the window of the
dressing-room, or through the open door, could be seen the moustached
face of a soldier, with his musket at his feet, watching that no serious
disorder took place.

The shaved heads of the convicts, and their red bodies, which the steam
made the colour of blood, seemed more monstrous than ever. On their
backs, made scarlet by the steam, stood out in striking relief the scars
left by the whips and the rods, made long before, but so thoroughly that
the flesh seemed to have been quite recently torn. Strange scars. A
shudder passed through me at the mere sight of them. Again the volume of
steam increased, and the bath-room was now covered with a thick, burning
cloud, covering agitation and cries. From this cloud stood out torn
backs, shaved heads; and, to complete the picture, Isaiah Fomitch
howling with joy on the highest of the benches. He was saturating
himself with steam. Any other man would have fainted away, but no
temperature is too high for him; he engages the services of a rubber for
a kopeck, but after a few moments the latter is unable to continue,
throws away his bunch of twigs, and runs to inundate himself with cold
water. Isaiah Fomitch does not lose courage, he runs to hire a second
rubber, then a third; on these occasions he thinks nothing of expense,
and changes his rubber four or five times. "He stews well, the gallant
Isaiah Fomitch," cry the convicts from below. The Jew feels that he goes
beyond all the others, he has beaten them; he triumphs with his hoarse
falsetto voice, and sings out his favourite air which rises above the
general hubbub. It seemed to me that if ever we met in hell we should be
reminded of the place where we then were. I could not resist a wish to
communicate this idea to Petroff. He looked all round him, but made no
answer.

I wished to buy a place for him on the bench by my side; but he sat
down at my feet and declared that he felt quite at his ease. Baklouchin
meanwhile bought us some hot water which he would bring to us as soon as
we wanted it. Petroff offered to clean me from head to foot, and he
begged me to go through the preliminary stewing process. I could not
make up my mind to it. At last he rubbed me all over with soap. I wished
to make him understand that I could wash myself, but it was no use
contradicting him and I gave myself up to him.

When he had done with me he took me back to the dressing-room, holding
me up, and telling me at each step to take care, as if I had been made
of porcelain. He helped me to put on my clothes, and when he had
finished his kindly work he rushed back to the bath to have a thorough
stewing.

When we got back to the barracks I offered him a glass of tea, which he
did not refuse. He drank it and thanked me. I wished to go to the
expense of a glass of vodka in his honour, and I succeeded in getting it
on the spot. Petroff was exceedingly pleased. He swallowed his vodka
with a murmur of satisfaction, declared that I had restored him to life,
and then suddenly rushed to the kitchen, as if the people who were
talking there could not decide anything important without him.

Now another man came up for a talk. This was Baklouchin, of whom I have
already spoken, and whom I had also invited to take tea.

I never knew a man of a more agreeable disposition than Baklouchin. It
must be admitted that he never forgave a wrong, and that he often got
into quarrels. He could not, above all, endure people interfering with
his affairs. He knew, in a word, how to take care of himself; but his
quarrels never lasted long, and I believe that all the convicts liked
him. Wherever he went he was well received. Even in the town he was
looked upon as the most amusing man in the world. He was a man of lofty
stature, thirty years old, with a frank, determined countenance, and
rather good-looking, with his tuft of hair on his chin. He possessed the
art of changing his face in such a comic manner by imitating the first
person he happened to see, that the people around him were constantly in
a roar. He was a professed joker, but he never allowed himself to be
slighted by those who did not enjoy his fun. Accordingly, no one spoke
disparagingly of him. He was full of life and fire. He made my
acquaintance at the very beginning of my imprisonment, and related to me
his military career, when he was a sapper in the Engineers, where he had
been placed as a favour by people of influence. He put a number of
questions to me about St. Petersburg; he even read books when he came to
take tea with me. He amused the whole company by relating how roughly
Lieutenant K---- had that morning handled the Major. He told me,
moreover, with a satisfied air, as he took his seat by my side, that we
should probably have a theatrical representation in the prison. The
convicts proposed to get up a play during the Christmas holidays. The
necessary actors were found, and, little by little, the scenery was
prepared. Some persons in the town had promised to lend women's clothes
for the performance. Some hopes were even entertained of obtaining,
through the medium of an officer's servant, a uniform with epaulettes,
provided only the Major did not take it into his head to forbid the
performance, as he had done the previous year. He was at that time in
ill-humour through having lost at cards, and he had been annoyed at
something that had taken place in the prison. Accordingly, in a fit of
ill-humour, he had forbidden the performance. It was possible, however,
that this year he would not prevent it. Baklouchin was in a state of
exultation. It could be seen that he would be one of the principal
supporters of the meditated theatre. I made up my mind to be present at
the performance. The ingenuous joy which Baklouchin manifested in
speaking of the undertaking was quite touching. From whispering, we
gradually got to talk of the matter quite openly. He told me, among
other things, that he had not served at St. Petersburg alone. He had
been sent to R---- with the rank of non-commissioned officer in a
garrison battalion.

"From there they sent me on here," added Baklouchin.

"And why?" I asked him.

"Why? You would never guess, Alexander Petrovitch. Because I was in
love."

"Come now. A man is not exiled for that," I said, with a laugh.

"I should have added," continued Baklouchin, "that it made me kill a
German with a pistol-shot. Was it worth while to send me to hard labour
for killing a German? Only think."

"How did it happen? Tell me the story. It must be a strange one."

"An amusing story indeed, Alexander Petrovitch."

"So much the better. Tell me."

"You wish me to do so? Well, then, listen."

And he told me the story of his murder. It was not "amusing," but it was
indeed strange.

"This is how it happened," began Baklouchin; "I had been sent to Riga, a
fine, handsome city, which has only one fault, there are too many
Germans there. I was still a young man, and I had a good character with
my officers. I wore my cap cocked on the side of my head, and passed my
time in the most agreeable manner. I made love to the German girls. One
of them, named Luisa, pleased me very much. She and her aunt were
getters-up of fine linen. The old woman was a true caricature; but she
had money. First of all I merely passed under the young girl's windows;
but I soon made her acquaintance. Luisa spoke Russian well enough,
though with a slight accent. She was charming. I never saw any one like
her. I was most pressing in my advances; but she only replied that she
would preserve her innocence, that as a wife she might prove worthy of
me. She was an affectionate, smiling girl, and wonderfully neat. In
fact, I assure you, I never saw any one like her. She herself had
suggested that I should marry her, and how was I not to marry her?
Suddenly Luisa did not come to her appointment. This happened once, then
twice, then a third time. I sent her a letter, but she did not reply.
'What is to be done?' I said to myself. If she had been deceiving me she
could easily have taken me in. She could have answered my letter and
come all the same to the appointment; but she was incapable of
falsehood. She had simply broken off with me. 'This is a trick of the
aunt,' I said to myself. I was afraid to go to her house.

"Even though she was aware of our engagement, we acted as if she were
ignorant of it. I wrote a fine letter in which I said to Luisa, 'If you
don't come, I will come to your aunt's for you.' She was afraid and
came. Then she began to weep, and told me that a German named Schultz, a
distant relation of theirs, a clockmaker by trade, and of a certain age,
but rich, had shown a wish to marry her--in order to make her happy, as
he said, and that he himself might not remain without a wife in his old
age. He had loved her a long time, so she told me, and had been
nourishing this idea for years, but he had kept it a secret, and had
never ventured to speak out. 'You see, Sasha,' she said to me, 'that it
is a question of my happiness; for he is rich, and would you prevent my
happiness?' I looked her in the face, she wept, embraced me, clasped me
in her arms.

"'Well, she is quite right,' I said to myself, 'what good is there in
marrying a soldier--even a non-commissioned officer? Come, farewell,
Luisa. God protect you. I have no right to prevent your happiness.'

"'And what sort of a man is he? Is he good-looking?'

"'No, he is old, and he has such a long nose.'

"She here burst into a fit of laughter. I left her. 'It was my destiny,'
I said to myself. The next day I passed by Schultz' shop (she had told
me where he lived). I looked through the window and saw a German, who
was arranging a watch, forty-five years of age, an aquiline nose,
swollen eyes, a dress-coat with a very high collar. I spat with contempt
as I looked at him. At that moment I was ready to break the shop
windows, but 'What is the use of it?' I said to myself; 'there is
nothing more to be done: it is over, all over.' I got back to the
barracks as the night was falling, and stretched myself out on my bed,
and--will you believe it, Alexander Petrovitch?--began to sob--yes, to
sob. One day passed, then a second, then a third. I saw Luisa no more. I
had learned, however, from an old woman (she was also a washerwoman, and
the girl I loved used sometimes to visit her), that this German knew of
our relations, and that for that reason he had made up his mind to marry
her as soon as possible, otherwise he would have waited two years
longer. He had made Luisa swear that she would see me no more. It
appeared that on account of me he had refused to loosen his
purse-strings, and kept Luisa and her aunt very close. Perhaps he would
yet change his idea, for he was not very resolute. The old woman told me
that he had invited them to take coffee with him the next day, a Sunday,
and that another relation, a former shopkeeper, now very poor, and an
assistant in some liquor store, would also come. When I found that the
business was to be settled on Sunday, I was so furious that I could not
recover my cold blood, and the following day I did nothing but reflect.
I believe I could have devoured that German. On Sunday morning I had not
come to any decision. As soon as the service was over I ran out, got
into my great-coat, and went to the house of this German. I thought I
should find them all there. Why I went to the German, and what I meant
to say to him, I did not know myself.

"I slipped a pistol into my pocket to be ready for everything; a little
pistol which was not worth a curse, with an old-fashioned lock--a thing
I had used when I was a boy, and which was really fit for nothing. I
loaded it, however, because I thought they would try to kick me out, and
that the German would insult me, in which case I would pull out my
pistol to frighten them all. I arrived. There was no one on the
staircase; they were all in the work-room. No servant. The one girl who
waited upon them was absent. I crossed the shop and saw that the door
was closed--an old door fastened from the inside. My heart beat; I
stopped and listened. They were speaking German. I broke open the door
with a kick. I looked round. The table was laid; there was a large
coffee-pot on it, with a spirit lamp underneath, and a plate of
biscuits. On a tray there was a small decanter of brandy, herrings,
sausages, and a bottle of some wine. Luisa and her aunt, both in their
Sunday best, were seated on a sofa. Opposite them, the German was
exhibiting himself on a chair, got up like a bridegroom, and in his coat
with the high collar, and with his hair carefully combed. On the other
side, there was another German, old, fat, and gray. He was taking no
part in the conversation. When I entered, Luisa turned very pale. The
aunt sprang up with a bound and sat down again. The German became angry.
What a rage he was in! He got up, and walking towards me, said:

"'What do you want?'

"I should have lost my self-possession if anger had not supported me.

"'What do I want? Is this the way to receive a guest? Why do you not
offer him something to drink? I have come to pay you a visit.'

"The German reflected a moment, and then said, 'Sit down.'

"I sat down.

"'Here is some vodka. Help yourself, I beg.'

"'And let it be good,' I cried, getting more and more into a rage.

"'It is good.'

"I was enraged to see him looking at me from top to toe. The most
frightful part of it was, that Luisa was looking on. I took a drink and
said to him:

"'Look here, German, what business have you to speak rudely to me? Let
us be better acquainted. I have come to see you as friends.'

"'I cannot be your friend,' he replied. 'You are a private soldier.'

"Then I lost all self-command.

"'Oh, you German! You sausage-seller! You know how much you are in my
power. Look here; do you wish me to break your head with this pistol?'

"I drew out my pistol, got up, and struck him on the forehead. The
women were more dead than alive; they were afraid to breathe. The eldest
of the two men, quite white, was trembling like a leaf.

"The German seemed much astonished. But he soon recovered himself.

"'I am not afraid of you,' he said, 'and I beg of you, as a well-bred
man, to put an end to this pleasantry. I am not afraid of you!'

"'You are afraid! You dare not move while this pistol is presented at
you.'

"'You dare not do such a thing!' he cried.

"'And why should I not dare?'

"'Because you would be severely punished.'

"May the devil take that idiot of a German! If he had not urged me on,
he would have been alive now.

"'So you think I dare not?'

"'No.'

"'I dare not, you think?'

"'You would not dare!'

"'Wouldn't I, sausage-maker?' I fired the pistol, and down he sank on
his chair. The others uttered shrieks. I put back my pistol in my
pocket, and when I returned to the fortress, threw it among some weeds
near the principal entrance.

"Inside the barracks I laid on my bed, and said to myself, 'I shall be
taken away soon.' One hour passed, then another, but I was not arrested.

"Towards evening I felt so sad, I went out at all hazards to see Luisa;
I passed before the house of the clockmaker's. There were a number of
people there, including the police. I ran on to the old woman's and
said:

"'Call Luisa!'

"I had only a moment to wait. She came immediately, and threw herself on
my neck in tears.

"'It is my fault,' she said. 'I should not have listened to my aunt.'

"She then told me that her aunt, immediately after the scene, had gone
back home. She was in such a fright that she fell and did not speak a
word; she had uttered nothing. On the contrary, she ordered her niece
to be as silent as herself.

"'No one has seen her since,' said Luisa.

"The clockmaker had previously sent his servant away, for he was afraid
of her. She was jealous, and would have scratched his eyes out had she
known that he wished to get married.

"There were no workmen in the house, he had sent them all away; he had
himself prepared the coffee and collation. As for the relation, who had
scarcely spoken a word all his life, he took his hat, and, without
opening his mouth, went away.

"'He is quite sure to be silent,' added Luisa.

"So, indeed, he was. For two weeks no one arrested me nor suspected me
the least in the world.

"You need not believe me unless you choose, Alexander Petrovitch.

"These two weeks were the happiest in my life. I saw Luisa every day.
And how much she had become attached to me!

"She said to me through her tears: 'If you are exiled, I will go with
you. I will leave everything to follow you.'

"I thought of making away with myself, so much had she moved me; but
after two weeks I was arrested. The old man and the aunt had agreed to
denounce me."

"But," I interrupted, "Baklouchin, for that they would only have given
you from ten to twelve years' hard labour, and in the civil section; yet
you are in the special section. How does that happen?"

"That is another affair," said Baklouchin. "When I was taken before the
Council of War, the captain appointed to conduct the case began by
insulting me, and calling me names before the Tribunal. I could not
stand it, and shouted out to him: 'Why do you insult me? Don't you see,
you scoundrel! that you are only looking at yourself in the glass?'

"This brought a new charge against me. I was tried a second time, and
for the two things was condemned to four thousand strokes, and to the
special section. When I was taken out to receive my punishment in the
_Green Street_, the captain was at the same time sent away. He had been
degraded from his rank, and was despatched to the Caucasus as a private
soldier. Good-bye, Alexander Petrovitch. Don't fail to come to our
performance."




