## CHAPTER VIII.

MY COMPANIONS


As will be understood, those to whom I was most drawn were people of my
own sort, that is, those of "noble" birth, especially in the early days;
but of the three ex-nobles in the place, who were Russians, I knew and
spoke to but one, Akim Akimitch; the other two were the spy A----n, and
the supposed parricide. Even with Akim I never exchanged a word except
when in extremity, in moments when the melancholy on me was simply
unendurable, and when I thought I really never should have the chance of
getting close to any other human being again.

In the last chapter I have tried to show that the convicts were of
different types, and tried to classify them; but when I think of Akim
Akimitch I don't know how to place him, he was quite _sui generis_, so
far as I could observe, in that establishment.

There may be, elsewhere, men like him, to whom it seemed as absolutely a
matter of indifference whether he was a free man, or in jail at hard
labour; at that place he stood alone in this curious impartiality of
temperament. He had settled down in the jail as if he was going to pass
his whole life, and didn't mind it at all. All his belongings, mattress,
cushions, utensils, were so ordered as to give the impression that he
was living in a furnished house of his own; there was nothing
provisional, temporary, bivouac-like, about him, or his words, or his
habits. He had a good many years still to spend in punishment, but I
much doubt whether he ever gave a thought to the time when he would get
out. He was entirely reconciled to his condition, not because he had
made any effort to be so, but simply out of natural submissiveness; but,
as far as his comfort went, it came to the same thing. He was not at all
a bad fellow, and in the early days his advice and help were quite
useful to me; but sometimes, I can't help saying it, his peculiarities
deepened my natural melancholy until it became almost intolerable
anguish.

When I became desperate with silence and solitude of soul, I would get
into talk with him; I wanted to hear, and reply to _some_ words falling
from a living soul, and the more filled with gall and hatred with all
our surroundings they had been, the more would they have been in
sympathy with my wretched mood; but he would just barely talk, quietly
go on sizing his lanterns, and then begin to tell me some story as to
how he had been at a review of troops in 18--, that their general of
division was so-and-so, that the manoeuvring had been very pretty, that
there had been a change in the skirmisher's system of signalling, and
the like; all of it in level imperturbable tones, like water falling
drop by drop. He did not put any life into them even when he told me of
a sharp affair in which he had been, in the Caucasus, for which his
sword had got the decoration of the Riband of St. Anne. The only
difference was, that his voice became a little more measured and grave;
he lowered his tones when he pronounced the name "St. Anne," as though
he were telling a great secret, and then, for three minutes at least,
did not utter a word, but only looked solemn.

During all that first year I had strange passages of feeling, in which I
hated Akim Akimitch with a bitter hatred, I am sure I cannot say why,
moments when I would despairingly curse the fate which made him my next
neighbour on my camp-bed, so close indeed that our heads nearly touched.
An hour afterwards I bitterly reproached myself for such extravagance.
It was, however, only during my first year of confinement that these
violent feelings overpowered me. As time went on, I got used to Akim
Akimitch's singular character, and was ashamed of my former explosions.
I don't remember that he and I ever got into anything like an open
quarrel.

Besides the three Russian nobles of whom I have spoken, there were eight
others there during my time; with some of whom I came to be on a footing
of intimate friendship. Even the best of them were morbid in mind,
exclusive, and intolerant to the very last degree; with two of them I
was obliged to discontinue all spoken intercourse. There were only three
who had any education, B--ski, M--tski, and the old man, J--ski, who had
formerly been a professor of mathematics, an excellent fellow, highly
eccentric, and of very narrow mental horizon in spite of his learning.
M--tski and B--ski were of a mould quite different from his. Between
M--tski and myself there was an excellent understanding from the first
set-off. He and I never once got into any sort of dispute; I respected
him highly, but could never become sincerely attached to him, though I
tried to. He was sour, embittered, and mistrustful, with much
self-control; this was quite antipathetic to me; the man had a closed
soul, closed to everybody, and he made you feel it. I felt it so
strongly that perhaps I was wrong about it. After all, his character, I
must say, was stamped with both nobleness and strength. His inveterate
scepticism made him very prudent in his relations with everybody about
him, and in conducting these he gave proof of remarkable tact and skill.
Sceptic as he was, there was another and a reverse side in his nature,
for in some things he was a profound and unalterable believer with faith
and hope unshakable. In spite of his tact in dealing with men, he got
into open hostilities with B--ski and his friend T--ski.

The first of these, B--ski, was a man of infirm health, of consumptive
tendency, irascible, and of a weak, nervous system; but a good and
generous man. His nervous irritability went so far that he was as
capricious as a child; a temperament of that kind was too much for me
there, so I soon saw as little of B--ski as I could possibly help,
though I never ceased to like him much. It was just the other way so far
as M--tski was concerned; with him I always was on easy terms, though I
did not like him at all. When I edged away from B--ski, I had to break
also, more or less, with T--ski, of whom I spoke in the last chapter,
which I much regretted, for, though of little education, he had an
excellent heart; a worthy, very spiritual man. He loved and respected
B--ski so much that those who broke with that friend of his he regarded
as his personal enemies. He quarrelled with M--tski on account of
B--ski, and they kept up the difference a long while. All these people
were as bilious as they could be, humoursome, mistrustful, the victims
of a moral and physical supersensitiveness. It is not to be wondered at;
their position was trying indeed, much more so than ours; they were all
exiled, transported, for ten or twelve years; and what made their
sojourn in the prison most distressing to them was their rooted,
ingrained prejudice, especially their unfortunate way of regarding the
convicts, which they could not get over; in their eyes the unhappy
fellows were mere wild beasts, without a single recognisable human
quality. Everything in their previous career and their present
circumstances combined to produce this unhappy feeling in them.

Their life at the jail was perpetual torment to them. They were kindly
and conversible with the Circassians, with the Tartars, with Isaiah
Fomitch; but for the other prisoners they had nothing but contempt and
aversion. The only one they had any real respect for was the aged "old
believer." For all this, during all the time I spent at the convict
establishment, I never knew a single prisoner to reproach them with
either their birth, or religious opinions, or convictions, as is so
usual with our common people in their relations with people of different
condition, especially if these happen to be foreigners. The fact is,
they cannot take the foreigner seriously; to the Russian common people
he seems a merely grotesque, comical creature. Our convicts had and
showed much more respect for the Polish nobles than for us Russians, but
I don't think the Poles cared about the matter, or took any notice of
the difference.

I spoke just now of T--ski, and have something more to say of him. When
he had with his friend to leave the first place assigned to them as
residence in their banishment to come to our fortress, he carried his
friend B---- nearly the whole way. B---- was of quite a weak frame, and
in bad health, and became exhausted before half of the first march was
accomplished. They had first been banished to Y--gorsk, where they lived
in tolerable comfort; life was much less hard there than in our
fortress. But in consequence of a correspondence with the exiles in one
of the other towns--a quite innocent exchange of letters--it was thought
necessary to remove them to our jail to be under the more direct
surveillance of the government. Until they came M--tski had been quite
alone, and dreadful must have been his sufferings in that first year of
his banishment.

J--ski was the old man always deep in prayer, of whom I spoke a little
earlier. All the political convicts were quite young men while J--ski
was at least fifty years old. He was a worthy, gentlemanlike person, if
eccentric. T--ski and B--ski detested him, and never spoke to him; they
insisted upon it that he was too obstinate and troublesome to put up
with, and I was obliged to admit it was so. I believe that at a convict
establishment--as in every place where people have to be together,
whether they like it or not--people are more ready to quarrel with and
detest one another than under other circumstances. Many causes
contributed to the squabbles that were, unfortunately, always going on.
J--ski was really disagreeable and narrow-minded; not one of those about
him was on good terms with him. He and I did not come to a rupture, but
we were never on a really friendly footing. I fancy that he was a strong
mathematician. One day he explained to me in his half-Russian,
half-Polish jargon, a system of astronomy of his own; I have been told
that he had written a work upon the subject which the learned world had
received with derision; I fancy his reasonings on some things had got
twisted. He used to be on his knees praying for a whole day sometimes,
which made the convicts respect him exceedingly during the remnant of
life he had to pass there; he died under my eyes at the jail after a
very trying illness. He had won the consideration of the prisoners, from
the first moment of his coming in, on account of what had happened with
the Major and him. When they were brought afoot from Y--gorsk to our
fortress, they were not shaved on the road at all, their hair and beards
had grown to great lengths when they were brought before the Major. That
worthy foamed like a madman; he was wild with indignation at such
infraction of discipline, though it was none of their fault.

"My God! did you ever see anything like it?" he roared; "they are
vagabonds, brigands."

J--ski knew very little Russian, and fancied that he was asking them if
they were brigands or vagabonds, so he answered:

"We are political prisoners, not rogues and vagabonds."

"So-o-o! You mean impudence! Clod!" howled the Major. "To the
guard-house with him; a hundred strokes of the rod at once, this
instant, I say!"

They gave the old man the punishment; he lay flat on the ground under
the strokes without the slightest resistance, kept his hand in his
teeth, and bore it all without a murmur, and without moving a muscle.
B--ski and T--ski arrived at the jail as this was all going on, and
M--ski was waiting for them at the principal gate, knowing that they
were just coming in; he threw himself on their neck, although he had
never seen them before. Utterly disgusted at the way the Major had
received them, they told M--ski all about the cruel business that had
just occurred. M--ski told me later that he was quite beside himself
with rage when he heard it.

"I could not contain myself for passion," he said, "I shook as though
with ague. I waited for J--ski at the great gate, for he would come
straight that way from the guard-house after his punishment. The gate
was opened, and there I saw pass before me J--ski, his lips all white
and trembling, his face pale as death; he did not look at a single
person, and passed through the groups of convicts assembled in the
court-yard--they knew a noble had just been subjected to
punishment--went into the barrack, went straight to his place, and,
without a word, dropped down on his knees for prayer. The prisoners were
surprised and even affected. When I saw this old man with white hairs,
who had left behind him at home a wife and children, kneeling and
praying after that scandalous treatment, I rushed away from the barrack,
and for a couple of hours felt as if I had gone stark, staring, raving
mad, or blind drunk.... From that first moment the convicts were full of
deference and consideration for J--ski; what particularly pleased them,
was that he did not utter a cry when undergoing the punishment."

But one must be fair and tell the truth about this sort of thing; this
sad story is not an instance of what frequently occurs in the treatment
by the authorities of transported noblemen, Russian or Polish; and this
isolated case affords no basis for passing judgment upon that treatment.
My anecdote merely shows that you may light upon a bad man anywhere and
everywhere. And if it happen that such a one is in absolute command of a
jail, and if he happen to have a grudge against one of the prisoners,
the lot of such a one will be indeed very far from enviable. But the
administrative chiefs who regulate and supervise convict labour in
Siberia, and from whom subordinates take their tone as well as their
orders, are careful to exercise a discriminating treatment in the case
of persons of noble birth, and, in some cases, grant them special
indulgences as compared with the lot of convicts of lower condition.
There are obvious reasons for this; these heads of departments are
nobles themselves, they know that men of that class must not be driven
to extremity; cases have been known where nobles have refused to submit
to corporal punishment, and flung themselves desperately on their
tormentors with very grave and serious consequences indeed;
moreover--and this, I think, is the leading cause of the good
treatment--some time ago, thirty-five years at least, there were
transported to Siberia quite a crowd of noblemen;[9] these were of such
correct and irreproachable demeanour, and held themselves so high, that
the heads of departments fell into the way, which they never afterwards
left, of regarding criminals of noble birth and ordinary convicts in
quite a different manner; and men in lower place took their cue from
them.

Many of these, no doubt, were little pleased with that disposition in
their superiors; such persons were pleased enough when they could do
exactly as they liked in the matter, but this did not often happen, they
were kept well within bounds; I have reason to be satisfied of this and
I will say why. I was put in the second category, a classification of
those condemned to hard labour, which was primarily and principally
composed of convicts who had been serfs, under military superintendence;
now this second category, or class, was much harder than the first (of
the mines) or the third (manufacturing work). It was harder, not only
for the nobles but for the other convicts too, because the governing and
administrative methods and _personnel_ in it were wholly military, and
were pretty much the same in type as those of the convict establishments
in Russia. The men in official position were severer, the general
treatment more rigorous than in the two other classes; the men were
never out of irons, an escort of soldiers was always present, you were
always, or nearly so, within stone walls; and things were quite
different in the other classes, at least so the convicts said, and there
were those among them who had every reason to know. They would all have
gladly gone off to the mines, which the law classified as the worst and
last punishment, it was their constant dream and desire to do so. All
those who had been in the Russian convict establishments spoke with
horror of them, and declared that there was no hell like them, that
Siberia was a paradise compared with confinement in the fortresses in
Russia.

If, then, it is the case that we nobles were treated with special
consideration in the establishment I was confined in, which was under
direct control of the Governor-General, and administered entirely on
military principles, there must have been some greater kindliness in the
treatment of the convicts of the first and third category or class. I
think I can speak with some authority about what went on throughout
Siberia in these respects, and I based my views, as to this, upon all
that I heard from convicts of these classes. We, in our prison, were
under much more rigorous surveillance than was elsewhere practised; we
were favoured with no sort of exemptions from the ordinary rules as
regards work and confinement, and the wearing of chains; we could not do
anything for ourselves to get immunity from the rules, for I, at least,
knew quite well that, _in the good old time which was quite of
yesterday_, there had been so much intriguing to undermine the credit of
officials that the authorities were greatly afraid of informers, and
that, as things stood, to show indulgence to a convict was regarded as a
crime. Everybody, therefore, authorities and convicts alike, was in fear
of what might happen; we of the nobles were thus quite down to the level
of the other convicts; the only point we were favoured in was in regard
to corporal punishment--but I think that we should have had even that
inflicted on us had we done anything for which it was prescribed, for
equality as to punishment was strictly enjoined or practised; what I
mean is, that we were not wantonly, causelessly, mishandled like the
other prisoners.

When the Governor got to know of the punishment inflicted on J--ski, he
was seriously angry with the Major, and ordered him to be more careful
for the future. The thing got very generally known. We learned also that
the Governor-General, who had great confidence in our Major, and who
liked him because of his exact observance of legal bounds, and thought
highly of his qualities in the service, gave him a sharp scolding. And
our Major took the lesson to heart. I have no doubt it was this
prevented his having M--ski beaten, which he would much have liked to
do, being much influenced by the slanderous things A--f said about
M----; but the Major could never get a fair pretext for doing so,
however much he persecuted and set spies upon his proposed victim; so he
had to deny himself that pleasure. The J--ski affair became known all
through the town, and public opinion condemned the Major; some persons
reproached him openly for what he had done, and some even insulted him.

The first occasion on which the man crossed my path may as well be
mentioned. We had alarming things reported to us--to me and another
nobleman under sentence--about the abominable character of this man,
while we were still at Tobolsk. Men who had been sentenced a long while
back to twenty-five years of the misery, nobles as we were, and who had
visited us so kindly during our provisional sojourn in the first
prison, had warned us what sort of man we were to be under; they had
also promised to do all they could for us with their friends to see that
he hurt us as little as possible. And, in fact, they did write to the
three daughters of the Governor-General, who, I believe, interceded on
our behalf with their father. But what could he do? No more, of course,
than tell the Major to be fair in applying the rules and regulations to
our case. It was about three in the afternoon that my companion and
myself arrived in the town; our escort took us at once to our tyrant. We
remained waiting for him in the ante-chamber while they went to find the
next-in-command at the prison. As soon as the latter had come, in walked
the Major. We saw an inflamed scarlet face that boded no good, and
affected us quite painfully; he seemed like a sort of spider about to
throw itself on a poor fly wriggling in its web.

"What's your name, man?" said he to my companion. He spoke with a harsh,
jerky voice, as if he wanted to overawe us.

My friend gave his name.

"And you?" said he, turning to me and glaring at me behind his
spectacles.

I gave mine.

"Sergeant! take 'em to the prison, and let 'em be shaved at the
guard-house, civilian-fashion, hair off half their skulls, and let 'em
be put in irons to-morrow. Why, what sort of cloaks have you got there?"
said he brutally, when he saw the gray cloaks with yellow sewn at the
back which they had given to us at Tobolsk. "Why, that's a new uniform,
begad--a new uniform! They're always getting up something or other.
That's a Petersburg trick," he said, as he inspected us one after the
other. "Got anything with them?" he said abruptly to the gendarme who
escorted us.

"They've got their own clothes, your worship," replied he; and the man
carried arms, just as if on parade, not without a nervous tremor.
Everybody knew the fellow, and was afraid of him.

"Take their clothes away from them. They can't keep anything but their
linen, their white things; take away all their coloured things if
they've got any, and sell them off at the next sale, and put the money
to the prison account. A convict has no property," said he, looking
severely at us. "Hark ye! Behave prettily; don't let me have any
complaining. If I do--cat-o'-nine-tails! The smallest offence, and to
the sticks you go!"

This way of receiving me, so different from anything I had ever known,
made me nearly ill that night. It was a frightful thing to happen at the
very moment of entering the infernal place. But I have already told that
part of my story.

Thus we had no sort of exemption or immunity from any of the miseries
inflicted there, no lightening of our labours when with the other
convicts; but friends tried to help us by getting us sent for three
months, B--ski and me, to the bureau of the Engineers, to do copying
work. This was done quietly, and as much as possible kept from being
talked about or observed. This piece of kindness was done for us by the
head engineers, during the short time that Lieutenant-Colonel G--kof was
Governor at our prison. This gentleman had command there only for six
short months, for he soon went back to Russia. He really seemed to us
all like an angel of goodness sent from heaven, and the feeling for him
among the convicts was of the strongest kind; it was not mere love, it
was something like adoration. I cannot help saying so. How he did it I
don't know, but their hearts went out to him from the moment they first
set eyes on him.

"He's more like a father than anything else," the prisoners kept
continually saying during all the time he was there at the head of the
engineering department. He was a brilliant, joyous fellow. He was of low
stature, with a bold, confident expression, and he was all gracious
kindness to the convicts, for whom he really did seem to entertain a
fatherly sort of affection. How was it he was so fond of them? It is
hard to say, but he seemed never to be able to pass a prisoner without a
bit of pleasant talk and a little laughing and joking together. There
was nothing that smacked of authority in his pleasantries, nothing that
reminded them of his position over them. He behaved just as if he was
one of themselves. In spite of this kind condescension, I don't remember
any one of the convicts ever failing in respect to him or taking the
slightest liberty--quite the other way. The convict's face would light
up in a wonderful, sudden way when he met the Governor; it was odd to
see how the face smiled all over, and the hand went to the cap, when the
Governor was seen in the distance making for the poor man. A word from
him was regarded as a signal honour. There are some people like that,
who know how to win all hearts.

G--kof had a bold, jaunty air, walked with long strides, holding himself
very straight; "a regular eagle," the convicts used to call him. He
could not do much to lighten their lot materially, for his office was
that of superintending the engineering work, which had to be done in
ways and quantities, settled absolutely and unalterably by the
regulations. But if he happened to come across a gang of convicts who
had actually got through their work, he allowed them to go back to
quarters before beat of drum, without waiting for the regulation moment.
The prisoners loved him for the confidence he showed in them, and
because of his aversion for all mean, trifling interferences with them,
which are so irritating when prison superiors are addicted to that sort
of thing. I am absolutely certain that if he had lost a thousand roubles
in notes, there was not a thief in the prison, however hardened, who
would not have brought them to him, if the man lit on them. I am sure of
it.

How the prisoners all felt for him, and with him when they learned that
he was at daggers drawn with our detested Major. That came about a
month after his arrival. Their delight knew no bounds. The Major had
formerly served with him in the same detachment; so, when they met,
after a long separation, they were at first boon companions, but the
intimacy could not and did not last. They came to
blows--figuratively--and G--kof became the Major's sworn enemy. Some
would have it that it was _more_ than figuratively, that they came to
actual fisticuffs, a likely thing enough as far as the Major was
concerned, for the man had no objection to a scrimmage.

When the convicts heard of the quarrel they really could not contain
their delight.

"Old Eight-eyes and the Commandant get on finely together! _He's_ an
eagle; but the other's a _bad 'un_!"

Those who believed in the fight were mighty curious to know which of the
two had had the worst of it, and got a good drubbing. If it had been
proved there had been no fighting our convicts, I think, would have been
bitterly disappointed.

"The Commandant gave him fits, you may bet your life on it," said they;
"he's a little 'un, but as bold as a lion; the other one got into a blue
funk, and hid under the bed from him."

But G--kof went away only too soon, and keenly was he regretted in the
prison.

Our engineers were all most excellent fellows; we had three or four
fresh batches of them while I was there.

"Our eagles never remain very long with us," said the prisoners;
"especially when they are good and kind fellows."

It was this G--kof who sent B--ski and myself to work in his bureau, for
he was partial to exiled nobles. When he left, our condition was still
fairly endurable, for there was another engineer there who showed us
much sympathy and friendship. We copied reports for some time, and our
handwriting was getting to be very good, when an order came from the
authorities that we were to be sent back to hard labour as before; some
spiteful person had been at work. At bottom we were rather pleased, for
we were quite tired of copying.

For two whole years I worked in company with B--ski, all the time in the
shops, and many a gossip did we have about our hopes for the future and
our notions and convictions. Good B--ski had a very odd mind, which
worked in a strange, exceptional way. There are some people of great
intelligence who indulge in paradox unconscionably; but when they have
undergone great and constant sufferings for their ideas and made great
sacrifices for them, you can't drive their notions out of their heads,
and it is cruel to try it. When you objected something to B--ski's
propositions, he was really hurt, and gave you a violent answer. He was,
perhaps, more in the right than I was as to some things wherein we
differed, but we were obliged to give one another up, very much to my
regret, for we had many thoughts in common.

As years went on M--tski became more and more sombre and melancholy; he
became a prey to despair. During the earliest part of my imprisonment he
was communicative enough, and let us see what was going on in him. When
I arrived at the prison he had just finished his second year. At first
he took a lively interest in the news I brought, for he knew nothing of
what had been going on in the outer world; he put questions to me,
listened eagerly, showed emotion, but, bit by bit, his reserve grew on
him and there was no getting at his thoughts. The glowing coals were all
covered up with ashes. Yet it was plain that his temper grew sourer and
sourer. "_Je hais ces brigands_,"[10] he would say, speaking of convicts
I had got to know something of; I never could make him see any good in
them. He really did not seem to fully enter into the meaning of anything
I said on their behalf, though he would sometimes seem to agree in a
listless sort of way. Next day it was just as before: "_je hais ces
brigands_." (We used often to speak French with him; so one of the
overseers of the works, the soldier, Dranichnikof, used always to call
us _aides chirurgiens_, God knows why!) M--tski never seemed to shake
off his usual apathy except when he spoke of his mother.

"She is old and infirm," he said; "she loves me better than anything in
the world, and I don't even know if she's still living. If she learns
that I've been whipped----"

M--tski was not a noble, and had been whipped before he was transported.
When the recollection of this came up in his mind he gnashed his teeth,
and could not look anybody in the face. In the latest days of his
imprisonment he used to walk to and fro, quite alone for the most part.
One day, at noon, he was summoned to the Governor, who received him with
a smile on his lips.

"Well, M--tski, what were your dreams last night?" asked the Governor.

Said M--tski to me later, "When he said that to me a shudder ran through
me; I felt struck at the heart."

His answer was, "I dreamed that I had a letter from my mother."

"Better than that, better!" replied the Governor. "You are free; your
mother has petitioned the Emperor, and he has granted her prayer. Here,
here's her letter, and the order for your dismissal. You are to leave
the jail without delay."

He came to us pale, scarcely able to believe in his good fortune.

We congratulated him. He pressed our hands with his own, which were
quite cold, and trembled violently. Many of the convicts wished him joy;
they were really glad to see his happiness.

He settled in Siberia, establishing himself in our town, where a little
after that they gave him a place. He used often to come to the jail to
bring us news, and tell us all that was going on, as often as he could
talk with us. It was political news that interested him chiefly.

Besides the four Poles, the political convicts of whom I spoke just now,
there were two others of that nation, who were sentenced for very short
periods; they had not much education, but were good, simple,
straightforward fellows. There was another, A--tchoukooski, quite a
colourless person; one more I must mention, B--in, a man well on in
years, who impressed us all very unfavourably indeed. I don't know what
he had been sentenced for, although he used to tell us some story or
other about it pretty frequently. He was a person of a vulgar, mean
type, with the coarse manner of an enriched shopkeeper. He was quite
without education, and seemed to take interest in nothing except what
concerned his trade, which was that of a painter, a sort of
scene-painter he was; he showed a good deal of talent in his work, and
the authorities of the prison soon came to know about his abilities, so
he got employment all through the town in decorating walls and ceilings.
In two years he beautified the rooms of nearly all the prison officials,
who remunerated him handsomely, so he lived pretty comfortably. He was
sent to work with three other prisoners, two of whom learned the
business thoroughly; one of these, T--jwoski, painted nearly as well as
B--in himself. Our Major, who had rooms in one of the government
buildings, sent for B--in, and gave him a commission to decorate the
walls and ceilings there, which he did so effectively, that the suite of
rooms of the Governor-General were quite put out of countenance by those
of the Major. The house itself was a ramshackle old place, while the
interior, thanks to B--in, was as gay as a palace. Our worthy Major was
hugely delighted, went about rubbing his hands, and told everybody that
he should look out for a wife at once, "a fellow _can't_ remain single
when he lives in a place like that;" he was quite serious about it. The
Major's satisfaction with B--in and his assistants went on increasing.
They occupied a month in the work at the Major's house. During those
memorable days the Major seemed to get into a different frame of mind
about us, and began to be quite kind to us political prisoners. One day
he sent for J--ski.

"J--ski," said he, "I've done you wrong; I had you beaten for nothing.
I'm very sorry. Do you understand? I'm very sorry. I, Major ----"

J--ski answered that he understood perfectly.

"Do you understand? I, who am set over you, I have sent for you to ask
your pardon. You can hardly realise it, I suppose. What are you to me,
fellow? A worm, less than a crawling worm; you're a convict, while I, by
God's grace,[11] am a Major; Major ----, _do_ you understand?"

J--ski answered that he quite well understood it all.

"Well, I want to be friends with you. But can you appreciate what I'm
doing? Can you feel the greatness of soul I'm showing--feel and
appreciate it? Just think of it; I, I, the Major!" etc. etc.

J--ski told me of this scene. There was, then, some human feeling left
in this drunken, unruly, and tormenting brute. Allowing for the man's
notions of things, and feeble faculties, one cannot deny that this was a
generous proceeding on his part. Perhaps he was a little less drunk than
usual, perhaps more; who can tell?

The Major's glorious idea of marrying came to nothing; the rooms got all
their bravery, but the wife was not forthcoming. Instead of going to the
altar in that agreeable way, he was pulled up before the authorities and
sent to trial. He received orders to send in his resignation. Some of
his old sins had found him out, it seems; things done when he had been
superintendent of police in our town. This crushing blow came down upon
him without notice, quite suddenly. All the convicts were greatly
rejoiced when they heard the great news; it was high day and holiday all
through the jail. The story went abroad that the Major sobbed, and
cried, and howled like an old woman. But he was helpless in the matter.
He was obliged to leave his place, sell his two gray horses, and
everything he had in the world; and he fell into complete destitution.
We came across him occasionally afterwards in civilian, threadbare
clothes, and wearing a cap with a cockade; he glanced at us convicts as
spitefully and maliciously as you please. But without his Major's
uniform, all the man's glory was gone. While placed over us, he gave
himself the airs of a being higher than human, who had got into coat and
breeches; now it was all over, he looked like the lackey he was, and a
disgraced lackey to boot.

With fellows of this sort, the uniform is the only saving grace; that
gone, all's gone.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] The Decembrists.

[10] French in the original Russian.

[11] Our Major was not the only officer who spoke of himself in that
lofty way; a good many officers did the same, men who had risen from the
ranks chiefly.




