## CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST MONTH


Three days after my arrival I was ordered to go to work. The impression
left upon me to this day is still very clear, although there was nothing
very striking in it, unless one considers that my position was in itself
extraordinary. The first sensations count for a good deal, and I as yet
looked upon everything with curiosity. My first three days were
certainly the most painful of all my terms of imprisonment.

My wandering is at an end, I said to myself every moment. I am now in
the convict prison, my resting-place for many years. Here is where I am
to live. I come here full of grief, who knows that when I leave it I
shall not do so with regret? I said this to myself as one touches a
wound, the better to feel its pain. The idea that I might regret my stay
was terrible to me. Already I felt to what an intolerable degree man is
a creature of habit, but this was a matter of the future. The present,
meanwhile, was terrible enough.

The wild curiosity with which my convict companions examined me, their
harshness towards a former nobleman now entering into their corporation,
a harshness which sometimes took the form of hatred--all this tormented
me to such a degree that I felt obliged of my own accord to go to work
in order to measure at one stroke the whole extent of my misfortune,
that I might at once begin to live like the others, and fall with them
into the same abyss.

But convicts differ, and I had not yet disentangled from the general
hostility the sympathy here and there manifested towards me.

After a time the affability and good-will shown to me by certain
convicts gave me a little courage, and restored my spirits. Most
friendly among them was Akim Akimitch. I soon noticed some kind,
good-natured faces in the dark and hateful crowd. Bad people are to be
found everywhere, but even among the worst there may be something good,
I began to think, by way of consolation. Who knows? These persons are
perhaps not worse than others who are free. While making these
reflections I felt some doubts, and, nevertheless, how much I was in the
right!

The convict Suchiloff, for example; a man whose acquaintance I did not
make until long afterwards, although he was near me during nearly the
whole period of my confinement. Whenever I speak of the convicts who are
not worse than other men, my thoughts turn involuntarily to him. He
acted as my servant, together with another prisoner named Osip, whom
Akim Akimitch had recommended to me immediately after my arrival. For
thirty kopecks a month this man agreed to cook me a separate dinner, in
case I should not be able to put up with the ordinary prison fare, and
should be able to pay for my own food. Osip was one of the four cooks
chosen by the prisoners in our two kitchens. I may observe that they
were at liberty to refuse these duties, and give them up whenever they
might think fit. The cooks were men from whom hard labour was not
expected. They had to bake bread and prepare the cabbage soup. They were
called "cook-maids," not from contempt, for the men chosen were always
the most intelligent, but merely in fun. The name given to them did not
annoy them.

For many years past Osip had been constantly selected as "cook-maid." He
never refused the duty except when he was out of sorts, or when he saw
an opportunity of getting spirits into the barracks. Although he had
been sent to the convict prison as a smuggler, he was remarkably honest
and good-tempered (I have spoken of him before); at the same time he was
a dreadful coward, and feared the rod above all things. Of a peaceful,
patient disposition, affable with everybody, he never got into quarrels;
but he could never resist the temptation of bringing spirits in,
notwithstanding his cowardice, and simply from his love of smuggling.
Like all the other cooks he dealt in spirits, but on a much less
extensive scale than Gazin, because he was afraid of running the same
risks. I always lived on good terms with Osip. To have a separate table
it was not necessary to be very rich; it cost me only one rouble a month
apart from the bread, which was given to us. Sometimes when I was very
hungry I made up my mind to eat the cabbage soup, in spite of the
disgust with which it generally filled me. After a time this disgust
entirely disappeared. I generally bought one pound of meat a day, which
cost me two kopecks--[5 kopecks = 2 pence.]

The old soldiers, who watched over the internal discipline of the
barracks, were ready, good-naturedly, to go every day to the market to
make purchases for the convicts. For this they received no pay, except
from time to time a trifling present. They did it for the sake of their
peace; their life in the convict prison would have been a perpetual
torment had they refused. They used to bring in tobacco, tea,
meat--everything, in short, that was desired, always excepting spirits.

For many years Osip prepared for me every day a piece of roast meat. How
he managed to get it cooked was a secret. What was strangest in the
matter was, that during all this time I scarcely exchanged two words
with him. I tried many times to make him talk, but he was incapable of
keeping up a conversation. He would only smile and answer my questions
by "yes" or "no." He was a Hercules, but he had no more intelligence
than a child of seven.

Suchiloff was also one of those who helped me. I had never asked him to
do so, he attached himself to me on his own account, and I scarcely
remember when he began to do so. His principal duty consisted in washing
my linen. For this purpose there was a basin in the middle of the
court-yard, round which the convicts washed their clothes in prison
buckets.

Suchiloff had found means for rendering me a number of little services.
He boiled my tea-urn, ran right and left to perform various commissions
for me, got me all kinds of things, mended my clothes, and greased my
boots four times a month. He did all this in a zealous manner, with a
business-like air, as if he felt all the weight of the duties he was
performing. He seemed quite to have joined his fate to mine, and
occupied himself with all my affairs. He never said: "You have so many
shirts, or your waistcoat is torn;" but, "We have so many shirts, and
our waistcoat is torn." I had somehow inspired him with admiration, and
I really believe that I had become his sole care in life. As he knew no
trade whatever his only source of income was from me, and it must be
understood that I paid him very little; but he was always pleased,
whatever he might receive. He would have been without means had he not
been a servant of mine, and he gave me the preference because I was more
affable than the others, and, above all, more equitable in money
matters. He was one of those beings who never get rich, and never know
how to manage their affairs; one of those in the prison who were hired
by the gamblers to watch all night in the ante-chamber, listening for
the least noise that might announce the arrival of the Major. If there
was a night visit they received nothing, indeed their back paid for
their want of attention. One thing which marks this kind of men is their
entire absence of individuality, which they seem entirely to have lost.

Suchiloff was a poor, meek fellow; all the courage seemed to have been
beaten out of him, although he had in reality been born meek. For
nothing in the world would he have raised his hand against any one in
the prison. I always pitied him without knowing why. I could not look at
him without feeling the deepest compassion for him. If asked to explain
this, I should find it impossible to do so. I could never get him to
talk, and he never became animated, except when, to put an end to all
attempts at conversation, I gave him something to do, or told him to go
somewhere for me. I soon found that he loved to be ordered about.
Neither tall nor short, neither ugly nor handsome, neither stupid nor
intelligent, neither old nor young, it would be difficult to describe in
any definite manner this man, except that his face was slightly pitted
with the small-pox, and that he had fair hair. He belonged, as far as I
could make out, to the same company as Sirotkin. The prisoners sometimes
laughed at him because he had "exchanged." During the march to Siberia
he had exchanged for a red shirt and a silver rouble. It was thought
comical that he should have sold himself for such a small sum, to take
the name of another prisoner in place of his own, and consequently to
accept the other's sentence. Strange as it may appear it was
nevertheless true. This custom, which had become traditional, and still
existed at the time I was sent to Siberia, I, at first, refused to
believe, but found afterwards that it really existed. This is how the
exchange was effected:

A company of prisoners started for Siberia. Among them there are exiles
of all kinds, some condemned to hard labour, others to labour in the
mines, others to simple colonisation. On the way out, no matter at what
stage of the journey, in the Government of Perm, for instance, a
prisoner wishes to exchange with another man, who--we will say he is
named Mikhailoff--has been condemned to hard labour for a capital
offence, and does not like the prospect of passing long years without
his liberty. He knows, in his cunning, what to do. He looks among his
comrades for some simple, weak-minded fellow, whose punishment is less
severe, who has been condemned to a few years in the mines, or to hard
labour, or has perhaps been simply exiled. At last he finds such a man
as Suchiloff, a former serf, sentenced only to become a colonist. The
man has made fifteen hundred versts [about one thousand miles] without a
kopeck, for the good reason that a Suchiloff is always without money;
fatigued, exhausted, he can get nothing to eat beyond the fixed rations,
nothing to wear in addition to the convict uniform.

Mikhailoff gets into conversation with Suchiloff, they suit one another,
and they strike up a friendship. At last at some station Mikhailoff
makes his comrade drunk, then he will ask him if he will "exchange."

"My name is Mikhailoff," he says to him, "condemned to what is called
hard labour, but which, in my own case, will be nothing of the kind, as
I am to enter a particular special section. I am classed with the
hard-labour men, but in my special division the labour is not so
severe."

Before the special section was abolished, many persons in the official
world, even at St. Petersburg, were unaware even of its existence. It
was in such a retired corner of one of the most distant regions of
Siberia, that it was difficult to know anything about it. It was
insignificant, moreover, from the number of persons belonging to it. In
my time they numbered altogether only seventy. I have since met men who
have served in Siberia, and know the country well, and yet have never
heard of the "special section." In the rules and regulations there are
only six lines about this institution. Attached to the convict prison of
---- is a special section reserved for the most dangerous criminals,
while the severest labours are being prepared for them. The prisoners
themselves knew nothing of this special section. Did it exist
temporarily or constantly? Neither Suchiloff nor any of the prisoners
being sent out, not Mikhailoff himself could guess the significance of
those two words. Mikhailoff, however, had his suspicion as to the true
character of this section. He formed his opinion from the gravity of the
crime for which he was made to march three or four thousand versts on
foot. It was certain that he was not being sent to a place where he
would be at his ease. Suchiloff was to be a colonist. What could
Mikhailoff desire better than that?

"Won't you change?" he asks. Suchiloff is a little drunk, he is a
simple-minded man, full of gratitude to the comrade who entertains him,
and dare not refuse; he has heard, moreover, from other prisoners, that
these exchanges are made, and understands, therefore, that there is
nothing extraordinary, unheard-of, in the proposition made to him. An
agreement is come to, the cunning Mikhailoff, profiting by Suchiloff's
simplicity, buys his name for a red shirt, and a silver rouble, which
are given before witnesses. The next day Suchiloff is sober; but more
liquor is given to him. Then he drinks up his own rouble, and after a
while the red shirt has the same fate.

"If you don't like the bargain we made, give me back my money," says
Mikhailoff. But where is Suchiloff to get a rouble? If he does not give
it back, the "artel" [_i.e._, the association--in this case of convicts]
will force him to keep his promise. The prisoners are very sensitive on
such points: he must keep his promise. The "artel" requires it, and, in
case of disobedience, woe to the offender! He will be killed, or at
least seriously intimidated. If indeed the "artel" once showed mercy to
the men who had broken their word, there would be an end to its
existence. If the given word can be recalled, and the bargain put an end
to after the stipulated sum has been paid, who would be bound by such an
agreement? It is a question of life or death for the "artel."
Accordingly the prisoners are very severe on the point.

Suchiloff then finds that it is impossible to go back, that nothing can
save him, and he accordingly agrees to all that is demanded of him. The
bargain is then made known to all the convoy, and if denunciations are
feared, the men looked upon as suspicious are entertained. What,
moreover, does it matter to the others whether Mikhailoff or Suchiloff
goes to the devil? They have had gratuitous drinks, they have been
feasted for nothing, and the secret is kept by all.

At the next station the names are called. When Mikhailoff's turn
arrives, Suchiloff answers "present," Mikhailoff replies "present" for
Suchiloff, and the journey is continued. The matter is not now even
talked about. At Tobolsk the prisoners are told off. Mikhailoff will
become a colonist, while Suchiloff is sent to the special section under
a double escort. It would be useless now to cry out, to protest, for
what proof could be given? How many years would it take to decide the
affair, what benefit would the complainant derive? Where, moreover, are
the witnesses? They would deny everything, even if they could be found.

That is how Suchiloff, for a silver rouble and a red shirt, came to be
sent to the special section. The prisoners laughed at him, not because
he had exchanged--though in general they despised those who had been
foolish enough to exchange a work that was easy for a work that was
hard--but simply because he had received nothing for the bargain except
a red shirt and a rouble--certainly a ridiculous compensation.

Generally speaking, the exchanges are made for relatively large sums;
several ten-rouble notes sometimes change hands. But Suchiloff was so
characterless, so insignificant, so null, that he could scarcely even be
laughed at. We lived a considerable time together, he and I; I had got
accustomed to him, and he had formed an attachment for me. One day,
however--I can never forgive myself for what I did--he had not executed
my orders, and when he came to ask me for his money I had the cruelty to
say to him, "You don't forget to ask for your money, but you don't do
what you are told." Suchiloff remained silent and hastened to do as he
was ordered, but he suddenly became very sad. Two days passed. I could
not believe that what I had said to him could affect him so much. I knew
that a person named Vassilieff was claiming from him in a morose manner
payment of a small debt. Suchiloff was probably short of money, and did
not dare to ask me for any.

"Suchiloff, you wish, I think, to ask me for some money to pay
Vassilieff; take this."

I was seated on my camp-bedstead. Suchiloff remained standing up before
me, much astonished that I myself should propose to give him money, and
that I remembered his difficult position; the more so as latterly he had
asked me several times for money in advance, and could scarcely hope
that I should give him any more. He looked at the paper I held out to
him, then looked at me, turned sharply on his heel and went out. I was
as astonished as I could be. I went out after him, and found him at the
back of the barracks. He was standing up with his face against the
palisade and his arms resting on the stakes.

"What is the matter, Suchiloff?" I asked him.

He made no reply, and to my stupefaction I saw that he was on the point
of bursting into tears.

"You think, Alexander Petrovitch," he said, in a trembling voice, in
endeavouring not to look at me, "that I care only for your money, but
I----"

He turned away from me, and struck the palisade with his forehead and
began to sob. It was the first time in the convict prison that I had
seen a man weep. I had much trouble in consoling him; and he afterwards
served me, if possible, with more zeal than ever. He watched for my
orders, but by almost imperceptible indications I could see that his
heart would never forgive me for my reproach. Meanwhile other men
laughed at him and teased him whenever the opportunity presented itself,
and even insulted him without his losing his temper; on the contrary, he
still remained on good terms with them. It is indeed difficult to know a
man, even after having lived long years with him.

The convict prison had not at first for me the significance it was
afterwards to assume. I was at first, in spite of my attention, unable
to understand many facts which were staring me in the face. I was
naturally first struck by the most salient points, but I saw them from a
false point of view, and the only impression they made upon me was one
of unmitigated sadness. What contributed above all to this result was my
meeting with A----f, the convict who had come to the prison before me,
and who had astonished me in such a painful manner during the first few
days. The effect of his baseness was to aggravate my moral suffering,
already sufficiently cruel. He offered the most repulsive example of the
kind of degradation and baseness to which a man may fall when all
feeling of honour has perished within him. This young man of noble
birth--I have spoken of him before--used to repeat to the Major all that
was done in the barracks, and in doing so through the Major's
body-servant Fedka. Here is the man's history.

Arrived at St. Petersburg before he had finished his studies, after a
quarrel with his parents, whom his life of debauchery had terrified, he
had not shrunk for the sake of money from doing the work of an informer.
He did not hesitate to sell the blood of ten men in order to satisfy his
insatiable thirst for the grossest and most licentious pleasures. At
last he became so completely perverted in the St. Petersburg taverns and
houses of ill-fame, that he did not hesitate to take part in an affair
which he knew to be conceived in madness--for he was not without
intelligence. He was condemned to exile and ten years' hard labour in
Siberia. One might have thought that such a frightful blow would have
shocked him, that it would have caused some reaction and brought about a
crisis; but he accepted his new fate without the least confusion. It did
not frighten him; all that he feared in it was the necessity of working,
and of giving up for ever his habits of debauchery. The name of convict
had no effect but to prepare him for new acts of baseness, and more
hideous villainies than any he had previously perpetrated.

"I am now a convict, and can crawl at ease, without shame."

That was the light in which he looked upon his new position. I think of
this disgusting creature as of some monstrous phenomenon. During the
many years I have lived in the midst of murderers, debauchees, and
proved rascals, never in my life did I meet a case of such complete
moral abasement, determined corruption, and shameless baseness. Among us
there was a parricide of noble birth. I have already spoken of him; but
I could see by several signs that he was much better and more humane
than A----f. During the whole time of my punishment, he was never
anything more in my eyes than a piece of flesh furnished with teeth and
a stomach, greedy for the most offensive and ferocious animal
enjoyments, for the satisfaction of which he was ready to assassinate
anyone. I do not exaggerate in the least; I recognised in A----f one of
the most perfect specimens of animality, restrained by no principles, no
rule. How much I was disgusted by his eternal smile! He was a monster--a
moral Quasimodo. He was at the same time intelligent, cunning,
good-looking, had received some education, and possessed a certain
capacity. Fire, plague, famine, no matter what scourge, is preferable to
the presence of such a man in human society. I have already said that in
the convict prison espionage and denunciation flourished as the natural
product of degradation, without the convicts thinking much of it. On the
contrary, they maintained friendly relations with A----f. They were more
affable with him than with any one else. The kindly attitude towards him
of our drunken friend, the Major, gave him a certain importance, and
even a certain worth in the eyes of the convicts. Later on, this
cowardly wretch ran away with another convict and the soldier in charge
of them; but of this I shall speak in proper time and place. At first,
he hung about me, thinking I did not know his history. I repeat that he
poisoned the first days of my imprisonment so as to drive me nearly to
despair. I was terrified by the mass of baseness and cowardice in the
midst of which I had been thrown. I imagined that every one else was as
foul and cowardly as he. But I made a mistake in supposing that every
one resembled A----f.

During the first three days I did nothing but wander about the convict
prison, when I did not remain stretched out on my camp-bedstead. I
entrusted to a prisoner of whom I was sure, the piece of linen which had
been delivered to me by the administration, in order that he might make
me some shirts. Always on the advice of Akim Akimitch, I got myself a
folding mattress. It was in felt, covered with linen, as thin as a
pancake, and very hard to any one who was not accustomed to it. Akim
Akimitch promised to get me all the most essential things, and with his
own hands made me a blanket out of a piece of old cloth, cut and sewn
together from all the old trousers and waistcoats which I had bought
from various prisoners. The clothes delivered to them, when they have
been worn the regulation time, become the property of the prisoners.
They at once sell them, for however much worn an article of clothing may
be, it always possesses a certain value. I was very much astonished by
all this, above all at the outset, during my first relations with this
world. I became as low as my companions, as much a convict as they.
Their customs, their habits, their ideas influenced me thoroughly, and
externally became my own, without affecting my inner self. I was
astonished and confused as though I had never heard or suspected
anything of the kind before, and yet I knew what to expect, or at least
what had been told me. The thing itself, however, produced on me a
different impression from the mere description of it. How could I
suppose, for instance, that old rags possessed still some value? And,
nevertheless, my blanket was made up entirely of tatters. It would be
difficult to describe the cloth out of which the clothes of the convicts
were made. It was like the thick, gray cloth manufactured for the
soldiers, but as soon as it had been worn some little time it showed the
threads and tore with abominable ease. The uniform ought to have lasted
for a whole year, but it never went so long as that. The prisoner
labours, carries heavy burdens, and the cloth naturally wears out, and
gets into holes very quickly. Our sheepskins were intended to be worn
for three years. During the whole of that time they served as outer
garments, blankets, and pillows, but they were very solid. Nevertheless,
at the end of the third year, it was not rare to see them mended with
ordinary linen. Although they were now very much worn, it was always
possible to sell them at the rate of forty kopecks a piece, the best
preserved ones even at the price of sixty kopecks, which was a great sum
for the convict prison.

Money, as I have before said, has a sovereign value in such a place. It
is certain that a prisoner who has some pecuniary resources suffers ten
times less than the one who has nothing.

"When the Government supplies all the wants of the convict, what need
can he have for money?" reasoned our chief.

Nevertheless, I repeat that if the prisoners had been deprived of the
opportunity of possessing something of their own, they would have lost
their reason, or would have died like flies. They would have committed
unheard-of crimes; some from wearisomeness or grief, the others, in
order to get sooner punished, and, according to their expression, "have
a change." If the convict who has gained some kopecks by the sweat of
his brow, who has embarked in perilous undertakings in order to conquer
them, if he spends this money recklessly, with childish stupidity, that
does not the least in the world prove that he does not know its value,
as might at first sight be thought. The convict is greedy for money, to
the point of losing his reason, and, if he throws it away, he does so in
order to procure what he places far above money--liberty, or at least a
semblance of liberty.

Convicts are great dreamers; I will speak of that further on with more
detail. At present I will confine myself to saying that I have heard
men, who had been condemned to twenty years' hard labour, say, with a
quiet air, "when I have finished my time, if God wishes, then----" The
very words hard labour, or forced labour, indicate that the man has lost
his freedom; and when this man spends his money he is carrying out his
own will.

In spite of the branding and the chains, in spite of the palisade which
hides from his eyes the free world, and encloses him in a cage like a
wild beast, he can get himself spirits and other delights; sometimes
even (not always), corrupt his immediate superintendents, the old
soldiers and non-commissioned officers, and get them to close their eyes
to his infractions of discipline within the prison. He can,
moreover--what he adores--swagger; that is to say, impress his
companions and persuade himself for a time, that he enjoys more liberty
than he really possesses. The poor devil wishes, in a word, to convince
himself of what he knows to be impossible. This is why the prisoners
take such pleasure in boasting and exaggerating in burlesque fashion
their own unhappy personality.

Finally, they run some risk when they give themselves up to this
boasting; in which again they find a semblance of life and liberty--the
only thing they care for. Would not a millionaire with a rope round his
neck give all his millions for one breath of air? A prisoner has lived
quietly for several years in succession, his conduct has been so
exemplary that he has been rewarded by special exemptions. Suddenly, to
the great astonishment of his chiefs, this man becomes mutinous, plays
the very devil, and does not recoil from a capital crime such as
assassination, violation, etc. Every one is astounded at the cause of
this unexpected explosion on the part of a man thought incapable of such
a thing. It is the convulsive manifestation of his personality, an
instinctive melancholia, an uncontrollable desire for self-assertion,
all of which obscures his reason. It is a sort of epileptic attack, a
spasm. A man buried alive who suddenly wakes up must strike in a similar
manner against the lid of his coffin. He tries to rise up, to push it
from him, although his reason must convince him of the uselessness of
his efforts.

Reason, however, has nothing to do with this convulsion. It must not be
forgotten that almost every voluntary manifestation on the part of a
convict is looked upon as a crime. Accordingly, it is a perfect matter
of indifference to them whether this manifestation be important or
insignificant, debauch for debauch, danger for danger. It is just as
well to go to the end, even as far as a murder. The only difficulty is
the first step. Little by little the man becomes excited, intoxicated,
and can no longer contain himself. For that reason it would be better
not to drive him to extremities. Everybody would be much better for it.

But how can this be managed?




