## CHAPTER XII.

THE PERFORMANCE.


On the evening of the third day of the holidays took place our first
theatrical performance. There had been much trouble about organising it.
But those who were to act had taken everything upon themselves, and the
other convicts knew nothing about the representation except that it was
to take place. We did not even know what was to be played. The actors,
while they were at work, were always thinking how they could get
together the greatest number of costumes. Whenever I met Baklouchin he
snapped his fingers with satisfaction, but told me nothing. I think the
Major was in a good humour; but we did not know for certain whether he
knew what was going on or not, whether he had authorised it, or whether
he had determined to shut his eyes and be silent, after assuring himself
that everything would take place quietly. He had heard, I fancy, of the
meditated representation, and said nothing about it, lest he should
spoil everything. The soldiers would be disorderly, or would get drunk,
unless they had something to divert them. Thus I think the Major must
have reasoned, for it will be only natural to do so. I may add that if
the convicts had not got up a performance during the holidays, or done
something of the kind, the administration would have been obliged to
organise some sort of amusement; but as our Major was distinguished by
ideas directly opposed to those of other people, I take a great
responsibility on myself in saying that he knew of our project and
authorised it. A man like him must always be crushing and stifling some
one, taking something away, depriving some one of a right--in a word,
for establishing order of this character he was known throughout the
town.

It mattered nothing to him that his exactions made the men rebellious.
For such offences there were suitable punishments (there are some people
who reason in this way), and with these rascals of convicts there was
nothing to do but to treat them very severely, deal with them strictly
according to law. These incapable executants of the law did not in the
least understand that to apply the law without understanding its spirit
is to provoke resistance. They are quite astonished that, in addition to
the execution of the law, good sense and a sound head should be expected
from them. The last condition would appear to them quite superfluous; to
require such a thing is vexatious, intolerant.

However this may be, the Sergeant-Major made no objection to the
performance, and that was all the convicts wanted. I may say in all
truth that if throughout the holidays there were no disorders in the
convict prison, no sanguinary quarrels, no robberies, that must be
attributed to the convicts being permitted to organise their
performance. I saw with my own eyes how they got out of the way of those
of their companions who had drunk too much, and how they prevented
quarrels on the ground that the representation would be forbidden. The
non-commissioned officer made the prisoners give their word of honour
that they would behave well, and that all would go off quietly. They
gave it with pleasure, and kept their promise religiously. They were
much flattered at finding their word of honour accepted. Let me add that
the representation cost nothing, absolutely nothing, to the
authorities, who were not called upon to spend a farthing. The theatre
could be put up and taken down within a quarter of an hour; and, in case
an order stopping the performance suddenly arrived, the scenery could
have been put away in a second. The costumes were concealed in the
convicts' boxes; but first of all let me say how our theatre was
constructed, what were the costumes, and what the bill, that is to say,
the pieces that were to be played. To tell the truth, there was no
written playbill, not, at least, for the first representation. It was
ready only for the second and third. Baklouchin composed it for the
officers and other distinguished visitors who might deign to honour the
performance with their presence, including the officer of the guard, the
officer of the watch, and an Engineer officer. It was in honour of these
that the playbill was written out.

It was supposed that the reputation of our theatre would extend to the
fortress, and even to the town, especially as there was no theatre at
N----: a few amateur performances, but nothing more. The convicts
delighted in the smallest success, and boasted of it like children.

"Who knows?" they said to one another; "when our chiefs hear of it they
will perhaps come and see. Then they will know what convicts are worth,
for this is not a performance given by soldiers, but a genuine piece
played by genuine actors; nothing like it could be seen anywhere in the
town. General Abrosimoff had a representation at his house, and it is
said he will have another. Well, they may beat us in the matter of
costumes, but as for the dialogue that is a very different thing. The
Governor himself will perhaps hear of it, and--who knows?--he may come
himself."

They had no theatre in the town. In a word, the imagination of the
convicts, above all after their first success, went so far as to make
them think that rewards would be distributed to them, and that their
period of hard labour would be shortened. A moment afterwards they were
the first to laugh at this fancy. In a word, they were children, true
children, when they were forty years of age. I knew in a general way the
subjects of the pieces that were to be represented, although there was
no bill. The title of the first was _Philatka and Miroshka Rivals_.
Baklouchin boasted to me, at least a week before the performance, that
the part of Philatka, which he had assigned to himself, would be played
in such a manner that nothing like it had ever been seen, even on the
St. Petersburg stage. He walked about in the barracks puffed up with
boundless importance. If now and then he declaimed a speech from his
part in the theatrical style, every one burst out laughing, whether the
speech was amusing or not; they laughed because he had forgotten
himself. It must be admitted that the convicts, as a body, were
self-contained and full of dignity; the only ones who got enthusiastic
at Baklouchin's tirades were the young ones, who had no false shame, or
those who were much looked up to, and whose authority was so firmly
established that they were not afraid to commit themselves. The others
listened silently, without blaming or contradicting, but they did their
best to show that the performance left them indifferent.

It was not until the very last moment, the very day of the
representation, that every one manifested genuine interest in what our
companions had undertaken. "What," was the general question, "would the
Major say? Would the performance succeed as well as the one given two
years before?" etc., etc. Baklouchin assured me that all the actors
would be quite at home on the stage, and that there would even be a
curtain. Sirotkin was to play a woman's part. "You will see how well I
look in women's clothes," he said. The Lady Bountiful was to have a
dress with skirts and trimmings, besides a parasol; while her husband,
the Lord of the Manor, was to wear an officer's uniform, with
epaulettes, and a cane in his hand.

The second piece that was to be played was entitled, _Kedril, the
Glutton_. The title puzzled me much, but it was useless to ask any
questions about it. I could only learn that the piece was not printed;
it was a manuscript copy obtained from a retired non-commissioned
officer in the town, who had doubtless formerly participated in its
representation on some military stage. We have, indeed, in the distant
towns and governments, a number of pieces of this kind, which, I
believe, are perfectly unknown and have never been printed, but which
appear to have grown up of themselves, in connection with the popular
theatre, in certain zones of Russia. I have spoken of the popular
theatre. It would be a good thing if our investigators of popular
literature would take the trouble to make careful researches as to this
popular theatre which exists, and which, perhaps, is not so
insignificant as may be thought.

I cannot think that everything I saw on the stage of our convict prison
was the work of our convicts. It must have sprung from old traditions
handed down from generation to generation, and preserved among the
soldiers, the workmen in industrial towns, and even the shopkeepers in
some poor, out-of-the-way places. These traditions have been preserved
in some villages and some Government towns by the servants of the large
landed proprietors. I even believe that copies of many old pieces have
been multiplied by these servants of the nobility.

The old Muscovite proprietors and nobles had their own theatres, in
which their servants used to play. Thence comes our popular theatre, the
originals of which are beyond discussion. As for _Kedril, the Glutton_,
in spite of my lively curiosity, I could learn nothing about it, except
that demons appeared on the stage and carried Kedril away to hell. What
did the name of Kedril signify? Why was he called Kedril and not Cyril?
Was the name Russian or foreign? I could not resolve this question.

It was announced that the representation would terminate with a musical
pantomime. All this promised to be very curious. The actors were
fifteen in number, all vivacious men. They were very energetic, got up a
number of rehearsals which sometimes took place behind the barracks,
kept away from the others, and gave themselves mysterious airs. They
evidently wished to surprise us with something extraordinary and
unexpected.

On work days the barracks were shut very early as night approached, but
an exception was made during the Christmas holidays, when the padlocks
were not put to the gates until the evening retreat--nine o'clock. This
favour had been granted specially in view of the play. During the whole
duration of the holidays a deputation was sent every evening to the
officer of the guard very humbly "to permit the representation and not
to shut at the usual hour." It was added that there had been previous
representations, and that nothing disorderly had occurred at any of
them.

The officer of the guard must have reasoned as follows: There was no
disorder, no infraction of discipline at the previous performance, and
the moment they give their word that to-night's performance shall take
place in the same manner, they mean to be their own police--the most
rigorous police of all. Moreover, he knew well that if he took it upon
himself to forbid the representation, these fellows (who knows, and with
convicts?) would have committed some offence which would have placed the
officer of the guard in a very difficult position. One final reason
insured his consent: To mount guard is horribly tiresome, and if he
authorised the performance he would see the play acted, not by soldiers,
but by convicts, a curious set of people. It would certainly be
interesting, and he had a right to be present at it.

In case the superior officer arrived and asked for the officer of the
guard, he would be told that the latter had gone to count the convicts
and close the barracks; an answer which could easily be made, and which
could not be disproved. That is why our superintendents authorised the
performance; and throughout the holidays the barracks were kept open
each evening until the retreat. The convicts had known beforehand that
they would meet with no opposition from the officer of the guard. They
were quite quiet about him.

Towards six o'clock Petroff came to look for me, and we went together to
the theatre. Nearly all the prisoners of our barracks were there, with
the exception of the "old believer" from Tchernigoff, and the Poles. The
latter did not decide to be present until the last day of the
representation, the 4th of January, after they had been assured that
everything would be managed in a becoming manner. The haughtiness of the
Poles irritated our convicts. Accordingly they were received on the 4th
of January with formal politeness, and conducted to the best places. As
for the Circassians and Isaiah Fomitch, the play was for them a genuine
delight. Isaiah Fomitch gave three kopecks each time, except the last,
when he placed ten kopecks on the plate; and how happy he looked!

The actors had decided that each spectator should give what he thought
fit. The receipts were to cover the expenses, and anything beyond was to
go to the actors. Petroff assured me that I should be allowed to have
one of the best places, however full the theatre might be; first,
because being richer than the others, there was a probability of my
giving more; and, secondly, because I knew more about acting than any
one else. What he had foreseen took place. But let me first describe the
theatre.

The barrack of the military section, which had been turned into the
theatre, was fifteen feet long. From the court-yard one entered, first
an ante-chamber, and afterwards the barrack itself. The building was
arranged, as I have already mentioned, in a particular manner, the beds
being placed against the wall, so as to leave an open space in the
middle. One half of the barrack was reserved for the spectators, while
the other, which communicated with the second building, formed the
stage. What astonished me directly I entered, was the curtain, which was
about ten feet long, and divided the barrack into two. It was indeed a
marvel, for it was painted in oil, and represented trees, tunnels,
ponds, and stars.

It was made of pieces of linen, old and new, given by the convicts;
shirts, the bandages which our peasants wrap round their feet in lieu of
socks, all sewn together well or ill, and forming together an immense
sheet. Where there was not enough linen, it had been replaced by writing
paper, taken sheet by sheet from the various office bureaus. Our
painters (among whom we had our Bruloff) had painted it all over, and
the effect was very remarkable.

This luxurious curtain delighted the convicts, even the most sombre and
most morose. These, however, like the others, as soon as the play began,
showed themselves mere children. They were all pleased and satisfied
with a certain satisfaction of vanity. The theatre was lighted with
candle ends. Two benches, which had been brought from the kitchen, were
placed before the curtain, together with three or four large chairs,
borrowed from the non-commissioned officers' room. These chairs were for
the officers, should they think fit to honour the performance. As for
the benches, they were for the non-commissioned officers, engineers,
clerks, directors of the works, and all the immediate superiors of the
convicts who had not officer's rank, and who had come perhaps to take a
look at the representation. In fact, there was no lack of visitors.
According to the days, they came in greater or smaller numbers, while
for the last representation there was not a single place unoccupied on
the benches.

At the back the convicts stood crowded together; standing up out of
respect to the visitors, and dressed in their vests, or in their short
pelisses, in spite of the suffocating heat. As might have been expected,
the place was too small; so all the prisoners stood up, heaped
together--above all in the last rows. The camp-bedsteads were all
occupied; and there were some amateurs who disputed constantly behind
the stage in the other barrack, and who viewed the performance from the
back. I was asked to go forward, and Petroff with me, close to the
benches, whence a good view could be obtained. They looked upon me as a
good judge, a connoisseur, who had seen many other theatres. The
convicts remarked that Baklouchin had often consulted me, and that he
had shown deference to my advice. Consequently they thought that I ought
to be treated with honour, and to have one of the best places. These men
are vain and frivolous, but only on the surface. They laughed at me when
I was at work, because I was a poor workman. Almazoff had a right to
despise us gentlemen, and to boast of his superior skill in pounding the
alabaster. His laughter and raillery were directed against our origin,
for we belonged by birth to the caste of his former masters, of whom he
could not preserve a good recollection; but here at the theatre these
same men made way for me; for they knew that about this matter I knew
more than they did. Those, even, who were not at all well disposed
towards me, were glad to hear me praise the performance, and gave way to
me without the least servility. I judged now by my impressions of that
time. I understood that in this new view of theirs there was no lowering
of themselves; rather a sentiment of their own dignity.

The most striking characteristic of our people is its conscientiousness,
and its love of justice; no false vanity, no sly ambition to reach the
first rank without being entitled to do so; such faults are foreign to
our people. Take it from its rough shell, and you will perceive, if you
study it without prejudice, attentively, and close at hand, qualities
which you would never have suspected. Our sages have very little to
teach our people. I will even say more; they might take lessons from it.

Petroff had told me innocently, on taking me into the theatre, that they
would pass me to the front, because they expected more money from me.
There were no fixed prices for the places. Each one gave what he liked,
and what he could. Nearly every one placed a piece of money in the plate
when it was handed round. Even if they had passed me forward in the hope
that I should give more than others, was there not in that a certain
feeling of personal dignity?

"You are richer than I am. Go to the first row. We are all equal here,
it is true; but you pay more, and the actors prefer a spectator like
you. Occupy the first place then, for we are not here with money, and
must arrange ourselves anyhow."

What noble pride in this mode of action! In final analysis not love of
money, but self-respect. There was little esteem for money among us. I
do not remember that one of us ever lowered himself to obtain money.
Some men used to make up to me, but from love of cunning and of fun
rather than in the hope of obtaining any benefit. I do not know whether
I explain myself clearly. I am, in any case, forgetting the performance.
Let me return to it.

Before the rise of the curtain, the room presented a strange and
animated look. In the first place, the crowd pressed, crushed, jammed
together on all sides, but impatient, full of expectation, every face
glowing with delight. In the last ranks was the grovelling, confused
mass of convicts. Many of them had brought with them logs of wood, which
they placed against the wall, on which they climbed up. In this
fatiguing position they paused to rest themselves by placing both hands
on the shoulders of their companions, who seemed quite at ease. Others
stood on their toes, with their heels against the stove, and thus
remained throughout the representation, supported by those around them.
Massed against the camp-bedsteads was another compact crowd; for here
were some of the best places of all. Five convicts had hoisted
themselves up to the top of the stove, whence they had a commanding
view. These fortunate ones were extremely happy. Elsewhere swarmed the
late arrivals, unable to find good places.

Every one conducted himself in a becoming manner, without making any
noise. Each one wished to show advantageously before the distinguished
persons who were visiting us. Simple and natural was the expression of
these red faces, damp with perspiration, as the rise of the curtain was
eagerly expected. What a strange look of infinite delight, of unmixed
pleasure, was painted on these scarred faces, these branded foreheads,
so dark and menacing at ordinary times! They were all without their
caps, and as I looked back at them from my place, it seemed to me that
their heads were entirely shaved.

Suddenly the signal is given, and the orchestra begins to play. This
orchestra deserves a special mention. It consisted of eight musicians:
two violins, one of which was the property of a convict, while the other
had been borrowed from outside; three balalaiki, made by the convicts
themselves; two guitars, and a tambourine. The violins sighed and
shrieked, and the guitars were worthless, but the balalaiki were
remarkably good; and the agile fingering of the artists would have done
honour to the cleverest executant.

They played scarcely anything but dance tunes. At the most exciting
passages they struck with their fingers on the body of their
instruments. The tone, the execution of the motive, were always original
and distinctive. One of the guitarists knew his instrument thoroughly.
It was the gentleman who had killed his father. As for the tambourinist,
he really did wonders. Now he whirled round the disk, balanced on one of
his fingers; now he rubbed the parchment with his thumb, and brought
from it a countless multitude of notes, now dull, now brilliant.

At last two harmonigers join the orchestra. I had no idea until then of
all that could be done with these popular and vulgar instruments. I was
astonished. The harmony, but, above all, the expression, the very
conception of the motive, were admirably rendered. I then understood
perfectly, and for the first time, the remarkable boldness, the
striking abandonment, which are expressed in our popular dance tunes,
and our village songs.

At last the curtain rose. Every one made a movement. Those who were at
the back raised themselves upon the point of their feet; some one fell
down from his log. At once there were looks that enjoined silence. The
performance now began.

I was seated not far from Ali, who was in the midst of the group formed
by his brothers and the other Circassians. They had a passionate love of
the theatre, and did not miss one of our evenings. I have remarked that
all the Mohammedans, Circassians, and so on, are fond of all kinds of
representations. Near them was Isaiah Fomitch, quite in a state of
ecstasy. As soon as the curtain rose he was all ears and eyes; his
countenance expressed an expectation of something marvellous. I should
have been grieved had he been disappointed. The charming face of Ali
shone with a childish joy, so pure that I was quite happy to behold it.
Involuntarily, whenever a general laugh echoed an amusing remark, I
turned towards him to see his countenance. He did not notice it, he had
something else to do.

Near him, placed on the left, was a convict, already old, sombre,
discontented, and always grumbling. He also had noticed Ali, and I saw
him cast furtive glances more than once towards him, so charming was the
young Circassian. The prisoners always called him Ali Simeonitch,
without my knowing why.

In the first piece, _Philatka and Miroshka_, Baklouchin, in the part of
Philatka, was really marvellous. He played his rôle to perfection. It
could be seen that he had weighed each speech, each movement. He managed
to give to each word, each gesture, a meaning which responded perfectly
to the character of the personage. Apart from the conscientious study he
had made of the character, he was gay, simple, natural, irresistible. If
you had seen Baklouchin you would certainly have said that he was a
genuine actor, an actor by vocation, and of great talent. I have seen
Philatka several times at the St. Petersburg and Moscow theatres, and I
declare that none of our celebrated actors was equal to Baklouchin in
this part. They were peasants, from no matter what country, and not true
Russian moujiks. Moreover, their desire to be peasant-like was too
apparent. Baklouchin was animated by emulation; for it was known that
the convict Potsiakin was to play the part of Kedril in the second
piece, and it was assumed--I do not know why--that the latter would show
more talent than Baklouchin. The latter was as vexed by this preference
as a child. How many times did he not come to me during the last days to
tell me all he felt! Two hours before the representation he was attacked
by fever. When the audience burst out laughing, and called out "Bravo,
Baklouchin! what a fellow you are!" his figure shone with joy, and true
inspiration could be read in his eyes. The scene of the kisses between
Kiroshka and Philatka, in which the latter calls out to the daughter,
"Wife, your mouth," and then wipes his own, was wonderfully comic. Every
one burst out laughing.

What interested me was the spectators. They were all at their ease, and
gave themselves up frankly to their mirth. Cries of approbation became
more and more numerous. A convict nudged his companion with his elbow,
and hastily communicated his impressions, without even troubling himself
to know who was by his side. When a comic song began, one man might be
seen agitating his arms violently, as if to engage his companions to
laugh; after which he turned suddenly towards the stage. A third smacked
his tongue against his palate, and could not keep quiet a moment; but as
there was not room for him to change his position, he hopped first on
one leg, then on the other; towards the end of the piece the general
gaiety attained its climax. I exaggerate nothing. Imagine the convict
prison, chains, captivity, long years of confinement, of task-work, of
monotonous life, falling away drop by drop like rain on an autumn day;
imagine all this despair in presence of permission given to the convicts
to amuse themselves, to breathe freely for an hour, to forget their
nightmare, and to organise a play--and what a play! one that excited the
envy and admiration of our town.

"Fancy those convicts!" people said: everything interested them, take
the costumes for instance. It seemed very strange, but then to see,
Nietsvitaeff, or Baklouchin, in a different costume from the one they
had worn for so many years.

He is a convict, a genuine convict, whose chains ring when he walks; and
there he is, out on the stage with a frock-coat, and a round hat, and a
cloak, like any ordinary civilian. He has put on hair, moustaches. He
takes a red handkerchief from his pocket and shakes it, like a real
nobleman. What enthusiasm is created! The "good landlord" arrives in an
aide-de-camp uniform, a very old one, it is true, but with epaulettes,
and a cocked hat. The effect produced was indescribable. There had been
two candidates for this costume, and--will it be believed?--they had
quarrelled like two little schoolboys as to which of them should play
the part. Both wanted to appear in military uniform with epaulettes. The
other actors separated them, and, by a majority of voices, the part was
entrusted to Nietsvitaeff; not because he was more suited to it than the
other, and that he bore a greater resemblance to a nobleman, but only
because he had assured them all that he would have a cane, and that he
would twirl it and rap it out grand, like a true nobleman--a dandy of
the latest fashion--which was more than Vanka and Ospiety could do,
seeing they have never known any noblemen. In fact, when Nietsvitaeff
went to the stage with his wife, he did nothing but draw circles on the
floor with his light bamboo cane, evidently thinking that this was the
sign of the best breeding, of supreme elegance. Probably in his
childhood, when he was still a barefooted child, he had been attracted
by the skill of some proprietor in twirling his cane, and this
impression had remained in his memory, although thirty years afterwards.

Nietsvitaeff was so occupied with his process that he saw no one, he
gave the replies in his dialogue without even raising his eyes. The most
important thing for him was the end of his cane, and the circles he drew
with it. The Lady Bountiful was also very remarkable; she came on in an
old worn-out muslin dress, which looked like a rag. Her arms and neck
were bare. She had a little calico cap on her head, with strings under
her chin, an umbrella in one hand, and in the other a fan of coloured
paper, with which she constantly fanned herself. This great lady was
welcomed with a wild laugh; she herself, too, was unable to restrain
herself, and burst out more than once. The part was filled by the
convict Ivanoff. As for Sirotkin, in his girl's dress, he looked
exceedingly well. The couplets were all well sung. In a word, the piece
was played to the satisfaction of every one; not the least hostile
criticism was passed--who, indeed, was there to criticise? The air,
"Sieni moi Sieni," was played again by way of overture, and the curtain
again went up.

_Kedril, the Glutton_, was now to be played. Kedril is a sort of Don
Juan. This comparison may justly be made, for the master and the servant
are both carried away by devils at the end of the piece; and the piece,
as the convicts had it, was played quite correctly; but the beginning
and the end must have been lost, for it had neither head nor tail. The
scene is laid in an inn somewhere in Russia. The innkeeper introduces
into a room a nobleman wearing a cloak and a battered round hat; the
valet, Kedril, follows his master; he carries a valise, and a fowl
rolled up in blue paper; he wears a short pelisse and a footman's cap.
It is this fellow who is the glutton. The convict Potsiakin, the rival
of Baklouchin, played this part, while the part of the nobleman was
filled by Ivanoff, the same who played the great lady in the first
piece. The innkeeper (Nietsvitaeff) warns the nobleman that the room is
haunted by demons, and goes away; the nobleman is interested and
preoccupied; he murmurs aloud that he has known that for a long time,
and orders Kedril to unpack his things and to get supper ready.

Kedril is a glutton and a coward. When he hears of devils he turns pale
and trembles like a leaf; he would like to run away, but is afraid of
his master; besides, he is hungry, he is voluptuous, he is sensual,
stupid, though cunning in his way, and, as before said, a poltroon; he
cheats his master every moment, though he fears him like fire. This type
of servant is a remarkable one in which may be recognised the principal
features of the character of Leporello, but indistinct and confused. The
part was played in really superior style by Potsiakin, whose talent was
beyond discussion, surpassing as it did in my opinion that of Baklouchin
himself. But when the next day I spoke to Baklouchin I concealed my
impression from him, knowing that it would give him bitter pain.

As for the convict who played the part of the nobleman, it was not bad.
Everything he said was without meaning, incomparable to anything I had
ever heard before; but his enunciation was pure and his gestures
becoming. While Kedril occupies himself with the valise, his master
walks up and down, and announces that from that day forth he means to
lead a quiet life. Kedril listens, makes grimaces, and amuses the
spectators by his reflections "aside." He has no pity for his master,
but he has heard of devils, would like to know what they are like, and
thereupon questions him. The nobleman replies that some time ago, being
in danger of death, he asked succour from hell. Then the devils aided
and delivered him, but the term of his liberty has expired; and if the
devils come that evening, it will be to exact his soul, as has been
agreed in their compact. Kedril begins to tremble in earnest, but his
master does not lose courage, and orders him to prepare the supper.
Hearing of victuals, Kedril revives. Taking out a bottle of wine, he
taps it on his own account. The audience expands with laughter; but the
door grates on its hinges, the winds shakes the shutters, Kedril
trembles, and hastily, almost without knowing what he is doing, puts
into his mouth an enormous piece of fowl, which he is unable to swallow.
There is another gust of wind.

"Is it ready?" cries the master, still walking backwards and forwards in
his room.

"Directly, sir. I am preparing it," says Kedril, who sits down, and,
taking care that his master does not see him, begins to eat the supper
himself. The audience is evidently charmed with the cunning of the
servant, who so cleverly makes game of the nobleman; and it must be
admitted that Poseikin, the representative of the part, deserved high
praise. He pronounced admirably the words: "Directly, sir.
I--am--preparing--it."

Kedril eats gradually, and at each mouthful trembles lest his master
shall see him. Every time that the nobleman turns round Kedril hides
under the table, holding the fowl in his hand. When he has appeased his
hunger, he begins to think of his master.

"Kedril, will it soon be ready?" cries the nobleman.

"It is ready now," replies Kedril boldly, when all at once he perceives
that there is scarcely anything left. Nothing remains but one leg. The
master, still sombre and pre-occupied, notices nothing, and takes his
seat, while Kedril places himself behind him with a napkin on his arm.
Every word, every gesture, every grimace from the servant, as he turns
towards the audience to laugh at his master's expense, excites the
greatest mirth among the convicts. Just at the moment when the young
nobleman begins to eat, the devils arrive. They resemble nothing human
or terrestrial. The side-door opens, and the phantom appears dressed
entirely in white, with a lighted lantern in lieu of a head, and with a
scythe in its hand. Why the white dress, scythe, and lantern? No one
could tell me, and the matter did not trouble the convicts. They were
sure that this was the way it ought to be done. The master comes
forward courageously to meet the apparitions, and calls out to them that
he is ready, and that they can take him. But Kedril, as timid as a hare,
hides under the table, not forgetting, in spite of his fright, to take a
bottle with him. The devils disappear, Kedril comes out of his
hiding-place, and the master begins to eat his fowl. Three devils enter
the room, and seize him to take him to hell.

"Save me, Kedril," he cries. But Kedril has something else to think of.
He has now with him in his hiding-place not only the bottle, but also
the plate of fowl and the bread. He is now alone. The demons are far
away, and his master also. Kedril gets from under the table, looks all
round, and suddenly his face beams with joy. He winks, like the rogue he
is, sits down in his master's place, and whispers to the audience: "I
have now no master but myself."

Every one laughs at seeing him masterless; and he says, always in an
under-tone and with a confidential air: "The devils have carried him
off!"

The enthusiasm of the spectators is now without limits. The last phrase
was uttered with such roguery, with such a triumphant grimace, that it
was impossible not to applaud. But Kedril's happiness does not last
long. Hardly has he taken up the bottle of wine, and poured himself out
a large glass, which he carries to his lips, than the devils return,
slip behind, and seize him. Kedril howls like one possessed, but he dare
not turn round. He wishes to defend himself, but cannot, for in his
hands he holds the bottle and the glass, from which he will not
separate. His eyes starting from his head, his mouth gaping with horror,
he remains for a moment looking at the audience with a comic expression
of cowardice that might have been painted. At last he is dragged,
carried away. His arms and legs are agitated in every direction, but he
still sticks to his bottle. He also shrieks, and his cries are still
heard when he has been carried from the stage.

The curtain falls amid general laughter, and every one is delighted.
The orchestra now attacks the famous dance tune Kamarinskaia. First it
is played softly, pianissimo; but little by little, the motive is
developed and played more lightly. The time is quickened, and the wood,
as well as the strings of the balalaiki, is made to sound. The musicians
enter thoroughly into the spirit of the dance. Glinka [who has arranged
the Kamarinskaia in the most ingenious manner, and with harmonies of his
own devising, for full orchestra] should have heard it as it was
executed in our Convict Prison.

The pantomimic musical accompaniment is begun; and throughout the
Kamarinskaia is played. The stage represents the interior of a hut. A
miller and his wife are sitting down, one mending clothes, the other
spinning flax. Sirotkin plays the part of the wife, and Nietsvitaeff
that of the husband. Our scenery was very poor. In this piece, as in the
preceding ones, imagination had to supply what was wanting in reality.
Instead of a wall at the back of the stage, there was a carpet or a
blanket; on the right, shabby screens; while on the left, where the
stage was not closed, the camp-bedsteads could be seen; but the
spectators were not exacting, and were willing to imagine all that was
wanting. It was an easy task for them; all convicts are great dreamers.
Directly they are told "this is a garden," it is for them a garden.
Informed that "this is a hut," they accept the definition without
difficulty. To them it is a hut. Sirotkin was charming in a woman's
dress. The miller finishes his work, takes his cap and his whip, goes up
to his wife, and gives her to understand by signs, that if during his
absence she makes the mistake of receiving any one, she will have to
deal with him--and he shows her his whip. The wife listens, and nods
affirmatively her head. The whip is evidently known to her; the hussey
has often deserved it. The husband goes out. Hardly has he turned upon
his heel, than his wife shakes her fist at him. There is a knock; the
door opens, and in comes a neighbour, miller also by trade. He wears a
beard, is in a kuftan, and he brings as a present a red handkerchief.
The woman smiles. Another knock is heard at the door. Where shall she
hide him? She conceals him under the table, and takes up her distaff
again. Another admirer now presents himself--a farrier in the uniform of
a non-commissioned officer.

Until now the pantomime had gone on capitally; the gestures of the
actors being irreproachable. It was astounding to see these improvised
players going through their parts in so correct a manner; and
involuntarily one said to oneself:

"What a deal of talent is lost in our Russia, left without use in our
prisons and places of exile!"

The convict who played the part of the farrier had, doubtless, taken
part in a performance at some provincial theatre, or had played with
amateurs. It seemed to me, in any case, that our actors knew nothing of
acting as an art, and bore themselves in the meanest manner. When it was
his turn to appear, he came on like one of the classical heroes of the
old repertory--taking a long stride with one foot before he raised the
other from the ground, throwing back his head on the upper part of his
body and casting proud looks around him. If such a gait was ridiculous
on the part of classical heroes, still more so was it when the actor was
representing a comic character. But the audience thought it quite
natural, and accepted the actor's triumphant walk as a necessary fact,
without criticising it.

A moment after the entry of the second admirer there is another knock at
the door. The wife loses her head. Where is the farrier to be concealed?
In her big box. It fortunately is open. The farrier disappears within it
and the lid falls upon him.

The new arrival is a Brahmin, in full costume. His entry is hailed by
the spectators with a formidable laugh. This Brahmin is represented by
the convict Cutchin, who plays the part perfectly, thanks, in a great
measure, to a suitable physiognomy. He explains in the pantomime his
love of the miller's wife, raises his hands to heaven, and then clasps
them on his breast.

There is now another knock at the door--a vigorous one this time. There
could be no mistake about it. It is the master of the house. The
miller's wife loses her head; the Brahmin runs wildly on all sides,
begging to be concealed. She helps him to slip behind the cupboard, and
begins to spin, and goes on spinning without thinking of opening the
door. In her fright she gets the thread twisted, drops the spindle, and,
in her agitation, makes the gesture of turning it when it is lying on
the ground. Sirotkin represented perfectly this state of alarm.

Then the miller kicks open the door and approaches his wife, whip in
hand. He has seen everything, for he was spying outside; and he
indicates by signs to his wife that she has three lovers concealed in
the house. Then he searches them out.

First, he finds the neighbour, whom he drives out with his fist. The
frightened farrier tries to escape. He raises, with his head, the cover
of the chest, and is at once seen. The miller thrashes him with his
whip, and for once this gallant does not march in the classical style.

The only one now remaining is the Brahmin, whom the husband seeks for
some time without finding him. At last he discovers him in his corner
behind the cupboard, bows to him politely, and then draws him by his
beard into the middle of the stage. The Brahmin tries to defend himself,
and cries out, "Accursed, accursed!"--the only words pronounced
throughout the pantomime. But the husband will not listen to him, and,
after settling accounts with him, turns to his wife. Seeing that her
turn has come, she throws away both wheel and spindle, and runs out,
causing an earthen pot to fall as she shakes the room in her fright. The
convicts burst into a laugh, and Ali, without looking at me, takes my
hand, and calls out, "See, see the Brahmin!" He cannot hold himself
upright, so overpowering is his laugh. The curtain falls, and another
song begins.

There were two or three more, all broadly humorous and very droll. The
convicts had not composed them themselves, but they had contributed
something to them. Every actor improvised to such purpose that the part
was a different one each evening. The pantomime ended with a ballet, in
which there was a burial. The Brahmin went through various incantations
over the corpse, and with effect. The dead man returns to life, and, in
their joy, all present begin to dance. The Brahmin dances in Brahminical
style with the dead man. This was the final scene. The convicts now
separated, happy, delighted, and full of praise for the actors and
gratitude towards the non-commissioned officers. There was not the least
quarrel, and they all went to bed with peaceful hearts, to sleep with a
sleep by no means familiar to them.

This is no fantasy of my imagination, but the truth, the very truth.
These unhappy men had been permitted to live for some moments in their
own way, to amuse themselves in a human manner, to escape for a brief
hour from their sad position as convicts; and a moral change was
effected, at least for a time.

The night is already quite dark. Something makes me shudder, and I
awake. The "old believer" is still on the top of the high porcelain
stove praying, and he will continue to pray until dawn. Ali is sleeping
peacefully by my side. I remember that when he went to bed he was still
laughing and talking about the theatre with his brothers. Little by
little I began to remember everything; the preceding day, the Christmas
holidays, and the whole month. I raised my head in fright and looked at
my companions, who were sleeping by the trembling light of the candle
provided by the authorities. I look at their unhappy countenances, their
miserable beds; I view this nakedness, the wretchedness, and then
convince myself that it is not a frightful night there, but a simple
reality. Yes, it is a reality. I hear a groan. Some one has moved his
arm and made his chains rattle. Another one is agitated in his dreams
and speaks aloud, while the old grandfather is praying for the "Orthodox
Christians." I listened to his prayer, uttered with regularity, in
soft, rather drawling tones: "Lord Jesus Christ have mercy upon us."

"Well, I am not here for ever, but only for a few years," I said to
myself, and I again laid my head down on my pillow.




