## CHAPTER VII.

THE FIRST MONTH (_continued_)


When I entered the convict prison I possessed a small sum of money; but
I carried very little of it about with me, lest it should be
confiscated. I had gummed some banknotes into the binding of my New
Testament--the only book authorised in the convict prison. This New
Testament had been given to me at Tobolsk, by a person who had been
exiled some dozens of years, and who had got accustomed to see in other
"unfortunates" a brother.

There are in Siberia people who pass their lives in giving brotherly
assistance to the "unfortunates." They feel the same sympathy for them
that they would have for their own children. Their compassion is
something sacred and quite disinterested. I cannot help here relating in
some words a meeting which I had at this time.

In the town where we were then imprisoned lived a widow, Nastasia
Ivanovna. Naturally, none of us were in direct relations with this
woman. She had made it the object of her life to come to the assistance
of all the exiles; but, above all, of us convicts. Had there been some
misfortune in her family? Had some person dear to her undergone a
punishment similar to ours? I do not know. In any case, she did for us
whatever she could. It is true she could do very little, for she was
very poor. But we felt when we were shut up in the convict prison that,
outside, we had a devoted friend. She often brought us news, which we
were very glad to hear, for nothing of the kind reached us.

When I left the prison to be taken to another town, I had the
opportunity of calling upon her and making her acquaintance. She lived
in one of the suburbs, at the house of a near relation.

Nastasia Ivanovna was neither old nor young, neither pretty nor ugly. It
was difficult, impossible even, to know whether she was intelligent and
well-bred. But in her actions could be seen infinite compassion, an
irresistible desire to please, to solace, to be in some way agreeable.
All this could be read in the sweetness of her smile.

I passed an entire evening at her house, with other companions of my
imprisonment. She looked us straight in the face, laughed when we
laughed, did everything we asked her, in conversation was always of our
opinion, and did her best in every way to entertain us. She gave us tea
and various little delicacies. If she had been rich we felt sure she
would have been pleased, if only to be able to entertain us better and
offer for us some solid consolation.

When we wished her "good-bye," she gave us each a present of a cardboard
cigar-case as a souvenir. She had made them herself--Heaven knows
how--with coloured paper, the paper with which school-boys' copy-books
are covered. All round this cardboard cigar-case she had gummed, by way
of ornamentation, a thin edge of gilt paper.

"As you smoke, these cigar-cases will perhaps be of use to you," she
said, as if excusing herself for making such a present.

There are people who say, as I have read and heard, that a great love
for one's neighbour is only a form of selfishness. What selfishness
could there be in this? That I could never understand.

Although I had not much money when I entered the convict prison, I could
not nevertheless feel seriously annoyed with convicts who, immediately
on my arrival, after having deceived me once, came to borrow of me a
second, a third time, and even oftener. But I admitted frankly that what
did annoy me was the thought that all these people, with their smiling
knavery, must take me for a fool, and laugh at me just because I lent
the money for the fifth time. It must have seemed to them that I was the
dupe of their tricks and their deceit. If, on the contrary, I had
refused them and sent them away, I am certain that they would have had
much more respect for me. Still, though it vexed me very much, I could
not refuse them.

I was rather anxious during the first days to know what footing I should
hold in the convict prison, and what rule of conduct I should follow
with my companions. I felt and perfectly understood that the place being
in every way new to me, I was walking in darkness, and it would be
impossible for me to live for ten years in darkness. I decided to act
frankly, according to the dictates of my conscience and my personal
feeling. But I also knew that this decision might be very well in
theory, and that I should, in practice, be governed by unforeseen
events. Accordingly, in addition to all the petty annoyances caused to
me by my confinement in the convict prison, one terrible anguish laid
hold of me and tormented me more and more.

"The dead-house!" I said to myself when night fell, and I looked from
the threshold of our barracks at the prisoners just returned from their
labours and walking about in the court-yard, from the kitchen to the
barracks, and _vice versâ_. As I examined their movements and their
physiognomies I endeavoured to guess what sort of men they were, and
what their disposition might be.

They lounged about in front of me, some with lowered brows, others full
of gaiety--one of these expressions was seen on every convict's
face--exchanged insults or talked on indifferent matters. Sometimes,
too, they wandered about in solitude, occupied apparently with their own
reflections; some of them with a worn-out, pathetic look, others with a
conceited air of superiority. Yes, here, even here!--their cap balanced
on the side of their head, their sheepskin coat picturesquely over the
shoulder, insolence in their eyes and mockery on their lips.

"Here is the world to which I am condemned, in which, in spite of
myself, I must somehow live," I said to myself.

I endeavoured to question Akim Akimitch, with whom I liked to take my
tea, in order not to be alone, for I wanted to know something about the
different convicts. In parenthesis I must say that the tea, at the
beginning of my imprisonment, was almost my only food. Akim Akimitch
never refused to take tea with me, and he himself heated our tin
tea-urns, made in the convict prison and let out to me by M----.

Akim Akimitch generally drank a glass of tea (he had glasses of his own)
calmly and silently, then thanked me when he had finished, and at once
went to work on my blanket; but he had not been able to tell me what I
wanted to know, and did not even understand my desire to know the
dispositions of the people surrounding me. He listened to me with a
cunning smile which I have still before my eyes. No, I thought, I must
find out for myself; it is useless to interrogate others.

The fourth day, the convicts were drawn up in two ranks, early in the
morning, in the court-yard before the guard-house, close to the prison
gates. Before and behind them were soldiers with loaded muskets and
fixed bayonets.

The soldier has the right to fire on the convict if he tries to escape.
But, on the other hand, he is answerable for his shot, if there was no
absolute necessity for him to fire. The same thing applies to revolts.
But who would think of openly taking to flight?

The Engineer officer arrived accompanied by the so-called "conductor"
and by some non-commissioned officers of the Line, together with sappers
and soldiers told off to superintend the labours of the convicts.

The roll was called. Then the convicts who were going to the tailors'
workshop started first. These men worked inside the prison, and made
clothes for all the inmates. The other exiles went into the outer
workshops, until at last arrived the turn of the prisoners destined for
field labour. I was of this number--there were altogether twenty of us.
Behind the fortress on the frozen river were two barges belonging to the
Government, which were not worth anything, but which had to be taken to
pieces in order that the wood might not be lost. The wood was in itself
all but valueless, for firewood can be bought in the town at a nominal
price. The whole country is covered with forests.

This work was given to us in order that we might not remain with our
arms crossed. This was understood on both sides. Accordingly, we went to
it apathetically; though just the contrary happened when work had to be
done, which would be profitable, or when a fixed task was assigned to
us. In this latter case, although prisoners were to derive no profit
from their work, they tried to get it over as soon as possible, and took
a pride in doing it quickly. When such work as I am speaking of had to
be done as a matter of form, rather than because it was necessary, task
work could not be asked for. We had to go on until the beating of the
drum at eleven o'clock called back the convicts.

The day was warm and foggy, the snow was on the point of melting. Our
entire band walked towards the bank behind the fortress, shaking lightly
their chains hid beneath their garments: the sound came forth clear and
ringing. Two or three convicts went to get their tools from the dépôt.

I walked on with the others. I had become a little animated, for I
wanted to see and know in what this field labour consisted, to what sort
of work I was condemned, and how I should do it for the first time in my
life.

I remember the smallest particulars. We met, as we were walking along, a
townsman with a long beard, who stopped and slipped his hand into his
pocket. A prisoner left our party, took off his cap and received
alms--to the extent of five kopecks--then came back hurriedly towards
us. The townsman made the sign of the cross and went his way. The five
kopecks were spent the same morning in buying cakes of white bread
which were shared equally among us. In my squad some were gloomy and
taciturn, others indifferent and indolent. There were some who talked in
an idle manner. One of these men was extremely gay, heaven knows why. He
sang and danced as we went along, shaking and ringing his chains at each
step. This fat and corpulent convict was the very one who, on the very
day of my arrival during the general washing, had a quarrel with one of
his companions about the water, and had ventured to compare him to some
sort of bird. His name was Scuratoff. He finished by shouting out a
lively song of which I remember the burden:


     They married me without my consent,
     When I was at the mill.


Nothing was wanting but a balalaika [the Russian banjo].

His extraordinary good-humour was justly reproved by several of the
prisoners, who were offended by it.

"Listen to his hallooing," said one of the convicts, "though it doesn't
become him."

"The wolf has but one song; this Tuliak [inhabitant of Tula] is stealing
it from him," said another, who could be recognised by his accent as a
Little Russian.

"Of course I am from Tula," replied Scuratoff; "but we don't stuff
ourselves to bursting as you do in your Pultava."

"Liar! what did you eat yourself? Bark shoes and cabbage soup?"

"You talk as if the devil fed you on sweet almonds," broke in a third.

"I admit, my friend, that I am an effeminate man," said Scuratoff with a
gentle sigh, as though he were really reproaching himself for his
effeminacy. "From my most tender infancy I was brought up in luxury, fed
on plums and delicate cakes. My brothers even now have a large business
at Moscow. They are wholesale dealers in the wind that blows; immensely
rich men, as you may imagine."

"And what did you sell?"

"I was very successful, and when I received my first two hundred----"

"Roubles? impossible!" interrupted one of the prisoners, struck with
amazement at hearing of so large a sum.

"No, my good fellow, not two hundred roubles, two hundred blows of the
stick. Luka; I say Luka!"

"Some have the right to call me Luka, but for you I am Luka Kouzmitch,"
replied rather ill-temperedly a small, feeble convict with a pointed
nose.

"The devil take you, you are really not worth speaking to; yet I wanted
to be civil to you. But to continue my story; this is how it happened
that I did not remain any longer at Moscow. I received my fifteen last
strokes and was then sent off, and was at----"

"But what were you sent for?" asked a convict who had been listening
attentively.

"Don't ask stupid questions. I was explaining to you how it was I did
not make my fortune at Moscow; and yet how anxious I was to be rich, you
could scarcely imagine how much."

Many of the prisoners began to laugh. Scuratoff was one of those lively
persons, full of animal spirits, who take a pleasure in amusing their
graver companions, and who, as a matter of course, received no reward
except insults. He belonged to a type of men, to whose characteristics I
shall, perhaps, have to return.

"And what a fellow he is now!" observed Luka Kouzmitch. "His clothes
alone must be worth a hundred roubles."

Scuratoff had the oldest and greasiest sheepskin that could be seen. It
was mended in many different places with pieces that scarcely hung
together. He looked at Luka attentively from head to foot.

"It is my head, friend," he said, "my head that is worth money. When I
took farewell of Moscow, I was half consoled, because my head was to
make the journey on my shoulders. Farewell, Moscow, I shall never
forget your free air, nor the tremendous flogging I got. As for my
sheepskin, you are not obliged to look at it."

"You would like me, perhaps, to look at your head?"

"If it was really his own natural property, but it was given him in
charity," cried Luka Kouzmitch. "It was a gift made to him at Tumen,
when the convoy was passing through the town."

"Scuratoff, had you a workshop?"

"What workshop could he have? He was only a cobbler," said one of the
convicts.

"It is true," said Scuratoff, without noticing the caustic tone of the
speaker. "I tried to mend boots, but I never got beyond a single pair."

"And were you paid for them?"

"Well, I found a fellow who certainly neither feared God nor honoured
either his father or his mother, and as a punishment, Providence made
him buy the work of my hands."

The men around Scuratoff burst into a laugh.

"I also worked once at the convict prison," continued Scuratoff, with
imperturbable coolness. "I did up the boots of Stepan Fedoritch, the
lieutenant."

"And was he satisfied?"

"No, my dear fellows, indeed he was not; he blackguarded me enough to
last me for the rest of my life. He also pushed me from behind with his
knee. What a rage he was in! Ah! my life has deceived me. I see no fun
in the convict prison whatever." He began to sing again.


     Akolina's husband is in the court-yard.
       There he waits.


Again he sang, and again he danced and leaped.

"Most unbecoming!" murmured the Little Russian, who was walking by my
side.

"Frivolous man!" said another in a serious, decided tone.

I could not make out why they insulted Scuratoff, nor why they despised
those convicts who were light-hearted, as they seemed to do. I
attributed the anger of the Little Russian and the others to a feeling
of personal hostility, but in this I was wrong. They were vexed that
Scuratoff had not that puffed-up air of false dignity with which the
whole of the convict prison was impregnated.

They did not, however, get annoyed with all the jokers, nor treat them
all like Scuratoff. Some of them were men who would stand no nonsense,
and forgive no one voluntarily or involuntarily. It was necessary to
treat them with respect. There was in our band a convict of this very
kind, a good-natured, lively fellow, whom I did not see in his true
light until later on. He was a tall young fellow, with pleasant manners,
and not without good looks. There was at the same time a very comic
expression on his face.

He was called the Sapper, because he had served in the Engineers. He
belonged to the special section.

But all the serious-minded convicts were not so particular as the Little
Russian, who could not bear to see people gay.

We had in our prison several men who aimed at a certain pre-eminence,
either in virtue of skill at their work, of their general ingenuity, of
their character, or their wit. Many of them were intelligent and
energetic, and reached the point they were aiming at--pre-eminence, that
is to say, and moral influence over their companions. They often hated
one another, and they excited general envy. They looked upon other
convicts with a dignified air, that was full of condescension; and they
never quarrelled without a cause. Favourably looked upon by the
administration, they in some measure directed the work, and none of them
would have lowered himself so far as to quarrel with a man about his
songs. All these men were very polite to me during the whole time of my
imprisonment, but not at all communicative.

At last we reached the bank; a little lower down was the old hulk, which
we were to break up, stuck fast in the ice. On the other side of the
water was the blue steppe and the sad horizon. I expected to see every
one go to work at once. Nothing of the kind. Some of the convicts sat
down negligently on wooden beams that were lying near the shore, and
nearly all took from their pockets pouches containing native
tobacco--which was sold in leaf at the market at the rate of three
kopecks a pound--and short wooden pipes. They lighted them while the
soldiers formed a circle around them, and began to watch us with a tired
look.

"Who the devil had the idea of sinking this barque?" asked one of the
convicts in a loud voice, without speaking to any one in particular.

"Were they very anxious, then, to have it broken up?"

"The people were not afraid to give us work," said another.

"Where are all those peasants going to work?" said the first, after a
short silence.

He had not even heard his companion's answer. He pointed with his finger
to the distance, where a troop of peasants were marching in file across
the virgin snow.

All the convicts turned negligently towards this side, and began from
mere idleness to laugh at the peasants as they approached them. One of
them, the last of the line, walked very comically with his arms apart,
and his head on one side. He wore a tall pointed cap. His shadow threw
itself in clear lines on the white snow.

"Look how our brother Petrovitch is dressed," said one of my companions,
imitating the pronunciation of the peasants of the locality. One amusing
thing--the convicts looked down on peasants, although they were for the
most part peasants by origin.

"The last one, too, above all, looks as if he were planting radishes."

"He is an important personage, he has lots of money," said a third.

They all began to laugh without, however, seeming genuinely amused.

During this time a woman selling cakes came up. She was a brisk, lively
person, and it was with her that the five kopecks given by the townsman
were spent.

The young fellow who sold white bread in the convict prison took two
dozen of her cakes, and had a long discussion with the woman in order to
get a reduction in price. She would not, however, agree to his terms.

At last the non-commissioned officer appointed to superintend the work
came up with a cane in his hand.

"What are you sitting down for? Begin at once."

"Give us our tasks, Ivan Matveitch," said one of the "foremen" among us,
as he slowly got up.

"What more do you want? Take out the barque, that is your task."

Then ultimately the convicts got up and went to the river, but very
slowly. Different "directors" appeared, "directors," at least, in words.
The barque was not to be broken up anyhow. The latitudinal and
longitudinal beams were to be preserved, and this was not an easy thing
to manage.

"Draw this beam out, that is the first thing to do," cried a convict who
was neither a director nor a foreman, but a simple workman. This man,
very quiet and a little stupid, had not previously spoken. He now bent
down, took hold of a heavy beam with both hands, and waited for some one
to help him. No one, however, seemed inclined to do so.

"Not you, indeed, you will never manage it; not even your grandfather,
the bear, could do it," muttered some one between his teeth.

"Well, my friend, are we to begin? As for me, I can do nothing alone,"
said, with a morose air, the man who had put himself forward, and who
now, quitting the beam, held himself upright.

"Unless you are going to do all the work by yourself, what are you in
such a hurry about?"

"I was only speaking," said the poor fellow, excusing himself for his
forwardness.

"Must you have blankets to keep yourselves warm, or are you to be
heated for the winter?" cried a non-commissioned officer to the twenty
men who seemed to loathe to begin work. "Go on at once."

"It is never any use being in a hurry, Ivan Matveitch."

"But you are doing nothing at all, Savelieff. What are you casting your
eyes about for? Are they for sale, by chance? Come, go on."

"What can I do alone?"

"Set us tasks, Ivan Matveitch."

"I told you before that I had no task to give you. Attack the barque,
and when you have finished we will go back to the house. Come, begin."

The prisoners began work, but with no good-will, and very indolently.
The irritation of the chief at seeing these vigorous men remain so idle
was intelligible enough. While the first rivet was being removed it
suddenly snapped.

"It broke to pieces," said the convict in self-justification. It was
impossible, then, they suggested, to work in such a manner. What was to
be done? A long discussion took place between the prisoners, and little
by little they came to insults; nor did this seem likely to be the end
of it. The under officer cried out again as he agitated his stick, but
the second rivet snapped like the first. It was then agreed that
hatchets were of no use, and that other tools must be procured.
Accordingly, two prisoners were sent under escort to the fortress to get
the proper instruments. Waiting their return, the other convicts sat
down on the bank as calmly as possible, pulled out their pipes and began
again to smoke. Finally, the under officer spat with contempt.

"Well," he exclaimed, "the work you are doing will not kill you. Oh,
what people, what people!" he grumbled, with an ill-natured air. He then
made a gesture, and went away to the fortress, brandishing his cane.

After an hour the "conductor" arrived. He listened quietly to what the
convicts had to say, declared that the task he gave them was to get off
four rivets unbroken, and to demolish a good part of the barque. As
soon as this was done the prisoners could go back to the house. The task
was a considerable one, but, good heavens! how the convicts now went to
work! Where now was their idleness, their want of skill? The hatchets
soon began to dance, and soon the rivets were sprung. Those who had no
hatchets made use of thick sticks to push beneath the rivets, and thus
in due time and in artistic fashion, they got them out. The convicts
seemed suddenly to have become intelligent in their conversation. No
more insults were heard. Every one knew perfectly what to say, to do, to
advise. Just half-an-hour before the beating of the drum, the appointed
task was executed, and the prisoners returned to the convict prison
fatigued, but pleased to have gained half-an-hour from the working time
fixed by the regulations.

As regards myself, I have only one thing to say. Wherever I stood to
help the workers I was never in my place; they always drove me away, and
generally insulted me. Any one of the ragged lot, any miserable workman
who would not have dared to say a syllable to the other convicts, all
more intelligent and skilful than he, assumed the right of swearing at
me if I went near him, under pretext that I interfered with him in his
work. At last one of the best of them said to me frankly, but coarsely:

"What do you want here? Be off with you! Why do you come when no one
calls you?"

"That is it," added another.

"You would do better to take a pitcher," said a third, "and carry water
to the house that is being built, or go to the tobacco factory. You are
no good here."

I was obliged to keep apart. To remain idle while others were working
seemed a shame; but when I went to the other end of the barque I was
insulted anew.

"What men we have to work!" was the cry. "What can be done with fellows
of this kind?"

All this was said spitefully. They were pleased to have the opportunity
of laughing at a gentleman.

It will now be understood that my first thought on entering the convict
prison was to ask myself how I should ever get on with such people. I
foresaw that such incidents would often be repeated; but I resolved not
to change my conduct in any way, whatever might be the result. I had
decided to live simply and intelligently, without manifesting the least
desire to approach my companions; but also without repelling them, if
they themselves desired to approach me; in no way to fear their threats
or their hatred; and to pretend as much as possible not to be affected
by them. Such was my plan. I saw from the first that they would despise
me, if I adopted any other course.

When I returned in the evening to the convict prison, having finished my
afternoon's work, fatigued and harassed, a deep sadness took possession
of me. "How many thousands of days have I to pass like this one?" Always
the same thought. I walked about alone and meditated as night fell,
when, suddenly, near the palisade behind the barracks, I saw my friend,
Bull, who ran towards me.

Bull was the dog of the prison; for the prison has its dog as companies
of infantry, batteries of artillery, and squadrons of cavalry have
theirs. He had been there for a long time, belonged to no one, looked
upon every one as his master, and lived on the remains from the kitchen.
He was a good-sized black dog, spotted with white, not very old, with
intelligent eyes, and a bushy tail. No one caressed him or paid the
least attention to him. As soon as I arrived I made friends with him by
giving him a piece of bread. When I patted him on the back he remained
motionless, looked at me with a pleased expression, and gently wagged
his tail.

That evening, not having seen me the whole day--me, the first person who
in so many years had thought of caressing him--he ran towards me,
leaping and barking. It had such an effect on me that I could not help
embracing him. I placed his head against my body. He placed his paws on
my shoulders and looked me in the face.

"Here is a friend sent to me by destiny," I said to myself, and during
the first weeks, so full of pain, every time that I came back from work
I hastened, before doing anything else, to go to the back of the
barracks with Bull, who leaped with joy before me. I took his head in my
hands and kissed it. At the same time a troubled, bitter feeling pressed
my heart. I well remember thinking--and taking pleasure in the
thought--that this was my one, my only friend in the world--my faithful
dog, Bull.




